HISTORY TERROIRS VARIETIES 
SECOND EDITION 
THE CAMELLIA SINENSIS TEA HOUSE 
Kevin Gascoyne, Frangois Marchand, Jasmin Desharnais 
ge 
and Hugo Américi 

Tea is an exceptionally comprehensive and 
beautifully illustrated reference to the world’s 
most popular beverage. 
Each of the six families of tea — from black and 
white, to green, yellow, wulong and Pu er — offers 
exciting variations to explore. Discover tea’s 
rich history of cultivation and its chemical inner 
workings, including how the trees are affected by 
soil, climate and altitude. 
As you appreciate the nuances of how this satisfying 
drink is produced and prepared worldwide, 
you 
will be inspired to seek out many of its refreshing, 
mouthwatering varieties. Tea will guide you to a 
better enjoyment of each cup. 



HISTORY TERROIRS VARIETIES 
SECOND EDITION 

) 
Nest iis4 
A _Firerty BOOK 
Published by Firefly Books Ltd. 2014 
Copyright © 2014 Les Editions de I'Homme 
Translation © 201! 
Firefly Books Ltd. 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the Publisher: 
Second printing 
Publisher Cataloging-in-Publication Data (U.S.) 
A CIP record for this title is available from the Library of Congress 
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication 
A CIP record for this title is available from Library and Archives Canada 
Published in the United States by 
Firefly Books (U.S.) Inc. 
PO, Box | 338, Ellicott Station 
Buffalo, New York 14205 
Published in Canada by 
Firefly Books Ltd. 
50 Staples Avenue, Unit | 
Richmond Hill, Ontario L4B OA7 
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of Québec's Société de développement 
des enterprises culturelles (SODEC) for the translation of this book. 
The publisher gratefully acknowledges the financial support for our publishing program 
by the Government of Canada through the Canada Book Fund as administered by the 
Department of Canadian Heritage. 
Printed in China 

HISTORY TERROIRS VARIETIES 
SECOND EDITION 
THE CAMELLIA SINENSIS TEA HOUSE 
Kevin Gascoyne, Francois Marchand, Jasmin Desharnais 
and Hugo Américi 
FIREFLY BOOKS 

Table of Contents 
FOPEWORG n. 
c0a ee 
ie 
A 
ere 
ee 
if 
PROCES 
uli dca SERRE oe es Pheer a 
I ERORIIGUOT .:. ncaeamalece 
20h «scooters 
10 
PART ONE 
From Garden to Cup 
he Cultivation OPeat gives... 
satn~ exe 
19 
Tea Ar Vesta gle arte thee 
y Minne 
ees 
29 
PART TWO 
From One Terroir to Another 
So Ma 
ne 
ep 
TR 
Wire se 5 
37 
FADO ame 2nd rao ena roar 
ase eee 
89 
SE INN Clana nar pais On ees ern Greee erin = Ph 
[25 
NCGS ea 
rae 
a centage 
ee 
ee 
[55 
Sri Lanka, Nepal, Vietnam and 
the. East Africari Coast ov. ccna maeanes 
|87 
PART THREE 
From Cup to Plate 
The: Artor Preparing lea is... vcs ans 
6 
« 
201 
A Short Tasting Guide, .eccceac 
eee cates zu 
FS itt CHBSERNON oi. oe no eee 
eee 22 
PART FOUR 
Tea and Health 
The Chemical Components ofTea...... 
248 
The Virkues OH Bae san 
ee eee ee 250 
Biochemical Analyses of 35 Teas........ 
252 
HIVGIEDE on « 
is.w recryicaile seins 
ne a ee ee 266 
Acknowledgments ......:ceeueseaaees 
268 
MONO 
SES ONY: Su, cathode 
BOR eee 
269 
Photo Credits 

FOREWORD 
Tea is the ultimate universal beverage. Whether in a 
Mongolian yurt, a Berber encampment in the middle 
of the Sahara, a house in Azerbaijan, admiring a verdant 
Irish landscape or in the heart of the mountains of 
New Zealand, it is tea that warms us when we are cold 
and cools us when we are hot. It welcomes the arriving 
guest and is a promise from the departing guest to 
return. From China, where it originated, 
tea has crossed 
all the borders of the world. It is known and respected 
for its virtues and appreciated for its taste. 
Celebrated by poets and adored by emperors, 
tea is the most widely consumed beverage in the 
world today and forms an integral part of the diet 
of millions at all levels of society. With its history that 
spans several millennia, a wealth of cultures that have 
influenced it and traditions that have raised it to its 
noble stature, the world of tea is so vast that it can 
never be completely known. 
Whether 
it comes 
from the precious 
first 
harvests of spring, the sacred mountains of China 
or the highest gardens of Darjeeling, every cup of 
tea tells a story, reveals knowledge and conjures up 
a landscape. If we add in the expertise of master 
craftspeople who have passed on these traditions 
over several centuries we have a vast diversity of 
unique and exotic products. 
For many years now, our approach as tasters 
and importers has led us to discover the terroirs 
of tea, the way in which it is grown and processed, 
the role each plays within its own culture and the 
economy of the country where it is produced, the 
evolution of the rituals that accompany its serving, 
and the reasons it came to be considered such a 
noble beverage. These discoveries 
have enriched 
our enjoyment of tea as well as our knowledge of it. 
This book reflects a progression that we hope will 
accompany you on your future taste travels. 
What we offer you here is naturally a Western 
approach to tea, but we attribute as much importance 
to the plant and the places where it grows as to 
the master producers who devote their lives to 
its cultivation. For we must not forget that, just like 
wine, tea represents one of humanity's most fabulous 
achievements, using precious knowledge inherited 
over generations and taking advantage of the most 
distinct properties of its specific growing environment. 
Hugo, Jasmin, Francois, Kevin 
and the team at Camellia Sinensis 
Tea House 

4 Vv 
‘ee 
& 
4 
% 
ae 
r 
,¢ 
4 
: 
. 
Cy 
/ 
#2 ON 
Garden in Thiashola, Nilgiri, India. 
a7 
“The philosophy of tea is not a simple aesthetic in the ordinary meaning of the term, for it allows us to express, 
together with ethics and religion, our entire concept of man and nature. It is a form of hygiene because it requires 
us to be clean; it is an economy, for it shows that well-being lies in simplicity rather than in complexity and 
expenditure; it is a moral geometry, for it defines our size in relation to the universe. Finally, it represents the true 
democratic spirit of the Far East in that it transforms all its enthusiasts into aristocrats of taste.” 
Okakura Kakuz6, The Book of Tea 

PREFACE 
My first real contact with the diverse world of tea occurred 
in the early 1990s, during the hazy but exhilarating days 
when | was immersed in studies to prepare for worldwide 
competitive examinations for the title of sommelier, parti- 
cularly those held in Paris in December |994 and in Tokyo 
in June 1995. To become a sommelier one must acquire 
an in-depth knowledge of wine. What is less well known, 
however, is that it also requires complete mastery of world 
cuisine and other alcoholic beverages as well as water, 
coffee and, of course, tea. 
The first stone in the foundation of my interest in tea 
was laid during my trips to Japan in 1995 and 1997, when 
| was totally captivated by the aniseed-infused aromas of 
chervil, fennel, freshly cut grass and chicken stock that ema- 
nated from some of the great Japanese Sencha and Gyo- 
kuro teas. And that was before | understood the power of 
their harmony with food. Since that day, tea has replaced 
coffee in my daily routine when it is ... tea time! 
The second stone in the foundation of my passion 
for tea was laid accidentally in 2001 when, following some 
health issues, | began to look into the healing power of food 
in order to restore the homeostasis of my body. All the 
scientific studies undertaken to this day arrive at the same 
conclusion: the active ingredients of tea — including the 
same catechins that are present in red wine, cocoa beans, 
cinnamon, blueberries, cranberries, strawberries, raspber- 
ries and blackberries, which are all complementary foods 
to serve with tea — have beneficial effects on both physi- 
cal and mental health because they stimulate, among other 
things, the production of the alpha rhythm, whose relaxing 
waves have a calming effect on the brain. 
Finally, the last but not least important stone in the 
foundation of my daily savoring of infusions of this ancient 
plant was my discovery of the tea boutiques of Camellia 
Sinensis. My contact with the members of the team and 
the highly original professionals who work there increased 
my knowledge and my passion a hundredfold — even a 
thousandfold, as this universe is almost infinite. 
However, that foundation still needed to be fully des- 
cribed as a finished “structure” in a way that would do it 
justice. That has now been done with this monument to 
the glory of tea. For that is what the tasterimporters of 
Camellia Sinensis offer here, in this new cathedral of tea, 
whose magnificent architecture is the fruit of their exten- 
sive travels through the greatest gardens of the world and 
of their encyclopedic knowledge. 
As you peruse this reference work, which will no 
doubt resonate throughout many countries, you will finally 
be able to drink in the world of tea as no other work has 
allowed you to do before. 
You will find out about the history and the various 
families of tea, the countries where tea is produced, its ter 
roirs and its complex development. 
You will also learn how 
to prepare it, how to savor it, the words to describe tt, the 
unlimited possibilities of pairing it with food and, of course, 
its multiple health benefits. As an added delight, you will find 
several recipes for cooking with tea. 
Finally, this book represents essential nourishment for 
the body and mind not only of the tea drinker, but also of 
those who have yet to discover its delights. It is an open 
door into a world of culture and civilization. Step in and be 
carried away by its charms ... 
Frangois Chartier, C. Q. 
Sommelier and wine and food 
correspondent for La Presse 
PREF

Zz 
=) 
on 
1) 
=) 
A 
=) 
a4 
a 
Zz 
10 
INTRODUCTION 
Different Ways of Drinking Tea 
Consumed by millions of enthusiasts around the 
world, tea has, of course, been adapted to different 
cultures. Long before Westerners regarded 
it as 
an aristocratic beverage reserved for the elite, the 
Chinese consumed tea primarily for its medicinal 
properties. It was used as a flavoring, in soups or 
mixed with other ingredients, and it allowed many 
nomadic peoples to balance diets that were low in 
vitamins but rich in fat. In the first century BCE, Shen 
Nong's Herbal Classic, the first work on medicine, 
advised that the stimulating properties of tea ‘‘give joy 
to the body and sparkle to the eyes.’ 
Over the centuries and through successive 
dynasties, the processing of tea leaves as well as the 
different ways of preparing tea evolved considerably. 
In China, the way of drinking tea can be classified 
under three main periods that correspond to three 
important dynasties (Tang, Song and Ming). It was 
successively boiled, beaten then brewed. 
In the 
second century CE, tea began to be seen 
as a 
beverage in its own right, but it was reserved for 
emperors and other high officials. It was only later, 
toward the seventh century, that tea began to be 
consumed by the common people. Under the Tang 
dynasty (618-907), Lu Yu, recognized as the first 
master of Chinese tea, wrote the first book devoted 
to tea, describing its cultivation and preparation. He 
raised the preparation of tea to an art. This is what 
he says in the Cha Jing, or The Classic of 
Tea: 
Tea has a thousand and one faces. If we just 
consider the broad categories, some tea cakes 
have the tanned look of boot leather, others 
are rounded like a zebu’s chest or curled into 
wreaths like the clouds floating over the moun- 
tain. Still others look like waves caressed by the 
breeze, or fine silver tiles, transformed into a 
thick, creamy elixir by pouring a little water 
over them. 
Tea has long been a part of commercial exchange. 
People began to trade using tea at the end of the 
sixth century, first between neighboring countries 
then farther afield, throughout the Tang dynasty. At 
the time, pounds of tea were exchanged for skins 
and horses. In the seventh century, as the Chinese 
were gradually making it their national drink, great 
harvests from Yunnan and Sichuan Provinces were 
transported as far north as Lhasa in Tibet, following 
what would later become the Tea Road: a 930-mile 
(1,500 km) route fraught with dangers over which 
a return trip took an entire year On this legendary 
journey, encountering nomadic tribes from the west 
of China as well as Mongols, Turks and Tibetans, tea 
was adopted by even more enthusiasts. 
In Tibet, where tea was endowed with significant 
spiritual value, it was enhanced with salt, yak butter and 
FIRST REFERENCE 
Although various ancient Chinese texts mention a grass called tu, referring to a bitter 
plant that was served during ancestor worship ceremonies, the consumption of tea is documented for the first 
time in the Shijing (The Book of Songs, dating from the seventh century BCE). 

Pek 
: 
¥ 
2 
. 
, i’ 
bd 
j 
& 
’ eat 
io 
k 
oe 
{ 
Ue 
eee 
ayer 
i 
& 
iy 
— 
Aa 
; 
ot 
b en 
+ 
4 
x 
% 
A 
a) 
e 
a 
‘ 
\ 
ah 
~ 
g 
j =) 
i 
o 
et 
\ N 
: 
£ 
SS 
: mo) 
s 
o) 
; 5 6 
5 fag 
; 
aN 
3 
$ 
y 
x Fo 
2 o 
te 
- 

goat's milk. This salty beverage prepared by brewing 
is a symbol of hospitality and is still served today, as It 
was then, in wooden bowls. 
Introduced by Buddhist monks who brought it 
back from their pilgrimage to China, tea was first tasted 
in Japan in the ninth century. 
The Japanese transformed 
the daily pleasure of drinking tea into a refined, rituali- 
zed and highly spiritual practice. They invented the "Way 
of Tea’’ (chado), a complete art of living that incorpora- 
tes the basic principles of Japanese culture. This ritual is 
based on the fundamental concepts of harmony, respect, 
purity and serenity. 
As more and more trade routes were established, 
tea could be more easily exported. 
The construction 
of several ports, especially in Canton during the Song 
dynasty (960-1279), led to the organization of a 
maritime trade route linking China to Korea and 
Japan. In the 
|7th century, thanks to the trading 
caravans, Chinese tea began to arrive in Russia, Iran, 
Turkey and Egypt. 
In Russia, the custom of drinking tea spread 
throughout the | 8th century, after the invention of the 
samovar. 
In its traditional 
form, this device 
uses 
charcoal to heat a central cavity filled with water over 
which is placed a small teapot containing a highly 
concentrated infusion. Each guest can then prepare his 
or her tea according to taste by diluting concentrated 
tea with the hot water Iran, Turkey and Afghanistan all 
adopted the samovar. 
A samovar. 
THE ROOTS OF THE WORD “TEA” 
The various words used to refer to tea were developed with 
the trade routes. The countries to which tea was brought by a sea route use words that begin with the letter 
T — “tea” in English, “Tee” in German, “thé” in French, “te” in Italian — that are all variations of the term “t’e,” 
borrowed from min nan hua, a Chinese dialect from Fujian Province. On the other hand, countries to which tea 
was brought by an overland route (Tibet, India, Iran, Russia) use words beginning with the syllable “tch” or “ch,” 
12 
borrowed from the Mandarin “cha.” 

In Europe, the first shipment of tea was brought 
ashore from a Dutch trading ship in the port of 
Amsterdam in |610.The Dutch subsequently shipped 
tea to Italy, Germany and Portugal. 
In 1645, the first cases of tea from China reached 
the port of London. Immediately adopted by Catherine 
of Braganza, the wife of the English king, the habit of 
drinking tea spread quickly throughout the court and 
the upper echelons of English society. But it was only 
after the introduction of “five o'clock tea” by Anne, 
Duchess of Bedford (1783-1857), that drinking tea 
became part of 
the daily routine of the working class. 
Thanks to the Industrial Revolution, working hours 
were changing, and the evening meal was being ser- 
ved a few hours later than before, which left time for 
a pause to drink tea. In some ways, it was this pause 
that helped introduce tea to the lower classes. 
High tea is a special moment,a break in the rhythm 
of daily life and a symbol of sharing. Traditional high 
tea is served with milk and sugar and accompanied 
by sandwiches, scones, biscuits or cakes. 
In India, during the 19th century, when China 
still held a monopoly over the tea trade, the British 
began to cultivate it themselves i order to avoid the 
Chinese middlemen. Today, tea continues to play an 
essential role in the Indian economy as well as in the 
lives of the people. The preference is for strong tea 
mixed with several spices and boiled in milk (chai). 
This beverage, usually bought from street vendors, 
is served in a disposable earthenware bow! that is 
traditionally thrown on the ground after use. 
In Morocco, the custom of drinking mint tea was 
popularized in the |9th century and survives today 
as an important rite of hospitality and conviviality. 
Tea 
is the national drink, consumed at all levels of society 
and at all hours of the day and night. It is prepared in 
different ways according to the region, but generally 
the tea is boiled in a metal teapot to which mint and 
sugar (sometimes even verbena or absinthe) are ad- 
ded. The mint tea is then poured into glasses, always 
from a great height to cool the tea and create a fro- 
thy beverage. 
A Tuareg serves mint tea in the Sahara desert, Algeria. 
13 

14 
Some Historical Milestones 
2737 BCE 
1122 BCE 
618 — 907 
Circa 700 
Circa 780 
Circa 805 
960 — 1279 
1191 
1368 — 1644 
1582 
1599 
1610 
1641 — 1853 
1645 
1712 
1773 
Founding myth of the discovery of tea by the divine 
oe 
Emperor Shen Nong. 
The Shijing, or Book of Songs, describes for the first time the use of tea leaves. 
The Tang dynasty and the first age of tea: boiled tea. 
Tea is distinguished from other bitter plants by the ideogram cha. 
Lu Yu writes the first book devoted to tea, the Cha. Jing, or Classic of Tea. 
Buddhist monks introduce tea In Japan. 
The Song dynasty and the second important period in the history of Chinese 
tea: the age of beaten tea. 
A monk named Eisai (1 141-1215) brings the first tea seeds to Japan. Eisai wrote 
a treatise on the medicinal virtues of tea in 1214. 
ae 
The Ming dynasty and the beginning of the age of infused tea, as we know 
ae 
tea today, 
Le 
Sen No Rikyu codifies the Japanese tea,ceremony, basing It on the principles of 
bes 
harmony, respect, purity and serenity, which are characteristic of the Buddhist 
movement. 
Queen Elizabeth | founds the East India Company, which held an almost total 
monopoly over the tea trade in the British Empire until | 834. 
The first importation of tea into European territory (Amsterdam), by the Dutch, X. 
is recorded. 
Japan is closed to all foreign trade. 
Delivery of the first chests of tea at the port of London. 
First botanical description of the tea plant Thea japonense by Kaempfer. 
The Boston Tea Party, which was an act of rebellion against the high taxes levied 
on tea by the East India Company (which monopolized tea sales in the British 
J 
colonies). Shipments of tea from three ships were thrown into the harbor 
marking the start of the American Revolution. 

Trade relations between England and China sour The British introduce 
opium trafficking to China to create a dependency among the Chinese 
and to get them. 
to exchange it for tea. 
Robert Bruce discovers wild tea plants in the jungle in Assam, India. 
The Tea Exchange opens in London. 
China's emperor orders the port of Canton closed to prevent opium 
trafficking. 
The first Opium War, between England and China, ends in 
the Treaty of Nanjing, in favor of the English. 
The British Empire sends a spy, Robert Fortune, 
to discover China's 
tea-growing secrets. 
“2 
‘ 
The second. Opium War in China, which ends with the Treaty of Tianjin. 
The start of the tea industry in Darjeeling, India. 
e 
A famous clipper race from Fuzhou in China to the port of London in 
England takes place between the Ariel and the Teaping. 
_ 
The parasite Hernileia vastatrix wipes out the coffee plantations of 
Sri Lanka. The country switches to tea growing a few years later. 
Thomas Sullivan invents the tea bag. 
The invention of the CTC (crushing, tearing, curling) process allows for 
large-scale tea production. 
The introduction of a new fermentation process for Pu er teas speeds 
up their aging. 
Start of the Luku tea contests in Taiwan. 
Selection of 22 tea cultivars and varieties considered the best for 
growing tea in China. 
The Pu er speculation bubble bursts. 
Late |700s 
to early 1800s 
1823 
1834 
1839 — 1842 
1848 
1856 — 1860 
1859 
1866 
1869 
Circa 1910 
Circa 1930 
Circa 1970 
1976 
1987 
2007 
15 


PART ONE 
FROM GARDEN 
TOCUP 


The Cultivation 
of Tea 
THETEA PLANT IS AN EVERGREEN TREE OF THE GENUS 
CAMELLIA, ONE OF 30 MEMBERS OF THE THEACEAE 
FAMILY.IN ITS WILD STATE, THE TEA TREE CAN REACH 
A HEIGHT OF 98 FEET (30 M), AND, ALTHOUGH IT ALSO 
BEARS FLOWERSANDFRUIT,ONLY THELEAFISUSEDTO 
- PRODUCETEA. DARK GREENIN COLOR AND ELLIPTICAL 
IN SHAPE, TEA LEAVES HAVE CRENELLATED EDGES 
_ AND CAN MEASURE FROM '/4 INCH TO 10 INCHES (5 MM 
TO 25 CM) IN LENGTH. ALTHOUGH 1% IS INDISPUTABLE 
THATTHETEATREEORIGINATEDIN XISHUANGBANNA, 
IN THE CHINESE PROVINCE OF YUNNAN, WHERE IT 
STILL GROWS IN GREAT ABUNDANCE IN THE WILD, 
IT IS NOW CULTIVATED ON ALL FIVE CONTINENTS 
BETWEEN THE 43RD PARALLEL IN THE NORTHERN 
HEMISPHERE (GEORGIA, IN EASTERN EUROPE) AND 
THE 27TH PARALLEL IN THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE 
(THE.CORRIENTES REGION OF ARGENTINA). 

CULTIVATION 
Tea tree varieties 
Among the 200 species of Camellia theaceae registered 
today, only one, Camellia sinensis, is used to produce tea. 
This species includes three main varieties: sinensis, assa- 
mica and cambodiensis. 
CAMELLIA SINENSIS VAR. SINENSIS 
“Sinensis’’ means “from China,’ the country where tea 
was first discovered. 
This variety is thought to be the 
most ancient variety used in the cultivation of tea. 
In its natural state, the Camellia sinensis var. sinensis 
tree can grow to a height of 20 feet (6 m). Its small, 
dark leaves are light in body. It Is a sturdy plant that 
has greater resistance to cold and drought than other 
varieties, so it is often grown at high altitudes as well 
as in regions with difficult climatic conditions, such as 
parts of China, Japan, lran and Turkey. 
Its productive life is relatively long and in some 
conditions can last well over |00 years. 
CAMELLIA SINENSIS VAR. ASSAMICA 
Discovered by Scottish Major Robert Bruce in the 
region of Assam, India, in the first half of the 19th 
century, Camellia 
sinensis 
var. assamica 
is grown 
extensively in India, Africa and Sri Lanka. Highly suited 
to a tropical climate, it is grown mainly on plains and 
in regions that enjoy abundant rainfall. 
Less aromatic than C. s. var sinensis 
leaves, 
its large, thick leaves produce a liquor that is quite 
robust and very dark when 
oxidized. 
C. s. 
var. 
assamica 
is the tallest of the C. sinensis varieties. 
In the wild, some trees can grow to a height of 
98 feet (30 m) and live several centuries. Under 
plantation 
conditions, 
however, 
the 
productive 
life of C. s. van assamica lasts no longer than 30 to 
50 years. 
CAMELLIA SINENSIS VAR. CAMBODIENSIS 
Large and flexible, the leaves of Camellia sinensis var. 
cambodiensis can grow to a length of 8 inches (20 cm). 
Its sensorial properties are 
less appreciated than 
those of the C. s. var sinensis and C. s. var. assamica, 
therefore, C. s. van cambodiensis is rarely used for tea 
cultivation. However, thanks to its excellent capacity 
for natural hybridization with the other two varieties, 
it Is occasionally used to create new cultivars. 
The Cultivar 
The term “cultivar” a contraction of the expression 
“cultivated variety,’ is used to define a plant species 
that was created through hybridization or mutation 
and selected for its specific characteristics. As these 
characteristics are not necessarily transferable by seed- 
ing, the cultivar must be reproduced through cuttings 
in order to retain the same genetic profile. 
Camellia sinensis var. sinensis is in the background, and in front of 
it is C. s. var. assamica, in Jaipur Estate, Assam, India. 

As we will see a little farther on, there is a wealth 
of cultivars that are hardly mentioned in Western 
botanical registers but are officially recognized in 
Eastern botanical lore. For, as well as being highly 
capable of natural hybridization, 
the tea tree has been 
frequently crossbred to make it better adapted to its 
environment and more resistant to disease, as well as 
to develop unique aromas. 
The Terroir 
In addition to the choice of plant material, growing 
season and quality of the picking, the characteristics of 
a plantation — its soil, climate, altitude, latitude — are 
important factors that greatly influence the quality of 
a tea. Each region has specific agricultural properties, 
so the same tea tree will produce different-tasting 
teas depending on the conditions in which tt is grown. 
The plant will constantly adapt to its environment, 
producing substances that, notably, can create inter 
esting flavors. The notion of a “terroir” helps define 
the specific characteristics of a particular region or 
expanse of land, by examining its soil, climate, altitude 
and latitude in combination with the expertise of the 
local growers. 
SOIL 
The quality of the soil and the subsoil, which is an 
essential element in the cultivation of the tea tree, 
varies enormously from one 
region to another. 
Fortunately, the tea tree is endowed with a formid- 
able ability to adapt, and it will thrive just as well in 
sedimentary as in volcanic soil. However for optimum 
growth, it needs an acidic soil (BH 4.5 to 5.5) because 
acidity will help it absorb nutrients. Ideally, it should 
also have a soil that is rich in minerals (nitrogen, 
potassium, magnesium, etc.) and covered with a deep 
layer of humus. In addition, its central root needs to 
get a solid grip at a depth of up to 6 feet (1.8 m), so 
the soil must be loose, not limestone or clay. As tea 
trees need a lot of rain, the most favorable soil will be 
permeable and drain well but still have good moisture 
retention. A mountainous terrain is often ideal. 
The ferruginous soil of Anxi, China, where the wulong tea Tie Guan Yin is grown. 
CLIMATE 
The tea tree grows best in a tropical or subtropical 
region. It needs plenty of rain, a minimum of about 
60 inches (1,500 mm) a year, and a dry season that 
lasts no longer than three months. The ideal average 
temperature Is around 65 to 68°F (18 to 20°C), with 
a minimum of five hours of sunshine a day and a rela- 
tive humidity of 70 percent to 90 percent. 
Tea trees are not very resistant to frost and 
wintery conditions. With the exception of some 
cultivars, especially those developed to resist the 
cold, a tea tree Is likely to be killed by temperatures 
below 23°F (-5 °C). Moreover, if the temperature is 
too low over the course of the year, its growth will 
slow considerably. 
Tea trees do, however, benefit from climatic 
variations, which can help develop flavors. The stress 
caused by weather changes disturbs the chloroplasts 
in the leaves and triggers a reaction from the plant, 
21 

22 
which strives to retain chlorophyll in its leaves, improving 
the flavor of the tea. Even the presence of certain in- 
sects may improve the flavor. 
ALTITUDE 
It is not unusual to see tea plantations on the steep 
slopes of high mountain ranges in Asia for a very good 
reason: these terrains produce tea of unrivaled quality. 
While the difficult climatic conditions found at these 
altitudes can stunt the growth of a tea tree, they are 
excellent for the development of aromas. Warm days 
give way to cold nights, and sun exposure is often 
reduced to a couple of hours a day because of the 
constant mist during certain seasons. Under these 
conditions the tea tree's growth Is slowed, but the 
new shoots it produces carry a higher concentration 
of the aromatic oils that create richer flavors. At an 
ideal altitude of around 3,300 to 5,000 feet (1,000 
to |,500 m), mist can even be an advantage for a tea 
tree as, even in the dry season, the new shoots will 
have the moisture they need to grow. In Taiwan, as 
in Darjeeling, some of the best harvests are found 
above 6,500 feet (2,000 m). 
LATITUDE 
Latitude also has a major impact on the growth of tea 
trees. It can even be said to determine, to a certain 
degree, the life rhythm of the tree. 
Tea is a perennial plant and, in certain regions 
close to the equator, its leaves can be harvested all 
year round. But in regions located beyond |6 degrees 
north or south, where daily sunlight is less than | | hours 
for a period longer than five weeks, the tea tree's 
growth will slow down, and it will become dormant. 
The harvest is then postponed until the following 
season. This period of dormancy is highly favorable for 
the production of good-quality tea. When the plant 
awakens in the spring, the aromatic ingredients it 
secretes are more concentrated and often confer an 
exquisite taste to the tea from the first harvests of 
the year. 
CAMELLIA SINENSIS (L.) O. KUNTZE 
The tea tree has been known to the Chinese since time immemo- 
rial, but in the West the first scientific description of it was written in 1712, by Dr. Kaempfer, a physician with the 
Dutch East India Company, who called it Thea japonense. Some 40 years later, in his masterwork Species Plantarum, 
which lists all the plants then known to man, Carl von Linnaeus renamed it Thea sinensis. At a later date he distin- 
guished between two different varieties: Camellia japonica and Camellia sassanqua. Note that, at the time, there were 
two accepted terms to define the plant: Thea and Camellia. It was not until 1959, after numerous debates among 
botanists, that the name Camellia was officially adopted by the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature. 
The 
term Camellia is an homage to a Moravian Jesuit called Georg Joseph Kamel (1661-1706), who studied botany 
in Asia at the end of the |7th century. The adjective sinensis was added by Linnaeus. 
The letter “L” also refers to 
the initial of Linnaeus, while “O. Kuntze” is the name of the botanist who, in 1881, combined them all to create 
the scientific name. 


Zz 
=) 
a 
< 
> 
= 
Ho 
=) 
O 
24 
The Gardens 
The domestic cultivation of tea began in the fourth 
century, and the first plantations probably appeared 
in Sichuan Province 
in China. Previously, tea was 
harvested in the forest from ancient trees growing 
in the wild. There are still ancient tea trees in the 
forests of Yunnan Province, whose leaves are used 
to produce rare or unique vintage teas, but today, as 
a general rule, tea is grown on plantations that are 
called “gardens” or “estates.” 
The size of these plantations varies enormously. 
Some cover less than a couple of acres, others 
spread over thousands 
of acres. Either terraced 
or simply covered in scattered plants, each couple 
of acres (| ha) usually holds 5,000 to 15,000 tea 
trees. In China, the smaller gardens may belong to 
independent growers who carry out all the different 
stages of production themselves, but the several- 
hundred-acre estates are usually the property of 
large corporations that own many other estates and 
employ thousands of workers. 
Most larger tea gardens have a name, as in 
Darjeeling, but this is not always the case. Elsewhere 
in India, such as the Nilgiri Hills, and Sri Lanka, many 
small-scale growers will bring their fresh leaf and sell 
it to a local manufacturer These harvests are less 
specific and often produce lower-grade teas. These 
teas will often be named after the region or factory 
that transforms the leaf. 
The largest plantations are found on the plains of 
Assam, Kenya and the other more industrial regions 
of Argentina. 
The smallest gardens are usually spread 
over the hillsides of very steep mountains at altitudes 
of up to 8,500 feet (2,600 m). 
TAKING CUTTINGS 
Today, the most common method of producing new tea plants is by taking cuttings. 
This technique for the propagation of plant species consists of cutting a leaf-bearing stem from a mother plant, 
then planting it directly into the soil in order to obtain a new plant endowed with the same genetic characteristics. 
This technique ensures a more homogeneous output with the same sensorial properties and higher yields. However, 
this method 
of production 
can 
be problematic, as 
all the plants obtained 
are 
clones 
of a mother 
plant that has both strengths and weaknesses. If a tree contracts a disease, for example, it may quickly spread 
throughout the plantation. It is to circumvent this risk that the propagation of tea trees is usually performed 
using a combination of the two methods of reproduction: seeding and taking cuttings. 

Workers manually picking tea leaves in the rain at the Hunwal Estate plantation in Assam, India. 

nf . 
- 
’ 
5 
f 
. 
’ 
J 
vi 
J 
> 
7 
U 
i] 
| 
ta 
¥ 
’ 
, 
: 
‘ 
’ 
; 
x 
% 
¥. 
\ 
1 
* 
’ 
’ 
LU 
v 
+ 
‘ 
{ 
\ 
- 
‘ 
: 
- 
a 
, 
‘ 
7 
t 
\ 
‘ 
‘ 
* 
. 
Y 
, 
\ 
’ 
. 
en 
) 
‘ 
. 
/ 
+ 
* 
7 
< 
J 
’ 
' 
’ 
sa 
» 
) 
" 
’ 
‘ 
° 
% 
" 
\ 
nN 
. 
— 
ue 
’ 
\ 
. 
‘ 
eo 
F 
‘ 
‘ 
\ 
? 
‘ 
N 
' 
° 
. 
. 
, 
r 
‘ 
‘ 
The Coonoor Garden in the Nilgiri Hills, India. 
’ 

A Bai Ye tea tree nursery for the production of Anji Bai Cha. 
PLANTATION MAINTENANCE 
The cultivation of tea requires a lot of work and skill. 
This is why, in most tea-producing countries, there 
are research 
centers devoted to the study and 
creation of new, more resistant cultivars that are 
capable of adapting to a given climate and offer more 
interesting sensory characteristics. 
This work has led 
to the development of a new growing technique 
that makes it easier to hybridize and clone the best 
cultivars. Previously, seeding techniques were quite 
risky and did not allow the production of uniform 
crops, especially since the tea tree's prolific natural 
capacity for hybridization generated new strains that 
were vastly different from one another 
As well as the constant work of clearing, draining, 
plowing and weeding that is essential to all agricultural 
endeavors, tea growers must wait at least three to 
five years before they see any return on a young tea 
tree. During this time, the young plant is cared for so 
that it will become a strong tree. Since, in its natural 
form, a tea tree can grow to a maximum height of 
20-100 feet (6 m to 30 m) depending on the variety, 
Straw is strewn between rows of tea trees, Japan. 
it is regularly pruned so that it grows no higher than 
about 3 feet (1 m), thus making it easier to harvest 
the leaves. In addition to stimulating the growth of 
new shoots, this pruning, which is called ‘‘shaping,’ 
forces the plant to branch out and develop along a 
horizontal plane, forming a so-called “picking table.” 
Throughout its average life span of 30 to 50 years, 
a tea tree will undergo regular pruning to help maintain 
a healthy yield. In addition to the frequent shaping, 
the tree will be more heavily pruned every five years 
to stimulate regeneration, strengthening the plant's 
structure and increasing its growth. 
In order to filter the sunshine and introduce 
essential nitrogen into the soil, “shade trees” of other 
species are used. Pruning waste and straw are strewn 
between the plants to protect and develop the 
topsoil. 
27 


Tea Harvests 
PICKING TEA LEAVES 
IS A SIMPLE YET CRITICAL 
ACTIVITY THAT INVOLVES DETACHING THE YOUNG 
SHOOTS 
FROM 
THE 
PLANTS. 
IN 
ALMOST 
ALL 
COUNTRIES, 
THIS TASK 
IS. 
ENTRUSTED 
TO THE 
DELICATE HANDS OF WOMEN. THE PICKERS MUST 
PINCH 
THE 
DELICATE 
SHOOTS BETWEEN 
THEIR 
THUMB AND FOREFINGER, ACCORDING TO THE TYPE 
OF PICKING DESIRED, AND THEN PLACE THE LEAVES 
IN A BAMBOO BASKET OR BAG THAT THEY CARRY 
BEHIND THEM. IT IS A CRITICAL OPERATION BECAUSE 
THE QUANTITY OF AROMATIC SUBSTANCES FOUND IN 
THE LEAVES VARIES ACCORDING TO THEIR DEGREE 
OF MATURITY. THE YOUNGER THE LEAF, THE HIGHER 
. 
THE 
CONCENTRATION 
OF 
DESIRABLE 
AROMATIC 
COMPOUNDS; 
HOWEVER, THE YOUNGER THE LEAF, 
THE SMALLER IT IS AND THE SMALLER THE HARVEST 
WILL BE. THEREFORE, THE YIELD OF A GARDEN AND 
THE TASTE QUALITY OF THE TEA WILL DEPEND TO A 
VERY LARGE DEGREE ON THE MOMENT CHOSEN TO 
HARVEST THE LEAVES. 
The garden where Huang Shan Mao Feng tea is grown, Anhui Province, China. 

30 
A bud and two leaves. 
In tropical regions where the climatic conditions are 
favorable, tea trees grow continuously. Therefore, the 
leaves can be harvested all year round, at intervals 
of 4 tol5 days. In more temperate or mountainous 
regions, picking follows the rhythm of the seasons 
and weather and usually takes place from April to 
November. However, certain times of year are more 
favorable for the blossoming of aromas. For example, 
because the delicate and tender leaves from the 
first harvest of the year contain more concentrated 
aromatic oils, they are the most highly prized. 
The Three 
Traditional Tea- 
Picking Styles 
The term “‘pekoe” is used for the young shoot located 
at the end of each stem (also called the terminal bud). 
As this bud has not yet unfurled, it is usually covered 
with a fine down. In fact, ‘‘pekoe,’ from the Chinese 
Picking Lu An Gua Pian green tea. 
pak-ho, is often used to describe the fine down on a 
newborn's skin. This pekoe serves as a reference for 
the three types of tea-leaf picking: imperial picking, 
fine picking and medium picking. 
As it includes only the bud and the first leaf below 
it, imperial or “‘super-fine”’ picking is the most presti- 
gious. It Is, in fact, for this reason that in the China of 
ancient times it was reserved for the use of emperors 
and high officials, hence the name. It is usually har 
vested once per year, in the spring. Also of very high 
quality, fine picking harvests the bud and the first two 
leaves. Medium picking harvests the bud and the fol- 
lowing three leaves. 
Today, there are many machines for harvesting 
tea, but they are less practical on sloped terrain and 
cannot carry out the delicate picking achieved by the 
hands of an expert. This is why, to obtain the best har 
vest in the small gardens on high, steep slopes or in 
countries where labor costs remain low, manual pic- 
king is still prevalent. 
It takes 10 pounds (5 kg) of fresh leaves, about 
12,000 shoots, to produce 2 pounds (| kg) of tea. 
In India, a tea picker will harvest on average 65 to 
| 10 pounds (30 to 50 kg) of leaves per day. 

The Tea Families 
Before Robert Fortune discovered the “‘secrets” of tea 
in the mid-19th century (see page 156), Europeans 
believed that green teas and black teas came from 
different plants. We know today that it is the pheno- 
menon of oxidation that modifies the natural state of 
the leaves, changing the color and taste. 
Oxidation is produced by oxidase, enzymes that 
reacts when the cells of a tea leaf are broken. Reacting 
with oxygen, these enzymes trigger the oxidation of 
the leaf, so it is possible to change freshly harvested 
leaves into any type of tea. 
If how the leaves are picked is one of the deter- 
mining factors regarding the quality of a 
tea, mastering 
the process of transforming those leaves, often done 
through traditional knowledge, is the decisive factor 
regarding a tea’s final taste. First, oxidation must take 
place shortly after harvesting, which is why most plan- 
tations have their own processing plant (a factory) to 
process the leaves as soon as they arrive from the 
garden. Smaller growers who do not have their own 
factory often join together to send their harvest to a 
larger producer who can process the leaves. 
A few examples of the vast array of tea infusions and tea leaves. 
Each family of teas comes from a particular 
method 
of processing the leaves, which we 
will 
review in greater detail in relation to each country. 
For example, to obtain a green tea, the leaves must 
be “fired” or steamed to disable the enzymes that 
causes oxidation. A light and controlled oxidation Is 
permitted in the case of wulongs. Whereas with black 
teas, oxidation is often fully encouraged, with leaves 
exposed to humidity (80 percent to 90 percent) 
and to an ambient temperature 
of 7| to 74°F 
(22 10 23°C), 
There are six main categories or families of tea: 
white, green, yellow, wulong (or oolong), black and 
Pu er (or sometimes Pu-erh). 
WHITE TEAS 
The best white teas come from prized harvests 
consisting entirely of buds. White teas also undergo 
the least handling. The leaves are dried naturally 
or with the help of fans to eliminate some of their 
moisture. 
The liquid they yield is delicate, extremely 
refreshing and less likely to contain much caffeine. 

32 
Chai, which is a blend of tea and spices. 
GREEN TEAS 
Produced mainly in China and Japan, where over | 500 
varieties can be found, green teas are the preferred 
beverages of these countries. The fresh leaves are 
dehydrated to prevent any possibility of oxidation, 
which increases the “green,” plant characteristics of 
the beverage. 
YELLOW TEAS 
The rare yellow teas undergo slight post-oxidation by 
steaming under a damp cloth while the leaves are still 
warm from being dehydrated. 
This produces a slight 
enzymic oxidation, giving the leaves and the liquid 
obtained from them a yellowish hue. 
WULONG TEAS 
Wulong teas 
(often 
referred 
to as “oolong” 
in 
English; “‘wulong”’ is the official Mandarin translation), 
processed according to a three-century-old tradition, 
are teas that undergo partial oxidation before being 
twisted or rolled. The Chinese and Taiwanese produce 
A green tea scented with flowers. 
two main types: teas that undergo |0 percent to 30 
percent oxidation and whose slightly sweet floral 
aromas are similar to those of green tea, and those 
that undergo 40 percent to 70 percent oxidation, 
which 
gives them woody, fruity and sometimes 
caramelized notes. “Wulong” means ‘‘black dragon” 
and refers to the black snakes that coil around the 
branches of the tea trees. To reassure the children 
who were scared of them, adults told them they were 
really little black dragons. 
BLACK TEAS 
Black teas undergo 
a more 
rigorous 
oxidation. 
Referring to the copper color of the infusion they 
produce, 
the Chinese call them red teas. 
PU ER STYLE TEAS 
Pu er (also Pu-erh) teas, which originated in Yunnan 
Province (in the south of China), where tea was 
harvested from ancient trees growing in the wild 
before being compressed for transportation, remain 
a Chinese specialty. Chinese medicine practitioners 
have used them for centuries 
for their digestive 
properties and cleansing action. 

Flavored or 
Scented Teas 
In addition to the six families of 
‘natural’ teas, it is 
possible to buy teas to which flower, fruit or spice- 
based flavors have been added in order to create 
a new type of tea. Although this is a totally different 
approach, It is undeniable that the flavoring of tea is 
an art in Its own right and must be taken into account 
as another facet of this fascinating world. 
Scented teas are created by adding flowers or 
blended spices to the leaves, whereas flavored teas are 
produced by spraying the leaves with the essential oils 
of fruits or with synthetic flavorings. 
The preparation of a flowerscented tea tradition- 
ally involves the use of a layered dryer in which rows 
of flowers are alternated with rows of tea leaves. In this 
process, the quality of the flowers is more important 
than the quality of the tea, but a lot of care must be 
taken to achieve the right balance between the slight 
bitterness of the tea and the fragrance of the flowers. 
Heated to a temperature of 104°F (40°C) fora period 
of about |2 hours, the leaves absorb the perfume of 
the flowers with which they are dried. Depending on 
the intensity of the aroma desired, the tea leaves will 
be treated four to eight times, with the flowers being 
changed every |2 hours. 
Smoked Teas 
Produced from coarsely harvested teas called su-chong, 
smoked teas are dried over burning spruce, which 
gives them a specific flavor This process was probably 
discovered by accident in Fujian Province in the early 
19th century. 
Legend has it that a tea grower — forced by the 
government to give up his warehouse but not want- 
ing to lose his latest crop, which was still moist — had 
the idea of placing the leaves over some spruce that 
was burning nearby. 
The leaves dried quickly and, in the 
process, acquired a smoky aroma. Although he was 
proud of his discovery, the grower had difficulty find- 
ing someone to buy his tea. Finally, a foreign merchant, 
enchanted by the smoky character of the tea, brought 
it back with him to Europe, where it became very 
popular. 
n 
i) 
z| 
= 
< 
fu 
< 
a) 
= 
33 


PART TWO 
CONSIDERING THE HIGH GLOBAL DEMAND 
FOR TEA, IT IS NOT SURPRISING THAT THE 
MAJORITY OF TEAS THAT ARE EXPORTED 
TO 
THE 
WEST 
OR 
ELSEWHERE 
ARE 
INDUSTRIALLY PRODUCED.THISLARGE-SCALE 
PRODUCTION TENDS TO BE MORE CONCERNED 
WITH PRODUCTIVITY. THEREFORE, IN ORDER 
TOCONCENTRATEMOREONQUALITY,WEHAVE 
CHOSEN TO LOOK AT THE MOST UNUSUAL 
TERROIRS, 
THOSE 
THAT 
REVEAL 
THE 
PARTICULAR CHARACTER OF A REGION OR A 
PARTICULAR EXPERTISE. 


China 
WITHA RICH CULTURAL HISTORY GOING BACK THOU- 
SANDS OF YEARS, CHINA — WHERE GUNPOWDER, 
PRINTING AND THE COMPASS WERE INVENTED — IS 
THECRADLEOFNUMEROUS DISCOVERIES THAT HAVE 
TRANSFORMED CIVILIZATIONS THE WORLD OVER. 
THE DISCOVERY OF TEA IS JUST ONE ELEMENT OF 
THIS CULTURAL HERITAGE, TAKING ROOT IN CHINA 
BEFORE CONQUERING 
THE OTHER CON-TINENTS. 
OVER THE CENTURIES, TEA HAS NATURALLY EMER- 
GED AS AN ESSENTIAL PRODUCT, ADOPTED FOR ITS 
MEDICINAL BENEFITS BEFORE BECOMING PART OF 
THE EVERYDAY LIFE OF CHINESE SOCIETY. TODAY, 
CHINA IS REMARKABLE FOR THE WIDE VARIETY OF 
TEAS IT PRODUCES, 
THE DIVERSITY OFITS TERROIRS 
AND ITS INCOMPARABLE EXPERTISE, WHICH HAS 
BEEN HANDED DOWN THROUGH A CULTURE THAT 
HAS MADE TEA A WAY OF LIFE. 

A wild tea tree at Nannuo Shan, in Yunnan Province, China. 

History 
China is where tea was born. Chinese legends that 
speak of its discovery are so ancient it would be easy 
to believe that tea has always existed there. But if 
tea has been known in China since time immemorial, 
it has not always been in its current form. Indeed, 
different ways of growing and drinking it have evolved 
over time and according to changing customs. 
SHEN NONG — THE 
FOUNDING MYTH 
Among 
the 
Chinese 
legends 
that 
recount 
the 
discovery of tea, the oldest dates from 2737 BCE. It 
involves the mythic Emperor Shen Nong (known as the 
“Divine Emperor’’), who, it is said, habitually tried new 
plants to discover their curative properties. Suffering 
from an unusual malady, he sat under a tree, put some 
water on to boil to purify it and then fell asleep from 
exhaustion. When he awoke, he noticed that some 
leaves had fallen into the water. Intrigued, he tasted the 
infusion and realized that, in spite of its bitter taste, It 
was able to both detoxify and stimulate him. 
Taking this legend into account, it is possible to say 
that tea has been used in the Chinese pharmacopoeia 
for over 4,000 years. According to Lu Yu, author of the 
first work devoted to tea, it was in the time of the Zhou 
dynasty (1121-256 BCE) that tea became a popular 
drink, Until then tea had been used medicinally or as a 
food, mixed into soup or with other foods. It was not 
until the Han dynasty (206 BCE-220 CE) that tea was 
considered a beverage in its own right. 
THREE DYNASTIES, 
THREE AGES OF TEA 
Chinese 
feudal 
society was 
at its peak in the 
pros-perous days of the Tang dynasty (618-907). 
During this era, the art of tea was developing along 
with the arts of painting, calligraphy and poetry. Strong 
economic growth, arich social life andthe abundance of 
cultural exchanges combined to create the conditions 
necessary for the spread of a culture centered on 
tea. More and more plantations appeared, the art of 
tea growing progressed and more specialized tech- 
niques for the processing of tea were developed. 
It is also during this dynasty that tea was dem- 
ocratized. Whereas courtiers, nobles, intellectuals 
and 
monks 
had 
always 
been 
accustomed 
to 
receiving their visitors over a serene cup of tea, this 
privilege now became a popular pastime. 
The custom 
quickly spread through every level of society. Tea 
became the beverage of choice for poets, artists 
and philosophers, as 
't was cheaper and more 
stimulating than alcohol. In addition, tea became an 
essential element of nomadic peoples’ diets, which 
was very poor in vitamins. This growing popularity 
triggered, among other things, the founding of the 
first teahouses. Poetry, ceramics and painting also 
contributed to the burgeoning of tea culture as a 
true art. 
During the Tang dynasty, tea was not prepared 
in the same way it is today. At that time, tea was 
compressed into bricks that were then softened so 
they could be crumbled with a mortar and pestle. 
The resulting powder was mixed with salt water 
and sometimes with ginger, onion, orange zest and 
rice before being boiled. The broth was drunk from 
small wooden bowls and was more like a soup than 
an infusion. For Lu Yu, who was largely responsible 
for spreading the idea that tea should be consumed 
without the addition 
of any other ingredients, 
“These drinks were no better than the rinsing water 
of gutters.’ 
Tea was also shaped into bricks to make 
it easier to transport because, from the south of 
China to the north of Tibet, tea traveled more than 
900 miles (1,500 km). It would have been extremely 
bulky to carry several pounds of loose-leaf tea on 
the back of a donkey. 
During this time, the popularity of tea was ex- 
panding beyond China. Entranced with the taste 
and the benefits of tea, neighboring countries, such 
as Korea and Mongolia, and many nomadic tribes 
CHINA
39 

40 
became major consumers. Recognizing that trading 
in tea bricks could increase court revenues, tea be- 
came a valuable exchange currency. Under the Tang 
dynasty, the Ministry of Horses and Tea was set up 
so that the Chinese could exchange their tea bricks 
for Mongolian horses, a trade that allowed them, 
among other things, to create their cavalry regiment. 
During the Song dynasty (960-1279), important 
changes occurred in the way tea was manufactured 
and consumed: it was the age of beaten tea. The 
dried leaves were ground with a millstone to obtain 
a fine powder that was then beaten in a bowl with 
a bamboo whip until “jade foam” appeared. The 
Japanese, who were introduced to tea during this 
period by Buddhist monks, still use this process 
during the chanoyu, the tea ceremony. 
Among the general population, using and drinking 
tea was becoming an easier process. It grew in popularity 
as its processing time was reduced and its prepara- 
tion was simplified. 
The custom of “‘precious” harvests 
began, when only the bud and the first leaf of the first 
spring harvest were picked. These were called imperial 
harvests, and the crop was reserved for the emperors. 
More luxurious accessories also appeared. Finished with 
a dark glaze that enhanced the jade green hue of the 
tea, wide and flat ceramic bowls gradually replaced 
wooden bowls. 
Unfortunately, the end of the | 3th century was 
marked in China by the invasion of Mongol hordes, which 
slowed down the diffusion of tea. It was not until the 
cultural renaissance of the Ming dynasty (1368-1644), 
almost a century later that tea culture was reborn. It 
was at this time that tea began to be prepared as we do 
it today, by pouring simmering water over dried leaves, 
marking the beginning of the age of brewed tea. Most 
of the instruments that serve to brew tea today (kettles, 
teapots, gaiwans, cups without handles, etc.) were in- 
vented during this period. 
The Qing dynasty (1644-1914) was another 
important period in the history of tea in China. 
Indeed, several prestigious teas were named during 
the Qing dynasty. The famous Bi Luo Chun and Long 
Jing were named by the Emperor Qianlong. During 
this time the Chinese also lost their monopoly over 
the tea trade. High demand in Europe encouraged 
the cultivation of tea in other parts of Eastern Asia 
and in India, Africa and Sri Lanka. Having discovered 
the secrets of tea (see page 156), the British no long- 
er needed to rely on China to satisfy their thirst for it. 
Throughout the 20th century — with the demise 
of 
the imperial era, the Japanese invasion of China and 
the civil war followed by the communist revolution of 
1949 — China underwent fundamental changes in 
its society and customs. The Cultural Revolution 
THE STORY OF LU YU 
Abandoned on the banks of a river, Lu Yu was adopted by a Zen monk from the 
Dragon Cloud monastery. Despite the influence of the environment in which he was raised, Lu Yu remained 
indifferent to Zen teachings and quickly discovered other interests. According to the story, he took advantage 
of a traveling theater troupe to flee the monastery and join the actors as they traveled throughout China. Lu Yu 
became famous for his talents as a teataster, his mastery of the method to prepare tea and for having written 
Cha Jing, the first book devoted to tea. The book was published around 780 and different versions, translated into 
several languages, are still available today. This was a unique moment in the history of tea. 

Tea, the elixir of life. 
(1966-1976) in particular, with its slogans like “we 
must forget the past and march toward the future,’ 
was 
especially detrimental 
to tea 
culture. Most 
teahouses closed. Tea growers, most of them the 
bearers of a long family tradition, were set to other 
tasks, often in distant provinces. During this century, 
the use of intensive production and industrial pro- 
cessing techniques for tea were greatly expanded. 
Tea bags and iced tea in cans also appeared on the 
Chinese market. 
With the softening of the regime since the late 
1980s, we have seen a renewed vigor in the tea in- 
dustry in China. Several prestigious teahouses have 
reappeared. Universities and agricultural schools are 
specializing in the study of tea. In order to develop 
the culture of tea on a more scientific basis, the 
Institute for Research into the Culture of Tea in China 
was founded in 1993 in Hangzhou. Museums devoted 
to tea and teapots are also being opened. Cultural 
associations, festivals and various activities are orga- 
nized in order to emphasize the importance of the 
cultivation of tea in Chinese culture and to further 
stimulate the industry. 
Today, with the emergence of a newly affluent 
level of society in China, lifestyles are changing and 
the demands of the nouveau riche in regard to tea 
are encouraging the growth of an increasingly refined 
market. 
41 

Chinese Terroirs 
China covers a vast territory, and tea growing 
spreads over thousands of miles. More than 3.7 million 
acres (1.5 million ha) are devoted to tea plantations. 
The best estates are concentrated in the southeastern 
part of China, particularly Fujian, Zhejiang and An- 
hui Provinces. The coastal provinces, with their mild, 
misty climate and numerous mountain ranges, are also 
favored 
terrain. 
Further 
south, Yunnan 
Province, 
where the tea tree originated, is famous for its tea 
production. 
Mongolia 
Myanmar 
(Burma) 
The remarkable variety of the weather and 
geological conditions of each of these regions gives the 
tea leaves produced there a unique character. In fact, 
these teas are often named after the region where 
they are grown. 
We can divide China into four regions: the south- 
west region, the southeast region and the regions 
located to the south and the north of the Yangzi 
Jiang River 
We present here the most important tea- 
producing provinces in each of these regions. 
Yellow 
Sea 
Be Shanghai 
langzhou 
East 
China Sea 

The village of Yiban in Yunnan Province. 
THE SOUTHWEST REGION 
The southwest region includes the provinces of 
Yunnan, Sichuan and Guizhou. In spite of its irregular 
terrain, 
the overall climate is generally mild and humid 
(subtropical) but punctuated by a season of heavy 
rains. The high mountains offer very diverse climatic 
conditions in relation to the elevation. 
YUNNAN PROVINCE 
Considered 
to be the birthplace of tea, Yunnan 
Province 
is undoubtedly one of the most ancient 
tea-growing regions. Wild tea trees, one of which Is 
reputed to be |,/00 years old, can still be found in the 
tropical forests of Xishuangbannaa. Its extremely varied 
terrain includes mountains with peaks soaring to over 
6,500 feet (2,000 m). Yunnan has a temperate, moist 
climate that alternates between hot summers and 
mild winters. 
The region has an average annual rainfall 
of between 40 and 80 inches (1,000 to 2,000 mm). 
Yunnan Province is also blessed with a rich red soil that 
abounds in organic materials. This region has always 
offered ideal conditions for the cultivation of 
tea. 
True to the tradition preserved over thousands 
of years, Yunnan still produces bricks of Pu er tea. 
In fact, black teas and Pu er teas represent the two 
major specialties of the region. The town of Pu er, 

44 
which for a long time was the starting point of the Tea 
Road, Is still an important trading center. Indeed, the 
recent enthusiasm for this type of tea has convinced 
several growers to follow the market trend and give 
up the cultivation of green or black teas in favor of 
the Pu er style. However, Yunnan Province remains 
one of the major producers of black teas, including 
the famous Yunnan Hong Gong Fu. 
THE SOUTHEAST REGION 
The southeast 
region includes the provinces of 
Guangdong, Guangxi and Fujian as well as the island 
province of Hainan. It produces many famous teas 
belonging to the six families, including Anxi Tie Guan 
Yin, Bai Hao Yin Zhen, Bai Mu Dan, Zhenghe Hong 
Gong Fu, Da Hong Pao, Rou Gui, Zhi Lan Xiang, Qi 
Lan Xiang, Huang Zhi Xiang and Mi Lan. 
The most common soil type is old clay soil that 
contains both red and yellow clay. 
Except in the north of Fujian, the temperature 
is warm, with an annual average of 66 to 72°F (19 to 
22°C), the rainfall is abundant, with 45 to 80 inches 
(1,200 to 2,000 mm) annually, and the picking season 
extends over a period of 10 months. 
FUJIAN PROVINCE 
Fujian Province, a region with a subtropical climate 
(meaning hot, humid summers and mild winters) 
is renowned for the variety of teas it produces. 
The mountainous massif of the Wuyi is famous 
for its wulong teas, and the Anxi district produces 
excellent Tie Guan Yin 
varieties. The 
plentiful 
organic matter contained in the rich, deep soil of 
this region is ideal for growing the best white teas, 
which can be found mainly in the Tai Mu mountains 
and near the towns of Zhenghe and Jianyang. Fujian 
is also said to be the birthplace of black teas and 
wulong teas. 
THE REGION SOUTH OF THE YANGZI 
JIANG RIVER 
The provinces of the region south of the Yangzi Jiang 
River are Zhejiang, Hunan, Jiangxi and the southern parts 
of the provinces of Anhui, Jiangsu and Hubei. Two-thirds 
of the tea produced in China, including several famous 
teas, come from this region. Most plantations are located 
on hillsides, and some of them are at very high altitudes. 
The mountainous terrain is extremely favorable for the 
production of high-quality teas, as the plantations enjoy 
excellent soil drainage and plentiful sunlight. 
The annual temperature varies from 59 to 65°F 
(15 to 18°C), and rainfall, which is concentrated in 
the spring and summer, can be up to 55 to 63 inches 
(1,400 to 1,600 mm) annually. 
The soil is red with yellow 
and yellowish-brown patches, and it can be alluvial in 
places. 
The soil quality is also excellent for pottery and 
is used, in particular in the production of the famous 
Yixing teapots (see page 202). 
ZHEJIANG PROVINCE 
Zhejiang, a rich coastal province, produces mainly 
green teas. These plantations enjoy a moist, sub- 
tropical climate and alluvial soil that is rich in minerals. 
Production 
includes 
high-quality 
vintages 
made 
according to traditional methods, such as Long Jing, 
Anji Bai Cha and Huiming, as well as lesser-quality 
teas industrially manufactured for export, such as the 
Gunpowder brand. This diversity is due to the fact 
that some plantations are in the mountains, where 
the best teas are cultivated, and others are on the 
plains, where industrial teas are grown. 
ANHUI PROVINCE 
Renowned for the beauty of its landscape, Anhui 
Province produces teas of exceptional 
quality In 
the mountainous 
massif of Huang Shan (‘yellow 
mountain’’), where the highest peaks soar to 5,900 feet 
(1,800 m), Huang Shan Mao Feng (‘downy point of 
the 
yellow mountain’), one of the best-quality Mao Feng 
teas, is produced at altitudes between 1000 and 2,600 
feet (300 to 800 m). A temperate climate combined 
with a mainly red soil, rich in humus and iron, allows 
the growers in Anhui to maintain a high standard 
of production. 

Province 

46 
The most famous black teas are grown in the 
southwest of the province, in the county of Qimen, 
located in the extension of the Huang Shan massif. 
With an annual mean temperature of about 60°F 
(15°C) and an annual rainfall of almost 67 inches 
(1,700 mm), the region is blessed with highly favorable 
growing conditions. Famous teas, such as Tai Ping Hou 
Kui and Qimen, are cultivated here. 
THE REGION NORTH 
OF THE YANGZI JIANG RIVER 
The provinces of Henan, Shaanxi, Gansu and Shandong, 
as well as the northern parts of the provinces of Anhui, 
Jiangsu and Hubei, make up the major growing region 
that lies north of the Yangzi Jiang River 
These regions are newcomers to the history of 
tea growing in China, and they have the coldest climate 
of all the Chinese tea-growing provinces. The average 
temperature is around 55°F (12°C), and it can drop 
several degrees below freezing in the winter months. 
Precipitation 
is low and rarely exceeds 40 inches 
(1,000 mm) a year with an average between 28 and 
40 inches (700 to 1,000 mm). The yellow to yellowish- 
brown soil, which is very poor in some areas, resembles 
the desert terrain of northern China. However, there 
are 
several 
mountainous 
regions 
with 
interesting 
climatic conditions that can produce good-quality teas, 
such as Lu An Gua Pian and Huo Shan Huang 
Ya. The 
most famous tea cultivated in the region, Xin Yang Mao 
Jian, is grown in Henan Province. 
The famous massif of Huang Shan, 
Yellow Mountain in Anhui Province. 


48 
The Chinese Tea Industry 
In China, annual tea production now exceeds a 
million tons (according to 2008 data from the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations), 
and government 
initiatives designed to promote 
trade are beginning to have a significant impact on 
this industrial sector Annual tea exports from China 
are close to 330,700 tons (300,000 t), and most 
of this is green tea, which represents more than 
75 percent of the total product exported. The 
industry is extremely diverse and includes numerous 
small traditional 
harvests from artisans alongside 
huge industrial corporations producing vast quantities 
of tea. 
INDEPENDENT GROWING AND 
INDUSTRIAL GROWING 
Tea growing in China is predominantly the domain 
of peasants who cultivate small-scale plantations. 
This explains, in part, the low yield of tea per acre 
compared to India, for example. |n all tea-growing 
regions we find independent producers who grow 
and process tea according to traditional, ancestral 
methods. Manual 
picking and processing 
is. still 
common practice among artisans. In addition, a very 
large part of the tea produced by these traditional 
methods 
is distributed 
for local 
consumption. 
Except in large towns, it Is rare to see certain 
types of teas outside the region in which they are 
produced. 
Industrial growing,onthe otherhand,is arelatively 
recent development in the history of tea in China, 
even more recent than industrial growing in India 
or Japan. Although 
large-scale 
tea 
production 
first appeared in the 1950s, it was not until the | 980s 
that the industry began to organize and diversify. 
To 
satisfy the needs of this industry, and in spite of the 
fact that cheap labor is still frequently employed, 
harvesting and processing methods have become 
increasingly mechanized. Unfortunately, this massive 
industrialization has created many undesirable side 
effects, and today it is not unusual to find industrial 
copies of famous independently grown teas. 
THE SPECIALTY TEA MARKET 
The tea market in China has changed considerably 
in recent years. Whereas production was originally 
destined for local consumption only, today it responds 
to an increasingly diversified market, one in which 
the quest for quality is the principal challenge. While 
quality tea is still a luxury product beyond the reach 
of Chinese lower classes, demand 
has increased 
substantially since the end of the 1990s, with the rise 
in average incomes. 
The demand 
for rare and unique products 
has put pressure on the artisans, leading them to 
specialize in certain types of cultivation and the 
production of several types of tea that only China 
can boast of offering. That is the case with the oldest 
A BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE CHINESE TEA TRADE 
Total annual production: about |,257,000 tons (1,140,000 t) 
Percentage of production by type of tea: green tea, 73.7%; black tea, 5.6%; wulong: 10.5%; other, | 1.2% 
Average production yield: about 665 pounds per acre (745 kg/ha) 
Annual exports: about 315,000 tons (286,000 t); Zhejiang Province exports the most 
Principal purchasing countries: Morocco, 62,600 tons (56,800 t); Japan, 30,500 tons (27,700 t); Uzbekistan, 
21,000 tons (19,000 t); United States, 20,700 tons (18,800 t); Russian Federation, 18,300 tons (16,600 t) 
Source: 2008 data from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 
(Values in imperial units of measure supplied by publisher.) 

BEAUTIFUL TEAS 
Over the past several years, a new aspect of tea appreciation has appeared in China: 
visual appreciation. Strangely, many new tea enthusiasts are more interested in the aesthetic appearance of a tea 
than in its taste.And so, some teas are analyzed in relation to the beauty of their leaves and the way they move in 
a glass. If the leaves have an attractive shape and color and remain parallel to the sides of a glass during infusion, 
they will be considered highly valuable, regardless of their taste. 
The reverse is also often true.As such, if a tea does 
not look attractive, it will be sold for a cheaper price even if it tastes very good. In conjunction with this fashion 
for beautiful teas, tea producers have also made great strides with their packaging in the past few years. Utilitarian 
bags have been replaced with more luxurious containers, such as metal boxes and cardboard packaging. 
ae 

50 
Tasting Tie Guan Yin at the tea market in Anxi, Fujian Province. 
known family of teas: Pu er teas have been captivating 
the attention and the taste of a large number of tea 
collectors. The same 
is true of the famous green 
teas — such as Long Jing, Bi Luo Chun and Anji Bal 
Cha, which are now available in most large Chinese 
cities — whose first harvests are fought over by 
enthusiasts. 
PROVINCIAL EXPORT COMPANIES 
Like the history of Chinese tea, the trading of tea in 
China has a rich tradition. Once used as a form of 
currency, tea remains vital to the economy of many 
regions throughout the country. 
As far as exports are concerned, China is an ex- 
ception: it is one of the few tea-producing countries 
that does not sell its product under the auction system. 
Until very recently, the export system was managed 
by government agencies grouped by province, which 
handled most of the teas on the market. Any tea 
destined for export had to go through the regional 
offices under government control, which proposed 
a standardized 
product typical of each region. To 
purchase tea, a foreign importer had no alternative 
but to deal with the representative responsible for 
the region in which he or she was interested. This 
representative 
exercised 
tight control 
over 
what 
product could be exported. For example, a buyer 
could not obtain a tea from any estate that did 
not fall under the jurisdiction of the government 
specialists. 
Today, in spite of a certain liberalization of the 
market system, large-scale exportation is still mostly 
organized through regional wholesalers. There are a 
number of wholesalers and exporters in the capital 
cities of every tea-producing region, and they offer 
different harvests according to the growing region to 
both Chinese and foreign buyers. 
THE APPELLATION SYSTEM 
In China, many elements are involved in the choice of 
a name for a tea. Some are named for the cultivars 
from which they were derived or for the region in 
which they are grown. In a more poetic vein, the 
name is sometimes inspired by a legend (for example, 
Tie Guan Yin and Long Jing). In some cases, the tea 
was named by an “interested” emperor, as is the case 
with Bi 
Luo Chun. 
Unfortunately, in the absence of a functioning 
system of controlled appellation, disreputable growers 
can usurp the name of a celebrated tea and use it 
to designate products from another terroir or made 
using a different method. One of the best examples 

of 
this is the case of Long Jing, the most famous green 
tea In China. 
Long Jing is the name of a little village close to 
the town of Hangzhou in Zhejiang Province. The 
region has been famous for the tea it produces for 
many centuries. Picked by hand, it is processed almost 
exclusively in the traditional way, thanks to the exper- 
tise of the local growers. As the tea trade has grown 
in China and the world, certain producers have tried 
to copy this type of 
tea in order to increase their sales 
based on their competitor's famous name. 
Today, most Long Jing teas sold exclusively for 
export on the international market are in fact teas 
that come from Sichuan, Taiwan or, in the case of 
organic teas, Jiangxi Province. Some traders will even 
buy tea leaves from the south of Zhejiang and sell 
them to producers who live close to Long Jing so 
they can be processed there. They then sell the teas 
produced as genuine Long Jing teas. It must be said, 
however, that this type of deception does not only 
happen in China. This problem is also a challenge for 
some of the other major tea-producing countries, 
CHINA
such as Japan, India and Taiwan. 
THE WORK OF A SPECIALIZED TASTER-IMPORTER The world market for tea is enormous: 
3.5 million tons (3.2 million t) of tea are produced every year. As a rule, distribution is handled by major import- 
export companies that buy from and sell to wholesalers. These wholesalers then resell the merchandise to other 
distributors, who are responsible for practically all the tea in 
circulation on the international market. These corporations are, of 
course, looking for cheap tea to sell to a mass market rather than 
high-end teas.The taster-importer, 
who is looking for a better-quality 
tea, tries first and foremost to establish contacts with independent 
traditional growers in order to build a trusting relationship. 
That is 
why he or she travels every year to tea-growing countries, visiting 
plantations and the people who work on them. Once a feeling of 
trust is established, taster-importers are sometimes invited to taste 
small, experimental batches of tea that would never find their way 
to the wholesalers. This is how they make valuable finds. And so, 
by dealing directly with the growers and avoiding the middlemen, 
taster-importers can choose teas on the basis of their complexity of 
taste or their unique characteristics. 
They can then purchase them 
for a fair price and import them by air to preserve their freshness. 


A Meeting with Mr. Liu Xu, 
Mr. Liu Xu is a national tea taster. He has also 
coauthored eight books on tea. 
Mr. Liu Xu, how long have you been working in 
the world of tea? 
| have been working in the world of tea since | 
was a university student 23 years ago. Today | am a 
national taster. 
What is your background? How does one 
become a taster of national standing? 
| was born in Chengdu in the province of Sichuan. 
| graduated in July 1991 from the Faculty of Food 
Products at the Agricultural University of Xinan, 
where | obtained a bachelor’s degree specializing in 
tea. In July of the same year, | started working at 
the Institute for Tea Research in the Department 
of Inspection and Tea Research. In 2003 | obtained 
my master’s degree and then the Certificate of 
Professional Tea Taster at the national level. Later | 
was involved in different types of training for tasters 
of all levels and from various countries. | have 
also been responsible for numerous evaluations 
on behalf of the China Tea Association, the Tea 
Inspection Center of the Ministry of Agriculture, 
the Huayun Art of Tea School and Shuren University 
in the province of Zhejiang. | have been invited to 
speak on many occasions at conferences overseas, 
in Japan and in Korea. 
Industry Professional 
What are your main responsibilities? 
In general, my duty is to evaluate newly created 
teas and teas from different regions. | regularly 
participate in several tea contests, inspecting and 
evaluating teas on a local and national level, and | 
teach tea-tasting courses to pupils who wish to 
become professional tasters. 
Which aspect of your profession do you 
like best? 
The opportunity to taste exceptional teas and to 
travel to the different growing regions to meet 
many people who are passionate about the field. 
What major challenges do you think the 
Chinese tea industry will have to face in the 
coming years? 
It is my opinion that the biggest challenge will be to 
interest younger generations in the culture of tea. It 
will also be critical to maintain a steady growth in 
tea production. 
What is your favorite tea? 
In each family of teas there are varieties of a superior 
quality. They are the ones | prefer. 
How would you define a good tea? 
The tea that you like is a good tea. A good tea is the 
tea that is at hand when you are thirsty.A good tea 
brings you all the joy of nature. A good tea lifts your 
spirits and fills you with enthusiasm. 
CHINA
5\5) 

54 
Gardens and Plants 
Spread over 3,781,000 acres (1,530,000 ha), the tea 
gardens of China are organized in many different 
ways. Tea trees are arranged in rows about 3 feet 
(| m) wide and are usually on a mountainside, ac- 
cording to the relief of the terrain. On the steep- 
est slopes, small stone retaining walls are built to 
create a stepped effect. The tea trees can be set out 
as hedges, separated into bushes or cultivated in a 
terraced pattern. 
Although new machinery appears every year in 
the factories, most of the plantations in China are still 
cultivated according to traditional customs. 
CULTIVARS AND VARIETIES 
In the early 1980s, the All-China Commission of 
Examination and Approval of the Best Genus of 
Tea was created to record, examine and analyze 
every cultivar of tea tree growing in China. At 
that time, some 
2,700 species were 
cataloged. 
In 1984, the commission recommended 30 teas 
that were considered the most promising. A few 
years 
later, in January 
1987, 22 cultivars were 
selected as the best and therefore most worthy 
of being cultivated in China. Consequently, these 
22 cultivars were given priority over all others. 
Unfortunately, 
instead 
of seeking 
to 
protect 
the naturally rich diversity of the numerous tea trees 
grown in China, the principal thrust of this kind of 
research is to increase productivity by standard- 
izing cultivation, 
We have chosen to present here four cultivars 
that are found primarily in China and are outstanding 
for the production of tea. Each of them belongs to a 
different tea family. The Fuding Da Bai variety is used 
for the cultivation of white tea, Long Jing 43 for green 
tea, Tie Guan Yin for wulong and Zhu Ye for black tea. 
FUDING DA BAI 
The Fuding Da Bai variety seems to have been 
discovered in 1857, growing wild on a mountain close 
to the town of Fuding. The person who discovered 
it, Chen Huan, is said to have then begun cultivating 
it. The Fuding Da Bai variety enjoys a long period of 
vegetative growth from the beginning of March to the 
end of November Its buds are white, sturdy and very 
hairy, which allows them to remain tender longer. Rich 
in nutrients, the leaves are perfect for the production 
of white tea, but they can also be used to produce 
black and green teas. In addition to being highly resis- 
tant to drought and cold, Fuding Da Bai has a survival 
rate of close to 95 percent. Its very high yield has 
made it one of today’s most widely grown teas in 
China. Some 840,000 acres (340,000 ha) are devoted 
to the cultivation of Fuding Da Bai. 
LONG JING 43 
The Long Jing 43 cultivar was developed by the 
Center for Tea Research at the Agricultural Institute 
of China in the 1960s. In 1978 it won an award at the 
Science Conference of China. 
Chosen in 1987 as one of the best cultivars, today 
it is grown in more than a dozen provinces, including 
Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Anhui, Jiangxi and Henan. Extremely 
productive and resistant, it bears buds that appear 
in great abundance in early spring. Its flat, pale-green 
leaves with brownish edges are very aromatic and thus 
perfectly adapted to the production of high-quality tea. 
TIE GUAN YIN 
The Tie Guan Yin variety, which produces a tea of 
the same name, is widely grown in China, mainly for 
the production of wulong teas. Legend has it that a 
certain MrWei discovered it 200 years ago. Renowned 
for the speed of its growth and the abundance of its 
harvests, Tie Guan Yin has oval leaves, and its young 
buds, easily recognizable by their purplish-red hue, are 
lacy and pointed and have a thick, silky texture. 
Compared to other cultivars, Tie Guan Yin 
contains a larger diversity of organic components, 
such as polyphenols, catechins and other amino acids. 
It is also rich in minerals, such as manganese, iron and 
potassium, which gives it a slightly mineral taste. 

THE AGE OF TEA TREES From one garden to another, 
or even within the same garden, the age of tea trees 
can vary enormously according to customs and the preference of the grower. Whereas young trees are usually 
preferred for the production of green teas, you can find ancient trees that may be several hundred years old being 
used for the production of Pu er and wulong teas in Yunnan and Guangdong Provinces. 
ZHU YE 
Today, the Zhu Ye cultivar is used for the production 
of Oimen, one of the most famous black teas of 
China. Previously intended for the production of 
green tea, this cultivar seems to have been used to 
produce Qimen for the first time in 1815, thanks to 
Hu Yun Long. According to legend, he had cultivated 
Zhu Ye to produce green tea until he returned from 
a trip to Fujian, the birthplace of black teas. He 
decided to convert his production of green tea to the 
production of black tea using the same trees. When 
he realized that the black tea he obtained from the 
Zhu Ye cultivar was better than the green tea, Hu Yun 
Long gave up the production of green tea to devote 
himself entirely to the production of Qimen. 

The Processing of Chinese Teas 
Just as the cultivation of the tea tree has a long tradition 
in China, the processing of the leaves is an art that the 
Chinese mastered many centuries ago. This experience, 
acquired over time and through 
trial and error, has 
spawned a wide variety of processing methods, so much 
so that it would be easy to believe that every region now 
has its own specific process. In fact, that would not be too 
far from the truth. Chinese tea production is based on 
the agricultural traditions of each region, and so different 
methods of processing have been adopted by each region, 
which has given rise to new types of teas. 
As well as being 
recognized as the birthplace of the six great tea families, 
China 
has 
developed 
methods 
to produce 
several 
hundred different types of teas. 
Before the processing methods were refined, the leaves 
were brewed when freshly picked. However since they spoiled 
very quickly, growers decided to first dehydrate them in the sun 
in order to preserve them for longer This idea was probably at 
the root of tea processing, because the heat of the sun on the 
leaves also created a natural chemical reaction that affected 
the taste and properties of the tea. Over time, the Chinese 
have learned to take advantage of this reaction. 
As most of the teas produced in the world are marketed 
in tea bags, the different methods of production, from 
picking to processing, are almost always industrialized. These 
techniques are only efficient in the case of high volumes, so 
large-scale producers need to emphasize quantity over quality. 
And yet tt is still the small-scale traditional methods that are 
characteristic of Chinese expertise: it is also these methods 
that are best at bringing out the distinctive characteristics 
of a tea from a specific terroir 
el 
gre ee 
see whoopee 
Sea 
Factory producing Huo Shan Huang 
Ya tea in Anhui Province. 

WHITE TEAS 
Renowned for their delicate aroma and their refreshing properties, white teas 
are a specialty of Fujian Province, which is divided into three main regions: Fuding, 
Zhenghe and Jianyang. Now, however, several estates in Darjeeling are producing 
white teas, and this trend seems to be spreading to other countries. 
Traditionally produced from precious harvests that last only a very short time 
(about two weeks) in the spring, white teas were once reserved exclusively for 
emperors and other high-ranking officials. These teas are the most minimally 
processed of all. 
White teas are usually divided into two types: those made only from downy buds 
(such as Yin Zhen and silver needles) and those made from a mixture of buds and 
leaves (such as Bai Mu Dan and Shou Mei). They are processed in two main stages, 
withering and sorting. 
WITHERING 
During the withering stage the leaves are simply spread out over bamboo 
racks. Depending on outside conditions, the leaves will be left to air-dry on 
the racks for 12 to 24 hours. 
To speed up the drying process, fans of different 
intensities are sometimes used to increase air circulation. In largerscale 
production settings, a leaf-drying machine Is used for the withering stage. 
SORTING 
This next stage consists of picking out broken leaves and other undesirable 
residue so only the whole buds and leaves are preserved. Sorting is often carried 
out using sieves of 
varying sizes, and branches are removed by hand. Sorting can 
also be done mechanically. 
FIRING 
Traditionally, leaves for white teas are not fired. However, certain lowerquality 
teas of the Mu Dan variety are subjected to oxidation or high-temperature drying, 
which changes their taste and appearance. 

YELLOW TEAS 
Although they have been known and appreciated for several centuries, yellow 
teas are becoming increasingly rare. Only a few remain, such as Jun Shan Yin Zhen. 
One province, Hunan, still produces limited quantities, ensuring the survival of 
this prestigious tea. It is called “yellow” because of an unusual characteristic arising 
from its processing: after being dehydrated, 
the still-warm leaves are covered with 
a damp cloth, triggering a slight oxidation through steaming, which gives the leaves 
a yellowish tinge. 
PICKING 
Only the bud is picked. In order to obtain a high-quality yellow tea, the bud is 
picked before it becomes downy. 
WITHERING 
The withering stage is carried out in the same way as for green tea, on cloths 
or bamboo racks. 
HEATING 
Heating is carried out in pans, and the leaves are stirred by hand. 
STEAM OXIDATION 
The process of steam oxidation involves spreading the leaves directly on the 
ground and leaving them covered with a damp cloth for a period of four to 10 
hours, depending on the weather conditions. Covering the leaves gently warms 
them, which affects the development of their aroma. 
DRYING 
The leaves are then dried for 10 to 20 minutes at a temperature of 230 to 
250°F (110 to 120°C). At the end of this stage, the leaves should contain no 
more than 5 percent humidity. The next stage is sorting by means of sieves, if 
the sorting is done manually, 

GREEN TEAS 
China overflows with famous green teas, including Long Jing, Bi Luo Chun, Anji Bai 
Cha and Xin Yang Mao Jian, to name but a few. Numerous traditional methods — 
handed down through centuries according to the customs of each region — have 
lead to a profusion of green teas, which today represent more than 70 percent 
of all Chinese production. 
The major growing regions are located in the south of 
the country, especially in provinces like Fujian, Zhejiang, Anhui, Henan, Jiangsu and 
Jiangxi. 
PICKING 
Methods of picking vary greatly from one region to another. Usually the leaves are 
picked when young (the bud plus one or two leaves), but there are exceptions 
to this rule. For example, more mature leaves are harvested to produce Tai Ping 
Hou Kui, and in the case of Lu An Gua Pian, only the leaves are picked and the 
bud is left on the stem. 
WITHERING 
Immediately after picking, the leaves are transported to the factory, 
where they will undergo the process of withering. Withering time will 
vary depending on the prevailing conditions and the water content of 
the leaves. The traditional method of withering is to spread the leaves 
on bamboo racks and leave them to dry for one to three hours in 
order to remove the surplus water 
To prevent them from drying too 
rapidly, they are sometimes spread on cloths in the shade. The mecha- 
nical method involves placing the leaves in a cylindrical machine with 
bamboo walls, so that they ‘‘spin dry” for a few minutes while fans 
blow air through them. 
It is important to note that, as soon as the leaves are picked, a 
natural chemical process causes oxydase, a process by which 
enzymes contained in the leaves react with oxygen in the air 
Handling the leaves during the withering and rolling processes 
breaks down the leaves’ cell structure, releasing the oils they 
contain, which, on contact with oxygen, trigger a chemical change 
in the leaves. In order to produce green tea, this natural process 
of oxidation 
must 
be interrupted. This 
is achieved through 
dehydration. 

GREEN TEAS (continued) 
HEATING 
This is the process of heating the leaves until the enzymes that cause oxi- 
dation 
lose their potency. Methods vary according to the region and the 
customs of the individual grower There are many ways to heat leaves. In China it 
usually involves the use of vats. 
Small quantities of leaves are put in pans or vats that are heated with wood, 
coal or electricity. 
The leaves are pressed to the bottom of the vat and then cons- 
tantly stirred so they don't burn. The leaves are processed in small batches. Next, 
different techniques are used according to the form the leaves are supposed 
to take. If the leaves are to be flat, as in the Long Jing variety, they are pressed 
to the bottom of the vat briefly before being stirred in a back-and-forth move- 
ment. If the type of tea is curly, like the Bi Luo Chun variety, they are rolled by 
hand and constantly stirred until they are dry. The heat of the vat can vary. At 
first the heat is low, but once the process is under way the heat is increased. 
When the leaves are mechanically processed, they are heated at least three 
times in rotating cylinders. In between heating periods they are sometimes spread 
on cloths to cool. As the leaves are heated, a chemical process is triggered: the 
sugars and proteins they contain are transformed, giving the tea an aromatic 
quality that is sometimes reminiscent of grilled nuts. This stage also releases the 
polyphenols contained in the leaves. 

ROLLING 
This stage consists of rolling the leaves to break down their cell structure and 
release the aromatic oils they contain. Rolling, which is partly responsible for 
the taste and appearance of Chinese green teas, also changes the shape of the 
finished product, determining whether they will be twisted, flat, needle-shaped or 
bead-shaped leaves. 
When processing is done by hand, rolling and dehydrating are part of a single 
process, as we have seen. In the case of mechanical processing, various machines are 
used to obtain curly or flat leaves. 
DRYING 
During this penultimate stage, the aromatic oils released during rolling become 
stabilized on the leaves. In addition, any remaining water is eliminated so there Is 
no risk of mold. 
At the end of this process, only 2 percent to 4 percent moisture 
remains in the leaves. 
SIFTING 
Lastly, the leaves are sifted through a 
fine sieve to remove any that broke 
during processing. At this stage, the 
leaves are sorted into sizes by means 
of bamboo meshes of different sizes 
placed one on top of the other. 

WULONG TEAS 
By mastering how to oxidize tea leaves, Chinese craftspeople have, over time, 
created a new family of teas, called wulong. They are different from black teas in that 
they are only partially oxidized, and so wulong teas fall between green and black 
teas. It was in the | 7th century that growers developed the method of processing 
these teas that come from Fujian Province, especially from the Wuyi Mountains and 
the Anxi district. 
Because of the vastness of the Chinese territory, the great variety of cultivars grown 
there and the different processing methods used, wulong teas come in a wide range of 
aromas and tastes. However, wulong teas fall into two main categories: teas that may be 
10 percent to 45 percent oxidized and are close to green teas, and teas that may be up 
to 70 percent oxidized and are closer to black teas. Ass for taste, the wulong teas that are 
less oxidized (green wulongs) are generally distinguished by their more delicate, floral 
aromas, whereas the more oxidized wulong teas (black wulongs) have more woody 
notes and are sometimes fruity or even a bit sweet. 
In the following paragraphs we will examine the processing of wulong teas more 
closely, and we will explore this further in the chapter on Taiwan (see pages | 38-142). 
PICKING 
Black wulong teas are produced from highly mature leaves. The leaves will be 
larger and more mature than those chosen for the production of green tea, for 
example. Often three leaves will be picked in addition to the bud. 
WITHERING 
Withering 
is usually carried out on 
cloths outside, but bamboo racks are 
also often used. The leaves are left for 
about two hours, depending on the 
weather conditions. 

OXIDATION 
Next comes the very important stage of oxidation, which governs the deve- 
lopment of the sensorial characteristics of the leaves. When processed manually, 
the leaves are spread on racks and stirred regularly for 12 to 18 hours in order 
to break down the cell structure and release the oils, facilitating the oxidation 
process. During mechanical processing, the leaves are heated at ambient humidity 
in rotating cylinders at temperatures varying from 77 to 86°F (25 to 30°C), for 
about eight hours. 
HEATING 
Next, the leaves are heated to stop the oxidation process. 
The traditional method 
uses the same type of vat used to dehydrate green teas. Mechanical processing 
involves using a rotating cylinder. 
ROLLING 
To obtain the twisted leaves typical of Chinese black wulong teas, the same machine 
is used for preparing twisted-leaf green teas or rolling the leaves for black teas. 
Traditionally, the leaves were rolled manually on a bamboo mat. 
DRYING AND FIRING 
The leaves are then dried in a rotating cylinder for 10 to 
20 minutes at a temperature ranging from 230 to 250°F (110 
toalZO°@) 
Finally, the firing stage is the same as the firing process for 
Taiwanese wulong teas (see page 141) but at higher tempe- 
ratures. The leaves are usually fired twice, and temperatures 
can vary according to the region of production. In the case of 
mechanical processing, an electric machine is used to heat the 
leaves to higher temperatures. It must be noted that firing is 
not necessarily done immediately after drying the leaves. It is 
possible to wait several months after the initial processing. 

64 
BLACK TEAS 
Black teas are made from completely oxidized leaves. They are found mainly in the south 
of China, in the provinces of Yunnan, Anhui (particularly Qimen) and Fujian (particularly 
Zhenghe). 
The Chinese often call them “red teas” (not to be confused with the red teas of 
South Africa), on account of the copper color of the infusion they produce. 
The method 
used to process black teas was developed during the | 8th century. 
Usually, more mature leaves are picked for the production of black teas, except in the 
case of very high-quality teas and “‘beautiful’’ teas (see ‘Beautiful Teas” on page 49). 
WITHERING 
Withering is usually carried out either 
3, 
on the ground or on bamboo racks and 
ve 
\ 
wi 
lasts for five to six hours, long enough 
a 
BN gh 
‘ 
for the leaves to soften and to lose 
oy 
60 percent of their moisture. They must 
be stirred often at this stage. 
In the case of mechanical processing, 
withering takes place in a controlled 
environment. The leaves are placed on 
sieves in brick containers that are usually 
heated by wood fires, a technique that 
gives Chinese black teas a slightly smoky 
aroma. The containers allow air from a 
turbine to circulate below the leaves. 
About four hours later the leaves are 
ready for the next stage. 
ROLLING 
Once the leaves have been thoroughly softened 
through withering, they are 
rolled 
in order to 
break down the structure of their cells, releasing 
the enzymes that trig 
the quality of tea desired, this is usually done by a 
r oxidation. Depending on 
machine that presses 
the leaves onto plates divided 
into strips. 

OXIDATION 
The oxidation period can vary from eight to 12 hours, depending on the ambient 
conditions. The leaves are spread on the ground and covered with large wet 
cloths to stimulate the chemical reaction. 
The temperature must be around 72°F 
(22°C). This technique takes longer than the method used for Indian black teas. As 
the oxidation takes place in milder conditions, a less astringent tea is obtained. This 
method also produces an earthy aroma and a burnt, sweet taste that is typical of 
Chinese black teas. 
Relying on their talent, experience and intuition, independent tea growers 
may decide to tweak different stages of the process. 
DRYING 
Any residual moisture in the leaves is eliminated and the 
oxidation process is stabilized during the drying stage. 
Drying techniques vary from one region to another The 
most common method uses conveyor belts through 
which warm air is blown to dry the leaves. Sometimes 
they are transferred to another wood-heated machine. 
SORTING AND SIFTING 
Whether it is carried out manually or mechanically, sorting and sifting separates the 
leaves into different grades (the sorting) while eliminating dust, branches and other 
residue (the sifting). In the case of a large harvest, the process may be mechanized. 
A bamboo sieve is most commonly used for higher-quality teas. After sorting, the 
teas are ready for packaging. 
FIRING (OPTIONAL) 
In certain cases, another stage is added: firing. This further reduces the moisture 
content and helps standardize the batch. 

66 
PU ER TEAS 
Famous for their history and curative properties, Pu er 
teas are post-fermented teas whose oxidation 
is not 
enzyme related. Also known as ‘‘aged teas,’ “‘post-oxidized 
teas,” ‘black teas’’ (by the Chinese) or even “dark teas,’ they 
owe their specific properties to their processing method, 
which gives them the advantage of improving over time. 
They can be traced back to the Tang dynasty (618-907), 
when tea was boiled and added to soup as a flavoring. 
They derive their name from the town of Pu er in Yunnan 
Province (in southwestern China), where growers from the 
neighboring mountains brought their harvests to be sold and 
sent elsewhere in China or in more far-flung regions, such 
as Tibet and Mongolia. Because of the high demand for tea 
and the fact that it was transported on horseback, the local 
population devised a processing method that consisted of 
compressing the tea into cakes of different sizes and shapes. 
During the Song dynasty, the town of Pu er was a major 
trading center for tea: all the teas sold there were called 
“Pu er’ whatever their particularities. Today, although Pu er 
teas are 
still produced mainly in Yunnan Province, other 
regions, such as Guangxi, Anhui, Guangdong and northern 
Vietnam produce them too. 
In a bid to prevent others from usurping the appellation, 
the Bureau of Standard Measurement of Yunnan Province 
(2003) 
defined 
Pu er teas 
as “fermented 
green 
tea 
products obtained from the large leaves of tea trees harvested 
in Yunnan Province.’ Although not all experts agree with 
this definition, tt is justified in part by the variety of tea tree, 
SHENG AND SHOU: TWO PARENTS OF THE PU ER TEA FAMILY Sheng (“raw”) Pu er, renowned today for 
its rich taste and medicinal properties, is certainly one of the first teas to have appeared in China. In accordance with the 
traditional method of processing, the leaves are usually compressed into cakes, thereby slowly oxidizing on contact with the air, 
which improves their flavor. They are fermented over a very long period of time, from 10 to 50 years. Sheng Pu er teas are not 
considered 
fully mature 
until they have been aged for 30 years. At this stage they are referred to as “vintage.” 
As with all teas, the plant matter used to create them determines their quality. Therefore, the best Sheng teas come from 
wild tea trees that are often several centuries old. During the 1970s, because of the growing demand for rare Pu er teas, the 
Chinese tea industry developed a new type of Pu er that could be brought to market faster: Shou (“cooked”) Pu er teas. Shou 
Pu er teas are processed in the same way as the Sheng variety, but they are exposed to a rapid fermentation over 45 to 60 days 
Two teas from the same year: Shou and Sheng 
to speed up the aging process. These teas are meant 
for immediate consumption, and, unlike the Sheng 
teas, they do not get better if they are preserved 
over a long period of time. Their flavor improves only 
slightly with aging. Shou Pu er teas are usually of 
lower quality,and the leaves used for their production 
come almost exclusively from plantations. Long 
considered an industrial product by true enthusiasts, 
Shou Pu er teas are appreciated today for their 
distinctive characteristics, including an earthy taste 
with hints of undergrowth and the animal-like notes 
triggered by rapid aging. 

Da 
Ye (‘large leaves’), grown in Yunnan. 
The best Pu er teas 
come from the famous mountains located in Xishuangbanna. 
Some of these mountains, including the well-known Youle, 
Banzhang, Manzhuan, Yiwu, Mensong, Banpen and Yiban, are 
still renowned for their tea production. 
Considering it takes several years for the aging process 
to improve the taste of these teas, aged Pu er teas are 
becoming ever more rare, and collectors are willing to 
spend a fortune to obtain a cake of aged Sheng. Rarity 
created a sudden rise in price that many investors saw as an 
opportunity. Therefore, at the beginning of 2000, plantations 
were springing up like mushrooms, as mountainsides were 
cleared to make way for the cultivation of tea trees dedicated 
to the production of Pu er teas. However, this furious 
growth of Sheng Pu er peaked in the fall of 2007, when the 
speculative bubble burst. Seeing the market collapse due to 
the inflated prices, the new investors pulled out. Since then 
the Pu er market has trended toward stabilization. However, 
the market for aged Pu er teas was not affected by this 
phenomenon. Because of the rarity of this product, demand 
and prices remain high. 
DIFFERENT SHAPES OF PU ER TEA In addition to the difference between Sheng and Shou, Pu er teas have other 
distinguishing features. One of the most obvious is indisputably their shape. There, too, the Chinese have shown great 
inventiveness. While the most common shape is the cake, Pu er teas can be compressed into many other shapes and sizes. The 
most common shapes are: 
* 
the cake (bing cha), which usually weighs around |2 ounces (355 g); 
¢ 
the brick (zhuan cha), weighing 9 ounces (250 g); 
* 
the nest (tuo cha), which normally weighs 3/2 or 9 ounces (100 or 250 g) but is also found in a '/e-ounce (5 g) size; 
¢ 
the pumpkin (jin gua), which comes in several sizes; 
* 
the mushroom, weighing around 8 ounces (240 g); 
¢ 
the cube, weighing roughly '/s ounce (5 g). 
Pu er teas are also made into various custom shapes (Buddha, pig and the like) to honor 
specific events, and they can also be left loose. 
THE TRADEMARK, OR NEI FEI A cake of Pu er tea is usually marked with 
a trademark, also called a nei fei, which often indicates the place where the tea was 
processed. 
The trademark is inscribed on a small piece of paper, which is placed on the 
leaves just before they are compressed. 
67 

PU ER TEAS (continued) 
To first step in the process to make Pu er tea is to produce what Is called maocha. 
PICKING 
As is the case with other teas, the quality of a Pu er tea depends in part on the 
plant material used. A grading system from one to nine defines the size of the 
WITHERING 
Processing Pu er teas begins with withering. 
To do this, the leaves are spread in the 
sun for a few hours. In industrial processing, the leaves are spread on racks in a room 
and heated with hot-water radiant heat. 
HEATING 
Small-scale heating takes place in pans and lasts for two to three minutes. 
The batches 
of leaves are far bigger that those used when producing green teas. The pans are usually 
heated by means of wood fires. 
ROLLING 
The leaves are then rolled by hand on a bamboo mat until they form a large ball. In 
industrial processing, the leaves are rolled in the same type of round roller press as 
used for black teas or for curly-leaf green teas. 
SECOND HEATING 
Sometimes the leaves are heated a second time in the pans, also for two to three minutes. 
SECOND ROLLING 
Ihe same method Is used as for the first rolling: by hand on a bamboo mat (the 
traditional method) or rolled in a round roller press (the industrial method). 

DRYING 
After the second rolling, the leaves are dried in the sun or in a temperature- and 
moisture-controlled greenhouse. In industrial processing, the leaves are dried on a 
conveyor belt that passes through a heating machine. 
SORTING 
Next, all residue is eliminated from the leaves by means of manual sorting. 
After all these stages, the maocha is ready. Often, the peasants who produce it sell it 
to other specialized processors who then compress the leaves into different shapes. 
Although the highest-quality leaves are usually reserved for the production of Sheng, 
the maocha can be used to produce both types of Pu er teas. However, from this 
stage onward, the processing methods of Sheng and Shou are different. 
SHENG PU ER TEAS 
Only two stages remain to finalize the processing of a Sheng Pu er tea: 
sorting and compression into cakes (or whatever shape is being used). 
YUNNAN QI ZI BING CHA _ In the world of tea,some methods still represent a tradition or particular way of thinking. Such is the 
case with the cakes of Pu er tea that are inscribed Yunnan qi zi bing cha, which means “tea cake of the seven sons of Yunnan.” 
Why seven 
sons? Seven is a lucky number for the Chinese, and the use of the plural implies that the family will be able to produce several sons, 
which will bring it good fortune. Consequently, by buying a cake of Pu er tea, the customer is acquiring not just tea but also the promise 
of prosperity. In addition, the round shape represents the full moon, which, for the Chinese, symbolizes a gathering of the whole family. 
69 

SHENG PU ER TEAS (continued) 
SORTING AND GROUPING 
Sorting — separating the leaves into different grades — is usually done by hand or by means of a 
machine. 
The leaves are sorted into nine principal grades, the first containing the smallest leaves and the 
ninth, the largest. It is at this stage that leaves from different origins may be grouped together. 
COMPRESSION 
First the leaves are split into groups that 
correspond to the desired weight of each 
cake to be formed. Next they are sprayed 
with steam to hydrate and soften them so 
they are more malleable. It is at this stage 
that the paper indicating the trademark of 
the tea (nei fei) is inserted into the leaves. 
The moist leaves are then placed in a cloth. 
According to traditional practice they are 
then pressed under a stone. A hydraulic 
press is used for mechanical compression. 
DRYING 
Once the cakes have been compressed, they are laid out to dry in the air, 
without any cloths over them, so any residual moisture can escape. In industrial 
processing the cakes are sometimes placed in a room heated by hot water 
pipes, which speeds up the drying process. The cakes are dried until they return 
to their original weight, the weight prior to the dampening they received at the 
compression stage. 
PACKAGING 
The traditional way of packaging Pu er teas was to wrap each cake in its individual 
identifying paper, group the cakes in lots of seven (called tong) and package each 
lot in dried bamboo bark. 
Each tong was placed in a bamboo basket as part of 
a lot of six (called jin). If we do the math, six times seven cakes makes 42 cakes, 
Given that every cake weighs | 3 ounces (375 g) and that there are 42 cakes in a 
Jin, a jin weighs 33 pounds (15.7 kg). 

SHOU PU ER TEAS 
To produce Shou Pu er teas, the fermentation process is accelerated by exposing the 
maocha leaves to high heat and humidity. 
FERMENTATION 
First the leaves are placed in a room and covered with a little water and a cloth. Next, they 
are exposed to high heat and humidity for 45 to 65 days. During this stage they will be turned 
over several times. 
SORTING 
Once the accelerated fermentation is over, the leaves are first sorted by machine 
then by hand in order to eliminate any unfermented leaves. 
COMPRESSION 
Next, the same compression process as for Sheng Pu er teas is used. However 
few Shou Pu er teas are compressed by the traditional method. Hydraulic 
presses are generally used. 
Once all these stages are completed, it is wise to wait at least three months 
before drinking the teas produced, 
to allow the fermentation process to stabilize. 
AGING PU ER TEAS 
The conditions during the aging process can greatly affect the taste a Pu er tea develops. 
Ideally, the temperature should be maintained between 68 and 86°F (20 to 30°C), although 
it does not have to be kept constant.At temperatures below 68°F (20°C) the aging process 
would take much longer The leaves should also be kept at a constant humidity between 
60 percent and 70 percent, and in a dark room, where they will not be exposed to light, 
that has good air circulation. 
The leaves should be kept away from any substance that might 
give off an aroma that they could absorb (such as coffee, spices, etc.). Ideally, Sheng Pu er 
and Shou Pu er varieties should be kept separate. In Hong Kong, several techniques have 
been developed with a view to aging Sheng Pu er teas more quickly. One of them, wet 
storage, involves creating a hot environment between 68 and 95°F (30 to 35°C) with a 
very high relative humidity (90 percent). These conditions greatly accelerate the aging of 
the leaves. 

Tim 
Local Customs for the Preparation of Tea 
Tea is an essential element of daily life in China, and, in 
a territory that includes almost 2.5 million acres 
(| million ha) of cultivated land, it is not surprising to 
find that the methods to prepare tea vary from 
region to region. Several provinces in western China 
follow different customs. 
In Yunnan 
Province, for 
example, the Dai, Hani and Jingpo peoples ferment 
their tea in pieces of bamboo and then add it to 
vegetables. Others chew it as a snack. The Muslims of 
Xinjang, in northwestern China, drink their tea from a 
gaiwan and infuse it with walnuts and sugar. 
China is the only country to produce all six 
families of tea. As the consumption of tea is based on 
local culture, Chinese tastes vary according to region 
and custom. Near Anxi, for example, in the south of 
the country, it is almost impossible to find anything 
other than Tie Guan Yin. Amazingly, even growers 
THE EVERYDAY TEA BOTTLE 
In China, the main utensil used for the 
infusion of tea leaves is the tea bottle. It can be found everywhere. Made of glass, 
plastic or stainless steel, it comes with a lid and sometimes a filter to keep the 
leaves in the bottom, so that several infusions can be made from the same leaves. 
And so, throughout the day, whether they are in a train, a workshop, an office or a 
bus, the Chinese can drink their tea at will. 
who have developed prestigious harvests usually 
show little interest in sipping anything other than the 
specialty of their region. 
In general, the Chinese prefer to drink green tea, 
and they drink it unceremoniously from a tea glass or 
bottle. They usually pour boiling water over the leaves 
— even a very high-quality vintage — then dilute the 
infusion when they have drunk about a quarter of 
the glass. Although it does nothing to develop or 
enhance the taste, this is by far the most prevalent 
practice. However, there is another way of drinking 
tea in China that, by paying more attention to the tea, 
gives far better results: preparing tea in a gaiwan. (The 
words zhong and gaiwan refer to the same object; 
the first is the Cantonese term and the second the 
Mandarin.) 


The gaiwan 
Made up of a simple saucer, 
bowl and lid, whose 
under-side Is used for inhaling aromas, the gaiwan 
is a Chinese container in which tea leaves can be 
infused in a small amount of water in order to 
concentrate the flavors. This method of infusion, 
introduced 
in China during the Ming dynasty 
(1368-1644) 
is still used today by the general 
public as well as by tea enthusiasts. In addition 
to concentrating the flavors, it allows the same 
leaves to be infused several times so that slight 
differences 
of flavor 
are 
revealed 
with 
each 
infusion. 
Although the gaiwan can be used with all kinds 
of tea, it bring out the aromas of more delicate 
teas, such as white or green teas, particularly well. 
It is also very effective for wulong and Pu er 
teas.) Traditionally, the liquid is drunk directly from 
the gaiwan, and the lid is used to hold back the 
eaves. However, to control the infusion better, it 
s preferable to use a cha hai, or reserve container, 
nto which the liquid is transferred when it is ready. 
Here are the main steps of the tasting process 
using a gaiwan: 
¢ 
Heat the gaiwan using hot water. Although this 
step is not absolutely necessary, it prepares the 
gaiwan for the infusion stage and, symbolically, as 
in many rituals related to tea, it is part of the 
purification of the utensils. 
¢ 
Place approximately | heaping teaspoon (5 ml) 
of tea in the gaiwan. The quantity of leaves used 
can vary from “2 to 2 teaspoons (2 to 10 ml), 
depending on the type of tea and the strength 
desired. 
As a general rule, the more leaves used, 
the shorter the infusion should be [. 
* 
Pour water at the required temperature over the 
leaves [J. Make sure that all the leaves are fully 
soaked with water by stirring gently with the lid [i 
* 
Leave the tea to infuse as long as necessary. 
Because of the large amount of leaves used in 

relation to the volume of water, the first infusion 
should be short (15 to 45 seconds). If you would 
like to check the progress of the infusion, pour 
a small quantity of the liquid into a bowl and 
taste it. 
When the infusion is ready, transfer 
the liquid into 
a separate cup or pot, holding back the leaves 
with the lid. Tilt the lid to keep all the leaves in 
the gaiwan, then pour off the liquid completely to 
prevent any leftovers from affecting subsequent 
infusions. Use the saucer to get a better grip on 
the gaiwan Kj. 
Inhale the aromas that emanate from the infused 
leaves and from the inside of the lid. Some of the 
subtlest aromas released by the freshly infused 
leaves are very volatile and can only be detected 
as they evaporate. 
ef 
Jaste; 
For the subsequent infusions, repeat the same 
steps, lengthening the infusion period each time. 
There are several methods for preparing an infusion 
in a gaiwan. Some recommend several short infusions, 
while others stop after two. 
If you are having difficulty getting the water to 
the right temperature for green or white teas, use 
a small amount of cold water (about a quarter of 
the gaiwan) and top up with water at just under the 
boiling point. 


A Meeting with Mr. He, Tea Grower 
Mr. He works for the Office of Agricultural Research, 
where he develops new teas. He has also been a tea 
grower since 1991. 
How did you get to where you 
are today in the world of tea? 
My family has been producing tea for several gener- 
ations, | forget how many exactly, but we grew it 
only for our own use. When we had too much we 
gave it away. Tea is part of my family heritage. 
From 
1987 to 
1991, | studied 
tea 
at the 
Agricultural University: of Zhejiang, and since then 
| have always worked in this field. 
At first | worked 
for the Department of Agriculture, whose main 
function was to teach farmers how to cultivate tea 
trees and the techniques for processing the leaves. 
Now | work for the Office of Agricultural Research 
on the development of new teas.At the same time, | 
own a tea garden where | have been producing my 
own tea since 1991. 
How big is your tea garden? 
My garden covers approximately 2 mous [| mou = 
'/g acre or '/is ha]. | also rent a tea garden covering 
580 mous. 
How much tea do you produce every year? 
Do you have employees? 
| 
| produce more than 1,500 kilos [3,300 pounds] of 
high-quality tea every year. About 20 people work | 
with me on the plantations and in the factory. In 
addition, in harvest season, | employ roughly 300 
pickers. 
Do you have a store where you sell your tea? 
| am both a producer and a trader. | own two tea 
stores, and eight others help me sell my tea. 
To whom do you sell your tea? 
The local or international market? 
| produce mainly for the local market. 
What kind of tea do you produce? 
When | started out, purchasing power was low 
in China, so 
| produced low-grade teas 
using 
machinery for picking. Now that purchasing power 
has increased, | produce high-quality teas from 
handpicked leaves. | produce less tea now than | did 
when | started. Even if production costs have risen 
considerably because of the increase in salaries, | 
want to continue to produce high-quality teas. 
Have you noticed changed in the industry 
and in your clientele since you started? 
At the moment, the Chinese appreciate tea for the 
way it looks, and that limits the development of 
the industry. | try to educate consumers so they will 
learn to better appreciate the taste and the nutritive 
values of tea and not just the way it looks. 
CHIN
a 

On the boat going to the garden of Tai Ping Hou Kui, which is inaccessible by car. 

ONE TEA, ONE STORY 
Tai Ping Hou Kut: 
Green Tea from Anhui Province 
A very long time ago, there lived in the magnificent 
mountains of Huang Shan a monkey couple and 
their baby. One day, the intrepid little monkey went 
out to explore the surrounding area but, caught in 
a thick fog, lost his way. Worried, his father set out 
to find him. Alas, after searching for several days in 
vain, the old monkey dropped from exhaustion into 
a ditch close to Taiping County. 
An old man who used to gather wild tea in the 
area came across the monkey’s body. Saddened by 
this gruesome find, he buried the monkey at the 
foot of the mountain and, to honor him, planted 
a few tea trees and other flowering plants. As he 
was leaving the place he heard a voice say, “Sir, | will 
repay you for what you have done.” The man turned 
around but saw no one. 
The following spring, the man returned to the 
mountain to harvest the leaves of the tea trees he 
The garden in which Tai Ping Hou Kui is grown. 
had planted there and, to his great surprise, saw 
that the mountain was covered in them. That was 
when he heard the voice again, ‘I give you these tea 
trees so that you may live well by cultivating them.” 
Frightened at first by the strange voice, the man 
then remembered the monkey he had buried at this 
very spot, and he understood that it was his spirit 
he had heard. To commemorate this unexpected 
gift, 
he named the hill Hou Gang (“monkey hill”) and 
the tea Hou Cha (“monkey tea”). And as the tea 
was of exceptional quality, the name became Hou 
Kui (kui meaning “the first” or “the best”). 
On a more historic note, Tai Ping Hou Kui 
has been cultivated in the region of Taiping (Anhui 
Province) 
since 
the 
Ming 
dynasty. 
Harvested 
exclusively for emperors under the Qing dynasty, 
Tai Ping Hou Kui tea was awarded the title “King of 
Tea” at the 2004 China Tea Exhibition. 
79 

Chinese Teas 
Bai Hao Yin Zhen | white tea | 
Translation: Silver needles. 
The words bai hao, 
(“White down’’) indicate the superior grade of Yin 
Zhen. 
Alternative names: Yin Zhen, Silver Needles 
Region: Fujian Province (Fuding, Zhenghe, Jianyang) 
Harvest season: Late March to early April 
Cultivar: Da Bai or Da Hao 
The production of this tea, as we know it today, dates 
from the early Jia Qing period of the Qing dynasty 
(1796). This tea was grown exclusively as a tribute 
paid to the emperor At the time, wild tea buds 
were picked in the Fuding region. After 1885, these 
were replaced by the buds of the Da Bai tea tree. 
Considered a great delicacy, this tea is made from 
a harvest of fine picking in which only the buds are 
taken. 
Tasting notes: The smell 
of fresh-cut 
hay and 
fields of flowers bathed in dew emanates from the 
steeped buds. The liquid, which tastes both sweet and 
vegetal, releases delicate notes of flowering clover 
and wheatgrass. Smooth and fluid, it leaves graceful 
aromas, in which apricot and artichoke combine, 
in the mouth. Its long finish, honeyed and thirst 
quenching, is soothing to the palate. 
Recommended 
infusion accessory: A gaiwan or 
small teapot. 2 
Jun Shan Yin Zhen | yellow tea | 
Translation: Silver needles from the emperor's 
mountain 
Alternative name: Mountain Silver Needles 
Region: Hunan Province 
Harvest Season: April 
Cultivar: Jun Shan Qun Ti Zhong. 
This tea is extremely rare. Produced in very small 
quantities, it is grown on a tiny island in the middle 
of Lake Dongting. Although 
it is processed in a similar 
way to green tea, it is characterized by low oxidation 
through steaming. This process gives the leaves a yel- 
lowish tinge. 
Tasting notes: The fine bud is encased in the exquisite 
down of the green needles. The steeped leaves 
release a rich but subtle aroma of plantain, roasted 
peanuts, green vegetables and papaya. Beneath this 
fruit and vegetable mixture, fine notes of vanilla and 
white pepper can be detected. The straw-colored 
liquid 
is made 
hazy by fine down 
particles 
in 
suspension. 
The liquid, round in flavor, is remarkably 
thick and coats the tongue. The sweet taste 
is 
counterbalanced by a touch of acidity. The lasting, 
slightly pungent aroma of artichoke is enriched by 
notes of green wood and peanut. The long vegetal 
and vanilla finish is very gentle. 
Recommended 
infusion accessory: A Gaiwan or 
small teapot. a 

Long Jing Shi Feng | green tea | 
Translation: Dragon's well 
Alternative name: Dragon's Well, Lung Ching 
Region: Zhejiang Province (Shi Feng, Meijiawu) 
Harvest season: Late March to early April 
Cultivar: Long Jing 43 
This tea, which is the most prestigious tea in China, is 
cultivated near Hangzhou, capital of Zhejiang Province 
and renowned for its magnificent Lake of the West 
(Xi Hu). Today, because of its enormous popularity, the 
Long Jing appellation is overused. It is therefore important 
to differentiate between Xi Hu Long Jing and Zhejiang 
Long Jing. Grown in the region of origin, Xi Hu Long Jing 
teas are processed entirely by hand, from picking to final 
sifting. Zhejiang Long Jing teas are harvested throughout 
the province and are, for the most part, picked by hand 
and processed mechanically. As this tea is the most 
frequently copied tea in China, rt must be noted that the 
majority of Long Jing teas on the market are produced 
outside the region of origin and often even in other 
provinces. They are also usually just poor imitations. 
Most Xi Hu Long Jing teas are grown on two 
facing mountain slopes, the famous Shi Feng (‘Lion's 
Peak’), actual site of the village of Long Jing, and 
Meijiawu, 
the neighboring village. The spring harvest is 
divided into two categories. 
The most prestigious is the 
imperial picking, known as ming gian, which takes place 
before the feast of Qingming, around March 20. Two 
weeks later it is the yu gian picking, which is also a high- 
quality harvest. 
According to legend, around the year 250, a Taoist 
monk came across a dragon hiding in a well not far 
from Hangzhou. 
The peasants were praying night and 
day for the rains to return because a terrible drought 
was devastating the region. The monk told the 
villagers of his discovery, and they implored the dragon 
in the well to come to their aid. As soon as they 
started praying, clouds began to gather and it began 
to pour with rain. To commemorate the event, the tea 
and an ancient temple nearby were given the name 
“Dragon's Well.” 
Tasting notes: The tender green leaves harvested on 
the slopes of Shi Feng are of a classic long, flat shape. 
Fine notes of seaweed and raw scallops emanate from 
the steeped leaves. The jade-green liquid releases a 
gentle vegetal aroma. In the mouth, the herbaceous 
attack is fresh and slightly sweet. The vegetal opening 
is full and followed by notes of green bean, cooked 
fennel and arugula in a gently unctuous stream. The 
finish is long in the mouth and mildly astringent, with a 
remarkable balance between sweetness and strength. 
Recommended 
infusion accessory: A gaiwan or 
small teapot. 
81 

Huang Shan Mao Feng | green tea | 
Translation: Downy point of the yellow mountain 
Region: The massif of Huang Shan, the Yellow 
Mountain, in Anhui Province 
Harvest season: April 
Cultivar: Huang Shan Da Ye Zhong 
It is said that long ago a man and a woman, madly in 
love with each other, saw their happiness destroyed 
by a lord who took the woman as a concubine. 
Driven half mad by this separation, the woman ran 
away to rejoin her lover only to find that the lord 
had had him killed. When she found the body of 
her lover in the mountains, she wept so much that 
her tears formed a torrent and her petrified body 
was transformed into a tea tree. Even today, that is 
the explanation given for the year-long humidity and 
cloudiness of the area. 
Tasting notes: The beautiful tender green leaves of 
Mao Feng tea are a delight to the eye. Whole and 
tipped by fine buds, they are slightly twisted, as if per 
forming an elegant dance. Their infusion releases deli- 
cate aromas of sorrel and raw vegetables. The silky 
liquid delights with its extremely delicate notes of 
green bean and artichoke heart. The light finish leaves 
a gentle vegetal impression in the mouth. 
Recommended 
infusion accessory: A gaiwan or 
small teapot. 
Oo 
Anji Bai Cha | green tea | 
Translation: White tea from the region of Anji 
Alternative name: An ji White Tea 
Region: Zhejiang Province 
Harvest season: Late March to early April 
Cultivar: Bai Ye 
Contrary to what the name of this tea implies, it Is in- 
deed a green tea. The name refers to the plant's leaves, 
which are a very pale green and almost white. Still 
largely unknown in the West, it is highly appreciated in 
China. It has only existed, however, for about |5 years. 
The cultivar was originally created in the Anji region. 
However, in recent years it has grown in popularity so 
quickly that a lot of growers, anxious to take advantage 
of the trend, have started to use it. We are now seeing 
teas of the Anji Bai Cha type appear in various regions 
of China. 
Tasting notes: The threadlike leaves of this delicate 
gem are pale green and uniform. Unfurled they look so 
tender and perfect that they seem barely plucked from 
the branch of the tea plant. They release a lush scent 
of greenery mixed with fresh grass and asparagus 
with light notes of white flowers. 
The pale liquid slides 
suavely and smoothly through the mouth. The sweet 
and tart attack swells to aromas of ground cherries 
and fresh beans. The overall sensation is both gentle 
and dazzling and has a remarkable balance. Fresh 
and exquisite, the long vegetal finish is undercut with 
flowers and transports the taster 
Recommended 
infusion accessory: A gaiwan or 
small teapot. 
ae 

Huiming | green tea | 
Translation: 
This tea is named after a monk 
Region: Zhejiang Province 
Harvest season: April to May and September 
to October 
Cultivar: Huiming 
The village of Jingning is located on the slopes of 
Mount Chimu. According to legend, tea production in 
this area dates back more than |,100 years, when the 
monk Huiming built a temple on Mount Nangan and 
planted tea trees around it. An ancient plantation of 
tea trees can still be seen close to this temple. 
Tasting notes: The twisted, dark-green leaves are 
covered in small, downy hairs. The infusion gives off 
aromas of fresh greenery, sea breezes and osman- 
thus flowers. 
The clear, pale-green liquid releases deli- 
cate notes of freshly picked flowers and leaves. The 
gentle attack reveals sweet aromas of fresh soybean 
and melon skin. This round and smooth tea tickles 
the senses far into the throat. The long, smooth finish 
develops into a light note of crocus flowers. 
Recommended 
infusion accessory: A gaiwan or 
small teapot. 
Dong Shan | green tea | 
Translation/alternative name: Mountain of the East 
Region: Jiangsu Province 
Harvest season: April to May 
Cultivar: Qun Ti Xiao Ye Zhong 
This tea is named after the mountain and the village 
where the famous Bi Luo Chun tea originated. Its 
recent history dates back only about |0 years. It is 
produced from the same tea trees as the Bi Luo Chun 
variety. The leaves are handpicked, but the processing 
is entirely mechanical. Once the short season of the 
Bi Luo Chun tea is over, the production of Dong Shan 
begins. 
The rich, aromatic potential of the exceptional 
gardens thus becomes available in a more modest 
form, so that it can be enjoyed on a daily basis. 
Tasting notes: The dark-green Dong Shan leaves 
produce an infusion with pronounced accents of 
ripe peaches, sunflower seeds and fresh scallops. Its 
sturdy liquid is rich and silky. The mouthfeel is intense, 
conjuring up seaweed and walnut. The persistent 
finish narrows to a touch of astringency. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A teapot. 
83 

84 
Anxi Tie Guan Yin | wulong | 
Translation: Iron goddess of mercy of Anxi 
Alternative name: Iron Goddess of Mercy 
Region: Fujian Province 
Harvest season: Late April to early May 
Cultivar: 
Tie Guan Yin 
According to legend, on the way home from his plan- 
tation, 
a grower named Mr Wei used to pass by a 
temple dedicated to Guan Yin, the goddess of mercy. 
Every time he was saddened to see the dilapidated 
state of the temple and the iron statue of Guan Yin. 
Although he didn’t have the means to restore them, 
he decided to burn incense there and to sweep the 
rooms and clean the statue. One night, the goddess 
Guan Yin came to him in a dream and said, “In the 
cave behind the temple lies a treasure that will last 
many generations... Be sure to share it generously 
with your neighbors.’ 
The next day, Mr Wei searched 
the cave and found only a small tea shoot. He took tt, 
planted it in his garden and cared for it so well that tt 
became a sturdy bush that bore beautiful tea leaves 
within two years. When he infused them in a gaiwan 
he noticed a remarkable aroma and a flavor that was 
pure and lasting even after several infusions. Encou- 
raged by these results he took even greater care of 
the plant, and after a few years the original tree had 
produced more than 200 bushes. Now that he had 
become rich, Mr Wei was able to have the temple 
and the statue of the goddess of mercy restored. He 
willingly shared seeds with his neighbors, and they all 
lived comfortably and were able to appreciate the 
delicate Tie Guan Yin tea. 
Another version 
of the legend 
claims that 
Mr. Wei named the tea after both the goddess and 
the iron pot in which he planted the young shoot. 
Although this tea is now very famous and produced 
in many regions throughout China, the best Tie Guan 
Yin is still found in Anxi. 
Tasting notes: In the palm of 
the hand, the rolled leaves 
of Tie Guan Yin tea present a delicate composition 
of shades of green. The infusion envelops the taster 
in a heady spring bouquet of lily of the valley, 
hyacinth and clover flowers. 
The mouthfeel presents 
gentle vegetable notes of artichoke heart and fresh 
mushroom before developing into a suave floral 
fullness. 
The velvety, very generous liquid is enriched 
with savory aromas of zucchini and vanilla. 
The long 
finish brings together vegetal and floral notes in a 
refreshing combination. 
Recommended 
infusion 
method 
accessory: The 
gong fu cha technique (see page 144) and a gaiwan 
or teapot. 

Mi Lan Xiang | wulong | 
Translation: Perfume of honeyed orchid 
Alternative name: Feng Huang Dan Cong 
Region: Guangdong Province 
Harvest season: Late April to early May and 
September to October 
Cultivar: Mi Lan Xiang 
The history of tea began more than |,000 years ago 
in the Feng Huang Mountains (Phoenix Mountains). 
Indeed, the teas of this region are documented in 
the Cha Jing, a tea classic written by Lu Yu in 780. 
Since that time, this region has a notion that is found 
nowhere else: the dan cong, the ‘unique tea tree.’ 
The term dan cong describes tea products made 
from the leaves of one chosen tea tree. The harvest 
from one plant represents approximately 3/2 pounds 
(1.5 kg) of tea. The older the tree, the more precious 
the harvest. The oldest of these chosen trees is 
reputed to be 800 years old. 
Another important custom from this region is the 
use of wild tea trees. Traditionally, this was the only 
method used. Even today, many growers use a tradi- 
tional planting method, in groves. Some gardens are 
also still planted with wild trees that are not pruned. 
These two customs are, of course, reserved for only 
the highest-quality teas. Once processed, the teas will 
be named for their smell. For example, Mi Lan Xiang 
means ‘perfume of honeyed orchid,’ and Huang Zhi 
Xiang means ‘perfume of orange blossom,’ to name 
two. In order to fully develop and stabilize these rich 
aromas, the teas generally undergo two firings, which 
will be as gentle as the quality demands. These teas, 
which were given in tribute to the emperor over 
many dynasties, are still rare today. 
Tasting notes: The long, dark leaves give off discrete 
aromas 
of brown sugar and candied melon. An 
astonishing procession of lychee, grapefruit, citrus and 
brioche emanates from the infusion. Heavier notes of 
toast and morels are carried on this aromatic wave. 
The peach-colored 
liquid has the same aromatic 
exuberance as the leaves. The attack of the mouthfeel 
is surprisingly strong and full bodied. 
The aromas of 
exotic fruit, muscat grape and melon are incredibly 
persistent. 
The sweet finish is drawn out into a minty 
note that is very refreshing. 
Recommended 
infusion 
method 
accessory: The 
gong fu cha technique (see page 144) and a gaiwan 
or teapot. 
85 

86 
Yunnan Hong Gong Fu | black tea | 
Translation: Great red tea of Yunnan 
Alternative name: Yunnan Black Tea 
Region: Yunnan Province 
Harvest season: April 
Cultivar: Yunnan Da Ye 
Contrary to popular belief, black tea has not been 
cultivated in Yunnan for very long. The cultivation dates 
back only to the beginning of the 20th century. In spite 
of that, some of the best black teas in the world are 
found there. The appellation Gong Fu is reserved for 
the highest-quality teas from Yunnan. The exceptional 
teas that have a right to this appellation are character 
ized by the abundance of buds produced by the trees. 
The Yunnan Hong Gong Fu variety comes from high- 
altitude plantations in the Simao region. 
The leaves are 
carefully picked in early spring and are only slightly 
oxidized before being manually dried by pressing in a 
large heated steel vat. 
Tasting notes: The leaves bear an abundance of 
beautiful golden buds. The gentle twisted shapes 
release suave aromas of blond tobacco, caramel 
and scorched earth. The red-orange liquid has a 
marmalade nose. The mouthfeel is round and slightly 
sweet. Aromas of tobacco, exotic wood and ripe 
apricot spread their fullness through the mouth. The 
long, rich finish is remarkably comforting. 
Recommended 
infusion accessory: A stoneware 
teapot or a gaiwan. 
Shou Pu er 1999 | old tea trees | 
Translation: Pu er is a town in Yunnan Province. 
The 
word shou means “cooked,” and 1999 is the year of 
production 
Region: Yunnan Province (Xishuangbanna) 
Harvest season: April 
Cultivar: Yunnan Da Ye 
This 
Pu 
er tea, produced through 
accelerated 
fermentation, has been aged since its production in 
1999. Contrary to Sheng Pu er teas, this aging does 
not significantly improve the tea, but it replaces the 
hardness of the young Shou with a softness and 
roundness. It is sold in cake form (bing), produced by 
the Yunnan Tea Company and stored in Hong Kong. It 
was produced from leaves picked from ancient trees, 
which is rare for a Shou Pu er tea. The broad leaves 
have been compressed in the traditional way and 
separate easily from the cake. 
Tasting notes: Softening as they are rinsed, the leaves 
give off an intense bouquet of peat, roots and sweet 
potato. A strong animal undertone suggests wet wool. 
The liquid is a very dark red-brown. 
The smooth and 
unctuous mouthfeel has aromas of ripe fig, spruce 
and tar Hazy notes of maple wood, brioche and dark 
chocolate caress the palate. The gentle persistence of 
burnt sugar and flint soothes the finish. 
Recommended 
infusion 
method/accessory: The 
gong fu cha technique (see page |44) and a gaiwan 
or teapot. 

SHENG PU ER 1974 HJH 74342 | aged tea | 
Translation: Pu er is a town in Yunnan Province. 
The word sheng means “‘raw;’ and |974 is the year 
of production. Menghai is the main factory where 
Pu er teas are made. The number 74 indicates the 
year In which the recipe was first used. The number 
34 indicates that the mixture is made up of leaves 
of grades three and four The number 2 indicates the 
Menghai factory. 
Region: Yunnan Province (Xishuangbanna) 
Harvest season: April 
Cultivar: Yunnan Da Ye 
This ancient Pu er tea deserves to be called vintage, 
since it has now been aging for more than 30 years. 
It should be noted that it has not been compressed 
into cakes, as the Sheng (raw) Pu er tradition would 
demand. However, It is still a “tea to keep” that has 
been carefully aged in a cellar in Hong Kong. Aging lea- 
ves loose triggers a faster post-fermentation process 
than when leaves are aged while compressed into 
cakes. The tea is brought to maturity faster, but it may 
also deteriorate faster Sheng Pu er teas aged as loose 
leaves first appeared in 1970. This is one of the first 
of its kind, processed by the farmous Menghai factory. 
Tasting notes: The medium-sized leaves, ranging In 
color from dark to light brown, give off the fragrance 
of beaten earth in the sun. The deep, very dense 
liquid has an astonishingly fine texture. 
The mouthfeel 
is complex, offering earthy aromas of raw beet and 
potato. These are mixed with more succulent notes 
of dark chocolate, salty caramel and ground cherries. 
The long finish leaves a refined mineral sweetness. 
This is a generous tea whose primitive beauty has 
been polished by time. 
Recommended infusion method/accessory: The gong 
fu cha technique (see page 144) and a gaiwan or 
teapot. 
87 

WE A 
NY UUNUTMN 
it 
} 
i 
Hy i ; 
HP 
AEN 
vn ip. 
HIN Ns 
Nv» 

Japan 
A WORK OF ART AND THE WORK OF A LIFETIME, TEA 
DRINKING IN JAPAN HAS EVOLVED INTO A SPIRITUAL 
IDEAL KNOWN AS CHADO (‘THE WAY OF TEA”). FROM 
ITS INTRODUCTION TO THE ARCHIPELAGO, TEA WAS 
ENDOWED WITH GREAT VALUE AND QUICKLY BECAME 
THECENTER OFANELABORATERITUAL.TODAY, 
IN BOTH 
THEIR METHODS OF CULTIVATION AND THEIR DEVELOP- 
MENT OF THE CEREMONY THAT ACCOMPANIES TEA 
DRINKING, THE JAPANESE HAVE CREATED A UNIQUE 
PRODUCT, WORTHY OF THEIR REFINED AND DEMAND- 
ING CULTURE. A JAPANESE LEGEND EXPLAINING THE 
DISCOVERY OF TEAINVOLVES BODHIDHARMA, 
A SIXTH- 
CENTURY INDIAN PRINCE AND THE FOUNDER OF CHAN 
BUDDHISM, WHICH WOULD BECOME ZEN BUDDHISM 
IN THE 12TH CENTURY. ACCORDING TO THE LEGEND, 
BODHIDHARMA MADE THE IMPOSSIBLE VOW OF NEVER 
SUCCUMBING TO SLEEP SO THAT HE COULD DEVOTE 
HIMSELFTOENDLESSMEDITATION.HOWEVER,ONEDAY, 
EXHAUSTED FROM HIS CONSTANT WAKEFULNESS, HE 
FELL ASLEEP. WHEN HE AWOKE, ENRAGED AT HAVING 
INTERRUPTED HIS MEDITATION, HE TORE OFF HIS 
EYELIDS AND BURIED THEM. A FEW YEARS LATER, 
PASSING BY THE EXACT SAME SPOT, HE SAW THAT TWO 
MAGNIFICENT BUSHES WITH OBLONG LEAVES HAD 
GROWN THERE: HIS EYELIDS HAD GIVEN BIRTH TO TWO 
TEA TREES. 

90 
History 
Tea was introduced to Japan in the eighth century by 
monks who had spent time in China studying Buddhism. 
At the time, tea was already a popular beverage in China, 
and the monks used it as a stimulant to stay awake during 
their long hours of meditation. History records the monk 
Saisho as being the first to have brought the custom back 
to Japan, so we have reason to believe that Japan's inter 
est in tea was roused at this time. However, because of 
the strained relations between China and Japan, it was 
not until the end of the |2th century that Japan could 
truly be considered as having a tea culture. 
In 1191, the monk Eisai (1141-1215), founder 
of the Rinzai sect of Zen Buddhism, brought a few 
tea-tree seeds back from a pilgrimage to China. He 
planted these seeds in the district of Hizen, in the 
northern part of the island of Kyushu, as well as 
around the monasteries of Hakata (Fukuoka). Eisai 
spread the idea that tea should be consumed for its 
medicinal properties. 
We are also indebted to him for 
the first Japanese book on tea, published in 1211. In 
addition to seeds, he also introduced the Japanese to 
the tea preparation method that was used in China at 
the time, under the Song dynasty (960—|279).The tea 
leaves were ground to a fine powder (matcha) before 
being brewed. The importance of ritual and discipline 
as well as the austere nature of Rinzai Zen philosophy 
no doubt had a great influence on the rigidly codified 
evolution of the Japanese tea ceremony. 
Later, some tea trees were planted on the main 
island of Honshu, near Kyoto, the former capital of 
Japan. Originally cultivated by monks to stimulate 
them during their meditation sessions, tea was soon 
adopted by intellectuals and statesmen. In the | 3th 
century, while noblemen were meeting to drink tea 
during ceremonial gatherings, the samurai also made 
it part of their lifestyle. The fashion for tea-tasting 
contests began, just like those held in China during 
the same period. More and more enthusiasts got 
together to test their ability to recognize different 
Chinese teas for days and nights on end. 
Later, Japanese grand tea masters appeared on 
the scene. In the |6th century, one of them, Sen 
No Rikyu, codified the tea ceremony 
(chanoyu), 
establishing a close relationship between Buddhist 
values and the various schools of Japanese tea of 
that 
era. 
From 1641 to 1853, Japan remained cut off from 
the rest of the world. It was a policy of isolation, known 
as sakoku, which forbade anyone from leaving the 
archipelago and permitted almost no contact with 
the outside world. For more that 200 years China 
alone provided the rest of the world with tea. 
How-ever, the isolation of Japan was not entirely 
negative because, in addition to contributing to the 
development of the unique character of Japanese 
culture, it led to the perfecting of new ways of 
processing tea. Thus, in 1738, Soen Nagatani created 
a method of leaf dehydration using steam. Thanks to 
this method, which brings out the fresh aroma of the 
leaves, he was able to create a green tea that was 
very different from Chinese green teas and which 
rapidly gained in popularity. 
In 1859, Japan abandoned its policy of isolation 
and finally opened up to the international market. It 
began exporting tea overseas, mainly to the United 
States, which became a major source of revenue. At 
the end of the 19th century the archipelago began 
industrializing tts production methods, in particular 
with the use of heated rotating cylinders invented 
by Kenzo Takahashi. 
The production of black tea on 
Japanese soil also began at this time. 
During the years after the First World War, 
Japanese tea exports set unprecedented records. 
At that time, Japan exported up to 22,003 tons 
(19,961 t) of green tea and | 1,178 tons (10,141 t) 
of black tea, But the explosion in demand was short- 
lived, and Japanese exports of black tea dropped 
again very quickly. 
As the Americans developed a preference for 
“English-tasting” tea (full-bodied black tea), it became 

difficult for the Japanese to compete with the large 
emerging growers in Sri Lanka, India and Kenya, who 
could produce tea at very low cost. In the face of this 
competition, the Japanese market gradually turned 
more and more toward domestic distribution. 
Several studies conducted by Japanese research- 
ers in the 1920s revealed scientific proof that tea 
contained vitamins and catechins. To promote the 
sale of 
tea, the government published these results to 
encourage the Japanese to drink it on a daily basis, as 
an integral part of their diet. After the Second World 
War, various groups and associations of growers 
continued to promote the benefits of tea, and all 
sorts of by-products based on tea began to appear. 
Later, to facilitate distribution, 
tea was marketed in tea 
bags, and a lot of attention was paid to packaging and 
presentation. 
Since then, Japan has increased its productivity 
considerably by using mechanical harvesting and new 
techniques for taking cuttings. They have concentra- 
ted almost exclusively on the production of green 
teas, 

92 
The Japanese Tea Masters 
Various tea masters 
have made their mark on 
the 
history of tea 
in Japan. Through 
continual 
aesthetic and spiritual research, they have steered 
tea culture in a new direction. 
The three tea masters 
presented below are renowned for having developed 
the Japanese art of preparing powdered tea and 
for establishing the precepts of the tea ceremony, 
chanoyu. 
MURATA SHUKO 
The father of the Way of Tea, or chado (see page |09), 
and of the tea ceremony as we know it today, is the 
Zen monk Murata Shuko (1422-1502). 
This disciple 
of the famous and eccentric monk Ikkyu taught his 
master that the spirit of the Buddha could be present 
not just in the act of drinking tea but also in the 
simple gestures involved in its preparation. Shuko 
was the first to serve tea to his guests himself and to 
simplify the tasting rules. As official tea master to 
the shogun Ashikaga Yoshimasa, he introduced the 
qualities of refinement, 
rigor, spiritual values and 
humility into the preparation of tea. He put an end 
to the use of sophisticated salons and luxurious 
reception rooms. He himself designed the first build- 
ing devoted to the tea ceremony, a simple cabin made 
of rustic materials at the back of a garden. 
TAKENO JOO 
Having been 
initiated 
into the tea ceremony by 
Shuko’s disciples, Takeno Joo (1502-1555) first prac- 
ticed the tea ceremony according to the principles of 
the master Shuko, but he then enriched it with the 
ideal of Zen simplicity. His tearoom, decorated with 
modest objects like everyday bowls from Japan or 
Korea, was closer to a personal concept of how to 
practice the Way of 
Tea. He eliminated the shelves 
Shuko used to display precious Chinese objects 
and replaced them with a piece of calligraphy and 
a simple floral arrangement. His “simple and natural’’ 
ceremony was imbued with honesty, caution and the 
strict emotional control typical of the wabi philosophy. 
SEN NO RIKYU 
A disciple of Takeno Joo from the age of 19, Sen 
No 
Rikyu 
(1521-I591) 
radicalized 
the 
trend 
established by his master The ceremony he offered 
became a cross between performance art and spiritual 
practice.While unifying the style of his predecessors, he 
set down the rules of the chado and codified chanoyu, 
the tea ceremony, which he raised to a high degree 
of perfection. Poverty, humility, modesty and imper 
fection became the fundamental criteria of the chado. 
Sen No Rikyu reduced the number of utensils used in 
the ceremony and demanded that the teahouse be 
built of coarser materials, such as straw, earth or wood 
still bearing tts bark. He also invented the nijiri guchi, a 
small entrance that obliged the guests to bow their 
head to enter the tearoom. 
Though famous for having defined the seven 
rules of the chanoyu ceremony (see page | 10), Rikyu 
went down in history for having been sentenced to 
commit suicide for treason by the powerful Emperor 
Hideyoshi. 
The real reasons for this sentence remain 
obscure. According to legend, following a final tea 
ceremony in the company of his faithful friends, he 
broke his bowl to indicate that “the lips of misfortune 
had touched it and so no other man should drink 
from it!’ Then he committed seppuku (hara-kiri) in 
silence with honor and dignity. 


94 
The Japanese Tea Industry 
The Japanese tea industry has gone through several 
growth phases over time. First established to respond 
to the tastes of the international market, the industry 
originally exported a large portion of tts production. 
That is why black tea was still being produced in Japan 
until the early 1970s. Today, almost all production is 
reserved for domestic consumption and less than 
| percent is exported. Specializing in the production of 
green tea, most of which (70 percent) is Sencha, Japan 
is the seventh-largest tea grower in the world today. 
While 
the younger 
generations 
are 
more 
interested in coffee — and in spite of the fact that 
tea drinking is still deeply entrenched in Japanese 
traditions — Japan is currently witnessing an evolution 
in consumer tastes. Each year Japan imports several 
thousand tons of grands crus tea from Darjeeling 
as well as wulong tea from the high mountains of 
Taiwan. 
Nevertheless, the Japanese tea industry 
continues to flourish, thanks to, among other things, 
many 
tea-based 
products, 
such 
as 
toothpaste, 
pharmaceutical 
products, 
pasta, 
iced 
tea 
and 
polyphenol extract in capsule form. 
It is rare to find small-scale growers in Japan who 
carry out all stages of production, from picking to the 
final processing of the tea, themselves. 
The very high 
cost of machinery forces the growers or processors 
to specialize in a specific stage of production, frag- 
menting the traditional chain of production. Thus, the 
Japanese tea industry comprises several sectors, as 
shown in the diagram below. 
A BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE JAPANESE TEA TRADE 
Production area: 
119,100 acres (48,200 ha) 
Total annual production: 101,500 tons (92,100 t) of green tea 
Annual production by province or region: Shizouka, 44,000 tons (39,900 t); Kagoshima, 26,570 tons (24,100 t); 
Mie, 8,400 tons (7,620 t); Miyazaki, 4,220 tons (3,830 t); Kyoto, 3,275 tons (2,970 t); Nara, 2,790 tons (2,530 t); 
Fukoka, 2,570 tons (2,330 t); Saga, 2,130 tons (1,930 t); Kumamoto, 1,920 tons (1,740 t);Aichi, 1,060 tons (964 t) 
Average production yield: |,700 pounds per acre (1,910 kg/ha) 
Annual exports: 2,105 tons (1,625 t) of green tea; 159 tons (144 t) of other teas 
Province that exports the most: Shizuoka 
Principal purchasing country: United States, since 1853 
Source: Tea Board of Japan, 2007. The data relates to aracha. (Values in imperial units of measure supplied by publisher.) 

7 
The tea market in Shizuoka is often bustling with activity as early as five o’clock in the morning. 
Japanese farmer-growers maintain their gardens 
and pick the tea according to the quality and the type 
of tea desired. Some farmers process the harvest them- 
selves, but usually they sell it or subcontract the pro- 
cessing to specialized companies that turn the leaves 
into aracha (see box below). In turn, these companies 
take the various batches of aracha to the tea market, 
where it is sold at auction. Many tasters will sample the 
batches of aracha, and they will often separate them into 
various groupings. (As there are corporate groups that 
offer exclusivity and certain benefits, some companies 
sell their aracha directly to their partners.) The selected 
batches of aracha will then be sent to various distribu- 
tors to undergo the different processes required to turn 
the leaves into a finished product. Finally, brokers and 
importers will sell the tea to the many distributors and 
retailers. 
ARACHA 
Processing Japanese green teas involves several stages. Aracha is the name given to leaves that have 
undergone a partial processing that will be completed later. Only 75 percent processed, it is a raw product that 
includes stems. Aracha is used to produce Bancha, Bocha or Sencha teas. The type of tea produced is usually 
determined in advance, based on the quality of the leaves picked. 
95 


A Meeting with Mr. Sato, 
Industry Professional 
Mr. Sato is the manager of the tea market in 
S117 40(o)\< PAW 11-182 O10 10 com 9A0H 010108 a] rose @ 
801001010) 
to 200,000 t) of tea are traded every day during 
harvest time. 
How long have you been working 
in the world of tea? 
It has been at least 40 years. 
What led you to choose this profession? 
My father was a tea grower, and when he came to 
sell our leaves at the market, | was always glad to 
come with him. Despite coming here so often, | 
realized that my interest, curiosity and desire to 
work in this field only grew. | did what | needed to 
do to apply, and | have been working here now for 
several decades. 
What are your everyday 
responsibilities? 
| supervise trading, make sure that the rules are 
respected and record sales. 
What part of your job do you prefer? 
| love to see and to taste all the beautiful teas! | 
also enjoy the pace of the work, which is often 
frantic in the high season. 
Can you tell.us a story related to your job? 
During 40 years in the business | have been able to 
conclude some very large deals, but | remember 
my first major transaction. | was young, quite new 
to the market, and | negotiated the sale of 100,000 
Mr. Sato (at left). 
kilos [220,000 pounds]! That’s a lot of tea. There’s 
a lot of pressure in those circumstances, and the 
seller and the buyer are often pretty tense 
... 
Once the deal was concluded | was very proud to 
have been able to control the situation. 
What challenges will the Japanese industry 
have to face in the coming years? 
| must tell you that we are mainly concerned 
about the excessive popularity of iced teas sold 
in bottles. Now there 
are 
vending machines 
everywhere. It’s a good product, cheap and healthy 
(in Japan we don’t add sugar). However, it is 
obvious that people, especially young people, are 
no longer taking the time to drink tea made from 
leaves in the more traditional way. 
We must strive 
to promote interest in high-quality teas that are 
savored rather than drunk. We would like young 
people to taste good tea while they are young and 
remember it all their lives. 
What ia your favorite tea? 
Japanese green teas that have particular and unique 
characteristics, whether it’s a Sencha, a Gyokuro 
or a Bancha. 
How would you define a good tea? 
For me, a good tea is often a combination of things: 
the color of the liquid, the shape and the look of 
the leaves, a pleasant aroma and a rich taste. 
97 

98 
Japanese 
Terroirs 
As is the case everywhere, the quality of the terroir 
is a determining factor in the flavor and character of 
a tea. Because the sea is never more than 75 miles 
(120 km) away from the Japanese islands, the sea 
air imparts iodized notes to the leaves and a marine 
aroma suggesting seaweed and fresh grass. But, as we 
will see later, processing methods also contribute to 
the teas’ distinctive flavor. 
Sea of Japan 
Oki PES NPCIOES @ 
3x’ 
or 
Tsushima Island 
ind 
In Japan, tea plantations are found from the Akita 
Prefecture in the north to the Okinawa Prefecture in 
the south. However, the southern islands of Kyushu 
and Shikoku, as well as the southern part of the main 
island of Honshu, are the major tea-growing areas. 
The climate is cooler there than in the rest of the 
archipelago, 50 to 65°F (10 to 18°C), and annual 
precipitation can be up to 60 inches (1,500 mm). The 
Sado oy 
PACIFIC 
OCEAN 

notion of a terroir usually applies less to Japanese teas, 
except for the grands crus. It is quite common to mix 
harvests from different gardens located in the same 
region, and sometimes even harvests from different 
prefectures, before processing them together. The 
map opposite provides an overview of Japan’s main 
tea-growing areas. 
SHIZUOKA PREFECTURE 
Located on the Pacific coast, Shizuoka Prefecture is 
a highly regarded tea-growing region. Covering an 
area slightly larger than 49,400 acres (20,000 ha), it 
accounts for almost half the archipelago's production, 
some 44,100 tons (40,000 t) of tea per year The 
region’s proximity to the ocean 
creates harsher 
weather conditions, a lower mean temperature and 
variable weather patterns, making Shiuzuoka ideal 
for growing quality tea. Tea trees raised in tough 
conditions often have more complex flavor profiles. 
This prefecture has along history in the production 
of tea, and most of the harvests from other parts 
of the country are brought here for final processing. 
Several hundred tea producers are based here, ensuring 
a very high output and extensive distribution. 
KYOTO PREFECTURE 
Located in the middle of the island of Honshu, Kyoto 
Prefecture is characterized by a damp, subtropical 
climate with mild winters and humid summers. Since 
the city of Kyoto was the capital of Japan for more 
than 
1,000 years, tea was intensively cultivated in 
the area. Today the gardens surrounding Kyoto are 
devoted to the production of high-quality tea and 
supply roughly 3 percent of 
Japan’s total output. 
One of the most prestigious tea-growing areas 
of the archipelago is Uji, located southeast of Kyoto. 
The first plants brought back by Eisai at the end of 
the 12th century were transplanted to this region. 
As the gardens are concentrated in the inland hills, 
they are naturally protected from the bad weather 
of the coastal region. Considered an original growing 
area and renowned for the rich quality of the teas it 
produces, the Uji region is famous for its Matcha and 
Gyokuro teas. 
KAGOSHIMA PREFECTURE 
(ISLAND OF KYUSHU) 
The island of Kyushu Is in the very far south of the 
country. The climate is subtropical, so the gardens of 
this region produce all kinds of teas: Sencha, Bancha, 
Kabusecha and Gyokuro, as well as an exclusive variety, 
Kamairicha, which Is a green tea that is steamed in vats. 
As Kagoshima Prefecture isthe main growing region, 
the teas produced there represent about 20 percent 
of the country’s total output. The other major growing 
regions on this island are Saga, Miyazaki and Fukuoka. 
NARA AND MIE PREFECTURES 
The less famous teas of Nara Prefecture are grown on 
the Yamato plateau, at an altitude between 650 and 
1,650 feet (200 to 500 m). They include Sencha, 
Bancha and Kabusecha varieties. The gardens of Mie 
Prefecture are at a lower altitude and produce mainly 
Kabusecha and Sencha varieties. 
29 

Japanese Gardens and Plants 
The Japanese use a unique method of tea cultivation, 
which is demonstrated by the beauty of Japanese 
tea gardens. The tea trees are planted side by side 
and pruned to form cylindrical hedges of varying 
heights and with a slightly rounded surface. In order 
to achieve this hedge formation, the tea trees are 
planted in twos, back to back and about 
| foot 
(30 cm) apart, with each group of two separated by 
a distance of about 2 feet (60 cm). 
The gardens are situated on gradually inclined 
terraces in the foothills of gently sloping mountains. 
Gardens located on the plains are usually used to 
produce more industrial teas. To make using machines 
easier, these gardens are laid out on flat ground without 
shade trees. Growers spread rice straw between the 
rows to prevent the soil from eroding or drying out. 
In Japan, it takes an average of four to five 
years before the first buds from new tea trees are 
ready to be picked, three years if the trees are on 
the plains. The year before the first picking, the trees 
are pruned in such a way that the new branches 
will form the desired rounded profile. This shape 
provides a maximum picking surface so that a greater 
number of buds can be harvested. Every five to six 
years the trees are subjected to more rigorous 
pruning (daigari) after the first spring picking, which 
strengthens the plant and stimulates growth. After 
this pruning, the tea trees become dormant and are 
not harvested from again for one year. The productive 
life of a Japanese tea tree varies according to its yield, 
but it is rarely longer than about 30 years. 

sis 
Fans circulate air above the tea trees. 
A widespread technique used in Japan is to 
install fans to circulate the air above the tea gardens. 
Strategically placed at a height of about 
|3 feet 
(4 m), these fans disperse any layers of fog and retain 
the heat that accumulates in the soil during the day. 
They also prevent the formation of dew, which can 
damage new shoots; in the heat of the sun a drop 
of dew can act like a magnifying glass and burn the 
leaves. In addition, when the temperature drops be- 
low 32°F (O°C), the dew freezes and can spoil the 
quality of the leaves. 
The fans are usually programmed 
to start up automatically when the temperature 
reaches 40°F (5°C). 
JAPANESE CULTIVARS 
Today there are 55 cultivars registered in Japan, of 
which about 40 are used exclusively for the produc- 
tion of green teas. Despite this variety, most of the 
Japanese production comes from one hybrid, the 
Yabukita cultivan Gokou, Beni Fouki and Samidori 
cultivars are among the others used. 
YABUKITA 
Yabukita is a hybrid of the sinensis variety that was 
developed 
by Hikosaburo 
Sugiyama 
in 
1954, 
in 
A garden in the Ashikubo valley. 
Shizuoka Prefecture. Renowned for its resistance to 
the weather conditions on the islands and its intensity 
of flavor, which is more suited to Japanese taste, this 
hybrid quickly spread throughout the archipelago. 
Almost 70 percent of Japanese tea gardens are 
composed entirely of Yabukita plants. In Shizuoka 
prefecture that percentage rises to 90 percent. 
In spite of the particular advantages of the Yabukita 
cultivar, there are certain disadvantages to uniform 
cultivation. As all the plants carry the same genetic 
baggage, they have the same qualities but also the 
same defects, which makes them more vulnerable to 
diseases and pests. Consequently, growers must take 
particular care of them. 
The widespread use of the Yabukita variety has 
the advantage of making grouping in batches easier, 
but it can also give rise to a certain loss of flavor. 
GOKOU 
Grown 
on 
small 
lots around 
Uji, in the Kyoto 
Prefecture, the Gokou cultivar is used primarily for 
the production of Gyokuro and Matcha tea. It was 
created by the Center for Tea Experimentation in 
Kyoto and is renowned for Its aromatic qualities. 
101 

102 
BENI FOUKI 
Originally, the Beni Fouki cultivar was used in Japan 
for the production of black tea. Today, it is also 
grown In southern Japan and processed into green 
tea, which is dehydrated in vats. Some claim it is 
high in catechins, and this tea is currently enjoying 
a surge in popularity. Research 
is under way to 
prove its medicinal value, particularly in the fight 
against certain allergies. 
SAMIDORI 
The Samidori cultivar, fruit of the research of Masa- 
Jiro Koyama, is mainly used in groupings to create 
COVERED GROWING 
_Tea trees are sometimes covered by special canopies 
to reduce the plants’ exposure to the sun, which triggers a change in the chemical 
composition of the leaves. Unable to carry out the process of photosynthesis effectively, 
the trees are forced to compensate by producing more chlorophyll and amino acids. 
To 
do this, they must draw more nutrients from the soil. This type of cultivation produces 
tender, very dark-green leaves that contain more chlorophyll and fewer tannins. 
Traditionally, straw was strewn over bamboo structures erected over the tea plants 
to reduce sunlight. Although straw is still used today, the structures 
are usually metal and covered with mesh netting made of synthetic 
fibers. Straw can cut out up to 95 percent of the light, whereas mesh 
netting blocks about 80 percent of the sun’s rays. 
Following traditional methods, the shaded plants are not pruned, 
which maximizes the number of buds along the whole length of the 
stem. Hence, in spite of the high cost of labor, covered tea plants are 
picked by hand. The picking takes place later in the spring because the leaves, deprived of light, 
take longer to reach maturity. 
The pickers must separate the stems one by one to select the new 
shoots. Covered gardens are used to produce Gyokuro, Kabusecha, Tencha and Matcha teas, and 
the duration of covering depends on the type of tea desired. 
Gyokuro and Matcha teas. Its bright-green leaves pro- 
duce a richly scented liquid with a hint of bitterness. 
HARVESTING 
Japanese tea harvests are seasonal and continue from 
mid-May to September The first harvests, called 
shincha (literally ‘new tea’), are eagerly awaited and 
often the most expensive. High-quality shincha picking 
is done by hand and only the smallest shoots are 
chosen. Depending on the altitude, four or five 
harvests will take place each year It is necessary to 
wait 45 to 50 days between harvests to allow the 
new shoots to grow back. 

Processing Japanese Green Teas 
Japanese methods of processing tea were, for a long time, 
inspired by Chinese practice, but today they are radically 
different, mainly because of state-of-the-art technologies 
and specific processing methods that were developed and 
refined over centuries. 
For the production of green teas, the Japanese “fire” 
the leaf using steam. Also known as the “Uji method,” this 
process preserves extremely fresh aromas with notes of 
the sea and herbaceous plants. 
In order to maintain 
competitive 
pricing on the 
international market in the face of high labor costs, Japanese 
growers have been quick to adopt technical advances. 
To produce Japanese-style green tea, the leaves must 
first be turned into aracha, a raw product that is then sold 
at auction to companies who complete the processing. 
After picking, the tea must undergo three essential stages in 
order to become aracha: steaming, rolling and drying. 
Hkeye} 

TRANSFORMING THE LEAVES INTO ARACHA 
PICKING 
Picking is carried out with a machine equipped with scissors and an air 
compressor, which blows the leaves into a bag. Two workers operate this small 
cutter, which adapts to the shape of the hedge to ensure precision picking. 
Faster but less precise, the harvester used for gardens located on the plains 
can be handled by just one person. Once the leaves are picked, they are 
quickly sent to the factory for processing. 
WITHERING 
Usually, the freshly picked leaves are sent straight to the steaming stage. 
However, some growers let them stand for a few hours. 
STEAMING 
The leaves are then heated with steam, a process that lasts 20 to 80 seconds. 
Steaming is extremely important, relative to the aromatic quality of the tea. A 
short steaming period (20 to 40 seconds) produces a tea in the Asamushi style: 
leaves are larger, fewer are broken, and they have a full, light taste reminiscent 
of green vegetables. A long period of steaming (40 to 80 seconds) produces a 
tea in the Fukamushi style: the leaves have been softened by the long steaming, 
are more easily broken, are smaller and produce an intense flavor and a darker 
liquid. This is the style of tea that the Japanese prefer today. 
COOLING 
After steaming, the leaves are cooled either by being blown through synthetic mesh tubes using 
air jets or by being placed in large rotating cylinders. 
This step eliminates excess humidity that 
could damage the leaves. 

FIRST DRYING 
The leaves then undergo a preliminary drying process at 210°F (100°C) for 
about 45 minutes in a rotating cylinder After this, they spend 30 minutes in a 
similar machine, where the temperature is lowered from | 75°F down to |05°F 
(80°C to 40°C), 
The edges of the cylinder are made of rough bamboo, and during drying, 
mechanical arms mix the leaves constantly so they brush against the walls. 
The mixing action is a determining factor in the color of 
the tea and the release 
of tannins, which by the same token affects the taste (texture, astringency, etc.) 
of the tea. 
ROLLING 
Rolling, which lasts 20 to 30 minutes, 
softens the stems 
and releases the 
natural oils contained in the leaves. 
SECOND DRYING 
The leaves are dried a second time for 20 to 40 minutes at 80°F (30°C), again 
in one of the cylinders, in order to reduce the humidity created by the rolling 
process and to stabilize the oils on the leaves. After this stage, roughly 13 
percent of the water remains in the leaves. 
Some processors use up to five or six different rotating cylinders through- 
out the processing, each of which has a different temperature and a different 
rotation time. The goal is to maintain the leaves at a constant temperature 
between 85 and 95°F (30 to 35 °C) and to reduce their moisture content 
gradually. 
SHAPING 
A machine equipped with mechanical arms gives the leaves a needle 
shape during a process that lasts between 40 and 60 minutes at 
temperatures varying from 158 to 248°F (70 to 120°C). 

THIRD DRYING 
The loose leaves then circulate on a conveyor belt for about 30 minutes as they 
are heated to 185°F (85°C), It is this third drying that finally produces aracha. 
FINAL PROCESSING 
GROUPING 
At the final stage of processing, different batches of leaves are sometimes grouped together and blended. 
SIFTING AND SORTING 
Next, dust and stems are separated from the leaves, and the leaves are then 
sorted into different sizes using sieves. The sifting is done mechanically by 
means of static rollers and mesh. The leaves can also be sifted electronically 
using several cameras equipped with optical scanners. Each leaf is scanned 
and, depending on its size and color, is separated from the others by a high- 
precision air jet. 
FINAL DRYING 
The final drying stage varies depending on the type of tea and the taste required. 
| 
The leaves are usually heated to a temperature of about | 05°F (40°C) to bring out 
the aromas. When the firing time is increased, 
the aroma of fresh grass diminishes 
and notes closer to those of grilled nuts are released. After the final drying stage, 
| percent to 3 percent humidity remains in the leaves. 
PACKAGING 
Japanese teas are usually packaged mechanically, Batches of | ounce to 44 pounds (25 g to 20 kg) are vacuum-packed, 
and sometimes nitrogen is added to the bag before sealing to protect the leaves during transportation and to ensure 
a longer shelf life. 

The Local Way of Preparing Tea 
Although making tea using the classic method of 
brewing from loose leaves is still the Japanese national 
drink, it does not fit well with the lifestyle of young 
Japanese. New products, such as iced coffee and iced 
tea, which are widely available from vending machines, 
are gaining In popularity and drawing the younger 
generation 
toward 
a 
more 
instant 
form 
of 
consumption. 
However, 
several 
customs 
remain 
fashioable. Restaurants serve Bancha, Hojicha and 
Genmaicha teas in teapots. For a more upscale tasting 
experience, Sencha and Gyokuro teas are brewed 
according to the traditional senchado method. 
SENCHADO 
The broad meaning of senchado is “Way of Sencha.” 
Senchado is an elaborate ritual method of steeping 
Japanese teas from leaves. It was created by learned 
BOTTLED ICED TEA 
Bottled iced teas can be found eve- 
rywhere in Japan and are a commercial success. Most are based 
on green tea, but there are some that use wulong or black tea. 
Although the tea is brewed and packaged in Japan, it is usually 
produced from leaves grown in China, Taiwan or Vietnam. The 
plastic bottles in which it is sold are made from PET plastic 
(polyethylene terephthalate), so bottled iced teas are popularly 
known as “pet.” 
Japanese who wanted to break free from the con- 
straints imposed by the rules of chanoyu. They adapted 
the Chinese method of infusing tea and created a 
more 
relaxed 
and 
practical 
context, which was 
conducive to philosophical and spiritual discussion. 
Seeking to align themselves with the spiritual lifestyle 
of ancient Chinese sages from the Ming dynasty, 
these intellectuals encouraged the practice of certain 
Chinese arts, such as calligraphy, painting, poetry and 
music, during their ritual, which often served as a 
backdrop for these activities. Over time, the growing 
popularity of loose-leaf tea led senchado enthusiasts 
to make the steeping method of Sencha tea less 
accessible by introducing, among other things, rules 
inspired by the chanoyu. 
Although it is less well known today than the 
chanoyu, 
the senchado ritual continues to be practiced. 

The Senchado Brewing Method 
Senchado is a tea-brewing method that concentrates 
the aromas of 
higher-quality teas, such as Gyokuro or 
high-grade Sencha. Just like the gong fu cha technique 
(see page 144), this method consists of several suc- 
cessive infusions using the same leaves so that new 
flavors develop in each brew. 
Here are the main steps: 
Prepare and heat the teapot and other utensils 
required. 
Place the tea leaves in the heated teapot. Use 
| to 2 heaping teaspoons (5 to 10 ml) of tea 
leaves J. 
Pour the water onto the leaves. For best results, 
ensure the water is between 
150 and 
167°F 
(65 to 75°C). To accomplish 
this, instead 
of 
pouring the water directly onto the leaves, it can be 
poured into a small bowl [EJ (one bowl per person) 
to cool a 
little. Water cools by about 50°F (10°C) 
when it is poured into a cold bowl. Using a bowl 
also ensures that the quantity of water poured 
onto the leaves will be exactly right Ei. 
Wait approximately 30 seconds. The first infu- 
sion is the longest as the leaves are not yet moist. 
Strain the liquor from the teapot into the bowl. 
J. !f you are serving several guests, ensure that 
the same amount of liquid is poured into each 
bowl by pouring a little at a time. Empty the tea- 
pot completely, or the tea will continue to steep. 
Taste. 
Proceed to the next infusion in the same way. 
The subsequent infusions should be shorter 

THE KYUSU TEAPOT A kyusu teapot 
has a straight handle and a fine interior strai- 
ner that filters the leaves when the liquid is 
poured. 
CHADO OR “THE WAY OF TEA” 
A genuine way of life directed by a code of ethics and 
morals in accordance with the very essence of tea, 
chado emerged in Japan during the I5th century. In 
his marvelous book outlining the close relationship 
between the spirit of tea and Japanese culture, The 
Book of Tea, Okakuro Kakuzé defines chado as follows: 
The Way of 
Tea is a cult founded on the love 
of beauty in even the most basic pursuits of 
our daily life. It teaches us purity and harmony, 
the mystery of mutual consideration and the 
romantic element inherent in the social order 
... 
Far from being a simple aesthetic, in the 
ordinary meaning of the term, the philosophy 
of tea expresses, at the same time as an ethic 
and a religion, our global concept of man and of 
nature. It is a hygiene, in that it demands clean- 
liness; an asceticism, in that it demonstrates 
that well-being is to be found in simplicity and 
not In some expensive complexity; and finally, a 
system of ethics, in that it defines our sense of 
proportion in relation to the universe. 
Sen No Rikyu defined the four basic principles that 
sum up the essence of the Way of Tea as follows: 
harmony, respect, purity and tranquility. He also 
incorporated wabi philosophy, a spiritual and aesthetic 
concept based on austerity and solitude that leads 
to a contemplative experience of the relationship 
between man and objects, into the Way of Tea. In 
concrete terms, wabi involves transcending materialism 
through human 
interaction 
and 
sees 
beauty 
in 
imperfection and in the suggestion of completeness 
that can be found in a void. And so the Way of Tea 
is not restrictive. It is accessible to whoever believes 
tea to be a way of life that enables us to discover the 
hidden beauty of people and objects. 
109 

110 
THE JAPANESE CHANOYU CEREMONY 
The chanoyu ceremony, an extremely codified ritual 
consisting of hundreds of different steps, is the most 
elaborate form of expression of the Way of Tea. 
Practiced according to the four principles defined by 
Sen No Rikyu, its purpose is to lead its practitioners 
to a spiritual dimension by offering and receiving tea 
in an atmosphere imbued with harmony and humility. 
“Cha no yu’’ literally means “water for tea.’ There 
are two principal methods of presenting chanoyu: chaji 
and chakai. Chaji, the more formal of the two, lasts 
three to four hours and includes a maximum of four 
participants. The guests are first received with great 
ceremony in the garden before being invited to a 
meal (kaiseki) in the teahouse. After a short pause, the 
host prepares the most formal moment of the event, 
the serving of a thick Matcha tea (koicha), which is 
followed, after another pause in the garden, by a 
lighter Matcha tea (usucha). These proceedings are 
accompanied by expressions of courtesy and respect 
and long moments of meditation. 
A shorter version of chaji, known 
as chakdi, 
lasts only 30 to 45 minutes. During this ceremony a 
light tea is served together with sweets. This is the 
most appropriate method for a large number of 
participants. 
THE SEVEN RULES OF CHANOYU 
SET BY SEN NO RIKYU 
The seven rules set by Sen No Rikyu present, in 
the form of statements accompanied by simple 
illustrations, the procedures that must be respected 
during the chanoyu ceremony. At first glance they 
seem easy to follow, but, once the underlying essence 
of each one is understood, it becomes apparent that 
they require total personal involvement as well as 
paying close attention to the needs of one's guests. 
« 
‘Arrange the flowers as they 
grow in the fields.’ Flowers should 
be arranged in such a way as to 
suggest nature in all its simplicity. 
¢ 
“Arrange the charcoal to heat 
the water’ This statement refers 
to the effort, the ability and 
the sincerity that the host must 
devote to this preparation. 
¢ 
“In summer, evoke coolness.” 
Everything must be done to make 
guests feel comfortable, including 
adapting the environment to the 
mood of the season. 
* 
“In winter evoke warmth.’ 
* 
“Take care of everything ahead 
of time.” Every detail must be 
carefully planned. 
* 
“Be prepared for rain.’ The 
host must be prepared for all 
eventualities, 
* 
“Give every one of your guests 
your full attention.” 


A Simple Method to Prepare Matcha 
To prepare Matcha, you will need three essential uten- 
using the chasen [—§ taking care not to crush 
sils: a chawan (tea bowl), a chasen (tea whisk) and a 
the grounds with the whisk. When a foam begins 
chashaku (teaspoon). 
to form, raise the whisk carefully, making sure to 
burst any large bubbles that have formed on the 
Heat the chawan and the chasen with very hot 
surface (J. 
water Wait about 30 seconds, discard the water 
then carefully wipe the chawan. 
Sift the required quantity of Matcha in a bowl 
MB The amount of tea for one bowl of Matcha 
is 2 chashaku, or | level teaspoon (5 ml). Using 
a fairly fine strainer, sift the tea with the aid of 
the chashaku. This process is important because, 
in addition to making the foam of the Matcha 
smoother, it prevents lumps. 
Pour roughly % cup (60 ml) of water at 167°F 
(75°C) over the tea [J then whisk the tea bris- 
kly from the bottom of the bowl to the top 

ONE TEA, ONE STORY 
Matchais a finely powdered green tea thatistradition- 
ally used for the Japanese tea ceremony. 
In the 
12th century, when the monk Eisai 
. 
introduced tea to Japan (see “History,” page 90), it 
was the custom in China to grind the leaves to a 
powder before beating them in a bowl. It was the 
— 
era of beaten tea. This method of preparation, later 
abandoned by the Chinese, was adopted by the 
Japanese, who integrated it into the ritual of chanoyu. 
_ 
The best-quality Matcha tea comes from the 
covered plantations of the Uji region. After being 
processed according to the stages described earlier 
(see pages 104-106), the leaves undergo a specific 
sorting. In order to produce plant matter that can 
be easily reduced to a fine powder, the veins of the 
leaves are removed. This produces Tencha, which 
is then ground between millstones. There are few 
“pure” Matcha teas, that is, teas from a single plot 
of land. Different Matcha teas are often combined, 
which helps balance their strengths and weaknesses. 
In the paragraph below we present a tasting-grade 
_ 
_ Matcha tea. © 
MATCHA SENDO_ 
Bright green in color, Matcha Sendo gives off an 
aroma of berries and dark chocolate. In the mouth, 
its dense texture is rich and appealing. This tea 
has surprising notes reminiscent 
of Jerusalem 
artichoke. It is a very stimulating tea and has a 
briskness that goes very well with sweet treats. 
113 

ya 
$i 
SF 
ee 
Net 

A Meeting with Mr. Wataru Sugiyama, 
Mr. Sugiyama is the owner of a tea factory in 
Shizuoka Prefecture. 
When did you start working in the world of tea? 
What has been your career path? 
| studied for two years at the national Tea Test 
Center, after which | started working in my father’s 
factory, where | learned about tea growing and 
processing under his guidance. My father, Tadahira 
Sugiyama, is a very influential person in the world 
of tea and has won several prizes awarded by 
the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. We are 
indebted to him for all the tea trees that make the 
famous teas from our gardens. 
In 2000, after the death of my father, | 
took over 
the family business. Since then, | have participated 
in several exhibitions, endeavoring to produce the 
highest-quality tea while using the least amount of 
pesticides and chemical fertilizers. 
How big are your gardens and how much tea do 
you produce every year? 
Do you have many employees? 
Our tea plantation covers about 250 hectares 
[618 acres] and we produce close to 15,000 kilos 
[33,070 pounds] of tea per year. 
We have four full- 
time employees and about 20 pickers that we hire 
during harvesting. 
Tea Grower 
What are your everyday responsibilities? 
To take care of the tea garden! Every day we consider 
the phases of the moon and decide what needs to 
be done on the plantation: caring for the tea trees, 
fertilizing, etc. 
Where are your teas sold? 
On the local or international market? 
We sell our teas directly to the consumer and to 
specialized tea stores in Japan. 
What changes have you seen in the tea industry 
Aince you began? 
Our town [Shimizu] has been exporting tea for a 
very long time.When | started out in the industry, 
the 
Japanese economy was booming, and our teas were 
often offered as gifts. There were also companies 
that bought large quantities of tea. Now, in a less fa- 
vorable economic environment, 
our sales have drop- 
ped considerably. Because of the popularity of teas 
sold in plastic bottles, consumers buy less and less 
loose-leaf tea.A good many people still appreciate 
high-quality teas, and these are the customers who 
buy our products. 
What is your favorite tea? 
Japanese green tea! 
JAPA
115 

The Nomenclature of Japanese Teas 
In Japan, the notion of terroir is less important than in 
China. As we have seen, the practice of mixing different 
batches of aracha in order to create a balanced flavor 
makes it impossible to determine a precise place of 
origin for a particular tea. Rather the names given to 
teas refer to the methods of production and processing 
of the leaves. However, in the case of very high-grade 
teas, there is sometimes a reference to the terroir There 
are eight main types of Japanese teas: Sencha, Bancha, 
Hojicha, Genmaicha, Tamaryokucha, Gyokuro, Kabusecha 
and Matcha. 
SENCHA 
Sencha, which means “infused tea,’ is the most common 
grade of Japanese tea, representing roughly 80 percent 
of the country’s total production. There are Sencha 
teas of medium quality, destined for popular consump- 
tion, but there are also some high-quality Sencha teas 
that are rare, complex and subtle in taste. 
Bocha (also called Kukicha) is made from batches 
of Sencha. This type of tea has stems deliberately 
mixed in with the leaves. Mecha is a variant of Sencha. 
This type of tea is made from the first harvest of the 
year which is carefully sorted so that only pieces of 
leaves and small shoots are retained. 
Hojicha tea leaves. 
BANCHA 
Bancha is usually produced from leaves and stems pic- 
ked during the late summer or fall harvests. 
The best 
quality Bancha teas, however, are made from leaves 
picked in June. 
HOJICHA 
Hojicha tea is a Bancha tea whose leaves have been 
roasted for a few minutes at a temperature of about 
390°F (200°C).Although this method strips the leaves 
of many of their properties, it gives them a honeyed 
taste reminiscent of hazelnuts. 
GENMAICHA 
Ganmaicha teas have a green tea base (Bancha or 
Sencha) with roasted grains of brown rice and popped 
rice mixed in. Genmaicha teas are usually entry-grade 
teas ideal for daily consumption. There are also high- 
quality Genmaicha teas, and the quality of the final 
product depends on the tea used as the base. Matcha 
is also added to some varieties. 
Matcha. 

TAMARYOKUCHA 
There are two types of Tamaryokucha. The first, 
Mushi Sei Tamaryokucha, or Guricha, is subjected to 
steam dehydration. Produced throughout Japan, this 
tea tries to imitate the appearance and taste of some 
Chinese curly-leaf green teas. 
The 
other type of Tamaryokucha 
is called 
Kamairi Sei Tamaryokucha, or simply Kamairicha. It is 
dehydrated in vats and grown mainly on the island of 
Kyushu. Although most batches are now processed 
mechanically, there are still some factories that offer 
batches processed by hand. 
GYOKURO 
Gyokuro 
(which means “precious 
dew’’) 
is the 
highest grade of tea produced in Japan. It is produced 
from just one harvest per year, in late May or early 
June. Traditionally, when the new shoots are about 
¥ inch (2 cm) long, growers erect a straw canopy 
over the tea trees for about |0 days. After that pe- 
riod, they add more straw to the canopies, and the 
trees are left covered in this way for another | | days, 
for a total period of about 2! days. The buds are then 
carefully picked to ensure all the buds growing along 
the stems are removed. Growers pay such close 
attention to their crops of Gyokuro tea to encourage 
the development of a delicate, rich flavor. Gyokuro 
teas are considered among the most flavorful teas in 
the world. 
KABUSECHA 
Shaded growing is also used to obtain Kabusecha 
teas, but it is done over a shorter period of time. 
Some growers hang a synthetic cover over their trees, 
while others place it directly on the plants. The plants 
are covered for an average of |2 days. 
Karigane, a tea similar to Bocha, is produced from 
batches of Kabusecha. However, unlike Bocha teas, 
the mixture of leaves and stems comes from shade- 
grown plants. 
MATCHA 
Introduced by Buddhist monks at the beginning of the 
first millennium, Matcha tea was the first type of tea 
consumed in Japan. Originally, the dried leaves were 
cut up and then ground between millstones. Today, 
the best Matchas are often produced from shade- 
grown leaves. 
THE AGING OF GYOKURO AND MATCHA TEAS 
Although it is less well known in the West, 
aging teas is a common practice in Asia, especially in Japan. Whereas Sencha teas are often appreciated for 
their freshness, liveliness and subtlety, many Japanese tea enthusiasts believe that Matcha and Gyokuro teas are 
smoother and richer if they are left to mature for a few months after processing. 
117 


Japanese Teas 
Bancha Shizuoka | green tea | 
Translation: Third harvest tea and name of the 
prefecture where it is grown 
Production area: Shizuoka Prefecture 
Harvest season: June for the best-quality teas and 
September for the rest 
Cultivar: Yabukita 
Bancha was the everyday tea for most Japanese until 
the middle of the Edo era (1603-1868), when Sencha 
became the most popular tea in Japan. In rural and 
mountainous regions, every household once grew a 
small amount of Bancha for its personal consumption. 
Tasting notes: Ihe large pieces of leaf that make up the 
summer Bancha tea (harvested in June) are irregular 
in shape and produce a humble, robust impression. 
The dark-green leaves are flattened, and pale-yellow 
stems are scattered among them. The infusion gives 
off delicate marine and herbaceous notes with the 
fruity accent of fresh almonds. 
The yellow-green liquid 
is shiny and clear: the mouthfeel is full, smooth and 
sweet, with hardly any bitterness. Aromas of fresh 
grass and white fish mingle harmoniously. 
The finish is 
a feeling of thirst-quenching freshness. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A mid-sized 
teapot. 
Sencha Fukamushi Aji | green tea | 
Translation: Infused tea, long dehydration and the 
name of a hill 
Production area: Shizuoka Prefecture 
Harvest season: Early May 
Cultivar: Yabukita 
In Japan, there are two major styles of Sencha tea: 
Asamushi and Fukamushi. Asamushi is characterized 
by a short dehydration period and rigorously sorted 
leaves, which produces a light tea with a delicate, 
vegetal freshness. Fukamushi teas have a longer period 
of dehydration and more fine particles are preserved 
during the sorting, which brings out the strength of 
the tannins and gives the tea a more iodized flavor 
The frank and direct taste of Fukamushi makes it the 
most popular type of Sencha among the Japanese. 
Tasting notes: The dry leaves are a mixture of short 
flattened 
needles and finely broken 
pieces. Infu- 
sion transforms their dark-green satiny texture into 
a dense paste. The nose carries aromas-of green 
vegetables and sea grasses enhanced with a floral 
touch. The foamy green liquid is slightly cloudy. The 
mouthfeel is quite full bodied; the attack conjures up 
freshly cut grass and develops a certain bitterness. 
Retro-olfaction releases notes of cooked spinach and 
fresh geranium flowers against a strong background 
of vegetal and iodized aromas. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A small kyusu or 
small teapot. 
119 

120 
Gyokuro Tamahomare | green tea | 
Translation: Pear! of dew and prestigious 
Production area: Uji, Kyoto Prefecture 
Harvest season: Once a year, in May 
Cultivar: Gokou 
Although some sources claim that shaded growing was 
practiced as early as the beginning of the | 7th century, 
the first Gyokuro tea was officially produced in 1835, 
in Uji, by Kahei Yamamoto. Gyokuro is the most pre- 
cious tea produced in Japan. It is processed entirely by 
hand, and meticulous care is taken at every stage of 
its production. 
The distinctive characteristic of its pro- 
duction is that the fields in which t is grown are shaded 
for three weeks before harvesting, so 80 percent to 
95 percent of the sun's rays are blocked. Most growers 
now use an open mesh to create the shade, however 
some prefer to use the traditional straw shading for 
their most prestigious teas. The purpose of shading Is 
to filter the light so that the tea tree, unable to fully 
carry out photosynthesis, releases more chlorophy!l 
and amino acids (particularly theanine), and fewer 
tannins, into the leaves. 
Tasting notes: The beautiful dried leaves are dark 
green and glisten in the light. Extremely fine and supple, 
they vary in size and give off delicate scents of butter, 
chlorophyll and green vegetables. Infusion releases 
appetizing aromas of vegetable broth. The same rich 
bouquet emanates from the thick emerald-green 
liquid. The smooth, velvety texture of the rounded 
mouthfeel is surprisingly dense. The generous, heady 
aromas of chlorophyll, corn salad, broth and oily nuts 
are quite intense. 
The fresh, sweet finish, reminiscent 
of snow peas, is very persistent. It is a remarkably com- 
plex tea, with absolutely no bitterness or astringency. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A small kyusu or 
small teapot. 

Sencha Keikoku | green tea | 
Translation: Infused tea and valley 
Production area: Shizuoka Prefecture 
Cultivar: Yabukita 
Harvest season: Early May 
Sencha, a tea that appeared in the early | 7th century, 
is the most widespread type of green tea in Japan and 
represents more than 80 percent of the country’s total 
production. Growing extends across many regions, 
from Kagoshima Prefecture in the south to Ibaraki 
Prefecture in the north, with the highest concentration 
in Shizuoka, There are many varieties of Sencha, from 
the very ordinary to the very refined, and the highest- 
quality teas are usually harvested between late April 
and mid-May. 
The liquid from this tea, whose long, flat 
leaves resemble pine needles, is vegetal and iodized. 
The Sencha Keikoku variety isa Sencha of the Asamushi 
type, which means that tt has undergone a short 
period of dehydration of only about 30 seconds. It 
comes from an area around the little town of Tenryu, 
which is dotted with many charming small tea gardens. 
Tasting notes: The needlelike leaves are very beauti- 
ful. Infusion releases a gentle smell of freshly cut grass, 
watercress and water chestnut. 
The cloudy, pistachio- 
green liquid smells of cooked celery and seaweed. 
The mouthfeel is of rich, full tannins that coat the 
tongue with a lively attack that quickly softens. This 
well-structured tea fills the mouth with vegetal aromas 
of arugula, leading into a long but light note of pine. 
The enduring finish of green mango and lime zest is 
delicate and refreshing. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A small kyusu or 
small teapot. 
Hojicha Shizuoka | roasted green tea | 
Translation: Roasted tea and the name of 
the prefecture 
Alternative names: Bancha Hojicha, Houjicha 
Production area: Shizuoka Prefecture 
Harvest season: Late in the season, usually 
September 
Cultivar: Yabukita 
This tea is a Bancha whose leaves have been roasted 
until they turn completely brown, which standardizes 
the flavor of the tea leaves. In Japan, it is customary to 
serve this tea hot in winter, for comfort, and cold in 
summer, for refreshment. It is also often used in the 
commercial production of bottled iced teas. However, 
it is still common to find a small earthenware pan, 
used to roast a small quantity of leaves over a gas 
flame for personal consumption, in Japanese family 
kitchens. 
Tasting notes: The large roasted leaves, mixed in with 
pieces of stem, are uniformly bronze in color Infusion 
releases calming roasted and woody aromas. The 
clear, amber-colored liquid has the same bouquet. 
The mouthfeel is delicately sweet. Subtle notes of nut 
and vanilla, as well as a fine vegetal presence, are 
overlaid on the woody, roasted base. The texture 
is aqueous without a trace of tannin. The airy finish 
is gently honeyed. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A medium-sized 
teapot. 
121 

i122 
Genmaicha Sencha-Matcha | green tea | 
Translation: Roasted rice tea, and 
Sencha-and-Matcha base 
Production area: Shizuoka Prefecture 
Harvest season: From spring to fall, depending on 
the type of tea desired 
Cultivar: Yabukita 
Genmaicha tea is a mixture of tea leaves and roasted 
and popped grains of rice. It was originally a beverage 
drunk by the poor who supplemented their tea with 
rice. Today it is enjoyed by people from all walks of 
life. Genmaicha is usually produced from Bancha, but 
the variety mentioned here is composed of a delicate 
combination of Sencha and Matcha teas. 
Tasting notes: The leaves and the grains of rice are 
covered in a fine powdered Matcha that gives the 
mixture a uniform bright-green color Some burst 
grains of rice,reminiscent of popped corn, are sprinkled 
throughout the mixture. Infusion releases a strong 
bouquet of roasted rice and a delicate note of sea air 
The Matcha powder makes the liquid cloudy, almost 
to the point of opacity. 
The mouthfeel offers a delicate 
attack and a velvety texture. 
The gentle sweetness of 
the rice combines with herbaceous aromas to produce 
a full finish that is smooth and calming. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A medium-sized 
teapot. 
Kabusecha Kawase | green tea | 
Translation: Shaded tea and the name of the grower 
Production area: Shizuoka Prefecture 
Harvest season: Early May 
Cultivar: Yabukita 
Like Gyokuro tea, Kabusecha is a shade-grown tea 
cultivated in gardens that are covered by canopies 
for about two weeks before the leaves are picked. 
As 
with Gyokuro teas, the goal is to increase the levels of 
chlorophyll and amino acids (particularly theanine) in 
the leaves, which produces a gentle and complex tea. 
However, in the case of Kabusecha teas, the canopies, 
made of synthetic material, are less dense and only 
block roughly 80 percent of the light. Processing is 
more mechanical, closer to that of Sencha teas, to re- 
duce costs and produce a quality tea at an affordable 
price. Therefore, Kabusecha teas are a compromise 
between Sencha and Gyokuro teas, offering a balance 
between strength and delicacy. 
Tasting notes: The dry leaves are mixed with needles 
and broken particles that are uniformly green. When 
they are infused they form a thick paste that gives off 
vegetal aromas of fresh grass and cilantro. The dark- 
green liquid is clouded by a thick haze of suspended 
particles. 
The vegetal nose is colored by a delicate note 
of apricot. In the mouth, the liquid presents brief acidity 
and a creamy texture. 
The strong, herbaceous aromas 
combine with a subtle note of raspberry. 
The dominant 
vegetal note, full and intense, leads to a light astringency. 
The delicately sweet finish tends gently toward aromas 
of green vegetables and berries. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A small kyusu or 
small teapot. 

Bocha | green tea | 
Translation: Stem tea 
Alternative name: Kukicha 
Production areas: Shizuoka and other prefectures 
Harvest season: May to June 
Cultivar: Yabukita 
Bocha Is produced from a mixture of tea stems and 
leaves. There are several different grades, as it can be 
made from different-quality teas, from the simplest 
Sencha to the most precious Gyokuro. Because the 
stems contain less caffeine than the leaves, this tea is 
less stimulating. 
Tasting notes: This tea contains no fine particles and 
is composed mainly of yellow stems mixed with long 
green needlelike leaves. The scented mixture releases 
pleasant buttery and fruity aromas. Infusion releases 
a warm bouquet leading to appetizing notes of corn, 
crabmeat and nori seaweed. A discreet fruity pre- 
sence is reminiscent of peach. The pale-green, slightly 
cloudy liquid is rounded and deliciously sweet in the 
mouth. The vegetal sweetness of zucchini and corn 
meld harmoniously with fine seafood notes. It is an 
appealing tea with a delicate finish of greenery and 
almonds. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A medium-sized 
teapot. 
Kamairicha | green tea | 
Translation: 
Tea heated in vats 
Production area: Miyazaki and Kagoshima Prefectures 
Harvest season: May to June and September 
Cultivar: Yabukita 
There are growers on the island of Kyushu who have 
continued to use the Chinese method of dehydration 
that gives tea leaves a curly shape. This Is the case, 
in particular, for Kamairicha (kama means ‘‘vat’’) teas. 
Remember that tea was originally introduced to Japan 
on the island of Kyushu, and so preserving this method 
of dehydration is probably a way of preserving the 
Chinese expertise initially handed down to this region. 
The origin of Kamairicha tea dates back to the 
| 5th century, when, it is said, Chinese ceramic artists 
were forcibly sent to Ureshino, on the island of 
Kyushu, to teach their technique to locals. History 
recounts that the homesick Chinese artists, prevented 
from leaving, began to process tea the way they had it 
in their homeland. 
Tasting notes: The small, dark-green leaves have 
the twisted shape and matte appearance of certain 
Chinese teas. Infusion reveals roasted aromas of 
hazelnut, nori seaweed and corn against a green 
vegetable background. The buttery, vegetal liquid 
is a luminous yellowish green. The mouthfeel pre- 
sents a lively, herbaceous attack leading to a slight 
bitternesswith 
roasted 
accents. The 
full, well- 
structured liquid reveals a dominant vegetal and 
sweet taste. The finish offers strong tannins and a 
lovely after taste. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A medium-sized 
teapot. 
123 


Taiwan 
ALTHOUGHTAIWANISA 
FAIRLY RECENTTEA-GROWING 
COUNTRY COMPARED TO CHINA, WHICH HAS A 
5,000-YEAR-OLD HISTORY OF TEA CULTIVATION, THE 
WEATHER AND GEOGRAPHY OF THE ARCHIPELAGO, 
AS WELL AS THE EXPERTISE INHERITED FROM THE 
CHINESE, HAVE ENCOURAGED THE DEVELOPMENT 
OF HIGH-QUALITY PRODUCTION IN THE COUNTRY. 
TODAY, THE RICH FLORAL FRAGRANCES OF THE HIGH- 
ALTITUDE TEAS AND THE LUXURIOUS TEXTURE OF 
THEIR SMALLHARVESTS DELIGHTTHEPALATESOFTHE 
MOST DISCERNING ENTHUSIASTS. 

126 
History 
Taiwan 
is a small island situated some 90 miles 
(150 km) off the coast of China, and its history is 
inevitably linked to the latter, especially as far as the 
culture of tea is concerned. However, China is not 
the only country that influenced the development 
of the Taiwanese tea industry, as various peoples 
have sought to control the territory, due to Its ideal 
strategic position for exporting goods to Europe. The 
Portuguese, Spanish, Dutch and English all occupied 
the island at various points during the |6th and | 7th 
centuries. The Dutch, who occupied Taiwan from 
1624 to 1662, were the first to develop the tea trade 
in this territory. 
In 1662, under the Qing dynasty, Admiral Zheng 
Cheng Gong reconquered the territory, and it was an- 
nexed to China in 1683. Following unification, a wave 
of Chinese immigration into Taiwan completely chan- 
ged the territory's culture. 
The new immigrants, most 
of whom came from Fujian Province, especially the 
area around Anxi and the Wuyi Mountains, brought 
with them tea seeds and plants, as well as their exper 
tise In tea growing, which was still unknown in Tatwan. 
Many plants were later transplanted to the north 
of 
the island, close to the capital, Taipei, as well as in the 
center of Taiwan. Families began to cultivate small tea 
gardens close to their homes to satisfy their personal 
needs and slowly, toward the end of the | 8th century, 
the tea trade started to develop. 
Noticing an increase in the importation of tea 
from the neighboring island, the Europeans — who 
at that time dealt with the Chinese at Xiamen and 
Fuzhou (two major Chinese tea-trading ports of that 
period) — decided to pay closer attention to Taiwan. 
Then, in 1866, a trader named John Dodd decided 
to become more involved in trade with Taiwan. He 
offered financing to Taiwanese peasants who wanted 
to start tea plantations, and he also set up factories in 
Taipei so the new local growers would have access 
to every stage of tea processing. At the time, it was 
not unusual for tea leaves to be shipped to Anxi or 
Fuzhou to undergo the final stages of processing. And 
so Taiwanese tea began to be exported to Europe and 
the United States, where it was greatly appreciated. 
During the first half 
of the 20th century, under the 
Japanese occupation that lasted from 1895 to 1945, 
the black-tea industry was supported in order to take 
advantage of the high demand in Europe and to avoid 
competing with Japanese green-tea production. 
The Japanese invested heavily in the tea industry 
in Taiwan, giving fertilizers and numerous tea plants to 
Taiwanese peasants. They offered training courses and 
encouraged the mechanization of processing, creating 
an environment in which the industry could thrive. 
With the arrival of the Chinese, who drove the 
Japanese out of the territory at the end of the Se- 
cond World War, the industry was oriented toward 
the production of green teas, which were exported 
to North African countries. Around 
1965, Taiwan 
also began to export tea to Japan. During the | 970s, 
because of the strong competition from China and 
WILD TEA TREES IN TAIWAN 
Although the tea trees cultivated in Taiwan today come from China, 
various types of wild tea trees have been found in the south of the island, close to Kaoshan. 

FORMOSA “Discovered” in 1590 by the Portuguese, 
who named it Formosa (“the beautiful”), Taiwan is a 
small, mountainous island. This ancient name was also 
once applied to Taiwanese teas, which were called 
“formosas,’ but this usage is no longer common. The 
island’s highest summit is Mount 
Yu Shan, which peaks 
at 12,966 feet (3,952 m). 
the self-sufficiency of the Japanese, Taiwan could no 
longer find an international outlet for its green tea, 
so the government decided to stimulate the domestic 
market. These new trading conditions forced the 
tea industry to turn to the production of wulong teas, 
which were the local favorite. In addition, the average 
income of the Taiwanese had increased considerably 
over this period, so growers decided to concentrate 
on quality rather than quantity. 

128 
The Taiwanese Tea Industry 
Today, Taiwan produces some of the best wulong 
teas in the world, and almost all the production Is 
consumed locally. To satisfy demand, and despite an 
18 percent tax on tea brought in from outside the 
territory, Taiwan imports more than three times as 
much tea as it exports each year This commercial 
activity extends beyond the island's borders, as some 
Taiwanese businessmen 
are now investing in tea 
production 
in Vietnam, Thailand 
and China. The 
Taiwanese inherited a genuine art of tea tasting from 
the Chinese through the gong fu cha ceremony,a simple 
and refined ritual that uses a special ‘sniffing’ cup to 
enhance the heady aromas released by wulong teas. 
Moreover, since the late 1990s, Taiwan has been 
one of the hubs of the Pu er tea trade. Some of 
the 
major Pu er collectors are Taiwanese, and they have 
contributed to the recent explosion of this market. 
Unlike in other countries, such as India, China 
or Sri Lanka, where many tea gardens extend over 
several thousand acres, the Taiwanese tea industry is 
fragmented among a number of small growers. Today 
there are more than 30,000 growers, who are, for the 
most part, small family businesses of no more than 
two to eight employees. 
The Tawainese industry produces some 1|8,/00 
tons (17,000 t) of tea per year, mostly wulong. This 
production is not much compared to the output of 
other tea-growing nations, especially since Taiwan 
must import several thousand tons of tea to satisfy 
local demand. However local weather and geographical 
conditions 
are 
not appropriate 
for high-volume 
production. Some gardens 
located 
high in the 
mountains, like those of Da Yu Lin, for example, can 
only be harvested twice a year. 
Until 
the 
beginning 
of the 
1980s, 
roughly 
80 percent of Taiwanese production was shipped 
abroad.To keep the industry alive in spite of competition 
from neighboring countries and to free the country 
from 
its dependency 
on 
exports, the Taiwanese 
government decided to try to redirect production 
toward the domestic market. It managed this very 
skillfully by channeling growers into high-quality teas 
and introducing many popular educational programs 
(museums, tea contests, festivals and the like). 
This transformation of the industry gave growers 
the impetus to form groups and to sell their tea 
directly to consumers, which eliminated the need for 
middlemen. 
This stimulated the emergence of a local 
A BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE TAIWANESE TEA TRADE 
Production area: 37,861 acres (15,322 ha) in 2009 
Total annual production: 18,497 tons (16,780 t) in 2009 
Principal growing region: Nantou, with a production area of 18,649 acres (7,547 ha) and a total anual production 
of 12,321 tons (11,177 t) in 2009 
Percentage of production per family of tea: wulong, 93%; green tea, 4%; black tea, 3% 
Average production yield: 1,006 pounds per acre (1,128 kg/ha) 
Annual exports: 2,901! tons (2,632 t) in 2010; 2,646 tons (2,400 t) in 2009; 2,581 tons (2,341 t) in 2008 
Source: Taiwan Agricultur and Food Agency, COA, Taiwan Tea Production Association. (Values in imperial units of measure supplied by publisher.) 

tea culture and a gradual reduction of exports. The 
Taiwanese are now free of the yoke of competition. 
They export only a very small proportion of their 
harvest (about |2 percent) and consume the bulk of 
it themselves. 
Today, almost all growers take great care of their 
gardens, from the choice of the tea trees to meticu- 
lous processing in order to produce the best pos- 
sible quality. They then enter their high-quality leaves 
in contests that usually take place twice a year, in May 
and November, in various growing regions, where 
they are judged and compared by eminent specialists. 
These contests can be very lucrative for a grower 
because, in addition to conferring fame and prestige, 
winning a prize increases the market value of a tea. 
Although there are still pockets where black tea 
is produced (particularly the east coast, close to Sun 
Moon Lake), as well as several low-grade imitations of 
quality Chinese green teas, Taiwan now specializes in 
one single tea, wulong. 
A grower from the Chushan region exhibiting his teas. 
BUBBLE TEA 
Bubble tea, which is very popular in Taiwan, is an exotic 
mixture of tapioca pearls and fruit syrup diluted with a cold infusion of 
tea (Pu er, black tea, wulong, green tea or jasmine tea). 
129 

TAIWAN 
130 
A Meeting with Ms. Lin Mei Yen, 
Ms.Lin Mei Yen is a judge at the Lugu tea competition. 
How long have you been working 
in the world of tea? 
Actually, | have always worked in areas associated 
with the tea industry, but | decided to dive into it 
completely in 1984. 
What attracted you to this profession? 
lam a tea grower.| hoped to develop my competen- 
cies further by becoming a judge.| particularly wanted 
to acquire the knowledge and skills that would help 
me better understand my everyday work. 
What are your daily responsibilities 
during a contest? 
First of all,| weigh the teas and check the uniformity 
of the leaves. Next | examine the dry leaves (color, 
shape, nose) and the infused leaves, and then | taste 
the infusion. Finally | grade the teas. 
What do you like best about your job? 
The possibility of tasting high-quality teas in the 
company of well-qualified colleagues! 
Tea Industry Professional 
Can you tell us an anecdote ora story 
about your work? 
Sometimes we taste several hundred teas in one day. 
Previously, the tasting room wasn’t air-conditioned. 
In the afternoon the room got quite hot, and the 
judges could get irritable by the end of the day, 
which could have an adverse effect on the results 
... Also, meals (rather bland with no spices) are 
now provided by the organization. Before, judges 
brought their own lunch and sometimes the food 
was much too spicy! 
What challenges will the Taiwanese industry 
have to face going forward? 
It is essential that growers work to preserve the 
unique style of their teas, of their region. Here, 
in Lugu, thanks to this kind of contest, we are 
partcularly keen to promote firing wulong teas, 
which represents the distinctive mark with which 
the grower signs his tea. 
What is your favorite tea? 
| love to brew Bao Zhong style wulong teas according 
to the gong fu cha tradition. | also like Bi Luo Chun 
green tea. 
How would you define a good tea? 
The most important thing is a balance between the 
aromas and the flavors. 
The liquid must fill the mouth 
as well as being tasty and smooth in the throat. 

nei, 
Biter ec 

re 
Talwanese Terroirs 
With several mountain ranges with peaks soaring to 
over 6,550 feet (2,000 m), a temperature that rarely 
drops below 55°F (13°C) and a mean rainfall of more 
than 79 inches (2,000 mm) a year, the climatic and geo- 
logical conditions of Taiwan are perfectly suited to the 
cultivation of tea. 
The Zhong Yang Shan Mai mountain range, in 
the middle of the island, creates a natural protective 
barrier against the typhoons and other storms that 
come in from the ocean, so most of the tea gardens 
are concentrated in the west of the island. However, 
the best crus are grown In the northern regions and 
on the western slopes of the highest mountains in the 
center of 
the island: Ali Shan, Shan Lin Xi and Li Shan, 
an 8,070-foot (2,460 m) summit where one of the 
highest tea gardens in the world can be found. 
THE DISTRICT OF NANTOU 
The district of Nantou, in the center of the island, 
is Taiwan's principal tea-growing region. This district 
produces roughly 12,100 tons (11,000 t) of tea per 
year, representing more than half the output of the 
entire country. Apart from the teas grown on certain 
famous mountains, such as the celebrated Mount 
Dong Ding and Mount Shan Lin Xi, where there are 
some exceptional gardens, the tea from the Nantou 
district is mostly of medium quality, in part because of 
the high volume produced.A lot of harvests from other 
parts of 
the island are also shipped here, and industrial 
processing 
methods 
are 
highly advanced. 
Small 
harvests of black tea, such as Sun Moon Lake tea, 
from the area around the eponymous lake, are also 
produced here. 
MOUNT DONG DING 
The celebrated Mount Dong Ding rises up close to 
Lugu in the region that pioneered tea growing in 
Taiwan. The first plantations on this mountain date 
from the middle of the I9th century. Now famous 
around the world, the mountain is entirely covered in 
tea plantations; 4,000 to 5,000 growers produce tea 
in this region at altitudes that range from 1,650 to 
2,600 feet (500 to 800 m). In addition to being an 
important tourist destination, the region attracts 
many Taiwanese consumers who buy tea. The govern- 
ment has also contributed a great deal to the promo- 
tion of the tea trade in this region. A festival is still 
held to present the new harvests for tasting and to 
teach the basics of the gong fu cha tea ceremony (see 
pages 144-145). 

MOUNT SHAN LI XIl 
Mount Shan Lin Xi, where the highest plantations 
rise to 5,400 feet (1,650 m), is also in the district of 
Nantou. Celebrated for its beauty, especially its many 
bamboo forests, it has developed rapidly over the last 
20 years. A lot of land has been cleared, and new 
plantations have appeared. 
The best gardens are on the 
steep mountain slopes that have all the ideal conditions 
for tea cultivation. 
An interesting characteristic of the 
region is that allthe gardens are named after the animals 
of the Chinese astrological signs (dragon, goat, etc). 
THE DISTRICT OF TAIPEI 
The district of Taipei, located in the north of the 
island, is the second-most-important growing region 
in the territory. Whereas most of the gardens were 
previously centered around the capital (Taipei) — 
which was the longtime point of departure for tea 
headed to overseas markets — they migrated south 
to the district of Nantou as heavy industrial and resi- 
dential development took over Taipei. Today, the best 
harvests are produced close to the town of Pinglin 
and in the Mucha Mountains. 
A garden at Shan Lin Xi. 
PINGLIN 
Located in the massif of the Wen Shan Mountains, some 
30 minutes from Taipei, Pinglin is a very popular village, and 
many residents of the capital go there regularly to buy their 
favorite tea. Because of this high demand, 
the prices of the 
tea from this region have increased considerably, and there 
is reason to believe they may now be somewhat inflated. 
Pinglin does, however, produce a style of wulong tea with 
twisted leaves that is rarely still found in Taiwan: Bao Zhong 
(see “The Origin of the term Bao Zhong’ on the following 
page and ‘Pinglin Bao Zhong” on page 152). Today, the 
preferred method of processing wulong leaves is the bead 
method, which makes it easier to ship and store the tea. 
THE MUCHA MOUNTAINS 
Around |875, two brothers from Anxi, China, planted 
a few shoots of the famous cultivar Tie Guan Yin in 
the Mucha Mountains, south of Taipei. Thanks to the 
persistence of these two brothers, 
Tie Guan Yin tea 
is found in Taiwan today. The originality of the tea pro- 
duced in Mucha is due to the cultivar grown there, 
but also to the intense firing it undergoes over several 
days, which gives it unique roasted notes. 
133 

Zz 
< 
= 
< 
= 
134 
THE DISTRICT OF HSINCHU 
Located 
in northwestern Taiwan, the district of 
Hsinchu ts an area of plains at an altitude of approxi- 
mately 650 feet (200 m). The region is famous for 
its wulong black teas, which are oxidized at a rate 
that varies between 40 percent and 60 percent. This 
oxidization darkens the appearance of the leaves and 
creates a beautiful coppery color when they are in- 
fused. Great classics come from this area, including Bai 
Hao (Oriental Beauty) and the Wulong Fancy teas, 
which are of a lower quality. 
THE DISTRICT OF CHIA YI 
Although tea growing only started in the district of 
Chia Yi 20 years ago, it is renowned for its production 
of Gao Shan Cha (see “Gao Shan Cha: A High-Altitude 
Tea’’ on page | 35).A little less than 10 percent of 
the 
country’s total production is harvested here. It is in this 
district that the great massif of the Ali Shan Mountain 
begins before merging with lofty Mount 
Yu Shan. 
ALI SHAN MOUNTAIN 
Without a doubt one of the most famous mountains 
on the island, where high-quality, high-altitude teas 
are grown, Ali Shan has several gardens located 
between 2,300 and 5,600 feet (700 to 1,700 m). 
This region was known for its giant evergreens. 
During the Japanese occupation many were felled 
for the Japanese market. 
The Ali Shan region is 
now a protected area. There is a natural park with 
luxurious vegetation. At the foot of the mountain, 
palm trees, banana trees and a number of fruit trees 
gently sway. 
YU SHAN MOUNTAIN 
Although Yu Shan Mountain soars to 12,966 feet 
(3,952 m), the plantations 
are 
at approximately 
4,250 feet (1,300 m). Tea growing began there about 
20 years ago and — contrary to other regions, such 
as Shan Lin Xi, where growing areas have expanded 
from year to year — the growth in the number of 
plantations on Yu Shan appears to be stable and 
limited. 
THE DISTRICT OF HUALIEN 
Located on the east coast in an area hit by typhoons and 
other ocean storms, the district of Hualien produces 
a meager output of tea. The region produces a number 
of different kinds of tea, including wulong, black, green 
and floral teas. While the gardens of Hualien are 
generally located at low altitudes, some operate at 
3,300 feet (1,000 m). Over the last few years, there 
has been a strong trend toward organic cultivation in 
this region. Moreover, in a rather rare phenomenon 
in Taiwan, growers in this district often produce more 
than one tea family. 
THE DISTRICT OF TAITUNG 
On the east coast, south of Hualien, lies Taitung, a 
small growing area of relatively little importance. 
THE DISTRICT OF TAICHUNG 
The district of Taichung contains the central massif of 
the island, including the mountains of Li Shan.and Da Yu 
Lin. High-quality, high-altitude teas are produced here. 
This new, rapidly expanding, growing region has only 
been producing tea for around |5 years. 
THE ORIGIN OF THE TERM BAO ZHONG 
The term bao zhong means “wrapped in paper” and 
appears to come from China (Anxi) where, more than 150 years ago, a merchant by the name of Wang 
Yi Cheng 
used to present a certain type of twisted leaf tea wrapped in paper. This custom, taken up again by the Wen Shan 
in Taiwan, was later associated with the name of the tea. 

A garden on Li Shan Mountain 
LI SHAN MOUNTAIN 
Li Shan Mountain, or’‘Pear Mountain,” includes several 
growing areas located between 5,250 and 8,700 feet 
(1,600 to 2,650 m). Fruit trees have been grown here 
for a long time, but the growing of tea Is fairly recent. 
Farmers are increasingly switching to tea growing 
A garden on Ali Shan Mountain 
On Li Shan, the two annual harvests are rather 
late compared to other harvests carried out on the 
island. The spring picking takes place at the end of 
May, and the winter picking at the end of October. 
The gardens of Da Yu Lin Mountain, located 
nearby, are among the highest in the world, at an 
because of the high demand and the high prices for = approximate altitude of 8,500 feet (2,600 m). 
tea produced in the area. However, to avoid exces- 
sive expansion, the government controls and limits 
the number of new plantations. 
GAO SHAN CHA: A HIGH-ALTITUDE TEA 
The tea trees that grow at more than 3,300 feet 
(1,000 m) are referred to as Gao Shan Cha, which means “high altitude tea.” Taiwan and Sri Lanka are the only 
countries to distinguish between high-altitude and low-altitude teas, although the region of Darjeeling in India also 
produces them. Teas grown at higher altitudes are highly sought after, since the higher the altitude at which the 
plant is grown, the more complex its aromatic properties and flavors will be. The weather conditions at high alti- 
tudes are obviously different. It is colder, which slows the growth of the tea trees but increases the concentration 
of aromatic oils in the leaves. In addition, thick fog filters the sun’s rays in the morning and at night, as well as during 
part of the day, thus reducing the amount of sunshine to a few hours each day, resulting in the plants producing 
young, extremely dark-green shoots that contain more amino acids and nitrogen compounds. Moistened by this 
fog, the leaves are also more tender and, unlike leaves that grow at lower altitudes, they remain supple, which is a 
good quality for further processing. 
135 

Talwanese Gardens 
and Plants 
By devoting themselves almost entirely to the pro- 
duction of wulong teas, Taiwanese growers have 
managed to develop a tea culture that is specific to 
their taste and their terroir. 
In new plantations, tea trees are spaced about 
12 to 20 inches (30 to 50 cm) apart and rows are 
about 6 feet (1.8 m) apart. The ideal planting time is 
after Chinese New Year. This is usually a rainy season, 
which helps the roots of the young plants to take 
hold. 
To protect the tea trees from winter snows, es- 
pecially in high-altitude gardens, growers plant high 
grasses along the paths between the rows of trees. 
The age of the trees is also a factor that growers 
take into consideration. A new plant will take 5 years 
to become productive. 
It will then be in its “Golden 
Age’ a term used by the Taiwanese for trees that are 
10 to 15 years old. At 30 years old the trees will be 
uprooted and replaced. 
The use of organic substances 
to care for the garden can help prolong a tea tree's 
useful life. 
Growers must wait 45 to 60 days between pick- 
ings in order to obtain perfect leaves. Taiwanese 
growers usually harvest four times a year. 

Taiwanese Cultivars 
Although the first cultivars to be grown on the island 
of Taiwan were of Chinese origin, over the years 
the Taiwanese have developed their own cultivars. 
Some, like the Si Ji Chun variety, are the result of 
natural hybridization, while others, such as the Jin 
Shuan cultivar, were developed by the Taiwanese 
Tea Experiment Station (TTES). Although roughly a 
hundred cultivars have been recorded, only a few are 
commonly used today, and they include the Qing Xin, 
Si Ji Chun, Cui Yu, Jin Shuan and Tie Guan Yin varieties. 
QING XIN (ALSO CALLED 
“CINGSHIN” AND “LUANZE’’) 
The Qing Xin cultivar is recognized by and appreciat- 
ed for the fragrances the leaves reveal during process- 
ing. It is the undisputed 
favorite 
of Taiwanese 
growers. It is most often planted at high altitude, at 
about 2,600 feet (800 m), and preferably in newly 
cleared soil. In order to encourage the growth of this 
temperamental cultivar it is best to use rich soil that has 
never been used to cultivate other plants, preferably 
on sloping ground, where regular drainage will help 
the roots take hold. 
SI Ji CHUN 
Discovered by chance in northern Taiwan and officially 
recognized in 1981, the Si Ji Chun variety Is said to 
be a natural hybrid produced from two Qing Xin 
varieties (Qing Shin Dapan and Qing Xin). The name 
given to this local variety means “tea of the four 
springs’ and refers to its exceptional productivity: five 
or six harvests per year, depending on the geographic 
region and the altitude of the plantation. 
With a great 
ability to adapt to all soil types, on the plains as well as 
in the mountains, and a strong resistance to parasites 
and disease, this variety is grown more and more 
widely in Taiwan. 
The leaves of Si Ji Chun teas are rich 
in aromatic substances that release an explosive floral 
attack when infused. 
CUI YU (ALSO CALLED “TZUIYU” 
AND “TAI CHA NO. 13”) 
This cultivar is the result of a forced hybridization, 
recorded 
in 1981, between the Yingchi Hungshin 
and Tai Cha No. 80 varieties. Cui Yu is another local 
variety grown mainly on the plains and in the Nantou 
region. This cultivar offers high yields and gentle floral 
aromas, but it does not seem to enjoy the same 
popularity as Si Ji Chun tea among either Taiwanese 
growers or consumers. 
JIN SHUAN (ALSO CALLED 
“CHINSUAN,” “MILKY WULONG” 
AND “TAI CHA NO. 12” ) 
This cultivar 
is sturdy, has plentiful buds and _ is 
adaptable. It is reputed to have an aroma reminiscent 
of milk, hence 
its nickname “Milky Wulong.” Very 
popular in the 1980s and 1990s, this variety seems to 
be less popular among growers today, as a glut on the 
maket caused prices to tumble. 
TIE GUAN YIN 
The Tie Guan Yin cultivar originated in China is now 
also found in Taiwan. It was planted there by the Tsang 
brothers around |875. It is grown only in the north of 
the island, in the Mucha region. 
Unfortunately, Taiwanese consumers seem to be 
moving away from the roasted version of Tie Guan 
Yin, preferring wulong teas with their delicate floral 
aromas. The Tie Guan Yin tea trees are now very old, 
and, given their declining popularity, growers will pro- 
bably turn to other varieties of tea when the time 
comes to replace their crops of Tie Guan Yin. We may 
be witnessing the final years of the Mucha Tie Guan 
Yin variety. 
iz 
< 
= 
< 
~ 
137 

138 
Processing Green Wulong Teas 
As previously noted, it is the process of oxidation that 
determines which of the six families a tea belongs to. The 
wulong family of teas consists of semi-oxidized teas that 
can be categorized somewhere between green teas and 
black teas. This family of teas, which is less well-known in the 
West, is widely grown in China (Fujian, Guangdong) and in 
Taiwan, where it is something of a specialty. A wulong tea 
can be closer to a green tea or a black tea depending on 
its degree of oxidation. This is why we distinguish between 
THE FIRST DAY 
green wulong teas, which generally undergo 30 percent to 50 
percent oxidation, and black wulong teas, which can be up 
to 70 percent oxidized. Of course, these different degrees of 
oxidation develop very different aromas. It is easy to tell the 
vegetal and floral bouquet of a green wulong from the sweet, 
woody notes of a black wulong. 
The processing of black wulong teas is described in the 
section on China (see pages 62-63), and below is a description 
of how green wulong teas are processed. 
On the first day, as soon as the freshly picked leaves arrive at the factory, skilled workers concentrate on the oxidation 
process, which will take up the better part of the day. 
PICKING 
Although most of the first picking takes place in April, some growing areas 
on the plains at an altitude of 330 feet (100 m) can be harvested as early as 
mid-February. If the factory is producing a wulong tea, the buds need to have 
reached a certain stage of maturity. 
The final bud must have opened before it 
can be picked, along with the three following leaves. Picking is done manually 
by women, especially at plantations on steep slopes. On the plains, machines 
are often used. 
WITHERING 
Once the leaves have been picked, they are spread out on large sheets, usually out- 
side, to undergo the first stage of processing: withering. 
This stage consists of drying 
the leaves slightly so the moisture they contain does not damage them. Depending 
on the weather conditions, they may be left to stand for 30 minutes to two hours. 
If the sun Is too strong, light canopies are placed over the leaves to protect them. 
WULONG 
The literal translation of wulong is “black dragon,” and it refers to the black snakes that were 
sometimes found wrapped around the branches of tea trees. It is said that adults would try to comfort children 
who were afraid of the snakes by telling them that the snakes were little black dragons. 

OXIDATION 
The next stage of processing, oxidation, is an extremely delicate step, as it 
largely determines the final flavor of the tea. It is during oxidation that aromas 
are released and begin to stabilize on the leaves. The leaves are spread out on 
woven bamboo trays about 3 feet (1 m) in diameter in an environment where 
the temperature Is maintained at 68 to 77°F (20 to 25°C) and the humidity at 
60 percent to 85 percent. 
The leaves are lightly stirred at regular one- to four 
hour intervals. 
This stirring action is very important, as the friction of the leaves 
against the bamboo trays breaks down the cellular structure of the leaves and 
releases oils that contain aromatic substances, thus triggering the process of 
oxidation. 
This stage can last from 10 to 18 hours. 
This process is instinctive, as only the experience of the grower, who 
touches and sniffs the leaves, tells him when it is exactly the right time to stop 
the oxidation process. 
FIRING 
Next, the leaves are fired. This process, as with green teas, is intended to stop 
oxidation by destroying the enzymes that cause it. Once the leaves have reached 
the required degree of oxidation, 
they are placed in a heated rotating cylinder that 
looks like a large clothes dryer, where they undergo a preliminary heating/stirring. 
The leaves will be heated to about 572°F (300°C) for five to seven minutes. 
ROLLING 
As soon as they are taken out of the rotating cylinder, the still-warm leaves are 
rolled for the first time.A mechanical arm attached to a rounded dome rotates 
swiftly, causing the leaves to brush against the walls of the machine and release 
their fragrance. This first rolling lasts three to five minutes. 
DRYING 
Drying stabilizes the aromas of the leaves. It also prevents excessive residual mois- 
ture from damaging the leaves. Drying starts at about |58°F (70°C), for five or six 
minutes, and then continues for 20 to 30 minutes at 212°F (100°C). 
Finally, the leaves are spread out on large bamboo trays and left to stand for 
six to eight hours. 

THE SECOND DAY 
On the second day the leaves undergo three basic stages, which will be 
repeated several dozen times: heating/stirring, rolling and compression. 
HEATING/STIRRING 
The leaves are first placed in a rotating cylinder for a few minutes to soften them. 
ROLLING 
Next, the leaves are formed into a 44-pound (20 kg) package and wrapped in 
a special fabric. This mass of leaves is placed in a machine equipped with four 
rotating rollers that compress it into a round shape. 
COMPRESSION 
Still wrapped in the fabric, the leaves are then placed in another machine, where 
they will be turned and rolled for about |0 minutes while being compressed. 
These three st 
140 to 392°F (60 to 200°C) and 30 to 40 times with a non-heated cylinder This is how, after a great 
deal of work, the distinctive wulong bead shape is obtained. 
eps are repeated |0 to 20 times with a rotating cylinder that is full of air heated to 

FINAL DRYING 
SORTING 
At the sorting stage, the leaves are separated from the small stems that are still 
attached. Although there are machines that can do this work, sorting is usually done 
by hand. It is an extremely tedious process that does nothing to enhance the flavor 
of the tea according to some growers; however, it remains important to those who 
want their tea to look perfect. After the sorting, the processing is complete. 
ROASTING 
In Taiwan, current practice is to leave the tea intact, without roasting It. However, at 
the request of customers, many producers heat the leaves one last time. It is often 
tea merchants who carry out this last step. With the help of an electric oven or 
bamboo baskets placed over a heated base, the leaves are heated at temperatures 
ranging from 167 to 320°F (75 to 160°C) for two to 60 hours, depending on the 
intensity required. There is no need to rotate the leaves in a convection oven, but 
if a bamboo basket on an electric heater is used, the leaves must be stirred at 20- 
to 30-minute intervals in order to ensure an even firing. Firing plays an important 
role in the taste and color of a tea. It can add woody, sweet, even caramelized 
aromas. In addition, it gives the liquid more balance, reducing the astringency as 
well as the level of caffeine. At the request of some older customers, who claim 
that roasted wulong teas “eliminate moisture” from the body, several growers fire 
their teas in the fall. This type of wulong gives that 
impression because, by reducing the “greenness” of 
the tea, firing makes it easier to drink and to digest. 
Although it may look like a simple operation at 
first glance, roasting is an art in itself, as it involves 
adding heat-induced notes without overpowering 
the other aromatic accents present in wulong tea. 
Later, the final drying will stabilize the aromas on the leaves and allow the 
grower to ensure that no more than 2 percent to 3 percent moisture remains 
in the leaves. This drying phase lasts five to ten minutes at a temperature 
ranging from 212 to 248°F (100 to 120°C). 
TAI

z 
< 
> 
< 
= 
STEMS INWULONG TEAS 
It takes one person 
no fewer than 10 hours to remove the stems from 
262 pounds (12 kg) of tea. Once the stems have been 
removed, only 20% pounds (9.4 kg) of tea remain. 
AGED WULONG TEAS 
Just as there are aged Pu er teas, there are also wulong teas 
that are called “aged” after several years of maturing. The 
creation of this type of wulong tea is probably a direct result 
of the humid climate of the island. Because of the climate, 
unsold harvests had a tendency to become saturated with 
moisture and to deteriorate. It is likely that certain growers, 
seeking to remedy this situation, came up with the idea of 
firing in order to conserve their teas. Combined with the 
effect of the aging of the leaves, the annual roasting gives rise 
to new flavors quite different from those that were present 
at the outset. 
THE AGING PROCESS 
The process of aging wulong teas consists of subjecting 
them to firing annually or every two to three years. As a 
skilled worker decides instinctively for how long and at what 
temperature the firing should take place, it Is difficult to 
" 
with stems. 
Tea leaves 
without stems. 
Tea leaves 
make any connection between the age of the tea and the 
intensity of the roast. However, after 20 to 25 years of 
aging, mineral notes begin to appear, creating similarities 
with aged Pu er teas. Further aging progressively confirms 
the mineral notes. 
Today, the production of aged wulong teas is quite 
rare and unfortunately, due to economic factors, this tra- 
dition could disappear entirely in a few years. The high 
demand for wulong teas leaves producers with very little 
surplus. Harvests are now vacuum-stored, further reducing 
the risk of deterioration. In addition, as the price of aged 
teas Is relatively low, growers no longer see any advantage 
in conserving and processing a small quantity over a long 
period of time to finally obtain a price only slightly higher 
than that of fresh tea. However, as tea enthusiasts, let us 
hope that this unique tradition, rich in gustatory pleasure, 
will be continued. 
BEFORE ELECTRICITY 
In the past, small pieces of coal were used for 
roasting. Today, few growers still resort to this method; however, it is sometimes 
possible to discover teas fired in this way in specialty stores. 

The Local Taste and Method of Preparing 
Tea 
The Taiwanese are proud of their wulong teas, and many 
of them travel long distances to buy tea from their 
favorite mountain garden. However, there has been a 
discernible change in consumer habits. Although tea was 
previously an integral part of daily life — at home, at 
work and in public places — the younger generation, 
who view tea as an outdated and outmoded drink, are 
gravitating toward coffee and energy drinks. In the face of 
this change of attitude and the rise in popularity of coffee 
in large cities, the values associated with tea seem 
old-fashioned. 
However, tea remains at the heart of a very 
important 
social 
ritual. 
In almost 
all Taiwanese 
households, it is customary to welcome visitors by 
offering them the best tea in the house. In addition, 
growers continue to make every effort to promote the 
popularity of tea, as they have done since the 1970s, 
by organizing many festivals and contests. These 
Still relatively unknown 
in the West, cha xi is a practice that 
consists of surrounding the pre- 
paration of tea with beauty by 
creating an aesthetic environment 
conducive to tasting. The choice of 
tea, accessories and ornaments, as 
well as the arrangement of these 
objects, is of prime importance. 
The idea is not to show off expen- 
sive possessions, so there 
is no 
need for luxurious accessories. 
The 
focus 
is more on the materials 
used and on the harmony of their 
placement. 
events also offer educational activities that promote 
socializing and teach participants the fundamentals 
of the gong fu cha ceremony (see pages |44—145). 
Tea parties, which are like large outdoor receptions, 
are just one of the activities organized in Taiwan 
to popularize tea culture. These events, which take 
place in parks or other large public spaces that are 
conducive to meditation, aim to bring together a large 
number of people around various themes connected 
to tea. 
Moreover, tea-growing villages organize a lot of 
tasting events, and small teahouses serving local teas 
can be found everywhere, sometimes tucked away in 
unexpected places. 
Taiwan is full of tea enthusiasts and well-informed 
connoisseurs who use the specific method of infusion 
known as gong fu cha to bring out the extraordinarily 
rich flavor of wulong teas. 

The Gong Fu Cha Ceremony 
The Chinese symbols for gong fu are the same as those 
representing the martial arts: they represent mastery of 
time and movement. 
The literal meaning of gong fu is ‘the 
time for tea,’ and tt refers to the time that is needed to 
achieve mastery of the art. 
The first mention of this ceremony can be traced 
back to the early |7th century in China. At that time, 
four utensils were used: a teapot, a charcoal burner, an 
earthenware kettle and a few small porcelain bowls. Over 
time, the method has undergone several developments 
that have led to better control of the infusion. Today, for 
example, a sniffing cup is used, allowing the taster to 
follow the development of the aromas that stabilize on 
the rim. This method of infusion, ideal for the preparation 
of wulong and Pu er teas, enables repeated infusions of 
the same leaves so that each stage reveals a different 
characteristic. Tasting a tea prepared in this method Is 
both a journey and a discovery. 
THE UTENSILS USED FOR GONG FU CHA 
As many as || utensils may be needed for the prepa- 
ration of tea following the gong fu cha method. Here 
are the most important ones: 
* 
Asmall, 2- to |-cup (100 to 200 ml), teapot 
* 
A cha chuan bow! into which the teapot can 
be placed 
¢ 
A cha hai (a container equipped with a spout) 
or a spare pot 
* 
Asniffing cup or a tasting cup 
(wen xiang bei or cha bei) 
¢ 
Akettle 
To these objects one can add a spoon, a small napkin 
and a box in which to place the tea 
—— 
wu 

Here are the steps of the gong fu cha method: 
Heat the utensils. Place your teapot in the cha 
chuan and pour a little simmering water into it. 
Put the lid back on and pour the contents into 
the spare pot. Once your teapot is well rinsed, 
add the required quantity of tea (2 or 3 tea- 
spoons/|0 to 15 ml). 
Rinse the leaves. Pour simmering water over the 
tea leaves and then discard this water At this 
point you can smell the first aromas released by 
the moistened leaves. 
Infuse the leaves. Refill the teapot with simmering 
water until it overflows [J place the lid back on 
the pot and pour water over the outside of the 
teapot to get rid of the foam. Meanwhile, empty 
the spare pot to prepare it to receive the liquid. 
Wait as long as you wish. The first two infusions 
should 
last only 20 to 60 seconds, but the 
following infusions can last one to three minutes. 
Note that a bubble will usually form at the end of 
the teapot's spout, and after a short while it will 
slide back into the teapot as if It is being sucked 
in. This phenomenon is due to the fact that the 
leaves soak up the water and are ‘drinking’ the 
liquid, so to speak. This indicates it is time to 
transfer the infusion. 
* — Pour the liquid into the spare pot. Be sure to drain 
the teapot so that no liquid remains inside Ej. 
¢ — Fill the sniffing cup, which has an elongated shape 
EB then transfer the liquid into the tasting cup EJ. 
Inhale the different fragrances that emanate from 
your now empty sniffing cup. Linger over the aro- 
mas that cling to the sides of the cup. 
o. 
lasue: 
This tasting technique will allow you to infuse the 
same leaves several times and to discover different fra- 
grances every time. The fundamental principles require 
patience, attentiveness and meticulousness. However, 
there is no set rule for a successful gong fu cha tasting. 
Tasters can adapt the technique to suit their own spe- 
cific approach, bearing in mind that it is by taking time 
and paying close attention to the task at hand that the 
most sublime moments can be lived. 

it 
\ 
eo 
ee 
Sa 
ee -2. 
oe. 

A Meeting with Mr. Chen Nen Yu, 
Mr. Chen Nen Yu is a tea grower in the district of 
Nantou. 
What lead you to work in the world of tea? 
How and when did you begin? Do you come 
froma 
tea-growing family tradition? 
| was born into a family of tea growers. Both my 
grandfather and my father were growers. | learned 
from them how to cultivate tea, to manage 
a 
garden and to process the leaves. | also received 
state-sponsored training in the tea industry. It has 
now been 17 years since | took over the family 
business. 
Do you have a large tea garden? How big is it? 
My tea garden covers 2 hectares [5 acres]. 
How much tea do you produce annually? 
Do you have employees? 
| produce about 5,000 kilos [11,000 pounds] of tea 
per year. In addition to the 30 pickers that | need 
during harvest time, | have three full-time employees 
who take care of the garden and five other seasonal 
employees who work in the processing plant. 
Tea Grower 
Do you have your own store to sell your tea? 
No, | don’t. 
To whom do you sell your tea? To the local 
or international market? 
| sell most of my tea on the local market. 
What kind of tea do you produce? 
| produce Qing Shin wulong tea in Lugu as well as 
a little Jin Shuan. | also have two gardens in Shan 
Lin Xi. 
Have you noticed changes in the industry and in 
your clientele since you started out? 
Yes, in my father’s and grandfather’s time, the 
garden was small, the business was small, salaries 
were lower and almost all production was done 
by hand. Now we have high-tech equipment that 
allows us to manage a bigger garden and produce 
a lot more tea. The tendency in the industry now 
is toward specialization in a specific area, either 
cultivation, processing or trading tea. 
TAIW
147 

148 
ONE TEA, ONE STORY 
T-18 Black Tea from Taiwan 
Created by the Black Tea Experimentation Cen- 
ter in Taiwan, T-18 is a hybrid produced from a tea 
tree from Burma (Myanmar) called Ashamu and a 
wild tea tree from southern Taiwan. After 40 years 
of research and observation, 
T-18 stood out from 
other similar hybrids because of its superior sensor- 
ial characteristics, and so it was finally launched on 
the market in 1999. 
Today it can be found mainly in the region 
around Sun Moon Lake (the largest natural lake in 
Taiwan), as well as on the east coast of the districts 
of Hualien and Taitung. This tea plant produces a 
whole-leaf black tea of unrivaled flavor. The liquid 
is rounded, full bodied, smooth and slightly minty, 
with generously fruity notes of prune and raisin. In- 
tended primarily for the local market, only minimal 
quantities are produced, which partly explains the 
high price of this tea. However, its originality and 
growing popularity bode well for increased produc- 
tion that should lead to more reasonable pricing. 
The Processing of T-18 
After withering for 16 to 22 hours, T-18 needs four 
periods of mechanical rolling lasting 30 minutes 
each. The tea will then be oxidized for two hours 
in a room where a temperature of 77°F (25°C) and 
a level of humidity of approximately 95 percent 
will be maintained as consistently as possible. Two 
stages of drying will follow, lasting 30 minutes each 
at a temperature of around 210°F (100°C). Lastly, 
the tea will be sorted, most often mechanically. 
The finest batches will sometimes be sorted with 
tweezers 
to prevent hands from 
transferring 
undesirable aromas to the leaves. 

Taiwanese Teas 
Shan Lin Xi | wulong | 
Translation: Coniferous forest close to the stream 
Production area: Nantou, at an altitude of 3,300 to 
5,400 feet (1,000 to 1,650 m) 
Harvest season: April, June, September and November 
Cultivar: Qing Xin 
Tea plantations did not appear on the steep slopes of 
Shan Lin Xi Mountain until the early 1980s. Although 
recently introduced, tea growing in the region has ex- 
panded more than anywhere else on the whole island 
of Taiwan. The mountainsides are covered with green 
and thriving gardens that radiate health. Their energy is 
reflected in the rich and spirited temperament of the 
teas they produce. 
The most interesting teas are made 
from spring and winter pickings. 
Tasting notes: The small beads of shiny leaves, barely 
softened by the heat of the water fill the air with 
fragrances of ground cherry and luxurious flowers. The 
vegetal base of the infusion bursts with the rich aroma 
of hyacinth. 
The nose, while still heady with flowers, 
offers appetizing notes of candied fruit and melted 
butter: In the mouth, the liquid is supple and rounded 
with a sweet, vegetal attack. 
The finish leads us delicately 
to a vegetal and fruity silk embellished with candied 
melon and coconut. 
Recommended infusion method and accessory: The 
gong fu cha technique and a gaiwan or teapot. 
Dong Ding | wulong | 
Translation: Frozen peaks 
Alternative name: Tung Ting 
Production area: Nantou, at an altitude of 1,650 to 
2,600 feet (500 to 800 m) 
Harvest season: April, June, September and November 
Cultivar: Qing Xin 
Since the 
1970s, the Taiwanese government has 
actively encouraged the production of tea in this 
region. A festival is still organized so that people can 
taste the new harvests and learn the basics of the 
gong fu cha preparation method. This festival follows 
the annual spring tea contest. There are more than 
4,000 growers in this region who use the Dong Ding 
name for their teas, even if it is not actually grown on 
the mountain. About 20 years ago the government 
designated three “official” Dong Ding growing regions. 
They are Zhang 
Yu, Yong Long and Feng Huang. 
Tasting notes: The satiny leaves rolled into tight beads 
are a very dark green. The infusion gives off a power 
ful bouquet of lilac, vanilla and clover honey. The golden 
liquid gleams with lovely hints of pale green. Aromas of 
narcissus and peony fill the mouth against a background 
of ripe peach and butter The unctuous texture leads to 
a long finish in which the floral aftertaste combines with 
a fresh vegetal note. 
Recommended infusion method and accessory: 
The 
gong fu cha technique and a gaiwan or teapot. 
149 

Si Ji Chun | wulong | 
Translation: 
Tea of the four springs 
Production area: Mainly Nantou, at an altitude of 
650 to 2,600 feet (200 to 800 m) 
Harvest season: March to November 
Cultivar: Si Ji Chun 
It is said that Si Ji Chun is a natural hybrid resulting 
from a crossing of Qing Shin Dapan and Qing Shin 
wulong cultivars. Approved in 1981, it was discovered 
by chance in northern Taiwan by a farmer from the 
Mucha region. The Si Ji Chun variety offers certain ad- 
vantages: it adapts well to various soil types; it provides 
up to five harvests per year; and its leaves release 
heady floral fragrances. These 
positive character 
istics explain its growing popularity and the spread 
of its use on the island, on the plains as well as in the 
mountains. 
Tasting notes: The explosive floral bouquet releases 
aromas of lilac, narcissus and hyacinth. The swelling 
floral attack is enriched with notes of spice and fresh 
grasses mixed with delicate aromas of browned butter 
and candied frurts. The texture Is rich and unctuous, 
and the finish offers a long, sweet aftertaste. 
Recommended infusion method and accessory: The 
gong fu cha technique and a gaiwan or teapot. 
* 
150 
‘ 
Ali Shan | wulong | 
Production area: Chia 
Yi, at an altitude of 2,600 to 
5,600 feet (800 to 1,700 m) 
Harvest season: April, June, September and 
November 
Cultivar: Qing Xin 
Ali Shan is an important tourist destination in Taiwan. 
The huge mountain, rising to a peak of more than 
8,500 feet (2,600 m), is equipped with an elaborate 
infrastructure to handle the thousands of visitors that 
flock there every year to watch the sunrise from the 
summit, to hike in the forest or to take the local steam 
train. The highly renowned tea gardens are located on 
various lower slopes. 
Tasting notes: Rich and heady floral aromas are re- 
leased from the emerald-green leaves. The delicately 
vegetal infusion gives off notes of fruit and pastry. In 
the mouth, aromas of coconut, exotic fruit and vanilla 
combine In a luxurious bouquet. 
The whole fades into 
a long, sweet finish of flower nectar The texture is 
smooth and supple. 
Recommended infusion method and accessory: The 
gong fu cha technique and a gaiwan or teapot. 
a 

Bai Hao | wulong | 
Translation: White down 
Alternative name: Oriental Beauty, Fancy Wulong 
Production area: Hsinchu, at an altitude of 500 to 
2,000 feet (150 to 600 m) 
Harvest season: June to July 
Cultivar: Qing Xin Dapan 
The hint of muscat grape that characterizes the taste 
of this tea is the effect of a tiny insect, Jacobiasca 
formosana. When the plant is bitten by this insect, 
it defends itself by secreting a specific hormone. 
The 
aromatic potential of the hormone is then released by 
the intensive oxidation of the leaves, which can reach 
50 percent to 60 percent. To take advantage of this 
insect, gardens must be located at low altitudes with 
sufficiently warm temperatures. 
The insect only attacks 
during the summer season, and only the bitten leaves 
are picked. 
Tasting notes: The fine, dark-red twisted leaves dotted 
with numerous silver buds delight the eye even before 
they release any aroma. The aromatic complexity 
of the bouquet mingling honeyed, floral and frurty 
notes announces more smooth delights to come. The 
coppery, remarkably clear liquid is full and velvety. The 
mouthfeel opens on a note of orchid and muscat grape 
followed by a harmonious succession of aromas of 
apple, nutmeg, autumn honey and exotic wood. It is a 
treasure trove of seemingly endless delights. 
Recommended infusion method and accessory: The 
gong fu cha technique and a gaiwan or teapot. 
Li Shan | wulong | 
Translation: Pear Mountain 
Production area: Tachung, at an altitude of 6,550 to 
7,900 feet (2,000 to 2,400 m) 
Harvest season: May and October 
Cultivar: Qing Xin 
The little village of Li Shan is nestled in a magnificent 
landscape. It is surrounded by mountain slopes covered 
in pear, peach and apple orchards. In fact, tea has 
been cultivated for less than 20 years in this region 
and is not the principal crop, although it is certainly 
increasingly popular The tea gardens are planted at 
very high altitude, up to 6,550 feet (2,000 m). 
At this 
altttude, growers plant long grasses between the rows 
to protect the tea trees from winter frosts. 
Tasting notes: Once they are rinsed, the leaves 
release appetizing odors of melted butter and caramel 
flan.A flood of floral aromas combining peony, white 
lily and hyacinth arises from the infusion. This heady 
bouquet is finished with notes of brioche and bar 
ley sugar The full liquor, swelling with persistent floral 
aromas, has a pleasantly oily texture. 
The finish carries 
a long aftertaste of flowers and candied zest. This is 
an elegant, sophisticated tea reminiscent of the most 
beautiful spring days. 
Recommended infusion method and accessory: 
The 
gong fu cha technique and a gaiwan or teapot. 

Pinglin Bao Zhong | wulong | 
Translation: Wrapped 
in Pinglin paper 
Alternative name: Ven Shan Bao Zhong 
Production area: Taipei (Wen Shan), at an altitude of 
1,300 to 2,000 feet (400 to 600 m) 
Harvest season: April, June, September and November 
Cultivar: Qing Xin and sometimes Cui 
Y! 
Situated in the Wen Shan mountain massif, about 
30 minutes from Taipei, Pinglin is a very popular 
village. Many residents of the capital go there regularly 
to buy their favorite tea. This high demand has pushed 
up the prices of 
the tea from this region considerably. 
It is interesting to note that Bao Zhong is one of the 
only wulong teas that is becoming hard to find in 
Taiwan. Today, the twisted-leaf style is being replaced 
by leaves rolled into small beads. 
Tasting notes: When the long, twisted leaves are 
rinsed they release generous fragrances of lilac, lily of 
the valley and vanilla. The infusion produces a nose 
with a dominant floral aspect enhanced with a gentle 
vegetal note of chlorophyll. 
The straw-colored liquid 
has a sweet and delicate attack and offers a mild 
acidity reminiscent of cooked 
peach. Aromas of 
flowers and melon develop in the mouth, culminating 
in a full roundness. The still-flowery finish stretches 
into a sweet note of birchwood. 
The aromas released 
by this tea are remarkably persistent. 
Recommended infusion method and accessory: The 
gong fu cha technique and a gaiwan or teapot. 
152 
| | 
| e 
Gabacha | wulong | 
Translation: 
Tea containing GABA 
Alternative name: Jia Yeh 
Production area: Taipei (Wen Shan) and Nantou, at 
an altitude of 1,300 to 2,000 feet (400 to 600 m) 
Harvest season: Two weeks before and after the 
Duan Wu holiday, which falls on May 5 in the lunar 
calendar 
Cultivar: Qing Xin 
This tea was introduced and developed in Taiwan 
following Japanese research on the GABA molecule 
during the 1980s. According to some studies, this 
molecule, which is found in the human brain, helps to 
reduce stress and anxiety. Thanks to a special method 
of production 
that 
includes 
vacuum-processing, 
this tea has a very high GABA content. In addition, 
this unusual processing method helps to bring out a 
very interesting, distinctive taste. 
Tasting notes: The large, irregular, twisted leaves are 
brown and dark red in color Their generous spicy 
and fruity character is delightful, even before infusion. 
As the leaves unfold, they release smooth fragrances 
of stewed fruit, nutmeg and licorice against a woody 
background. The balance of acidity and sweetness 
in the mouth combines notes of dried apricot and 
marmalade to which aromas of fresh tobacco and 
brown sugar join, producing a rounded, silky texture. 
Recommended infusion method and accessory: 
The 
gong fu cha technique and a gaiwan or teapot. 
ee 

Gui Fei | wulong | 
Translation: Imperial concubine 
Alternative name: Zhuo Yan Cha 
Production area: Nantou, at an altitude of 1,500 to 
2,300 feet (450 to 700 m) 
Harvest season: June and September 
Cultivar: Qing Xin 
This tea appeared quite recently and in the most 
unlikely circumstances. 
Following the 
devastating 
earthquake of 1999, many plantations in the Nantou 
region were temporarily abandoned. Untended, the 
gardens fell prey to the invasion of numerous parasites. 
One of these, Jacobiasca formosana, is a tiny insect 
that Is one reason for the renown of the Bai Hao 
tea grown in the northwest of the island. When 
the growers realized the insects affected how the 
leaves taste, they decided to process the leaves that 
had been bitten by the insects. The leaves are rolled 
tightly, in accordance with the style of the region, and 
30 percent to 40 percent oxidized, which brings out the 
distinctive character of the bitten leaves. Gui Fei tea 
thereby combines in a highly original way two great 
classic Taiwanese teas: Bai Hao and Dong Ding. As 
well as creating a new style of tea, the growers were 
looking for a way to take advantage of the summer 
harvests, when the level of oxidation is lower, and the 
teas are often less interesting. 
Tasting notes: The leaves are rolled into beads that 
have a prettily marbled green and copper appearance. 
The infusion releases aromas of cinnamon, flowers and 
oxidized apple to form an attractive bouquet topped 
off by a powerful fragrance of roses. The luminous 
golden liquid offers the nose delicious notes of honey 
and muscat grape. The texture is smooth and round 
in the mouth, opening onto a delicate fruity note. The 
light finish extends into a base of marzipan and honey. 
Recommended infusion method and accessory: 
The 
gong fu cha technique and a gaiwan or teapot. 
153 

hae 
: 
y 
+8 
4 

India 
THE BRITISH ESTABLISHED AN INDUSTRY IN INDIA 
THAT, TOTHIS DAY, RESPONDS TOA STRONG INTERNA- 
TIONAL DEMAND FOR TEA WHILE MAINTAINING EX- 
CEPTIONAL QUALITY STANDARDS 
IN SOME OF ITS 
GROWING REGIONS. HOWEVER, THE DISCOVERY OF 
WILD TEA TREES IN THE JUNGLES OF ASSAM INDICA- 
TES THAT INDIA IS ONE OF THE BIRTHPLACES OF THE 
TEA TREE. 

156 
History 
The true beginning of the history of tea cultivation in 
India can be attributed in part to Major Robert Bruce. 
In 1823, as an employee of the East India Company, 
he discovered wild tea trees growing in the state of 
Assam, close to the border with Burma (Myanmar). 
Major Bruce had noticed certain tribes chewing the 
leaves of tall trees that were identified as wild tea 
trees, but to his knowledge there were not enough of 
these to produce a significant harvest, nor were there 
any plantations. However, at that time the British were 
looking for ways to get around supply problems rela- 
ted to their tea imports, including the Japanese mar- 
ket being closed to the outside world, the long ship- 
ping route between China and England (which often 
resulted in tea spoiling while still aboard the ships) 
and the exorbitant prices demanded by the Chinese, 
who enjoyed a monopoly on the trade (see “The End 
of the Chinese Monopoly: 
The Opium Wars” on the 
facing page). And so, in response to their need to find 
new tea-growing regions, the British took a serious 
interest in Robert Bruce's discovery. 
Even before Bruce's discovery, several attempts 
had been made to grow 
tea trees in India.As early as the 
beginning of the 19th century, C.]. Gordon had brou- 
ght back approximately 80,000 Camellia sinensis var. 
sinensis seeds from China, which 
he introduced 
in Darjeeling, Kumaon, Assam and southern 
India, 
long before the tea tree discovered in Assam was 
recognized as a variety of Camellia sinensis. However, 
this first attempt to grow tea failed due to a lack of 
experience. 
Establishing and developing a new tea supply 
chain was, of course, a challenge fraught with many 
difficulties, but — motivated by the problems arising 
from trade with China and the high global demand 
for tea — the British plunged into the venture. In 
1834, Charles Alexander Bruce succeeded in creating 
India's first plantation, carrying on the project started 
by his brother, who had died in the intervening years. 
Some four years later he made his first delivery to 
England — 
12 cases of tea. Received with much 
el 
Sale 
curiosity, this first shipment was sold at auction for a 
good price, although it did not quite live up to British 
expectations. It was not easy, after just a few years, to 
compete with the Chinese, given their level of expertise. 
The British decided to send spies to China to try 
to discover 
the secrets of growing tea. Botanist Robert 
Fortune, disguised 
as 
a tea merchant, managed 
to gain access to the gardens and pick up enough 
clues to understand the mysterious process that pro- 
duced China's famous black tea and the important 
phenomenon involved, oxidation. In 1848, he returned 
with 20,000 plants, essential information regarding the 
processing of the leaves and a Chinese labor force of 
about 80 workers, who were to prove invaluable to 
the creation of new plantations. It was at this point 
that the cultivation of 
tea in India really got under way. 
Next, a huge deforestation program in the region 
of Assam cleared the way for vast gardens. Moreover, 
the British applied the experience they had acquired 
during the agricultural revolution in Europe in the 
17th century to the management of the plantations, 
which led to industrial methods of production being 
adopted more quickly in India. Consequently, by the 
early |860s, Indian production was sufficient to meet 

THE END OF THE CHINESE MONOPOLY: THE OPIUM WARS 
Qteen Elizabeth | founded the 
East India Company (EIC) in 1600, hoping to dominate trade with Asia. The company was supposed to give the 
British control over the tea trade with China.When the EIC managed to establish its first trading post in Canton 
in 1684, tea became the main export, mostly in response to the huge demands of the English market, as tea had 
become extremely popular in England. However, the Chinese were self-sufficient and wary of foreign trade, so 
they demanded payment in cash, rather than in exchange for goods. This did not suit the British, as they were rich 
in goods, produced mainly in their Indian colonies, but not in money. 
To encourage the Chinese to export their tea, the British began to exchange it for opium. This trade not 
only destabilized the Chinese market, it made the population dependent on foreign trade (since they could only 
obtain opium through foreign trade). This trade proved to be an absolute disaster for China. As early as 1729, 
the Chinese instigated various prohibitionist measures to fight against the opium trade. In 1796, Emperor 
Jia Qing 
established the death penalty for opium trafficking. In spite of these efforts, the drug trade continued to spread 
like wildfire. It is said that by 1830, the British had exported more than 1,650 tons (1,500 t) of opium to China. 
In 1839, the Chinese government managed to fight back by confiscating and burning stocks of opium. Next, 
all ports involved in the opium trade were closed, including the port of Canton. In reaction to these measures, the 
British initiated a series of military interventions historically referred to as the first Opium War (1840-1842). This 
war destroyed Chinese defenses and, in effect, terminated their trade monopoly. 
The conflict was resolved by the 
Treaty of Nanjing, which forced the Chinese to restart the opium trade with Britain. 
The Chinese also had to turn 
over the island of Hong Kong to the British and give them access to five major ports, including Fuzhou, Canton and 
Shanghai.When the Chinese failed to respect the terms of the treaty the British launched the second Opium War 
(1856-1860), hoping to obtain further concessions from them. This second war was even more disastrous for the 
Chinese. They were then obliged to sign the Treaty of Tianjin, which greatly favored the British. 
British needs. Regions that were suitable for better 
quality harvests were also established in the mountains 
of Darjeeling and Nilgiri. 
Specializing in the production of black teas, the 
British were able to launch an industry that would 
explode over the following decades, increasing from 
a few hundred tons in the early |860s to more than 
198,400 tons (180,000 t) in 1914. The invention of 
crush, tear, curl (CTC) processing, which facilitates 
mechanical handling of the leaves, paved the way for 
high-volume production. 
On August 15, 1947, the former British colony of 
India was partitioned into two independent nations. 
As a result, the tea-growing gardens and processing 
plants that had belonged to the English gradually 
came under Indian control.In 1951, the Indian govern- 
ment signed the Plantation Act in law, ensuring better 
working conditions for plantation workers. Today, 
the active involvement of the Indian tea industry in 
the field of research makes it a world leader both 
in terms of the quality of its teas and the quantity of 
its output. 
157 

158 
The Indian Tea Industry 
With annual production of 1,081,170 tons (980,820 t), 
India is the second-largest tea producer in the world 
after China. The tea industry is a vitally important 
sector 
of the 
Indian 
national 
economy, 
directly 
employing more than 
a million workers. Before 
its independence 
in 1947, India kept only about 
30 percent of its output for the domestic market. 
Today, the reverse is true: a large majority of Indian 
production 
is sold on the local market. Only 21 
percent is exported. Although tea gardens can be 
found throughout the country, most of them are 
concentrated in the states of Assam, Western Bengal, 
Tamil-Nadu and Kerala. 
Home to 900 gardens, some of which spread 
over several thousand acres, Assam is the largest 
tea-growing region in the world: more than 550,000 
tons (500,000 t) of tea are produced there annually, 
sometimes even glutting the market. Luxury teas, 
like Darjeelings, are reserved for the export market. 
Japan, Great Britain, Europe and, more recently, North 
America, are the major importers. 
The industry's rapid growth was made possible 
by the development of highly efficient black-tea 
processing 
methods. The CTC 
method, 
which 
consists of grinding the leaves into very small pieces, 
allows growers to produce a uniform standard of 
tea 
— ideal for the industrialized market. This led to the 
creation of tea bags (see ‘Tea in Bags,’ on facing page), 
a product that is extremely important in the industry 
today.Very high domestic demand, growing at a rate of 
3 percent to 4 percent per year, has encouraged the 
use of the CTC method, which allows for very high 
productivity, if not high quality. 
In addition to the product destined for local 
consumption, India produces more and more high- 
quality teas that are based on seasonal harvests and 
the specific tastes of importing countries looking for 
more upscale teas. The Darjeeling region is a good 
example of 
this trend. 
THE TEA INDUSTRY IN DARJEELING 
Although 
the market 
it serves 
represents 
only 
3 percent of the total tea production of India, the 
Darjeeling tea industry occupies a unique position. 
Realizing that they could not compete with the high 
volumes produced in other milder regions of the 
world, growers decided to perfect their product in 
order to produce an exceptional black tea that would 
give them access to a global market. 
A garden in Darjeeling produces about 445 pounds 
of tea per acre (500 kg/ha) per year, three times less 
than a garden in Assam, for example. In order to 
A BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE INDIAN TEA TRADE 
Total growing area: |,429,400 acres (578,458 ha) 
Total annual production: |,081,170 tons (980,820 t) 
Principal growing region:Assam, with 537,373 tons (487,497 t) 
Percentage of production by type of tea: CTC, 90%; orthodox, 8.9%; green tea and wulong!.2% 
Average production yield: 1,521 pounds per acre (1,705 kg/ha) 
Annual exports: 223,900 tons (203,120 t) 
Source: 2008 data from the Tea Board of India. (Values in imperial units of measure supplied by publisher.) 

A CTC factory in Assam. 
ensure the viability of the industry, growers pay special 
attention to each harvest throughout the year. 
By producing ever more complex and unusual 
teas, which have allowed growers to demand higher 
prices, the Darjeeling region has built up an excellent 
reputation. However, 
in spite of its reputation, 
a flourishing international market and the rapid 
The organic section of the Coonoor Garden in the Nilgiri Hills, Tamil Nadu. 
growth of 
the local market (thanks to an increasingly 
affluent middle class), Darjeeling tea survives in a 
fragile context. 
Political 
instability and very high 
production costs have created serious problems for 
growers. Every year, several gardens are forced to 
close or are bought out by other owners. 
TEA IN BAGS 
The invention of tea bags is attributed to Thomas Sullivan,a New York tea trader and distributor. In 
June 1908, as he was preparing several samples for prospective clients, Sullivan came up with the idea of putting a little 
of the tea leaves into small silk bags. 
To taste it, he thought, they would just need to remove the tea from the bags. But 
when the clients received the samples, they plunged the bags directly into the boiling water. Pleased with the result, they 
asked Sullivan for more tea “‘in bags.” From there, the idea took hold. 
Today, some 130 million cups of tea are brewed from tea bags every day, but the packaging was modified many 
times before it achieved popular acceptance. 
This was the case particularly in England, where deeply ingrained consumer 
habits had to be changed. Thomas Sullivan himself made one of the first changes, when he replaced the silk with gauze, 
which was just as effective but less expensive.Another important change originated in Boston, where, in 1930,William 
Hermanson invented a bag made of heat-sealed paper fibers. But the greatest change came after the Second World War, 
when Joseph Tetley and Co. (1953) began mass-producing tea in bags. Ever since, the tea-bag market has continued to 
flourish. 
Tea bags have taken on new shapes, round, pyramid shaped, etc.,and now contain many different varieties of tea. 
159 

160 
TEA TASTERS 
The world of tea could not manage without tea tasters. They make 
significant contributions throughout the production process of tea, right up until 
marketing, especially in relation to the evaluation of a harvest and the processing 
methods. Tea tasters can fulfill many roles, depending on the different needs of 
the companies. Some of them, who are also called “tea blenders,” specialize in the 
creation of blends, such as when a uniform tea is required or to test the quality. 
THE DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 
Most of the Indian tea that is destined for export 
is sold at auction in Kolkata (formerly Calcutta). All 
the tea-producing companies deal with a broker who 
hires professional tea tasters to evaluate the quality 
of a harvest and the price that it could fetch. A buyer 
who wishes to source an Indian tea must go through 
a broker, who will provide a list of the available teas. 
THE APPELLATION SYSTEM 
The buyer can then enter the tasting room. Over the 
following days, the buyer will decide which batches 
he or she would like to purchase. 
The buyer will then 
attend the auction and bid on the chosen batches. 
Taster-importers, who enjoy a privileged rela- 
tionship with growers, can visit the gardens directly. 
They can thereby sample and buy the grower’s latest 
batches before they are even sent to Kolkata. 
India is currently trying to apply the first tea appellation system in the 
world. Developed by the Tea Board of India in collaboration with the Darjeeling Tea Association, the system has 
been put in place in response to copies of famous teas, such as those of Darjeeling. Note that the market cur- 
rently offers approximately four times as much tea under the Darjeeling label than is actually produced in the 
region every year. In order to increase volume, teas from other more productive regions, such as Assam, are added 
to Darjeeling teas. The appellation system obliges growers to indicate the geographic origin (garden), the name 
of the cultivars used and the processing method used for any given harvest. In spite of the good intentions of the 
tea producers, a lot remains to be done to ensure that this standard is respected. 

The Temi Garden in Sikkim State. 


A Meeting with oe Kavl Seth, 
Mr. Kavi Seth is the head taster for |. Thomas, India’s 
most important tea broker in Kolkata. 
How long have you been working 
in the tea industry? 
| began working in the tea industry in August 1985. 
What brought you to this line of work? 
In the beginning, when | was finishing my studies 
at the college of New Delhi, | knew nothing about 
the workings of the tea market. However, one of 
my uncles was a general manager with J. 
Thomas & 
Company Private Limited, and he invited me to join 
the company. 
What are your everyday responsibilities? 
The work of a taster may appear monotonous, but 
it is up to each of us to make it interesting. 
We must 
taste and evaluate the teas, attend the auctions, 
collect information about the market and interact 
with the buyers and sellers. 
What do you like beast about your profession? 
The auctions! Even if it is sometimes mentally and 
physically exhausting. Also, the fact that every tea is 
different, especially the Darjeeling teas. There can be 
an enormous price difference between the batches. 
Industry Professional 
What challenges will the Indian tea industry 
need to meet in the years to come? 
Over the past few years, the tea industry has 
experienced a steep drop in prices because of 
inflation in the Indian economy. Fortunately, 2008 
was a good year and prices reached record highs. 
The major challenge for our industry is to re- 
establish a strong presence on the export market, 
which has been declining for several years now. 
What is your favorite tea? 
A second harvest from Darjeeling, for its unique 
muscat grape characteristic. 
How would you define a good tea? 
For me, not only does a good tea look good, it 
tastes good and can be kept for a long time. 
163 

Indian Terroirs 
Tea growing in India began in the northeast of 
the country, with the discovery of wild tea trees 
(see page 156), and spread along the banks of the 
Brahmaputra River to the foothills of the Himalayas. 
Darjeeling and Assam are the most famous pro- 
duction regions. Some high-quality harvests come 
Surathe 
Mumbai ; 
(Bombay) 
o4 dep 
¥ 
“4 
164 
ye 
Nagpur 
12) 
C; 
bang, 
Goaavat 
) 
Indravati 
Bhima 
Hyderabad 
* 
o 
ran fe 
g 
Bangalore 
Classi 
(Madras) 
: ¥ sri 
h) 
( banka 
from the south, where the Nilgiri Hills are loca- 
ted. Other lesser-known growing regions, such as 
Dooars, Terai, Kangra, Cachar, Travancore and Sikkim, 
produce 
high-volume 
harvests 
that 
are 
mainly 
destined to supply the domestic market. 
600 
e 800 
t 
Myen mia? 
(Burne) 
1.000 km 

The city of Darjeeling with Kanchenjunga Mountain in the background. 
THE DARJEELING REGION 
Suspended high in the foothills of the magnificent 
Indian Himalayas, Darjeeling (the land of storms) is 
a district of Western Bengal. The town of Darjeeling 
itself is perched at an altitude of 6,890 feet (2,100 m). 
From this amazing vantage point, three of the four 
highest peaks in the world can be seen: Everest, 
Kanchenjunga and Lho-Tse. 
To the west, the Singalila 
River separates Darjeeling from the Kingdom of 
Nepal. The region of Sikkim lies to the north, with 
Tibet beyond. 
The first recorded plantations in Darjeeling date 
from 1856. Twenty years later there were more than 
a hundred. Today, the district of Darjeeling alone 
contains 86 tea gardens. These are the only gardens 
that 
are 
recognized 
by the 
Darjeeling 
Planters 
Association, having the right to sell their tea under 
the international appellation of Darjeeling. 
Running down the mountainsides 
of the Himalayan 
foothills, this region is blessed with undeniable natural 
advantages. The gardens are planted on the steep 
slopes of the valleys, which provide excellent soll 
drainage, and they grow at altitudes from 1000 to 
7,500 feet (300 to 2,300 m), with the majority 
located at over 3,300 feet (1,000 m). 
Seamenerease Eat 
The soil is rich and slightly acidic with a pH of 
about 5.5.With temperatures averaging 77°F (25°C) 
in summer and 46°F (8°C) in winter (the high-altitude 
regions are frequently affected by frost), and rainfall 
that varies from 63 to 158 inches (1,600 to 4,000 mm) 
(in the south), the tea trees grow in ideal conditions. 
The intense high-altitude sunlight is filtered by frequent 
cloudy periods, which prevents the leaves from drying 
out or burning. The almost constant fog during the 
monsoon season and the presence of a light breeze 
that cools the atmosphere help the new shoots to 
develop. 
Today, this magnificent region enjoys unprecedented 
fare. The delicacy of the teas it produces have earned it 
the nickname of the “Champagne of Black Teas.’ 
THE ASSAM REGION 
The Assam State lies in northeastern India, 125 miles 
(200 km) east of Darjeeling, close to the borders of 
Burma (Myanmar) and Bangladesh. It is here that the 
Camellia sinsensis var. assamica was dis-covered, a 
tea with large leaves that brews into a full-bodied, 
dark liquid with a lot of character This highly fertile 
tropical region is covered at low altitude by a vast 
jungle through which flows the Brahmaputra River. 
Workers picking tea leaves in tropical rain, in Assam. 
165 

166 
It contains some 900 gardens, stretching from the 
Himalayas in the north to the mountains of Naga and 
Patkoi in the south. 
Approximately | 18 inches (3,000 mm) of pre- 
cipitation falls on the 370-mile (600 km) valley every 
year. Between October and March, the temperature 
remains stable, at a mild 68 to 77°F (20 to 25°C). 
During the monsoon — from April to September, 
when the temperature can soar to 95°F (35°C) — 
the valley becomes a kind of natural hothouse in 
which the pickers work in extremely difficult condi- 
tions. In spite of that, more than half of Indian tea 
is grown here, most of it processed using the CTC 
method. Most of the plantations are in the vast 
plains along the Brahmaputra River. 
These are the leaves most often used to create 
the ‘‘British-taste” teas, that is, teas destined for sale 
in tea bags and to be enjoyed with the addition of a 
little milk. Assam teas can be drunk just as they are, 
but their natural spicy, astringent and malty flavor 
makes them an excellent base for the preparation 
of chai (see Indian Chai recipe on page 244). Some 
“orthodox” teas are still produced in Assam, and 
they have surprisingly rich aromas and body. 
THE NILGIRI HILLS 
High on the plateaus of southeastern India, the Nilgiri 
Hills are part of the western Ghat range known as 
the “Blue Mountains.’ This is the third-largest tea- 
growing area in India. Beginning in the middle of 
the |9th century, it has produced teas that are well 
structured, slightly fruity and spicy. Because of the 
tropical climate, growing is continuous and harvesting 
takes place all year long. About 80 percent of the 
cultivars used are C. s. var. assamica, and the best 
harvests are picked in January and February. Almost 
all the tea is grown for the domestic market and 
processed by the CTC method. 
There more than 30,000 gardens in this growing 
region. Although some gardens, like the Tiashola 
Estate, cover several hundred acres, most are no 
larger than 25 acres (10 ha). In spite of the high 
number of growers, the industry is currently going 
through a difficult phase. Many gardens are being 
abandoned and investment Is rare. 
Some parts of the Nilgiri Hills are located at 
high altitude, where excellent growing conditions and 
a 
particularly rich soil favor the cultivation of very 
high-quality teas. For now, only a few growers seem 
interested in this rich potential. Let us hope they will 
be able to revitalize the industry. 
THE SIKKIM REGION 
Just north of Darjeeling, between Nepal and Bhutan, 
is Sikkim State. One single garden, Temi, is responsible 
for the increasing renown of this area. Following a 
government project about 30 years ago that called 
upon the expertise of the Darjeeling growers, this 
garden was planted with cultivars from the Darjeeling 
region. 
Temi is at the top of a mountain that borders 
the Teesta River, which marks the boundary between 
Sikkim and Darjeeling. 
The harvests from this region, 
which are processed according to the orthodox 
method, (see page |72) have the well-structured 
taste and explosive aromas typical of Darjeeling teas. 
Lunch awaits the pickers at Hunwal, in Assam. 


168 
Indian Gardens and Plants 
The first governor of Darjeeling, Dr. Campbell, was 
the first to experiment with tea planting in the region, 
in 1835. Campbell planted his own garden with some 
seeds and cuttings (Camellia sinensis var. sinensis) that 
had come mostly from China. These samples were 
distributed by the governor general, who was trying 
to encourage tea growing on Indian soil. There were 
other samples, belonging to the C. s. var assamica 
variety, that were discovered 
in the northeastern 
jungles of India by Scottish Major Robert Bruce. 
Since these two varieties thrived in their new 
environment, they were planted on newly cleared 
land in the same district. It soon became obvious that 
the Darjeeling region was an exceptionally favorable 
tea terroir Despite the lack of sunlight, damp atmos- 
phere and cold mountain climate, which shortened 
the growing season, the tea trees produced leaves 
of extraordinary flavor The teas of this region are 
blessed with rare aromatic complexity and richness. 
Several tea gardens in Darjeeling have preserved 
sections of the original plantations that date back to 
1860 or even earlier Growers are proud to show 
visitors areas of their gardens that contain “‘pure’’ C. s. 
var. sinensis. 
The teas harvested in these sections are 
sometimes referred to as “grands crus,’ as in the case 
of the Singell garden, for example, which contains 
a ‘heritage’ section that grows only original trees. 
INDIAN TEA TREES AND STRESS 
However, as many of these trees are reaching the 
limit of their productive life, their yield has diminished 
considerably. (A slowing of the sap’s flow seems to be 
partially responsible for this phenomenon.) Currently, 
replanting represents a major challenge in Darjeeling. 
In order to establish new plantations, a large 
number of cultivars have been selected to corres- 
pond to the needs and climatic conditions of certain 
areas. The India Tea Research Association at Jorhat 
(Assam) nurtures and distributes young tea trees 
grown from cuttings (about 30 for Darjeeling, 30 for 
Assam and another 30 for the Nilgiri Hills). The culti- 
vars are chosen according to various criteria, including 
production capacity, adaptability to different soils and 
climates, and the aromatic complexity of the leaves. 
The Camellia sinensis var sinensis cultivars are 
used most frequently in high-altitude plantations, like 
those of the mountains of Darjeeling, where weather 
conditions are harsher 
The C. s. var. assamica cultivars 
are more often used on the plains, at an altitude of 
around |000 feet (300 m). 
Unfortunately, tea trees obtained from cuttings 
have a much shorter life span. Tea trees grown from 
seed have a much more highly developed root sys- 
tem, which allows them to extract more nourishment 
from the soil, giving them a productive life of 120 to 
I50 years. Cultivars produced from cuttings have 
For a plant that originated in the tropical forests of south China, 
the rigorous conditions found in the mountainous regions of Darjeeling can be difficult. However, this stress 
contributes to the development of exceptional aromas. Here is the opinion of S.E. Kabir, founder of the Department 
of Tea Studies at North Bengal University: “The high level of volatile components that produce aroma (VCPA) found in 
the tea trees of Darjeeling can be attributed to the ‘meeting’ between the Chinese variety and the agro-environmental 
conditions of the region. The misty atmosphere — high humidity, short periods of sunlight, etc. — favors the synthe- 
sis of the precursors responsible for the biosynthesis of the enzymes necessary for the production of the volatile 
components and, therefore, of the taste.” The unfavorable weather conditions of the Himalayan foothills would 
appear to be essential for the development of the aromatic characteristics of Darjeeling teas. 

Camellia sinensis var. assamica in the Nilgiri Hills. 
a useful life of only about 40 years. Moreover, their 
shallow roots can quickly drain the soil of mineral 
resources, endangering later generations of trees. For 
these reasons, although two-thirds of the plantations 
in Daneeling have been created from cloned culti- 
vars, many growers are now choosing to seed certain 
sections of their gardens. 
More than 30 cultivars are grown in India today. 
Among them, 178, originated in the famous garden 
of Tukdha in 1978, is one of the most widespread. 
Although its popularity is in sharp decline because its 
productivity and quality decrease with age, it has been 
a star cultivar for the past few years. Most popular 
today, the AV2 (Ambari Vegetative 2 from the Terai 
garden) and P312 (Phoobsering 312) are also used 
regularly, although both are a little more delicate and 
require good fertilization and adequate water. 
VARIOUS DARJEELING HARVESTS 
Since tea is a seasonal product, the quality of a har 
vest depends largely on the growing conditions of 
the trees. Rainfall, sunlight and temperature all have 
Camellia sinensis var. sinensis in Darjeeling. 
an effect on the lengthening of the shoots and the 
unfurling of the leaves. Gardens are picked at intervals 
of 
fourto seven days, depending on weather conditions. 
The timing of 
the intervals between pickings is crucial. 
Growers must strike a balance between productivity 
and the health of the plant because excessive pick- 
ing can endanger the tea tree. In Darjeeling there are 
three main harvests, each of which produces a dis- 
tinctive taste representative of the season. 
FIRST FLUSH 
The first picking period of the year begins between 
mid-March and the end of March, when the spring 
rains have stimulated plant growth, and it ends around 
the second week of May. This first harvest yields 
light-bodied teas with explosive aromas. The moment 
when the first new leaves appear depends on the 
weather and varies from one garden to another Some 
growers irrigate to artificially stimulate the growth 
of the trees, as early as February, in order to obtain 
advanced harvests. 
169 

170 
FINE PICKING 
In Darjeeling, the usual method of harvesting is fine picking, 
which means that only the final bud and two leaves are picked. 
While global enthusiasm was previously center 
ed on Second Flush teas, a new market for excep- 
tional teas was created when the world turned its 
attention to the First Flush. Consequently, growers 
strive to create ever more complex fragrances. In 
Darjeeling, the fresh quality of the young spring 
shoots is enhanced by a shorter period of oxida- 
tion (which preserves the herbaceous aroma), an 
explosive attack and a sweet aftertaste. Over the 
last 15 years, the First Flush teas of Darjeeling have 
become a growing phenomenon. 
The first harvest lasts from six to eight weeks, 
after which the tea trees are trimmed and lightly 
pruned then left to rest for a few weeks, according 
to the natural cycle of each garden. After the picking, 
the plants naturally fall dormant, and growers cannot 
undertake another harvest until the trees awaken. 
SECOND FLUSH 
The second harvest takes place from the end of June 
until mid-July, and it yields a higher volume. Some 
growers delay the second harvest in order to slip 
an in-between picking between the first and second 
harvests. Although they are new, the leaves picked 
during this second 
harvest 
are firmer They are 
processed using a longer oxidation period, which 
gives them a full-bodied liquid with a malty fragrance 
reminiscent of ripe fruit. 
After the second harvest, another pause (banjhi) 
is necessary so that the tea trees can regenerate 
before the third harvest. 
AUTUMN FLUSH 
After the monsoon, which lasts until September, and 
just before the tea tree goes into winter hibernation, 
the final harvest of the year the fall harvest, takes 
place, in October and November. A heightened 
interest in methods of cultivation and processing 
has lead to a discernable improvement in quality. 
As growers seek 
to increase the number of quality teas 
they produce, they are paying more and more 
attention to second and third harvests. 
THE CHEMISTRY OF BLACK TEAS 
Polyphenols are essential components of tea leaves. In the fresh 
leaf they are colorless and acrid, but during oxidation these enzymes are transformed into theaflavins and 
thearubigins, the two elements that give tea its color and astringency. Oxidation develops brown, red and black 
pigments and reduces the leaves’ astringency. 

In order to compete with the low production costs of 
the Chinese, who had access to a very cheap labor force, 
the British had to reinvent every stage of processing. 
They 
needed to reduce costs by turning their tea plantations into 
industrial enterprises. 
As we have seen, the first methods of processing black 
tea appeared in China during the | 7th century. 
To produce 
satisfactory results, this method required the repetition 
of numerous steps. The British were able to develop 
techniques that were far simpler and more efficient by 
mechanizing the whole process. Taking inspiration from 
Chinese traditional methods, at the end of the 
|9th 
century they created the first industrial technique, the 
orthodox 
process. This mechanized 
process 
requires 
expertise and intuition and allows for greater control 
over the different variables that affect the chemistry of 
tea leaves. This process 
is still used today to produce 
extremely high-quality teas, such as those from Darjeeling. 

Developed by the British in northeastern India around 
1860 and constantly 
improved upon since, the orthodox method is one of the oldest mechanized 
methods of black-tea processing. It consists of five steps: withering, rolling, 
oxidation, dehydration and sorting. More complex than the CTC method, the 
orthodox method is used to process the best black-tea harvests. 
WITHERING 
Withering reduces the water content of the leaves, softening them and changing 
the waxy texture so they can then be rolled without breaking. While dehydra- 
tion changes the physical structure of the leaves, the natural activity of the 
enzymes begins to subtly change the chemistry of their flavors. This triggers, 
among other reactions, an increase in amino acids. The freshly picked leaves are 
evenly spread out in withering vats on metal, jute or plastic grids that allow air to 
circulate freely. The ambient humidity, ventilation and temperature are constan- 
tly monitored to ensure successful withering. After |4 to |7 hours, the moisture 
content of the leaves will have been reduced by 60 percent to 70 percent. 
ROLLING 
The following stage, rolling, consists of breaking the outside membranes of the 
leaves in order to release the oils and enzymes they contain. For 10 to 20 minutes, 
the piles of leaves are held in copper vats inside enormous machines. These 
machines roll the leaves under pressure until they form a compact mass. Next, 
with the aid of a rolling machine, various levels of pressure are applied to the leaves 
following a precise cycle until their cellular membranes are broken, releasing the 
oils they contain. As soon as these oils are exposed to the air the phenomenon 
of oxidation begins. If rolling is too intense, the leaves will be discolored and dull, 
and if rolling is too light the leaves will be dry, gray and dusty and brew into a pale 
and tasteless liquid. 

OXIDATION 
On contact with oxygen, the enzymes contained in the oils of the leaves trigger 
a chemical reaction called “enzymatic oxidation” or fermentation. 
This process of 
chemical change will determine the flavor, strength, body and color of the tea. 
The rolled leaves are spread out on trays made of stainless steel, ceramic 
or glass in a humid environment and at a temperature between 68 and 86°F 
(20 to 30°C). Depending on the moisture content of the leaves, they will be 
spread in a thin layer (for quick oxidation at low temperature) or in a thick layer 
(for slower oxidation). 
The temperature and humidity are sometimes controlled 
by humidifiers in order 
to maintain a minimum of 90 percent humidity in the room. 
Oxidation time can vary considerably, according to the ambient temperature and 
the type of tea being produced. While |5 to 30 minutes can be enough for First Flush Darjeeling teas, certain teas from the 
Assam region need to oxidize for up to four hours. This is a critical stage and requires workers with expertise and good 
intuition because they must strike a perfect balance for the different tea flavors. Excessive oxidation will result in a liquid that 
is thick, strong and has a wine-like (fermented) taste, while too little oxidation will produce a green and raw infusion with 
a thin liquid. Often, in order to make the process easier to manage, the oxidation is slowed down to prolong the period 
during which the aromas are at their peak. According to many factory managers, this moment is recognizable by a surprising 
and very specific smell of apple. When the precise moment to stop the oxidation arrives, the leaves are ready to be dried. 
DRYING 
Dehydration puts an end to the process of oxidation by altering the enzymes that causes it. The leaves 
are placed either on conveyors or on a series of revolving trays in a large machine that is heated to a 
temperature of 248°F (120°C). If drying is incomplete the oxidation process can continue uncontrolled, 
while if it is too intense the leaves will burn and acquire a smoky taste. The process lasts 20 to 30 minutes, 
until the moisture content of the leaves is reduced to 2 percent to 6 percent. 
SORTING 
After the drying stage, the leaves are sorted. Vibrating grids of varying sizes placed 
one on top of another separate the leaves into different grades. 
The largest leaves 
remain on the top grid while the crushed leaves (fannings) and dust fall to the 
ground, 
The intermediate leaves are caught by the other grids. 
In Darjeeling, all teas, regardless of the quality, are sorted in this way. The grade 
a tea is given is therefore an indication of size, not quality. Sorting is, however, an 
essential step, as each size of leaf requires a different infusion time and will have 
different characteristics. 

174 
imc 
i. 
MPIC’ PIV 
The method of 
processing called CTC, which stands for crushing, tearing and curling, 
is an industrial method that was developed in India by Sir William McKercher. 
In the 1930s, borrowing ideas from existing machinery, Sir William perfected a 
system of industrial processing that would speed up the oxidation process and 
produce higher yields more quickly. 
The CTC method consists of three simple steps. After a brief withering 
process, the leaves are cut and then crushed in metallic cylinders equipped with 
blades. During the next step they are torn apart by a machine called a Rotorvane. 
Finally, the leaves are sent to a ghoogi, a large barrel in which they are rolled into 
small beads. 
At first used only for coarser leaves, this method gained in popularity in the 
middle of the 20th century, with the invention of tea bags. Although this method 
thoroughly revolutionized the tea industry, it was inevitably at the expense of 
quality. Furthermore, the majority of the leaves used in the CTC method are of 
an inferior picking quality. 
Most tea-growing regions have adopted modern and highly mechanized 
production methods that aim for high volume and uniform quality. Hence, this 
method of production of black teas is now found In practically every country that 
produces high volumes of tea. 
THE LOT CONCEPT 
After picking, the harvest must immediately be sent to the processing plant to be treated in order 
to bring out its specific flavor. If the leaves are left to stand for too long they will become oxidized and unusable. Therefore 
nearly every garden has its own processing plant. In Darjeeling, growers identify each daily harvest taken from their garden by a 
lot number. For example, the appellation “Darjeeling Singell First Flush DJ2” means that the tea comes from the second lot or 
“invoice” number processed during the first spring picking in the Singell garden of Darjeeling. It should be noted that a lot might 
come from just one section of a garden or be composed of a grouping from two or three sections. 
’ 

MELLOWING 
When tea leaves the factory, the aromas of the first harvests are not yet completely stabilized. 
Growers will even maintain sufficient moisture in the leaves for a slight oxidation to continue, creating a process called 
mellowing. Thus, the tea will continue to develop over a period of up to three months after processing, after which 
the reaction will gradually stop. Some enthusiasts are passionate about the green aspect of the immature leaves and 
the floral character of the aromas reminiscent of muscat grapes, while others prefer the moment when the aromas 
are stabilized and the liquid acquires its full roundness. 
GRADES OF BLACK TEA 
There are three major systems of grading black teas. 
The grades refer more to the state of the leaves 
(whole, broken 
or crushed) than to their taste 
qualities. Usually, whole leaves will result in a more 
complex and aromatic 
infusion, whereas 
broken 
leaves create a darker liquid with a simpler flavor 
profile. 
Here is the grading system used in Darjeeling to 
indicate the grade of a whole-leaf tea. In this case, 
the most important aspect is the number of buds 
(pekoes). 
The more buds a tea contains, the more 
letters there are in Its appellation. 
SFTGFOP: Special Finest Tippy Golden Flowery 
Orange Pekoe 
FTGFOP: Finest Tippy Golden Flowery Orange Pekoe 
TGFOP: Tippy Golden Flowery Orange Pekoe 
GFOP: Golden Flowery Orange Pekoe 
FOP: Flowery Orange Pekoe 
OP: Orange Pekoe 
Tippy refers to the abundance of flowering buds. 
Golden refers to the tips that turn golden after 
oxidation. 
Flowery refers to the slightly floral aroma released by 
the buds. 
Orange is a purely historic reference to the Dutch 
royal family of Holland-Nassau, who were among 
the first to import tea into Europe. 
Pekoe comes from pak-ho, meaning ‘white down.’ Also 
used to describe the hair of newborn babies, here it 
refers to the final leaf on a branch (final bud), which ts 
covered in a fine white down. 
The numeral | sometimes appears at the end of the 
grade of certain batches. Like the letter S, the garden 
manager adds the number one if he considers the batch 
to be exceptional. 
DARJEELING WULONG TEAS 
Some experienced growers will test new processing techniques to 
obtain teas with different aromatic characteristics. By reducing oxidation time, they have developed teas that are 
clearer and lighter and contain greener leaves. This has led to the creation of wulong teas from fall harvests and 
to teas with floral aromas from the first harvests. 
175 

One Tea, One Story 
The Darjeeling Singell “Heritage” 
Located in the heart of Darjeeling, the Singell garden 
was one of the first to be sown in India, in the 19th 
century. Although more and more cloned trees are 
being planted there, it was originally planted with 
Classic China-type trees that are said to have been 
brought back from China by British botanists. Proud 
of this heritage, the growers have managed to pre- 
serve a section of the garden, called “heritage,” that 
remains planted only with these first trees. 
Now 150 years old and grown from seeds 
rather than cuttings, these trees 
have plunged 
their roots deep into the soil, which gives them 
greater resistance to weather conditions. In this 
way they derive nourishment from the mineral 
reserves of the terroir. 
Illustrating the pure and classic character for 
which Darjeeling teas are internationally renowned, 
the teas produced by the heritage section of the 
garden are also remarkable for the quality of their 
taste. The leaves release intense fragrances of pastry, 
and their well-balanced liquid has a silky texture and 
a pronounced floral character with notes of clover 
honey and muscat grape. 

When the English established tea in India, the product 
India. Indians usually choose an inexpensive lower- 
was destined mainly for the export market. Before 
grade black tea, either loose or in tea bags. They 
the 1850s, the people of India drank almost no tea, 
are not as concerned about the quality of the tea 
whereas now they consume almost 79 percent of — because they usually add milk, sugar and spices to it 
what they grow. Now considered the national drink, 
and make chai (see recipe on page 244). 
tea is the most affordable and available beverage in 
177 

Invented by the professional sector and used in tasting 
salons during contests or to batch teas, comparative 
tasting is a method of observing, smelling and tasting 
various teas and comparing them to each other. 
The teas are subjected to the same conditions and 
prepared according to identical parameters (quantity 
of leaves, water temperature and infusion time), so 
that their essential characteristics can be more easily 
compared. 
For each tea to be tasted you will need the fol- 
lowing accessories: 
¢* 
A cup with a lid for the infusion 
¢ 
A bowl to receive the infused liquid 
¢ 
Asmall dish or a sheet of white paper on which 
to observe the dried leaves 
¢ 
A scale for weighing each tea and a timer to time 
the infusion 
Carry out the tasting in a well-lit spot close to 
a window, as this will make It easier to distinguish 
the different shades of the leaves and liquids. To 
make it easier to taste the differences, the teas are 

usually presented in ascending order, from mildest to 
strongest. 
Weigh the tea. In the case of black tea, it is custo- 
mary to use '/i2 ounce (2.5 to 3g) and a 4-fluid- 
ounce (120 ml) infusion cup 9. 
concentrate the flavors, as their distinctive charac- 
teristics will be easier to detect. You should also 
place a small quantity of each tea in a small dish or 
on a sheet of paper. 
Pour the water on the leaves in the cup [B¥. In the 
case of black tea, use almost-boiling water about 
203°F (95°C). Place the lid on the cup as soon as 
you finish pouring the water. 
Wait three minutes. This is the standard infusion 
time and is best for this type of tasting. Remem- 
ber that the goal is not to get the best results for 
each type of tea but to submit them to the same 
conditions. 
Tip the cup with the lid into the tasting bowl 
El. The liquid will flow through the opening 
in the rim of the cup, and the leaves will be 
held back. 
Flip the cup over quickly so the leaves are caught 
on the back of the lid, and inhale the vec 
released by the freshly infused leaves [EJ 
Taste. First smell the liquid using a spoon or 
pres 
directly from the bow! ff then take a sip 
rolling it around your mouth to cover all the 
taste buds and the tongue. With the liquid in 
your mouth, breathe out completely through 
your nose to allow all the aromatic elements to 
come in contact with the olfactory gland through 
retro-olfaction. Follow the development of the 
liquid in your mouth, the texture, suppleness, etc. 
Note: In India, milk is added when tasting teas that 
are produced to be consumed that way. The addition 
of milk is essential for the evaluation of the color of 
the liquid, an important consideration for that market 
sector. 


A Meeting with Mr. H.K. Panjikar, Tea Grower 
Mr. Panjikar is the manager of the Gopaldhara garden 
in Darjeeling. 
How and when did you start to work 
in the world of tea? 
When | had finished my studies | was looking for a 
stimulating job. As my older brother worked in the 
world of tea, | could see the challenges | would face 
and | decided to get involved. My brother helped me. 
And so, on January 5, 1988, | began working in the 
Poobong garden in Darjeeling. 
What have you done since then? 
After being hired as an assistant at Poobong, | 
worked 
in several gardens, such as Pussimbing, 
Singtam and Singbulli, as assistant to the factory 
director. | was then promoted to principal assist- 
ant to the director, and | worked at Selimbong then 
at Gopaldhara (2000) where | was interim manager 
. 
until | became manager in 2002. That is the position 
| hold today. 
What are your everyday responsibilities? 
Very early in the morning | tour the garden. After 
lunch I go to the factory to direct operations. In the 
afternoon | return to the garden to check on things 
again. In the evening | taste the teas and decide ona 
strategy for the following days. 
What is your involvement with the tea 
industry? 
My goal has.always been to improve the garden | 
manage as much as | can. To do that | don’t neces- 
sarily follow the theory. For example, a few years 
ago | ordered very radical pruning of the trees in 
a section of the garden. Several Darjeeling growers 
criticized me for it. Everyone thought that | would 
lose at least half of the section pruned.A year later, 
seeing how the plants had grown back, several grow- 
ers followed my example. | have also created many 
of the new teas that are found on the market today, 
Tate 
Ue] Tay-an'A'(olate(-1gm 
(=r: Fm 
@i(olar-V im 
@le)(elr-ate Mm CY 
Male late 
der. In Darjeeling | am considered an innovator. 
What changes have you seen in the tea industry 
since you began? 
Since the beginning of my career in the tea industry, 
| have seen three major trends. First, between 1988 
and 1991 the industry concentrated on quantity 
rather than quality. 
We used a lot of chemical prod- 
ucts. The Russians were buying a lot of Indian out- 
put, and quantity was more important than quality. 
Secondly, between 
1992 and 1998, with the 
dissolution 
of the Soviet regime, the Russians 
withdrew from the Indian market. The Europeans 
became our principal customers. From then on, qual- 
ity was more important. Important measures have 
been put forward to prevent the use of chemicals. 
We have created a standard MRL (minimum residue 
level) for export. 
Thirdly, a new period began in 1999. Garden 
owners began organic growing. Since then all the 
gardens have reduced their use of chemicals, and 
most of them now practice some level of organic 
cultivation. 
Tea production today is based on quality. 
What i your favorite tea? 
Wonder Tea (a wulong) and Red Thunder (an autumn 
black tea). 
181 

Indian Teas 
Darjeeling Samabeong First Flush 
I certified organic black tea and a fair-trade product | 
Production area: Darjeeling, Western Bengal 
Harvest season: April 
Cultivar: AV2, P31 2 
This small isolated garden, one of the highest in the 
Himalayan area, is located in the far east of Darjeeling. 
Founded in the early |9th century, it has a rich and 
colorful history. In the 1930s, Samabeong produced 
tea bricks for the Tibetan market. The garden changed 
hands several times and was inactive for a long time 
before being acquired by the current owners in the 
early 1990s. At that time, the garden was certified 
as an organic fair-trade business. 
The garden contains 
80 percent original Chinese varieties (C. s. var sinensis). 
The rest is mainly planted with recent clones, such as 
AV2 and P31 2. 
Tasting notes: This harvest yields a remarkably green 
tea with a lovely fresh quality. 
The large, lightly rolled 
leaves are delightfully bright and release smooth notes 
of fragrant hay and daisies. 
The mouthfeel is light, and 
the liquid is lively with an interesting minty attack. The 
harmony of the spicy, fruity and floral aromatic notes 
reveals a remarkable complexity underlined by a rich 
texture with almost perfect balance. 
Recommended 
infusion 
accessory: A teapot or 
gaiwan., 
182 
| 
: e 
Darjeeling Sungma First Flush | black tea | 
Production area: Darjeeling, Western Bengal 
Harvest season: Mid-March 
Cultivar: 
AV2 
The ancient garden of Sungma is directly opposite the 
Gopaldhara garden, on the other side of the valley, 
where the Balasun River flows. It is administered by a 
professional agronomist, Mr Jah, one of the most 
experienced and respected managers in the region. 
Planted in 1863, the garden is still composed of 
80 percent original Chinese varieties to which clones 
(15 percent) and C. s. van assamica (5 percent) 
hybrids have been added. Over the past few years, 
this garden has become one of the best in the region 
and regularly produces high-quality tea. Supported by 
a high proportion of ancient Chinese plants, the 
classic teas it produces are among the best there are. 
Tasting notes: The dry, uniformly shaped 
leaves, 
ranging from light brown to pale green, look cared 
for and include many silvery buds. The liquid is dark 
for a first picking and gives off a fragrance of wild 
flowers. The mouthfeel is well structured, revealing 
pronounced aromas that open onto a fruity note. The 
unctuous texture shows remarkable balance. 
The full 
finish leads to aromas of muscat grape and delicate 
accents of peach. 
Recommended 
infusion accessory: A teapot or 
gaiwan. 
ee 

Darjeeling Castleton Second Flush | black tea | 
Production area: Darjeeling, Western Bengal 
Harvest season: June 
Cultivar: Classic China 
Castleton is one of the oldest gardens in Darjeeling. 
It Is composed mainly of Chinese trees from the 
1860s, which give the teas produced here a unique 
character and complexity. In recent years, many grow- 
ers have chosen to replant old sections with hybrids 
that yield higher volumes. This situation has created a 
controversy in the tea community, in relation to the 
importance of preserving at least some of the ancient 
trees. In spite of their lower productivity and slower 
growth, these trees are an irreplaceable resource in the 
production of quality teas. Their genetic qualities are 
the result of centuries of improvement in China, long 
before they were introduced to India in the middle of 
the 19th century. 
Tasting notes: The dark-brown uniform leaves are 
sprinkled with golden buds. On infusion they release 
rich fragrances of walnut, caramelized figs and ginger 
bread. The amber liquid reveals an immediate aroma 
of muscat grape that is typically present in second 
harvests. This aroma is carried through to the finish. 
The mouthfeel is full, unfoldinga harmonious succession 
of malt notes reminiscent of brown sugar and cocoa. 
It is a full tea with a delightful aromatic complexity. 
Recommended infusion accessory: 
A teapot. 
Darjeeling Autumn Gopaldhara “Red 
Thunder” | black tea | 
Production area: Darjeeling, Western Bengal 
Harvest season: October 
Cultivar: AV2, P312, BI57 
Known as Red Thunder, this tea requires very specific 
harvest conditions that occur only a few days a year. 
Only a very small quantity is produced. It is picked in 
the highest section of the garden, the famous Wonder 
Tea section, which produces Gopaldhara's renowned 
wulong. Unlike the wulong, Red Thunder is harvested 
in the fall and undergoes more intense oxidation. 
Tasting notes: The robust-looking leaves, rolled by 
hand and broad and irregular in shape, display various 
tones of copper and include numerous buds. The 
woody nose conjures up stewed red fruit. The supple, 
dark mahogany liquid has a pleasant floral attack. 
Comforting aromas of fruit and spices gently com- 
bine to create a good balance. 
The peppery finish, 
typical of Gopaldhara teas, gives way to a long, delica- 
tely aromatic aftertaste. 
Recommended 
infusion 
accessory: A teapot or 
gaiwan. 
183 

Darjeeling Avongrove | certified organic 
white tea | 
Production area: Darjeeling, Western Bengal 
Harvest season: July 
Cultivar: C. s. var assamica hybrid 
Black tea is the most famous product of 
the Darjeeling 
region and accounts for 99 percent of production. 
However, over the past few years, some unusual yet 
noteworthy teas from other families have appeared. 
That is the case with this delicious white tea from the 
Avongrove garden. It is produced from fine picking on 
sections of Assam trees that have been radically 
pruned. The buds are separated from the leaves, and 
both are left to wither for about 72 hours. The with- 
ering is done naturally, without the use of hot air 
Next, the delicate buds are dried at 248°F (120°C).A 
final manual sorting removes any remaining leaves. 
Tasting notes: The long buds covered in fine silvery 
down look very well cared for Infusion releases a deli- 
cate floral bouquet with spicy accents. 
The pale, shiny 
liquid has a nose of 
fresh mushroom, vanilla and white 
chocolate. In the mouth, the elegant attack combines 
aromas of orange blossom and pepper. The complex 
liquid coats the mouth with a velvety texture and 
has delicate notes of fresh hay and honey. Beautifully 
balanced, 
the finish is distinguished and mild. 
Recommended 
infusion accessory: A teapot or 
gaiwan. 
t 
184 
: 
aay 
Darjeeling Gopaldhara Wonder Tea 
First Flush | wulong | 
Production area: Darjeeling, Western Bengal 
Harvest season: Late March 
Cultivar: A blend of clones BI57,AV2, P312 
This tea comes from one of the highest areas of the 
Darjeeling plantations, at an altitude of more than 
7,200 feet (2,200 m). It is in this particular section of 
the Gopaldhara garden that Wonder Tea is grown. 
The Gopaldhara garden has adapted the methods of 
processing black tea that have made this region famous 
to the production of wulong tea. The whole leaves 
undergo prolonged withering and partial oxidation of 
about 35 percent. Darjeeling expertise being adapted 
and applied to a very high-quality raw material has led 
to the development of an exceptional tea that is con- 
stantly gaining recognition in the industry. 
Tasting notes: The coppery-green leaves are remark- 
ably large and whole, attesting to the care taken in their 
processing, Infusion releases a heady aromatic bouquet, 
a floral combination with accents of hay and oxidized 
apple. The golden liquid distils smooth, fruity notes. The 
floral dominant, sustained through to the finish, has 
aromas of fresh peach and melon combined with 
notes of celery and pepper typical of Gopaldhara teas. 
This tea has exceptional balance and a long and full 
mouthfeel that is relaxing and delightful. 
Recommended 
infusion 
accessory: A teapot or 
gaiwan. 
x © 

Assam Duflating Orthodox | black tea | 
Production area: Assam 
Harvest season: June 
Cultivar: Assamica hybrid 
Assam |s one of the largest tea-growing regions in the 
world, and Duflating is one of the largest gardens in 
Assam. It has several thousand employees and an an- 
nual output of 
close to 2 million pounds (1 million kg). 
As with most gardens in the region, it mostly uses CTC 
production and creates teas intended for mass distri- 
bution. However, a small portion of the garden is re- 
served for the production of higher-quality orthodox 
teas. This remarkable tea is one of the finest Assam 
grands crus. Unusually for this region, it is made from 
a fine-picked harvest and undergoes rigorous sorting. 
Tasting notes: The small, twisted leaves seem to 
consist only of delicate golden buds. Infusion releases 
rich fragrances of grains and blond tobacco, 
The shiny 
liquid is a dark reddish orange. The texture in the 
mouth is thick and silky. A slight bitterness carries a 
malty dominant harmonized with the fruity aromas of 
ground cherry and almond as well as a subtle note of 
raw sugar The supple tannins offer structure and 
balance. A light astringency accompanies a long after 
taste of burnt sugar. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A teapot. 
Nilgiri Coonoor | black tea | 
Production area: Nilgiri Massif (“Blue Mountains’’) 
Harvest season: February to June 
Cultivar: Assamica hybrid 
This tea is the result of an increasing trend in India. 
More and more 
large plantations are developing 
specialty teas along with their standard commercial 
teas. Produced in low volumes, these teas are destined 
for sale in the specialty tea stores that are open- 
ing everywhere. Nilgiri Coonoor tea is an unusual 
black tea that is part of this trend. Few teas of this 
region have a similar style or light aromatic character. 
Indi Khanna, a veteran grower in Assam, took over 
a small section of the famous Coonoor garden. He 
immediately began organic cultivation of Assam hybrid 
plants. The leaves are treated In a small custom-built 
factory using machines from China that reproduce 
manual processing. 
Tasting notes: The large leaves of this tea have a strik- 
ing appearance. 
The nose is a fruity bouquet of stewed 
papaya and peach with a subtle hint of osmanthus 
flowers. In the mouth, the lively liquid with well- 
structured tannins is slightly malty. Aromas of pepper 
coriander seed, orange peel and cooked fruits delicately 
unfold. The finish is long and coats the mouth with 
pleasantly fruity tannins. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A teapot. 
185 


Sri Lanka, 
Nepal, 
Vietnam 
and the East 
African Coast 
IN ADDITION TO CHINA, JAPAN, TAIWAN AND INDIA, 
MANY OTHER COUNTRIES AROUND THE WORLD GROW 
TEA. FOLLOWING IS A DESCRIPTION OF SOME OF THE 
TERROIRS IN SRI LANKA, NEPAL, VIETNAM AND TWO 
EAST AFRICAN COUNTRIES, KENYA AND MALAWI. 

< 
we 
Zz 
< 
a 
fa 
n 
188 
Sri Lanka 
The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, 
formerly known 
as Ceylon, occupies 
an 
entire 
tropical island situated 25 miles (40 km) off the 
southeastern tip of India. Although Sri Lanka is now 
one of the world’s major tea exporters, and the 
appellation “Ceylon Tea’ is still in use, its tea industry 
is relatively young. Before |860, not a single tea tree 
grew on the island. It was entirely covered with 
coffee plantations, which represented the country's 
primary economic resource. 
The establishment of the first tea gardens on the 
island is attributed to a young Scot, James Taylor, who 
worked for a large coffee grower Taylor managed to 
obtain a few tea-tree seeds from the Royal Botanical 
Gardens of Peradeniya, with which to try to create a 
first plantation. Throughout the |860s he experi- 
mented with different growing and leaf-processing 
methods 
on 
a few acres 
of the Loolecondera 
Estate, which were referred to as Field No. 7. This 
garden, in Kandy, is considered 
the pioneer of 
tea growing in Sri Lanka. However, Taylor's work 
would probably have gone unnoticed if a sudden 
epidemic had not devastated the coffee trees. 
Starting in 1869, a parasitic fungus (Hemileia 
vastatrix) that attacked the leaves of coffee plants 
swept the entire island and completely wiped out the 
coffee plantations in a couple of decades. Looking for 
a substitute crop, growers copied Taylor and turned 
to tea trees. With an already established agricultural 
system and experienced growers, the transition from 
coffee to tea growing happened quickly. In fact, tea- 
producing areas grew from 1000 acres (400 ha) in 
1875 to 300,000 acres (120,000 ha) in 1900. 
Consisting of just two small crates, the first 
exportation of Sri Lankan tea took place in 1872. 
After that, high demand from the British stimulated 
the industry's expansion. In 1890, the explosion of the 
tea-growing industry was also encouraged by Thomas 
Lipton, who, sensing a bargain, arrived on the island to 
snap up plantations fora song. He invested in industrial 
machinery for cheaper high-volume production and 
concentrated on developing packaging that would be 
attractive to customers. 
During the 1990s, after the break up of the 
USSR, Sri Lanka benefitted greatly from the business 
coming in from the new republics. 
Their tea industry has become well organized 
and highly regulated by the government. All teas are 
sold through the auctions in Colombo. 

Recent years have seen Sri Lanka become one 
of the world’s top exporters, but tea production 
for the industrial market is increasing in many other 
countries. With Sri Lanka’s relatively high costs of 
production the quality control 
is becoming their 
essential distinction. 
THE SRI LANKAN TEA INDUSTRY 
With a favorable climate that allows growers to 
produce several harvests per year, Sri Lanka is the 
fourth-largest tea grower in the world. Its annual 
output of 2 million pounds (223 million kg) of tea 
(according to 2008 data from the Tea Board of Sri 
Lanka) represents 6 percent of global production. 
Dependent on the export market and tailoring its 
product to the high standards of importing countries, 
Sri Lanka exports almost all of its production. 
THE GARDENS 
Stretching from the mountains down to the south- 
ern plains of the country, plantations cover more than 
544,000 acres (220,000 ha) of the island. Most of the 
gardens are in the south of the island, on the eastern 
and western slopes of 
the high plateaus. They fall into 
three groups, according to their altitude: 
¢ 
The low-grown gardens, from sea level to 
2000 feet (600 m). 
¢ 
The medium-grown gardens, from 2,000 to 
4,000 feet (600 to 1,200 m). 
¢ 
The high-grown gardens, situated between 
4,000 and 6,500 feet (1,200 to 2,000 m). 
GROWING AREAS 
Although plantations can be found throughout the 
island, there are three major quality growing areas in 
Sri Lanka: Nuwara Eliya, Dimbula and Uva. 
The highest peaks are found in the region of 
Nuwara Eliya, a 
mountainous valley in the center of the 
island, and culminate 
in a plateau at 6,500 feet 
A garden in Heputale. 
(2,000 m). The climate is hot and humid, yielding 
several 
harvests throughout the year The 
best 
harvests, however, are gathered from January to the 
end of March. 
Recognized as one of 
the foremost plantations in 
Sri Lanka, the growing area of Dimbula was established 
in the 
1870s, during the epidemic that would 
completely destroy the coffee trees. The gardens are 
ocated at altitudes that vary from 3,300 to 5,600 feet 
|,000 to 1,700 m). The harvests destined for the 
production of high-quality teas also take place from 
anuary to March. 
High on the eastern 
slopes of the central 
mountains, the plantations of the province of Uva 
are also situated at an altitude of 3,300 to 5,600 feet 
(1,000 to 1,700 m). Because this area is affected by 
a different weather system, the best harvests are 
gathered from August to October. 
189 

190 
Nepal 
“The Nepalese believe that every morning and 
evening, 
Siva, who 
lives 
at the top of Mount 
Kachenjunga, blows a gentle breeze onto the gardens, 
giving the tea its exceptional quality,’ said a Nepalese 
grower. 
Sandwiched between China to the north and 
India to the south, Nepal is nestled in the heart of 
the Himalayas. With several peaks soaring higher 
than 26,200 feet (8,000 m), Nepal experiences 
weather conditions similar to those of Darjeeling. In 
fact, tea growing began there around the same time 
(late 19th century). However, whereas Darjeeling 
benefited from investment and production geared 
to the export market, the tea industry in Nepal 
suffered from inefficient government management 
that severely hampered the transition to privatization. 
Nevertheless, over the last |0 years, the Nepalese 
industry has experienced rapid growth. 
The surface 
area of plantations has multiplied almost fivefold, 
increasing from 8,600 acres (3,500 ha) in 1996 to 
more than 37,000 acres (15,000 ha) in 2004, while 
production has increased at the same rate, going 
from 3,202 tons (2,905 t) in 1996 to 12,843 tons 
(11,651 t) in 2004. In addition, 
the industry's prospects 
for the future are very promising, as many recently 
planted estates will soon be ready for harvesting. 
Nepalese tea 
is produced 
primarily for the 
domestic market and consists mostly of black CTC- 
processed tea (see page | 74). Most of these teas are 
grown on the Terai Plains and at an altitude of 
no more 
than |,000 feet (300 m). However, some plantations 
produce teas according to the orthodox method 
(see page |72). These have aromatic qualities similar 
to those of Darjeeling teas and are also produced 
for the export market. They are found mostly in the 
mountainous regions of llam, Panchthar, Taplejung and 
Dhankuta.The districts of 
llam and Dhankuta produce 
Nepal's premium-quality teas. 
Although Nepal 
is already producing quality 
teas and its production is still developing on a more 
commercial level, the industry must overcome several 
hurdles before it can truly thrive — the precarious 
political situation, abject poverty and very bad roads 
do not encourage investment. However, it appears 
that some investors working in the tea sector in 
Darjeeling are showing more interest in the growing 
regions of Nepal, where conditions are similar to their 
own. If their plans come to fruition and they bring 
their knowledge and experience to Nepal, it would 
not be surprising to see the appearance of grands 
crus teas grown in these famous mountains. 
Nepalese pickers getting ready to start their workday. 


= 
< 
z 
= 
ho 
> 
192 
Vietnam 
Just as in China, the cultivation of tea in Vietnam 
springs from a long tradition. Some local legends 
recount that the first tea trees were brought to 
Vietnam from what is now known as the Golden 
Triangle — Chinese border, Laos, Burma (Myanmar), 
Thailand and Vietnam — more than |,000 years ago. 
Today, tea growing is well established on Vietnamese 
soil, and the industry employs roughly two million 
people. Over 197,000 acres (80,000 ha) are reserved 
for tea plantations, producing an output that has 
exploded over the last two decades to reach 99,200 
tons (90,000 t) in 2004. The tea produced here is 
often produced for the domestic market and priced 
to be affordable for the local population. 
GROWING AREAS 
From the central tropical regions to the mountains 
of the north, tea Is grown in more than 30 prov- 
inces throughout the country. Vietnamese production 
consists mainly of black teas (60 percent, of which 
a small proportion is produced using the orthodox 
method — see page |72), green teas (35 percent) 
and a miscellaneous category that includes jasmine 
tea, lotus tea and wulong teas. The northern prov- 
inces grow about 65 percent of the national output. 
In the southern regions of the country, especially in 
the mountains, more and more wulong teas are being 
produced, thanks to Taiwanese investment. 
THAI NGUYEN 
Thai Nguyen is the principal growing area and one 
of the only regions reputed for the excellence of its 
tea production. 
The tea gardens in this province are 
located at altitudes between 
1000 and !,650 feet 
(300 to 500 m) and are more numerous than rice 
or corn plantations. Sometimes organized into small 
cooperatives, the tea industry in Thai Nguyen consists 
of small groups of artisans who nearly all process the 
tea themselves. Some of them also sell and distribute 
their own product, but most sell their tea to larger 
companies who package it for sale in supermarkets. 
THE GARDENS 
Vietnam 
is blessed with many natural advantages 
(climate, soil quality) that have helped it develop tea 
growing. Tea gardens in Vietnam are small, usually 
no more than 5,400 square feet (500 m7). Between 
pickings, the tea trees are pruned to keep them at 
a height of about 24 inches (60 cm). The trees are 
planted about 8 to |2 inches (20 to 30 cm) apart, and 
the space between rows is only |6 to 24 inches (40 
to 60 cm), so the small gardens are densely grown. 
Harvests take place from March through to early 
November, and the best pickings are gathered in April 
and September. 
CULTIVARS 
The tree recognized as the local tea tree is called 
Trung Du La Nho (‘‘small middle tea leaf”), and it 
is used in almost 70 percent of the plantations in 
the north of the country. Other cultivars are also 
grown, including LDP! and TLE777, both from China. 
Created in Vietnam from a hybrid of these two, LT is 
another cultivar in widespread use. 
Final sorting of a Vietnamese green tea. 


-& 
n 
< 
Oo 
S) 
Zz 
< 
'S) 
a4 
fs 
< 
a 
7p) 
< 
ea) 
194 
African Countries 
As happened in many countries that turned to tea 
growing in the |9th century, the establishment of tea 
cultivation in Africa was a direct result of European 
colonization. 
The first tea gardens to be planted on 
the African continent were created on an experi- 
mental basis in the |1850s in South Africa (Natal 
region), and the first commercial 
plantations ap- 
peared in 1877, in the Stanger Although these first at- 
tempts yielded interesting results, it was not until the 
1920s that tea growing really got under way. Today, 
more than |0 African countries produce tea, most of 
them using the CTC method. Among the major tea 
growers are Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Burundi, Malawi, 
Mozambique and Rwanda. 
Yielding very high output — nearly | ton per acre 
(2 t/ha), whereas China produces barely '/3 ton per 
acre (0.7 t/ha) 
— African production is concentrated 
almost entirely on black teas. 
Today, with the development of the specialty tea 
market, several experiments to improve quality are in 
development, using mainly the orthodox processing 
method (see page |72). In addition, new families of 
teas, especially white and green teas, are appearing. 
These experiments are taking place mainly in Kenya 
and Malawi, currently the only African countries that 
offer high-quality teas. 
KENYA 
A serious part of the industry since the beginning 
of the 20th century, Kenya is now the foremost tea 
grower on the African continent and the third-largest 
in the world. More than 370,000 acres (150,000 
ha) of gardens are now devoted to the cultivation 
of tea, with an annual output of more than 375,000 
tons (340,000 t). Most of the gardens are situated 
in mountainous regions at altitudes from 5,000 to 
6,500 feet (1,500 to 2,000 m), as well as west of 
the Rift Valley. In 2008, Kenya exported more than 
353,000 tons (320,000 t) of tea throughout the 
world. The most famous gardens are Milima, Marinyn 
and Kangaita, which all use the orthodox and CTC 
processing methods. 
MALAWI 
One of the first African countries to market its tea 
production, Malawi is still one of the major African 
growers. 
The industry is composed mainly of small 
artisans, who produce more 
than 49,600 tons 
(45,000 t) of tea per year. After cotton, tea is the 
country's major commercial crop. 
The first plantations were established in 1878 
and gradually spread to the regions of Malanje 
and Thyolo, At the time, tea trees from the Natal 
ROOIBOS = Exclusively grown in SouthAfrica, rooibos is a beverage that the local population has been consuming 
for centuries. It is prepared using a plant of the family of pulses (Aspalathus linearis). 
This plant, which is grown on 
the plains in the Cedarberg region, is a bush that grows 3 to 6 feet (I to 2 m) in height and is covered in small 
branches. 
The leaves and stems are harvested then cut, crushed, oxidated and dried in the sun. Commonly called 
“red tea,’ rooibos is rich in minerals and vitamins. Its bright-red liquid is fruity and acidic. 

A tea garden in Malawi. 
region of South Africa were transplanted, but, due to 
Malawi's unpredictable weather, these trees did not 
live up to expectations. During the 1920s, trees of the 
assamica variety, better suited to the subtropical cli- 
mate of Malawi, were imported from India, where the 
development of cultivars was already very advanced. 
Today, growing areas are found mainly in the 
southern regions of the country, around Thyolo and 
Mulanje (in the Shire Highlands). Mulanje is the most 
important growing region in the country. 
Malawan teas are still relatively unknown. They 
are used primarily in tea blends. Most plantations 
belong to foreign companies 
that export their 
production primarily to Europe. Harvesting takes 
place during the southern hemisphere summer, from 
October to April. 
+95 

196 
A Sri Lankan Tea 
Ceylan Uva Adawatte | black tea | 
Region: Uva 
Harvest season: July to October 
Cultivar: Assamica hybrid 
Sri Lanka is blessed with a terroir that is ideal for 
the cultivation of tea and an expertise inherited from 
the great tea plantations of India. The Uva region is 
traditionally famous for its high-grown grands crus. 
Although it is grown at a slightly lower altitude, the 
low-grown garden of Adawatte has shown astonish- 
ing energy and dynamism, contributing to the revival 
of quality teas in Sri Lanka. This tea is produced from 
the leaves of pure Assam hybrids planted in the 1930s, 
and it is processed following the orthodox methods 
that have established the reputation of the teas from 
this classic terroir 
Tasting notes: The dark, beautifully regular leaves 
are twisted and hardly broken. Infusion releases an 
exceptionally aromatic bouquet and creates a bright 
vermilion liquid. The nose combines woody and fruity 
fragrances with accents of molasses. In the mouth, the 
slightly acidic attack is reminiscent of sun-dried to- 
mato. The round liquid against a woody background 
develops a gentle bitterness. Mild peppery aromas 
and minty notes of wood tea and eucalyptus form 
a surprising combination in the full mouthfeel with 
personality and a pleasant astringent finish. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A teapot. 
A Nepalese Tea 
Nepal Fikkal | certified organic green tea | 
Region: llam 
Harvest season: April to June 
Cultivar: Yabukita (Japan) and AV2 (Darjeeling) 
The Nepalese tea industry produces mostly black 
teas. This plantation is entirely devoted to the cultiva- 
tion of organic green tea, making it an unexpected 
find. A recent project, it is a collective effort on the 
part of a group of resolute growers who planted a 
small garden with hybrids of trees from Japan and the 
nearby region of Darjeeling. 
The tiny processing plant 
was built and equipped with small Japanese machines. 
This unusual project is still in the experimental phase, 
but its long-term goal is to produce high-quality 
green tea on Nepalese soil. Several varieties of green 
tea are available, but Nepal Fikkal offers a surprising 
“Japanese-style” tea. 
Tasting notes: Infusion of the small needle-shaped 
leaves releases a rich herbaceous bouquet that is 
lightly iodized. The clear, very pale-green liquid has a 
discreet vegetal nose. Round in the mouth, it gives off 
sharp aromas of fresh grasses with a slight bitterness, 
revealing shades of ash and cocoa. Notes of green 
bean and celery form the heart of 
this vegetal palette. 
The finish leads into a delicate astringency with notes 
of minerals and sea ain 
Recommended infusion accessory: A teapot. 

A Vietnamese Tea 
Tan Huong LT | green tea | 
Translation: Name of the growing cooperative and 
the name of the cultivar 
Region: Thai Nguyen 
Harvest season: March to November 
Cultivar: LT 
Tan Huong LT tea comes from the Thai Nguyen 
region north of Hanoi. Tea is the principal crop here, 
and the garden is well tended. Indeed, almost every 
family in this rural region owns a small tea garden. In 
the early 1980s, the growers joined together to form 
cooperatives, with all the members working together 
to process each member's tea. Their efforts gave rise 
to this invigorating tea, grown without chemicals. 
Tasting notes: The long, twisted, gray-green leaves 
look clean and robust. Infusion releases appetizing 
aromas of smoked meat and corn. The generous nose 
is reminiscent of bok choy and cooked broccoli. In 
the mouth, the light and vegetal attack echoes the 
nose and develops full vegetal aromas that are sweet, 
slightly herbaceous and smoky. The tannins build a 
slow finish of sweet and sour contrasts. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A teapot. 
An African Tea 
Kenya Kangaita | fair-trade black tea | 
Region: Kinrinyaga district of Kenya 
Harvest season: All year 
Cultivar: Assamica hybrid 
The tea-processing plant in Kangaita was built in 1965. 
Located at high altitude, close to 6,250 feet (1,900 m), 
it processes the leaves of some 3,700 small growers. 
The product of assamica tea trees, Kenya Kangaita 
tea Is processed according to the orthodox method 
(see page | 72), unusual for this region, where teas are 
usually produced using CTC processing. 
Tasting notes: The dried leaves are broken and regu- 
lar with a classic appearance. Infusion releases warm 
fragrances of malt and spices. The nose is domin- 
ated by notes of oats and caramel, enlivened by 
a touch of bay leaf and pepper The attack is lively 
and clear in the mouth with a strong flavor of lightly 
roasted grains. The strong tannins develop a long 
finish with a touch of the bitterness of citrus zest. A 
robust tea, it shows strength without being coarse. 
Recommended infusion accessory: A teapot. 
197 


PART THREE 

ad 

The Art of 
Preparing Tea 
TOWARD THE END OF THE 16TH CENTURY, SEN 
NO RIKYU, ONE OF THE GREATEST JAPANESE TEA 
MASTERS, MADE THE FOLLOWING REMARK: “TEA IS 
NOTHING MORE THAN THIS: HEAT THE WATER, PRE- 
PARE THE TEA AND DRINK IT PROPERLY. THAT IS ALL 
YOU NEED TO KNOW.” THE EXTREME SIMPLICITY OF 
THIS STATEMENT IS RATHER SURPRISING COMING 
FROM THE MAN WHO ESTABLISHED THE BASIC 
PRINCIPLES OF WHAT 
IS KNOWN TODAY AS “THE WAY 
OF TEA.” ALTHOUGH FOR RIKYU THIS SIMPLICITY 
DEMANDED TOTAL PERSONAL INVOLVEMENT, IT IS 
TRUE THAT IN ESSENCE, TEA PREPARATION IS A 
SIMPLE PROCESS. HOWEVER, EXPERIENCE TEACHES 
US THAT TEA IS “MOODY,” SO, IN SPITE OF BEING 
PREPARED IN AN IDENTICAL WAY, ONE DAY IT CAN 
TURN OUT PERFECTLY AND THE FOLLOWING DAY IT 
CAN BE LESS SUCCESSFUL. 

< 
w 
i 
=) 
= 
faa 
< 
a 
fa 
a4 
An 
is) 
Oo 
= 
aa 
< 
en 
< 
= 
202 
Teapots 
For centuries, 
tea masters and tea enthusiasts the world 
over have sought the perfect method of preparing 
leaf tea. Either as part of a ritual or simply to obtain the 
best possible beverage, each culture has developed its 
own art of tea, adapted to its specific lifestyle. Of course, 
the practice of drinking tea is essentially personal, 
but it is possible to enhance and develop the prepara- 
tion of leaf tea and adapt it to daily consumption. 
The 
teapot is best suited to this purpose. Here, then, |s an 
overview of different kinds of teapots, some of which 
are linked to a specific culture or ritual. 
YIXING TEAPOTS 
Earthenware Yixing teapots come from the Chinese 
county of the same name. Thanks to the porous nature 
of the clay from which they are made, they have the 
capacity to remember’ 
the teas that have been infused 
in them, and so they are called ‘memory teapots.’ 
Objects fashioned from clay date back 
to the Han 
dynasty (206 BCE to 220 CE), but it was in the middle 
of the Ming dynasty (1368-1644), around 1500, that 
a significant production began. Toward the end of 
the |7th century, Yixing teapots arrived in Europe. 
High demand from European clients led Chinese 
craftspeople to create some of their pieces with 
them in mind. 
Yixing is a town in Jiangshu Province, 
to the west 
of Shanghai. Famous for the quality of its clay as well 
as for the incredible creativity of its potters, Yixing 
still produces teapots that enjoy a solid reputation 
in China and abroad. The center of production is in 
Dingshan, 
a community close to Yixing. In addition 
to the small workshops of craftspeople who work 
entirely by hand, there are large manufacturers who 
mass-produce teapots. 
Yixing teapots are particularly suited to the 
preparation of black, wulong and Pu er teas. 
YIXING CLAY 
There are three main types of Yixing clay: zishani (purple), hongni (red) and banshanlu 
(yellow). 
The following natural characteristics make Yixing clay a distinctive raw material: 
* 
Its malleability, which makes it easy to work with and has allowed craftspeople to develop a technique to make the 
teapots entirely by hand. Note that Yixing teapots are rarely formed using a pottery wheel; they are usually shaped 
by hand. 
* 
Its porous quality, which means that a Yixing teapot should only be used for a single family of teas. 
* 
Its high concentration of ferrous oxide is easily visible on the surface of the teapots. 
The clay is made from rocks that are extracted, crushed, cleaned, kneaded and sifted, then mixed together. 
The 
colors of the three types of Yixing clay vary according to where and from what depth the rocks were extracted, 
as well as the firing method used by the potter. The sound made by the teapot when it is tapped gently with its lid 
is also distinctive and can often be a test of quality. 
The sound should be clear and metallic. 

THE MEMORY TEAPOT 
When they are hot, the sides of a Yixing teapot absorb the tannins in the tea, 
creating a deposit that builds up over successive infusions. This is how the memory teapot acquires its coating. 
The 
more the teapot is used, the better it will reveal the wealth of aromas in the teas infused in it. 
THE THREE-LEVEL RULE 
If a Yixing teapot for the gong fu cha ceremony is well 
made, it will conform to the three-level rule: the tip 
of the spout and the top of the handle will be level 
with the rim of the teapot. In addition, the lid should 
fit the opening in the teapot as closely as possible, so 
it does not move, and the handle and spout should 
be perfectly aligned. 
The seal (or signature) of the potter is printed 
on each teapot. It is usually on the bottom of the 
teapot or under the lid, and sometimes it is under 
the handle. 

KYUSU TEAPOTS 
Japanese Kyusu teapots are distinguished by their 
hollow lateral handle, which is meant to facilitate 
handling and, according to the Japanese, provide 
a more ergonomic design. Light and elegant, they 
are often made of sandstone clay fired at a high 
temperature, which enhances the flavor of fine 
Japanese green teas. They are sometimes made of 
porcelain or even glass. Note that Japanese potters 
originally made teapots from porcelain and only 
started to use local sandstone in the |9th century. 
It was at this time too that the hollow lateral handle 
appeared. 
Kyusu teapots 
are 
usually equipped 
with 
a 
very fine mesh that is useful for infusing finely cut 
Japanese green teas, as it keeps the leaves in the 
teapot. Handcrafted teapots often have an integrated 
clay strainer whereas the strainer in industrially mass- 
produced teapots is often made of stainless steel. 
Kyusu teapots vary in size. The largest are used 
for classic infusions, while the smallest are used for the 
senchado tastings (see page 108) commonly practiced 
in Japan. 
ENAMELED CERAMIC TEAPOTS 
Ceramic has long been recognized for its quality and 
delicacy. The enamel coating makes these teapots 
suitable for all families of teas. They are particularly 
recommended for fragile, delicate teas, such as white 
teas or Chinese green teas, which are renowned for 
their delicacy and subtlety. 
METAL TEAPOTS 
There are many types of metal teapots, and their 
quality varies significantly. North African teapots are 
perfectly suited to brewing mint tea. Unfortunately, 
they may give tea a slightly metallic flavor so they 
should not be used for the infusion of delicate teas. 
Stainless steel is the most suitable metal for teapots. 

ENAMELED CAST-IRON TEAPOTS 
Originally used in China as kettles, enameled cast-iron 
teapots are suitable for many types of tea. The enamel 
coating makes them easy to clean and prevents the 
tea from coming in contact with the cast iron. How- 
ever, they are not recommended for delicate teas, 
GLASS TEAPOTS 
Glass teapots offer the same advantages of neutral- 
ity and versatility as ceramic teapots. Their smooth 
surface is suitable for the infusion of all types of tea 
and will not affect the taste. In addition, thanks to the 
transparency of the glass, the leaves can be seen un- 
furling and dancing in the water and the color of the 
infusion can be fully appreciated. Most designs are 
equipped with an infusion strainer that is removed 
when preparing tea in bags. 
< 
a 
al 
o 
2 
a4 
< 
= 
en 
& 
Au 
i 
is) 
eS 
a4 
< 
| 
eo 
= 
CHOOSING A TEAPOT 
As pottery is an art in which, as in the art of tea, many manufacturing techniques and 
various quality standards exist, there is a wide choice of teapots on the market. Here are the main criteria that should be 
considered in terms of the material, 
the size, the shape and the quality of a teapot: 
¢ 
The material. Cast iron, clay or ceramic? First you must decide what kind of tea you want to drink. Ceramic 
and enameled cast-iron teapots are suitable for many types of tea. Clay teapots are ideal for black, Pu er and 
wulong teas. Because they are porous and “remember” the tea, clay teapots can enhance a tea’s flavor. 
e 
Size. Do not buy a teapot that is too large. Some delicate teas need to be infused in a small quantity of water 
to release their precious fragrances. A Chinese saying claims that the smaller the teapot, the better the tea. 
e 
Shape. To enhance your tea-drinking experience, choose a teapot that is suited to your hand. Handles come 
in many different shapes and sizes, so always lift a teapot before purchasing it to ensure it will pour well and 
that you like the grip. 
¢ 
Quality. A good teapot will age well. Beware of cheap teapots, especially in cast iron or clay, as they may 
deteriorate quickly. 
205 

Preparing Tea ina Teapot 
Tea reacts to various factors that one must keep in 
mind in order to get the best possible flavor from an 
infusion. 
The ratio of tea to water, the temperature 
of the water and the length of the infusion are all 
important factors to consider, regardless of the in- 
fusing method being used. Following the instructions 
below will help you prepare tea that tastes perfect 
nearly every time. 
* — Start by warming your teapot with hot water: fill to 
about a third, wait 30 seconds, then discard the water. 
You can also warm the outside of the teapot Jj. 
Add the leaves. The basic recipe requires one heap- 
ing teaspoon (5 ml) — the equivalent of '/\4 to '/io 
ounce (2 to 3 grams) — for every | cup (250 ml) 
of water [EJ You can place the leaves directly into 
the teapot. If you use a tea strainer, make sure it is 
as large as possible in relation to the teapot. The 
more space the leaves have to unfurl in the water, 
the better the tea will be. Tea eggs are not recom- 
mended, as they compress the leaves. 
Pour the water over the leaves [J. Water quality 
and temperature are important. You should never 

pour boiling water on tea leaves, as it can scald the 
leaves and destroy their delicate aroma.The higher the 
quality of a green or white tea, the less resistance it will 
have to hot water 
Let the leaves infuse for the required time, which is 
usually between three and seven 
minutes. Small, 
broken leaves will infuse more rapidly. 
Stop the infusion 
by pouring the 
liquid into 
another container or by removing the filter used 
for infusion [Z§. An infusion must be controlled 
to be successful. If it is too short, the character of 
the liquid will not be revealed; if it is too long, the 
bitterness of the tannins will overwhelm the aromas. 
* 
Serve and savor [ff]. 
The table on the following pages presents general 
guidelines for the preparation of tea. 
THE 
ART 
OF 
PREP
TEA 

208 
Tips for Successful Infusion 
FAMILY 
WHITE TEAS 
Bai Hao Yin Zhen, 
Yu Xue Ya 
Bai Mu Dan, Hong Xue Ya 
APPEARANCE 
OF THE LEAVES 
QUANTITY 
'/io oz. (3 g) tea to 
| cup (250 ml) water 
(2 teaspoons per 
cup/!0 ml per 250 ml) 
Non-rolled, fine, needle- 
shaped buds covered in 
white down, 
= 
Avongrove Darjeeling, 
Malawi Satemwa 
YELLOW TEA 
Jun Shan Yin Zhen 
GREEN TEAS 
Pan fired in vats (Chinese 
method) 
Huiming, Yuzan, Bi Luo Chun, 
Dong Shan, Fuding Mao Jian, 
Xin Yang Mao Jian, 
Tan Huong, 
Wuyuan Zi Mei, Kamairicha 
Silver and slightly blackish 
leaves, 
'/io oz. (3 g) tea to 
| cup (250 ml) water 
(1/4 teaspoons per cup 
7 ml per 250 ml) 
Slightly silvery and pale- 
green buds and leaves. 
'/\2 oz. (2.5 g) tea to 
|cup (250 ml) water 
Small but dense leaves with 
varied shapes (rolled, flat, 
twisted), varying from dark 
green to greenish yellow. 
(| teaspoon per cup/ 
5 ml per 250 ml) 
TEMPER- LENGTH OF 
ATURE 
INFUSION 
149 to 167°F| 
5—7 minutes 
67 to |76°F 
: 
5-7 minutes 
(75 to 80°C) 
76 to |94°F 
80 to 90°C) 
67 to 185°F| 
4-5 minutes 
75 to 85°C) 
167 to 185°F} 
3-5 minutes 
(75 to 85°C) 
Huang Shan Mao Feng, Long 
Jing,Anji Bai Cha, Lu An Gua 
Pian, 
Tai Ping Hou Kui, Huo 
Shan Huang 
Ya, Tian Mu Qing 
Ding, Lu Shan Yun Wu, Xue 
Ya, Wu He 
'/io oz. (3 g) tea to 
| cup (250 ml) water 
Large, bulkier leaves with 
varied shapes (twisted, 
curly, flat), varying from dark 
green to greenish yellow. 
7 ml per 250 ml) 
(1/4 teaspoons per cup/ 
167 to 185°F 
(75 to 85°C) 
4-5 minutes 
COMMENTS 
White teas should be infused in a small 
volume of water (e.g. in a gaiwan) to bring out 
all their subtlety. 
These can take a larger volume of water. 
These can take a larger volume of water. 
Infused in a gaiwan, a yellow tea will be as 
strong as a green tea; in a teapot it will be 
as mild as a white tea. 
A higher-quality tea with a greater number of 
buds, use less water at a lower temperature. 
The best way to infuse Chinese green teas is 
in a gaiwan. 
Steam dehydration 
(Japanese method) 
Sencha, Gyokuro, 
Kabusecha 
Bocha, Bancha 
Fine flat leaves, varying from 
dark to bright green. 
'/\2 oz. (2.5 g) tea to 
|cup (250 ml) water 
(| teaspoon per cup/ 
5 ml per 250 ml) 
Leaves only, whole or 
broken. 
Stems and leaves, 
'/\2 oz. (2.5 g) tea to 
Icup (250 ml) water 
(| teaspoon per cup/ 
5 ml per 250 ml) 
140 to 167°F 
(60 to 75°C) 
3-4 minutes 
167 to 185°F} 
4—5 minutes 
(75 to 85°C) 
The senchado technique is recommended for 
the highest grades of this tea. 

FAMILY 
WULONG TEAS 
Dong Ding, Si Ji Chun, Tie 
Guan Yin, Shan Lin Xi, 
Ali 
Shan, Da Yu Lin, Ma Yuan 
Shan, 
Yu Shan, Cui Yu, Jin 
Shuan, Gui Fei 
TWISTED-LEAF 
WULONG TEAS 
Rou Gui, Shui Xian, Da Hong 
Pao, Bai Hao, Qi Lan Xiang, 
Mi Lan Xiang, Qian Li Xiang, 
Zhi Lan Xiang, Shui Jin Gui, 
Pinglin Bao Zhong 
BLACK TEAS 
Darjeeling (all gardens, 
regardless of picking 
season), Assam, Nilgiri, 
Kenya, 
Jin Zhen, Qimen, 
Zhenghe Hong Gong Fu, 
Ceylan 
Yunnan Hong Gong Fu, Jin 
Die, Bai Lin Gong Fu 
APPEARANCE 
OF THE LEAVES 
Tightly rolled leaves (balls, 
pearls, beads), varying from 
forest green to blue green 
to deep black 
‘Twisted leaves, varying from 
blue green to dark brown. 
Crushed, broken or whole 
small or medium-length 
leaves, varying from brown 
_| to black, sometimes with 
golden or silver tips (buds). 
Some first-harvest 
Darjeeling teas have green 
or brownish-green leaves. 
Whole leaves with many 
golden buds. 
TEMPER- LENGTH OF 
QUANTITY 
ATURE 
INFUSION 
COMMENTS 
lio. 0z.(3.g) teato 
| 
203°F 
| 
4-5 minutes | 
Rinse the leaves so they can unfurl more 
| cup (250 ml) water | (95°C) 
easily* 
(2 teaspoons per 
cup/!0 ml per 250 ml) 
Use a container large enough to allow the 
a 
leaves to unfurl freely. 
The cha technique is ideal for the infusion of 
'/i0 oz. (3 g) tea to 
wulong teas. 
| cup (250 ml) water 
(2 teaspoons per 
cup/!0 ml per 250 ml) 
203°F 
34 minutes | For Darjeeling First Flush teas, the temperature 
(95°C) 
can be lowered to 194°F (90°C). 
The color of the liquid will vary (from amber 
to red) according to the type of tea. 
If the leaves are very broken or crushed, 
shorten infusion time. 
185 to 194°F| 4-5 minutes 
(85 to 90°C) 
'/12 02, (2.5 g) tea to 
Icup (250 ml) water 
(| teaspoon per cup/ 
5 ml per 250 ml) 
'/i2 02, (2.5 g) tea to 
| cup (250 ml) water 
(| teaspoon per cup/ 
5 ml per 250 ml) 
Chinese black teas with many golden buds 
should be infused in cooler water. 
< 
w 
Be 
oO 
5 
a 
< 
Au 
a 
pa 
pu 
fa 
io) 
& 
aa 
< 
w 
x 
& 
* Rinsing: Certain teas, especially Pu er and wulong teas, need to be rinsed for a few seconds before they are infused. Rinsing gives a 
more balanced infusion. 
To do this, pour almost-boiling water, 194 to 203°F (90 to 95°C), over the leaves (enough to cover them), then 
; 
; 
20 
discard the water a few seconds later and make your infusion. 
3 


A Short 
Tasting Guide 
INTIMATELY LINKED TO OUR EXPERIENCES AND 
OUR EATING HABITS, TASTE IS ONE OF THE MOST 
FUNDAMENTAL CULTURAL TRAITS. IT ENABLES US 
TO PERCEIVE, CONSCIOUSLY OR NOT, THE ENTIRE 
RANGE OF FLAVORS WHILE CREATING DIRECT LINKS 
BETWEEN OUR PAST AND OUR PRESENT. IN OTHER 
WORDS, IT ALLOWS US TO TRAVEL IN TIME AND 
SPACEBY ASSOCIATINGOUR PERCEPTIONS TOOTHER 
SENSORIAL AND 
CULTURAL 
DOMAINS. 
ON THE 
OTHER HAND, TASTE IS NOT AN INFALLIBLE SENSE, 
AS OUR PERCEPTIONS CAN CHANGE ACCORDING TO 
THE CONTEXT AND ENVIRONMENT. BUT SINCE WE 
ARE EQUIPPED WITH THOUSANDS OF TASTE BUDS 
THAT ACT AS RECEIVERS AND REGENERATE EVERY 
10 DAYS, WE HAVE THE CAPACITY TO EDUCATE AND 
REFINE OUR TASTE. 

A 
SHORT 
TASTING 
GUIDE 
212 
Tasting is first and foremost a quest for sen- 
sorial pleasure, but it is also a way of appreciating 
taste. It allows us, through our sensory organs, to 
identify the components that make up a fragrance 
and to then analyze and communicate our taste 
impressions. 
It is not easy to learn how to identify and dis- 
sociate impressions, especially as certain fragrances 
may be imbued with happy or unhappy memories, 
leading our brain to make associations that may 
have nothing to do with the inherent qualities of 
the food or drink that we are trying to taste. The 
point of tasting is, therefore, to go beyond first 
impressions (it’s good, it’s bad, | like it, | don't like 
it) sO we can more precisely evaluate the qual- 
ity of whatever we are tasting. No special talent 
is needed to do this. With a little effort, we can 
all develop our tasting ability. That being said, it is 
helpful to understand the basics of the complex 
mechanism of taste in order to properly appre- 
ciate the tasting experience. Here, as elsewhere, 
theory enhances practice, increasing the pleasure 
to be derived. 
Visual Analysis 
Our first contact with tea is usually made through 
sight. Although it is not always a reliable indicator of 
the richness of a tea, the appearance of the leaves 
(their shape, texture, color, the presence of buds) still 
gives us a first impression. 
A close observation of a tea’s leaves can give 
us some idea of its taste. The presence of white tips 
formed by buds can be an indication of quality, as can 
a brilliant, shiny color, which Is often a sign of 
freshness. 
On the other hand, dull, grayish leaves without luster 
can indicate processing or storage defects. 

Taste 
Taste is a combination of several complex sensations. It 
mainly involves two of our sensory systems: olfactory 
receptors (the nose) and gustatory receptors (the 
tongue). 
After visual analysis, the second critical step of 
tasting is to sniff the fragrances released by the tea 
leaves. In addition to preparing the brain to receive 
tasting information, this step provides important 
information that the tongue alone cannot detect. 
Our olfactory system is far more complex than our 
gustatory system. Most of the information relating 
to taste is impossible to perceive without a sense of 
smell (such as when your nose is blocked). 
Let us briefly review how the olfactory system 
works. 
Olfactory sensations can be perceived in two 
ways: by direct olfaction or by retro-nasal olfaction. 
In both cases, they must reach the olfactory gland, 
where the information is processed. 
In the case of direct olfaction, volatile molecules 
pass through the nasal cavities and go directly to 
the receptors of the olfactory gland, giving us a first 
impression or an indication of 
the taste. 
As for retro- 
nasal olfaction, this occurs once the liquid is in the 
mouth. Aromas rise through the pharynx toward the 
nasal cavities to reach the olfactory gland. This gives 
a more intense perception of the aromatic aspect of 
a tea. 
SMELL AND AROMA 
“Smell” is used to describe sensations perceived by direct olfaction, while “aroma” 
defines perception through retro-nasal olfaction. 
213 

A 
SHORT 
TASTING 
GUIDE 
214 
Olfactory gland 
Olfactory mucus 
tongue 
the nose, a taster should pay close 
olfaction (indicated by the red arrow). 
THE TONGUE 
While aromas are perceived primarily by the sense 
of smell, flavors are detected mainly by the tongue, 
which is covered with gustatory receptors (these are 
also found in other parts of the mouth, such as the 
soft palate), These receptors lie under the taste buds. 
The tongue is equipped with some 10,000 of these, 
and each represents a bouquet of 50 to |00 cells that 
react to all flavors. 
In addition to direct olfaction through 
attention to the phenomenon of retro- 
Human beings detect only five essential tastes: 
sweet, salty, acidic, bitter and umami (which means 
‘tasty’ in Japanese). Each of these tastes is detected 
to different degrees, and the perception of one can 
be affected by another. That is why we generally 
refer to a gustatory “continuum.” 

THE PERCEPTION OF FLAVORS 
ON THE TONGUE 
As taste buds are not specialized, any taste bud, what- 
ever its position on the tongue, can detect all tastes. 
As taste is also defined by sensation, other sen- 
sory receptors in the oral cavity are involved. Among 
other things, they allow us to determine texture, tem- 
perature, freshness and astringency. 
It should be noted that the temperature of a tea 
can affect our perception of its flavors. At very high 
temperatures bitterness is less noticeable and sweet- 
ness is accentuated. However heat has no effect on 
the perception of acidity. 

A 
SHORT 
TASTING 
GUIDE 
216 
The Way of Tasting 
If you wish to enhance the experience of drinking 
tea, the first thing to do, before even wetting your 
lips with the fresh infusion, is to sniff the leaves be- 
fore and after infusion, inhaling the subtle fragrances 
they contain. Next, study the color and texture of the 
liquid, then bring the bowl very close to your nose 
to smell the fragrances released by the liquor You 
can use the ‘little dog’’ technique, involving repeated 
rapid sniffing. Concentration is important at this mo- 
ment, as the first impressions derived from the smells 
are often very revealing. 
Now that you have inhaled the aromas of both 
the leaves and the liquor you are ready to take your 
first sip. Once you are ready to drink, take a small sip 
and then expel air through your nostrils to facilitate 
retro-olfactory perception. Pay special attention to the 
sensations the liquid creates throughout your mouth. 
Of the five essential tastes, salty is rarely found in tea. 
Bitterness, however is present in varying degrees in al- 
most all teas because of the tannins and the caffeine, 
which give structure to the liquid. But that is not a bad 
thing! For a Western palate, bitterness is perhaps an 
acquired taste, but it is not a defect as such. Study how 
the bitterness is balanced with other aromas in the 
tea. Link the flavor to others it reminds you of. Try to 
go beyond your first impression. Allow your sensations 
to guide you while maintaining your concentration so 
as not to lose these precious first impressions. Finally, 
try to define the sensations so as to better understand 
and remember them. 
All the senses are involved in tasting. It is not just 
about the nose and the tongue. Hearing allows us to 
hear the ‘‘song of the water’ and know that it is ready 
for infusion. Vision tells us how the tea looks. So the 
environment, the music, the lighting, the other people 
present, our own mood are all elements to take into 
account if you are to succeed in truly tasting. In the 
wrong conditions, even tasting a grand cru can be an 
unpleasant experience. 
FLAVOR 
Flavor is the combination of olfacto-gustatory sensations derived from consuming a food. 

Words for Tasting 
Apart from the wealth of knowledge and cultural and 
personal experience he or she possesses, a taster 
must be able to summon up several skills. One of 
them is knowing how to structure sensations in order 
to express them clearly. 
When one inhales a fragrance, an image or 
an emotion comes to mind more readily than a 
word. Unfortunately, without the help of the right 
vocabulary, an emotion can be difficult to interpret. 
Learning to describe our sensations as precisely as 
possible helps us to refine our senses and enrich the 
perception we have of a tea (or any other food). 
Associating a smell with a word allows us to classify 
it, to categorize it so that it will be easier to recognize 
later. It is necessary therefore to build up a gustatory 
memory. 
The greater the precision of the terms used, 
the easier it will be to detect shades of taste and for 
the brain to remember taste experiences. 
Learning 
the 
right vocabulary 
is, therefore, 
fundamental. At first, it may seem a tedious exercise, 
but with patience and training It soon becomes clear 
that it is not that difficult. By developing our olfactory 
memory every day and becoming aware of the smells 
around us, our senses will naturally learn to be more 
precise. Group tasting also creates the opportunity to 
exchange tasting terms and to detect certain elements 
that a solitary taster cannot at first appreciate. Sharing 
and expressing sensations is part of the pleasure of 
tasting; in some ways, this is the goal. 
Naming the aromas of a tea is much more 
difficult than detecting the various flavors, for a very 
simple reason: an infusion of tea releases several 
hundred volatile molecules. Bombarded with all this 
information, 
the brain has to sort and summarize. 
THE NOTES OF TEA 
The smells released by tea are not perceptible at 
the same time or in the same way. Their degree of 
volatility changes their persistence and tells us how 
the taste of a tea evolves. 
¢ 
Head notes are volatile notes that are often fleet- 
ing and give us a first impression of 
the taste of a 
tea. We perceive them immediately. 
* 
Body notes are those we perceive when the li- 
quid is in the mouth. They structure the liquid and 
give it its character. Powerful and stable, they are 
responsible for the overall impression we have of 
a tea. 
* 
Tail notes are those that remain in the mouth 
and linger in aromas after the liquid is swallowed. 
When a tea is rich in flavors, the tail notes can 
show either its persistence or the evolution of the 
flavor, which will sometimes culminate in complex 
sensations. 
After having sniffed the tea and having tried to 
detect as many aromas emanating from the leaves 
or the liquid as possible, the second challenge is to 
describe the texture as well as the general impression 
that it leaves. 
217 

FAMILIES OF AROMAS 
To learn how to use the vocabulary of tasting cor 
rectly, it is a good idea to start by getting to know the 
various families of tea aromas. 
The aim is not to learn 
by heart all these terms and definitions, but to better 
understand the groups of smells according to their 
A 
SHORT 
TASTING 
GUIDE 
Smoked, grilled, burnt, toast, grilled 
almond, ash, wood fire, tobacco, 
roasting, bacon, tar 
218 
The wheel of flavors 
olfactory characteristics. Of course, the fragrances of 
tea are not set, and they can belong to several families 
and often mingle different shades of various aromas, 
mystifying us and enhancing our pleasure. 

A Brief Lexicon of Tasting 
Ample: Round texture, generous liquid, quite long in 
the mouth. 
Aromatic: Rich in aroma, very fragrant. 
Astringent: Pungent, hard or full-bodied character, 
creates a drying feeling in the mouth. 
Bite: Describes a feeling of astringency that is acidic 
and strong. 
Body: Describes a texture that has presence and 
coats the mouth. 
Bold: Possessing a well-defined, instantly discernible 
character. 
Brisk: Possessing great liveliness with a touch of 
acidity. 
Complex: Very rich in aromas with many subtle 
qualities. 
Delicate: Light, refined. 
Fresh: A liquid that gives a feeling of freshness, 
sometimes a little acidic. 
Full: Quality of a liquid that fills the mouth and has 
persistence. 
Fullbodied: Possessing body. 
Generous: Supported by a rich, aromatic intensity. 
Heady: Rich and complex. 
Heavy: Fragrance that is felt in the back of the 
mouth, dense. 
Intense: Strong, powerful presence. 
Light: Supple and without body. 
Long: With a long finish; the quality of a well- 
structured liquid. 
Mild: Silky, supple, velvety, not astringent, sometimes 
associated with sweet. 
Opulent: Rich, round, heady fragrance. 
Persistence: Describes an aroma that is long in the 
mouth (aftertaste). 
Powerful: With a lot of strength, fullbodied. 
Pungent: Creating a feeling of astringency that is 
harsh and coarse. 
Raw: A slightly acidic liquid. 
Refined: Possessing delicacy and subtlety. 
Robust: A strong constitution with a lot of body, 
powerful. 
Rough: A liquid that is too astringent and Is 
unpleasant. 
Round: Describes a supple, silky, slightly tannic liquid 
that fills the mouth. 
Runny: A supple, smooth liquid with little body. 
Sharp: Brisk, slightly acidic character, narrow and 
incisive; may be delicate or robust. 
Short: Possessing aromas or savors that quickly fade. 
Silky: Describes a liquid with a supple texture. 
Smooth: Light texture without roughness. 
Structured: Well-structured tannic liquid, full and 
strong, fullbodied but not coarse. 
Subtle: Refined and complex. 
Sustained: An aroma with a persistent presence. 
Tannic: Describes a well-structured liquid that 
creates a pleasant feeling of astringency. 
Unctuous: Thick, mellow, very round texture. 
Velvety: With a thickness reminiscent of velvet. 
Vigorous: Slightly acidic character without softness. 
Warm: Round, comforting liquid with no acidity. 
Watery: VVith a texture like water 
Young: Describes a rather green character, 
immature, sometimes a little acidic. 
219 

LET ae 
a 
Fp OS 
EPO ABR IGE 
: 
elise 
= 
= 
~ 
oe 
som 
owt 
Sa 
= 
=== 
7 
Lame 
EES 
on 
aR 
wen 
ting mens mer 
Te 
porns 
ec 
rneee: 
oe 
ore, 
pitta 
ren 
Soe 
ee 
a 
SORTS Aen teen 
eee 
ves 
Se 
Beeman 
= 
‘ 
= 
a 
cs 
astern 
Fier 
wags 
NOUS 
RRA 
eG 
é 
‘ 
+ 
i ¢ 4 
z 
4 
bs 
, 
tater 
tab ontns 
we 
Verne 
are ee pA 
AY, Sopa aateetiomers 
~ 
REM 
Sa peel ae ip pBABE 4 
sete 
ee Tane 
tent 
RUIN 
OA 
han 
BONS a 

Tea in 
Gastronomy 
IF QUEBEC IN CANADA HAS BECOME A RECOGNIZED 
GASTRONOMIC MECCA, IT IS LARGELY DUE TO THE 
MANY REMARKABLECHEFSWHOKNOWHOWTOBRING 
OUT THE BEST OF THE LOCAL PRODUCTS AS WELL AS 
PRODUCTS FROM AFAR. THAT IS WHY WE DECIDED TO 
ASK SOME TALENTED CHEFS AND FOOD LOVERS TO 
CREATE RECIPES THAT WOULD COMBINE TEA WITH 
OTHER FOODS. WE INVITE YOU TO DISCOVER THIS 
NEW ASPECT OF THE FASCINATING WORLD OF TEA! 


Bowls of Choco-Chai 
SERVES 6 TO 8 
| cup (250 ml) light cream (20%) or whole milk 
4 tablespoons (60 ml) Camellia chai spice/tea mix 
4 tablespoons (60 ml) brown or granulated sugar 
6 ounces (180 g) semisweet chocolate 
3 eggs 
|. Bring the cream and chai to a boil. Add the sugar and stir to dissolve. Remove from 
the heat and let infuse for |5 minutes. 
2. Chop the chocolate using a blender or food processor 
3. Reheat the chai infusion, then strain through a fine sieve. 
4, Restart the food processor, pour in the hot infusion and blend until the chocolate 
is fully melted. Add the eggs one at a time and blend 30 to 60 seconds, until the 
mixture is very smooth. 
5. Fill small tea bowls or glasses, about 4 cup (75 ml), with the choco-chai. 
6. Refrigerate at least 2 hours then serve with the garnish of your choice. 
soe “ ick: 
osto 
A la di Stasio 
Suggested garnishes: lightly whipped cream, 
TEA PAIRINGS. 
cocoa powder or Augar-coated 
fennel seeds. 
a 
* 
Darjeeling ae 
3 ay — 
223 

Tea-Flavored Panna Cotta | sy Josee v1 Stasio 
SERVES 6 
Panna cotta 
Tea Jelly 
| tablespoon (15 ml) gelatin 
2 cups (500 ml) water 
2 tablespoons (30 ml) cold water 
4 teaspoons (20 ml) jasmine 
or 
Puree] om GNC n)) iicinlem @A0).<) elem al=r-\y'al ley.) MeR=r-lan 
7; cup (150 ml) granulated 
2 tablespoons (30 ml) jasmine or vanilla tea 
nile) 
(= oXerolam 
@pomanl) moxo-tela 
Y2 cup (125 ml) granulated sugar 
FOR THE PANNA COTTA 
|. Soak the gelatin in the cold water for 5 minutes. 
2, Heat the cream and tea. Stir the sugar into the mixture to dissolve. Allow to infuse 
for 10 minutes. 
. Strain the infusion. 
4. Add the prepared gelatin and stir until completely dissolved. Remove from the 
heat and add the yogurt. 
5. Pour into six oiled ramekins or glasses. Refrigerate at least 2 hours, until the 
preparation has set. 
6. If using ramekins, dip them into boiling water for a few seconds to unmold the 
panna cotta. If serving in glasses, add the garnish of your choice (such as strawberry, 
raspberry or kiwi coulis; honey-coated orange sections; a concassé of tea jelly and 
small berries). 
OJ 
FOR THE TEA JELLY 
SUGGESTED 
A fresh and gentle fragrance to serve with the panna cotta or with seasonal fruit. 
ahead) 
cee 
|. Bring the water to a boil, then reduce the heat. Once the temperature has 
* Ali Shan 
dropped to |85°F (85°C), pour the water into a teapot, add the tea and let 
* Long Jing 
infuse for 5 minutes. 
* Kamairicha 
2. Strain the tea, add the sugar and stir to dissolve. 
3. Meanwhile, prepare the gelatin by adding to 3 tablespoons (45 ml) water and 
setting aside for 5 minutes. 
4. Add the prepared gelatin to the hot tea. Pour into a pie plate or round pan and 
leave to set in the refrigerator for a few hours. 
5. Cube the jelly and serve with a citrus salad and light syrup or with honeydew 
melon and cantaloupe balls or cubes. 
The panna cotta and tea jelly can be layered. However, take care to chill the panna 
cotta in the refrigerator until firm before adding the layer of tea jelly. 
224 


OO-8 
Stet 
4. 
fa 
2 
aie 
7 
P 
.<. 
% 
. 
PAE 
DAES 
a 
EES 
aN 
5 
BO 
| 
= 
4 
™ 
. 
n 
: 
eB 
yp 
ND 
Hl 
hey 
a 
ae 
ee 
: 
ae 
Se 
ites 
a 
& 
} 
ee 
SS 
eae 

ed Goat Milk, Matcha and White Chocolate Balls 
with 
Marjoram Macaroons 
SERVES 6 TO 8 
4 cups (| L) whole goat's milk 
4 to 5 eggs whites 
'/s cup (60 ml) freshly shaved ginger 
“/s cup (150 ml) white chocolate 
2'/2 cups (625 ml) confectioners’ sugar 
'/, cup. (125 ml) cocoa butter 
5 ounces (150 g) ground almonds 
| tablespoon (15 ml) Matcha tea 
2 teaspoons (10 ml) ground marjoram 
. To prepare the goat's milk filling, pour the milk into a pan, add the ginger and 
bring to a boil, stirring constantly. Reduce the heat and reduce the liquid by half 
over low heat. 
2. Place the reduced milk mixture into the blender and blend until very smooth. Pour 
into |-inch (2 cm) semicircular molds and chill overnight in the freezer, making sure 
they are level. 
3. To prepare the macaroons, preheat the oven to 350°F (175°C). Sift together the 
confectioners’ sugar, ground almonds and marjoram into a bowl. 
4. In a deep bowl, beat the egg whites until stiff, then fold in the sugar-and-almond 
mixture. 
5. Transfer the mixture to a piping bag and form mini macaroons on a baking sheet 
covered with parchment paper. Let stand |5 minutes at room temperature. Bake for 
10 to 12 minutes then leave to cool on a rack. 
6. To prepare the Matcha and white chocolate shells, melt the white chocolate in a 
double boiler and the cocoa butter in a microwave oven. Combine them in a bowl 
and add the Matcha tea. Set aside. 
7. Unmold the frozen semicircular spheres of goat's milk and stick them together in 
pairs to form balls. Stick a bamboo skewer through the two halves of each ball to 
hold them together Place the balls back in the freezer as you work, to keep them 
from becoming too soft. 
8. Dip each ball into the chocolate-Matcha mixture, let excess drain off and place on a 
tray covered with plastic wrap. Dip each ball a second time. Refrigerate. 
9. To serve, top each ball with a marjoram macaroon. Each one must be eaten in a 
single bite, otherwise the filling will ooze out. 
STEPHANE Mopar, 
chef at 
L’Utopie restaurant 
SUlele] 
Sy 55) 
TEA PAIRINGS 
227 

Pork Flank Braised in Pu er Tea with a Concassé of Jerusalem 
Artichokes and Cloves, and a Chicory and Star Anise Emulsion 
BY STEPHANE MODAT 
SERVES 4TO 6 
| white onion, coarsely chopped 
| cup (250 ml) Jerusalem artichokes, peeled 
and rinsed 
in 
| carrot, coarsely chopped 
clean water 
/2 garlic clove, coarsely chopped 
Salt, to taste 
| leek, white part only, coarsely chopped 
'f4 cup (50 ml) heavy cream (36%) 
2'/s pounds (| kg) fresh pork flank 
Pinch ground cloves 
| teaspoon (5 ml) + | tablespoon (15 ml) butter or oil 
'/, cup (125 ml) chicory 
About 2 cups (500 ml) chicken stock 
2 star anise 
Salt and pepper to taste 
| teaspoon (5 ml) soy lecithin (available at natur 
2 teaspoons (10 ml) Shou Pu er tea 
stores) 
|. Spread the vegetables in a shallow roasting pan. Set aside. 
2. Remove the skin from the pork flank. In a hot skillet, heat | teaspoon (5 ml) of 
butter or oil and brown the meat on all sides. Arrange the meat on top of the 
vegetables. Add enough chicken stock to almost cover the meat, taking care not 
to cover It completely. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Cook, uncovered, in a 
350°F (180°C) oven for 90 minutes. 
3. After 90 minutes, wrap the Pu er tea in cheesecloth. Close tightly with butcher's 
string and place in the stock. Cover the roasting pan and continue to cook for 
another 90 minutes. (If cooked uncovered, the crust that forms on the meat will be 
too hard.) 
4, Once the meat is cooked, flatten it between two pie plates so that it looks like a 
ators 
slice of bacon. Refrigerate for at least 2 hours. 
To serve, cube the meat and reheat it, 
TEA PAIRINGS 
uncovered, in the cooking stock. 
* Autumn Flush Darjeeling 
5. Heat a large saucepan of salted water. Plunge the Jerusalem artichokes into 
* Gabacha 
simmering water and cook just until a knife sinks easily into them. Jerusalem 
* Hojicha 
artichokes need to cook for quite a long time, but at a low boil. 
6. Leave the Jerusalem artichokes to cool, and pat dry with a paper towel. Dice them 
and brown them in | tablespoon (15 ml) of butter or oil, Salt to taste. When they 
are hot, add the cream, to thicken the mixture, and the cloves. 
7. To prepare the chicory emulsion, bring a pot of water to a boil. Remove from the 
heat, add the chicory and star anise and leave to infuse for 15 minutes. Pour the 
emulsion through a chinois (cone shaped sieve) and blend in the lecithin. Remove 
the foam that forms on the surface. 
8, Arrange pieces of meat and diced Jerusalem artichokes in serving dishes. Add a 
spoonful of chicory emulsion. 
228 


} 
wy, 
Vag 
: 
Y 
PIN 
j 
NIN 
r 
~@G 
‘ 
\V/ 
BAR 

Beef in Wulong Tea 
SERVES 4 
2 (10-ounce/300 g) pieces of sirloin 
Salt and pepper, to taste 
2 tablespoons (30 ml) extra virgin olive oil 
6 to 7 tablespoons (90 to 105 ml) butter 
| cup (250 ml) water 
2 tablespoons (30 ml) wulong tea (such as Shui Xian, Mi Lan Xiang or Qi Lan Xiang) 
. Season the pieces of beef with salt and pepper to taste. Heat a cast-iron skillet over 
high heat until it smokes. Add the olive oil and 4 tablespoons (60 ml) of butter 
2. Place the pieces of beef in the skillet and cook until a crust forms, around 3 or 
4 minutes on each side, depending on the thickness of the beef. Place the beef 
in a cold oven for 2 to 3 minutes, depending on the desired degree of doneness. 
Remove the beef from the skillet. Set aside. 
NorRMAND LapRISE, 
3. Wipe excess fat from the skillet. Melt 2 or 3 tablespoons (30 to 45 ml) of butter 
Owner and chef of 
and cook until it turns hazelnut brown. Deglaze with water, scraping the bottom 
Toqué! restaurant 
of 
the skillet to recover any browned bits of the meat. Reduce the liquid by half 
and add the wulong tea. Leave to infuse for 2 to 3 minutes, then pour through a 
fine strainer Bring the mixture back to a boil and whisk. 
4. Slice the beef and serve with the wulong-flavored drippings. 
5. Serve the meat with a vegetable puree and seasonal onions. 
SUGGESTED 
In our grandmothers’ time it was customary to 
deglaze a pan with tea, often a strong black tea, 
and 40 this is an affectionate nod to our 
ancestors and their traditional knowledge. 
231 

Strawberries with Jellied Matcha 
MAKES 8 APPETIZERS 
‘ge strawberries 
3 sheets gelatin 
| cup (250 ml) cold water, plus extra water fo 
2 tablespoons (30 ml) powdered Matcha Suisen 
Wasabi paste, to taste 
. Slice each strawberry in half and cut a piece off the rounded side of each half so 
the pieces are flat on both sides. Set aside on a serving dish. 
2. Place the sheets of gelatin in cold water to soak. Set aside. 
3. Heat the water to |50°F (65°C) and add the powdered Matcha tea. Whisk well. 
Let stand until the foam subsides. 
4. Wring the excess moisture from the gelatin sheets. Place the sheets in the warm 
tea mixture. Whisk until the gelatin dissolves. Cool in an ice bath until the mixture 
CHARLES-ANTOINE CRETE, 
hiceenea tle 
ioe ert 
5. Place a little wasabi in the center of each strawberry half, then quickly cover with 
ee 
a small spoonful of jellied Matcha. If the Matcha jelly hardens too fast, heat it over 
a small pan of boiling water to obtain the right consistency. 
6. Refrigerate uncovered for 2 or 3 hours before serving. 
SUGGESTED 
TEA PAIRINGS 
+ 
Bai Hao Yin Zhen 
/— + LuAn 
Gua Pian 
__ 
* Sencha Keikoku 
232 


"tha. 

Tomato Coulis with Sencha 
YIELDS | CUP (250 ML) 
10 large ripe plum tomatoes 
Salt and pepper to taste 
Ice cubes 
| cup (250 ml) water 
4 tablespoons (60 ml) olive oil 
8 teaspoons (40 ml) Sencha Haruno 
|O sprigs thyme 
/2 teaspoons (7 ml) sugar 
| head garlic, separated into unpeeled cloves 
|/4 teaspoons (7 ml) salt 
cut in half 
|. It is important to choose very ripe tomatoes, as they will be easier to peel. Preheat 
CLAUDE PELLETIER, 
the oven to 300°F (150°C) and bring a large saucepan of water to a boil. Remove 
chef at 
the tomato stems and, using a small paring knife, score the base of each tomato in 
Le Club Chasse et Péche 
the shape of a cross to facilitate peeling. Fill a large mixing bowl with ice and water 
restaurant 
2. Plunge the tomatoes into the boiling water for about 30 seconds, pull them out 
then immediately plunge them into the bowl of ice water Using a paring knife, peel 
the tomatoes starting at the scored base. They should peel very easily. 
3, Line a baking sheet with well-oiled parchment paper Slice the tomatoes in half 
lengthwise and place them facedown on the lined baking sheet. Arrange the garlic 
cloves and the sprigs of thyme on top of the tomatoes. Salt and pepper to taste. 
Bake in the oven for 3/2 hours, until the tomatoes are soft to the touch and 
slightly dry. 
4. Bring | cup (250 ml) water to a boil and infuse the tea for 3 minutes, taking care to 
use the proportions suggested. Do not press the leaves during infusion because the 
liquid will become too bitter Remove the leaves and set aside. 
5. Blend the still-hot tomatoes in a blender to obtain a smooth puree. With the 
blender still running, add the tea, sugar and a little salt and combine well. 
6. Strain the coulis through a fine strainer. Add pepper to taste. Serve hot or at room 
temperature with poultry, white meat or lobster. 
SUGGESTED 
TEA PAIRINGS 
235 

Cream Pots with Hojicha 
SERVES 4 
|'/3 cup (325 ml) cream 
2 teaspoons (10 ml) Hojicha tea 
5 medium-sized egg yolks 
/, cup (125 ml) granulated sugar 
| teaspoon (5 ml) vanilla extract 
. Heat the oven to 300°F (150°C). 
2. Bring the cream and Hojicha to a boil. Set aside. 
3. In a mixing bow|, beat the egg yolks, sugar and vanilla extract until the mixture 
turns whitish. Slowly pour the tea-flavored cream into the egg mixture, whisking 
constantly. Pour the mixture into four small glass pots or ramekins. 
4. Place the pots in a fairly deep oven dish and add very hot water to the dish. 
(The water should be hotter than the mixture in the pots.) Cover the dish with 
aluminum foil. Bake in the oven for 40 minutes, until the mixture is firm. 
wing a ae 
5. Garnish with pecans and serve warm or chilled with fancy cookies. 
Head pastry chef at 
Le Club Chasse et Péche 
restaurant 
SUGGESTED 
TEA PAIRINGS 
* Hojicha 
* Rou Gui 
* Sun Moon Lake 
236 



Scallop Carpaccio with Marinated Celery and 
Shiitake Mushrooms in a Chinese White Tea Broth 
SERVES 6 
Carpaccio 
|’ pounds (600 g) fresh size 
Ze] 0 (o\0a8))) <3) 
(e=cele-l narelares 
2 ounces (60 g) shiitake mushrooms, sliced 
Ta1komntaliay inp] 
9) (-lele)6}ue | tel0|0)940)0)190))) 
Fleur de sel, to taste 
U-10 
scallops, sliced 
3 tablespoons (45 ml) olive oil 
/2 lemon, juiced 
|. Slice the scallops and place them in a bowl. Add the olive oil, lemon juice, almonds, 
shiitake mushrooms and fleur de sel. 
| teaspoons (7 ml) fennel seeds 
| star anise 
| 
teaspoons (7 ml) mustard seeds 
| sprig thyme 
Marinated Celery 
| cup (250 ml) water 
Y2 cup (125 ml) white wine vinegar 
Y2 cup (125 ml) sugar 
2 teaspoons (10 ml) salt 
| bay leaf 
| % teaspoons (7 ml) cracked black 
Y pound (220 g) celery, finely sliced 
pepper 
(about 2 cups/500 ml) 
| teaspoons (7 ml) coriander seeds 
|. Place all the ingredients except the celery in a small saucepan and bring to a boll. 
Simmer for 10 minutes. 
2. Strain to remove the spices and pour the hot liquid over the raw celery. Allow to cool. 
Broth 
17/3 cups/400 ml) 
2 cups (500 ml) water 
2 teaspoons (10 ml) Bai Hao 
3'/2 ounces (100 g) shiitake 
Yin Zhen tea 
ane sialgelolpasire ale)ple\crel (-lele)0)e 
Salt, to taste 
|, Bring the water to a boil in a small saucepan. Place the chopped mushrooms and 
tea in a bowl and pour the boiling water over. Cover with plastic wrap and leave to 
infuse for 5 minutes. Strain then salt to taste. 
ASSEMBLY 
|. Place the marinated celery and a few celery leaves or celery shoots on the scallop 
carpaccio. 
2. Pour a little white tea broth over the entire dish and enjoy. 
Marc-ANDRE JETTE, 
chef at 
Newtown 
restaurant 
SUGGESTED 
TEA PAIRINGS 
ao 
Yin Zhen 
2 
: 
| 
Anji 
Bai Cha 
a8 
Bet 
os 
Bae 
| 
* Huang Shan Mao Feng 
St 
239 

240 
PATRICE DEMERS, 
Head pastry chef at 
Newtown 
restaurant 
SUGGESTED 
TEA PAIRINGS 
* Puer 
* Assam Khagorijan 
* Aged wulong 
Chocolate—Pu er Set Cream with Kumquats, 
Hazelnuts, Shortbread and Jelly 
SERVES 4 
/, cup (125 ml) heavy cream (367%) 
ypmee|om 
a omnel) mall, 
/s cup (30 ml) sug 
atin, rehydrated 
s (30 ml) Pu er tea 
|. In a saucepan, bring the cream, milk and sugar to a boil. Remove from the heat and 
add the gelatin and tea. Let infuse for 5 minutes. 
2. Pour the cream through a chinois then pour it over the chocolate and mix with 
a hand blender. Coat four small ramekins with vegetable oil then pour the 
chocolate cream into the greased ramekins. Allow to set in the refrigerator 
for at least 6 hours. 
Candied Kumquats 
|2 kumquats 
| cup (250 ml) water 
Y2 cup (125 ml) sugar 
|. Cut the ends off the kumquats. Slice each kumquat in half and remove the seeds. 
Place the kumquats in a small heatproof mixing bowl. In a saucepan, bring the 
water and sugar to a boil. Pour the boiling syrup over the kumquats. Leave to cool. 
Refrigerate. 
Hazelnut Praline 
/4 cup (60 ml) water 
/, cup (125 ml) sugar 
1*/3 cup (400 ml) roasted hazelnuts 
|, In a saucepan, bring the water and sugar to a boil and cook to 250°F (120°C ). 
Add the hazelnuts and stir with a wooden spoon until the sugar is crystallized. 
2, Transfer the mixture to a clean saucepan, reheat over moderate heat and 
caramelize the hazelnuts, stirring constantly. 
QW Place the hazelnuts on a baking sheet covered with parchment paper and let cool. 
Separate into small pieces while they are still very hot. Set aside in a dry place in a 
sealed container 
(continued on page 242) 

” 

Cardamom-Honey Jelly 
| cup (250 ml) honey 
| cup (250 ml) water 
3 tablespoons (45 ml) cardamom pods, crushed 
| teaspoons (7 ml) agar 
|, In a small saucepan, bring the honey, water and cardamom to a boil. Remove from 
the heat and allow to infuse for 10 minutes. Pour the preparation through a chinois 
and whisk in the agar. Bring back to a boil and simmer for | minute, stirring regularly. 
2. Pour into a shallow rectangular mold and allow to set in the refrigerator Unmold 
the jelly, dice it finely and blend in a food processor or blender to a smooth puree. 
Hazelnut Shortbread 
| cup (250 ml) hazelnuts 
|’ cups (375 ml) all-purpose flour 
| cup (250 ml) confectioners’ sugar 
Y, teaspoon (2 ml) salt 
Y% cup (175 ml) cold butter, diced 
|. Blend the nuts and flour in a food processor and reduce to a powder. Add the 
confectioners’ sugar, salt and butter and process to form a smooth dough. Place 
the dough on a sheet of parchment paper and cover with a second sheet. With 
a rolling pin, roll out the dough to a thickness of about 
% inch (1.5 cm). Leave 
the dough to become firm in a cool place. Bake the shortbread at 350°F 
(180°C ) for 12 minutes, until golden. Leave to cool then cut into cubes. 
ASSEMBLY 
|. Dip the ramekins in hot water for a few seconds and then, using the tip of a knife, 
gently detach the set cream from the sides. 
2. Unmold the set creams onto serving plates. 
Garnish each plate with four pieces of candied kumquat, a few hazelnut pralines, 
a little cardamom-honey jelly and two cubes of hazelnut shortbread. 
242 

Ich igo Daifu ku BY KAzuyo FUKUNISHI 
SERVES 8 
8 cups (2 L) water 
3 ounces (90 g) mochiko (sweet rice flour) 
| cup (250 ml) granulated sugar 
Cornstarch, as needed 
8 strawberries 
3 ounces (90 g) anko or an (puree of adzuki beans cooked with sugar) 
|. In a microwavable bowl, slowly pour the water over the mochiko, stirring constantly. 
Add the sugar and combine well. Microwave for | minute on high and stir with a 
wooden spoon. 
2. Return to the microwave for 3 to 4 minutes, interrupting once or twice to stir 
Continue cooking until the preparation swells. Let the bowl cool for 30 seconds 
before removing from the microwave and stir again with a wooden spoon. 
3. Sprinkle a little cornstarch on a baking sheet. Transfer the mixture to the baking 
sheet, flatten and cut into eight equal pieces. 
4. Coat each strawberry with anko, mold into a ball shape and wrap each ball in a 
piece of rice paste. Pinch the ends to seal the paste and roll again to restore a 
round shape. Prepare and serve the same day, if possible. 
SULEle] S91) 
A small Japanese delicacy that is perfect with tea. 
UcaolaiNes 

Indian Chai 
YIELDS 4 CUPS (1 L) 
2 cinnamon sticks 
8 teaspoons (40 ml) dark, full- 
Y2 nutmeg seed 
bodied tea (such as Assam) 
|2 green cardamom pods 
2 cups (500 ml) milk 
4 whole cloves 
8 teaspoons (40 ml) brown or 
2 cups 500 ml) boiling water 
granulated sugar 
Y2 inch (1.25 cm) piece ginger, 
freshly grated 
|. Crush the spices (except the ginger) with a mortar and pestle and place them in a 
saucepan. Heat the spices, then add boiling water and ginger and allow to boil for 
15 minutes. 
2. Add the tea, milk and brown sugar and bring to a boil. Remove from the heat, 
cover and allow to infuse for 3 to 5 minutes. Taste and adjust the amount of 
sugar if desired, or allow to infuse longer for a more full-bodied drink. 
3. Strain the mixture and serve. 
Note: The main spice used in chai is cardamom. 
You can substitute the others with 
pepper, fennel or cloves. There are as many different ways to prepare chai as there are 
Indians in India! 
244 

= 
Iced Tea (Cold Infusion) 
YIELDS 4 CUPS (I L) 
| orange, finely chopped 
| small bunch fresh sweet mint 
8 teaspoons (40 ml) Assam or other tea 
5 teaspoons (25 ml) raw sugar 
20 green cardamom pods 
5 star anise 
Rose petals (optional) 
4 cups (| L) cold water 
|. Place all the ingredients in a large container and add the cold water. 
2. Cover and allow to infuse for 10 hours in the refrigerator. 
3. Strain then add more sugar, to taste. Serve very cold with pomegranate 
seeds as a garnish. 
Note: Various teas and spices can be used, 
to suit individual tastes. Cold infusing 
for a long time allows all the fragrances of a tea to develop without releasing the 
tannins, creating a very refreshing drink It is, of course, possible to prepare a hot 
infusion and dilute it with ice cubes to cool it. 
Mint Tea 
YIELDS 300 ML (1 '4 CUPS) 
| 4 teaspoons (7 ml) organic Chinese gunpowder green tea 
| teaspoon (5 ml) granulated sugar 
| large bunch fresh mint 
|% cups (300 ml) water 
. Heat a teapot. 
2. Place the mint in the teapot and add the sugar. 
3, Place the tea in a tea strainer and rinse with boiling water 
Place the strainer in the teapot and add the boiling water. 
4, Allow to infuse for 3 minutes, 4 minutes for a more full-bodied tea, then 
remove the strainer. 
Note: 
As a variation, the leaves can be placed directly in the teapot without the 
use of a strainer This method allows the tea to get stronger as it infuses. 

4 a 
z Pan a 

PART FOUR 
TEA.AND 
HEALTH 

248 
The Chemical Components of Tea 
“The act of drinking tea must be appreciated for its own sake, without seeking any other 
justification, for only thus can the tea drinker taste the sunlight, the wind and the clouds.” 
When you pour simmering water over tea leaves and 
feel transported by the magical aromas they release, 
the soluble elements that make up the tea leaf are 
gently transferred to the liquid. During infusion, some 
chemical elements, such as vitamin C, are destroyed, 
whereas others are more easily dissolved into the 
liquid. Roughly speaking, a cup of tea is composed of 
several hundred active substances. While tea leaves 
contain the components found in every living organism 
(proteins, carbohydrates, amino acids and the like) 
and those characteristic of plant species (such as 
chlorophyll and cellulose), it is the presence of poly- 
phenols and alkaloids that gives an infusion of tea 
leaves such astonishing properties. 
POLYPHENOLS 
Polyphenols, as their name suggests, are a combina- 
tion of several groups of phenols that make up a 
family of organic molecules present throughout the 
plant kingdom. In tea, these phenols are found in the 
catechins, of which epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) is 
the main component. Commonly known as “tannins” 
and having astringent properties that make living tis- 
sues contract, these polyphenols give tea its astrin- 
gency, strength and thickness. 
ALKALOIDS 
Alkaloids are naturally occurring heterocyclic organic 
molecules that contain nitrogen and are found in 
J. Blofeld, Thé et tao 
amino acids. Three kinds of alkaloids are found in tea, 
the main one being caffeine. 
THEINE OR CAFFEINE? 
Theine and caffeine are the same alkaloid. Recognized 
in 1838 as being identical to the caffeine in coffee, 
the caffeine in tea is, nonetheless, distinguished from 
the caffeine in coffee because it forms different bonds 
with other substances, which changes how it affects 
the body. When tea leaves are infused, the caffeine 
combines with tannins, which attenuate and stabilize 
its effect. Tannins prevent caffeine from being released 
rapidly, so it is absorbed over a longer period of 
time. 
The effect, therefore, lasts longer and is more regular. 
In tea, caffeine stimulates the central nervous sys- 
tem and the cardiovascular system by enlarging the 
diameter of the vessels in the cerebral cortex. When 
ingested in coffee, caffeine has a direct effect on blood 
circulation through the coronary system, stimulating an 
acceleration of the heart rate. In other words, tea is a 
more of a stimulant than an excitant. It sharpens the 
mind, increases concentration, eliminates fatigue and 
enhances intellectual acuity. 
THE NUTRIENTS PRESENT IN TEA 
Tea leaves are 20 percent proteins, but only 4 percent 
of those proteins, present in the form of albumin, are 
water soluble. In addition, just like the proteins, only a 
small percentage of the carbohydrates in tea are sol- 
uble in water: Just one carbohydrate, monosaccharide, 

TEA 
AND
HEA
is soluble, making tea a low-calorie drink that contains 
also contains many vitamins (including A, B complex, 
only one or two calories per cup. Tea also contains 
E, K and flavonoids), about 30 minerals (including po- 
some 20 amino acids, including theanine, which ac- 
__tassium, phosphorus, iron, magnesium and calcium), 
counts for 50 to 60 percent of these amino acids.Tea 
chlorophyll and hundreds of aromatic components. 
WATER QUALITY 
Since 99 percent of a cup of tea consists of water, the quality of the water used is 
extremely important. Ancient Chinese masters used to amuse themselves by trying to guess the source of the 
water used to infuse their tea, and the choice of water is still critically important today. Lu Yu claimed that “the most 
suitable water is from the same region as the tea,’ as when in contact with the water that the tree drank all its life, the 
leaves will reveal their true nature.A rather utopian ideal today, yet the use of high-quality water is strongly advised. 
Hard, limestone-rich water should be avoided, 
as should water laden with calcium oxide, magnesium, 
lead or chlorine 
(which can cause a bleach aftertaste). 
The ideal water is pH neutral and contains few minerals. 
249 

TEA 
AND 
HEALTH 
The Virtues of Tea 
“Tea comforts the spirit, banishes passivity, lightens the body and adds sparkle to the eyes.” 
Ever since Shen Nong discovered the stimulating 
and detoxifying properties of tea some 4,000 years 
ago, humans have been interested in its medicinal 
properties. It is these properties that first made it 
popular, at a time when it was considered a medicine. 
It was 
thought 
that 
its bitter 
taste 
stimulated 
wakefulness, good overall health and the acquisition 
of great wisdom. In Chinese medicine, during the Tang 
and Song dynasties, the medicinal effects of tea were 
recognized more and more. It was recommended 
to cure and prevent various ills, such as headaches, 
dark thoughts and bad digestion as well as to dissolve 
fats. A few centuries later Li Shizhen (1518-1593), 
physician and author of Compendium of Materia 
Medica, claimed that tea could regulate the body's 
internal temperature, calm anxiety, dissolve fats and 
improve concentration. 
Although the stimulating, diuretic and antibacterial 
properties 
oftea were recognized by Chinese medicine 
a very long time ago, it is only recently that modern 
science has confirmed these benefits. Because of 
its antioxidant effects, the health benefits of tea are 
arousing a lot of interest in the medical community, 
particularly in the areas of cancer prevention and 
the treatment of degenerative and cardiovascular 
Shen Nong, Medicinal Herbs 
diseases. Today, we no longer believe that tea is an 
elixir of immortality or has the mystical powers 
attributed to it by the Taoists of yore. However, it has 
virtues that contribute to longevity by stimulating 
heart function, strengthening the immune system and 
preventing cellular mutations. 
Of course, processing brings out new chemical 
elements in the leaves, which change their taste as 
well as their properties, and so each family of tea has 
its own specific qualities. 
THE PROPERTIES OF WHITE TEA 
Refreshing and thirst quenching, in China, white tea 
is consumed mainly in the summer According to 
Chinese medicine, it helps to counteract excessive 
heat and alleviates the symptoms of menopause. 
THE PROPERTIES OF GREEN TEA 
According to recent studies, green tea appears to 
contain a higher number of polyphenols than other 
tea families, making it increasingly popular in the West 
over the last few years. Thanks to its antioxidant 
properties, green tea could prevent certain. forms of 
cancer Also said to enhance intellectual performance, 
green tea contains more iron, vitamins and catechins 
ANTIOXIDANTS 
Studied for their antioxidant effects, the polyphenols contained in tea have been the sub- 
ject of much research in recent years. Research shows that the abundant presence of catechins (molecules belong- 
ing to the polyphenols group) in green tea may act as a powerful antioxidant (thereby neutralizing free radicals), 
which may help prevent the effects of aging and the onset of illnesses such as cancer and cardiovascular disease. 
Polyphenols protect the body against cell damage, in particular, by fighting the breakdown of cellular membranes 
caused by various stressors (smoke, pollution, viruses, etc.). They may also prevent the development of the metas- 
tases that lead to cancerous tumors. 

THE MAJOR PROPERTIES OF TEA 
Here are some of the many beneficial properties attributed to tea: 
* 
It supports the heart system. 
¢ 
It activates circulation. 
* 
It helps detoxification and the elimination of toxins. 
* 
It fights hypertension. 
* 
It reduces fatigue. 
* 
It slows the aging process. 
* 
It helps prevent certain types of cancer. 
* 
It helps digestion. 
* 
It reduces cholesterol. 
* 
It balances body temperature. 
* 
It strengthens the immune system. 
* 
It enhances concentration. 
In general, drinking tea regularly reduces the risk of coronary disease and helps strengthen vascular walls while 
increasing the elasticity of blood vessels. It also slows the absorption of sugars and fats, controls hypertension and 
helps prevent food poisoning. 
than black tea. The dehydration method used in the 
processing of green tea produces a higher polyphenol 
content in the leaves. 
THE PROPERTIES OF WULONG TEA 
Regular consumption of wulongtea 
(just over 4 ounce/ 
8 grams per day) is said to have a slimming effect by 
stimulating the metabolizing of lipids. Its relaxing, anti- 
stress, even euphoric effect is said to be due to the 
high concentration of aromatic oils, which are drawn 
out from the leaves during rolling. 
THE PROPERTIES OF BLACK TEA 
The enzymatic oxidation undergone by the leaves 
during the processing of black tea converts some of 
the catechins into theaflavins and thearubigins and 
destroys some of the vitamins. On the other hand, 
the caffeine in black tea is released more rapidly into 
the bloodstream over a shorter period compared to 
green tea, as oxidation partially separates it from the 
tannins. This means that black tea is more effective as 
a physical stimulant than green tea. 
THE PROPERTIES OF PU ER TEA 
Because of its specific properties, Pu er tea has long 
been used as a dietary supplement by many nomadic 
tribes and ethnic groups living in regions of AsiaAs 
these people ate mostly very fatty yak meat, tea 
allowed them to balance their diet, counteracting 
the fat. Today the purging qualities of Pu er teas are 
recognized as helping specifically to regulate the body 
and stimulate digestion. Pu er also helps eliminate 
cholesterol from the body. 
IRON ABSORPTION 
Tea facilitates digestion by stimulating the elimination of fats. On the other hand, it 
can inhibit the absorption of iron and calcium from foods. For this reason, drinking tea with meals is not recom- 
mended, nor is drinking tea during the half hour before or after a meal. 
251 

252 
Biochemical Analyses of 35 Teas 
Tea is extremely popular because of its health benefits. 
Given the number of studies on the multiple virtues of 
tea that have been published over the last few years, 
tea enthusiasts have every right to ask what all this 
really means. Are white teas really lower in caffeine 
than black teas? Do the different methods of infusion 
currently used change the concentration of certain 
components of tea? Do successive infusions of the 
same leaves produce the same caffeine content as 
one long infusion? 
Until now, most studies only looked at generalities 
and did not reflect the diversity to be found in 
the world of tea. In addition, the results obtained 
by scientists 
in a laboratory did not necessarily 
correspond to the results obtained by a tea enthusiast 
at home, in the context of daily consumption. 
And 
so, wanting to know more about the 
benefits of certain teas, the team at Camellia Sinensis 
asked TransBlOTech to measure the concentrations 
of various components present in an infusion in order 
to evaluate their attributes. 
TransBlOTech 
is a center for research 
and 
biotechnology 
transfers. 
The 
center 
supports 
innovation 
in companies working in the areas of 
health food products, functional foods, nutraceuticals, 
cosmeceuticals and life sciences. It provides services 
in research and development, technical analysis and 
assistance, especially for clients who want to use the 
technologies it develops. Thanks to its cutting-edge 
research facilities, TransBlIO Tech is able to offer services 
relating to the characterization and assaying of active 
ingredients, bioactive molecules and metabolites. In 
addition, they can provide services relating to animal 
genotyping, validation of antimicrobial power, cellular 
biology and microbiology. The various technological 
platforms that TransBlOTech has developed are linked 
to the product regulation imposed by Health Canada. 
The researchers in immunology and pharmacol- 
ogy at the center participate in preclinical studies. 
They measure the inflammatory response of differ- 
ent types of human and animal cells when they are 
brought into contact with a bioactive molecule. They 
also evaluate the effect of various molecules on the 
immune system. Their experience in pharmacology 
also allows them to analyze the power of various 
molecules to penetrate the intestinal wall as well as 
their bioavailability and their absorption by the body. 
In addition, they conduct research into pharmacokin- 
etics, pharmacodynamics and metabolomics. 
The team at Camellia Sinensis Tea House asked 
TransBlIOTech 
to 
analyze 
the 
concentration 
of 
certain molecules present in the infusion of 
the leaves 
of more than 30 different teas. We should stress 
that in carrying out their analyses the researchers 
respected 
the 
conditions 
of 
preparation 
we 
prescribed and also that they analyzed the liquid 
of infused teas rather than the composition of raw 
leaves. For each tea the volume of tea to water and 
the required water temperature were respected. 
In addition, a teapot suited to each type of tea was 
used, as well as bottled spring water (pH 7.22). Thus, 
the results obtained in this scientific context are a 
true reflection of the tea in the cup of a consumer 
who follows the same directions. 
Of course, these results are not to be considered 
as absolute but rather on a comparative basis. As 
with a tea’s flavor the concentration of caffeine and 
antioxidants can vary depending on where the tea was 
grown, the climate in which the trees grew, the picking 
season and the method of processing used. The size 
and grading of the leaves can also affect the results. 
It should also be noted that the infusions studied 
were prepared in duplicate and analyzed in triplicate. 
The results presented are the average finding, 

Three factors were targeted: caffeine concen- 
tration, catechin concentration and the antioxidant 
power of the tea. 
The method chosen for the analysis of caffeine 
and catechin concentration was liquid chromatog- 
raphy. This technique separates a mixture by forcing 
it through a solid fixture (separating column) using 
variable ratios of liquid (mobile phase). Circulating 
through the solid element at varying speeds accord- 
ing to their affinity with the separating column, the 
molecules of the mixture emerge separated. Among 
other things, liquid chromatography can determine 
the concentrations of the various molecular elements 
that make up a liquid. 
Three techniques were used to analyze the anti- 
oxidant power of tea. 
First, a large number of teas were sorted using 
a method (ABTS-TEAC) that provides a rapid com- 
parison of a high number of samples of the same kind. 
Later, the ORAC method, recognized in the food 
sector, was used to quantify the antioxidant power 
of each tea. The advantage of this method is that it 
gives a standardized and widely accepted measure of 
antioxidant power, making it easier to compare dif- 
ferent foods. 
Finally,a more innovative method, called HORAC, 
was used to study the antioxidants contained in cer 
tain specific teas. By reproducing the defense mech- 
anism against certain free radicals (hydroxyls), this 
further analysis allowed us to validate the results we 
obtained previously. 
CAFFEINE 
The family of xanthines, whose chemical structure 
is illustrated below, includes a well-known element: 
caffeine, 
or 
1|,3,7-trimethylxanthine. Among 
the 
everyday natural products that contain caffeine are 
coffee, tea, maté, guarana and cocoa. 
Theobromine, or 3,7-dimethylxanthine, 
is the 
main alkaloid present in cocoa, whereas theophylline, 
or |,3-dimethylxanthine, is found in small quantities in 
tea. These three molecules, which have similar chem- 
ical structures, are diuretic and act as psychotropic 
stimulants. 
The table on the following page shows the caf- 
feine content of a |-cup (250 ml) serving of vari- 
ous teas infused using the method appropriate for 
each one. 
Caffeine: Dye Sees ise = Cae 
Theobromine: R, = lt R, = Be = CH, 
Theophylline: R, = R, = CHR, =a 
Source: Merck Index 
x 
= 
J 
< 
ee 
ee 
Q 
Z 
< 
< 
a 
aa 
253 

< 
= 
_ 
< 
Ae 
= 
=) 
Zz 
< 
< 
ae 
e 
254 
TABLE |: Concentration of caffeine in various infusions of tea 
(caffeine content by liquid chromatography—UV) 
All teas were infused in a teapot and 2 cups 
(500 ml) water, except Matcha Sendo, which was 
Producing 
whisked in a bowl with a /2 cup (100 ml) water 
Concentration 
Tea 
Family 
country 
Quantity 
Temperature 
Length of infusion 
of caffeine 
Matcha Sendo 
Green 
Japan —| "fo 02. (1.5. g)] 167°F (75°C) 
30sec. 
| EIGER 
Darj. Sungma First Flush DJ2 | 
Black 
“India | /e oz. (5 g)] 203°F (95°C)| 
45min 
| EEE 
Xue Ya 
Green 
China | '/s oz. (5 g)| 185°F (85°C) 
5Smin 
| irra 
Tai Ping Hou Kui 
Green 
China | '/e oz. (5 g)| 185°F (85°C) 
6énin 
| Ea 
Bai Hao 
Wulong 
Taiwan | '/e oz. (5 g)]| 203°F (95°C) 
6 min 
Rr 
ae 
Sencha Ashikubo 
Green 
Japan ‘| '/s oz. (5 g)| 167°F (75°C) 
45min 
| SOR 
Long Jing Shi Feng 
Green 
China 
=| '/e oz. (5 g)] 185°F (85°C) 
4.5 min 
| 
48mg | 
Bai Mu Dan Wang 
White 
China | '/s oz. (5 g)| 176°F (80°C) 
6 min 
ne 
Hojicha Shizuoka 
Green 
Japan 
Ife Oz. C 2) 203°F Ce 
45 min 
23 mg 
Kamairicha 
Mr. Chang’s Dong Ding 
Yunnan HongGongFu 
ss 
|| 
Yerba maté 
Bancha Shizuoka 
Anxi Tie Guan Yin 
Bocha 
Rou Gui 
Autumn Darj. Sungma DJ480 | 
Bai Hao Yin Zhen 
Gyokuro Tamahomare 
Sencha Fukamushi Aji 
Ali Shan 1991 Qingxin 
Organic Huiming 
Dragon Pearls jasmine 
Sencha Isagawa 
Mucha Tie Guan Yin 
Yerba mate 
Green 
Wulong 
Green 
Wulong 
Black © 
White 
Green 
Green 
Wulong 
Green 
Green 
Green 
Wulong 
Te 
f 
Taiwan 
Pe 
Ching: 
Brazil 
Japan 
China 
Japan 
China 
India 
China 
Japan 
Japan 
Taiwan 
China 
China 
Japan 
Taiwan 
1% oz. (5 ai 203°F (PS?) 
3.5 min 
/6 oz. (5 g)| 203°F (95°C) 
4.5 min 
/6 oz. (5 g)| 185°F (85°C) 
4.5 min 
/6 oz. (5 g)} 185°F (85°C) 
45 min 
/¢ oz. (5 g)} 185°F (85°C) 
4.5 min 
/6 oz. (5 g)| 203°F (95°C) 
4.5 min 
/6 oz. (5 g)| 1 76°F (80°C) 
3.5 min 
/6 oz. (5 g)} 203°F (95°C) 
6 min 
Doz Gg 203 05°C) 2S Sb iin 
/6 oz. (5 g)} 167°F (75°C) 
6 min 
'f6 oz. (5 g)} 149°F (65°C) 
4.5 min 
/¢ oz. (5 g)} 167°F (75°C) 
4.5 min 
/6 oz. (5 g)| 203°F (95°C) 
4.5 min 
"le oz. (5 g)} 185°F (85°C)] 
4.5 min 
'f6 oz. (5 g)} 185°F (85°C) 
3.5 min 
'/e oz. (5 g)} 167°F (75°C) 
3.5 min 
'/¢ 02. (5 g)| 203°F (95°C) 
4.5 min 
22 mg 
17 mg 
17 mg 
o 
= 3 
Sb EREREEEREEE
13 mg 
13 mg 
12 mg 
12 mg 

VARIATIONS ON TEA 
The analysis of the caffeine content of various types of tea leads us to believe that 
there is no real consistency in this area. In every tea family, some teas contain very little caffeine while others 
(exeyate-linle- i 
koyer 
Among the teas analyzed, it is surprising to find that 
some black teas (Assam Banaspaty, Yunnan Hong 
Gong Fu) do not contain a higher concentration of 
caffeine than many green (and white!) teas, which are 
usually thought to be less stimulating. 
This result can 
perhaps be explained by the fact that the oxidation 
undergone by black tea helps to reduce the caffeine 
content. (Note that the Darjeeling Sungma First 
Flush DJ2 underwent low oxidation.) Given the low 
number of black teas that were tested for this study, 
we may conclude that further analysis would be 
necessary to confirm this supposition. 
CAFFEINE CONCENTRATION 
ACCORDING TO LENGTH OF INFUSION 
Wanting to know more about the phenomenon 
of the dissolution of caffeine in tea, we ordered an 
analysis of the length of infusion. 
We chose a tea with 
a high caffeine content, Long Jing Shi Feng tea, and 
had it prepared according to a standard method of 
infusion: '/e ounce (5 g) of tea in 2 cups (500 ml) of 
water at |85°F (85°C). 
The graph below shows that a large amount of 
the caffeine is released during the first three minutes 
of infusion. It also shows that after six minutes of 
infusion, even if the curve tends to level off, caffeine is 
still being released. 
GRAPH I: Dissolution of the caffeine contained in the leaves of 
e 
E 
x 
100 
Bray 
£90 
§ 
= 
80 
oO 
S 
70 
Ee 
° 
xe 
60 
ys} 8 50 
iw 
x 
40 
oO 
2 
3 
30 
a 
Y 
20 
we 
(e) 
jo) 
oo 
§6=—«dt'O 
§ 
5 
0 
5 
a 
Long Jing Shi Feng tea in relation to the length of infusion. 
Length of infusion (min) 
255 

256 
To better understand the effects of time and 
of a single tea measured according to two different 
temperature on the infusion of tea leaves, we asked 
methods of infusion (see Tables 4 and 5), Finally, we 
for several analyses under varying infusion conditions 
measured the caffeine content of a second infusion of 
(see Tables 2 and 3).We then had the caffeine content — the same tea leaves (see Table 6). 
TABLE 2: Concentration of caffeine in organic Huiming tea in two infusions of different duration 
(caffeine content by liquid chromatography — UY) 
Both infusions were made in a teapot 
in 2 cups (500 ml) of water. Fresh leaves 
Concentration 
Producing 
were used for each infusion. 
of caffeine in 
Tea 
Family 
country 
Infusion 
Quantity 
Temperature 
Length of infusion 
| cup (250 ml) 
Organic Huiming 
 |Green| China 
single 
"fe oz. (5 g)|I 85°F (85°C) | 4.5 min | 
13 mg 
single 
'/s oz. (5 g)|185°F (85°C) OEE | = 
21 mg 
TABLE 3: Concentration of caffeine in organic Huiming tea 
using two infusions at different temperatures 
Both infusions made in a teapot in 
2 cups (500 ml) water. Fresh leaves 
Concentration 
Producing 
used for each infusion. 
of caffeine in 
Tea 
Family 
country 
Infusion 
Quantity 
Temperature 
Length of infusion | cup (250 ml) 
Organic Huiming 
| 
Green | China 
single 
'/e oz. (5 g) 
45 min 
| 
13 mg 
single 
'/e oz. (5 g) 
45 min 
203°F (95°C) 
19 mg 
TABLE 4: Concentration of caffeine in Long Jing Shi Feng infused two different ways 
One single infusion made in a teapot using 
fresh leaves and 2 cups (500 ml) water. Three 
successive infusions made in a gaiwan each using the same 
Producing 
leaves and ¥2 cup (100 ml) water. 
Concentration 
Tea 
Family 
country 
Infusion 
Quantity 
Temperature 
Length of infusion _ of caffeine 
Long Jing Shi Feng | Green | China 
single 
fe oz. (5 g) |185°F (85°C)| 
4.5 min 
19mg (in 2 cups/S00 
mi) 
first 
'/7 oz. (4g) 
|185°F (85°C)} 
45 sec 
29 mg 
(in scant 4 cup/100 mi) 
second 
same leaves 
|!85°F (85°C)} 
45 sec 
29 mg (in 
scant 4 cup/10 
mi) 
as |st 
third 
same leaves as |!85°F (85°C)| 
60 sec 
24 mg (in 
scant Ys 
cup/100 
mi) 
Ist and 2nd 

TABLE 5: Concentration of caffeine in Sencha Ashikubo tea infused using two different techniques 
One single infusion made in teapot in 
2 cups (500 ml) water. Two subsequent 
infusions each using the same leaves in scant /2 cup 
Producing 
(100 ml) water using senchado technique. 
Concentration 
Tea 
Family 
country 
Infusion 
Quantity 
Temperature Length ofinfusion 
of caffeine 
Sencha Ashikubo | Green | China 
single 
"fe oz. (5 g) 
L67°F Za°C) ) 4.5 min, | 94 ma Gn2 cups00 mp 
first 
7 OZ, G g) 
| 67°F @Wa76) 
45 sec 
16 mg (in scant 4 cup/|00 ml) 
second 
same leaves as Ist] 167°F (75°C) | 20 sec} 
téme in scant 
% 
cup/i00 ml) 
TABLE 6: Concentration of caffeine in two infusions of Sencha Ashikubo tea 
Two successive infusions made in a teapot using the 
Producing 
same leaves and 2 cups (500 ml) of water. 
Concentration 
Tea 
Family 
country 
Infusion 
Quantity 
Temperature Length of infusion 
of caffeine 
Sencha Ashikubo | 
Green| japan 
first 
Vooz. © gy 
SN67F US Gi 4 
5imain 
96 mg 
second 
same leaves as Ist J167°F (75°C)] 
3.5 min 
83 mg 
It is surprising to note that a second infusion of the 
that, as shown by the table above, this practice may 
same leaves of Sencha Ashikubo still contains alot of _ be futile. If they wish to avoid the stimulating effect of 
caffeine after a first infusion of 4/2 minutes. Enthusi- 
tea, they would be wiser to choose a less caffeine-rich 
asts who try to “decaffeinate” their tea by throwing __ tea rather than wasting their first infusion. 
away the first infusion will be disappointed to see 
TEA 
AND
HEA
YERBA MATE 
ff they look at Table |, on page 254, yerba maté drinkers will no doubt be surprised to learn 
that this drink is low in caffeine. 
The explanation probably lies in the customary method of infusion, which is quite 
different from the one used here. Usually, according to individual taste, a large quantity of yerba maté, about 7/4 to 
13/4 ounces (20 to 50 g), is infused, whereas only '/e ounce (5 g) was used for the purpose of analysis. 

< 
Be 
a 
Zz 
< 
< 
ANTIOXIDANT POWER 
As we have seen, the antioxidants found naturally in 
food can help to neutralize some of the free radicals 
in an organism. These are unstable molecules that 
try to stabilize by attaching themselves to other mol- 
ecules in the metabolic system. This damages the 
healthy molecules and causes them to deteriorate. 
The body contains a certain stock of antioxidant 
molecules that counter the effects of free radicals by 
neutralizing them. Unfortunately, this stock is some- 
times insufficient. Therefore, the daily consumption 
of foods that are high in antioxidants can prevent or 
delay the damage to human cells and tissues caused 
by free radicals. ' 
The mechanisms of neutralization of free rad- 
icals are so complex that it is difficult to undertake a 
simple analysis to determine the ability of a particular 
food to contribute to the process. That is why vari- 
ous complementary tests (ABTS, ORAC, HORAC, 
NORAC, SORAC and SOAC) have been developed 
to mimic the trapping mechanisms of radicals. These 
tests provide an overview of the ability of a food to 
prevent various diseases associated with the presence 
of free radicals in the human body. The polyphenolic 
components of plants are recognized for their anti- 
oxidant properties. Many studies recently carried out 
on tea have shown its strong bioactive and antioxidant 
potential due to its high polyphenol content. Some 
studies have shown, for example, that the polyphenols 
in green tea have a protective effect against the 
stressors associated with Parkinson's disease. 
To determine the antioxidant ability of the teas 
selected, we first used a rapid screening process 
(ABTS-TEAC). It is important to note that although 
this method allows a comparison between samples of 
a similar type, it doesn't permit a comparison of the 
results obtained with those from other foods. Another 
technique that we will see later on does allow this kind 
of comparison. 
TABLE 7: Concentration of antioxidants measured by means of the ABTS-TEAC3 method? 
All teas were infused in a teapot with 2 cups 
(500 ml) of water, except the Matcha which was 
Concentration of 
Producing 
whisked in a bowl with 100 ml of water 
antioxidants in 
Tea 
Family 
country 
Quantity | Temperature 
Length of infusion 
| cup (250 ml) 
Matcha Sendo 
Green 
Japan — | 
"fo oz. (1.5 g)|167°F (75°C) 
30 sec 
Lu An Gua Pian 
Green 
China 
'/6 oz. (5 g) |185°F (85°C) 
4 min 
Sencha Keikoku 
Green 
Japan 
fe oz. (5 2) 16PF Ga 
4 min 
Long Jing Shi Feng 
Green 
China | '/s02.(5 g) |176°F (80°C)} 
4.5 min 
Anji Bai Cha 
Green 
China | '/s oz. (5 g) }185°F (85°C) 
6 min 
|. CHUNG, H.Y., T-YoKozawA, D.Y, SOUNG, |.S, Kye, J. K No, and B.S, Baek. Peroxynitrite -Scavenging Activity of Green Tea Tannin,” |. 
Agric. Food 
Chem., 46, 4484 (1998). 
2, BALUCHNEJADMOJARAD, T. 
and M. ROGHANI."'Green Tea Polyphenol Epigallocatechin-3-gallate Attenuates Behavioral Abnormality in Hemi- 
parkinsonian Rat,’ Iranian Biomedical Journal, 10, 203 (2006), 
MANDEL, S.A., Y AvRAMOVICH- TIROSH, L. REZNICHENKO, H, ZHENG, O.Weinres, [Amit and M.B.Youpm.' Multifunctional Activities of Green Tea Cat- 
echins in Neuroprotection: Modulation of Cell Survival Genes, Iron-Dependent Oxidative Stress and PKC Signaling Pathway;’ Neurosignals, | 4, 
46 (2005). 
3. ABTS is a chemical compound used to evaluate the antioxidant capacity of a food substance, 
D 58 
TEAC stands for Trolox equivalent antioxidant capacity, a unit of measurement used to express the results of antioxidant activity 
caused by the referenced compound, namely Trolox, which is a water-soluble equivalent of vitamin E, 

TABLE 7 (continued) 
All teas were infused in a teapot with 2 cups 
(500 ml) of water, except the Matcha which was 
Concentration of 
Producing 
whisked in a bowl with 100 ml of water: 
antioxidants in 
Tea 
Family 
country 
Quantity 
Temperature 
Length of infusion 
| cup (250 ml) 
‘TaiPingHouKui =| Green| China ["/s0z.G9)|185°F (85°C) 6 min | (EOPRERTES 
ucrngitchs = ad 8] Green Fie ae ana 
5°F 
( 
Smin 
| PERSE 
: 
aFirst Flush DJ3 | Black | Ind 
95°C) 
35 min 
| RPE 
Gat = a ?< 
Green a 
‘eg | "e0z.( g)} 
oot 
; 
,150 umoles 
os | Green | Japan |'/s 02.6 8) esr eso] 4 15 min | 
Bai Mu Dan Wang 
White 
China 
"fe oz. (5 g)1 1 76°F (80°C)} 
~~ 
& min 
Bai Hao 
Wulong 
"fe oz. (5 g)}203°F (95°C)} 
= 6 min 
| 
a 
oe 
; 
» 
975 umoles 
Mr. GES — Ome 
mil 
nn 
Sree = 
an 
| ‘46 oz. (5 g)} Or 
F 
(7 °C) 
fe 
in if 900 moles 
Taiwan 
875 pmoles 
yy 
UC) 
3.5 min 
750 moles 
203 (95°C) 
Ko72e (526) 
: 2) 176°F (80°C) 
: 
Bes 
AOE & eo 
Shan Lin Xi 
Bai Hao Yin Zhen 
‘XinYang 
Mao 
Jian 
S) 
625 umoles 
i 
575 umoles 
575 ymoles 
Anxi Tie Guan Yin 
E 
Smi 
550 umoles 
Organic Huiming =| Green 
| 
China 
io | oe 
Mucha Tie Guan Yin 
; 
450 moles 
425 moles 
425 umoles 
375 moles 
. 375 moles 
, 
203°F 
(5 
| 
45min 
|G 
hea a]ierFOO] sen | ER 
Chine 
oz 5 [185% 5°] 35min 
SeaslianvAb | 
Green | Japan 
Dragon Pearls jasmine | Green | 
259 

TABLE 8: Concentration of antioxidants resulting from two successive infusions of four and six minutes 
compared to the concentration resulting from a single infusion of 10 minutes 
The four teas were infused in a teapot in 2 cups (500 ml) 
water. The two successive infusions were made with the 
TEAC 
Producing 
same leaves and the single infusion with fresh leaves. 
concentration in 
Teas 
Family 
country 
Quantity 
Temperature 
Length of infusion 
| cup (250 ml) 
Lu An Gua Pian 
Green 
China 
First infusion 
"fe oz. (5 g) 
185°F (85°C) 
4 min 
2,500 umoles 
Second infusion 
same leaves 
185°F (85°C) 
6 min 
1,625 moles 
Single infusion 
"fe oz. (5 g) 
185°F (85°C) 
10 min 
2,925 moles 
Sencha Asamushi Keikoku 
Green 
Japan 
First infusion 
"le oz. (5 g) 
KG/ “Fas 
@) 
4 min 
2,375 ymoles 
Second infusion 
same leaves 
675 G56) 
6 min 
1,025 ymoles 
Single infusion 
'/e oz. (5 g) 
67°F (75°C) 
10 min 
2,750 ymoles 
Shan Lin Xi 
Wulong | Taiwan 
First infusion 
"le oz. (5 g) 
203°R 9576) 
4 min 
750 umoles 
Second infusion 
same leaves 
2OSTE (57) 
6 min 
|,050 ymoles 
Single infusion 
'fe oz. (5 g) 
PROBS Fel eis) 
Ga 
10 min 
1,725 moles 
Darj. Singell First Flush DJ2 
Black 
India 
First infusion 
'fe oz. (5 g) 
2OS2EKIS<S) 
4 min 
375 moles 
Second infusion 
same leaves 
203" P9536) 
6 min 
600 moles 
Single infusion 
'/e oz. (5 g) 
2032s) 
10 min 
425 moles 
TABLE 9: Concentration of antioxidants measured by the ABTS method in Trolox equivalents 
(TEAC) in two teas infused at various temperatures 
Both teas were infused in a teapot 
and 2 cups (500 ml) water. Fresh leaves 
TEAC 
Producing 
used for each infusion. 
concentration in 
Teas 
Family 
country 
Quantity 
Temperature 
Length of infusion 
| cup (250 ml) 
Organic Huiming 
Green 
China 
Single infusion 
/6 oz. (5 g)| 
185°F (85°C) 
4.5 min 
500 umoles 
Single infusion 
/6 oz. (5 g)| 203°F (95°C) 
4.5 min 
725 umoles 
Gyokuro Tamahomare 
Green 
Japan 
Single infusion 
/6 02. (5 g)| 
149°F (65°C) 
4.5 min 
375 moles 
Single infusion 
/6 02. (5 g)} 
185°F (85°C) 
4.5 min 
525 umoles 
Single infusion 
/¢ oz. (5 g)} 212°F (100°C)} 
4.5 min 
325 moles 
RR 
ESS 
SSS SS 
260 

These analyses 
lead 
us to believe that it is 
usually possible to obtain a higher concentration of 
antioxidants by increasing the infusion temperature. 
However, the example of the Gyokuro Tamahomare 
tea infused at 212°F (100°C) tells us that, in this case, 
boiling water reduces the concentration of antioxidants. 
Following the ABTS-TEAC analyses that allowed 
us to compare several samples, we pursued our 
study using two other methods of scientific analysis: 
the ORAC and HORAC tests. These tests determine 
whether a food neutralizes the peroxyl and hydroxyl 
radicals often associated with pathologies of the 
human body. We should point out that the ORAC 
test is recognized in the food sector the HORAC 
test, because of its innovative character, is less well 
known. 
TABLE 10: Concentration of antioxidants measured by the 
ORAC method in Trolox equivalents (TEAC) 
All the teas were infused in a teapot and 2 cups (500 ml) water, 
except for the Matcha Sendo, which was whisked in a bowl 
TEAC 
Producing 
containing a 
scant /2 cup (100 ml) water. 
concentration in 
Teas 
Family 
country 
Quantity 
Temperature 
Length of infusion 
| cup (250 ml) 
MatchaSendo 
== —|_ Green. | 
_ Japan 
|"/o0z.(I.5g)| 167°F(75°C)| 
30sec —| 3,100 moles 
‘Long jingShiFeng 
= 
= 
| Green. 
| China | 
'e0z. (5g) | 185°F(85°C)| 
min 
| 2,425 umoles 
‘AnjiBaiCha 
== = —' | Green. | China | ‘oz (Sg) | 
176°F (80°C)] 45min 
| 
1,175 ymoles 
‘Kamairicha 
=== 
| Green 
| Japan’ 
| ‘soz (5g) | 176°F (80°C)| 3.5 min 
| 1,050 umoles- 
Darj.Sungma First Flush DJ2 | Black | India | Yeoz(5g) | 203°F(95°C)] 45min | 
750 umoles — 
Mr. Chang’s Dong Ding 
Wulong 
Taiwan 
16 Oz. (0's) |= 2038°F (5°€) 
4.5 min 
550 umoles 
‘Assam Banaspaty =|‘ Black_ | India| fs oz. g) | 203°F (95°C)| 45min | 500 umoles 
‘SenchaAshikubo ==— 
|| 
Green. |_ Japan’ | 
‘soz (Sg) | 167°F(75°C)| 
35min 
| 425 umoles 
Bai Hao Yin Zhen 
White 
China 
ig oz. (oe) | 167°F 75-C) 
6 min 
300 moles 
Dragon Pearls jasmine 
| Green 
| 
China | '/eoz.(5g) 
| 185°F(85°C)| 
3.5min 
| 
150 umoles — 
As the comparison of these results with those for oth er foods is not obvious, Graph 2 on the following page 
presents a comparison of the ORAC antioxidant values of various common beverages. 
The data used for this table 
were drawn from the data bank of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
x 
eS 
eat 
< 
ha 
= 
=) 
Zz 
< 
< 
aa) 
= 
261 

GRAPH 2: Comparison of the ORAC values of various common beverages 
5000 
4500 
= 4000 
= 
2 3500 
a 
< 3000 
an 
3 2500 
£ 
2 2000 
§ 1500 
O 
2 
© 
1000 
500 
0 
Darj. Sungma 
Tomato or 
Long Jing Shi 
Matcha 
First Flush 
Kamairicha 
Anji Bai Cha 
vegetable 
Cranberry 
Feng 
Strawberry 
Sendo 
Red Grape 
Cs 
black tea 
black tea 
green tea 
juice 
Juice 
green tea 
juice 
green tea 
juice 
— 
Beverage 
< 
<3) 
x 
= 
is 
Table 11: Concentration of antioxidants measured by the HORAC 
< 
method in caffeic acid equivalents (CAE*) 
ae 
All teas infused 
i 
d 2 cups (500 
ml) 
eee 
teas Infused 
ina teapot an 
cups 
mi) 
water, 
= 
except for the Matcha, which was whisked in a bowl with 
umoles 
Producing 
a scant 2 cup (100 ml) water. 
CAE/cup 
Tea 
Family 
country 
Quantity 
Temperature 
Length of infusion 
250 ml 
Matcha Sendo 
Green 
Japan 
'/0 oz. (1.5 g)| 
167°F (75°C) 
30 sec 
200 moles 
Long Jing Shi Feng 
Green 
China 
/6 oz. (5 g) | |185°F (85°C) 
6 min 
175 ymoles 
Anji Bai Cha 
Green 
China 
/6 0z.(5 g) | |176°F (80°C) 
4.5 min 
175 umoles 
Kamairicha 
Green 
Japan 
/s 0z.(5 g) | 176°F (80°C) 
3.5 min 
150 umoles 
Darj. Sungma First Flush DJ2 
Black 
India 
/s oz. (5 g) | 203°F (95°C) 
4.5 min 
125 moles 
Mr Chang’s Dong Ding 
Wulong 
Taiwan 
eon. 3 g) | 203°R (5G) 
4.5 min 
75 ymoles 
Assam Banaspaty 
Black 
India 
/6 oz.(5 g) | 203°F (95°C) 
4.5 min 
75 ymoles 
Sencha Ashikubo 
Green 
Japan 
'f6 oz. (5 g) | 167°F (75°C) 
3.5 min 
25 ymoles 
Bai Hao Yin Zhen 
White 
China 
/6 oz.(5 g) | 167°F (75°C) 
6 min 
125 ymoles 
Dragon Pearls jasmine 
Green 
China 
16 0z.(5 g) | 185°F (85°C) 
3.5 min 
O ymoles 
SA 
SSE 
4. CAE (caffeic acid equivalent): A unit of measure that expresses results in relation to the protection offered by the referenced antioxi- 
dant, in this case, caffeic acid. 
262 

CATECHINS 
The protective and anti-cancer powers attributed 
to tea are mainly due to the presence of a subclass 
of polyphenic 
molecules 
called 
catechins. These 
antioxidants come from the metabolism of the tea 
tree, and they play an important role in the plant's 
defense. The principal catechins found in tea are 
catechin (C), epicatechin (EC), epigallocatechin (EGC), 
epicatechin gallate (ECG) and epigallocatechin gallate 
(EGCG) (see Figure |). These elements represent 
2 percent to 8 percent of the mass of dried leaves. 
The percentage of catechins in tea varies enor- 
mously depending on the method of cultivation of 
the tea trees and the processing of the leaves. As a 
general rule, black tea contains fewer catechins than 
green tea because, as green tea does not undergo 
oxidation, its molecules remain unchanged. That Is 
why we chose to focus our analysis on green teas. 
For comparison purposes we also analyzed two black 
teas, a wulong tea and a white tea. 
(-)-Epicatechin (EC) 
(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) 
Figure |: Principal catechins contained in tea (Source: Sigma-Aldrich) 
263 

TABLE 12: Concentration of catechins in various infusions 
Catechins in | cup (250 ml) of infusion 
Teas 
Family 
Infusion conditions 
EGOG'EGC. 
(Eo. 
£66 
1% 02. 6 Qi 
in 2 cups Ga nf 
for 45 min at 185% (85°C) 
[icf iti fs. 5 
fs 02. 6 i et 60 oo 
for 6 fain ae (OPE £05) 
}s}ofol.| 4 
Mr. Chang’s Dong Ding 
Bai Hao Yin Zhen 
These results confirm the previous findings: teas that showed a high content in the ORAC and HORAC 
264 
tests are also the highest rated in this analysis. 
CONCLUSION 
These exploratory tests allowed 
us to compare 
different types of teas in order to evaluate their 
principal virtues. 
We saw how certain infusion condi- 
tions could give rise to significant differences in the 
concentration of caffeine and antioxidants. 
The many 
results obtained for each family of teas showed us, 
on the one hand, that green teas are not necessarily 
richer in antioxidants than wulong teas, and on the 
other hand, that black teas are not necessarily more 
stimulating than white teas, contrary to certain pre- 
conceived ideas in the world of tea. 
We also note that Chinese green teas show 
very good results. Lu An Gua Pian, Long Jing Shi 
Feng and Anji Bai Cha, three Chinese green teas, 
demonstrate a high concentration of antioxidants 
compared to high-quality Japanese Sencha teas. 
In the light of all this new data, it appears that tea 
still has a lot of surprises in store for us and that we 
are only just beginning to improve our understanding 
of its beneficial effects. Especially since we know that, 
from one year to the next, because of varying wea- 
ther conditions, the regular creation of new cultivars 
and the constant evolution of growing and proces- 
sing techniques, the molecular structure of a tea leaf 
is forever changing. Therefore, we think it wiser to 
advise the tea enthusiast to choose a tea according 
to taste and personal preference, giving first priority 
to sensory pleasure, Therefore, each tea represents 
a thousand remedies and a thousand pleasures. Re- 
member, it is by savoring various types of tea on a 
daily basis that we can best profit from the benefits 
of this mythical drink. 
Enjoy! 
5. Here is the meaning of the acronyms used to indicate the different types of catechin: EGCG: Epigallocatechin-3-gallate; 
EGC: Epigallocatechin; C: Catechin; E: Epicatechin; ECG: Epicatechin-3-gallate 

BIBLIOGRAPHY FOR THE BIOLOGICAL ANALYSES OF TEA 
Acubo, 
A., L. CABRERA, RAMIANO et al.'‘Fruit and Vegetable 
Intakes, Dietary Antioxidant Nutrients, and Total 
Mortality in Spanish Adults: Findings from the Spanish 
Cohort of the European Prospective Investigation into 
Cancer and Nutrition” (EPIC-Spain),” The American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 85, no. 6 (June 2007): 
1634-1642. 
BALUCHNEJADMOJARAD, 
T., and M. ROGHANI. ‘Green Tea 
Polyphenol Epigallocatechin-3-gallate Attenuates 
Behavioral Abnormality in Hemi-parkinsonian Rat,” 
Iranian Biomedical Journal |0, no. 4 (2006): 203-207. 
CHUNG, H.Y., 
T- YoKozawa, D. SOUNG et al. “‘Peroxynitrite- 
Scavenging Activity of Green Tea Tannin,” Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry 46, no. || (1998): 
4484-4486. 
DAI, Q., A.R. BORENSTEIN, 
Y. Wu et al. ‘Fruit and Vegetable 
Juices and Alzheimer's Disease: 
The Kame Project,’ 
American Journal of Medicine |19,no.9 (2006): 75 |— 
759. 
Frei, B., and J.V. HiGDON. “Antioxidant Activity of Tea 
Polyphenols in Vivo: Evidence from Animal Studies,” 
Journal of Nutrition 133, (2003): 3275S—3284S. 
GENKINGER, J. M., E.A. Platz, S.C. HOFFMAN et al. "Fruit, 
Vegetable, and Antioxidant Intake and All-Cause, 
Cancer, and Cardiovascular Disease Mortality in 
a Community-Dwelling Population in Washington 
County, Maryland,’ American Journal of Epiderniology 
160, no. 12 (2004): 1223-1233. 
JENSEN, G.S., X. Wu, K. M. PATTERSON et al.“‘In Vitro and in 
Vivo Antioxidant and Anti-inflammatory Capacities of 
an Antioxidant-Rich Fruit and Berry Juice Blend. Results 
of a Pilot and Randomized, Doubleblinded, Placebo- 
Controlled, Crossover Study,’ Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry 56, no. 18 (2008): 8326-8333. 
MANDEL, S.A., Y. AVRAMOVICH- TIROSH, L. REZNICHENKO et al. 
“Multifunctional Activities of Green Tea Catechins in 
Neuroprotection. Modulation of Cell Survival Genes, 
lron-Dependent Oxidative Stress and PKC Signaling 
Pathway,’ Neurosignals 14, no. |—2 (2005): 46-60. 
MARTIN, 
A., M. SMITH, G. PERRY and J. JOSEPH. 
“Nutritional Antioxidants, Vitamins, Cognition and 
Neurodegenerative Disease,’ Principles of Gender 
Specific Medicine. Edited by Marianne J. Legato, MD. San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2004: 813-823. 
United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural 
Research Service, Nov. 2007 
http://www.ars.usda.gov/SP2UserFiles/Place/ | 2354500/ 
Data/ORAC/ORACO7.pdf 
WéeinBerG, B.A and B.K. Beater. The World of Caffeine: 
The 
Science of the World's Most Popular Drug. New York, NY: 
Routledge, 2001. 
= 
= 
eed 
< 
is) 
se 
a 
Zz 
< 
< 
ful 
oa 
265 

266 
Index 
Africa, 40, 64, 194-195 
African countries, 
194-195 
African tea, 197 
Aging Pu er tea, 7| 
Ali Shan, 224 
Ali Shan (wulong), 150 
Ali Shan mountain, | 34 
Ali Shan mountain garden, | 35 
Alkaloids, 248 
Anhui Province, 
44 
Anhui Province garden, 28-29 
Anhui Province green tea, 78-79 
Anji Bai Cha (green tea), 27, 82, 239 
Antioxidants, 250, 258-262 
Anxi Tie Guan Yin (wulong), 84 
Appellation system, 50-51, 160 
Aracha, 95 
Ashikubo valley garden, |0| 
Assam Banaspaty, 223 
Assam Duflating Orthodox (black tea), 
185 
Assam Khagorijan, 240 
Assam region, |65—| 66 
Autumn Flush Darjeeling, 228 
Bai Hao (wulong), 51! 
Bai Hao Yin Zhen, 232, 239 
Bai Hao Yin Zhen (white tea), 80 
Bai Lin Hong Gong Fu, 235 
Bai Ye tea tree nursery, 27 
Bancha, | 16 
Bancha Shizuoka (green tea), 119 
Beef in wulong tea and suggested tea 
pairings, 230-23 | 
Beni Fouki, | 02 
Black tea, 32, 64-65, 148, 170, | 72-174, 
175,209,25)) 
Bocha, 235 
Bocha (green tea), |23 
Bottled iced tea, 107 
Bubble tea, |29 
Caffeine, 248, 253-257 
Camellia sinensis, 22-23, |69—170 
Catechins, 263-264 
Ceylan Uva Adawatte (black tea), 196 
Chado or way of tea, 109 
Chai, 32, 244 
Chanoyu ceremony, | 10-11 
| 
Cha Xi, 143 
Chen Nen Yu, !46—147 
Chia Yi district, 134 
China, 36-87 
cultivar, 54-55 
gardens and plants, 54-55 
history, 39-4 | 
industry professional Liu Xu, 52-53 
preparation of tea, 72—73 
tea grower Mr He, 76-77 
tea industry, 48-53 
tea processing, 56-77, 80-87 
tea trade, 48 
terroirs, 42-47 
three dynasties, three ages of tea, 39-4 | 
Choco-Chai bowls and suggested tea 
pairings, 222-223 
Chocolate Pu erTea set cream and 
suggested tea pairings, 240-242 
Chushan region grower exhibiting teas, 
129 
Coonoor Garden, Nilgiri Hills, India, 26, 
159 
Covered growing, |02 
Cream pots with Hojicha and suggested 
tea pairings, 236 
Creamy goat milk matcha and suggested 
tea pairings, 226-227 
Créte, Charles-Antoine, 232 
CTC factory, Assam, India, 159 
CTC method of processing, | 74 
Cuiyu, 137 
Cultivar 
China, 54-55 
cultivation for tea, 20-2 | 
Japan, 101-102 
Taiwan, | 37 
Vietnam, 192 
Cultivation for tea, 19-33 
cultivar, 20-2 | 
cuttings, 24-25 
families, 3|—32 
gardens, 24 
picking styles, 30 
plantation maintenance, 27 
smoked teas, 33 
terroir, 2!—23 
tree varieties, 20 
Darjeeling, 158-159, 165, 169-170, 175 
Darjeeling Autumn Gopaldhara Red 
Thunder (black tea), |83 
Darjeeling Avongrove (organic white tea), 
184 
Darjeeling Castleton Second Flush (black 
tea), |83 
Darjeeling Gopaldhara Wonder 
Tea First 
Flush (Wulong), 184 
Darjeeling Samabeong First Flush (organic 
black tea), 182 
Darjeeling Second Flush, 223 
Darjeeling Singell Heritage, | 76 
Darjeeling Sungma First Flush (black tea), 
182 
Demers, Patrice, 240 
Di Stasio, Josée, 223, 224 
Dong Ding (wulong), 149, 227 
Dong Shan (green tea), 83 
Factory producing tea, 56 
Formosa, |27 
Fuding Da Bai, 54 
Fujian Province, 44 
Fukunishi, Kazuyo, 243 
Gabacha (wulong), 152, 228 
Gao Shan Cha, 135 
Gardens. See also specific name 
China, 54-55 
cultivation for tea, 24 
India, |68—170 
Japan, |00—102 
Sri Lanka, 189 
Taiwan, |36 
Vietnam, 192 
Gastronomy and tea, 220-245 
Genmaicha, | 16 
Genmaicha Sencha-Matcha (green tea), 
122 
Gokou, !01 
Gong Fu Cha ceremony, |44—145 
Green tea, 30, 32, 59-61, 78-79, 103-106, 
208, 250 
Green wulong teas processing, | 38-142 
Guan Yin, 54-55 
Gui Fei (wulong), 153 
Gyokuro, | 17 
Gyokuro Tamahomare (green tea), | 20 
Harvests, 45, 102, 169-170. See also 
Picking 
Heputale garden, | 89 
High altitude tea, | 35 
Hojicha, | 16, 228, 236 
Hojicha Shizuoka (roasted green tea), |21 
Hsinchu district, | 34 
Hualien district, | 34 
Huang Shan Mao Feng (green tea), 28-29, 
82, 239 
Huiming (green tea), 83, 243 
Huo Shan Huang 
Ya tea producing factory, 
56 
Iced tea (cold infusion), 245 
Ichigo Daifuku and suggested tea pairings, 
243 
India, |54—185 
gardens and plants, |68—| 70 
history, 156-157 
industry professional Kavi Seth, |62— 
163 
preparation of tea, |77 
processing black teas, |71—175 
tea grower H. K. Panjikar, |80—18| 
tea industry, |58—163 
teas, 182-185 
tea trade, 158 
terroirs, |64—| 67 
trees for tea, 168 
Infusion, 
31, 208-209, 245, 254-257, 264 
lron absorption, 25 | 
Japan, 88-123 
cultivar, 101-102 
gardens and plants, |O0O—|06 
history, 90-9 | 
industry professional M. Sato, 96-97 
preparing tea, 107-1 | | 
processing green teas, 103-106 
tea grower Wataru Sugiyama, | 14-115 

tea industry, 94-95 
tea masters, 92-93 
tea nomenclature, | |6—| 17 
teas, | 19-123 
tea trade, 94 
terroirs, 98-99 
Jetté, Marc-André, 238 
Jin Shuan, 137 
Jun Shan Yin Zhen (yellow tea), 80 
Kabusecha, | | 7, 227 
Kabusecha Kawase (green tea), |22 
Kagoshima prefecture, 99 
Kamairicha (green tea), 123, 224 
Kenya, 194, 197 
Kenya Kangaita (black tea), 197 
Kyoto prefecture, 99 
Kyusu teapots, 109, 204 
Laprise, Normand, 23 | 
Li Shan (wulong), 151 
Li Shan Mountain garden, |35 
Long Jing, 54, 224 
Long Jing Shi Feng (green tea), 81 
Lot concept of processing, | 74 
Lu An Gua Pian (green tea), 30, 232 
Lu Yu, 40-4 | 
Malawi, 194-196 
Malawi tea garden, 195 
Matcha tea, 112,113, 116, 117,243 
Mellowing process of black tea, | 75 
Mi Lan Xiang (wulong), 85 
Mint tea, 13,245 
Modat, Stéphane, 227, 228 
Mount Dong Ding, | 32, 133 
Mount Shan Li Xii, 133 
Mucha mountains, | 33 
Murata Shuko, 92 
Nantou district, | 32-133 
Nara and Mie prefectures, 99 
Nei Fei trademark, 67 
Nepal, 190-191, 196 
Nilgiri Coonoor (black tea), 185, 231 
Nilgiri Hills, 166 
Nutrients, 248 
Opium Wars, |57 
ORAC values of common beverages, 262 
Orthodox method of processing, 
|72—|74 
Pelletier, Claude, 235 
Picking, 25, 29, 30, 45, 58, 62, 104, 166— 
167, 169-170, 190-191 
Pinglin, 133 
Pinglin Bao Zhong (wulong), |52 
Polyphenols, 248 
Pork flank braised in Pu er tea and 
suggested tea pairings, 228-229 
Processing, 56-77, 80-87, 103-106, 
138=142 
Processing tea, |7!—|75 
Pu er tea, 32, 66-69, 209, 240, 25 | 
Qi Men, 235 
Qing Xin, 137 
Rooibos, |94 
Rou Gui, 236 
Sahara desert, Algeria and mint tea, |3 
Samidori, |02 
Samovar, |2 
Scallop carpaccio in Chinese white 
tea broth and suggested tea pairings, 
238-239 
Sencha, | 16 
Senchado, |07 
Senchado brewing method, 108 
Sencha Fukamushi Aji (green tea), | 19 
Sencha Keikoku, 232 
Sencha Keikoku (green tea), | 2 
Sen No Rikyu, 92 
Seven rules set by Sen No Rikyu, | 10 
Shan Lin Xi (wulong), 149, 243 
Shan Lin Xii garden, | 33 
Sheng, 66 
Sheng Pu er 1974 HJH 74342 (aged tea), 
86 
Sheng Pu er tea china, 69—/0 
Shen Nong founding myth, 39 
Shizuoka, 95, 99 
Shou, 66 
Shou Pu er 1999 (old tea trees) china, 86 
Shou Pu er teas china, 7| 
Shui Xian, 231 
Si Ji Chun (wulong), 137, 150 
Sikkim region, 166 
Simple method, | 12 
Sri Lanka, 188-189, 196 
Strawberries in jellied matcha and 
suggested tea pairings, 232-233 
Sun Moon Lake, 236 
Taichung district, |34 
Taipei district, 133 
Taitung district, 134 
Taiwan, | 24-153 
cultivar, 137 
gardens and plants, |36 
Gong Fu Cha ceremony, 144-145 
green wulong teas processing, | 38—|42 
history, | 26-127 
T-18 black tea, 148 
tea industry, |28—13| 
tea industry professional Lin Mei Yen, 
130-131 
tea preparation, 143 
teas, 149-153 
tea trade, 128 
terroirs, |32—|35 
wild tea trees, |26—|27 
Takeno Joo, 92 
Tamaryokucha, | |7 
Tan Huong LT (green tea), 197 
Tasting, 160 
comparative in India, | 78-179 
guide, 
210-219 
Tie Guan Yin, Anxi, 50 
Tea 
art of preparing, 200-209 
bags, 159 
biochemical analysis, 252—264 
bottle, 72-73 
chemical components, 248-249 
first mention, |0—| | 
flavored or scented teas, 33 
and health, 248-265 
high altitude, 135 
historical milestones by year, |4—15 
importer, 5 | 
virtues, 250-25 | 
ways to drink, 10-13 
Tea-flavored panna cotta and suggested 
tea pairings, 224-225 
Teapots, 202—205 
preparing tea in, 206-207 
Terroirs 
China, 42-47 
cultivation for tea, 21-23 
India, 164-167 
Japan, 98-99 
Taiwan, |32—135 
Thai Nguyen, 192 
Theine, 248. See also Caffeine 
Tie Guan Yin, 137 
Tomato coulis with sencha and suggested 
tea pairings, 234-235 
Trees for tea, 27, 30,55, 101, 126-127, 
168 
Vietnam, 192-193 
cultivar, 192 
gardens, 192 
green tea final sorting, 192-193 
growing areas, 192 
tea, 197 
Waki, Masami, 236 
Water quality and tea, 249 
White tea, 
31,57, 208, 250 
Wulong tea, 32, 62-63, | 38-142, 142, 
5,209 227,251) 
Wulong vielli, 240 
Yabukita, 101 
Yangzi Jiang River, 44, 46 
Yellow Mountain, Anhui Province, massif, 
46-47 
Yellow tea, 32, 58, 208 
Yerba Maté, 257 
Yixing clay, 202-203 
Yixing teapots, 202 
Yunnan, 231 
Yunnan Hong Gong Fu (black tea), 86 
Yunnan Province, 43-44 
Yunnan Qi Zi Bing Cha, 69 
Yu Shan mountain, | 34 
Zhejiang Province, 44 
Gaiwan, 74-75 
Zhu Ye, 55 
267 

268 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to extend their sincere thanks to the following people: Richard Béliveau, Francois 
Chartier, Josée di Stasio, Normand Laprise, Christine Lamarche, Charles-Antoine Créte, Stephane Modat, 
Patrice Demers, Marc-André Jetté, Claude Pelletier, Hubert Marsolais, Masami Waki, Jeff Fuchs, Alexis Bernard, 
Sébastien Collin, Elsa Marsot, Valérie Roberge, Mathieu Lévesque, Mathieu Dupuis, Kazuyo Fukunishi, Yu Hui 
Tseng and Fabien Maiolino, Claude Chapdelaine, Ed Behr, James McGuire, Stéphane Erler, Louise Roberge, 
Mélany Gagnon, Maxime Maheu, Denis Beaumont, Héléne Tremblay, Yolaine Lebeuf, Laurence Cambron Fortin, 
Julie De Grandmont, as well as all the team at Editions de l'homme, especially Erwan, Josée, Linda, Céline and 
Diane. We would also like to warmly thank Marie Henrichon, Annie Tapp, Claudie Pouliot, Marielle Bertin, 
Nathalie Morrissette and our families. Finally, a very big thank you to the team at Camellia Sinensis, both past 
and present, to our customers and to our invaluable translators, 
Yan Xie, Hisako Kobayashi and Pierre Nadeau. 
The Camellia Sinensis Team would like to give special thanks to all the craftspeople and the professionals of 
the tea industry that we have had the pleasure of working with over the years. Their generosity, knowledge and 
friendship have fueled our passion for tea to this level and without them the whole journey would have been 
impossible. Thank you! 
Special Thanks 
Samir Changoiwala and his father, the Mohan family, M. Panjhika, J.R Gurung, Praveen Periwal, Indi Khanna, 
Dr. Pathak, Kavi Seth, Krishan Katyal, M. Rai, M. Subba, M. Jah, M. Singh, Sudeep Banherjee, Rajah Banerjhee, M. 
Bashu and all the generous planters of Darjeeling, Dilan Wijeyesekera, Alexander Kay, Grace Mogambi. 
Fe Hl Rt 
Camellia Sinensis 4872 BY 216 i It Ar Xt PA TR OR 
SH RA 
RI 
RK, ES 
4 BY 30 i 
BN AR TH 0 HTT, FP, 
FRR AOKI 
RA RAS, HN, 
NAAVAU EB. RAN, 
RINNE -PMEAT HEN. BRK. 
FNM © tt ADs AEE + RARE © PRR © PPA HE + AREA + HIE + PRUETT + ER 
MR 
KRA + RIK + HIER + MIAME + GTR + PARRY + HEAR AR © WOKE © UGE BR 
WHT RM + KEK + GRR WIE + FE + Wi + EAR + KR + ERA 
BAG + EA + MGC E + RHE + WV + MAR + SMR 
KAKA + UH + RHE 
+ WE 
MBH ¢ AG + BRIG + mA HE + We + RHE + HH + PRE + RM 
Pa 
He + EAE + PTTL + KAS E © HAYA + WRT © BLA AR + ON EH » Bh weer © IEP 
BAA RK + ERK + KS! 

malar 
DAUPYRYYAF —hld, REMY), 
HICH WT Sle, BRBADAX, BSC, RERORP 
ROFARICML DD SORMOBERLET. ile Beat CAWISCeeBL< 
Bo THOS. 
BRB INO. BAS, Mik, SUTRA RVRMBMCEY, MESOBAICHMS SIBMECOLA ILC 
KR CSELITTCNEL RSOKRABLCS, TCE COWMOIEMLAIFSCESCEBD 9FETE 
CLEDOIMESCEWKLE, 
BA BARB: AM F072: 
all RK BN Bs VR ART: 
|MU Se ARE oth PS BR RA AIE- 1 ER RR 
fat (AZ: aH SCAR itl ak RMS 5h SA FBSA FLL HES 
Bibliography 
Bécaup, Nadia. Le Tea: Ia culture chinoise du Tea, Editions Stéphane Bachés, 2004. 
BLOFELD, John. Thé et tao: /’art chinois du Tea, Albin Michel, 1997. 
BoNHEURE, Denis. Tea, Macmillan, 
The tropical agriculturalist series, Paris, 1990. 
Buret, Paul, Histoire du Tea, Editions Desjonquéres, 2001. 
CHAN, Kam Pong. First Step to Chinese Puerh Tea, Wushing Books, 2006. 
CHow, Kit, and lone Kramer. All the Tea in China, China Books, 1990. 
Cottectir. China: Homeland of Tea, 1994. 
Co tectir. Tea for two: les rituels du Tea dans le monde, Crédit Communal, 1999. 
MACFARLANE, Alan, and Iris MACFARLANE. The Empire of Tea, The Overlook Press, 2003. 
Deumas, Francois-Xavier Mathias Minet and Christine Barsaste. Le guide de dégustation de |’amateur de Tea, 
Chéne, 2007. 
FisHer, Aaron. Tea Wisdom, Tuttle Publishing, 2009. 
Gautier, Lydia. Le Tea: arémes et saveurs du monde, Aubanel, 2005. 
Heiss, Mary Lou, and Robert J. Heiss. The Story of Tea:A Cultural History and Drinking Guide, Ten Speed Press, 
2007. 
Huets DE Lemps, Alain. Boissons et civilisations en Afrique, Presses Universitaires de Bordeaux, 2001. 
Kakuzo, Okakura. Le livre du Tea, Editions Philippe Picquier, 1996. 
Lu, Yu. Le cha jing ou le classique du Tea, Jean-Claude Gawsewitch Editeur, 2004. 
MONTSEREN, Jean. Guide de I'amateur de Tea, Editions Solar Paris, 1999. 
SCALA, Olivier and Marie Grezarb. Teas: cultures, senteurs, saveurs, Editions Solar, 2005. 
SOsHiTsU, Sen. Vie du Tea, esprit du Tea, Jean-Cyrille Godefroy, 1998. 
Ukers, William H. All About Tea, Hyperion Press, 1935 (réédition 1999). 
WANG, Ling. Le Tea et Ia culture chinoise, Editions Langues étrangéres, 2006. 
269 

270 
Photo Credits 
All photos were taken by members of the Camellia 
Sinensis 
Tea House team except for: 
B.S.PI./Corbis: page | | | 
Christophe Boisvieux/Corbis: page | 86 
Floris Leeuwenberg/Corbis: page 88 
Jeff Fuchs: page | | 
Lo Mak/Redlink/Corbis: page |24 
Mathieu Dupuis: pages 8! to 87,116,119 to 123, 
lA2 (top), 143, 144 (top), 149 to 153,182 to. 185, 
Wat 
227,231,232, 236, 239, 240/270, and 27'| 
Mathieu Lévesque: pages 220, 222, 225, 226, 229, 230, 233, 234, 
237, 238, 241, 245, 244 and 245 
Monic Richard: page 223 
Owen Franken/Corbis: page | 3 
Pierre Nadeau: page 107 
Shutterstock: pages 12,127 and 195 
Tom Nebbia/Corbis: page 36, 
Locations 
In Montreal’s Latin Quarter 
351 Emery 
H2X |J2 
Tel.: 
514.286.4002 
Beside Montreal's Jean- Talon market 
7010 Rue Casgrain 
H25 3A4 
Tel.: 514.271.4002 
In Quebec's Saint-Roch Quarter 
624 Rue Saint-Joseph E 
GIK 3B9 
Tel.: 418.525.0247 
www.camellia-sinensis.com 

4 
™ 
N 


Driven by a passion for the tea plant and its 
extraordinary variety, this group of four professional 
tea-tasters, of the renowned Camellia Sinensis 
Tea House in Montreal (KEVIN GASCOYNE, 
FRANCOIS MARCHAND, JASMIN 
DESHARNAIS and HUGO AMERIC]), travel 
to the top tea-producing countries every spring. 
The tasters each specialize in different tea-growing 
regions, from which they select premium teas for 
their world-famous catalog, available online 
(www.camellia-sinensis.com). 
Many years of developing strong ties with select 
growers has earned the tasters access to a higher 
quality of leaf and insight into the subtle variations 
fo) ia -tol ala) (e [U[om >) 
p-Veld(ecclel o) 
a aa-XX-Molge-1 
ims ofcto)o) (=e Mal 
trusting relationships also give them exclusive access 
to some exceptionally rare teas, some of which 
would not otherwise leave their countries of origin. 
The authors are excited to share their delicious 
discoveries. 
JONATHAN RACINE works for the Camellia 
Sinensis Tea House. His studies in literature and his 
passion for tea gave him the background for writing 
n 
this book. He has traveled 
to China, as a taster, to 
meet with producers, to 
learn about planting and 
the selection process, 
elalemcom-rl amie yaar-lare 
knowledge from growers 
and experts about the 
practice and culture of tea 
cultivation. 
FIREFLY BOOKS 

The Camellia sinensis plant may have originated in China, but over the 
centuries the beverage that made it famous has quenched thirsts and 
warmed bodies the world over. Tea allows you to travel the terroirs 
of the world’s great tea-growing regions, including China, East Africa, 
India, Japan, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Taiwan and Vietnam. 
| 
= 
HISTORY TERROIRS VARIETIES 
Experts from the Camellia Sinensis Tea House guide you through the 
various types of tea and methods to enjoy them. Detailed entries 
describe how to prepare the perfect cup of white, black, wulong, 
Pu er, yellow or green tea, including the quantities required, ideal 
temperature and correct length of infusion. 
To complete the experience, gourmet recipes from top chefs 
demonstrate how to use tea to its greatest advantage. Also, through 
specially commissioned scientific testing, this book provides fresh 
insight into the many health benefits of tea. 
JRE 
| 
ren 
=== cascovne 
USED 
ry TER: HISTORY, TERROIRS, VARIETIES 
a 2 
tiled BK 
“31 
~(U ma 
72660 
15-6 
90 
SOMBSP 
SEMEL 
AMEE 
EE 
ELE 
CE 
Ee gies 
aes 
ei 

a 
ae 
Joe A aR PMN 
NE IR herein ore 
tle Se 
oN, 
+ 
? 
aay 
a 
; 
% 
ia 
> 
w= 
. 
; 
3 
= 
= — = 
om 
a= = 3 = a = — — m= a wa 
j 
is 
i 
i* 
Pe 
r 
i 
~ 
ye 
ees 
t 
Fe 
boy 
& 
94 
* 
I 
j 
i! 
' 
} 
j 
} 
{ 
) 
! 
iu 
{ 
j 
Ps 
{ 
i 
| 
/ 
‘ 
i 
4 
i 
i 
; 
i 
A 
y 
etd 
i 
J 
- 
iv: 
| 
j 
$ 
f 
3 
a 
4 
;! 
i 
i 
f 
j 
‘| 
i 
aa 
i 
. 
i 
1 
j 
+ 
} 
i 
| 
i 
: 
U 
i 
j 
| 
{ 
J 
j 
} 
{ 
t 
yt 
r 
7 
j 
| 
r 
F, 
st 
i 
J 
/ 
f 
‘ 
‘ 
: 
1 
ee 
Dome 
i 
‘ 
E 
‘ 
i 
1nd 
) 
} 
i 
/ 
! 
Ul 
i 
rad 
Sin 
y 
i 
a5 
{ 
! 
;4 
i 
/ 
f 
{ 
‘ 
t 
1 
j 
, 
j 
} 
14 
4 
‘. 
i 
/. 
; 
ja 
j 
t 
‘ 
4 
re. 
j 
j 
Ea 
3 
3 
' 
A 
f 
re 
} 
i 
j 
PEL 
tt 
¢ 
. 
j 
} 
‘ 
, 
i 
{ 
i 
j 
A 
/ 
: 
1 
\ 
{ 
4 
; 
34 
: 
i 
: 
% 
. 
, 
« 
ts 
= 
ES 
e 
‘ 
. 
, 
F; 
P 
J 
i 
eee" 
EES Is SU Raat 

