
Teach Yourself VISUALLY™ iPhoto® for
iPad®
Table of Contents
Chapter 1: Discovering iPhoto for iOS
Take a First Look at iPhoto
Browse Groups of Photos
View Photos
Explore Albums
View Events
Explore Journals
Investigate iPhoto Settings
Get Help
Find Further Help Online
Investigate Other Apps
Chapter 2: Taking and Importing Photos
Understanding the Camera App
Take Photos with Camera
Using Camera Options
Control Exposure and Focus
Take Photos from the Lock Screen
Record Video
Understanding Photo Management
Get Started with the Photos App
Using the Camera Roll
Save and Share Photos
Using the Camera Connection Kit
Copy Photos to a Mac or PC
Chapter 3: Using iCloud and Photo Stream
Understanding Photo Stream
Set up Photo Stream for iOS
Set up Photo Stream on a Mac
Set up Photo Stream in Windows
Add Photos to Photo Stream
Delete Photos from Photo Stream
Reset Photo Stream
Chapter 4: Introducing Photo Browsing
Understanding Photo Browsing
Introducing the Thumbnail Browser
View Single Photos
Introducing the Thumbnail Grid
Select Multiple Photos by Dragging
Select Multiple Photos by Tapping
Select a Range of Photos
Using the Loupe
Find Similar Photos
View Photo Information

Chapter 5: Organizing Photos
Understanding Albums and Events
View Albums
Create an Album with Photos
Set the Key Photo
Create Albums on a Mac
Import Albums and Events
Clear the Camera Roll
Chapter 6: Tagging and Flagging Photos
Understanding Photo Tagging
Flag Photos
Create Favorites
Add Custom Tags
Hide Photos
Search Tagged Photos
Caption Photos
Chapter 7: Getting Started with Editing
Learn about Editing
Using Auto-Enhance
Fix a Sideways or Inverted Photo
Fix the Horizon
Rotate a Photo Manually
Crop a Photo
View Edited and Unedited Photos
Using Undo and Redo
Chapter 8: Correcting and Enhancing Photos
Learn about Enhancement
Control Enhancements by Dragging
Understanding Exposure
Enhance Shadows and Highlights
Work with Contrast and Brightness
Learn about Color
Add and Remove Color
Work with Different Colors
Understanding White Balance
Using a White Balance Preset
Fix White Balance Manually
Chapter 9: Using Brush Effects
Understanding Brush Effects
Manage Brush Effects
Zoom for Fine Control
Repair a Photo
Remove Red Eye
Make Colors Pop
Remove Color Selectively
Add Emphasis and Lighten a Photo
Add Impact and Darken a Photo
Sharpen Parts of a Photo
Create Soft Dreamy Effects
Edit Matching Areas
Erase Brush Effects
Chapter 10: Using Filters and Effects

Understanding Effects
Add Ink Effects
Create Warm and Cool Colorings
Master Duotones
Convert Color to Black-and-White
Pick Out Strong Colors
Create Vintage Film Effects
Convert a Photo into Art
Chapter 11: Creating Advanced Photo Effects
Understanding Advanced Editing
Add a Color Gradient
Work with Vignettes
Create a Fake Miniature
Add Mood and Atmosphere
Improve a Portrait
Prepare a Photo for Framing
Combine Effects
Chapter 12: Sharing Photos
Learn about Photo Sharing
Save Photos to the Camera Roll
Share Photos with iTunes
E-Mail Photos
Beam Photos to Another Device
Print Photos
Share Photos via Twitter
Upload Photos to Flickr
Post Photos to Facebook
Create and View a Slide Show
Using Other Sharing Options
Chapter 13: Creating Journals
Learn about Journals
Create a New Journal
Change a Journal’s Background
Add Photos to a Journal
Add Other Items to a Journal
Lay Out a Journal Automatically
Move and Resize Items
Swap Items
Edit Special Content
Share a Journal to iCloud
Share a Journal to iTunes
Chapter 14: Using iPhoto on the iPhone
Compare Devices
Using the Thumbnail Browser
Access the Edit Tools
Using Settings and Options
Take HDR Photos

Teach Yourself VISUALLY™ iPhoto® for iPad®
Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
10475 Crosspoint Boulevard
Indianapolis, IN 46256
www.wiley.com
Published simultaneously in Canada
Copyright © 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the

1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the
Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-
8400, fax 978-646-8600. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed
to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken,
NJ 07030, 201-748-6011, fax 201-748-6008, or online at
www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand.
Some material included with standard print versions of this book may not be included
in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD
that is not included in the version you purchased, you may download this material at
http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit
www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013934421
ISBN: 978-1-118-44360-6
Manufactured in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Trademark Acknowledgments
Wiley, the Wiley logo, Visual, the Visual logo, Teach Yourself VISUALLY, Read Less -
Learn More and related trade dress are trademarks or registered trademarks of John
Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates. iPhoto and iPad are registered trademarks of
Apple, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John
Wiley & Sons, Inc. is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this
book. Teach Yourself VISUALLY iPhoto for iPad is an independent publication and
has not been authorized, sponsored, or otherwise approved by Apple, Inc.
Sales | Contact Wiley at (877) 762-2974 or fax (317) 572-4002.
LIMIT OF LIABILITY/DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY: THE PUBLISHER AND
THE AUTHOR MAKE NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES WITH
RESPECT TO THE ACCURACY OR COMPLETENESS OF THE CONTENTS OF
THIS WORK AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES,
INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION WARRANTIES OF FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO WARRANTY MAY BE CREATED OR EXTENDED
BY SALES OR PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS. THE ADVICE AND STRATEGIES
CONTAINED HEREIN MAY NOT BE SUITABLE FOR EVERY SITUATION.
THIS WORK IS SOLD WITH THE UNDERSTANDING THAT THE PUBLISHER
IS NOT ENGAGED IN RENDERING LEGAL, ACCOUNTING, OR OTHER
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. IF PROFESSIONAL ASSISTANCE IS REQUIRED,
THE SERVICES OF A COMPETENT PROFESSIONAL PERSON SHOULD BE

SOUGHT. NEITHER THE PUBLISHER NOR THE AUTHOR SHALL BE LIABLE
FOR DAMAGES ARISING HEREFROM. THE FACT THAT AN ORGANIZATION
OR WEBSITE IS REFERRED TO IN THIS WORK AS A CITATION AND/OR A
POTENTIAL SOURCE OF FURTHER INFORMATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT
THE AUTHOR OR THE PUBLISHER ENDORSES THE INFORMATION THE
ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE MAY PROVIDE OR RECOMMENDATIONS IT
MAY MAKE. FURTHER, READERS SHOULD BE AWARE THAT INTERNET
WEBSITES LISTED IN THIS WORK MAY HAVE CHANGED OR
DISAPPEARED BETWEEN WHEN THIS WORK WAS WRITTEN AND WHEN
IT IS READ.
FOR PURPOSES OF ILLUSTRATING THE CONCEPTS AND TECHNIQUES
DESCRIBED IN THIS BOOK, THE AUTHOR HAS CREATED VARIOUS
NAMES, COMPANY NAMES, MAILING, E-MAIL AND INTERNET
ADDRESSES, PHONE AND FAX NUMBERS AND SIMILAR INFORMATION,
ALL OF WHICH ARE FICTITIOUS. ANY RESEMBLANCE OF THESE
FICTITIOUS NAMES, ADDRESSES, PHONE AND FAX NUMBERS AND
SIMILAR INFORMATION TO ANY ACTUAL PERSON, COMPANY AND/OR
ORGANIZATION IS UNINTENTIONAL AND PURELY COINCIDENTAL.
Contact Us
For general information on our other products and services please contact our
Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-
572-3993 or fax 317-572-4002.
For technical support please visit www.wiley.com/techsupport.


Credits
Acquisitions Editor
Aaron Black
Sr. Project Editor
Sarah Hellert
Technical Editor
Dennis R. Cohen
Copy Editor
Scott Tullis
Editorial Director
Robyn Siesky
Business Manager
Amy Knies
Sr. Marketing Manager
Sandy Smith
Vice President and Executive Group Publisher
Richard Swadley
Vice President and Executive Publisher
Barry Pruett
Project Coordinator
Patrick Redmond
Graphics and Production Specialists
Ronda David-Burroughs
Jennifer Goldsmith
Jennifer Mayberry
Proofreader
Sossity R. Smith
Indexer
BIM Indexing & Proofreading Services


About the Author
Richard Wentk has been writing professionally about technology and creativity since
1993. He is a regular contributor to numerous magazines including the British Journal
of Photography, Total Digital Photography, Digital Camera, and Computer Arts. He is
an Associate Member of the Royal Photographic Society and exhibits work regularly in
the United Kingdom. He is also an app developer and the author of a number of books
for developers and Mac users including the iOS App Development Portable Genius.
For the latest news and information, visit his site at www.zettaboom.com.
Author’s Acknowledgments
All books are a collaboration, and this one is no exception. I’d like to thank Aaron
Black for giving the green light to this project and Sarah Hellert for making the
transition from copy to printed item as painless as possible.
Special thanks are due to Hans Peter Blochwitz, Jos van Galen, Rhys Jones, and
Justyna Furmanczyk for permission to use their superb photos.
Extra special thanks to Annette Saunders for contributing further exemplary photos and
for making the writing process far more pleasurable than it would have been otherwise.


How to Use This Book
Who This Book Is For
This book is for the reader who has never used this particular technology or software
application. It is also for readers who want to expand their knowledge.
The Conventions in This Book
 Steps
This book uses a step-by-step format to guide you easily through each task. Numbered
steps are actions you must do; bulleted steps clarify a point, step, or optional feature;
and indented steps give you the result.
 Notes
Notes give additional information — special conditions that may occur during an
operation, a situation that you want to avoid, or a cross-reference to a related area of
the book.
 Icons and Buttons
Icons and buttons show you exactly what you need to click to perform a step.
 Tips
Tips offer additional information, including warnings and shortcuts.
 Bold
Bold type shows command names or options that you must click or text or numbers
you must type.
 Italics
Italic type introduces and defines a new term.


Chapter 1: Discovering iPhoto for iOS
iPhoto for iOS offers many great features for editing, organizing, sharing, and displaying
photos. In this chapter you learn the basics of iPhoto and discover how to get started with
photos, albums, events, and journals on the iPad and iPhone.
Take a First Look at iPhoto
Browse Groups of Photos
View Photos
Explore Albums
View Events
Explore Journals
Investigate iPhoto Settings
Get Help
Find Further Help Online
Investigate Other Apps
Take a First Look at iPhoto
iPhoto is designed to help you get more from your photography. But before you can begin
editing and sharing your photos, you must understand how iPhoto groups your photos into

collections.
You can use iPhoto as a stand-alone app, but iPhoto works closely with other apps:
Camera and Photo on iOS devices, and iTunes and iPhoto on the Mac. Supporting iPhoto
with these other applications helps you get the most from iPhoto by keeping your photos
organized and ready to share.
Understanding iPhoto Browsing
iPhoto can display all the photos in your device in a single list. This option can be
spectacular, but it can also be difficult to search for a specific photo. To help you find
photos, iPhoto can group related photos into collections. The three collection types
appear on the main iPhoto launch page: Albums, Events, and Journals. Each has its
quirks. Some features may not work as you expect.
Understanding Albums
iPhoto displays three kinds of albums. You can group any of your photos into a named
album using the Photos app on an iOS device. You can also create albums using
iPhoto on the Mac, and import them to your device through iTunes or by uploading
them to Apple’s Photo Stream service. iPhoto for iOS creates albums automatically
when you select photos as favorites, when you edit photos, or when you beam photos
between devices by sharing them over Wi-Fi. You can also tag photos with your own
keywords. iPhoto automatically creates tag albums for photos that share a tag.
Understanding Events
Events organize your photos by date. You can import events from your Mac iPhoto
library using iTunes. This is a good way to display your existing photo collections.
Events are also created automatically when you import photos from a digital camera
or memory card using the iPad Camera Connection Kit. You cannot create events any
other way.

Understanding Journals
You can use journals to display your photos in a beautiful layout with supporting text,
maps, calendar dates, and other details. Journals are for sharing, not for browsing. You
can upload them to your iCloud account as a web page and send the link to friends
and family.
Browse Groups of Photos
You can use the buttons on the main iPhoto launch screen to browse photos and view your
albums, events, and journals.
You can also swap between the different views by swiping left or right at the top or bottom
of the screen.
A Help Button
Displays the iPhoto help pages.
B Albums Button
Displays a list of albums on your device.
C Photos Button
Displays every photo on your device without trying to group them.

D Events Button
Shows a list of events on your device.
E Journals Button
Displays the journals you have created.
View Photos
When you first fire up iPhoto and tap the Photos button on the launch page, iPhoto shows
you every photo stored on your device as a list of thumbnails — small preview images.
To browse your photos, scroll through the list. A Power Scroll feature at the right of the
window makes it easy to scroll through them quickly. iPhoto displays the month and date
of the photos as you scroll through them.
View Photos
 Tap the iPhoto icon on the Home screen to launch iPhoto.
Note: If you use iPhoto regularly, you can tap and hold its icon to rearrange your app
display and drag the iPhoto icon to the Dock for quick access.

iPhoto launches.
 If the thumbnails do not appear, tap the Photos button.
The list of thumbnails appears.
 Drag your finger up and down on the Power Scroll bar to move quickly through the
photos.
A iPhoto displays the month and date as you scroll.
Note: To scroll more slowly, drag your finger on the photo grid.
 Tap any photo to view it.

iPhoto displays the photo in an Editor screen with a selection of editing controls and a
smaller thumbnails list.
 Tap the Photos button to return to the list of albums.
Note: You can swipe your finger left and right in the Editor to view further photos.
TIPS
Is there a quick way to scroll to the top of the thumbnails?
Tap the status bar on your device — the area at the top of the screen that displays the
time, battery charge, Wi-Fi signal strength, and other status information. iPhoto quickly
scrolls to the top of the thumbnails list. Unfortunately there is no quick way to scroll to
the end of the list.
Can I view the list in portrait mode?
In portrait mode, the display shows slightly more photos per screen than in landscape
mode. To select portrait mode, rotate the device to one of the two possible portrait
orientations with the home button and connector port at the top or bottom. The thumbnail
display rotates automatically.
Explore Albums
You can view the albums on your device by tapping the Albums button on the iPhoto start
page. The albums feature displays the albums you create in iPhoto for the Mac, Photoshop
Elements, Aperture, or the iOS Photos app. You can create tag albums by adding tag
keywords to a photo, as described in Chapter 6. You cannot create standard albums.
iPhoto maintains a collection of special albums for your convenience, including edited
photos and photos you mark with the flag and favorite (rosette) symbols. The iOS camera
roll and photos you beam — wirelessly import — from other devices also appear in
special albums.

Explore Albums
 Launch iPhoto.
 If the Albums page does not appear, tap the Albums button.
iPhoto displays a list of albums.
Note: The Edited, Flagged, Beamed, and Favorites albums appear only after you edit,
beam, flag, or favorite a photo.
Note: Named albums appear only if you create them in the Photos app or import them via
iTunes or Photo Stream.
 If there are more than 12 albums, drag your finger up and down to scroll through the
list.
 Tap any album to view it.

iPhoto displays the photos in the album in the small thumbnails list at one side of the
screen and loads the first photo in the Editor.
 Swipe left or right to view further photos in the album.
Note: You can also view photos by tapping them in the thumbnails list.
 Tap the Albums button to return to the main thumbnails list.
TIPS
Why do albums appear in different colors?
The colors help you recognize the different types of albums. The albums you create
yourself appear with a gray border. The Camera Roll album appears with a gray-blue
border. The remaining albums are generated and maintained by iPhoto. They appear with
a light brown border.
What is the Photo Box album?
There is no way to delete a photo permanently in iPhoto. If you use the Photos app to

delete a photo from your device after you edit it, select it as a favorite, or use it in a
journal, iPhoto keeps a copy of the photo in the Edited album. If you then remove the
photo’s edits or tags or remove it from a journal, iPhoto moves it to Photo Box —
because it has nowhere else to put it.
View Events
Events are groups of photos arranged by date. iPhoto automatically splits photos into
events when you import them from a digital camera or SD card using the iPad Camera
Connection Kit. You can view events on your device by tapping the Events button on the
iPhoto start page.
You can also import events from iPhoto on the Mac using iTunes or Photo Stream. This is
a good way to set up an iPad as a portable photo album. There is no way to create events
in iPhoto itself.
View Events
 Launch iPhoto.
 If the Events page does not appear, tap the Events button.

iPhoto displays a list of events.
Note: If there are no events, the page displays a note about importing and creating them.
 If there are more than 12 events, drag your finger up and down to scroll through the list.
 Tap any event to view it.
iPhoto displays the photos in the event in the small thumbnails list at one side of the
screen and also loads the first photo into the Editor.
 Swipe left or right to view further photos in the event.
Note: You can also view photos by tapping them in the thumbnails list.

 Tap the Events button to return to the main thumbnails list.
TIPS
Why do some thumbnails include small white icons?
If you edit, flag, or favorite a photo, iPhoto adds a matching small icon to it to remind
you — for example, flagged photos show a small flag. The icons appear in the
thumbnails when you view events and albums, but not in the main photo list.
Can I rearrange the order of events?
Events are listed in date order, so you cannot rearrange them. However, you can create
and rearrange events in iPhoto for the Mac and download them into iPhoto for iOS. This
is a very indirect way to change the order, but it does work.
Explore Journals
You can use journals to collect related photos and display them as web pages with
additional comments, date icons, map locations, and other information.
Journals are designed to be shared. You can upload them to iCloud and share them as web
links. You can also view them on a device. In iPhoto, collecting photos in a journal,
tapping them to open them, and swiping through them is the only way to view them full
screen.
Explore Journals

 Launch iPhoto.
 If the Journals page does not appear, tap the Journals button.
The list of journals appears.
Note: If you have not created any journals, this page displays a brief note about creating
them.
 Tap any journal to view its contents.
Note: You can read more about creating and editing journals in Chapter 13.

iPhoto displays the contents of the journal.
A Optionally, tap any photo to view it full screen.
Note: You can swipe through the photos in the journal in full-screen mode.
 Tap the Journals button to return to the list of journals.
 Tap the Edit button to enter edit mode.
iPhoto adds two icons to each journal so you can delete or favorite the journals in the list.
 Tap the delete icon ( ) of any journal to delete it.
 Tap the favorite (rosette) icon ( ) of any journal to mark it as a favorite.
iPhoto adds a small white favorite symbol to the journal.
 Tap the Edit button again to leave edit mode.
TIPS

Why would I use journals instead of albums or events?
Albums are a collection of photos. Journals are a collection of photos laid out on pages
with supporting text, notes, titles, dates, map locations, and other supporting information.
You cannot create albums or events in iPhoto, but you can create journals.
Do I need an iCloud account to use journals?
You can create and view journals on your device without an iCloud account and without
Internet access. iCloud is essential only if you want to share your journals with friends,
family, and colleagues online.
Investigate iPhoto Settings
Like most apps, iPhoto includes a selection of preferences and settings. You can use the
settings to make minor changes to iPhoto’s features.
None of the settings are critically important, and you can use iPhoto without modifying
them. But you can get more from iPhoto if you understand what the settings do and know
how to find them.
Investigate iPhoto Settings
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap any of the following buttons: Albums, Photos, Events, or Journals.

 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ) to display the settings popover.
iPhoto displays a popover with a selection of settings.
 Turn on the Wireless Beaming switch to allow other devices to send photos wirelessly
to your device.
 Turn on the Include Photo Location and Location Lookup switches to allow iPhoto
to embed location information in photos and journals.
 Turn on the Sound Effects switch to play sounds as you use iPhoto.
 Turn on Mirror on TV to show the iPhoto interface when you view photos on a
connected TV or monitor.

 Tap anywhere on the screen outside the popover to close it and save your changes.
TIPS
Does iPhoto have any other preferences?
You can access the preferences of many iOS apps by tapping the settings (gear) icon ( )
on the home page and tapping the icon of the app in the list that appears. iPhoto uses this
feature to display a version number, acknowledgements, and legal information, but you
cannot use it to change any further preferences.
Why would I turn off photo location sharing?
If you take photos at home and include location information when you share them,
anyone can find your address from the photo. This can be very bad for your privacy and
security. Always share personal photos with location information turned off.
Get Help
iPhoto includes built-in help. You can access the help from any page in iPhoto to learn
more about the features on that page. You can also browse through the help pages to learn
more about all of iPhoto’s features.
To access the help pages, tap the help icon. On the albums, photos, events, and journals
pages the icon displays the main help file for browsing. On any Editor page, the icon
displays help tips for that page.
Get Help

 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap any of the following buttons: Albums, Photos, Events, or Journals.
 Tap the help icon ( ) at the top left of the page.
iPhoto displays a popover with a selection of help headings.
 Tap any heading in the list to view the help for a topic.
Note: You can browse through the help topics by tapping the name and using the
navigation button at the top left of the help popover to return when done.
 Tap Done when finished.
iPhoto hides the popover.
Note: You cannot hide the help popover by tapping outside it.

 Tap any event or album to open an Editor page.
 Tap the help icon ( ) to view help notes for the page.
In the Editor pages only, iPhoto overlays help notes for each unique feature on the page.
 Read a help note to see a quick tip for each feature.
 Tap the arrow ( ) next to a note to view more detailed help.
iPhoto displays the relevant help page in the main help document.
 Tap Done when finished.
A Optionally, tap the top left navigation button to browse other help topics.
TIPS
Why are some help tips missing?
iPhoto does not repeat help notes. If an icon has no help note, it is described on some

other page. In the Editor, go up a level using the top left navigation button and try
tapping the help icon ( ) on that page instead.
iPhoto is easy to use. Do I need to read the help?
iPhoto has many hidden features. Even if you find iPhoto easy to use, you can find many
useful hints and tips in the help.
Find Further Help Online
Although the built-in help is detailed and comprehensive, you may have further questions
about iPhoto. You can use the Apple Support Forums to get help for specific questions.
The support forums are free and easy to search. You may find that other users have already
asked and answered your question. You can also use the rest of the Internet to search for
help.
Find Further Help Online
 Launch any web browser.
 Type http://discussions.apple.com into the address bar.
Note: Do not type the /index.jspa suffix — it appears automatically when the page loads.

The browser displays the Apple Support Communities page.
 Scroll down the list to find the iOS Apps heading.
 Click or tap the iPhoto for iOS link on the page.
The browser displays questions and answers about iPhoto for iOS.
 Tap any category to view relevant questions and answers.
 Optionally, scroll down to read the most recent discussions.

 Scroll to the top of the page when done.
 Type a question to search all support discussions for related words.
Note: If you register on the forums, you can start your own question topics.
TIPS
Why do some of the answers apply to iPhoto for Mac?
Even if you search on the iPhoto for iOS discussion page, the search returns answers for
related software, included iPhoto for the Mac. There is no way to limit answers to iPhoto
for iOS at this time.
Can I find other help online?
You can use any search engine to find tips and answers to questions. Most searches return
answers to questions about iPhoto for the Mac. You can avoid this by including “iOS,”
“iPad,” or “iPhone” in your search question.
Investigate Other Apps
You can use other apps from the App Store to expand your creative options. Competing
apps offer extra features and have different strengths. They do not integrate quite so
seamlessly with other Apple applications, but it is easy to share photos between apps, and
to use the features of one app to supplement the features of the others. All apps work with
the camera roll, and some also work with albums and events.
Apps are cheap. You can buy a collection of powerful apps for much less than the cost of a
single desktop photo editing application.
PS Express
Photoshop Express is free. You can use it for very basic editing, including cropping,
rotation, and image flipping. You can also apply borders, tints, and other visual

effects. But you cannot copy and paste images, adjust the color balance, or zoom into
part of a photo. Digital noise reduction, which can help eliminate graininess from
photos shot in poor light, is available as a $3.99 add-on. At the time of writing,
Photoshop Express does not work with the iPad 2 camera.
PS Touch
Photoshop Touch ($9.99) includes many of the powerful features in the desktop
version of Photoshop Elements, including cropping, color, contrast and exposure
control, rotation, and a good selection of preset filters. You can select an area for
editing using your fingers. You can also blend multiple photos and selections together.
Because Photoshop Touch is so powerful, it requires an iPad 2 or later, running iOS 5
or later.
Instagram
You can use Instagram to apply simple filters and effects to photos and share them to
the most popular social networking sites, including Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, Tumblr,
Foursquare, and Posterous. The effects are limited but easy to use. Instagram has
become very popular because its users can create photos with a strong mood and feel
and share them with their friends and social followers almost instantly. The app is free
and runs on the iPad as an emulated iPhone app.

Snapseed
Chosen as Apple’s own App of the Year in 2011, Snapseed ($4.99) is a popular and
powerful editor. Built-in help makes the app very intuitive. You can use the filters to
add moods and textures to your photos, with adjustable controls. Snapseed falls
midway between the one-touch effects of Instagram and the more complex editing
available in Photoshop Touch. The editing options are limited compared to a desktop
photo editor, but you can get attractive results very quickly.
Luminance
Luminance ($0.99) is a popular photo editor with limited features and good social
sharing options. You can crop photos, or adjust the color and contrast. You can also
apply a limited selection of preset color effects, and create your own presets. The
design makes it easy to apply multiple effects at the same time. Some users may find
it simpler to work with than iPhoto’s more complex adjustment options, but
Luminance lacks iPhoto’s brush-based editing.

Pixlr-o-matic
Pixlr-o-matic is another package of preset filters. The design is attractive, but the
features are limited to preset effects that you have no control over. Social sharing is
simple and built-in. The basic version of the app is free. The plus version ($0.99) adds
in-app purchase of further preset filter packs. The app competes with Instagram and is
worth considering for mood and atmosphere, but it does not compete with iPhoto as a
serious editing tool.
FX Photo Studio HD
FX Photo Studio ($1.99) is another attempt to find a good balance between ease of use
and editing potential. You can use it to apply preset effects to photos. The effects are
simple but sophisticated. You can adjust one or two elements in each, and apply
effects to selected parts of a photo. You can also apply basic editing including
cropping, rotation, and color control. Although FX Photo Studio is not an
outstandingly popular app, it is well worth investigating.


Chapter 2: Taking and Importing
Photos
iPhoto is designed to work with the Camera and Photos apps to take, view, import, and
manage photo collections. Use Camera to take photos. Use Photos to view and organize
them. You can also import photos from an external camera using the Camera Connection
Kit.
Understanding the Camera App
Take Photos with Camera
Using Camera Options
Control Exposure and Focus
Take Photos from the Lock Screen
Record Video
Understanding Photo Management
Get Started with the Photos App
Using the Camera Roll
Save and Share Photos
Using the Camera Connection Kit
Copy Photos to a Mac or PC


Understanding the Camera App
All iPhone and recent iPad devices include at least one built-in camera, and some models
include multiple cameras with a built-in LED flash. You can use the Camera app to take
photos with these cameras.
Although Camera looks simple, it has some clever hidden features. You can use them to
create impressive special effects. Camera is also good for quick snaps and can be accessed
through the lock screen without unlocking your device.
Select a Camera
The iPhone 4 and later and the iPad 2 and later include a front camera and a rear
camera. You can select either in the Camera app. The front-facing camera is designed
for live video with FaceTime, Skype, and similar services. Photo quality is limited,
but you can use it to take snaps of yourself without having to use a mirror. The rear-
facing camera takes better quality photos. It also works with the LED flash, if your
device has one.
Using Camera Controls
iDevice cameras are automatic, so you cannot set the focus, exposure, or shutter
speed. However, you can use a manual digital zoom to zoom into part of your photo.
You can also tap the photo preview window to force the camera to focus on a small
area in the photo. The camera tries to make this area as sharp as possible in the photo,
and also uses the brightness of the area to estimate exposure. You can use this feature
to create silhouettes, shoot into a bright light, focus on a background and blur a
foreground, or deliberately overexpose a photo for special effects.

Using Camera Options
Depending on your iDevice, you can choose various camera options. The grid
displays a grid that divides the photo preview into nine boxes called thirds. This is a
standard feature on more expensive cameras. You can use it to improve the
composition of your shot. The HDR (High Dynamic Range) option is available on the
iPhone 4 and later. It combines three photos with different brightness levels into a
single photo with enhanced detail in shadows and highlights. The HDR feature is
described in Chapter 14.
Using the Lock Screen and the Side Button
You need to be quick to catch some photo opportunities. If your iDevice is locked, it
can take a while to unlock it, launch the Camera app, and take a snap. To solve this
problem, the iPhone includes quick access to Camera on the lock screen, so you can
take photos without unlocking your device. Another hidden feature is side button
snapping. In some orientations the on-screen button in Camera is awkwardly placed,
but the top side button does the same job and is easier to reach. It also has a positive
physical click, so you are less likely to move the camera when you use it.

Record Video
Both front and rear cameras — where available — can record video. This option is
easy to use. You simply select video or stills with an on-screen switch, and tap the
Recording button ( ) to begin recording. The button graphics change to remind you
what you are capturing. Video quality on the rear camera of the iPhone and 3rd and
4th generation iPads can be surprisingly good.


Take Photos with Camera
You can take a photo with the Camera app by tapping the on-screen snap button or the top
side button on the case. The mechanical button is often easier to reach, although you may
need to use two hands.
You can also select the forward or rear cameras manually before you take your photo, and
on models with a flash, set the flash so it always fires, never fires, or fires only when the
light is poor. Not all devices support the extra options. If they are not available, the buttons
for them do not appear in the display.
Take Photos with Camera
 Launch the Camera app by tapping the Camera icon on the Home screen.
A iPhoto displays the photo preview window.
 Move the switch to select the still camera if it is not already selected.
Note: This example uses the iPhone screens because an iPhone is more portable than an
iPad. The screen layout is different on the iPad, and some options are not available.

 Tap the front/rear camera selector icon (
) to select a camera.
B Camera flips the preview window and shows the view from the other camera.
Note: The front-facing camera is not available on all devices.
Note: Flash and other options are not available when using the front-facing camera.
Note: The front-facing camera usually shows you. (This example deliberately hides the
author.)
 Tap the Flash mode button to display the flash options.
Note: The mode button always shows the current flash mode.
 Tap one of the modes to select it.
Note: Auto mode automatically fires the flash in poor light but does not fire it in good
light.

 Tap the camera icon ( ) to take a photo.
C Camera takes a photo and adds it to the camera roll.
Note: A shutter graphic covers the preview window while Camera takes the photo.
Note: It can take Camera a few seconds to take a photo, especially in poor light. Try to
keep the camera still while the shutter is visible.
TIPS
Why is there such a difference between the front and rear cameras?
The rear camera is designed for photography. The front camera is really a webcam and is
officially called the iSight/FaceTime camera. Use the rear camera when you can. The
front camera is good enough for front-facing snaps in good light, but photos from the rear
camera always look smoother and more detailed.
Why would I use flash in daylight?
Photographers often use fill-in flash in daylight to add extra light to a scene. The built-in
flash is not very powerful, but you can still use it for basic fill-in flash. Turn on the flash
before you take a photo. If the subject is lit from the side or the rear, the flash adds extra
light from the front. The results can be dramatic.


Using Camera Options
You can use a built-in digital zoom to bring distant objects closer before you snap them
with the Camera app. You can also display a nine-cell grid to help you frame your photo.
Both options are partly hidden. The zoom feature is slightly awkward to use. You can
pinch zoom with two fingers on the photo preview, but you may find it easier to tap with
two fingers and drag the zoom slider with a single finger. The other camera options appear
when you tap the translucent Options button.
Using Camera Options
 Launch the Camera app by tapping the Camera icon on the Home screen.
A iPhoto displays the photo preview window.
 Tap the Options button to view your camera’s options.
B Camera displays options.
 Tap the Grid switch to enable the grid overlay.

 Tap Done to save and hide the options.
Note: You can also tap anywhere on the screen outside the Options box.
C iPhoto displays a grid of thirds in the photo preview area.
Note: The grid does not appear in your photos.
 For good results experiment with placing objects and lines in your photos on lines or
points on the grid.
Note: The grid is one suggested way to improve your photos, but your photos may still
look good with features placed elsewhere.
Note: The HDR option is described in Chapter 14.
 Tap with two fingers on the preview window to show the zoom slider.
 Drag the slider left or right to change the zoom magnification.
Note: You can also pinch and expand with two fingers on the preview, but this often feels
less precise than the zoom slider.

Note: As in this example, the photo may look fuzzy if you zoom in too much.
 Tap the camera icon ( ) to take the photo.
TIPS
Is the zoom digital or optical?
The zoom is digital — it is really a crop. Because camera resolution is limited, the image
quality gets worse the more you zoom in. The cameras on the iPhone 4S and 5 are just
about good enough to support the maximum zoom. The cameras on earlier iPhones and
on iPads can zoom in to around two-thirds of the maximum. If you zoom in further the
image becomes very fuzzy.
What is the grid for?
Photographers use the Rule of Thirds when composing a shot. Photos often look good
when strong lines in the image line up with the lines on the grid, or when important
features are on the crossing points. For more details, search the web for “Rule of Thirds.”


Control Exposure and Focus
Although you cannot set the camera’s exposure and focus manually, you can use a hidden
feature to force the camera to look at part of a scene and estimate the brightness and focus
from a smaller area.
If you tap once, the camera measures the light in the area you select, but continues to
update the exposure if you move the camera or the light changes. If you tap and hold on
the screen, the camera locks the exposure and focus. If you move the camera, exposure
and focus do not change.
Control Exposure and Focus
 Launch the Camera app by tapping the Camera icon on the Home screen.
A iPhoto displays the photo preview window.
 Point the camera at brighter or darker parts of a scene. (This example points at a darker
area.)

The camera automatically corrects the exposure by measuring the brightness in the entire
preview area.
Note: To demonstrate this even more clearly, point the camera at the sun or sky and then
the ground.
 Without moving the camera, tap a darker area in the preview.
B Camera displays a small square used to estimate the exposure.
Note: If the area is in shadow, Camera lightens the shot. If the area is brightly lit, Camera
darkens the shot. In this mode, Camera ignores the brightness in the rest of the scene.
Note: You can tap again as often as you want to select other areas.
 Tap and hold with a finger in the preview area.
C Camera displays an animated square.
D Camera displays the “AE/AF lock” message at the bottom of the preview. AE/AF is
short for AutoExposure/AutoFocus.

Note: The exposure and focus are now locked. They no longer follow changes in light or
camera position.
 Tap anywhere in the preview area to unlock exposure and focus.
 Tap the camera icon ( ) to take a photo.
TIPS
How can I use this feature?
If you tap and hold a bright area in a scene, you can force the camera to underexpose
your photo, creating silhouettes and shadows. If you tap and hold a dark area, you can
deliberately create a washed-out look. You can also use this feature to highlight the
ground or the sky when snapping landscapes. Tap and hold on the sky, and the camera
captures a cloudscape. Tap and hold the landscape and the sky becomes white, but the
landscape is exposed correctly.
Is this feature like the AE/AF lock on bigger cameras?
It is the iPhone/iPad equivalent. Unfortunately, you cannot lock focus and exposure
separately — they always work together.


Take Photos from the Lock Screen
If you have an iPhone, you can take photos without unlocking it first. You can load the
Camera app directly from the lock screen by flicking the camera icon upwards.
Photo opportunities can disappear in moments, but unlocking your iPhone and launching
Camera can take a few seconds. You can use the lock screen option to snap a scene
quickly before you lose it forever.
Take Photos from the Lock Screen
 If your phone’s display is dark, tap the power button or home button to display the lock
screen.
 Tap and hold the camera icon ( ).
 Drag the camera icon ( ) upwards.
Note: Do not drag the unlock slider next to the icon.
Note: The shutter display may appear briefly while Camera launches.

 Use any of Camera’s features to take one or more photos.
Note: All of Camera’s features work as normal.
Note: You can rotate your iPhone to take photos in landscape orientation after you unlock
it.
 Swipe down in the top half of the preview window to lock your device again.
Note: Swiping in the lower half of the window does nothing.
TIPS
Can I use the top button to take a photo from the lock screen?
Unfortunately not. You must slide the Camera app up from the bottom of the lock screen
before you can take a photo with the top button. The button does nothing while the lock
screen is visible.
Does this feature work on the iPad?

The iPad does not support the lock screen camera feature. Instead, you can turn your iPad
into a digital picture frame. A couple of seconds after you tap the lock screen icon, the
iPad displays an animated slide show with photos selected from the albums and events on
your device. You can stop the slide show by tapping the screen again and either tapping
the slide show icon or unlocking the device.


Record Video
You can record video on all iPhones more recent than the 3G and all iPads from the iPad 2
onwards. Video is saved to the camera roll — described later in this chapter — just like
photo stills. To record video, flick a switch in the Camera app. Instead of a camera icon,
Camera displays a red button, which flashes as you record.
Video uses more storage space than photos. If you record a lot of video on your device,
copy it to a Mac or PC as soon as you can to avoid wasting space.
Record Video
 Launch the Camera app by tapping the Camera icon on the Home screen.
A iPhoto displays the photo preview window.
 Move the switch to select the video camera if it is not already selected.
B Camera displays the shutter graphic for a second or so while it changes modes, and also
replaces the camera icon with a recording icon with a red LED.

 Tap the recording icon ( ) to begin recording video.
C Camera beeps once and flashes the LED while it records video.
D Camera displays a time counter so you can see how much video you have recorded.
 Tap the recording icon ( ) again to stop recording video.
E Camera beeps again and adds the video to the camera roll.
 Tap the camera roll to view your photos and recordings.
 Tap the video to prepare it for playback.
Note: For more information about previewing and viewing the camera roll, see the section
later in this chapter.
 Tap the play icon ( ) to view the video.
TIPS

Why do some of the camera options disappear?
Video recording uses a fixed zoom with a small amount of magnification. You can turn
on the flash to use it as a constant light source for your video. Other options are not
available, so you cannot use the grid or enable HDR mode.
Can I edit the video?
Camera has no movie editing options. But iMovie ($4.99 from the App Store) includes
basic clip trimming, transitions (that is, clip crossfades and other animations) and basic
support for titles, music dubbing, and online sharing. If you want to edit videos, iMovie
is an affordable but powerful option.


Understanding Photo Management
iPhoto includes very limited photo management. To manage photos, use the free Photos
app. Both apps access the same photo library, which holds all the photos on your device.
Photos in the library can be collected into albums and events. Albums collect photos by
theme, and events group photos by import date. Some albums are created automatically.
For example, the camera roll holds all photos taken with the Camera app. You can create
other albums using iPhoto on a Mac, and import them to your device with iTunes. You can
also import photos from an attached camera or memory card using the iPad Camera
Connection Kit.
Understanding the Photo Library
You can use the photo library to preview every photo on your device. The library
appears in Photos and in iPhoto. You can select it by tapping the Photos icon on the
main page in either app. Both apps display the photos as small thumbnail previews.
Photos are sorted in date order using the date the photo was created as a file. Original
photos are sorted correctly, but if you copy a photo or save it from a web page, the
copy date overrides the original creation date, and the library can easily become a
disorganized jumble. Fortunately, photos can be grouped in other ways.
Understanding Albums and Events
You can get more from the photos in the library by grouping them into collections.
You can use albums to collect related photos together — by subject, person, color,
mood, or for any other reason. You can tag photos with useful words, and iPhoto
automatically groups photos with matching words into albums for you. Your iDevice
also creates some albums automatically — for example, iPhoto includes a Beamed
album for photos sent manually from other devices. Events organize photos by date.
Although you can create albums in Photos, and both iPhoto and Photos can create
events, both options are easier to use on a Mac. Many users create albums and events
in iPhoto on a Mac or some other application such as Aperture, Photoshop, or
Photoshop Elements and use their iDevice as a portable photo album. (For more about
creating albums in Photos, see Chapter 5.)

Understanding the Camera Roll
The camera roll is a special album. The Camera app adds photos to it whenever you
take a snap. Some apps, including iPhoto, Mail, and Safari, can also save photos to the
camera roll. You can copy the photos on the camera roll to a Mac or PC, upload them
to iPhoto on a Mac, or share them to an e-mail, text message, or Twitter post. You can
access the camera roll in iPhoto and Photos or indirectly through the Camera app.
Understanding Places
Many cameras including the iPhone and some iPad models embed location
information into photos as you take them. The Places feature in the Photos app
displays your photo locations on a map with pins for each location. When you zoom
out of the map, Places automatically groups nearby locations under a single pin to
help keep the display clear and uncluttered. As you zoom in, nearby locations are split
and shown with pins of their own. iPhoto on the Mac has an equivalent feature.
Unfortunately, iPhoto for iOS does not show places, but if you add photos to a journal,
you can show the location of each photo on a separate map. For details see Chapter
13.
Understanding the iPad Camera Connection Kit

The iPad Camera Connection Kit is a pair of adapters that plug into a standard
iDevice socket or, via a further optional adapter, into the new iPhone 5 socket. One
adapter has a slot for an SD memory card. The other has a standard full-sized flat
USB socket. Both adapters work the same way. If you plug in a memory card or a
camera via a USB cable, iPhoto imports the photos it finds and collects them into
events. The kit is not compatible with the iPhone.


Get Started with the Photos App
You can use the Photos app to view and manage the photos, albums, and events on your
device. iPhoto and Photos share the same library so you can see the same photos, albums,
and events in both. Use Photos to preview and manage your photos, and iPhoto to edit and
enhance them.
Photos is included with every iDevice, so you do not need to download it. It is included on
devices that lack a camera, because you can use Photos to view photos, albums and events
you download to your device with iTunes.
Get Started with the Photos App
 Tap the Photos icon on the Home screen to launch the Photos app.
 Tap the Photos button to view all the photos in your device library.
 Tap any photo to view it.
Note: Photos displays a line of mini-thumbnails under a photo when you preview it. The

thumbnails fade out after a second or so, and you can view the photo full screen. Tap the
screen again to see the thumbnails.
Note: You can view photos by tapping their thumbnails and by swiping left and right.
 Tap the Albums button or the Events button to view the albums and events in your
device library.
 Tap any album or event to view the photos it holds.
Note: For more about creating and deleting albums in Photos, see Chapter 5.
 Tap the Places button to see a map with pins for photo locations.
 Tap a pin to view a popover with a preview of the photo or photos at that location.
 Tap the popover to view all the photos at that location.
Note: If you zoom into a location, more pins may appear. Photos groups nearby locations
under a single pin to keep the display uncluttered.

TIPS
Can I edit photos with Photos?
If you tap a photo in Photos and tap the Edit button, you can apply Rotate, Enhance,
Red-Eye, and Crop tools. These are simpler than the equivalent editing tools in iPhoto,
which are described in Chapters 7 to 11 of this book.
When should I use Photos instead of iPhoto?
Photos offers full-screen photo viewing. iPhoto does not. You can select any album or
event in Photos, tap to select a photo, and after a couple of seconds the top and bottom
tool bars disappear. You can now drag-scroll through that collection, viewing the photos
full screen. You can also rotate your device to get the best view in portrait or landscape
mode.


Using the Camera Roll
The camera roll is a special album that stores the most recent images added to your
iDevice. You can access it through iPhoto, Photos, and — indirectly — through the
Camera app. Many third-party photo apps also work with the camera roll.
When you take a photo with your device’s camera, the photo is saved to the camera roll.
You can also save photos to the camera roll from other sources, including e-mails and web
pages.
Using the Camera Roll
 In Camera, tap the thumbnail in the toolbar to open the camera roll.
Note: You can also open the camera roll by tapping the Camera Roll album in iPhoto and
Photos.
Note: This example uses the iPad 2 camera.
 Tap one of the mini-thumbnails to view a photo.

A The camera roll displays the number of the current photo and the total number of
photos in the roll.
 Swipe left or right to view other photos in the roll.
 Tap the trash can icon ( ) to delete a photo.
 Tap Delete Photo in the popover to confirm.
Note: There is no Undo option; you cannot recover a photo after you delete it.
Note: You can delete photos only from the camera roll. You cannot delete photos from
events or from other albums.
TIPS
How is the camera roll different from other albums?
iDevices have tight security, so you must use special software such as iTunes to copy and
manage most of your albums and events. The camera roll works differently. You can

copy the photos in it to a Mac or PC. Only the camera roll and the imported photo albums
allow this.
Why does iPhoto sometimes display an Updating Photo Library message?
If you add or remove photos from the photo library on your device — for example, by
saving photos to the camera roll — iPhoto notices the change and reloads the library
automatically to keep it up to date.


Save and Share Photos
iPhoto includes sophisticated photo sharing options which are introduced in Chapter 12.
But you can also save photos from web pages and e-mail to the camera roll, and share any
photo in the camera roll to some other destination.
As of iOS 6 you can share photos by e-mail, Twitter, and Facebook. You can also print a
photo, save it as your device wallpaper, copy it to paste it into another app, and assign it to
an address book contact.
Save and Share Photos
Save a Photo from an E-Mail Message
 Launch the Mail app from the Home screen.
 Select any e-mail that includes a photo attachment and tap the photo preview.
 Tap the Save Image icon to save a single image.
A You can tap the Save Images icon to save all the images in the e-mail at once.

 Launch the Photos app and tap the Camera Roll album to open it.
 Tap the most recent mini-thumbnails at the right of the list.
B Photos displays the photo you saved from the e-mail.
Save a Photo from a Website
 Launch Safari and open a web page.
 Tap and hold any image on the page.
Note: Images can be any size, anywhere on the page. They do not have to fill the screen.
 Tap Save Image to save the image to the camera roll.
Share a Photo
 Return to Photos and view the camera roll album.
 Tap the Share icon ( ) to share a photo.
 Tap one of the options in the popover to select a sharing option.

iPhoto displays a sharing tool for each option. For more details, see Chapter 12.
TIPS
Are uploaded photos full sized?
Between them, iPhoto and Facebook shrink photos to a manageable size, usually a few
hundred pixels on a side. iPhoto does not upload the original full-sized versions of your
photos. Although web users can still download and link to your photos, they cannot make
high-resolution prints or copies.
Do the photos include location information?
iPhoto uploads location information to Facebook, and you can add a location to the photo
on Facebook if you choose to. However, location information is stripped out of the photo.
If someone downloads a photo, he cannot see your location.


Using the Camera Connection Kit
You can use Apple’s optional Camera Connection Kit to import photos into your device.
The official Apple version of the kit includes two connectors — one with a slot for an SD
card and one with a standard USB socket. The Camera Connection Kit can read JPEG,
PNG, and RAW format files.
To get started, plug one end of the connector into your device’s main port. Insert an SD
card or connect a USB camera — you can use another iDevice as a source. The Photos
app launches automatically. You can then start importing your photos.
Using the Camera Connection Kit
 Plug one of the connectors into the main port of your device.
Note: This example uses a single combined budget non-Apple connector with a built-in
card reader and USB socket.
 Insert a card into the slot.
 If you are using a combined reader with a switch, set the switch to the SD or Card
position.

 Alternatively, plug a connector with a USB socket into your device.
 Connect your camera with a USB cable that matches its socket.
Note: Many cameras use the “Mini-B” plug shown here. Some use smaller plugs called
“Micro-AB” or “Micro-B.” Check your camera’s manual for details.
 Plug the end of the USB cable with the standard plug into the connector.
 Set the side switch to USB, if necessary.
The Photos app launches automatically.
Photos begins to load preview images from the camera or card, and displays a grid of
empty thumbnails and a Loading icon.

After a while, typically a few minutes, Photos finishes loading the thumbnails.
 Tap Import All to begin importing the photos.
A You can alternatively tap Delete All to clear the photos from the card or camera.
Note: If you delete the photos, you lose them forever.
TIPS
Which memory cards and cameras are supported?
The official Apple Camera Connection Kit supports SD and SDHC cards. SDXC cards
do not work. You can use CF and other flash cards with a separate non-Apple converter
— look on Amazon, eBay, and photo accessory stores. Most cameras with a USB
connector are compatible with the USB adapter. You can also import photos from any
USB drive or supported card by copying them to a folder named DCIM.
Can I buy a cheaper adapter?
eBay and Amazon sell budget alternatives of the official Apple Camera Connection Kit.
Many are all-in-one designs that combine a USB socket with a card reader. Some have
extra slots for a wider range of memory cards. Prices are extremely low compared to the
Apple model, but reliability cannot be guaranteed.
When you use the Camera Connection Kit, the Photos app launches automatically and
displays a grid of thumbnails. You cannot pick and choose the photos you want — you
must import them all, or cancel the import completely. As the photos import, Photos marks
them with a green check mark. After import you can choose to keep the photos on the
source or delete them. Photos automatically creates Last Import and All Imported albums,
and splits the photos into events by date. You can view the albums and events in Photos or
in iPhoto.

Photos begins to import the photos. Each photo is marked with a green check after import.
A You can optionally tap Stop Import to end the import.
Note: Photos keeps the photos already imported if you stop early.
B Photos asks if you want to delete the photos from your card or camera.
 Tap Keep to keep the photos.
C You can tap Delete to delete the photos.
Note: You cannot recover the photos if you delete them.

 Tap the Events button.
D Photos automatically splits the photos into events grouped by date.
Note: All the photos taken on the same date appear in a single event.
 Tap the Albums button.
 Tap the Last Import album to open it.
Photos automatically collects all the photos from the last import into this album.
Note: Photos also creates an album called All Imported, which holds photos from every
import.
Note: Import does not rotate photos, so if any of your photos are sideways you must rotate

them manually in iPhoto or Photos.
TIPS
Can I add imported photos to an album?
You cannot add the imported photos to an existing album. However, you can create a
completely new album and add as many photos as you want to that. You also cannot add
the new photos to an existing event.
What happens when I next sync my device?
iTunes does not automatically import the new photos, events, or albums to your Mac.
Photos in the Last Import and All Imported albums can be imported to a Mac or PC just
like the photos on your camera roll, but they are not grouped into albums. If you have
iPhoto for the Mac, you can place them into albums by hand.


Copy Photos to a Mac or PC
You can copy the photos in your camera roll and all photos imported with the Camera
Connection Kit from your device to a Mac or PC. To access photos in albums or events,
use the sharing options introduced in Chapter 12.
Use manual copying if you do not have iPhoto for the Mac or if you are using a PC. A
device plugged into a PC appears as an external USB drive. This option is not available on
a Mac, but you can import the photos using an application called Image Capture.
Copy Photos to a Mac or PC
Copy Photos to a Mac
 Plug your device into your Mac.
 Open the Applications folder in Finder.
 Double-click the Image Capture application.
 Use the file selector to choose a folder for your photos.

 Click Import All to import all photos.
A You can press and hold 
 on the keyboard and click single photos to select them and
then click Import to import the selected photos.
Note: You can use the connection and delete options at the bottom left to choose what
happens on connection and import.
Copy Photos to a PC
 On a PC, plug your device into a USB socket.
The AutoPlay dialog box appears.
 Click Open device to view files.
Note: You may need to scroll down a list to see this option.
B You can optionally click Always do this for this device (  changes to ) to view the
files automatically without seeing the dialog box.
Note: If you have image editing software installed, you may be able to import the photos
into it directly.
 Click through the folders on the device until you open the folder at the lowest level
inside the DCIM (Digital Camera Import) folder.

 Drag some or all of the photos from the device and drop them into any other folder.
TIPS
Can I copy photos from a computer to the device?
You cannot add photos to a device. To import photos on a Mac or PC for viewing, use
iTunes. On a Mac, you can import photos from the Pictures folder or from the Mac
version of iPhoto. On a PC you can select a folder by name. Copying photos adds them to
an event or folder, but not to the camera roll.
Why is there no way to file-copy photos on a Mac?
For security reasons, Apple devices are locked to specific software. When you plug your
device into your Mac, it does not appear in Finder as a USB drive. You can access the
photos on the camera roll only through iTunes and Image Capture.

Chapter 3: Using iCloud and Photo
Stream
You can use Photo Stream to share photos automatically between devices that have Wi-Fi.
You do not need to remember to beam photos or share them by hand. You must remember
to save the photos on a device before they disappear.
Understanding Photo Stream
Set Up Photo Stream for iOS
Set Up Photo Stream on a Mac
Set Up Photo Stream in Windows
Add Photos to Photo Stream
Delete Photos from Photo Stream
Reset Photo Stream


Understanding Photo Stream
Photo Stream is Apple’s simplest and most straightforward photo sharing tool. Photo
Stream is like a shared album. It uses iCloud technology to share photos automatically
between devices. When you take or upload a photo, iCloud copies it to other devices with
the same iCloud account.
Photo Stream works almost effortlessly, but it can be easy to miss that it is a
synchronization tool, not a giant Internet hard drive. Photo Stream copies photos between
devices. Although you can create small online galleries with Photo Stream, it is not an
alternative to online photo sharing sites such as Flickr or Picasa.
Understanding iCloud
Photo Stream relies on iCloud technology to manage photo copying. To use iCloud,
you must have an Apple ID, which is usually the same as your iTunes and App Store
ID. You must enable iCloud and log in with your ID on every device you want to use
for photo sharing, including handheld devices, Macs, and PCs. Once Photo Stream is
working, photos pass through iCloud to every device. iCloud does not keep the photos
it shares. Instead, it checks if all connected devices have the same images, and copies
photos between them until they do. Note that although other iCloud traffic may use
your cellular connection, photo sharing always works over Wi-Fi. Photo Stream does
not affect your iCloud storage allowance.
Understanding Photo Sharing
When you share a photo with Photo Stream, it automatically appears on other devices
with a Wi-Fi connection and the same iCloud account. (In iOS 6, you can share photos
between multiple accounts.) You can share photos in various ways. If you take a photo
with the Camera app or save a photo from some other source to the camera roll, Photo
Stream shares it automatically. You can also share photos from a Mac or PC. You can
even use Photo Stream to share photos between Macs, PCs, and an Apple TV.

Understanding Photo Stream on a Device
On a device, both incoming and outgoing shared photos appear in a special My Photo
Stream album in iPhoto. Streamed photos also appear in the Photos app in a special
Photo Stream collection. Because device memory is limited, the Photo Stream album
keeps only the last 1,000 shared photos. It also deletes photos that were streamed
more than 30 days ago. If you want to keep streamed photos for longer, you must
move them to another album using iPhoto on a Mac or equivalent Mac or PC software
and then reimport them with iTunes.
Understanding Photo Stream on a Mac
On a Mac, Photo Stream offers unlimited storage. Photos are never deleted
automatically, and you can keep as many you take. Once you set up Photo Stream on a
Mac, you can open the Photo Stream album to view photos streamed from devices.
You can also copy photos to your devices by dragging them from your Mac’s iPhoto
collection into the Photo Stream album. This option is a great way to share a small
number of photos with a device without having to synchronize them through iTunes.
However, you cannot stream albums or events — iTunes sync is the only way to copy
these items to a device.
Understanding Photo Stream on a PC
If you install iCloud on a PC and turn on Photo Stream, photos are copied to a special

Photo Stream folder in the Pictures folder on your PC. Photo Stream on a PC is less
sophisticated than the Mac version. You cannot share photos from a PC application,
but you can copy photos from a digital camera over USB into the Photo Stream
upload folder to share them with your devices or with a Mac.


Set up Photo Stream for iOS
You can set up Photo Stream for iOS in the Settings app. When Photo Stream is running,
iPhoto, Photos, and the Camera app send and receive photos automatically. You do not
need to select them or send them manually.
You must enable Wi-Fi before you use Photo Stream. If Wi-Fi is not available
immediately, Photo Stream queues new photos and syncs them when your device
discovers a Wi-Fi connection. If you never enable Wi-Fi, Photo Stream cannot work.
Set up Photo Stream for iOS
 Launch the Settings app on your device.
 Tap the Wi-Fi option.
Settings displays the Wi-Fi options.
 If Wi-Fi is not already running, tap the switch to enable it.
 If a network is available, tap it to connect to it.

 Tap the iCloud option.
iPhoto displays the iCloud settings.
 Tap the Photo Stream option.
Settings displays the Photo Stream options.
 Tap the switch to enable your personal Photo Stream.
 Optionally, tap the Shared Photo Streams switch to enable shared photo streams.
Note: You can create a shared photo stream without enabling your personal photo stream,
although this is not usually a useful option.
A iPhoto enables either or both options and Photo Stream starts working.
Note: You do not need to change any settings in iPhoto, Photos, or the Camera app.
TIPS
Does saving a photo from a web page send it to Photo Stream?

Yes. If you tap and hold on any image in Safari in iOS and then tap the Save Image
option, the photo is saved to your camera roll and sent out over Photo Stream. Photo
Stream also works with any photo from any other source such as a document. Every
photo added to the camera roll is synced.
How quick is Photo Stream?
Photo Stream is fast, but not instant. A single new photo usually appears in a minute or
so. If your Wi-Fi connection is slow or if you upload a lot of photos quickly, it can take
much longer for Photo Stream to catch up. For best performance avoid uploading tens of
photos at once. Syncing many photos can take a very long time.


Set up Photo Stream on a Mac
You can set up iPhoto on a Mac to work with Photo Stream. Once iPhoto is running,
photos from devices appear automatically in the Photo Stream collection in iPhoto for
Mac. You can also drag any photo onto the Photo Stream item to share it with your
devices, or even with another Mac.
To set up Photo Stream, open the iCloud item in the System Preferences and enable the
Photo Stream option. Once you enable Photo Stream, sharing begins automatically.
Set up Photo Stream on a Mac
 Click  and then System Preferences to open the System Preferences application.
 Double-click iCloud to open it.
System Preferences shows the iCloud settings.
 If you are not already logged in, enter your iCloud account e-mail address or Apple ID
and password.

 Click Sign In.
Note: The Sign In button stays grayed out until you enter an Apple ID and password.
iCloud signs you in.
 Click the Photo Stream check box in the list of iCloud options (  changes to ).
iCloud enables Photo Stream.
Note: Unless you also have iPhoto open, iCloud does not give you any other warning that
Photo Stream is running.
 Launch iPhoto.
 Click the Photo Stream item.
A Streamed photos from devices appear automatically in this area.
Note: You can also drag any photo and drop it on the Photo Stream item to copy it to your
stream and all the devices connected to it.

TIPS
Does Photo Stream work only with iPhoto?
You might expect Photo Stream to sync your Mac’s Pictures folder, but it does not.
However, it does work with Apple’s professional Aperture photo application. You can
share photos from Aperture in much the same way as you can share them with iPhoto.
Does Photo Stream work on all Macs?
iCloud is built into OS X Lion 10.7.2 and later. The latest features, including sharing to
multiple iCloud accounts, are available only with OS X Mountain Lion.


Set up Photo Stream in Windows
You can install Photo Stream on a recent Windows PC and use it to send and receive
photos from your Photo Stream. Photo Stream is not currently supported by any Windows
photo or design applications, but you can still use it to copy photos to and from your
devices. You can also use it to share photos with a Mac, or with another PC.
Because there is no application support, Photo Stream copies photos to and from a pair of
folders on your PC. You can select the folders you want to share. Copying photos from a
digital camera into the Upload folder shares them automatically.
Set up Photo Stream in Windows
 Open your favorite browser and search the web for the current download location of the
iCloud Control Panel for Windows.
Note: At this writing, the URL is http://support.apple.com/kb/DL1455.
 Right click the installer and save it to your PC.
 Double-click the installer to launch it.
 Click Next and follow the steps to complete the installation.
The installer installs the iCloud Control Panel on your PC.
 Enter your Apple ID and password.
 Click Sign in.
Note: The Sign In button stays grayed out until you enter an Apple ID and password.

 Click the Photo Stream check box to enable Photo Stream (  changes to ).
 Click the Options button to select Photo Stream’s upload and download folders.
 Click Change to select a different folder for the upload and/or download folders, and
navigate to the new folder in Windows Explorer.
 Click OK when done.
 Click Apply in the previous dialog box to set the folders and launch Photo Stream.
The iCloud Control Panel launches Photo Stream. Photos from devices appear in the
download folder. Photos you copy to the upload folder appear on connected devices.
TIPS
Can I use any version of Windows?
Photo Stream works with iCloud, so your PC must be running Windows Vista SP2,
Windows 7, or Windows 8. Windows XP and earlier versions are not supported.
Can I use iCloud’s other features on Windows?
You can use iCloud on the PC to share contacts, your calendar, email, and other
information with Macs and with your handheld devices. If you use both Macs and PCs,

iCloud makes data sharing simple and convenient.


Add Photos to Photo Stream
Once Photo Stream is running, you can add photos to it by taking a photo on a device,
uploading photos into iPhoto, dragging photos from your Mac’s iPhoto collection to the
Photo Stream item, or by saving photos from other sources to the camera roll on a device.
Whenever you add photos, they are shared automatically with all connected devices.
Because Photo Stream works over Wi-Fi, devices do not have to be close to each other.
You can take photos anywhere and your photos will often get home before you do.
Add Photos to Photo Stream
Take Photos on a Device and Add Them to Photo Stream
 On a device, launch the Camera app.
 Tap the camera icon ( ) to take a photo.
If Wi-Fi is available, Photo Stream shares the photo immediately. If not, Photo Stream
waits until your device has a Wi-Fi connection.
Share Photos from a Device Using iPhoto on a Mac

 In iPhoto on a Mac, connect a device with photos on its camera roll and wait until it is
recognized.
 Click the Import Photos button to import the photos.
Photo Stream shares the photos as soon as they are imported.
Note: If Photo Stream is already running on the device you are importing from, iPhoto
reports that the photos have already been uploaded, so you do not need to upload them
again.
Share Other Photos from Your Mac’s iPhoto Library to Photo Stream
 In iPhoto on a Mac, select a photo or a range of photos.
 Drag and drop the photo(s) on the Photo Stream item in the list at the left.
Photo Stream shares the photos.
View the Shared Photos

 To view the shared photos in iPhoto on a device, open the Albums list.
 Tap the My Photo Stream album to open it.
A The streamed photos appear in the My Photo Stream album. You can tap any thumbnail
to view a photo.
Note: In iPhoto on a Mac, click the Photo Stream item in the list at the left of the page to
view the stream.
TIPS
Can I choose which photos are added to Photo Stream?
In iOS 5, all camera roll photos are streamed. You cannot select certain photos only. In
iOS 6, the sharing option in the Photos app includes a new selective streaming feature.
You can select certain photos for streaming and e-mail the recipients a link to the stream.
To use selective streaming, select any photo or group of photos in the Photos view, tap
the share option at the top left of the toolbar (top right for a single photo), tap Photo
Stream, and either create a new stream or add the photos to an existing stream.
Does Photo Stream slow down my Mac?
Photo Stream uses a lot of processor power. On slower Macs you may notice that other
applications run more slowly when Photo Stream is enabled and iPhoto is running.


Delete Photos from Photo Stream
You can delete photos from a Photo Stream using the Photos app on a device. iPhoto does
not include a delete option.
When you delete a photo from Photo Stream, it disappears from the Photo Stream album
on all devices. Deleting a photo from a camera roll does not remove it from Photo Stream.
Similarly, deleting a new photo from Photo Stream does not remove it from the camera
roll. When Photo Stream is running you must delete a photo from the camera roll and from
Photo Stream to get rid of it completely.
Delete Photos from Photo Stream
 Launch the Photos app.
 Tap the Photo Stream button to open it.
Photos displays a list of streams, including My Photo Stream.
 Tap My Photo Stream to open it.

Note: My Photo Stream is the main shared stream for your iCloud account. If you have
created shared streams for friends and relatives they also appear on this page.
Photos displays thumbnails of the photos in the stream.
 Tap the Edit button.
 Tap photos to select them for deletion.
Photos marks the selected photos with a check.
 Tap Delete to remove the photos from the stream.
 Tap Delete Selected Photos to confirm the deletion.
Photo Stream deletes the photos from the stream on all connected devices.
Note: Photo Stream deletions are permanent. There is no Undo option.
TIPS
Do edited photos count as a separate photo?

Edited and original photos are separate. If you delete an original photo from a stream,
edited versions stay in the stream and vice versa.
Does deleting a photo from a stream delete it from albums and photo collections?
Photo Stream is a portable shared album. You can add and remove photos from it just as
you can with any other album. The photos remain on your device and in other collections
even if you delete them from a stream.


Reset Photo Stream
You may sometimes want to remove all Photo Stream photos from your devices and start
from scratch.
Deleting all photos is a two-stage process. First, log in to the iCloud website and reset
Photo Stream for your account. This step deletes photos that have not synced across all
devices. Next, turn Photo Stream off and on again on every device. This deletes the photos
in the Photo Stream album. After both steps, Photo Stream is empty and you can start
adding photos again.
Reset Photo Stream
 Open a web browser with the following URL: www.icloud.com.
 If you have not signed in to iCloud before, click the Sign In button.
 Type your iCloud username.
 Type your iCloud password.

 Click the arrow ( ).
Note: You can optionally click Keep me signed in to stay signed in (  changes to ).
iCloud signs you in. You can now use other iCloud online services.
 Click your account name.
iCloud displays a dialog with various options.
 Click the Advanced option.
 Click Reset Photo Stream.
 Click Reset to confirm.
Note: You may also be asked to enter your password again.
iCloud resets the Photo Stream and ends any pending copy operations.
 To delete all Photo Stream photos from a device, turn off Photo Stream on the device,
and then turn it on again.
The Photo Stream album is emptied on every device.

TIPS
Why is there no Photo Stream icon on icloud.com?
icloud.com does not include your photo stream, and you cannot view photos online. This
is because Photo Stream is not an online file space. It is a sharing tool. Photos in your
streams are stored on your devices, not on Apple’s servers.
Why do I need to turn Photo Stream off and on again?
It would be convenient if iCloud could send a reset command to every device, but this
feature is not available in the current version. When you turn off Photo Stream on a
device, the Photo Stream album is cleared automatically. Unfortunately, the only way to
remove streamed photos from a device is to turn off Photo Stream to delete the photos,
and then turn it back on again.

Chapter 4: Introducing Photo
Browsing
You can use iPhoto’s browser to preview photos, collect photos for sharing, and select
photos for editing. The browser displays a grid of thumbnails — small preview photos.
You can change the thumbnail display to suit the way you work.
Understanding Photo Browsing
Introducing the Thumbnail Browser
View Single Photos
Introducing the Thumbnail Grid
Select Multiple Photos by Dragging
Select Multiple Photos by Tapping
Select a Range of Photos
Using the Loupe
Find Similar Photos
View Photo Information


Understanding Photo Browsing
You can use Photo Browsing to preview your photos and select them for editing. All of
iPhoto’s main features, including simple and advanced editing, tagging, flagging, and
sharing, are built into the browser.
To use the browser, first select an album, event, or photo collection on the main page. Tap
to open it. The browser displays the photos for that item only. To browse all the photos on
your device, select the Photos item.
Understanding Thumbnails
The browser displays thumbnails — small photo previews arranged on a grid. You can
change the size and position of the grid and hide it completely to leave more — or less
— room for photo previews. When you edit or tag a photo (see Chapter 6 for details)
iPhoto adds a small white symbol to the photo’s thumbnail. You can use this feature to
see at a glance which photos are modified, which are favorites, and so on.
Understanding Previews
To view a photo, tap its thumbnail. iPhoto loads a larger version of the photo into the
main preview area on the screen. You can now edit the photo, share it, or view
information about it. Note that although the Photos app has a full-screen preview
option, iPhoto does not. You can hide the edit buttons along the bottom of the screen,
but you cannot hide the top toolbar.
Understanding Photo Selection
You can select more than one photo at a time. You cannot edit more than one photo at
once, but you can tag multiple photos, share them, or add them to a journal. You can
also search for visually similar photos. Some of the selection options are invisible —
you can find out about them later in this chapter.



Introducing the Thumbnail Browser
You can use the options in the thumbnail browser to rearrange the thumbnail view. You
can also access the main editing tools, caption your photo, and use the tagging features
described in Chapter 6.
A Thumbnails Grid
Displays a scrollable list of small photo previews.
B Selected Thumbnail
A selected thumbnail is outlined with a white box.
C Show/Hide Icon
Tap this icon to show or hide the thumbnails grid.
D Share Icon
Tap this icon to display iPhoto’s sharing options.
E Info Icon
Tap this icon to display info about the photo.
F Edit Options
Tap to select edit mode and show or hide edits.
G Preview Area
Selected photos appear here.

H Edit Icons
Tap to use iPhoto’s advanced editing features.
I Main Toolbar
Tap these icons for simple edits and for tagging and flagging.
J Supporting Tools
Scroll through the photos and select further options.


View Single Photos
You can select a single photo by tapping its thumbnail, by swiping through the thumbnails,
or by tapping a pair of buttons to step through the thumbnails.
When you select a photo, iPhoto automatically resizes it to fill the preview area. You can
now edit the photo, share it, or check its information to find out about the camera and
settings used to take the photo. Or you can simply look at it. Note that there is no full-
screen preview option, but you can hide the bottom toolbar by tapping the Edit button at
the top right.
View Single Photos
 Select an album or event or the Photos collection on the main page.
iPhoto displays the photos in the item you selected.
 If the thumbnail grid is not visible, tap the Show/Hide Thumbnails icon ( ).
 Tap any thumbnail to display a photo in the main preview area.

iPhoto displays the photo.
 Swipe left or right to view the previous or next photo in the list.
 Tap one of the previous or next buttons to view the previous or next photo in the
thumbnails list.
iPhoto displays the previous or next photo.
TIPS
Can I zoom into part of a photo?
You can use a two-finger pinch in the preview area to zoom into and out of a photo to
view details. You can also use a two-finger rotation to rotate a photo. The two gestures
are similar, so practice pinching to avoid rotating your photos by accident. You can
double-tap part of a photo to zoom in and double-tap again to zoom out.
Is there a difference between swipe scrolling and button scrolling?
Many users feel that swipe-scrolling feels quicker and more natural than button scrolling

because the scroll buttons are small. If you swipe to scroll, you can cancel the swipe
before the next photo appears by lifting your finger. iPhoto “un-scrolls” the preview
window to show the original photo.


Introducing the Thumbnail Grid
You can set up the thumbnail grid to maximize space for previews, or hide it altogether.
The default width shows two thumbnails, but you can set the width to display between one
and four thumbnails instead. You can also move the thumbnail grid to the left or the right
of the preview area.
The thumbnail toolbar includes extra photo filtering features that work with iPhoto’s
tagging and flagging features. You can use these to show a selection of thumbnails. For
details, see Chapter 6.
Introducing the Thumbnail Grid
 Open the thumbnail browser.
Note: See the previous section to open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap and hold the divider at the top of the thumbnail grid.
 Slide it to the left and release it.
iPhoto displays a single column of thumbnails.

 Tap and hold the divider again.
 Slide it to the right and release it.
iPhoto displays two, three, or four columns of thumbnails.
 Tap and hold the thumbnail toolbar.
 Drag it to the right of the screen and release it.
iPhoto moves the thumbnail grid to the right edge of the screen.
Note: Be careful to tap the toolbar, not the divider or the disclosure triangle.

 Tap the Show/Hide Thumbnails icon ( ) for the thumbnail grid.
A iPhoto hides the thumbnails and resizes the photo so it almost fills the screen.
Note: You can tap the Show/Hide Thumbnails icon again to show the thumbnails.
Note: You can also show and hide the thumbnail grid by tapping and dragging the edge
next to the preview area.
TIPS
Why can I move the thumbnails to either side of the screen?
Some users are left-handed, whereas others find it more comfortable to keep the
thumbnails on the right-hand side of the screen. If you prefer the thumbnails at the left,
you can ignore this feature.
Can I move the thumbnails to the top or bottom of the screen?
In landscape mode, the thumbnails can be placed only on either side of the preview area.
If you rotate your device to portrait mode, the thumbnails automatically move to the
bottom of the screen. You cannot move them to the top. In portrait mode, you can view
up to five thumbnail rows by dragging the horizontal divider. You can also scroll through
them vertically, which is a very quick way to preview the thumbnails list.


Select Multiple Photos by Dragging
You can preview multiple photos in the preview area. This is a good way to select photos
before you share them or add them to a journal. You can also use this feature to tag and
flag multiple photos.
You can drag photos to the preview area to select more than one photo a time. To deselect
a photo from a multiple preview, swipe down on it. You can also double-select a photo in a
group preview to view it at maximum size. Double selection adds a double-width border
around a thumbnail.
Select Multiple Photos by Dragging
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap a photo to select it.
iPhoto displays the photo in the preview area.
 Drag another thumbnail from the grid onto the preview area.

iPhoto displays both photos, resizes them automatically to make them fit, and draws a thin
white selection frame around both thumbnails.
 Repeat step 3 and drag further thumbnails into the preview area.
iPhoto displays the other photos, resizing them as needed.
Note: You can add any thumbnail from any position in the list, in any order.
 Tap a thumbnail to double-select a photo and expand it to fill the preview area.
Note: You can also tap any photo in the preview area to expand it.
 Tap the photo or its thumbnail again to restore multiple previews.
 Tap any unselected thumbnail to remove the multiple selections.
Note: You can swipe down on a photo to remove it from a multiple selection without
deselecting the others.
TIPS

How many photos can I preview at once?
You can view up to 12 photos in the preview area. If you select more than 12 photos,
iPhoto previews the first 11 and adds a message at the bottom right-hand corner telling
you that further photos are selected but not shown. You cannot view these photos —
there is no way to scroll the previews.
Can I zoom and rotate the photos?
If you pinch-zoom any photo in a multiple preview, you can zoom into it. You can also
drag the zoomed area inside its frame. The size of the frame does not change. You can
also use a two-finger rotation gesture to rotate a photo.


Select Multiple Photos by Tapping
You can select photos for multiple preview by tapping and holding their thumbnails.
Although to some users dragging feels slightly more natural than tapping, the latter offers
extra features, more positive responses, and more control. For example, you can remove a
single photo from the preview list by tapping it and holding it.
Select Multiple Photos by Tapping
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap a thumbnail to preview a photo.
iPhoto displays the photo in the preview area.
 Tap and hold another thumbnail.
A iPhoto adds the second photo to the preview area.

 Repeat step 3 to add further photos.
iPhoto adds the photos to the preview area.
Note: You can add any thumbnail from any position in the list, in any order.
 Tap and hold a selected thumbnail to remove it from the preview list.
iPhoto deselects the photo and removes it from the preview area.
Note: Be careful to tap and hold the photo. If you tap without holding, iPhoto either
double-selects a photo if it is already selected, or cancels the multiple selection.
TIPS
Can I select a range of photos?
You can, but not by tapping with two fingers. iPhoto includes a range selection option,
but it is slightly hidden. For details, see the next section.
Can I combine tapping with dragging?

You can use either gesture to add a photo to the preview area. iPhoto does not remember
which gesture you used, so you always can tap and hold a photo to deselect it from a
multiple preview, even if you added it by dragging.


Select a Range of Photos
You can use a partially hidden feature in iPhoto to select a range of photos. Selecting a
range saves you time. You can select the first and last photos in the range, and iPhoto
automatically selects the photos between them.
You can also use this feature to select individual photos by tapping them once to select
them and tapping them again to deselect them. When you tap Done, iPhoto adds all
selected photos to the preview area.
Select a Range of Photos
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ).
 Tap the Select Multiple option.
Note: If the settings (gear) icon is not visible, tap the Edit button near the top right of the
screen.

iPhoto opens the Range page.
 Tap the Range button.
 Tap the first photo in the range you want to select.
iPhoto highlights the photo with a white border and marks it with a check mark.
Note: You cannot use any of the editing tools or tagging and flagging features while the
Range page is open.
 Tap the last photo in the range you want to select.
A iPhoto highlights all photos in the range with a check mark.
Note: You can scroll up and down the thumbnails and select any photo as the end of the
range.
 Tap Done.
B iPhoto hides the range selection page and adds all the photos in the range to the preview
area.

TIP
Do I have to select a range?
When you use the Select Multiple feature, you can select individual photos by tapping
them. This feature is similar to the tap and hold selection option in the previous section,
with three differences: selected photos are not added to the preview area until you tap
Done; selected photos are highlighted with a check mark; and you can tap photos to
select them without having to hold them. Although using Select Multiple adds an extra
couple of taps, it is the most flexible and powerful way to select multiple photos.


Using the Loupe
iPhoto includes a virtual magnifying glass called a loupe. The loupe looks and works like
a small magnifying lens. You can drag it over a photo to magnify a small area.
Professional photographers use a glass loupe to highlight details and look for flaws on
paper prints. You can use the virtual loupe in the same way. The loupe’s small size is fixed
and you can only use it to magnify a preview. You cannot use it to work on a small part of
a photo while editing.
Using the Loupe
 Tap any photo to select it and view it in the preview area.
 Close two fingers, and then tap and hold them on the preview area at the same time.
Note: You may find it takes practice to get the gesture to work for you. Try to move your
fingers as little as possible after tapping.
iPhoto displays the loupe and magnifies the area you selected.

 Drag the loupe over the photo to move it and magnify a different area.
Note: You can drag the rim of the loupe or the magnified “lens” area.
 Place two fingers inside the loupe area and rotate them to change the magnification.
Note: Rotate clockwise to increase magnification and counterclockwise to decrease it.
Note: When the loupe first appears, rotating counterclockwise does nothing because the
magnification is already as low as it can be.
 When done, tap anywhere on the photo or on the loupe to make it disappear.
iPhoto hides the loupe.
TIPS
Can I use the loupe on multiple photos?
The loupe works only on a single preview. You cannot use it when multiple photos are
selected. However, you can pinch-zoom into any selected photo in the preview area. The

size of the photo’s frame is fixed, but you can zoom in to magnify an area and drag the
magnified view within the frame.
Can I use the loupe on a zoomed photo?
You can usually use the loupe on a photo you have already pinch-zoomed. However, the
loupe does not appear if you have already pinch-zoomed to the highest possible
magnification, and it does not offer any extra magnification if you pinch-zoom by
smaller amount.


Find Similar Photos
You can search the thumbnails to find similar photos. This feature is still experimental. It
can find photos with very obvious similarities in colors and textures, but it cannot
recognize photos by theme. For example, it cannot recognize family or group shots, beach
shots, sunsets, and so on.
The search feature is hidden. You can access it by double-tapping any photo. If iPhoto
finds matches, it displays them in the preview area and plays a short repeating tone. If it
cannot find matches, iPhoto plays a buzz.
Find Similar Photos
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Double-tap any photo to begin the search.
iPhoto plays a short mechanical sound when it begins its search.
A If there are matches, iPhoto plays a companion sound, and then highlights and displays

matching photos in the preview area, just as if you selected them manually.
Note: “Similar” seems to mean “with similar colors.” Shapes and composition are less
important.
 Double-tap a photo that does not match any others.
iPhoto plays the “searching” sound.
If there is no match, iPhoto plays the “no match found” buzz and does not show any
further photos in the preview area.
TIPS

How fast is the search feature?
Searches are almost instant, although they can take a second or two if iPhoto is searching
thousands of thumbnails. iPhoto plays a “searching now” tone when it begins. If you
search a few hundred photos, the results appear almost immediately.
Can I tune the search to make it more sensitive or to recognize faces?
The search feature compares the range of colors in a photo. It does not recognize shapes.
There are no search options, so you cannot fine-tune the search. iPhoto has no facial-
recognition feature, and the search feature is not a substitute.


View Photo Information
You can use the Info option to display information about your photos, including the date
of the photo, the camera used, and the camera settings. If your camera saves photos with
location information, you can view the photo’s location on a map and the approximate
street address, if one exists.
The Info feature lists technical details including the aperture, shutter speed, lens focal
length, exposure mode, exposure correction, and ISO number, known technically as EXIF
(Exchangeable Image Format) data. You can also check the resolution in absolute
dimensions and megapixels, the file size, and the file format.
View Photo Information
 Open the thumbnail browser and tap a photo to select it.
 Tap the info icon ( ) to view information.
A iPhoto displays the photo info in a pop-over, including the time, data, location, file type,
and exposure mode.

Note: Not all photos include all possible information. If information is missing, boxes and
fields are left empty.
Note: The exposure mode icon — the dot to the left of the JPEG box — uses standard
symbols. For an explanation, see www.inspiredart.biz/Digital%20Symbols.htm.
 Tap the Map button to view the photo location.
Note: The Map button only appears when the photo includes location information.
iPhoto displays the photo location on a map with a red pin.
B Optionally, you can drag the map in the frame to view more of it.
Note: You cannot pinch the map to zoom in and out.
 Tap a different thumbnail to view that photo’s info.
iPhoto displays the info for the new photo.
Note: You do not need to close the pop-over and reopen it to view the info for another
photo.

 Tap anywhere outside the Info pop-over to close it.
Note: You cannot select multiple photos while the pop-over is open.
Note: You can use the Comments button to add comments to photos uploaded to
Facebook and Flickr as described in Chapter 12.
TIPS
Which iPhone and iPad models save location details?
All iPhones from the 3G onwards and all iPad 3G/4G models save location information
as long as you enable location services in the Settings app. iPad Wi-Fi models use stored
Wi-Fi information to estimate locations. Accuracy is very variable. If Wi-Fi is off,
location services are also off.
Which digital cameras save location details?
The large number of models makes it impossible to list them. Many affordable cameras
from around 2010 onwards include a GPS — Global Positioning Service — feature. GPS
has been available as an option on professional cameras from around 2005. If in doubt,
check your camera’s manual to see if GPS is available.

Chapter 5: Organizing Photos
You can use albums and events to organize your photos. This chapter explains how you
can create and delete albums and how to use them to manage your photos for sharing and
viewing.
Understanding Albums and Events
View Albums
Create an Album with Photos
Set the Key Photo
Create Albums on a Mac
Import Albums and Events
Clear the Camera Roll


Understanding Albums and Events
You can use albums and events to organize your photos. Events group photos by date.
Albums group photos by theme or subject. For example, you can create an album called
“Family” to keep all your family photos together. iPhoto also creates a selection of smart
albums automatically so you can view edited, beamed, flagged, tagged, or favorite photos
together. iPhoto automatically creates a smart album for each tag — a word or description
— you add to your photos. (For details see the next chapter.)
There is no other way to create albums or events in iPhoto. Typically you create albums in
Photos for iOS, in iPhoto on the Mac, or with other Mac and PC software.
Understanding Albums
You can use albums to group related photos together for easy sharing or viewing. You
can create as many albums as you want (until your device runs out of memory), but
iPhoto lists all albums on a single page. One photo can be in multiple albums. To get
the most from albums, use them selectively. Most users do not need more than a few
tens of albums; if you create more, your albums can become difficult to manage. You
can collect photos into albums using the Photos app on your device. You can also
import albums created with iPhoto or other software on a Mac or PC, such as Apple
Aperture or Adobe Photoshop Elements. You cannot create this kind of album directly
in iPhoto. But you can tag photos with simple descriptions such as wedding or
vacation 2013. iPhoto automatically creates smart albums for photos that share a tag.
Understanding Events
Events are always imported. iPhoto on the Mac creates events automatically, grouping
photos by date. iPhoto on iOS can also create events, but only if you upload photos to
your device with the optional Camera Connection Kit. (See Chapter 2.) Unfortunately,
photos in the camera roll are ignored. To create events from photos in the camera roll,
upload them to iPhoto on a Mac and then re-import the events using iTunes.

Using iPhoto with Photos
Many of the features you might expect to find in iPhoto are available only in the
Photos app included with every iOS device. For example, you can use the app to
create, delete, and view albums, and to delete photos from your device. If you create
an album in Photos, iPhoto displays it on its Albums page. The camera roll, most
albums, and all photos are shared between the apps. But the Photos app does not show
the “smart” albums iPhoto creates for favorite, flagged, beamed, edited or tagged
photos.
Using iPhoto for iOS with iPhoto for Mac
iPhoto for Mac offers more tools for managing photos, events, and albums and works
well with iPhoto for iOS. iPhoto for Mac creates events automatically when you
import photos from your device camera roll. You can also create albums and move
photos between events and albums. Note that iPhoto on the Mac cannot sync events or
albums to a device. Instead, you use iTunes to pick the albums and events you want to
view on your device and then use the sync feature to copy them. To delete albums
from your device, deselect them in iTunes then sync.
Using Smart Albums
iPhoto automatically collects certain photos into albums which appear on the Albums

page — Edited, Flagged, Beamed, Favorites, and the Camera Roll. These smart
albums appear only when there is at least one qualifying photo. For example, the
Edited album appears only after you edit a photo. These albums do not appear in
Photos, and you cannot delete them. You can view the photos in the albums in the
usual way, by tapping the album on the Albums page and scrolling through the
thumbnails. You can remove photos from these albums by hiding them or untagging
them. (For details see the next chapter.)


View Albums
You can use the Albums page to view the albums on your device. iPhoto displays the
albums on simulated glass shelves. If you have a lot of albums, iPhoto adds shelves for
them automatically. You can drag your finger down the list to scroll through it.
The photo displayed on the cover of the album is called the key photo. Unless you tell it
otherwise, iPhoto displays the first photo in the album, but you can pick any photo as the
key photo. (For details, see the section “Set the Key Photo” later in this chapter.)
View Albums
 Launch iPhoto.
 Open the main page.
Note: If iPhoto launches in the thumbnail browser/editor, tap the return button near the top
left to return to the main page. The label on the button varies, but its position on the screen
is always the same.
 If the albums are not visible, tap the Albums button to view a list of albums.

iPhoto displays the albums on your device with an attractive animation.
 Drag the page up and down to view further albums.
 Tap any album to open it.
Note: Smart albums, standard albums, and tag albums all have different border graphics.
iPhoto displays the photos in the album as a list of thumbnails.
Note: iPhoto remembers the last photo you select.
 Drag the thumbnails up and down to view the complete list.
 Tap any photo to select it and preview it.
iPhoto loads the photo into the preview area.
Note: You can now use the edit tools on the photo.

 Swipe left and right to preview other photos in the album.
 Tap the Albums button to return to the albums page.
TIPS
Can I also view albums in the Photos app?
Photos and iPhoto share albums. When you download or create an album, you can view it
in both apps. iPhoto’s automatic albums — flagged, edited, favorite, and beamed photos
— do not appear in Photos. Nor does the Photo Box album, but the Camera Roll album
does as long as it holds at least one photo.
Can I change the order of the albums?
iPhoto sorts albums automatically into a “natural” near-alphabetic order. You cannot
change this or sort the photos some other way. Even if you rearrange the album order in
iPhoto on the Mac, iPhoto for iOS ignores that ordering.


Create an Album with Photos
Unfortunately, you cannot create albums in iPhoto. To create albums directly on your
device, use the Photos app instead. After you create an album in Photos, it appears
automatically in iPhoto, too. The two apps display albums in different ways — the Photos
thumbnails list is much smaller and harder to see, and Photos has no key photo.
Otherwise, albums are identical.
The Create Album option in Photos is not completely intuitive. It is also limited — you
can add photos only to new albums, not to existing imported albums.
Create an Album with Photos
 Tap the Photos icon to launch Photos.
 Tap the Albums button to view albums.
Photos displays a list of albums.
 Tap the Edit button to turn on album editing.

iPhoto turns on album editing. The Edit button is replaced with a Done button.
 Tap the New Album button.
Note: The button is clearer when the alert is not visible.
 Type a name for the album into the alert’s text box.
 Tap Save to create the new album.
Note: Tap Cancel if you change your mind. Photos returns to the Albums page and does
not create the album.
 Tap the photos you want to add to your new album.
iPhoto adds a check mark to a photo when you select it.
Note: Tap a photo again to deselect it.
 Tap Done to add the photos to the new album.
A iPhoto adds the photos to the new album and adds the album to the list.
Note: If you open iPhoto, you can see your new album there, too.

TIPS
How do I delete albums?
To delete an album, tap the Edit button and tap the close icon ( ) at the top left of the
album. Tap Done when finished. You can only delete an album if you previously created
it in Photos. You cannot delete albums you import with iTunes.
Is there a quick way to select multiple photos while I add them?
Unfortunately, there is no quick way to select a range of photos, but you can drag-select
photos without tapping them one by one. Tap and hold two fingers on any photo. Drag
both fingers slowly over the photos you want to select. Photos selects all the photos as
your fingers move over them.


Set the Key Photo
You can set an album’s key photo to select the photo that appears on its cover. You can use
key photos for decoration, or to make the Albums page look more attractive. You can also
use them to remind yourself of the contents of an album, or to display a favorite photo as
the album cover.
Key photos have no other purpose. They are not pre-selected when you open an album,
and there is no automatic album for key photos only. Key photos are not linked to iPhoto’s
Favorites feature, which is introduced in the next chapter.
Set the Key Photo
 Launch iPhoto.
 Open the main page.
 If the albums are not visible, tap the Albums button.
iPhoto displays the albums.

 Tap any new or imported album to open it.
Note: Key photos are not available in the Beamed, Edited, Flagged, or Favorite albums, or
the camera roll.
 Scroll through the thumbnails and tap your chosen key photo in the thumbnails list.
iPhoto previews the photo.
 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ).
iPhoto displays a popover with various options.
 Tap Set as Key Photo in the popover.
 Tap the Albums button to return to the Albums list.
A iPhoto displays the album with the new key photo on the cover.
TIPS

Why does Photos ignore key photos?
Key photos are an iPhoto feature. Photos is a simpler app and does not support key
photos. It displays a preview photo instead, which is usually the first photo in the album.
The Camera Roll album is the exception. Both Photos and iPhoto display the most recent
photo as the cover of the Camera Roll.
Can I set a key photo for the smart albums?
Smart albums do not support key photos. The cover photo is always the first photo added
to the album.


Create Albums on a Mac
If you have iPhoto for the Mac you can use it to create and manage albums. You can then
import them into your device for viewing and sharing.
iPhoto on the Mac is easier to use than iPhoto for iOS because of the bigger screen and
easy drag-and-drop photo management. You can get more from either application if you
use them together. Creating and managing albums on a Mac is much more straightforward
than managing them on a device.
Create Albums on a Mac
 Launch iPhoto on your Mac.
Note: If you plug in a device, iPhoto launches automatically.
 If you have new photos to import, click the Import button.
 If you want iPhoto to create an event for each separate date as you import the photos,
click Split Events (  changes to ).
Note: If you do not click Split Events, iPhoto creates a single event for all the imported
photos.

A After an import, iPhoto automatically selects the Last Import smart album.
 To create a new album, click File and New Album or press + .
Note: You can add any photo to any album. You do not have to import photos first.
iPhoto adds a new album named “untitled album” to the existing albums.
Note: iPhoto automatically adds all photos in the current thumbnails list to the new album.
 Type a new name for your new album.
Note: Optionally, you can drag the album to a new position in the list after naming it.

 Drag a photo from any album, collection, or event and drop it on the new album.
iPhoto adds the photo to the album.
Note: iPhoto displays a floating translucent thumbnail of the photo as you drag it.
 Repeat step 6 to add as many photos as you want from any collection or other album.
Note: You can delete a photo from an album by right-clicking it and selecting Remove
From Album.
TIPS
Can I manage events in the same way?
Events are designed to organize photos by date, and iPhoto creates events automatically.
But you can also add photos to events manually. Select the Photos library item to view a
list of photos grouped into events. You can now drag any photo and drop it on any event,
although if you have a lot of events, this may take a while.
Does iPhoto for iOS have the Faces and Places features?
The current version does not support face recognition and labeling. There is no single
Places map of all photos, but you can view a photo’s location in its info listing. For
details, see the section “View Photo Information” in Chapter 4.


Import Albums and Events
After creating an album in iPhoto, you can use iTunes to import it to your device. You can
also import events. The import feature turns your iPad or iPhone into a portable photo
album. Photos in imported events and albums can also be edited with the advanced editing
options in iPhoto for iOS.
The import feature in iTunes is easy to use, but it can also be easy to miss. You may want
to practice it a few times.
Import Albums and Events
 Plug your device into your Mac.
 Launch iTunes if it does not launch automatically.
 Select your device in the Devices list after it appears.
Note: If your device syncs automatically, wait until the sync ends.
 Click Photos.

 Click Sync Photos from (  changes to ).
 Select iPhoto for syncing.
 Click Selected albums, Events, and Faces (  changes to ).
 Select one of the date range options for events to include in the sync.
Note: Even if you select No Events, you can still choose events you want to include.
 Click the albums you want to copy to your device (  changes to ).
 Click the events you want to copy to your device (  changes to ).
 Click the Apply button.
iPhoto copies the photos to the device. (This may take a few minutes.)
Note: If you uncheck an album or event that was previously copied, iTunes removes it
from the device when it syncs.
 Launch iPhoto on your device.
 Select either Albums or Events on the main page.

A iPhoto displays the albums or events you synced.
TIPS
Can I sync all photos?
If you click All photos, albums, Events, and Faces in the Sync Photos box (  changes
to ), iTunes copies all photos to your device. Note that you may not want to do this,
because it uses a lot of memory and can create an unmanageably large photo library on a
device.
How do I sync from the Pictures folder instead of iPhoto?
Select the Pictures option in the Sync Photos From menu. Folders appear as albums. Be
aware that syncing from Pictures on a Mac deletes all your iPhoto photos, and vice versa.


Clear the Camera Roll
Because of the album and event options, you may sometimes import photos from your
device camera roll or dSLR memory card without deleting them automatically. If you do
this you may eventually need to clear your camera roll or memory to remove the clutter.
You can re-import all photos into iPhoto to create a new event, but if you have already
imported the photos this may create duplicates. A better option is to use the Image Capture
utility to view and manage photos directly on your device.
Clear the Camera Roll
 Launch Finder.
 Find or navigate to your Applications folder.
 Double-click the Image Capture application to launch it.
 Select the Other option to import to a spare or new folder.
 To create a new folder, click the New Folder button in the file sheet.

 Type the name of the new folder in the dialog.
 Click the Create button.
 Click the Choose button in the file sheet.
Image Capture creates a new folder.
Note: You can also select an existing folder for the photos.
 Select individual photos.
Note: You can click to select individual photos, or press and hold 
 and click two photos
to select a range.
Note: You can skip step 8 if you want to delete all photos.
 Click Delete after import (  changes to ).
 Click Import to delete selected photos or Import All to delete all photos.
Note: Photos are imported to your Mac first and then deleted.

iPhoto deletes the photos from your device after copying them to the folder you selected.
TIPS
Can I delete hidden photos?
You can delete photos only from the camera roll. There is no way to delete photos in
albums or events. Even if you use Photos, the trash can appears only for photos in the
camera roll.
Can I delete photos using a PC instead of a Mac?
Your device appears automatically as a USB storage device when you plug it in. You can
use Windows Explorer to select the device, open it, and delete the photos in the camera
roll. There is no way to directly preview individual photos before you delete them.

Chapter 6: Tagging and Flagging
Photos
You can use photo tagging to highlight the photos you love, to select photos for sharing,
and to hide the photos you do not want to see. Tagging is easy, but learning to use tagging
effectively takes some extra effort.
Understanding Photo Tagging
Flag Photos
Create Favorites
Add Custom Tags
Hide Photos
Search Tagged Photos
Caption Photos


Understanding Photo Tagging
You can use tagging to select photos and organize them into special albums. iPhoto offers
three standard tags you can apply manually to your photos: a flag to mark a photo
temporarily, a favorite icon, and an X to hide a photo. You can also tag photos with words.
iPhoto automatically applies a toolbox tag to photos after editing. And when you beam
photos between devices, iPhoto marks them internally with yet another hidden tag.
The secret to using tagging efficiently is to understand how to use the different kinds of
tags for common tasks, such as journal creation, smart album creation, and photo sharing.
Understanding Flagging
Use the flag tag to select photos for a task, such as sharing the photos to Facebook or
adding them to a journal. Do not use flagging to mark photos you like. For speed, you
can flag or unflag groups of photos with a few taps. You can also flag photos taken in
the last day or last week. These more advanced flagging options are easy to miss,
unless you know where to find them. Flagged photos appear automatically in the
Flagged smart album.
Understanding Favorites
Use the blue ribbon tag to mark your favorite photos. iPhoto automatically collects
favorite photos in a special Favorites smart album. As soon as you tag at least one
photo as a favorite, the Favorites album is created for you and you can view it on the
Albums page. Do not use the blue ribbon symbol to mark photos for sharing — use
the flag instead.
Understanding Hidden Photos
Use the X tag to hide photos. Hiding photos does not delete them. (There is no way to
delete photos in iPhoto.) It removes them from the main thumbnails list and all other
photo collections. iPhoto includes an option to view all hidden photos, so you can
change your mind and unhide them later. The hide feature is hidden in a popover.

Understanding Custom Tags
You can tag photos with your own words or phrases. For example, you can tag photos
with the names of friends or family, or by subject or other content, or with a date or
description of a special event. iPhoto automatically collects photos with the same tags
into smart albums that appear in the Albums list. Note that tags only work on iDevices
and are not copied when you sync your photos to a Mac or PC.
Understanding Edited Photos
When you edit a photo, iPhoto automatically tags it with a toolbox symbol. The
symbol works much like a tag. You cannot apply it by hand, but you can use it as a
quick way to select edited images for viewing or sharing. Edited photos automatically
appear in the special Edited album.
Understanding Beamed Photos
When you share a photo with another device using iPhoto’s beaming feature, iPhoto
automatically applies a “beamed” tag. You cannot apply this tag manually, and it has
no visible symbol. Beamed photos appear in the main Photos list and are collected
automatically in the Beamed smart album. You cannot import beamed photos into
iTunes or the Mac version of iPhoto.
Using Tags as Search Filters
You can use tags as a search filter. For example, the iPhoto thumbnails list can show

photos that are tagged with a flag or marked as hidden. You can also view photos you
have edited or list them by date. You can share a collection of photos tagged with a
flag by beaming them, e-mailing them, or uploading them to a social networking site.
Using Flags for Viewing and Sharing
You can use combined tags to select photos for viewing or sharing. Begin by selecting
photos manually, viewing an album, or filtering a collection in the thumbnail browser.
Next, flag the photos using iPhoto’s Flag All option. You can now share the photos or
collect them into a journal. Use the Unflag All option to unflag them when done.


Flag Photos
You can flag photos in two ways. The thumbnail browser displays a list of tagging icons
along the bottom toolbar. Tap the flag icon to flag a photo or unflag an already flagged
photo.
There is also a quick but hidden way to flag multiple photos. Select one or more photos,
and then tap the flag icon and hold it. iPhoto displays a popover with further options. You
can use this feature to flag photos in groups, or to unflag photos with a single tap. These
group options work only on the currently visible thumbnails.
Flag Photos
 Launch iPhoto.
 Open the thumbnail browser from within an album, an event, or the general photos
collection.
 Tap the Edit button at the top right if edit mode is not selected, and then tap any
thumbnail to select it for viewing.
Note: The steps in this section also work if you select a group of photos.
The thumbnail browser displays the photo.
 Tap the flag icon ( ) to flag the photo.
iPhoto flashes a brief animation of a flag, adds the flag symbol to the photo, and also
highlights the flag icon in the toolbar.

 Tap the flag icon ( ) again to unflag the photo.
iPhoto displays the flag disappearing to the right, removes the flag symbol from the photo,
and unhighlights the flag on the toolbar.
Note: Flag symbols on photos appear in the thumbnail view in the editor, but not in the
Photos collection.
 Tap and hold the flag icon ( ).
iPhoto displays a popover with further options.
 Tap one of the options to flag a group of photos.
Note: The 24 hours or 7 days options flag photos taken in those periods, as well as any
undated photos.
 Tap Choose Photos to select multiple photos or a range of photos.
iPhoto flags the selected photos in a group.

 Tap Unflag All to unflag a group of photos.
Note: This option unflags all photos visible in the current thumbnails. It does not unflag
other photos.
TIPS
Why do the Flag All and Unflag All options appear only in some albums?
There is no official explanation, but experiments suggest that the Flag All and Unflag All
options appear in albums created with photos taken on an iPhone or iPad. The options are
missing on albums created with photos taken with any other digital cameras.
Is there a quick way to unflag all photos?
Keep in mind that the Unflag All option unflags only the photos visible in the current
thumbnails list, not all the flagged photos on your device. To unflag all photos on your
device, open the Flagged album, tap and hold the flag icon ( ), and then tap Unflag All.


Create Favorites
You can tag photos as favorites. Tagging a photo as a favorite marks it with a rosette icon
and automatically adds it to iPhoto’s Favorites album.
The Favorites feature is limited. You cannot share favorite photos directly or use favorites
as a filter for thumbnails. But you can open the Favorites album, flag every photo in it,
and then share the flagged photos.
Create Favorites
 Launch iPhoto.
 Open any album, event, or the photo list.
 Tap the Edit button at the top right if edit mode is not selected, and then tap any
thumbnail to select it for viewing.
Note: The steps in this section also work if you select a group of photos.
The thumbnail browser displays the photo.
 Tap the favorite icon ( ) to favorite the photo.

iPhoto flashes a brief animation of a rosette, adds the favorite symbol to the photo, and
highlights the favorite icon in the toolbar.
 Tap the favorite icon ( ) again to unfavorite the photo.
iPhoto shows the rosette disappearing to the right, removes the small favorite symbol from
the photo, and unhighlights the favorite icon on the toolbar.
 Return to the Albums page to view iPhoto’s albums.
 Tap the Favorites album to open it.
Note: You must have at least one favorite photo to see this album.

iPhoto opens the album and displays your favorite photos.
 Tap the Albums button to return to the main thumbnails list.
TIPS
Can I flag and favorite the same photo?
You can flag any photo, so you can flag and favorite the same photo. However, you
cannot hide and favorite a photo at the same time. Hiding a photo unfavorites it — and
vice versa.
Why do photos disappear from the Favorites album when I unfavorite them?
The Favorites album displays only photos with the favorites tag. If you remove the tag,
the photo immediately disappears from the album. This makes sense in theory, but can be
distracting in practice. To show the photo again, tap the undo icon ( ) in the top toolbar.


Add Custom Tags
You can add custom tags of your own words or phrases to your photos. Photos that share
custom tags appear automatically in their own smart albums on the Albums page. You can
also search for custom tags when you view photos.
The custom tag feature is easy to use but very powerful. For speed and convenience you
can use the multiple selection features introduced in Chapter 4 to add a custom tag to
many photos at once. You can create as many custom tags as you want, but too many tags
can clutter the album page and search list.
Add Custom Tags
 Launch iPhoto.
 Open any album, event, or the photo list.
 Tap the Edit button at the top right if edit mode is not selected, and then tap any
thumbnail to select it for viewing.
Note: The steps in this section also work if you select a group of photos.
The thumbnail browser displays the photo.
 Tap and hold the custom tag icon ( ).
A iPhoto displays a tag popover. If you have already created custom tags they appear in
this list.
Note: This example shows two tags created earlier, Flowers and Garden.

 Tap one of the tags to apply it to the photo.
B iPhoto flashes a brief tag animation and applies the tag to the photo.
Note: You can apply more than one tag to a photo.
 Tap the text box at the top of the popover to create a new custom tag.
 When the keyboard appears, type your new tag into the box.
 Tap Done or Hide Keyboard when finished.
iPhoto saves the new tag to the tag list, applies it to the photo, and hides the keyboard.
 Tap the Albums, Events, or Photos button to the return to iPhoto’s main page.

 Tap the Albums button to view the albums if they are not already visible.
C Every tag automatically creates a smart album in the album list. iPhoto displays a smart
album for the photos tagged with every custom tag you create.
Note: The tagged smart albums appear with a wallet/pocket graphic to remind you they
are not like iPhoto’s other albums.
TIPS
Can I delete a tag from the list?
You can only delete tags if no photos use them. To deselect all photos, use the multiple
selection options introduced in Chapter 4 and use the tag popover to remove the tags. Tap
the Edit button at the top right of the popover. Tap the red minus sign and the delete
button to delete a tag. You can also use edit mode to change the order of the tags by
dragging them up and down the list.
Is there a quicker way to tag photos?
When the popover is open, tap any tag in the column at the right. iPhoto selects a tag and
displays a single gray tag icon in that column. Tap anywhere to close the popover. You
can now select any photo or photos in the usual way and tag them with the tag you
selected by tapping the custom tag icon ( ).


Hide Photos
You can use the hide tag in iPhoto to hide photos you do not like. Hiding a photo makes it
disappear from the main photo list and from any albums and events that feature it. It also
makes the photo disappear from the Camera Roll album in iPhoto.
However, hiding a photo does not delete the photo from your device. You can still see the
photo in the Photos app and in any journals you added it to. Unlike iPhoto’s other tagging
features, the Hide option is in a popover.
Hide Photos
 Launch iPhoto.
 Open the thumbnail browser from within an album, an event, or the general photos
collection.
 Tap the Edit button at the top right if edit mode is not selected, and then tap any
thumbnail to select it for viewing.
Note: The steps in this section also work if you select a group of photos.
The thumbnail browser displays the photo.
 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ) to display a popover.

 Tap Hide Photo.
A iPhoto flashes a red cross and hides the photo.
 Tap the disclosure triangle at the top of the thumbnails.
iPhoto displays a popover with tag-related search and sort options.
 Tap Hidden Items to view the hidden photos in the currently selected album or event.
Note: To see all hidden photos on your device, select the Photos collection first and then
open the popover and tap Hidden Items.

iPhoto displays the hidden photos in the current album, event, or photo list.
 Tap any photo to select it.
 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ) to show the popover.
 Tap Unhide Photo to unhide the photo.
Note: Unhiding a photo removes it from the hidden thumbnails list. The photo reappears
in its original location.
TIPS
Why is there no way to delete photos?
iPhoto does not duplicate features available elsewhere. Because you can delete photos in
the Photos app, Apple apparently decided there was no need to include a delete option in
iPhoto.
Is there a quick way to bulk delete a group of unwanted photos?
Only from the camera roll. On a Mac, you can use the Image Capture application to bulk
delete photos. On a PC, you can connect the device over USB and delete files manually
in Windows Explorer. For details, see Chapter 5. There is no easy way to bulk delete
photos without a Mac or PC.


Search Tagged Photos
You can view tagged photos in two ways. Edited, Tagged, Beamed, and Favorite photos
are automatically collected into albums. To view these photos, open their smart albums on
the Albums page, as described earlier in this chapter.
When you are viewing any album or event or the photos list in the editor, you can use a
popover to view only Flagged, Edited, or Hidden photos; photos with custom tags; and
photos used, or not used, in journals. The popover includes a search order option so you
view your selection in forward or reverse date order.
Search Tagged Photos
 Launch iPhoto.
 Open the thumbnail browser from within an album, an event, or the general photos
collection.
 Tap the disclosure triangle at the top of the thumbnail browser.

A iPhoto displays a popover with various search options for the thumbnails.
Note: The totals at the right show the number of each type of item.
 Tap any option to view the matching photos.
iPhoto displays only the photos with the tag you select from the current album, event, or
collection.
Note: The example is showing edited photos. Note the toolbox symbol on every photo.
 Tap any photo to view it.
Note: You can select and view multiple photos in the usual ways.
 Tap Oldest First or Newest First to show the oldest or newest thumbnails at the top of
the list.
B iPhoto changes the date order in the thumbnails list.
TIPS

Why are some photos missing when I view all hidden photos on my device?
Because they have been deleted manually in the Photos app or using a Mac or PC. iPhoto
keeps a “slot” for every photo it shows. Empty slots remain after photos are deleted.
iPhoto displays them as gray squares.
Why is there no way to select favorite photos in the popover?
This would be a useful option, but Apple has not included it. To view favorite photos,
open the Favorites album. Unfortunately, there is no way to view only your favorite
photos in an album or event.


Caption Photos
You can add short descriptive captions to your photos. A caption appears as a line of text
above a selected photo, and is added to thumbnails rather like a tag. But captions are
purely for decoration and description. You cannot search your photos for a caption.
When you add a photo to a journal, its caption appears on the photo automatically.
Caption Photos
 Launch iPhoto.
 Open the thumbnail browser from within an album, an event, or the general photos
collection.
 Tap the Edit button at the top right if edit mode is not selected, and then tap any
thumbnail to select it for viewing.
 Tap Add a Caption above the photo.
Note: The text lacks contrast and is easy to miss.

iPhoto shows the keyboard and a blank caption ready for editing.
 Use the keyboard to type text into the caption.
Note: Text is auto-corrected as you type.
 Tap Done when finished.
A iPhoto adds the caption to the photo’s title bar and thumbnail.
 Add more captions and select the thumbnail of a different captioned photo.
B iPhoto displays the new photo’s caption in the title bar.
 Add a captioned photo to a journal (see Chapter 13) and open the journal.
iPhoto automatically displays the caption in the journal.
TIPS
Are captions visible in iPhoto for the Mac?

No. When you add a caption to a photo in iPhoto in iOS and import it to iPhoto on the
Mac, the caption does not appear on the Mac. The description remains blank. This may
— perhaps — be fixed in a future version of iPhoto for the Mac.
Is there a limit to the length of a caption?
Captions always appear on a single line. You can make the text as long as you want, but
iPhoto displays only a short section of around 30 characters. If the text is very long,
iPhoto automatically shrinks the font to make more of the text visible. Very long captions
are still cut off.

Chapter 7: Getting Started with
Editing
You can use iPhoto’s editing tools to correct and improve your photos. There is a lot to
learn about editing. This chapter introduces iPhoto’s simplest tools for very basic edits,
which include cropping, rotating, and enhancing a photo. The next few chapters introduce
further enhancement tools for more subtle and powerful corrections and creative
applications.
Learn about Editing
Using Auto-Enhance
Fix a Sideways or Inverted Photo
Fix the Horizon
Rotate a Photo Manually
Crop a Photo
View Edited and Unedited Photos
Using Undo and Redo
Learn about Editing
You can use iPhoto’s editing tools in two ways. You can apply simple corrections — for

example, you can rotate a photo slightly to fix a slanted horizon. You can also crop a
photo to remove features that distract from the person or scene you want a viewer to
concentrate on. More complex corrections can improve the look and feel of a photo by
changing the lighting, contrast, color, or exposure.
Most photos can be improved or enhanced. This chapter introduces iPhoto’s simplest
editing tools. The following chapters introduce tools you can use to create more complex
effects.
Understanding Auto-Enhance
You can use auto-enhance to improve the color and contrast in a photo. Auto-enhance
is a “magic” single-click option with no settings. Technically, it increases the
saturation and contrast in an image. If your photo has good saturation and contrast
already, this tool does very little — in fact, you may not be able to tell the difference
between the enhanced photo and the original. On most photos the effect is more
obvious, but still subtle. You can use it as a good starting point before you add further
edits.
Understanding Rotation
iPhoto includes two rotation tools. The first tool spins a photo in 90-degree steps. You
can use this tool to correct photos that were taken upside down or with the camera on
its side. The second tool is combined with the cropping tool. You can use it to fix
slanted horizons, or to rotate photos for more creative reasons — for example, some
photos do not have a clear horizontal marker, and look better when rotated slightly.
The second tool always crops some of the detail at the edges of a photo to hide the

empty areas that a rotation creates.
Understanding Cropping
The crop tool removes the edges around a photo. You can use cropping to change the
relative height and width — the aspect ratio — of a photo to match the standard
dimensions used for cards, prints, or posters. You can also crop a photo to a square
frame, which is a popular option for web pages. Creatively you can use cropping to
remove clutter and irrelevant detail around the edges of a photo to highlight the most
important features. Cropping literally chops away the sides of a photo, so it always
creates a smaller photo with a lower resolution. For best results start with the highest
resolution you can. Otherwise you may be left with a tiny image too small to be
printed.
Understanding Versions in iPhoto
Whenever you edit a photo, iPhoto keeps the original. You can use a compare tool to
preview the original and edited versions. If you do not like your edits, iPhoto includes
a Revert to Original option, which throws away your edits and restores the original.
You can re-edit and restore a photo as many times as you want until you create an
edited version you are happy with. No easy way exists to compare different edited
versions within iPhoto itself. However, you can share both original and any edited
versions to your camera roll. You can then review them, save them to a Mac or some
other device, or edit them further.

Understanding Undo and Redo
When you revert to an original photo, you lose all edits. iPhoto includes an undo
feature. You can use it to compare a photo before and after an edit and step back
through a series of edits. If you do not like your edit, you can cancel it. You can also
redo an edit to repeat it after undoing it, which is a good way to compare before and
after views.
Using Auto-Enhance
Auto-enhance is a simple one-click photo improvement tool. You can use it to make colors
brighter and more attractive, and to improve contrast.
Auto-enhance has no settings and you cannot control what it does. You either apply it or
not. Although the effect is simple, it improves most photos, and works reliably on
portraits. The results on more complex or abstract shots are less predictable, but usually
worth trying.
Using Auto-Enhance

 Launch iPhoto.
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for enhancement.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
iPhoto highlights the Edit button in blue and displays the bottom toolbar.
 Tap the Auto-Enhance icon ( ).

A iPhoto starts applying the effect. (Wait until the alert disappears.)
iPhoto enhances the colors in the original photo.
B iPhoto highlights the tools it applied.
Note: The effect is subtle. The changes are more obvious on the third-generation and later
iPads because they have a better color display.
TIPS
What does auto-enhance really do?
The details are an Apple secret, but auto-enhance increases color saturation — that is, it
makes colors brighter and more intense. As a useful side effect this also improves the
contrast.
Can I apply auto-enhance more than once?
No. Auto-enhance is designed to create a subtle, natural-looking improvement. You
cannot use it to create garish colors. The first time you apply it, it increases color as much

as it can. Applying it again does nothing. If you want to create more dramatic color edits,
use the tools introduced in Chapter 8.
Fix a Sideways or Inverted Photo
Sometimes you may need to take a photo with an iPhone on its side or upside down.
Occasionally you may forget which way is up.
iPhoto includes a simple quick-fix option for inverted photos. You can rotate a photo by
90 degrees by tapping the rotation tool, or by spinning the photo with two fingers. The
rotation tool includes a hidden feature — if you tap and hold it, you can choose the
rotation direction.
Fix a Sideways or Inverted Photo
 Launch iPhoto.
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for enhancement.

 Tap the Rotation icon ( ).
A iPhoto rotates the photo 90 degrees to the right (clockwise).
B iPhoto adds the toolbox marker to the photo’s thumbnail to show it has been edited.
 Tap and hold the Rotation icon ( ).
iPhoto displays a popover with options to rotate the photo clockwise or counterclockwise.
 Tap the counterclockwise option to rotate the photo to the left.
 Tap the clockwise option to rotate the photo to the right.
 Place two fingers on the photo.
 Rotate them to spin the photo.
iPhoto “snaps” the rotation to the nearest 90 degrees — that is, you can only rotate a photo
to the next whole side, and not by a smaller amount.
Note: Two-finger rotation is slightly tricky, so you may need to try this gesture a few
times before it works for you.

TIPS
Does a rotation count as a permanent edit?
Spinning a photo with your fingers or with the photo rotation tool is a permanent edit.
iPhoto marks the photo thumbnail with its toolbox marker, and the photo appears in the
Edited smart album.
Does rotating a photo affect the image quality?
Rotation is not an exact science, and if you rotate a photo over and over the quality will
eventually degrade. But you would need to repeat a rotation tens or even hundreds of
times to see an obvious difference. So in practice, rotation has no effect.
Fix the Horizon
Many photographers, including professionals, find it difficult to take photos with a
perfectly level horizon. iPhoto includes a quick-fix tool for obviously skewed photos. The
tool is very easy to use — you can fix a horizon with two taps.
The tool is not infallible. It may miss a horizon that is obvious to a human viewer, or make
a mistake in its estimate. You can fine-tune the rotation before applying it. You can also
set it manually, as described in the next section.
Fix the Horizon
 Launch iPhoto.
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap the thumbnail of a photo with a skewed horizon.

 Tap the Crop icon ( ).
A If iPhoto can find a horizon, it displays an anchor point X and an arrow, joined by a line
that estimates the angle of the horizon.
 Tap the arrow to fix the horizon.
Note: You can tap the X icon opposite the arrow to cancel.
iPhoto rotates the photo to fix the horizon.

 Drag the rotation control to fine-tune the rotation.
Note: You can use the grid as a reference.
 Tap the Crop icon ( ) again to repair and set the horizon.
TIPS
Can I force iPhoto to find a horizon?
If iPhoto cannot find a horizon, the anchor point X and arrow do not appear. You cannot
force iPhoto to display them. If you can see the horizon but iPhoto cannot, you can rotate
the photo manually to fix it.
If the horizon looks straight on the grid, why does my photo still look skewed?
Some camera and lens combinations cannot produce a straight horizon. For example, if
you use a wide-angle lens, the horizon may be curved. In some photos, vertical lines may
not be at right angles to the horizontal lines on the grid — for example, the sides of tall
buildings may be angled because of perspective. iPhoto does not include tools to fix these
advanced problems.
Rotate a Photo Manually
You can rotate a photo’s horizon manually or for creative effects. The rotation feature is
built into the crop tool, but they are somewhat independent. You can crop a photo without
rotating it, but for practical reasons rotating a photo always crops the edges.
Rotation is limited to 20 degrees left or right. You can use a rotation dial to set it very
accurately. A grid appears automatically to help you align features in the photo. You can
also tilt your device to control the rotation. This is called gyro-rotation. It is a clever
feature, but can be tricky to control.
Rotate a Photo Manually

 Launch iPhoto.
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap the thumbnail of a photo to select it for rotation.
 Tap the Crop icon ( ).
A iPhoto displays the rotation dial.

 Drag the dial left or right to rotate the photo.
B You can tap the dial to use gyro-rotation.
Note: When gyro-rotation is enabled, iPhoto outlines the dial in blue.
Note: Keep your device flat and rotate it horizontally to set the amount of gyro-rotation.
Do not tilt it vertically.
 Touch the photo with two fingers and spin them to rotate the photo.
Note: iPhoto displays a reference grid as you rotate the photo. It also displays the
uncropped edges of the photo around the visible area.
 Drag the cropped area to center it.
Note: You can also resize it with a pinch zoom. You can zoom in or out.
 Tap the Crop icon ( ) again to finish the rotation.
TIPS

Why does rotating a photo always crop the edges?
If you rotate a photo without cropping it, it loses triangular “wedges” on each side.
iPhoto resizes photos automatically to avoid this. You can use a pinch zoom to resize the
photo manually if iPhoto is cropping too much, or too little, of the photo.
Why is the rotation limited to twenty degrees?
The rotation option is designed for corrections, not for creative effects. It would be useful
to have a wider range, but unfortunately this option is not available.
Crop a Photo
You can use cropping to prepare a photo for printing. For example, in the United States,
small photo prints have standard sizes in inches — 4 × 6, 5 × 7, and so on. Many cameras
produce prints that do not match these sizes exactly. You can use the crop tool to chop
away the sides of a photo to make it fit a standard print size. iPhoto includes a selection of
standard crop ratios. For creative applications, you can create your own ratio, or use
cropping to highlight an area by removing unwanted features in a photo.
Crop a Photo
 Launch iPhoto.
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap the thumbnail of a photo to select it for rotation.

 Tap the Crop icon ( ).
 Tap and drag the corner and/or edges of a photo to change the crop.
Note: You can repeat step 5 until the crop looks good.
A You can tap the Lock Aspect Ratio icon ( ) to lock the ratio before cropping.
Note: This example does not show a locked ratio.
 Use a two-finger pinch to zoom or expand the area within the crop.
Note: You can also drag the image within the frame to reposition it.
 To select a standard crop ratio, tap the settings (gear) icon ( ).
 Tap one of the standard crop ratios to select it.
iPhoto immediately resizes the crop frame around the photo.
 Tap the dot selector to see a further page of preset ratios.
Note: After selecting a ratio, you can drag and zoom the photo within the crop frame to
improve the composition.

B You can drag the rotation dial to rotate the photo within the crop frame.
C iPhoto shows a preview of the cropped photo.
 Tap the Crop icon ( ) again to finish cropping.
iPhoto applies the crop and adds a toolbox edit marker to the photo’s thumbnail.
TIPS
How do I know which ratio to select?
Many of the ratios match standard print sizes, such as 5 × 7 inches. For others, divide the
print size down until it is as small as it can be, and use that as the ratio. For example, 6 ×
8 inches is the same as 3 × 4 — you can divide each number by two.
Can I crop too much?
If you take a distant photo of someone and use the pinch zoom feature to crop the photo
around them and zoom it at the same time, you get a fuzzy result. You can tell you have
cropped too much when a photo loses sharpness. Fuzziness can look fine on the screen,
but is less appealing when printed.
View Edited and Unedited Photos
You can use the Show Original feature in iPhoto to compare an edited photo with the
unedited original. You can also use a feature called Revert to Original to cancel all edits.
Both features work with multiple edits, including the simple edits described in this
chapter, and the more complex editing features introduced later in this book.
When you compare versions, iPhoto always displays the photo as it was taken or
uploaded. The edited version shows every change you made to it. When you revert to
original, all your edits are lost and you can start again from scratch.
View Edited and Unedited Photos

 Launch iPhoto.
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap the thumbnail of any edited photo to select it for comparison.
A iPhoto displays the edited photo in the preview area.
 Tap the Show Original icon ( ) to show the original unedited photo.
B iPhoto displays the original photo.

 Tap the Show Original icon ( ) again to swap back the edited version.
 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ).
iPhoto displays extra options in a popover.
 Tap the Revert to Original option.
Note: If you do not see the Revert to Original option, tap the Edit button at the top right
twice.
C iPhoto cancels all edits, displays the original photo, and removes the toolbox marker
from the photo thumbnail.
Note: You can revert at any time, even after you preview other photos, potentially months
or years after you finish editing.
TIPS
Can iPhoto show the original and edited versions at the same time?

No. You can view an edited photo or an original photo. One always replaces the other.
However, you can share any photo to the camera roll to create a fresh independent copy
at any time.
Can I revert and change my mind?
If you revert to original and tap the undo icon ( ) — described in the next section —
iPhoto restores the original edits. You can use this option if you change your mind and
decide you want to keep the edits after all. For quick comparisons, use the Show Original
icon ( ) instead.
Using Undo and Redo
iPhoto saves a copy of your changes as you edit. You can then use the undo icon to step
back through your edits, either to correct a mistake or to compare each change with the
edits around it.
This means iPhoto supports multiple levels of undo. It also includes a feature called redo.
After you undo edits you can step forward through them, repeating each edit you made
originally. These are powerful options. You can use them to review changes as you work,
correcting mistakes and keeping the changes that look good.
Using Undo and Redo
 Launch iPhoto.
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap the thumbnail of any photo for editing.

 Edit the photo.
Note: You can use any of the editing features in this chapter or the following chapters.
 Tap the undo icon ( ) to undo the last edit.
iPhoto undoes the last edit and displays the photo as it was before you changed it.
 Tap the undo icon ( ) repeatedly.
iPhoto undoes your edits one by one, stepping back through them and showing the photo
as it was before each change.

 Tap and hold the undo icon ( ).
iPhoto displays a popover with undo and redo options.
 Tap the Redo option.
Note: iPhoto displays the name of each operation in the popover.
iPhoto redoes the edit.
Note: The popover stays visible after each operation. You can move in either direction
through the undo list by tapping the undo or redo options as they appear.
TIPS
How many levels of undo are there?
Apple does not specify a limit. In practice, there seem to be many tens of steps, so you
are unlikely to run out of steps if you use this feature. However, if memory is tight,
iPhoto may run out of memory and crash. Note also that when you work on another
photo, iPhoto forgets the first photo’s undo history.
What happens if I start editing midway through the undo list?
iPhoto throws away all subsequent edits in the list and keeps your new changes. You can
still step back to the start of the undo list, but you can no longer step forward through
your original edits. However, you can step forward through the new changes you make.

Chapter 8: Correcting and Enhancing
Photos
You can use iPhoto’s editing tools to fix mistakes in lighting, color, and contrast and to
adjust photos to make them look better.
Learn about Enhancement
Control Enhancements by Dragging
Understanding Exposure
Enhance Shadows and Highlights
Work with Contrast and Brightness
Learn about Color
Add and Remove Color
Work with Different Colors
Understanding White Balance
Using a White Balance Preset
Fix White Balance Manually


Learn about Enhancement
The previous chapter introduced the crop tool and the auto-enhance tool. This chapter
introduces the color and exposure tools. You can use these two tools to improve most
photos by correcting and enhancing color and by changing the brightness and contrast.
After you enhance your photos, you can use the creative tools introduced in later chapters
to make further changes or fix more specific problems.
Understanding Enhancement
Cameras always lie, because a photo always captures one of many possible views of a
scene. A photo of a person shot outdoors at midday looks very different from a photo
taken near sunset, or under cloud, or indoors. You can use enhancements to
compensate for some of these distortions — for example, to remove the yellow
coloring added to scenes lit by candles or incandescent bulbs. You can also use
enhancements to change the mood of a photo in more creative ways, making it lighter
or darker, and the colors more or less vivid and accurate. Like all edits in iPhoto,
enhancements are nondestructive; you can always remove them to restore the original
photo.
Understanding Exposure
Cameras work by measuring the light in a scene. For good results, a camera has to
make a good estimate of the average brightness — the exposure — of a scene.
Cameras do not always get this right. Semi-pro cameras have complicated exposure
options. They work well with practice, but it can take beginners a while to master
them. Budget pocket cameras usually guess the exposure correctly when the light is
good, but may struggle when there is too little light, or too much light. You can use
iPhoto’s Exposure tool to correct both kinds of errors.
Understanding Color
Color has a big impact on the mood of an image. Bright, bold colors can make a photo

more appealing. Alternatively, you may want to tone down the color in a scene for
special effects. iPhoto’s Color tool gives you both options. You can make the colors in
a photo stronger or less vibrant. You can control the red, green, and blue shades
separately for extra control. For example, you can make a blue sky more vibrant
without changing the other parts of a scene.
Understanding White Balance
Most people do not notice the difference in color between indoor and outdoor lighting
until they take a photo indoors and wonder why it looks so yellow. Your eyes
compensate automatically for different types of lighting. Most cameras try to
compensate too, using white balance, a process that tries to re-create the true colors
however a scene is lit. iPhoto includes a white balance tool for fixing color errors,
with various presets for common lighting types. You can also use a manual white
balance option to try to fix the colors by hand.
Understanding Two-Axis Control
The enhancement tools have a unique editing option. If you tap and hold a finger on a
photo, iPhoto displays four arrows. Moving your finger in the direction of each arrow
changes the image in a different way. iPhoto labels the arrows so you can see what
they do without having to look up the details in the help. This two-axis, one-finger
editing gives you a quick and intuitive way to improve your photos.

Understanding the Limitations of Enhancement
You can use enhancements for simple corrections and for more extreme creative
effects, but the enhancement tools cannot perform miracles. You cannot correct the
exposure of a completely dark photo taken with too little light, or a photo that is so
bright all the detail has been washed out. You cannot add colors to a scene that does
not have them — for example, a snow field under heavy cloud does not have much
color. The enhancement tools can work only with the detail you give them. You
cannot fix very bad photos that should be taken again.


Control Enhancements by Dragging
You can control the color and enhancement tools with a selection of on-screen sliders. But
both tools also include a hidden one-finger drag option that can change two settings at
once.
To use this feature, select the Color or Enhancement tool and tap and hold anywhere on
the photo. iPhoto displays four arrows, although a few options display two — one up, and
one down. Keep your finger on the screen and drag it to make changes. The controls are
contextual — iPhoto tries to guess what you are doing and displays the controls it thinks
you need.
Control Enhancements by Dragging
 Launch iPhoto and open the editor.
 Tap a thumbnail to select it for editing.
 If the Edit button is not selected, tap it to enter edit mode.
 Tap the Exposure icon ( ).

 Tap and hold a finger in the preview area.
A iPhoto displays four arrows.
 Drag your finger up and down to set brightness.
 Drag your finger left and right to set contrast.
B iPhoto moves the main controls automatically as you drag your finger.
 Tap the Color icon ( ).
 Tap and hold a finger in the preview area.

C iPhoto displays two or four arrows.
Note: The up/down Saturation arrow always appears.
Note: The left/right arrow displays Warmth, Blue Skies, or Greenery depending whether
you tap a red/orange, blue, or green part of the image.
Note: If iPhoto does not recognize a color when you tap, the left/right arrow does not
appear at all.
 Drag your finger up and down and left and right to change the color.
TIPS
Does this feature appear elsewhere in iPhoto?
The arrows appear only in the color and exposure editors. The other editors and tools
have different controls.
Can I force iPhoto to work with a color?
In the color editor, iPhoto picks the left/right arrow options from the color you tap. If you
want to change one of the other colors, you can use the sliders in the usual way. For more
information, see the section “Work with Different Colors” later in this chapter.


Understanding Exposure
When a photo’s exposure is correct, it has a good balance between highlights and
shadows. The lightest and darkest areas of the scene reveal as much detail as possible. An
overexposed photo looks washed out, with no detail in the highlights. An underexposed
photo appears murky and dark, with no detail in the shadows.
iPhoto includes an Exposure tool. You can use the tool to repair photos with poor
exposure. You can also use it to experiment with the brightness, contrast, and dark/light
balance in a photo. This can change the mood in a creative way and enhance the visual
impact.
Understanding Exposure
Digital cameras measure the light from each part of a scene. However, the available
light is variable. A scene shot in bright sunlight is millions of times brighter than a
scene lit by a candle. No camera can capture this extreme brightness range in a single
shot. So cameras cheat with a trick borrowed from nature. The camera estimates the
average brightness — the exposure — of a scene and captures a limited range of light
and dark values around the average. (Your eyes adapt to brightness changes in the
same way.) When the exposure is correct, the captured measurements match the
brightness differences in the scene.
Understanding Exposure Settings
Like all digital cameras, the iPhone and iPad cameras estimate exposure
automatically. However, you can use the neat trick described in Chapter 2 to override
the camera’s guess about the available light to create special effects. More complex
cameras always include an automatic exposure option. On some you can also set the
exposure manually, often with the help of a built-in light meter. You can use this
feature to correct the camera’s light estimate — for example, if the light is complex
and you want to bring out the detail in one part of a scene.
Understanding Contrast

Contrast is the difference between the brightest and darkest areas in a scene. A shot of
a plain gray sky has very little contrast because the brightness is even across the
scene. Shots with the light source in front of the camera have a lot of contrast because
there is a big brightness difference between the lightest and darkest areas. Cameras do
not have a contrast setting because the light in a scene sets the contrast. But you can
use iPhoto to modify the contrast in a shot for special effects or to improve the look of
a photo.
Understanding Shadows and Highlights
Cameras have to adapt to the average brightness because the range of bright and dark
measurements they can capture is limited. The darkest black in a scene is called the
black point. The brightest white is called the white point. When the exposure is poor,
the black point may be lighter than a pure black, and the white point may be darker
than a pure white. The Exposure tool uses a pair of indicators to show you where the
black and white points are in your photo. You can slide the indicators to correct
obvious exposure errors. On some photos you can push the shadows and highlights to
extremes to “pop” the colors.
Understanding Bracketing
Because exposure is always a best guess, your camera sometimes gets it wrong. The
easiest way to fix poor exposure is to retake a shot. If your camera has manual
exposure control, you can use a professional technique called bracketing: Shoot the
same scene three or more times starting with an exposure that is slightly too dark, and
increasing it until the exposure is slightly too light. This gives you the best chance of
capturing a good exposure you can work with. Some cameras have automatic
bracketing, and take three or more photos with different exposures in less than a
second. The iPhone and iPad cameras lack this feature, but you can often reshoot a
scene manually.

Understanding Creative Exposure
You can control exposure creatively to create special effects and change the mood of a
photo by controlling light and shadow. Black and white landscapes are often darker
than usual to bring out the textures in a scene. Lifestyle photographs and portraits are
often shot with a lighter exposure to create a bright and airy feel. You can
dramatically improve your photography by looking at the bright and dark balance in
professional photos.


Enhance Shadows and Highlights
You can use the Exposure tool to adjust the shadows and highlights in a photo. The tool
displays shadows and highlights sliders, and displays the “perfect” shadow and highlight
points with a pair of fine lines at the left and right of the control area. It also displays
sliders for contrast and brightness, which are described later in this chapter.
To work with the shadows and highlights, drag the two sliders to the left and right. You
can ignore the “perfect” positions and experiment with other settings. The results may not
be technically ideal, but some photos look better with “incorrect” settings.
Enhance Shadows and Highlights
 Launch iPhoto and open the editor.
 Tap a thumbnail to select it for editing.
 If the Edit button is not selected, tap it to enter edit mode.
 Tap the Exposure icon ( ).

iPhoto displays controls for shadows, highlights, contrast, and brightness.
 Drag the shadows slider at the left to adjust the darkest point of the image and set it to
black.
A The thin line close to the slider shows the “perfect” position.
B The area to the left of the slider flashes red if shadows are too dark.
Note: You can ignore the warning if you think the photo still looks good.
C iPhoto adjusts the shadows to make them darker or lighter.
 Drag the highlights slider at the right to adjust the brightness of the highlights.
D The fine line to the right indicates the “perfect” highlights exposure.
Note: The area to the right of the line flashes red if you make the highlights too bright, but
you may want to do this deliberately.
E iPhoto adjusts the shadows and highlights according to your settings.
Note: The highlights in this photo are deliberately underexposed to reveal the texture of

the white wall around the door.
TIPS
Can I change the exposure in a small part of a photo?
The Exposure tool works on complete photos. To adjust parts of a photo, use the Lighten
and Darken brushes described in Chapter 9. The brushes give you less control over
shadows and highlights, but you can apply them selectively to create more complex
effects.
How can I fix a very poor exposure?
All photos capture a narrow brightness range, so there is a limit to the magical power of
the Exposure tool. If a photo is badly overexposed, detail in the highlights is lost forever.
If a photo is underexposed, you can usually pull detail out of the shadows, but the
corrected image will look grainy and the quality will be poor.


Work with Contrast and Brightness
You can use the exposure editor’s three central sliders to set contrast and brightness.
iPhoto does not display any guides or warnings for these settings, nor does it estimate the
“perfect” exposure. So it is up to you to experiment with the settings until your photo
looks good.
Contrast and brightness can change the feel of a photo. Less contrast creates a lighter
mood. More contrast creates deeper shadows and a darker and heavier mood. Automatic
cameras often get the exposure approximately right, so you may not need to do much with
these settings.
Work with Contrast and Brightness
 Launch iPhoto and open the editor.
 Select a thumbnail for editing.
 If the Edit button is not selected, tap it to enter edit mode.
 Tap the Exposure icon ( ).

 Drag either of the contrast sliders left or right.
Note: The sliders are linked and move in opposite directions. The closer the sliders, the
lower the contrast.
Note: If you move the sliders too close together, some areas in the photo become gray.
A iPhoto modifies the contrast, changing the difference between bright and dark areas.
 Drag the brightness slider left or right.
Note: iPhoto moves the contrast sliders automatically.

B iPhoto adjusts the overall brightness, keeping the contrast unchanged.
Note: The contrast in this photo has been increased to enhance the mood and compensate
for the harsh light from the sun. The brightness has been increased to make the foreground
stand out.
TIPS
Should I adjust brightness or contrast first?
You can start with either. The settings interact, and you can always undo your changes by
tapping the undo icon ( ). There is no formula, but you may find it useful to look at your
photo with fresh eyes after each edit and think about how you can improve it next.
Can I reset the exposure if I make a mistake?
As with most tools in iPhoto, the settings (gear) icon ( ) displays extra options. You can
reset the exposure by tapping the gear icon to show a popover then tapping the Reset
Exposure menu item. You can also copy and paste the exposure settings to a different
photo, although you usually get better results by adjusting the exposure of each photo
separately.


Learn about Color
Everyone loves photos with bright colors. iPhoto includes a selection of color editing
options that can improve and enhance the color in all your photos. You can also use them
to create black-and-white photos from color or to dial down or enhance the intensity of the
colors in your shots.
This section introduces the color adjustment tool. You can use it to make colors more or
less vivid and to change the color balance in a photo, making it warmer or cooler. The tool
also includes special options for working with skin tones. You can use them to improve
the look of your portraits, and to adjust colors around your subjects without making them
look unnatural.
Understanding Digital Color
Digital cameras capture images by measuring the brightness of a scene on a grid of
points called pixels. Cameras record color by measuring the amount of red, green, and
blue in each pixel. The science of color is complex and cameras sometimes get colors
wrong. For example, orange flames sometimes appear purple in photos, and some
purple flowers appear blue. But most of the time combining red, green, and blue in
different proportions captures most of the colors your eyes can see. If you could look
inside a digital photo, you would see a long string of numbers grouped in threes — the
red, green, and blue brightness values for each pixel.

Understanding Saturation
Color saturation measures how punchy and bright colors are. Black-and-white photos
have no saturation at all. A typical photo has medium saturation. Maximum saturation
looks garish, blotchy, and unnatural. Many photographers deliberately boost saturation
slightly because viewers love bright colors. Landscape photos often have unrealistic
saturation, but many photos benefit from a slight boost. Alternatively, you can dial
down saturation to create moody or vintage looks. iPhoto’s color tools can create both
effects.
Edit Colors Individually
iPhoto’s color saturation tool controls how vivid the colors are in your photo. It

includes extra sliders you can use to adjust the individual colors in a photo. But be
careful — these sliders do not modify red, green, and blue in a simple way, so they
may not create the results you expect. You can use them for independent adjustment
of sky and cloud blues, foliage greens, and skin tone reds and pinks. The slider effects
are designed to help you and make editing easier. But the results can be difficult to
predict, especially if you are used to the more straightforward color editing in other
software.
Work with Skin Tones
The skin tone adjustment increases the amount of pink/orange in a photo. It is a subtle
effect that gives portraits a warmer and healthier look. You can also use it to add
warmth to photos lit by bright blue skies. The effect on darker reds is less obvious.
Usefully, the color adjustment tool includes a Preserve Skin Tones option. You can
use it to try to keep skin tones lifelike as you adjust other colors.
Adjust Greenery
The foliage/green slider changes the brightness of mid-green foliage. You can use it to
make grass and leaves stand out more in your photo. If you exaggerate the effect it
creates an unnatural look because foliage appears to be lit differently from the rest of
your photo.
Enhance Sky Blues
This slider creates a complex result. It does not just make blues brighter — it seems to
vary the overall contrast and brightness of background lighting. White or gray parts of
a scene become brighter even if they are not noticeably blue. Other colors become
more saturated, and overall contrast increases. This slider has a very obvious effect, so
take care when using it. Dialing down the blue slider while dialing up skin tones can
add a subtle, interesting glow to the complexion of your models.


Add and Remove Color
You can use the Color tool’s saturation slider to set the amount of color in your photo.
Drag it to the left to make colors less vivid. Drag it to the right to make them more intense.
At the far left the slider removes all color, leaving a black-and-white photo.
The slider is sensitive and small movements create big changes. For best results, fix the
colors in your photo first using the white balance tool and the other color sliders. Adjust
the saturation only after the colors look good.
Add and Remove Color
 Launch iPhoto and open the editor.
 Tap a thumbnail to select it for editing.
 If the Edit button is not selected, tap it to enter edit mode.
 Tap the Color icon ( ).
 Drag the saturation slider to the far left.

iPhoto removes the color from the photo, leaving a black-and-white image.
 Drag the saturation slider to the far right.
iPhoto exaggerates the colors and makes the look unnatural.
 Position the saturation slider slightly to the right of the middle.
iPhoto pops the colors slightly without making them too bright.
Note: This position works well on most photos.
TIPS
Can I make desaturation more dramatic?
Removing color by desaturating a photo can leave it looking bland. You can use the
black-and-white effects introduced in Chapter 10 to create more complex results. The
black-and-white effects give you more control over how colors are converted to black-
and-white. For example, you can make blue skies darker or lighter.

Can I add color to a black-and-white photo?
Some cameras add special effects — for example, you can save black-and-white photos.
iPhoto cannot add colors back to a black-and-white photo. You can hand-paint colors
onto a black-and-white photo with a more complex editor such as Photoshop Elements
for Mac/PC or Photoshop for iPad. iPhoto does not have this feature.


Work with Different Colors
You can use the three color sliders in the color editor to control the amount of skin tone
warmth, the brightness of the sky and backgrounds, and the vividness of foliage.
If you are changing the colors in a portrait, you can also use a Preserve Skin Tones option
to keep your subjects looking natural. The blue slider has the most vivid effect, so use it
first. Experiment with the foliage slider if the photo needs it. Finish by adjusting the
warmth slider.
Work with Different Colors
 Launch iPhoto and open the editor.
 Select a thumbnail for editing.
 If the Edit button is not selected, tap it to enter edit mode.
 Tap the Color icon ( ).
 Move the saturation slider slightly to the right to highlight the changes you are about to

make.
 Drag the blue skies slider slightly left or right to make the sky darker or brighter.
Note: This slider has a big effect. Big movements create distorted results. Try small
movements left and right and see which looks better.
 Drag the greenery slider left and right to make foliage and grass more or less obvious.
Note: Moving the slider all the way to the right can make grass unnaturally bright. Try
moving it in both directions to see which result looks best.
Note: This example deliberately makes the grass darker.
 Drag the warmth slider left and right to add or remove a subtle warm coloring.
Note: This slider has a very subtle effect. It is most obvious on skin tones in portraits. You
may find it hard to see the difference on other photos.
Note: This example deliberately makes the photo cooler to emphasize the blue of the sky
and the sea.

TIPS
Why do the color sliders work so differently?
Apple has tried to create an editing tool that does what users need. Color adjustments can
be complex, and more powerful software has many options. The skies/warmth/foliage
approach is effective for simple edits. It is not as flexible as more complex effects, but it
is easy to use.
What other color editing options can I use?
The white balance tool described in the next three sections can create more complex
color effects. Although it is designed to correct colors, you can use it creatively to change
the mood and feel of your photos.


Understanding White Balance
Ideally, you would like all the colors in your photo to be accurate. In practice, lighting
conditions vary, so all photos have slightly inaccurate colors. Cameras try to fix this
problem automatically, but camera software does not always get it right, even when set up
correctly.
You can fix color shifts after you take a photo with iPhoto’s white balance tool. You can
compensate for specific kinds of light — indoor incandescent, outdoor shade, outdoor
sunny, flash, and so on. You can also correct colors manually by pointing iPhoto at a gray
or white feature in a photo and leaving it to correct the colors for you.
What Is White Balance?
If you take a photo of white paper you should get a white result. In practice you rarely
do. The true color depends on the surrounding lights. Candles and incandescent bulbs
have an orange and yellow cast — an all-over tint. Blue skies add a cool blue cast.
White balance deliberately shifts the colors in your photo to compensate for the way
the scene is lit. When you fix white balance errors, whites in your scene lose their tints
and become white again, and all the other colors become more accurate.
Recognize White Balance Errors
When you know what to look for, white balance errors are easy to spot. Indoor scenes
often look yellow. Outdoor scenes can be too cold and blue. Scenes taken in shade
often have a slight brown and orange cast. If you are not sure if the colors in your
photo are correct, look at the whites and grays. If they are tinted, the white balance is
wrong and you may need to fix it.
Understanding White Balance Correction
White balance is a complex process and applies two different color corrections.
Luckily, you do not need to understand the details to use it successfully. iPhoto’s
correction tool makes it easy to fix color problems with a few taps. Note that you

cannot fix white balance problems with iPhoto’s other color tools. White balance
changes colors in a unique way, and no other tool produces exactly the same effect.
Understanding Camera White Balance
Cameras, including budget cameras, attempt to manage white balance as you take a
photo. Most cameras are set to manage white balance automatically. Some include
manual white balance options, so you can choose a setting that matches the lighting
conditions to give your camera the best chance of getting an accurate result.
Unfortunately, in-camera white balance does not always work as it should. Some
cameras are set incorrectly, whereas others do not do a good job of correcting color
errors. So even if your camera has this feature you may still need to correct your
photos in iPhoto.
Fix White Balance Automatically
iPhoto includes a selection of white balance presets. You can fix white balance by
applying a preset that matches the light you used to take the photo — for example,
you can select sun, cloud, flash, shade, incandescent lighting, and fluorescent lighting.
The presets are fixed, so you have no control over how they correct colors.
Fix White Balance Manually
If you need finer control over white balance, iPhoto includes two manual options.
Both display a loupe — a graphic of a magnifying glass — which you can move to set
a reference point for color correction. One option is designed to use skin tones as a
reference, and the other works with any white/gray point in a photo.
Work Creatively with White Balance

Your eyes adjust white balance automatically, so you rarely notice the color
differences between indoor, outdoor, and artificial lighting. Viewers looking at snaps
are very tolerant of white balance errors. Few viewers care that an indoor snap posted
on someone’s Facebook wall is slightly yellow. White balance is important for
landscape, portrait, or nature photography, where colors should have maximum
impact. However, photographers sometimes change the white balance incorrectly to
change the mood of a scene, making scenes cooler or warmer with blue or orange.
Feel free to keep photos that look good even if the colors are distorted.


Using a White Balance Preset
You can use one of the white balance presets to apply a standard white balance correction
to your photo. For example, if you know your photo was taken under a cloudy sky, you
can apply the Cloudy white balance preset.
You can apply a preset by tapping the White Balance icon in the toolbar and tapping one
of the further icons in the popover. To see a list of names, tap the help button first. Note
that although technically white balance is designed to correct colors, you can also use it
creatively to apply an all-over color shift.
Using a White Balance Preset
 Launch iPhoto and open the editor.
 Tap a thumbnail to select it for editing.
 If the Edit button is not selected, tap it to enter edit mode.
 Tap the Color icon ( ).

 Tap the White Balance icon ( ).
A iPhoto displays a popover with a list of white balance presets.
 Tap the help icon ( ) to see the names of the presets.
B iPhoto displays the names above the popover.
Note: Many users find it difficult to remember the meaning of each symbol, so remember
that you can see their names if you tap the help icon ( ).
 Tap each preset in turn until you find the one that makes the colors look most natural.
Note: The WB preset matches the white balance estimated by the camera.
Note: In theory, the presets correct for different lighting conditions. In practice, try them
all and use the one that works best.
 Tap anywhere outside the popover to hide it.
iPhoto adjusts the white balance in the photo.
C iPhoto displays the preset icon to remind you which preset you selected.

Note: In this example, the Sun preset brightens the blue in the sky and removes a slight
orange cast, making the colors more accurate.
TIPS
Are these presets standard?
There are no official industry standard white balance presets. But many cameras and
photo editing tools offer an identical selection. Cheaper cameras may lack a few of the
presets, and expensive cameras and software may occasionally include a few more,
including some you can specify yourself.
What is color temperature?
If you look up white balance online you may find references to color temperature, which
is a measure of color in units called Kelvins (K) derived from physics. The theory is
complex, but in outline iPhoto uses color temperature values when it fixes white balance
errors.


Fix White Balance Manually
You can use two special modes to correct white balance manually. Both display a loupe —
a virtual magnifying glass. To correct white balance, move the loupe to a point with a
reference color. The white balance tool takes that color and corrects it, shifting all the
other colors in the photo by the same amount.
The Face Balance loupe is designed to fix skin tones. Move it to a bright area of skin. The
Custom loupe is designed to correct whites and grays. Both tools can create dramatic color
shifts if you deliberately misplace them. The results often look surreal, but sometimes they
can unexpectedly enhance a photo.
Fix White Balance Manually
 Launch iPhoto and open the editor.
 Tap a thumbnail to select it for editing.
 If the Edit button is not selected, tap it to enter edit mode.
 Tap the Color icon ( ).
 Tap the White Balance icon ( ) to show the white balance popover.
 Tap the Face Balance preset icon ( ) in the popover.

A iPhoto plays a sound and displays the loupe.
 Drag the loupe around the image to find a reference skin tone shade.
B iPhoto estimates the white balance from the point you select.
Note: You may need to move the loupe over most of your subject’s face to find a good
color.
 Tap the White Balance icon again.
 Tap the Custom Balance preset icon ( ).
Note: This example demonstrates how to work with Face Balance and Custom Balance. In
practice you apply one or the other — the order does not matter — and keep the one that
looks best.

 Move the loupe until the color is good.
 Tap the White Balance icon again to hide the loupe and lock in the change.
Note: The Custom Balance option creates more extreme color shifts. This example
deliberately exaggerates the reds.
TIPS
What is the difference between Face and Custom mode?
Face mode is designed for portraits and creates small shifts, whereas Custom mode
creates extreme color shifts. In theory, you should place the loupe on a white or gray
area. In practice, you typically move the loupe around the scene until you find colors that
look good.
How can I get more accurate colors?
Professional photographers use expensive white/gray/black or full-color reference cards
with ideal colors. Simulate a white reference card with a sheet of paper. Take a shot with
the paper close to your subject but off to one side, so you can crop it out later. Place the
loupe on the paper in iPhoto, and you should get accurate color correction.

Chapter 9: Using Brush Effects
iPhoto’s brush effects provide a palette of powerful and subtle tools for fixing, improving,
and transforming photos. You can use them to fix small blemishes and problems in photos;
to subtly improve photos to add color, contrast, and impact; and to enhance the mood with
soft focus and selective color effects. Brush effects are easy to understand, but you may
need to practice with them to create the best possible results.
Understanding Brush Effects
Manage Brush Effects
Zoom for Fine Control
Repair a Photo
Remove Red Eye
Make Colors Pop
Remove Color Selectively
Add Emphasis and Lighten a Photo
Add Impact and Darken a Photo
Sharpen Parts of a Photo
Create Soft Dreamy Effects
Edit Matching Areas

Erase Brush Effects


Understanding Brush Effects
You can apply brush effects to parts of a photo by “painting” them with a finger. You can
set the intensity of each effect to make it more or less obvious. You can also paint with an
eraser to remove the strokes. Many effects support “layered” painting. The effects get
stronger and more obvious the more times you brush an area.
The effects appear as a set of animated brushes that fold out from the bottom of the screen.
When you begin painting, the brush tips move to the bottom of the screen. Select a
different effect by tapping a different brush.
Using Brush Effects
Brush effects are perfect for quick fixes and subtle creative enhancement. iPhoto’s
other editing tools can fix obvious problems or apply a dramatic transformation. You
can use the brush effects to create more subtle improvements. Because you may want
to “paint” an entire image, you can also apply a brush effect to all of a photo with a
single tap, and set the intensity of the effect with a slider. The brushes can be tricky to
work with. When you “paint” with an effect it may take a few goes to create the effect
you want, so do not be afraid to experiment and practice.
Understanding the Repair Brush
You can use the Repair brush to remove minor skin blemishes. The brush works by
copying color and texture and softening detail. To use it, “paint” around the blemish
you want to remove but avoid crossing important lines in the image. If you make the
painted area too big, the brush creates a waxy and unnatural look.
Work with Color
The Saturate and Desaturate brushes are similar to the Color slider introduced in
Chapter 8. You can use the Saturate brush to pop colors and make them stronger, and
the Desaturate brush to make colors less intense. You can set the intensity of both
effects with a hidden slider, and apply an all-over saturate or desaturate effect. Subtly

increasing the saturation improves most photos and is particularly useful for portraits.
Too much saturation looks garish and unnatural. You can use the Desaturate brush to
create special effects, including selective color — where most of a photo is black-and-
white, and only the subject is in color — and vintage or romantic looks with muted
colors.
Lighten and Darken a Photo
You can use the lighten and darken brushes to make parts of a photo lighter or darker.
As with the Saturate and Desaturate brushes, you can control the intensity with a
slider and apply the effect to the entire photo with a couple of taps. You can use both
effects to “relight” a photo after you take it, making some areas brighter to emphasize
them or darkening other areas to add impact or enhance the mood. These simple
effects can create subtle and powerful results.
Undo, Erase, and Control Brush Effects
Hidden options give you more power. You can “paint” with the eraser to remove an
effect from parts of a photo. You can use a “detect edges” feature to force an effect to
work on areas with matching color and lighting. You can also apply an effect to a
photo with a single tap, control the intensity of an effect, remove individual effects,
and zoom into a photo to work on small areas with a finer brush. These options are
easy to work with - after you know where to find them.
Create Artistic Effects
Because you have almost infinite control over the location and intensity of each brush
stroke, you can use brush effects very creatively. Most photos look better with brighter

colors and improved contrast, and the brushes are good for these simple
improvements. You can also create effects that transform the impact of a photo. You
can make a foreground subject stand out from the background, add a dreamy
atmosphere, darken the mood, and so on. Chapter 11 has some examples. The
possibilities are limited only by your imagination.


Manage Brush Effects
You can get better results if you explore important settings for each effect before you
begin brushing. You can access the settings through a popover.
Tap the settings (gear) icon to display the popover. Different brushes have different
options. You can erase the strokes for a single effect or for all effects, as described later in
this chapter. Some brushes also give you an intensity slider, an option to view strokes, and
a one-tap option to apply the effect to the entire image.
Manage Brush Effects
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap a thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
iPhoto displays a selection of brushes and dims the edit area.
 Tap a brush to select it.

Note: This example uses the Saturate brush.
A iPhoto moves the brushes to the bottom of the screen, and highlights the brush you
selected.
 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ) to reveal the settings popover for the brush.
Note: All brushes have different settings.
Note: If you dragged the thumbnail grid to the other side of the screen as described in
Chapter 4, the settings (gear) icon appears on the left instead of the right.
 Drag the strength slider (where available) to change how much each stroke modifies the
image.
 Tap Show Strokes to see which areas you have stroked with the brush.
 Tap Entire Image to automatically apply strokes to the entire photo.
 Tap Erase Strokes to remove the strokes for this brush, and Erase All Strokes to erase
all effects for every brush.

TIPS
What does Show Strokes do?
When you select Show Strokes and begin brushing, iPhoto displays your strokes in red.
You can instantly see where you have applied an effect. You can use this feature to avoid
blotches created by imprecise brushing.
Does the effect strength slider affect each stroke?
The slider sets the strength of all strokes. You cannot apply some strokes with one
strength, move the slider, and apply more strokes with a different strength. However,
most of the brushes support layering — brush an area three or four times, and the effect
gets stronger with each stroke.


Zoom for Fine Control
In some editing packages you can set the size of a brush for coarser or finer effects. iPhoto
does not have this feature, but you can paint with a “smaller” and more detailed brush by
zooming into a photo. You can also pan around the photo to work with different areas.
To zoom, use the standard pinch-zoom gesture. To pan, drag the image with two fingers.
(Dragging with one finger applies the brush, so you must use a different gesture for
panning.)
Zoom for Fine Control
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap a thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Tap any brush to select it.
Note: This example uses the lighten brush, but you can zoom and pan with any brush.

 Pinch out to zoom into the photo.
 Drag with two fingers to move the zoomed area.
 Apply the brush to the zoomed photo.
Note: Because the photo is zoomed the effective brush area is smaller, giving you finer
control and making it easier to keep the effect within a small area without blotching or
smudging.
TIPS
Can I zoom out to simulate the effect of a bigger brush?
iPhoto always fits a photo to the size of the preview area. You cannot zoom out further to
make the photo smaller and the brush bigger. So there is no way to paint with very large
brushes.
What is the maximum zoom factor?
You can zoom most photos by a factor of 3 to 4. The maximum zoom depends on the size

and the resolution of the original photo. This zoom factor gives you enough resolution for
fine edits.


Repair a Photo
Photos — and subjects — often have blemishes. You can use the Repair brush to fix minor
skin blemishes and improve the look of your photo.
The Repair brush can be tricky to work with. If you apply thick strokes at the standard
resolution, the brush creates unattractive waxy blurs. For good results, zoom the photo
first and work with the smallest possible strokes. Tap the undo icon to undo individual
strokes if you make a mistake.
Repair a Photo
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap a thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Repair brush to select it.
Note: If you have already applied the Crop, Exposure, Color, or Effects tools, iPhoto
“peels back” the photo to reveal a fresh view.

 Pinch-zoom and drag to select the area of the photo you want to improve.
Note: For good results, always zoom in.
 Carefully apply the brush to part of the portrait.
Note: The red brush stroke fades almost immediately and iPhoto shows the repaired area
under it.
Note: Try to use small strokes or dots on areas with similar lighting. Do not stroke across
shadows or highlights. Try to follow the natural contours of the face.
A Do not stroke across lines, details, or edges, because the repair brush smudges them.
Note: If you make a mistake, tap the undo icon ( ).

 Zoom out when done to check your changes.
Note: This example shows repairs to the, nose, cheeks, and chin.
Note: The finished repair should be realistic without waxy smoothness or blurred details.
Keep some imperfections for a more natural look.
Note: This example deliberately over-repairs the nose to show how too much retouching
can look unrealistic.
TIPS
What does the repair brush do?
The brush paints detail from the surrounding photo into each stroke. The detail is
softened and blurred, making the result smoother. If you paint with very coarse strokes,
you can clearly see the blurring effect.
How can I get good results with this brush?
Try to paint along lines and areas with similar lighting, creating a result that keeps the
light and shade of the original. Do not brush across details. Human eyes are very
sensitive to the structure and lighting of faces. If you change the look too much you can
distort the original, making it unnatural and unbelievable.


Remove Red Eye
Red eye is a striking and unwelcome effect that can appear in photos taken with a budget
camera. As the name suggests, subjects appear to have sinister red eyes. Cameras produce
it when an on-camera flash unit is too close to the lens and reflects light from inside the
eye.
You can try to remove red eye with the Red Eye brush, but sometimes it does not work
very well. To use it, simply tap each pupil. If your photo has enough resolution, you can
also try to remove red eye with the Desaturate brush.
Remove Red Eye
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap a thumbnail with red eye to select it for correction.
 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Red Eye brush to select it.

 Tap the pupil of one eye to apply the brush.
Note: The brush displays a brief expanding circle animation if you tap the pupil correctly.
If you miss the pupil it displays a circle and shakes it from side to side.
 Repeat for the pupil of the other eye.
 Pinch-zoom to the biggest possible size to check the results.
Note: The brush inserts a dark circle over the pupil, but often misses some areas and
removes the highlights from the eyes.
 If you do not like the result, tap the settings (gear) icon ( ).
 Tap Clear Red Eye Repairs.

 Tap the Desaturate brush to select it.
 Very carefully tap and drag slightly over the pupil of one eye.
 Repeat for the other eye.
Note: If you make a mistake, tap the undo icon ( ).
Note: Often, as in this example, the brush is too big for the pupil. This technique may
remove some of the color from the iris and the rest of the eye.
TIPS
How can I get more accurate results?
Sometimes you can get cleaner edges around the pupil if you turn on the Detect Edges
feature which is described toward the end of this chapter in the section “Edit Matching
Areas.” But unfortunately fixing red eye is difficult, and it may not be possible to get a
perfect result.
How can I avoid red eye when taking a photo?
Some cameras trigger the flash twice to narrow the pupils of your subjects’ eyes and
make red eye unlikely. If you have a separate handheld flash, try moving it away from
the camera lens. You can also try bouncing light off the ceiling. A few smaller cameras
work well if you hold your finger close to the flash when it fires, diffusing the light.


Make Colors Pop
You can use the Saturate brush to make colors pop in your photo. The brush has the same
effect as the saturation slider in the color editor, but you can “paint” the effect into a photo
for extra control. Many photos look good with some subtle extra saturation, especially
portraits and landscapes.
Because you can saturate some areas while leaving others unchanged, you can use this
brush to add saturation and avoid the artifacts that can appear if you saturate an entire
photo. You can use this effect to highlight some parts of a photo, making the entire image
more appealing.
Make Colors Pop
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap a thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Saturate brush to select it.

 Brush over an area or feature to highlight it.
A iPhoto increases the color intensity, drawing attention to the area.
Note: The effect can be subtle. Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ) and use the strength slider
to make it more or less obvious.
 Brush further areas to make them more prominent and to highlight other parts of the
photo.

 For a more complex effect, brush along lines or edges to lead viewers to the features
you want to emphasize.
Note: This example is slightly exaggerated to demonstrate the effect.
TIPS
When would I paint saturation into a photo?
Faces in portraits often look better with slightly enhanced color, but be careful not to
overdo the effect and make your subjects bright orange instead of a healthy warm pink.
Generally, you can draw attention to parts of a photo by making the colors stronger.
Often this means popping the foreground, but you can try different possibilities to see
which works best.
How can I get finer control?
If your fingers are wide you can pinch-zoom to expand the photo for finer control. You
can also paint more finely with an optional iPad stylus, available at affordable prices (less
than $10) from many online stores. The stylus tip is thinner than a finger and gives you
very accurate control.


Remove Color Selectively
You can use the desaturate brush to tone down the colors in parts of a photo. Desaturation
is more of a creative effect than saturation. You can use it to highlight a subject by
removing some of the color from the background, or to add atmosphere by fading colors
deliberately.
This example removes one color from a photo. For a more striking and complex effect,
you can use the same tool to remove all colors except those in or around your subject.
Remove Color Selectively
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap a thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Desaturate brush to select it.
 Stroke with the brush to remove color from an area.

Note: Optionally, you can tap the settings (gear) icon ( ) to show the effect settings and
use the strength slider to make the effect stronger or weaker.
 Pinch-zoom and drag to apply a smaller brush to important edges in the photo.
 Zoom out again to check your work.
Note: This example is a demonstration. For a more typical application use the effect to
remove color on or around a model.
Note: As this example shows, unfortunately the effect may not be strong enough to
remove all color.
TIPS
Why would I deliberately remove color?
Chapter 11 has some examples of creative editing. Color removal can create some very
striking effects, but you can also use it for more natural results. Weaker colors can
suggest a gentler mood, especially when combined with effects like vignetting, which is

also described in Chapter 11.
How can I select areas more precisely?
The Edit Matching Areas option described later in this chapter works well with the
saturation and desaturation tools. It remembers the first color you tap and works on areas
with a similar color. For example, if you tap the sky and drag your finger down onto a
landscape, the brush stops working outside the blue areas. This makes color selection
very easy.


Add Emphasis and Lighten a Photo
You can use the lighten brush to make parts of your photo lighter. Creatively, you can
“relight” your photo after you take it to bring out areas in shadow. You can also use the
brush correctively to improve the exposure of a photo, but use the exposure editor
introduced in Chapter 8 first because it creates a more obvious result.
The lighten effect is too subtle for dramatic corrections, but you can use it to emphasize
parts of a photo by making them slightly brighter. This catches the viewer’s eye even
when the edit is too subtle to be obvious.
Add Emphasis and Lighten a Photo
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap a thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Lighten brush to select it.

 To create a highlight effect, brush around an area or feature.
 For more complex effects, zoom and pan to “relight” a feature or area, carefully
keeping the effect inside the lines that define it.
Note: This example lightens the area under the overhang.
Note: Because the area is very dark, the result is slightly blotchy. The lighten effect can
only lift the brightness of areas that have good detail in the shadows.
 Zoom out to check your work.
Note: This example brightens the area under the overhang, and also the corner and
window to the left, bringing out some of the details lost in shadow in the original.
TIPS
Can I relight very dark areas?
The lighten brush has a limited range. You can use it to throw some virtual light on
darker parts of a photo, but you cannot relight areas that are so dark they have no detail.

What can I do with this effect?
Newspaper and advertising photos often use a version of this effect to add a halo around
a portrait or part of a landscape. If you brush around an object, it appears to pop out of
the photo. The effect works particularly well against a dark sky.


Add Impact and Darken a Photo
You can use the darken brush to darken parts of your photo and place it into virtual
shadow. Like the lighten brush, the effect is subtle. But if you apply the brush to a photo
and then compare it with an unedited version, you can see that it can make a big difference
to the mood of the photo.
You can use the brush to add extra contrast and “bite” to areas as well as darken them. Use
it when a photo is slightly overlit and you want to give it more weight, depth, and impact.
Add Impact and Darken a Photo
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap a thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Darken brush to select it.
 Brush an area to darken it.

Note: The flowers and plants in this example are slightly overexposed. Darkening them
adds contrast and subtly enhances their impact.
 Darken a wider area to enhance the effect.
Note: In this example, darkening the wall and the flowers gives weight and impact to the
right-hand side of the photo and balances the shadows around the door.
 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ) to display the effect settings.
 The default slider setting is around 75%. Drag it to the right to make the effect stronger.
Note: The slider resets itself to 75% every time you use this brush.
TIPS
When would I darken a photo?
Photographers often darken and lighten areas deliberately to enhance the impact of a
photo. You can darken the area around a portrait to make the subject stand out more. This
effect also works well if you darken an entire photo and use the erase brush to remove the

darken effect from the point of interest.
How can I make the effect darker still?
Applying the effect to an entire photo usually makes it dark enough. If you want to create
an even darker result, you can save a version of the photo to the camera roll, reload it,
and continue brushing. For details see Chapter 11.


Sharpen Parts of a Photo
You can use the sharpen brush to add sharpness selectively. Sharpening a photo is another
way to make an area stand out. You can also combine the effect with the soften brush for a
more powerful and striking result.
The sharpen brush is subtle and the effect can be difficult to see. For good results use it on
areas with plenty of fine detail, such as hair. The effect makes lines and edges stand out,
but it needs clean and sharp edges to work with.
Sharpen Parts of a Photo
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap a thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Sharpen brush to select it.
Note: This example demonstrates the effect on a zoomed photo to emphasize it.

 Brush an area to sharpen it and highlight the details.
 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ) to show the settings popover.
 Tap Sharpen Entire Image to apply the effect to the entire photo.
 Tap the strength buttons to select the intensity of the effect.
Note: Unlike the other effects, sharpen can look good applied to a whole photo, but it can
also enhance noise and grain.
iPhoto sharpens the entire image, highlighting all the details.
Note: Sharpening the entire image always creates a more intense effect than applying the
sharpen brush.

TIPS
Why does this effect do nothing?
To highlight the effect, tap the original/edited button and compare your changes with the
original photo. You should see that the painted areas are clearer and sharper. If not, try a
different photo with cleaner edges. At extreme settings you may see a subtle bright halo
around objects, especially against a plain background.
Can I correct a blurred photo?
You cannot fix a badly blurred photo. The sharpen effect needs edges to work with, and a
badly blurred photo does not have them. The blur is “burned into” the photo, and no tool
or effect can remove it. However, you can improve the impact of a slightly soft photo by
giving it more bite and clarity.


Create Soft Dreamy Effects
You can use the soften brush to deliberately blur your photo. You can often improve a
portrait by blurring the area around it. Features such as hair and clothes can also look good
if you soften them.
This brush supports layering. Areas become softer as you brush them over and over. You
can typically brush four or five times before the effect reaches a maximum. You can use
this feature to create soft-focus areas, or to improve the skin on a portrait without making
it look waxy and unrealistic.
Create Soft Dreamy Effects
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap a thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Soften brush to select it.

 Brushing around the edges of a photo often creates a good look.
 For a more extreme effect, brush everywhere except for the areas you want to highlight.
Note: This example brushes around and between the roses, making them stand out.
 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ) to show the settings popover.
 Tap the strength buttons to vary the intensity of the effect.
Note: The Soften Entire Image option does not look good, even at the weakest setting.
TIPS
Why is the Soften Entire Image effect so strong?
Softening the entire image is like applying multiple strokes to all of it. This option works
well on some of the brushes, but the softening effect is too strong to be useful on most
photos — it simply blurs the entire image.
Is this effect similar to soft focus?

Photographers create soft-focus effects by shooting through layers of crinkled plastic
wrap or smearing transparent gel on glass in front of the lens. The soften brush can create
similar results, but you must apply it selectively to create a convincing result.


Edit Matching Areas
The Edit Matching Areas option works like an assistant that remembers the color and
texture of the area you first tap. If you drag your finger onto some other color, the assistant
disables the current brush.
You can use this feature to trap an effect inside an area. If your fingers are wide, it can be
difficult to avoid painting over boundaries, creating smeared results. The Matching Areas
option helps keep your edits clean and precise.
Edit Matching Areas
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap a thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Tap any brush to select it.
Note: This example uses the Saturate brush, but the effect works with any brush you
select.

 Tap the Detect Edges icon ( ).
A iPhoto highlights the icon.
 Tap on or inside an area with a distinct color.
 Without lifting your finger, brush around the area.
 Repeat for similar areas in the photo.
B iPhoto “traps” the brush effect inside an area with a color that matches your tap.
Note: Colored areas often have bright edges and the effect does not detect them
accurately, so the “trapped” area may be slightly too small.

 Repeat for other areas you want to edit.
Note: You can tap any other brushes to select them and they will all “trap” an effect in the
same way.
TIPS
When would I use this feature?
The best way to explore this feature is to experiment with it. It can be quirky and
unpredictable, and it can also work very well indeed. Try it whenever you want to apply
any brush effect to a limited area. It may or may not do what you need. When it does, it
can save you a lot of time.
Why is it not working?
This option works well on areas with clean and distinct colors and sharp edges. More
complex textures and edges with distinct colors can confuse it. For more accurate control
over edges, zoom into your photo and paint around the difficult edges by hand. You can
then zoom out and apply a wider brush to the areas in between.


Erase Brush Effects
The brush effects give the best results with practice, persistence, and skill. Fortunately,
you can undo and redo changes until you create the result you want by tapping the undo
icon. You can also remove all the strokes for a single effect or for all effects, as described
in the section “Manage Brush Effects.”
But you may also want to correct brush strokes by hand. You can use the Undo brush to
remove some or all of a brush effect. It cancels the effect of an existing stroke. You can
“paint” it on your photo until you create the result you want.
Erase Brush Effects
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap a thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Soften brush to select it.

 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ) to show the effect settings popover.
 Tap Desaturate Entire Image.
A iPhoto removes the colors from the image.
 Tap the Undo brush icon ( ).
 Brush an area to remove the effect.
Note: In this example, brushing restores color to a selected part of the sky.
 Brush a different area “by accident.”
 Tap the undo icon ( ).
iPhoto undoes the effect of the Undo brush and restores the original effect.
Note: Use this option if you make a mistake with the Undo brush ( ).
TIPS

Is the Undo brush a corrective or creative tool?
You can use it either way — there are many applications. One option is to zoom into a
photo and make very small corrections around lines and edges. But you can also use it
creatively, as demonstrated in this section.
Does the Undo brush have an intensity setting?
No, nor does it support layering. If you brush over an existing effect, it completely
removes that effect. You cannot use it to tone down an effect or to make it less intense.

Chapter 10: Using Filters and Effects
You can use iPhoto’s effects to transform your photos in dramatic ways. Instead of subtly
enhancing a photo, you can totally transform its look and mood to create visually striking
effects that were once only available to professionals. The effects are easy to use, but
because they can be unpredictable the best way to master them is to experiment. This
chapter introduces the simpler effects. Chapter 11 explores further creative experiments.
Understanding Effects
Add Ink Effects
Create Warm and Cool Colorings
Master Duotones
Convert Color to Black-and-White
Pick Out Strong Colors
Create Vintage Film Effects
Convert a Photo into Art


Understanding Effects
You can modify your photos in creative ways by applying various effects. Most create
dramatic results — for example, you can change a color photo into a black-and-white one,
or convert a photo into a painting. The Warm & Cool effect can create more subtle
adjustments.
The effects appear on animated fold-out strips. You can select an effect by tapping a strip,
and then modify the effect by dragging your finger left and right. You can also modify
some effects by dragging your fingers on the photo.
Understanding Photo Effects
In the days of darkroom editing, photographers evolved a range of extreme special
effects. iPhoto includes digital versions of many of these popular wet-paper, lens
filter, and darkroom effects. The enhancements and corrections introduced in Chapter
8 add subtle improvements to a photo. The effects in this chapter are much more
dramatic. You can use them to completely transform the look and the mood of a photo
and to create images that look creative, unusual, and “photographic.” For best results,
choose your source photo carefully, but do not be afraid to experiment. If you do not
like an effect, you can always restore the original photo. Note that iPhoto can only
apply one effect at a time, but you can save an edited photo to the camera roll, re-open
it, and apply another effect.
Understanding Color Effects
Chapter 8 discussed how to enhance the color of a photo. The color filter effects can
do much more. For example, the Black & White effect removes all the color from a
photo, and it also allows you to choose how colors map to brightness. You can make a
blue sky a dramatic shade of dark gray, or a much brighter white. The Aura effect is
even more complex. It converts most of a photo into black-and-white, but leaves one
or two selected colors.

Understanding Duotones
Duotones are one particular color effect. Visually, a duotone looks like a black-and-
white photo overlaid with a subtle tint. A true chemical paper duotone uses a complex
process that adds a hint of color and enhances the midtones — middle-brightness
grays — to increase the impact of the photo. iPhoto uses a simpler process to create an
approximation of the real effect. For even better results you can enhance the photo
further by changing the exposure as described in Chapter 8. You can also restore some
of the original colors to create an unusual blended result with austere but dramatic
colors.
Understanding Vignettes and Highlights
An optional vignette effect is built into three filters — Black & White, Vintage, and
Artistic. You can use this feature to darken the corners or edges of a photo, adding
romantic distance to your photo and highlighting one area. This is not a complicated
effect, but it can dramatically enhance the mood of a photo. You can set the width of
the vignette by pinching with two fingers and move the center by dragging with one.
Understanding Artistic Effects
iPhoto includes a selection of popular art-look effects in the Artistic filter. Landscape
photographers often create dramatic skies by using a plastic or glass filter over the

lens with a gradient effect — a thick deep color, often orange or gray, that shades to
transparency toward the middle of the frame. iPhoto includes three gradient effects
with subtly different color tints. You can also blur the top and bottom of a photo to
create an effect called tilt-shift, which creates photos that look like miniature scenes.
You can add ink effects to create attractive painted photo edges. And you can
experiment with two paint-like filters that mimic brush strokes on canvas or paper.
This chapter introduces the paint-like effects. The other artistic effects are introduced
in Chapter 11.


Add Ink Effects
You can make your photos look more artistic by adding an ink effect to the edges of the
photo. Unlike a photo, hand-drawn art is never a perfect rectangle because the edges are
often smeared or textured.
You can create a similar result with the ink effects in iPhoto, applying one of six ready-
made borders. The effect includes a color saturation slider so you can fade or pop the
colors to heighten the mood. The ink effects are simple but they can look great on cards
and small prints.
Add Ink Effects
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for enhancement.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
 Tap the Effects icon ( ).

A iPhoto folds out a set of effects strips.
Note: The original photo is darkened when the strips appear.
Note: The strips include tiny preview thumbnails of each effect at different settings.
 Tap the Ink Effects strip to select the ink effects.
B iPhoto moves the Ink Effects strip to the bottom of the screen, ready for editing.
 Tap one of the preview thumbnails on the strip to select an effect.
C iPhoto adds a hand-drawn or hand-painted border to the photo.
Note: Tap the thumbnails to apply the different borders.
 Slide your finger on the saturation bar to tone down or boost the colors in the photo.
TIPS
Can I customize the ink effects?

The border shapes and textures are fixed and you cannot import borders or create your
own. But if you drag one finger up and down you can set the intensity or “bite” of the
effect. You can also drag a finger left and right to change the color saturation.
Why do the colors change when I boost them?
The saturation slider applies a complex color shift that tries to mimic the look and feel of
a pastel drawing. Blues are popped more than other colors. The effect is not the same as
the color boost introduced in Chapter 8.


Create Warm and Cool Colorings
The Warm & Cool effect is designed to change the color balance of a photo. You can shift
the balance slightly toward red for warmth, or toward blue for coolness. The effect is
useful for adding life to portraits and for wintry or watery landscapes.
On other photos, you may find it difficult to see a difference. The results are very subtle
and depend on the colors in the source photo and the quality of your iPad’s display. You
can see the effect more easily on the improved retina display on the 3rd and 4th generation
iPads and on high-quality paper prints.
Create Warm and Cool Colorings
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for enhancement.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
 Tap the Effects icon ( ).

A iPhoto folds out a set of effects strips.
Note: The original photo is darkened when the strips appear.
 Tap the Warm & Cool strip to select the Warm & Cool effect.
B iPhoto moves the Warm & Cool strip to the bottom of the screen, ready for editing.
 Tap the strip.
C iPhoto displays a light blue indicator line.
 Slide your finger on the indicator to the left to add more red and warm up the photo.
 Slide your finger to the right to add more blue and cool down the photo.
Note: The effect is subtle.
TIPS
Why does this filter do nothing?

The effect can be very subtle. Look closely at the colors and move the sliders between
the extremes to see a difference. You should be able to see it working on any portrait
photo taken in bright sunlight. The cooler extreme can enhance seascapes and snow
scenes.
How do I remove an effect?
Tap the undo icon ( ) in the top toolbar. You can also tap the settings (gear) icon ( ) in
the lower toolbar and tap Remove Effect. You can find the settings (gear) icon on the
bottom corner of the screen, on the opposite side from the thumbnail grid.


Master Duotones
You can use the Duotone effect to create black-and-white images with a hint of color.
Simple black-and-white can look austere and lackluster. A subtle tint creates extra impact.
You can set the tint color, but not the tint intensity. Be careful to avoid a muddy result.
Blue, orange, and purple tints often look good. Yellow is less useful. You can also add
back muted versions of the original colors. The results are unpredictable — some photos
look good, others become garish and weird.
Master Duotones
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for enhancement.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
 Tap the Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Duotone effect strip.

A iPhoto moves the Duotone strip to the bottom toolbar, ready for editing.
Note: You can preview the effect by viewing the thumbnails in the strip.
 Tap anywhere on the strip to create a duotone.
B iPhoto displays a light blue indicator marker on the strip.
 Slide the marker left and right to select the tint color.
 Tap the Color icon ( ) to add back some of the original color.
Note: You can toggle the Color icon by tapping it again.
TIPS
What can I do with duotones?
Duotones are “black-and-white but better.” Viewers often do not notice the hint of color,
but the duotone effect is more eye-catching than a plain black-and-white photo. The
creative applications are almost endless. Simple images with a clean composition work

best because duotones highlight shapes and textures.
Is this filter a good way to create a sepia look?
Moving the slider to the fifth or sixth thumbnail from the left creates a subtle sepia effect.
The Black & White tool described in the next section includes a less subtle sepia option.


Convert Color to Black-and-White
You can use the Black & White effect to remove the colors from your photo. The color
adjustment tool introduced in Chapter 8 also removes colors. The Black & White effect is
more sophisticated, and includes many extra features.
You can control how colors map to different shades of gray, to lighten or darken skies and
grass. You can also add film grain — subtle specks that add texture to a photo. The filter
also includes a single-tap sepia option, which overlays a tan color for a vintage look. And
finally, you can add a vignette effect.
Convert Color to Black-and-White
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for enhancement.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
 Tap the Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Black & White effect strip.

A iPhoto moves the Black & White strip to the bottom of the toolbar.
 Tap the toolbar to convert the photo to black-and-white.
B iPhoto displays a light blue indicator marker on the strip.
 Slide your finger left and right to change how colors are mapped to shades of gray.
Note: Small movements can make a big difference.
 Tap the Vignette icon ( ) to darken the corners of the photo.
Note: You can find out more about the vignette effect in the next chapter.

 Tap the Grain icon ( ) to add film grain to the photo.
Note: Film grain is subtle and may only be obvious if you close the editor and zoom into
the photo.
 Tap the Sepia icon ( ) to create a vintage look with a light tan overlay.
Note: You can tap the icons again to turn off the effects.
TIPS
How can I understand color mapping?
If you find — or take — a photo of a rainbow or a color spectrum, you can use it as a
reference to see how the filter converts color to brightness. But you do not need to know
the details to create a good result. The best approach is to experiment with the slider
position until you find a setting that works for you.
When would I add film grain?
Without color, black-and-white images rely on texture. The small speckles added by the
film grain effect add an all-over texture that makes a photo appear more eye-catching
with extra depth and character. Without it, digital photos taken in bright light can look
smooth and plastic. Photos taken in poor light usually have grain of their own and do not
need more.


Pick Out Strong Colors
You can use the Aura effect to copy a striking photographic technique that is often used in
creative photography and advertising.
The Aura effect creates a black-and-white photo with selected color highlights. The results
are unpredictable and depend on the colors in the original scene. You cannot select the
colors with any accuracy, but you can use the effect to create quirky and interesting hybrid
photos, such as a black-and-white landscape under a blue sky.
Pick Out Strong Colors
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for enhancement.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
 Tap the Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Aura effect strip.

A iPhoto moves the Aura strip to the bottom of the toolbar.
 Tap the strip at the far left to remove all the colors.
B iPhoto displays a light blue indicator bar and removes the colors from the photo.
 Slide your finger to the right to restore a range of colors.
C iPhoto converts part of the photo to black-and-white but keeps selected colors.
TIPS
How can I get more control over color selection?
The Aura filter cannot match the powerful color selection tools available in a
professional photo editor. But you can use the Desaturate brush introduced in Chapter 9
to “paint” a similar effect with your fingers.
Which photos work best with the effect?
For portraits, make your subject wear a single strong color that clashes with the

background. For other subjects, use photos with strong areas of red/orange, green, or
blue. Although the effect is difficult to fine-tune, it can often pick out single colors for
you.


Create Vintage Film Effects
You can use the Vintage effect to re-create popular vintage film looks. Vintage photos
often have muted or incorrect colors because the colors have faded. Some films
deliberately over-emphasized reds and oranges for better-looking skin tones.
You can select one of six standard effects — Early Chrome, Sixties, Saturated Film,
Neutral Film, Vivacious, and Muted. The best way to understand them is to try them all
with different source photos. The color and contrast of your starting image make a big
difference to the result.
Create Vintage Film Effects
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for enhancement.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
 Tap the Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Vintage effect strip.

A iPhoto moves the Vintage strip to the bottom of the toolbar.
 Tap the help icon ( ) to view the name of each effect.
 Tap one of the thumbnails to preview an effect, such as the Early Chrome thumbnail.
 Tap the Vignette icon ( ) to remove the vignette effect.
Note: The Vintage effect always adds a vignette effect. You must turn it off if you do not
want it.

iPhoto applies the effect.
 Tap the other effect thumbnails to explore what they do, such as the Sixties thumbnail.
Note: The thumbnails apply different effects. You cannot use a slider to move smoothly
between them.
TIPS
Can I modify the vintage effects?
No, the effects are preset and you cannot change them. However, you can re-create most
of the effects manually using exposure and color adjustments. For example, to copy the
Early Chrome effect, push in the highlight and shadow sliders of the Exposure tool to
decrease the contrast, and use the Color tool to turn down the saturation.
Can I modify the vignette effect?
You can adjust the vignette in the usual ways. Pinch with two fingers to shrink or expand
the darkened area. Drag the center of the vignette to change its position.


Convert a Photo into Art
You can use the Artistic filters to turn photos into paintings. People find art interesting
because it hints at shapes, colors, and scenes, and distorts images in interesting ways. The
paint-effect filters in iPhoto simulate two of the many possible ways a photo can be turned
into art.
The filters have no settings, so you cannot change what they do. For good results, modify
the color and exposure of a photo before applying a filter. Art often distorts color and
contrast. You can create a more realistic painted effect by starting with a photo you have
modified in unrealistic ways.
Convert a Photo into Art
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for enhancement.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
 Tap the Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Artistic effect strip.

A iPhoto moves the Artistic strip to the bottom of the toolbar.
 Tap the help icon ( ) to view the name of each effect.
 Tap the Oil Paint thumbnail to view the oil paint effect.
iPhoto applies the oil paint effect.
Note: The effect softens hard edges and removes detail, but does not simulate brush
strokes.

 Tap the Watercolor thumbnail.
iPhoto applies the watercolor effect.
Note: The effect breaks up the image into lightly textured areas of color.
TIPS
Can I make these effects look more like paintings?
iPhoto’s paint-like effects are very simple. You may not find them very convincing if you
have worked with real watercolors, oils, and acrylics. Unfortunately these effects have no
settings. You can use them as they are, or not at all. But do try modifying the color and
exposure of a photo before you apply them.
What do the other Artistic filters do?
The other Artistic filters are photographic and do not attempt to simulate a painted look.
You can use them to add colored gradients, blur the top and bottom of the image, or add a
vignette. For details, see the next chapter.

Chapter 11: Creating Advanced Photo
Effects
You can combine iPhoto’s effects for impressive creative results. This chapter introduces
recipes for a few advanced effects and explains how you can take iPhoto further by
creating your own.
Understanding Advanced Editing
Add a Color Gradient
Work with Vignettes
Create a Fake Miniature
Add Mood and Atmosphere
Improve a Portrait
Prepare a Photo for Framing
Combine Effects


Understanding Advanced Editing
Once you master the basic features of iPhoto, you can begin to explore more advanced
effects. Some advanced effects are built-in one-tap effects. For example, you can use the
tilt-shift effect in the Artistic effect strip to transform your photos into miniature scenes.
Other effects are more open-ended, and you may need to combine multiple steps to create
the result you want.
One-Tap Advanced Edits
The Artistic effect strip in iPhoto includes powerful ways to enhance photos with a
single tap. The gradient effects apply a smooth color shading from the top of the
photo. You can use them to enhance the sky in landscapes and outdoor photos, and to
add atmosphere to some interior shots. The quirky tilt-shift effect blurs the top and
bottom of a scene, creating an unusual optical illusion that makes outdoor scenes look
like miniatures. You can set the size and position of the blurred area to maximize the
illusion.
Enhance Mood and Impact
iPhoto has many options, and it can be difficult to master them without a guide.
Concentrating on mood and impact helps you make more sense of iPhoto’s features.
You will find editing becomes less technical and more emotional and creative. The
best photos have a definite mood and a strong visual impact — often a blend of clean
shapes, a clear subject, and strong colors or textures. If you try to bring out these
features as you work, you may be surprised how easy it is to convert snaps into eye-
catching images.
Ask Creative Questions
Because you can transform your photos in so many ways, it is good to have a guide.
For inspiration, take any photo from a website, book, or magazine, and pull it apart to

see how it works. Look at the colors, the shapes and composition, and the emotional
impact of the subject or scene. Look especially at how the photo distorts reality. Are
the colors realistic, muted, or exaggerated? Are they shifted towards red, green, or
blue? Are parts of the photo deliberately blurred or darkened to lead your eye to the
subject? Are there strong lines or other shapes? Once you understand the look, you
can experiment with the tools in iPhoto and try to re-create it.
Experiment
You can never destroy a photo by editing it, so you can experiment without worrying
that you may lose your favorite images. Mistakes are essential for creativity. With
iPhoto you can experiment with your photos as much as you want. Once you know
how to save versions, you can keep experimenting over and over, starting with the
same photo or with different variations.
Understanding the iPhoto Workflow
iPhoto is designed with a workflow in mind — a standard sequence of edits that can
help you create a good result. Typically you crop and rotate a photo, correct or modify
its exposure, correct the color, and perhaps apply a brush effect. You can apply one of
the artistic effects, but you can apply only one effect at a time. iPhoto uses a page flip
display to show partially modified versions of a photo as you work on it. This can be
confusing; the secret is to understand that iPhoto shows the result of one tool at a
time. The flipped view shows the combined result. It is visible only when you finish
working with each tool, effect, or brush set.

Combing Effects
You can break out of the standard workflow with a simple trick that gives you extra
creative choices. Simply save a photo to the camera roll after each major edit, and
reload it for further work. You can use this trick to apply any combination of tools,
effects, or brushes in any order. You can also apply the same effect more than once —
for example, you can apply two vignette effects with different centers. Best of all, you
can produce multiple versions of the same photo and keep the ones you like best.


Add a Color Gradient
Professional photographers sometimes use a gradient filter (grad) — a piece of glass with
a fading color tint fitted in front of a camera lens. The bottom half of the glass is
transparent. Photographers use grad filters to darken skies, make clouds more obvious, and
add drama to landscapes.
You can simulate the effect of a grad filter with iPhoto’s Color Gradient effect, which adds
a warm orange, cool blue, or neutral gray tint. You can change the width and position of
the gradient and rotate it through 360 degrees for creative effects.
Add a Color Gradient
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
 Tap the Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Artistic effect strip.

A iPhoto moves the strip to the bottom toolbar, ready for editing.
 Tap the first thumbnail to add a gray gradient.
 Pinch with two fingers to set the upper and lower edge of the gradient.
 Tap the second thumbnail to add a warm gradient.
Note: iPhoto cancels the previous gray gradient and adds a warm gradient.
Note: On its own this gradient may look gray, but if you compare it with the previous gray
effect, you can see it is a sepia color.
 Pinch with two fingers to set the gradient.
Note: You can rotate the gradient by twisting your fingers.

 Tap the third thumbnail to add a cool blue gradient.
 Pinch and rotate the gradient to position it.
TIPS
Why are there three color options?
You can match the gradient to the strongest colors in the scene and to change the mood of
a photo. The blue gradient works well on sunny midday photos with blue skies. The red
effect is good for scenes taken around sunrise or sunset with warm colors. The gray effect
can work on almost any photo, but it lacks the punch of the colored gradients.
Is it better to use a real glass filter?
You may not have a choice, because not many budget cameras support glass filters,
although more expensive SLR cameras usually do. A good glass filter usually produces
more dramatic and striking results than a software effect but the effect becomes part of
the photo. In iPhoto you can add the effect later and adjust it until it looks good.


Work with Vignettes
You can use the vignette effect to simulate a vintage look, hide clutter, and to draw the eye
to one part of a scene. Vignettes are simple but powerful. Viewers do not usually notice a
subtle vignette effect consciously, but they do notice that the photo has a different mood.
The vignette effect is built into the Black & White and Vintage filters, and is also a stand-
alone filter on the Artistic effect strip. All versions are identical and work the same way.
You can pinch to change the size of the vignette, and drag its center point with your finger.
Work with Vignettes
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
 Tap the Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Artistic effect strip.

A iPhoto moves the strip to the bottom toolbar, ready for editing.
 Tap the fourth thumbnail to create a vignette.
B iPhoto adds the vignette and darkens the corners of the photo.
 Pinch the photo with two fingers to change the size of the vignette.
 Drag your finger on the photo to change the center of the vignette.
Note: Be careful to keep the effect subtle. Too much can make a photo feel
claustrophobic. Sometimes you may want to do this deliberately.
TIPS
When would I use a vignette?
Experiment with a vignette when you want to add atmosphere to a photo. A good tip is to
track your eyes when you look at the photo. Where do they spend the most time? Adding
a vignette can control a viewer’s point of interest. You can enhance the effect by using

the Soften brush to blur the darkened area.
Can I change the shape of the vignette?
The vignette is always a circle. You can change the size of the circle so it covers only the
edges of the image, and you can move the center of the circle. iPhoto does not support
square or rectangular vignettes.


Create a Fake Miniature
You can use the tilt-shift effect to blur a photo deliberately and make it look like a
miniature model. The effect simulates a narrow depth of field — the size of a photo’s in-
focus area — creating the illusion of a tiny scene shot from close-up. You can also use the
effect with portraits to blur the foreground and background, assuming the model is near
the center of the shot.
For a good result, start with a photo of a distant scene. Buildings surrounded by tiny cars
and people work best.
Create a Fake Miniature
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
 Tap the Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Artistic effect strip.

A iPhoto moves the Artistic strip to the bottom toolbar, ready for editing.
 Tap the fifth thumbnail to create the tilt-shift effect.
B iPhoto blurs the top and bottom of the image.
 Pinch the photo with two fingers to change the size of the blurred area.
C iPhoto displays two lines to mark the edges of the blurred area.
 Drag your finger on the photo to move the blurred area up and down.
Note: The closer you move the two lines, the stronger the effect.
Note: You can rotate the lines with your fingers, but the effect is usually stronger if you
keep them horizontal.

iPhoto makes the photo look like a miniature.
TIPS
When would I use the tilt-shift effect?
This is a striking effect and a handful of professional photographers have built their
careers around it. But because it is so quirky and unusual, you are unlikely to use it often.
However, you can also use this effect to add top/bottom blur on portraits. The results are
less specialized and can be more useful.
Why is it called tilt-shift?
The effect can be created optically with a special camera/lens combination. The lens can
be tilted to shift the focus point in the scene. The iPhoto effect looks almost as good but
is very much cheaper to buy.


Add Mood and Atmosphere
You can use any of iPhoto’s editing tools to add mood and atmosphere to a photo. Each
photo is different, but you can usually make an obvious improvement by adjusting color
saturation and exposure. You can also use the soften brush to add soft focus effects.
This example creates a very obvious enhancement — sometimes dramatic changes can
look good. The next two examples in this chapter demonstrate how to create more subtle
improvements.
Add Mood and Atmosphere
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
 Tap the Exposure icon ( ).
 Move the black-point slider to darken the shadows.
 Move the white-point slider to brighten the highlights.
 If the photo needs it, use the central sliders to enhance the contrast.

 Tap the Color Editor icon ( ).
 Drag the saturation slider to the right to bring up the colors.
 Drag the skin tone slider to the right to warm up the photo and make it redder.
 If the photo needs it, drag the green and blue sliders to the right for even more color.
Note: Not every photo needs every step. Aim to increase the power and impact of the
photo.
Note: The colors in this example are deliberately exaggerated for effect.
 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Select the Soften brush.
 Stroke your finger on the photo to soften the subject and the background.
Note: This example softens the girl’s hair and the foreground detail to bring out the
dreamy and artistic mood of the original photo.
Note: You may need to undo and repeat the coloring and softening until you get a result

you like.
TIP
Is there a summary of tools and effects?
The variations are almost endless, and the best way to explore them is to experiment.
Here are some tips to get you started.
Tool/Effect
Result/Application
Soften brush
Create areas of dreamy soft focus
Lighten brush
Brighten a subject — similar to fill-in flash
Darken brush
Darken a background
Increase color saturation
Add richness and warmth
Decrease color saturation
Create coolness, starkness, and distance
Lighter exposure
Create a lighter, more delicate mood
Darker exposure
Add drama and weight
Vignette
Create a more distant, reflective mood


Improve a Portrait
You can use the tools and effects in iPhoto to enhance portraits and make them more
appealing and eye-catching. Improving a portrait has no set recipe, so use the basics of
photography — color, light, emotion, and composition — as a guide. Look at a photo
before you try to improve it. How well does each element work, and how can you make it
work better?
This example uses a photo of a baby with good composition and strong emotion. The
lighting and color can be improved with editing.
Improve a Portrait
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
 Look carefully at the photo to find ways it could be improved.
 Look especially at the lighting and color of the main subject.
Note: In this example the face is slightly dark, the colors are not very strong, and there is
limited contrast between the subject and the background.

 Select the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Tap the Saturate brush to improve the color.
 Carefully paint the face to bring out the natural warmth.
 Paint the hands and to make them more colorful.
Note: The saturation in the example is slightly exaggerated for clarity.
 Select the Lighten brush.
 Paint the face to lighten the brow and remove the shadow.
Note: The lightness in the example is slightly exaggerated for clarity.

 Tap the Desaturate brush.
 Paint the background around the subject to remove some of the color.
Note: The contrast between the saturated subject and desaturated background brings the
subject forward and adds to the impact.
TIPS
Is it always useful to look at background and foreground contrast?
You can improve a portrait in many ways, but creating contrast between the subject and
the background is a popular option. You can create contrast with any feature of the photo
— exposure, saturation, sharpness, and so on.
Does it matter if the enhancement is obvious?
Aim for enhancements that improve the photo and do not distract the viewer. If you
change the original too much, you can create a photo that looks unnatural and obviously
fake. But “too much” depends on the audience. Some viewers are happy with obvious
edits as long as they like the mood you create.


Prepare a Photo for Framing
You can use cropping and portrait enhancement to improve a photo before you frame it.
iPhoto’s Crop tool can cut out clutter and resize the photo to match a standard print size.
Use the other editing tools to make a portrait more flattering, usually by making the image
warmer, smoother, and more colorful.
You can use the effects introduced in the previous chapter to create dramatic portraits —
for example, you can use the Aura filter or create a duotone. This example uses more basic
edits to crop and enhance a color photo of a model.
Prepare a Photo for Framing
 Open the thumbnail browser.
 Tap any thumbnail to select a photo for editing.
 If the bottom toolbar is not visible, tap the Edit button.
 Look at the photo to see how it can be improved.
Note: In this example the empty space around the subject is unnecessary, and the overall
color balance is slightly blue and cool.
 Tap the Crop tool ( ).

 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ).
 Select a standard print size.
Note: This example selects the 4 × 3 size.
 Drag and pinch the photo inside the frame to fill the area with the subject.
 Use the rotation dial to rotate the subject.
Note: Steps 8 and 9 are to taste; aim for a result that looks good to you.
 Tap the Color Editor icon ( ).
 Adjust the sliders to the right to enhance the color.
Note: The settings in this example warm the skin tone and increase overall saturation.
 Tap the White Balance icon ( ) and select the Face Balance preset icon ( ).
 Place the loupe on the rock to create a warm red color shift.

 Tap the Brush Effects icon ( ).
 Select the Sharpen brush.
 Carefully paint the subject and the water drops to make them stand out.
 Select the Lighten brush and paint the subject to bring the details out of the shadow.
Note: Some portraits work better with softening instead of sharpening.
Note: This example exaggerates the edits for clarity. Changes are usually more subtle.
TIPS
Can I overuse soft focus?
Blur and soft focus are very strong techniques, and they can become distracting if you
overuse them. If your subject looks plastic or waxy you have overdone the effect. The
best edits are so subtle that most viewers cannot see them without a side-by-side
comparison with the original photo.
Why does the photo look different when I print it?
Professional photographers use color calibration, a technical process that matches colors
in cameras, monitors, and printers. The iPad does not support this, so the colors you see
on its screen may not match the colors you see on a different screen or on a paper print.
You can compensate by trial and error. If colors are exaggerated on paper, use the color
tool to decrease saturation slightly.


Combine Effects
iPhoto does not give you an easy way to apply multiple effects to a photo. The undo
feature can step back through edits, but does not save versions for you.
You can fix both problems by saving photos to the camera roll as you edit them. iPhoto
treats each saved version as a separate photo. You can edit it from scratch to create unique
combined effects. You can delete unwanted versions in the Photos app, or manually when
you sync. And you can use this option to load edited photos back into iPhoto on a Mac.
Combine Effects
Note: This is an advanced technique. You do not have to use it, but it is useful to know
you can.
 Open the thumbnail browser, and select any photo for editing.
 Edit the photo using any of iPhoto’s tools and effects.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
 Tap the Camera Roll icon.

 Tap the Selected option.
Note: Optionally, you can select and save more than one edited photo at a time using the
features introduced in Chapter 4.
 Tap the Camera Roll button.

iPhoto saves the photo to the camera roll, automatically opens the Camera Roll album, and
reloads the photo.
 Use any of iPhoto’s editing options to continue editing the photo.
Note: You can repeat steps 3 to 7 every time you want to save a new version to the camera
roll.
Note: The most recently saved photo always appears at the top of the thumbnails.
TIPS
Why would I keep different versions?
Because you can dump working versions back to a Mac or PC where memory and
storage space are cheap, you can experiment with creating many different interpretations
of a photo. A good tip is to save versions as you work, leave them for a day or two, and
then look at them with fresh eyes. You will see immediately that some versions work
better than others. You can then decide which versions you want to keep.
How can I work on an older version?
Select it from the camera roll. As long as you do not delete the versions from the camera
roll, you can select any saved version for further editing. You can use this option to save
different versions so you can compare them later, and perhaps start editing from a
different point.

Chapter 12: Sharing Photos
You can use iPhoto’s sharing features to share your edited and original photos with friends
and family. iPhoto includes direct support for Twitter, Facebook, and the popular Flickr
online album. You can also print and e-mail photos, and save them to the device camera
roll or a special iTunes-compatible folder. This chapter explores each option in detail.
Chapter 13 explains how to save and share photos in journals.
Learn about Photo Sharing
Save Photos to the Camera Roll
Share Photos with iTunes
E-Mail Photos
Beam Photos to Another Device
Print Photos
Share Photos via Twitter
Upload Photos to Flickr
Post Photos to Facebook
Create and View a Slide Show
Using Other Sharing Options


Learn about Photo Sharing
Photos are more fun when shared. iPhoto includes a full selection of sharing features. You
can use them to share photos to social networks, e-mail photos to friends or colleagues,
add photos to an online album, print photos, and view them on the iPad or an external
display.
You can also copy photos to your Mac or Windows computer and import them into other
photo-editing applications. Because the iOS file system is locked down for security
reasons, you may need to spend some extra time getting comfortable with these more
serious sharing options.
Select and Share
You can access the sharing options by tapping the Share icon ( ) which appears near
the top right of the main toolbar in the thumbnail browser. The options appear in a
popover. You can add photos to a journal; save photos to the camera roll; share photos
with iTunes; e-mail, beam, or print photos; share photos to a social network; or create
a slide show. You can share more than one photo at a time by selecting or flagging
multiple photos. For details see Chapter 4 or Chapter 6. You can also share every
photo in the current album or event.
Using Social Networks
Social networks are immensely popular, and you can share photos to both Twitter and
Facebook from iPhoto. After you log in — you only need to do this once — you can

share photos quickly and easily, adding an optional comment or caption. You can also
upload photos to the Flickr photo sharing service, an easy and free way to keep your
photo collection safe online and share your favorites with friends and family.
Print and View
With Apple’s AirPrint technology, you can send your photos to a Wi-Fi-enabled
printer for instant printing. Many budget printers can create small prints with a
standard glossy finish, which can rival, or sometimes beat, the colors produced by a
commercial photo print service. AirPrint is useful and convenient but not essential.
You can also save your photos to a folder that appears in iTunes and print them from a
Mac or PC. More expensive printers can create small posters or art prints on larger
paper for framing and selling. For less permanent sharing you can also connect your
device to a projector or a home TV, with optional horizontal mirroring so they display
correctly.
Create Slide Shows
You can create a complex slide show with a few finger taps. Slide shows combine
your selection of photos with preset animations and an optional musical backing. You
cannot save or share slide shows, but you can view them on a device or on an external
display, such as a TV or projector. Although slide shows are limited — you cannot
change the animations or use your own music — they are a simple, fun, and effective
way to view photos with friends and family members.

Beam and Save to iTunes
You can beam photos between devices as long as the devices are on the same Wi-Fi
network and both are running iPhoto. Beaming a photo literally copies it from one
device to another. It is a good option for sharing a small number of photos but is not a
speedy choice, and is not ideal for sharing large collections. You can also share photos
to a Mac or PC through iTunes. When you next sync your device in iTunes, the photos
appear in special folders on the File Sharing page. You can copy the folders to your
Mac or Windows hard drives with simple drag and drop.


Save Photos to the Camera Roll
Getting photos into iPhoto is relatively easy. Copying photos out of iPhoto is less obvious,
especially when they appear in one of iPhoto’s smart albums.
In fact, you can export any photo from any album, event, or photo collection. The trick is
to save your photo to the device camera roll. You can then import the contents of the
camera roll into iPhoto on a Mac, or copy the photos directly from your device in
Windows. To save a photo, access the Share dialog and select the Camera Roll option.
Save Photos to the Camera Roll
 Open the thumbnail browser for any album or event or for the Photos collection.
 Tap any thumbnail to select it for saving.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
Note: You do not need to be in Edit mode to save a photo.
 Tap the Camera Roll icon.

iPhoto displays the Selection popover.
 Tap the Selected option to save the current photo.
A You can tap the Choose Photos option to select and save a different photo.
Note: You can only select and save a single photo at a time.
Note: If exactly one photo is flagged, the Flagged option is not grayed out, and you can
share that one photo.
B iPhoto displays a progress bar as it saves the selected photo to the camera roll.
 Tap Done when finished or Camera Roll to open the Camera Roll album and view the
photo.
TIPS
How can I share an entire album?
You can only share a single photo at a time to the camera roll. To share an entire album,

share to iTunes and copy the photos from iTunes to a folder on your Mac or PC as
described in the next section.
Why does saving to the camera roll create duplicates?
Imported, beamed, or uploaded photos already exist on your device. Saving them to the
camera roll creates another copy. This is not usually a problem. You can clear the camera
roll by importing the photos to your Mac or copying them to a Windows PC and deleting
the files from your device. When you clear the camera roll, the duplicates disappear.


Share Photos with iTunes
You can copy photos from your device to your Mac or PC via iTunes. To use this feature,
tap the iTunes option in the sharing popover.
iPhoto saves your selected photos to a named folder. To access the folder, connect your
device to your Mac or PC, launch iTunes, select your device in the device list, and click
the Apps option. Scroll down and click iPhoto in the File Sharing list to see the folders
created by the Share to iTunes option. You can drag the folders from iTunes and drop them
on any location in Finder or Windows Explorer.
Share Photos with iTunes
 Open the thumbnail browser for any album or event or for the Photos collection.
 Select one or more photos for sharing.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
Note: You do not need to be in Edit mode to share a photo.
 Tap the iTunes icon.

 Tap the Selected option to save the currently selected photos.
A You can tap the Flagged option to save all flagged photos in the current album or event
or in the complete photo collection.
B You can tap the All option to save all photos in the current album or event or in the
complete photo collection.
C You can tap the Choose Photos option to select one or more other photos.
D iPhoto displays a progress bar as it saves the selected photos to iPhoto’s documents
folder.

 Connect your device to your Mac and launch iTunes if it does not launch automatically.
 Select your device in the Devices list.
 Click Apps.
 Scroll down to the File Sharing section and click iPhoto.
E iTunes displays a list of folders saved from iPhoto.
Note: You can drag folders from the iPhoto Documents list to any folder on your hard
drive, and then open them to view or copy the photos inside them.
TIPS
Why are the import and export options on different pages?
The iTunes design separates these features. You can upload photos to your device using
the Photos option introduced in Chapter 5. It would be simpler if you could import
photos on the same page, but iOS has a secure file system and you can only access some
of the files in your device on the Apps File Sharing page.
Why can I not open the folders on this page?
Currently there is no way to open a folder on the File Sharing page in iTunes. To open a
folder, first copy it to your Mac or PC. Note that you can delete files and folders on this
page by clicking to highlight them, and then pressing 
. (You can also import files by
dragging them from Finder or Windows Explorer, but iPhoto ignores them.)


E-Mail Photos
You can share photos by e-mailing them. The e-mail option is a good choice for private
sharing. However, you can share only a maximum of five photos in a single e-mail.
The e-mail feature has some hidden options. If you have more than one e-mail account set
up on your device, you can tap the sender field to select a different sender. You can also
set the image size to send a thumbnail instead of a full-sized image.
E-Mail Photos
 Open the thumbnail browser for any album or event or for the Photos collection.
 Select one or more photos for sharing.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
Note: You do not need to be in Edit mode to e-mail a photo.
 Tap the Email icon.

 Tap the Selected option to e-mail the currently selected photos.
A You can tap the Flagged option to e-mail all flagged photos in the current album or
event or in the complete photo collection.
B You can tap the All option to e-mail all photos in the current album or event or in the
complete photo collection.
C You can tap the Choose Photos option to e-mail one or more other photos.
Note: Some options are grayed out automatically so you cannot e-mail more than five
photos.
iPhoto displays an e-mail composer.
 Tap the To: field to set the recipient.
 Tap the Subject: field to change the subject.
D You can tap Cancel followed by Delete Draft to cancel.
 Tap the Cc: field to show further options.

 Tap a button to select an image size for the photos.
Note: Select Small or Medium if sending to someone’s phone or tablet.
 Tap  to add further recipients.
 Tap the Bcc: field to add further hidden recipients.
Note: Addresses in the Bcc: field are hidden from all recipients.
 Tap Send to send the e-mail.
TIPS
Why is e-mail sharing limited?
Many e-mail systems reject large messages. There is no standard maximum size, but
5MB is a practical limit. Messages larger than 10MB are very likely to be rejected.
iPhoto deliberately limits the size to avoid this, but keep in mind that if you import
photos from a good SLR, a single image can easily be 5MB or more, and you should e-
mail a smaller version.
How can I e-mail more images?
The e-mail sharing option is designed for casual sharing among friends and for low-
volume business use. iPhoto cannot e-mail tens or hundreds of photos. For professional
photo sharing, import the photos to a Mac or PC and use a high-volume service such as
FTP (File Transfer Protocol) to upload them to a company web server.


Beam Photos to Another Device
You can beam photos to another device. Beaming copies photos over Wi-Fi. The other
device must be connected to the same Wi-Fi network, and it must be running iPhoto. You
can beam a maximum of 100 photos.
To beam photos, select them and tap the Beam sharing option. iPhoto looks for devices on
the network that are also running iPhoto for iOS. (As of version 1.1, you cannot beam
photos to iPhoto on a Mac.) When you select a device, iPhoto sends a request. If the user
accepts the request, iPhoto copies the photos and puts them in a special Beamed album.
Beam Photos to Another Device
 Open the thumbnail browser for any album or event or for the Photos collection.
 Select one or more photos for sharing.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
Note: You do not need to be in Edit mode to beam a photo.
 Tap the Beam icon.
Note: You must enable beaming in the iPhoto preferences. See Chapter 1 for details.

 Tap the Selected option to beam the currently selected photos.
A You can tap the Flagged option to beam all flagged photos in the current album or
event or in the complete photo collection.
B You can tap the All option to beam all photos in the current album or event or in the
complete photo collection.
C You can tap the Choose Photos option to beam one or more other photos.
Note: Options are grayed out if they offer more than a hundred photos.
 Launch iPhoto on the other device, if it is not running already.
 Tap the name of the other device in the popover to select it.
 Tap Beam Photos to begin beaming.
iPhoto displays an alert showing that beaming has started.

 On the other device, tap Yes when the Accept Photos dialog appears.
 Wait until beaming completes.
Note: In the current version of iPhoto, the progress bar does not indicate progress while
beaming, but beaming is still happening while you wait.
TIPS
How can I save the photos in the Beamed album?
The Beamed album is invisible to iTunes, so you cannot sync the photos in it to your Mac
or PC. But you can save photos from the album to the device camera roll, and then
import or copy the camera roll from your device to a Mac or PC.
Why is beaming so slow?
Beaming was speeded up in version 1.1 of iPhoto. But the speed still depends on the
speed and quality of your Wi-Fi connection. Public Wi-Fi is often slow. Beaming works
best with a handful of photos; it can take hours to beam a hundred photos.


Print Photos
You can send photos from iPhoto to any compatible AirPrint printer. The printing option
has no settings and works over Wi-Fi. After you select a printer, it “just works.” You can
select an unlimited number of photos for printing, but you should print only in small
batches of ten or so.
Note that you cannot send photos to a commercial print lab from iPhoto. If you have too
many photos to print at home, you can upload the photos to Flickr, iPhoto on a Mac,
Photoshop Elements on a PC, and similar packages and use the commercial printing
features built into those products. Many photo print services also support direct uploading
from your photo library via a web page.
Print Photos
 Open the thumbnail browser for any album or event or for the Photos collection.
 Select one or more photos for printing.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
Note: You do not need to be in Edit mode to print photos.
 Tap the Print icon.

 Tap the Selected option to print the currently selected photos.
A You can tap the Flagged option to print all flagged photos in the current album or event
or in the complete photo collection.
B You can tap the All option to print all photos in the current album or event or in the
complete photo collection.
C You can tap the Choose Photos option to print one or more other photos.
Note: You can select unlimited photos for printing.
 Tap the Printer option to select a printer.
D You can tap  or  for more or fewer copies.

 Tap a printer to select it.
Note: By default, only AirPrint printers appear in this list. To print to a standard printer,
see the tip.
 Tap the Printer Options button to return to the previous dialog.
 Tap the Print button to begin printing.
TIP
Do I have to use a special printer?
In theory you must buy a compatible printer to use AirPrint. For a list of models, see the
Apple support document at http://support.apple.com/kb/ht4356. In practice you can print
to any printer attached to a Mac or PC as long as it is on the same Wi-Fi network. The
details depend on your computer and other hardware. Some printer manufacturers have
created their own special drivers — search the web for the manufacturer’s name and
“AirPrint.” For a general solution for a Mac, search the web for “AirPrint Hacktivator.”
For Windows, search for “sc.exe Bonjour AirPrint.”


Share Photos via Twitter
You can use the Twitter share option to send a photo with optional text to the popular
Twitter service. iPhoto uses your usual Twitter identity and sign-in details. You can share
only one photo in each tweet.
Photos appear as Photobucket links in your Twitter feed. iPhoto automatically shrinks the
photo to a reasonable size, uploads it to Photobucket, and creates a clickable link. If you
add text, it appears above the photo link in your feed.
Share Photos via Twitter
 Open the thumbnail browser for any album or event or for the Photos collection.
 Select a photo for tweeting.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
Note: You do not need to be in Edit mode to tweet a photo.
 Tap the Twitter icon.

 Tap the Selected option to tweet the current photo.
A You can tap the Choose Photo option to select and tweet a different photo.
Note: You can only tweet a single photo at a time.
Note: If exactly one photo is flagged, the Flagged option is not grayed out, and you can
tweet that one photo.
 Type some text to describe your tweet.
B iPhoto displays the remaining character count as you type.
Note: Tweets are limited to 140 characters.
 Tap Send to send the tweet.
Note: You must have Wi-Fi or mobile data access to send a tweet.
C You can tap Cancel to cancel it.
D You can tap the Add Location option at the bottom left to include your location with
the tweet.

E iPhoto posts the tweet. You and your followers can view it with any Twitter client.
TIPS
Why does iPhoto ask me to sign in?
The Twitter feature uses your device’s standard Twitter account. If you have not already
signed in, iPhoto opens the Settings app on the correct page so you can enter your details.
You only need to do this once. After you sign in, iPhoto always skips straight to the
Twitter send popover.
Can I share photos to more than one account?
In iOS, your device can log in to only one account at a time. Currently iPhoto uses the
first account you set up in Settings, even if you change the selected account in the Twitter
app. So you can send photos only from that one account. There is no way to switch
accounts or to send photos from multiple accounts.


Upload Photos to Flickr
You can use the Flickr photo sharing service to share your photos. You can create public
and private photo collections and upload tens or even hundreds of photos at a time.
However, sharing is slow, so expect to wait a few hours if you attempt to upload an entire
album.
Flickr is easy to use. It is managed by Yahoo! and you will need a Yahoo!, Facebook, or
Twitter account to use it. iPhoto asks you to sign up or log in before you can share photos,
but you only need to do this once on each device.
Upload Photos to Flickr
 Open the thumbnail browser for any album or event or for the Photos collection.
 Select one or more photos for uploading.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
Note: You do not need to be in Edit mode to upload photos.
 Tap the Flickr icon.

 Tap the Selected option to upload the currently selected photos.
A You can tap the Flagged option to upload flagged photos in the current album or event
or in the complete photo collection.
B You can tap the All option to upload all photos in the current album or event or in the
complete photo collection.
C You can tap the Choose Photos option to select one or more other photos.
Note: You can select unlimited photos for upload.
D You can tap to select a set.
E You can tap to select Privacy.
Note: You can select Private, Family, Friends, and Public privacy settings to limit
access to your photos.
F You can tap Add Tags to show a Tag text box.
Note: Tags are optional single-word descriptions that can help you sort and find photos.

 Tap Share to Flickr to upload the photos.
iPhoto displays a progress bar as it uploads the photos, followed by a Done dialog when
uploading is complete.
G The photo or photos appear on the Flickr website.
Note: The privacy settings control access to the photos. You can nominate friends and
family groups to keep some photos private. For details, see the online help on Flickr.
TIPS
Why would I use Flickr?
Flickr is a popular and widely known photo sharing service. Visitors can view and
comment on your public photos. You can also create private collections for friends and
family. You can use Flickr as an online album. Some users find it easier to use than
iCloud journals. You can also order paper prints and photo books using the Snapfish
service.
Do I have to use Yahoo! to use Flickr?
You can log in to Flickr with a Facebook or Twitter account. You do not have to create a
separate Yahoo! ID if you do not want one.


Post Photos to Facebook
You can upload one or more photos to Facebook with the Facebook sharing option. By
default, the photos are posted to your Facebook Wall Photos album. You can also choose
to upload them to one of your other albums.
You must sign in to Facebook before you can post photos, and also give iPhoto permission
to send and receive data from your Facebook account. You only need to do this once.
After you sign in and set up the account, you can post photos with a few taps. Uploaded
photos do not include a description, but you can add one on Facebook.
Post Photos to Facebook
 Open the thumbnail browser for any album or event or for the Photos collection.
 Select one or more photos for posting.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
Note: You do not need to be in Edit mode to post photos.
 Tap the Facebook icon.

 Tap the Selected option to post the currently selected photos.
A You can tap the Flagged option to post all flagged photos in the current album or event
or in the complete photo collection.
B You can tap the All option to post all photos in the current album or event or in the
complete photo collection.
C You can tap the Choose Photos option to post one or more other photos.
Note: You can post an unlimited number of photos.
D By default photos are posted to your Wall Photos album, but you can tap the Album
option to select a different album.
 Tap Share to Facebook to upload the photos.
Note: Sharing can take a long time, especially if you post tens or hundreds of photos.

iPhoto displays a progress bar as it uploads the photos, followed by a Done dialog when
uploading is complete.
E The photo or photos appear on Facebook.
F You can click this option to add a description.
TIPS
Are uploaded photos full-sized?
Between them, iPhoto and Facebook shrink photos to a manageable size, usually a few
hundred pixels on a side. iPhoto does not upload the original full-sized versions of your
photos. Although web users can still download and link to your photos, they cannot make
high-resolution prints or copies.
Do the photos include location information?
iPhoto uploads location information to Facebook, and you can add a location to the photo
on Facebook if you choose to. However, location information is stripped out of the photo.
If someone downloads a photo, he cannot see your location.


Create and View a Slide Show
You can create a live slide show to display your photos with interesting animations and
music. Slide shows are a good way to make your photo collections more entertaining. You
can select the photos you want to share, or share every photo in an album.
iPhoto creates slide shows “live” as you view them. You cannot save a slide show as a file,
copy it to another device, or upload it to iCloud or to a web server. However, you can view
a slide show on an external display.
Create and View a Slide Show
 Open the thumbnail browser for any album or event or for the Photos collection.
 Select one or more photos for the slide show.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
Note: You do not need to be in Edit mode to create a slide show.
 Tap the Slideshow icon.

 Tap the Selected option to include all selected photos.
A You can tap the Flagged option to include all flagged photos in the current album or
event or in the complete photo collection.
B You can tap the All option to include all photos in the current album or event or in the
complete photo collection.
C You can tap the Choose Photos option to select other photos.
Note: You can include an unlimited number of photos, but you must include more than
one.
 Tap to select an animation style.
Note: To see what the animation styles do, experiment with them.
 Tap this switch to add music.
 Select the backing track.
 Tap Start Slideshow to play the slide show.

iPhoto plays an animated slide show with optional backing music.
Note: You can tap the screen to show a transport bar with stop, pause, previous, and next
buttons.
Note: This example is playing a slide show with all photos selected, not just the photos
selected in the previous steps.
TIPS
How can I improve the sound quality?
If you use the built-in speaker on your device, the music may sound thin and tinny. You
can connect your device to an external music system with better speakers through a
standard 3.5mm adapter lead. Most mall electronic supplies stores stock suitable
adapters, but they may be expensive. eBay is a good source for cheap adapters.
Why does iPhoto crash if I select a lot of photos?
iPhoto creates the slide show and saves it before it plays. If your device has too little free
memory, iPhoto can crash if it tries to work with too many photos, usually when you try
to change the slide show type or select different music. To fix this, create a slide show
with a single item, change the animation and music, go back, and reselect all the photos
you want to see.


Using Other Sharing Options
You can use other sharing options to do more with your photos. You can view photos on
an external display by plugging your iDevice into a projector with a special adapter. If you
have an Apple TV, you can use AirPlay to view photos on your television.
You can also share your photos with other apps. In version 1.1 of iPhoto you can copy
photos to Apple’s Cards and iMovie apps and to selected third-party apps. Unfortunately
the app sharing feature is not compatible with popular photo-editing apps. iMovie can
accept multiple photos and videos. The other options can share a single photo at a time.
Using Other Sharing Options
Copy a Photo to Cards
 Select a photo and tap the Share icon ( ).
 Tap the Cards icon and tap the Selected option.
A iPhoto opens the Cards app, copies the photo to it and pastes it into the standard card
templates.
Note: You can only share one photo at a time.
Note: The Cards app is free. Cards cost $2.99 each if mailed within the US and $4.99 if
mailed elsewhere.
Copy a Photo to iMovie

 Select a photo or video and tap the Share icon ( ).
 Tap the iMovie icon and tap the Selected option.
B iPhoto opens iMovie app and copies the photo or movie to it so that you can add it to a
video or slide show.
Note: You must install iMovie ($4.99) to use this option.
Copy a Photo to Other Apps
 Select a photo or video.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
 Tap the Open in icon and tap the Selected option.
 Tap one of the apps in the popover.
Note: Only a few apps are compatible with photo sharing. Most photo-editing apps are
not. There is no guarantee that apps listed in the popover can receive or display photos
correctly.

Show Photos on an External Display
 Connect your iPad via a special adapter to a projector or external monitor.
iPhoto displays photos on the external display.
Note: You can enable mirroring to display iPhoto as you edit. For details see the section
“Investigate iPhoto Settings” in Chapter 1.
TIPS
Which adapter do I need?
Projectors and monitors support four standards — composite video, HDMI, VGA, and
DVI. Your display’s manual lists the connectors your display works with. The Apple
Store sells Apple-brand adapters for the first three types. You can find HDMI to DVI
adapter cables on Amazon and eBay.
Can I buy a cheaper adapter?
eBay is a popular source of cheap cables and adapters. However, performance is not
guaranteed. The products are usually much cheaper than their official Apple equivalents,
but they may not work correctly, so you buy from eBay at your own risk.

Chapter 13: Creating Journals
You can use journals to collect and display your photos in attractive documents. Albums
and events are simple photo collections. Journals can be decorated with text, notes, quotes,
maps, calendars, and even weather reports and recipes. Journals also support full-screen
photo viewing, and you can easily share them with friends and family.
Learn about Journals
Create a New Journal
Change a Journal’s Background
Add Photos to a Journal
Add Other Items to a Journal
Lay Out a Journal Automatically
Move and Resize Items
Swap Items
Edit Special Content
Share a Journal to iCloud
Share a Journal to iTunes
Learn about Journals

Journals are a unique feature in iPhoto for iOS. You can use them to present your photos
in attractive and creative ways. You can choose the photos you want to include. You can
also add further content including quotes, text, maps, weather reports, and recipes.
Journals are more open-ended than iPhoto’s albums and events. They make an ideal
replacement for paper photo albums. You can arrange photos as you want, highlight some
photos by size, and add captions. You can also share your journals to iCloud, and then
send friends and family a link to a single journal or your journal collection.
Create a Journal
To create a journal, use the Share popover introduced in Chapter 12 and share one or
more photos to a new journal. There is no separate “create a journal” option. You can
name a journal when you create it. Note that the name on the Journals page is fixed —
you cannot change it later. You can also set the background image and layout style of
the journal. iPhoto gives you the option to open the journal immediately after you
create it so you can customize the layout and add further content.
Add Photos and Other Items
You can add as many photos as you want at any time to a journal by selecting an
existing journal in the Share popover. You can edit a journal to show text in various
styles. You can also decorate a journal with page dividers, smileys, and other graphics
by importing them into iPhoto from your Mac or PC and adding them to a journal by
hand. Some of the built-in extra content — calendar, weather, maps, and so on —
reads and uses information from the last photo you add.
Design a Journal
Journals include a full set of page layout options. You can change the size of a photo
or any other element, change the position, create multiple pages, and move content
between pages. You can also select one of a small number of fixed background colors
and textures. The design options are simple but powerful. You can easily create a
layout that displays your photos in an attractive way.

View a Journal
Journals are the only way to view photos full screen in iPhoto. When you tap a photo
in a journal, iPhoto hides the toolbars and other content and scales the photo so it fills
as much of the screen as possible. You can then drag left or right to view the other
photos in the journal. Unfortunately, you cannot zoom photos.
Create a Slide Show
You can convert a journal into a slide show with a couple of taps. The slide show
option is exactly the same as the slide show feature introduced in the previous chapter.
Only photos are displayed. Extra items — text, maps, and so on — are ignored.
Share a Journal to iCloud
You can share a journal to iCloud and to a “Home Page.” In fact, both options create a
new web page on iCloud, but the first option displays a single journal, whereas the
Home Page displays a collection arranged on a glass shelf. Viewers can click on any
journal on the “shelf” to view it. You can view the journals in any web browser. You
can also share the link by copying and pasting it into an e-mail or some other
document. Sharing is a simple process, but it is not quick. iCloud can take a good few
moments to set up and display your journals.

Share a Journal to iTunes
You can share a journal to iTunes, creating a folder with web pages that you can copy
using the File Sharing option in iTunes and view in Safari. The pages look and work
like a journal. You can upload them to a private web server to share your journal
online without uploading it to iCloud.
Create a New Journal
To create a new journal, select one or more photos, tap the Share icon, and select the
Journal icon. iPhoto asks you which photos you want to include.
Select Journal and then New, select a journal background, type a name, and tap the
Create Journal button. iPhoto adds the photos to a new journal. You can then edit the
layout and add further content, or create another journal.
Create a New Journal
 Select an album, event, or the photos list to open the thumbnail browser.
 Select one or more photos to add to the journal.
Note: For more information about selecting photos, see Chapter 4.
Note: If you select an edited photo, iPhoto automatically adds the edited version to the
journal.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
 Tap the Journal icon.

iPhoto displays a popover with photo selection options.
 Tap one of the selection options.
Note: Selected chooses the photos you selected in step 2, and Flagged chooses all flagged
photos.
Note: iPhoto limits the number of photos you can add. Grayed out features like the All
option here are over the limit.
Note: You can use the Choose option to view the thumbnails again and select further
photos.
 Tap the name field.
iPhoto displays the keyboard, or enables input from an external Bluetooth keyboard if you
are using one.
 Type a name for the new journal.
Note: You cannot change the name that appears on the Journals page after you create it.
 Tap one of the preset styles for the journal to select it.

 Tap the Create Journal button.
Note: You can tap the Back button at the top of the popover to go back to a previous step.
 Tap the Done button to continue viewing and editing photos or if you want to add
further photos to the journal.
A You can tap the Show button to close the editor and thumbnail view and open the
journal.
TIPS
Do I have to give the journal a name?
If you leave the name field blank, iPhoto creates a new journal with the name of the first
photo you add. You can edit this to enter a more descriptive name.
What happens if I delete a photo in a journal?
iPhoto creates a copy of every photo in a journal. If you take a new photo, add it to a
journal from the camera roll, and then delete the photo, the photo does not disappear,
although you may see a temporary placeholder image while iPhoto reorganizes its photo
collection immediately after the deletion.
Change a Journal’s Background
Journals offer six preset backgrounds and layouts. The default is Cotton, which displays
photos on a light fabric. Border is identical, but adds a thin white border around each
photo. Denim is a dark gray fabric. Light and Dark are plain near-white and near-black
colored backgrounds. Mosaic is similar to Dark but leaves no spaces between photos.
You can change the background at any time by tapping the settings (gear) icon and
selecting one of the backgrounds in the popover. To preview a different background, tap
the thumbnail in the popover.

Change a Journal’s Background
 If your journal is not already open, tap the Journals button.
 Tap the journal to open it.
A iPhoto displays the contents of the journal.
 Tap the Edit button to enable editing.

 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ).
iPhoto displays a popover with a preview of the different backgrounds.
 Tap one of the thumbnails to select a different background.
Note: iPhoto updates the background at each selection.
Note: You can tap anywhere outside the popover to hide it.
Note: iPhoto also displays the background selection popover when you create a new
journal or add photos to an existing journal.
TIPS

Can I create my own backgrounds?
It would certainly be useful to add custom colors and textures, but this option is not
available in the current version of iPhoto. It may perhaps be added later. For now the
backgrounds are fixed, and you cannot customize them.
Why does the Mosaic background leave no space between photos?
This is a deliberate design choice. As the name suggests, the Mosaic background creates
a mosaic of images. You can use it to create a custom thumbnail grid. The other
backgrounds are designed to look more like printed photos on fabric or plain paper.
Add Photos to a Journal
To add one or more photos to an existing journal, repeat the steps used to create a new
journal, but select an existing journal as the destination from the list that appears in the
popover. Not all journals will appear in the list, so you may need to scroll down.
By default, iPhoto automatically creates a new page whenever you add photos. This is
rarely what you want, especially when you add photos singly. For better results, select a
page before you add the photos.
Add Photos to a Journal
 Select an album, event, or the photos list to open the thumbnail browser.
 Select one or more photos to add to the journal.
Note: For more information about selecting photos, see Chapter 4.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
iPhoto displays a popover with share options.
 Tap the Journal icon (see the section “Create a New Journal” for an example).
 Tap Selected, Flagged, All, or Choose Photos to select the photos to add.

 Tap the Journal button when it appears.
A iPhoto displays a list of journals.
 Tap the name of the journal to which you want to add photos.
Note: You can drag the list up and down to scroll through it.
iPhoto displays a page selection popover.
 Tap the Page button.
Note: If you leave Automatic selected iPhoto creates a new page in the journal for the
photo or photos. Select a page manually to add the photos to it.

 Tap one of the Pages options.
Note: Typically you add photos to Page 1 or another page that already exists, but you can
select New Page here to create a new page for the photo.
 Tap the Back button.
 Tap the Add to Journal button in the previous popover to add the photos.
iPhoto adds the photos to the journal and displays a dialog asking if you want to show it,
or if you are done and want to continue editing and viewing photos.
TIPS
Why do the photos have different sizes?
If you add multiple photos, iPhoto attempts to create an attractive layout. It does not
“look” at the photos or try to select which photos are more important. The default layout
can usually be improved with manual editing.
Does iPhoto copy captions?
If you caption a photo in the thumbnail browser and add it to a journal, iPhoto copies the
caption and includes it automatically. See Chapter 6 for details.
Add Other Items to a Journal
Albums and events can only include photos. Journals can also include text in various
formats, and other content including maps, weather icons, and a calendar date display.
To add other items, tap the Edit button, tap , and select the content from a popover. The
text options add text on various backgrounds. You can add a header, a plain description, a
yellow stick-on note, a divider, and a “memory,” a note with torn paper edges. Some
content includes extra settings. For example, you can tap a Date to turn off auto-lookup
and set the date manually.

Add Other Items to a Journal
 Open a journal.
 If Edit mode is not already selected, tap the Edit button.
 Tap  to add other content.
iPhoto displays a content popover with various items.
 Tap any item to add it to the journal.
Note: This example adds a Memory item.

A iPhoto adds the item to the journal. Items with editable text display the keyboard
automatically.
Note: Some items do not have a visible boundary around them.
 For items that show text, type on the keyboard to edit the text.
 Tap the Hide button when done to hide the keyboard.
iPhoto edits the item and displays your new text.
Note: You can add as many extra items to a journal as you want.
Note: You can customize items that show text (including the main heading) by tapping
them and selecting border, text style, and layout options from a popover.
TIPS
Can I add video clips to a journal?
If you create a live recording with the Camera app, it appears on your device camera roll

in the usual way, and you can add it to a journal. Video clips appear as stills in the
journal. You can play them by tapping the play icon in the full-screen view.
How does iPhoto know the weather for a photo?
iPhoto uses the history feature at Weather Underground (www.wunderground.com) to
find the weather for the date and location of the last photo you add. The photo must
include location information. You can also set the weather manually by double-tapping a
weather icon and turning off the Auto switch. If you delete a photo, you must turn Edit
mode off and on again before adding a weather item. Otherwise, iPhoto does not know
which photo to find details for.
Lay Out a Journal Automatically
If you have a lot of photos, notes, and other content, you can save time by using the
single-tap automatic layout feature to lay out pages for you. This feature is a good way to
minimize wasted space.
To use this feature, tap the Edit button, tap the settings (gear) icon, and tap one of the
preset layout buttons. You can also set a small, medium, or large grid size. Use the layout
as a starting point — you can resize and move content by hand to make the layout look
even better, as described in the next section.
Lay Out a Journal Automatically
 Open a journal.
 If Edit mode is not already selected, tap the Edit button.
 Tap the settings (gear) icon ( ).

 Tap one of the preset layout buttons.
Note: Use the layout thumbnails in the popover as a guide. The final layout may not
match the thumbnails exactly, but it will be close.
iPhoto adjusts the layout to match the preset.
 Tap a different thumbnail to change the layout.

iPhoto rearranges the layout again.
 Tap one of the Grid Size buttons to change the size of the items on the layout.
iPhoto resizes the content and rearranges the layout to fit it onto the screen.
Note: The effect of the Grid Size options is most obvious if you select the grid layout
thumbnail at the bottom right.
Note: You can usually improve on an automatic layout by moving and resizing items
manually.
TIPS
How does the automatic layout feature work?
This feature cannot “see” photos and does not know which photos matter to you, so it
attempts to make the content as large as possible on the page using the current layout as a
starting point.
How can I add space to a page?
Automatic layouts often look busy. You can thin them out by adding one or more Space
items from the content popover. (Tap  to access the content popover.) As the name
suggests, these items add empty space to a page. You can use them for finer control of a
manual layout, and to add some gaps to an automatic layout. You can also add a divider
element, but dividers disappear if you use the automatic layout option.
Move and Resize Items
You can customize a page layout by resizing and moving the items on the page. To move
an item, tap it and hold it. You can then drag it to a new position. Other items on the page
move around to make space for it. The results are always entertaining, but often
unpredictable.

To resize an item, tap it and release it. iPhoto adds a blue border with corner and edge
markers. Drag the markers to change the size. You can also pinch zoom/expand inside any
item to change its size. iPhoto moves the other items around as you make changes.
Move and Resize Items
 Open a journal.
 If Edit mode is not already selected, tap the Edit button.
 If the Enable Item Swapping icon ( ) is highlighted, tap it to deselect it.
 Tap and hold an item until its size increases slightly.
 Drag it to a new position and release it.
Note: iPhoto rearranges the other items as you drag and displays a translucent preview of
the item’s new position.

 To resize an item tap it once.
A iPhoto draws a blue border around the item.
Note: Not all items can be resized.
B iPhoto also displays optional editing popovers.
Note: Different item types display different popover options.
Note: You can tap the trash can icon ( ) to delete an item from the journal.
 Drag the bottom dot to change the height of an item.
 Drag the side dot to change the width of an item.
 Drag the corner dot to change the height and width.
 Double-tap the caption item to caption a photo.
Note: When you resize a photo, iPhoto may crop it to the area inside the frame.
Note: You cannot scroll photos inside a frame to set the visible area.

Note: You can tap the undo icon ( ) to undo your changes.
TIPS
Can I make the layout more predictable?
There is no way to fix the position of some items while you move or resize others around
them. You must resize and move items repeatedly until you create a layout you like.
Why does nothing happen when I tap?
The difference between a tap and hold and release and a plain tap and release is subtle.
When iPhoto is ready to move a photo, it floats the photo and makes it slightly larger.
When it is ready to resize the photo, it displays the blue border. If you tap and nothing
happens, try again.
Swap Items
You can use iPhoto’s Swap Items feature to swap photos and other content on the grid
without modifying the layout. This is a good option to use when you create a layout you
like but want to reposition some of the photos and other content in it. Swapping items
helps you define the look and impact of the journal. Bigger photos make more of an
impression than smaller ones.
You can swap any photo with any other, whatever the size. You can also swap text content
with other text content. But you cannot swap text content with a smaller photo, and you
can only swap weather and calendar icons with items that have a frame with exactly the
same dimensions.
Swap Items
 Open a journal.
 If Edit mode is not already selected, tap the Edit button.

 Tap the Enable Item Swapping icon ( ) if it is not already highlighted.
 Tap a photo to select it, hold it, and drag it on top of another photo.
A With Swap Items on, iPhoto locks the layout and previews the old and new position of
your swapped photos on the grid.
 Release the floating photo.
iPhoto swaps the two photos and resizes them if necessary.
 Drag and hold any box with text content and hold it over a larger photo.
B iPhoto draws a blue line around the larger photo to show you can swap the items.
 Release the text box to swap it with the photo.

 Drag the same text box over a photo with a smaller frame.
C iPhoto draws a red frame around two items when their sizes do not allow swapping.
Release the text box to allow it to return to its original location.
TIPS
Why does swapping depend on size??
Text boxes can include a large block of text. If you swap the text into a smaller frame
some of it will disappear off the bottom of the frame, creating a bad visual effect. Apple
decided not to allow this. And because some items have a fixed size, you cannot swap
them with larger or smaller content.
Are there any hidden editing options?
Tapping in the gaps between content displays the new content popover. You can select an
item and add it to the layout as described earlier in this chapter. Depending on the layout,
the item may not appear in the gap.
Edit Special Content
You can add special content — text, dates, maps, and so on — to your journal. For text,
iPhoto displays a message telling you that you can double-tap the text to edit it. But some
editing options remain hidden, and iPhoto does not give you clear instructions for editing
other types of content.
You must be in Edit mode to edit special content. Tap an item once to display a small
popover menu with a delete option. Some content offers further options in the popover.
Double-tap an item to edit its contents.
Edit Special Content

 Open a journal.
 If Edit mode is not already selected, tap the Edit button.
 Tap any text box to show a popover.
 Tap the options to set the frame and background, the lettering style, and the
justification, the text layout in the box.
 To edit a weather item, double-tap it to display a popover.
 Tap the Auto switch so you can select the weather by hand.
 Tap the Weather and Temperature settings to change them.
 Tap anywhere outside the popover to hide it and display the new weather.

 To edit a date item, double-tap it to display a popover.
 Tap the Auto switch so you can set the date manually.
 Tap the Date setting to display a date scroller and set the date.
 Tap anywhere outside the popover to hide it and display the new date.
Note: You can also double-tap a map to display scroll arrows, and then drag the map to
reposition it.
 Single-tap a map to view more options on a popover.
 Tap Remove Pin to remove the default pin.
 Tap Place Pin to show a further location look-up popover.
Note: You can use this extra popover to place a pin on a location after a search, or at the
current location of the device.
Note: All items include a trash can icon ( ) to remove an item from a journal.

TIPS
Why do some items show an Auto option?
When Auto is on, the weather and date items use information embedded in the last photo
you add to your journal. The date item reads the date from the photo. The weather item
reads the date and location and looks up the weather from a record on an online database.
These features do not work without an Internet connection. If you turn off Auto, you can
set the date and weather manually.
Can I modify photos in a journal?
If you single-tap a photo and select Edit, iPhoto displays the standard photo editor page.
If you double-tap a photo iPhoto displays drag arrows. Depending on the photo layout,
you can drag the content left and right or up and down inside its frame.
Share a Journal to iCloud
You can share your journals to iCloud and send friends and family web links for easy
viewing. If you select Publish to iCloud, iPhoto creates a single web page with a single
journal. If you select Add to Home Page, iPhoto adds the journal to a “Home Page” on
iCloud which displays all your public journals.
After publishing the journal you can share it as a weblink. You can create an e-mail with
an embedded link, post a link to Facebook or Twitter, send the link in a text message, or
copy it for use in some other application.
Share a Journal to iCloud
 Open a journal.
 If Edit mode is selected, tap the Edit button to deselect it.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).

 Tap the iCloud icon.
 Tap the Publish to iCloud switch to turn it on.
iPhoto displays a larger popover and begins uploading the journal.
Note: This can take a long time, even with a small journal.
Note: The share buttons remain grayed out while the journal uploads, and an “Uploading”
message appears at the bottom of the popover.
Note: iPhoto adds a small iCloud logo to published journals on the main Journals page.
 When the upload completes, tap the Add to Home Page switch to add the journal to
your iCloud journal home page.
Note: The home page upload also takes a long time.
 Tap the View Journal in Safari button to open Safari and view the journal online.
 Tap the Share Journal button to open a sharing popover.
 Tap the Publish Changes button to update your journal when you change it.

Note: iPhoto displays an alert exclamation mark on the Share icon when you edit a journal
to remind you to publish the changes.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
 Tap one of the sharing buttons to send friends and family a link to your journal.
Note: The Copy icon copies the journal link to the Clipboard. If you open a document or
text editor you can paste the link into a document.
TIPS
Why does iPhoto call the journal collection a Home Page?
This is a remnant of the older MobileMe service which offered extra features. MobileMe
is no longer available, so think of the “Home Page” as your public journal collection.
Why is the upload process so slow?
iPhoto and iCloud do a lot of work when they create a web page. All photos have to be
resized and uploaded, and iPhoto also has to create the web page itself. This can take a
long time. Expect to wait at least a few minutes — much longer if your journal has many
photos.
Share a Journal to iTunes
You can share a journal to a folder which you can copy via iTunes. This sharing option
works almost exactly like the iTunes sharing option introduced in the previous chapter,
with the difference that the folder it creates includes extra information needed to show a
journal as a web page.
After you copy the folder from iTunes, you can view the journal from your Mac or PC’s
hard drive in Safari. You can also upload the journal to a web server. The page iPhoto
creates is mostly compatible with other browsers, so almost all web users can view it.

Share a Journal to iTunes
 Open a journal.
 If Edit mode is selected, tap the Edit button to deselect it.
 Tap the Share icon ( ).
 Tap the iTunes icon.
A iPhoto creates and saves a folder of photos embedded in a web page.
Note: It can take a few minutes for iPhoto to finish exporting the photos and web details.

 Connect your device to your Mac and launch iTunes if it does not launch automatically.
 Click your device in the Devices list.
 Click Apps.
 Scroll down to the File Sharing section and click iPhoto.
B iPhoto displays a list of the documents iPhoto has saved, including the folder you
created in steps 1 to 4.
Note: When you save a journal, it automatically appears in this list as a named folder.
 Drag the folder from iTunes and drop it on another folder in Finder.
 Click individual photos to view them.
Note: iPhoto saves the original and the resized versions of all photos in the journal folder.
C You can click the index.html file in the Public subfolder to open the journal in your
web browser.

TIPS
Can I upload the content to a web server?
If you have your own web server, you can copy all the files inside the Public folder using
FTP (File Transfer Protocol) to a folder on the server. This can be a better option than
using iCloud because your photos remain private, and iCloud does not need to load or
process the content before it appears.
Is there any way to create a Home Page on my server?
The Save to iTunes option saves single journals. You cannot re-create the Home Page
feature available on iCloud. However, you can create a separate index page using
conventional web links to each journal.

Chapter 14: Using iPhoto on the
iPhone
You can use iPhoto on an iPhone as well as on an iPad. Although the app has similar
features on both devices, it is not identical. You can get more from iPhoto on the iPhone
by discovering the differences and understanding how some features offer extra
possibilities.
Compare Devices
Using the Thumbnail Browser
Access the Edit Tools
Using Settings and Options
Take HDR Photos


Compare Devices
iPhoto on the iPhone is very similar to iPhoto on the iPad, but there are important
differences. Although the features in both versions are almost identical, the overall
experience is different because the two devices have different strengths and weaknesses.
The devices have obvious hardware differences, but other differences are more subtle. You
can get more from iPhoto by making the best use of its possibilities on each device.
Compare Portability
Unlike the iPad, the iPhone is a pocket device: it is easy to carry, easy to hold, and can
be easy to hide. You can use it as a convenient pocket camera to snap interesting
scenes almost anywhere. This spontaneity can make you more creative. You can
easily get into the habit of stopping to capture interesting subjects. You are less likely
to take an iPad everywhere with you, and less likely to take photos with it if you do.
Assess Camera Quality
The 8-megapixel camera in the iPhone 4S approaches the quality of a good digital
compact camera. The 5-megapixel camera in the iPhone 4 is a step down in quality,
but is capable of good results in good light. The camera in the 3rd and 4th generation
iPads is comparable to the iPhone 4’s camera but lacks some of its options, including
HDR (High Dynamic Range) capture. The older iPad 2 has a relatively poor camera
and produces grainy and noisy images in all but the best light.
Using the Flash
The cameras on the iPhone 4, 4S, and 5 include a simple LED (Light Emitting Diode)
flash unit. The flash has a limited range of a few yards, and is most effective on close
subjects. Although less powerful than the flash of a basic digital compact camera, it is
good enough for simple portraits and close-ups. The iPad camera lacks a flash. The
camera works best in bright daylight. You cannot create photographic special effects
such as fill-in flash.

Using a Smaller Screen
The iPhone has a much smaller screen than the iPad. iPhoto’s designers have done a
remarkable job of packing iPhoto’s features into this smaller space. But a few features
have been moved or made less obvious — for example, the Editor displays fewer
thumbnails. So the app is slightly less intuitive overall. More critically, the small
screen cannot reveal the fine detail visible on the iPad. Grain, noise, and other
imperfections are easy to miss, even on an iPhone with a retina display. Realistically,
the iPhone displays a large thumbnail preview of a photo. To get the best view of a
photo, use an iPad, a TV, or an external monitor.
Using the Lock Screen
The iPhone has a useful camera feature on the lock screen. You can drag the lock icon
up to reveal the Camera app, even when the phone is locked. This saves time and
helps you capture fleeting photos quickly. The iPad has an animated album viewer on
its lock screen. There is no quick way to unlock an iPad and take a photo.
Compare Processors and Memory
iPads are designed to be faster than iPhones. iPad models also have more working
memory (not to be confused with the 16GB, 32GB, or 64GB of storage for data and
photos). With the extra speed of the newer A5X and A6X processors, extra memory,
and improved graphics, editing and previews are noticeably faster on an iPad.

Compare Overall Ease of Use
Both devices have advantages. The iPhone has a better camera and is more portable.
The iPad has a bigger screen and is better for photo viewing and editing. Having both
devices is ideal. Apple’s app synchronization installs a single purchase of iPhoto on
both so you do not need to buy two copies. Where Wi-Fi is available, you can then use
Photo Stream or photo beaming to copy new photos from an iPhone to an iPad for
viewing and editing.


Using the Thumbnail Browser
You can use iPhoto on the iPhone to view albums, photos, events, and journals, just as you
can on the iPad. Each opens into a smaller version of the iPhoto thumbnail browser. You
can view one or two thumbnail columns, drag the thumbnails to the left or right edge of
the screen, or tap a disclosure triangle to view different photo sets. There is no way to
view three columns.
In portrait mode, you can view a single row of thumbnails. There is no way to view
multiple rows, and the photo set disclosure triangle remains hidden.
Using the Thumbnail Browser
 Launch iPhoto.
 Tap any of the following buttons to open the thumbnail browser: Albums, Photos,
Events, or Journals.
iPhoto opens the thumbnail browser.
 Drag the thumbnails up and down to select a photo.

 Tap a photo to preview it.
 Drag the width control left or right to view one or two columns of thumbnails.
 Drag the entire thumbnail toolbar to the right to move it to the other side of the screen.
iPhoto moves the thumbnail browser to the other edge of the screen.
A Optionally, tap the Back button to exit the thumbnail browser.
 Tap the disclosure triangle to display the thumbnail filter selector.
Note: The disclosure triangle works on either side of the screen.
iPhoto displays the filter selector.
B Optionally, tap one of the four filter types to select it. iPhoto will display a filtered list
of thumbnails.
 Tap Cancel to leave the current filter unchanged.
TIPS

Can I hide the thumbnails?
You can hide the thumbnails by tapping the grid of nine squares ( ), just as you can in
iPhoto on the iPad. The thumbnails disappear, leaving just the main photo preview.
Swipe left or right on the preview to view other photos.
Does using a retina display make a difference?
The standard- and retina-display versions of iPhoto on the iPhone are identical. The same
tools and options are available, and they work the same way. The only difference is photo
preview quality. With a retina display, the preview is noticeably smoother and more
detailed.


Access the Edit Tools
In iPhoto on the iPhone, the edit options are partly hidden. The one-click edit icons —
auto-enhance, rotate, flag, favorite, and hide — are included on the bottom toolbar. The
more complex image editing options are collected on a separate slide-out toolbar.
You can slide out the image editing tools when you need them, and hide them when you
have finished working. The tools themselves are identical. You can use all the tools
available on the iPad version.
Access the Edit Tools
 Launch iPhoto.
 From one of the collections, tap any photo to open the thumbnail browser.
 Note the one-click edit tools in the toolbar along the bottom of the window.
 Tap the toolbox icon ( ) to view the image editing tools.
The edit tools slide out from the left and cover the one-click editing toolbar.

 Tap any image editing tool to use it.
iPhoto displays the settings and options for the selected tool.
 Tap the icons in the toolbar to set up and use the editing tool.
 Tap the tool’s icon when done.
iPhoto hides the options for the tool.
 Tap the close icon ( ) to hide the editing tools.
Note: The brushes and effects tools display extra icons the first time you dismiss their
main icons.
TIPS
Why do some tools have extra icons?
The brushes and effects include too many features for a single toolbar, so the tools have
been split across two toolbars. You can access them by opening the main set of tools, and
then closing them to reveal the second set. Tap the toolbox icon ( ) again to reveal the

main editing toolbar.
Do the tools work the same way in portrait mode?
The exposure and color tools work differently. Their sliders do not fit into the small
horizontal space in portrait mode, so they are replaced by sets of icons. Tap an icon to
reveal the corresponding slider.


Using Settings and Options
iOS on the iPhone does not support popovers. Instead of displaying a floating popover for
settings and options, iPhoto slides a sheet up from the bottom of the screen. To dismiss the
sheet, tap Done at the top right.
Otherwise, the settings and options for iPhoto on the iPhone are identical to those on the
iPad. The settings (gear) icons on each page display the usual features, but the layout of
each sheet is slightly different.
Using Settings and Options
 Launch iPhoto.
 On one of the collections pages, tap the settings (gear) icon ( ).
iPhoto slides a settings sheet from the bottom of the screen.
 Tap the Help button to browse the help pages.
 Scroll down to view more settings.

 Tap Done when finished.
iPhoto hides the settings sheet.
 Open a collection and tap any photo to open the thumbnail browser.
 Select any of the editing tools.
 Tap the tool’s settings (gear) icon ( ).
iPhoto displays the settings and options for that tool.
 Tap Reset to cancel any pending edits.
 Tap the dot selector to view another page of options.
Note: This option is available only for the Crop tool, shown here.
 Tap Done when finished to hide the sheet.
TIPS
Why are there no popovers on the iPhone?

The sliding sheets — technically modal views — on the iPhone were added to iOS before
the iPad was released. Popovers can be almost any size, and may not fit on the iPhone’s
screen. So iOS on the iPhone continues to use the older technology, even though the
sheets are less visually polished.
Are there any other important differences?
iPhoto on the iPhone has no help icons; help is available only in one location. You can
find the Help button at the top of the main settings page, which appears when you tap the
settings (gear) icon ( ) on any of the main collections — Albums, Photos, Events, and
Journals.


Take HDR Photos
Conventional cameras find it hard to capture images that combine bright light with deep
shadow. HDR (High Dynamic Range) photography attempts to solve this problem by
combining multiple exposures in a single image. You can use HDR to reveal shadow or
sky detail that would normally be missed, such as a blue sky with clouds instead of an
overexposed white area.
The HDR mode on the iPhone takes three photos at once — underexposed, overexposed,
and just right. The iPhone combines the exposures automatically to create a single image
with extra detail. The effect is subtle but useful.
Take HDR Photos
 Launch the Camera app.
 Tap the Options button.
A list of camera options appears.
 Tap the HDR switch to turn on HDR mode.

 Tap Done to hide the options.
A iPhoto displays the HDR On message at the bottom of the screen and enables HDR
mode.
 Select any scene with bright light and deep shadow.
 Tap the camera icon ( ) to snap the scene in the usual way.
Camera takes an HDR photo of the scene.
Note: Creating an HDR photo takes a couple of seconds.
 View the photo in the camera roll or in iPhoto.
 Note how the HDR label appears automatically on HDR photos.
The photo has extra detail in the shadows and is less overexposed than the preview.
TIPS
Why do iPhone HDR photos look less dramatic than some other HDR photos?

Other cameras and software create HDR images by combining photos with a much wider
exposure range. The results can be surreal and garish. (Brooding skies over strangely lit
landscapes are very popular.) HDR on the iPhone is more subtle, and usually more
useful.
Do I need to keep the camera steady for HDR?
Yes. Because HDR uses multiple exposures, camera shake can create obvious
misalignments in the combined image. Take extra care to keep the iPhone steady when
shooting HDR images. Use a small tripod if you have one.

