   Diane Pecorari
Teaching to
Avoid Plagiarism
How to promote good source use

Teaching to Avoid Plagiarism


Teaching to Avoid 
Plagiarism
How to promote good source use
Diane Pecorari

Open University Press
McGraw- Hill Education
McGraw- Hill House
Shoppenhangers Road
Maidenhead
Berkshire
England
SL6 2QL
email: enquiries@openup.co.uk
world wide web: www.openup.co.uk
and Two Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121- 2289, USA
First published 2013
Copyright © Diane Pecorari, 2013
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the 
purpose of criticism and review, no part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form 
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or 
otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher or a 
licence from the Copyright Licensing Agency Limited. Details of such 
licences (for reprographic reproduction) may be obtained from the 
Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd of Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, 
London EC1N 8TS.
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library
ISBN- 13: 978- 0- 33- 524593- 2 (pb)
ISBN- 10: 0- 33- 524593- 5 (pb)
eISBN: 978- 0- 33- 524594- 9
Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication Data
CIP data applied for
Typesetting and e- book compilations by
Reﬁ neCatch Limited, Bungay, Suffolk
Fictitious names of companies, products, people, characters and/or data that may be 
used herein (in case studies or in examples) are not intended to represent any real 
individual, company, product or event.

Praise for this book
“Diane Pecorari’s book provides practical examples and activities on 
handling plagiarism blended with research-based ﬁ ndings. It is 
useful for teachers wanting to improve their understanding and 
practices in managing plagiarism, but also student advisors and 
academic support skills staff who deal with issues of academic 
integrity. This book makes a unique contribution to the ﬁ eld of 
plagiarism management as its structure affords direct professional 
development opportunities. Assessment tasks, broad questions and 
activities are provided at the end of each chapter, encouraging readers 
to understand both policy and practice in their own institution to 
better manage plagiarism and source attribution. “
Dr Wendy Sutherland-Smith, School of Psychology, Faculty of Health, 
Deakin University, Australia
“Teaching to Avoid Plagiarism successfully turns attention away 
from the detection and punishment of plagiarism and focuses instead 
on understanding and prevention through the promotion of good 
source use. Combining practical activities based on real-life examples 
with wide-ranging original research, this important book should be 
required reading, not only for staff development ofﬁ cers and lecturers, 
but more widely throughout the higher education community.”
Maggie Charles, Oxford University Language Centre
“Diane Pecorari’s insightful research and scholarship on plagiarism 
is used to excellent effect in this book which advocates a proactive 
rather than reactive approach to the difﬁ culties faced by students in 
learning how to integrate their source texts. Thoughtful activities 
and discussion questions aimed at staff development are teamed 
with advice on ways to build in support within disciplinary writing 
which will help students master the necessary academic skills to 
avoid plagiarism. The emphasis, quite rightly, is also on helping 
students understand how plagiarism disrupts the ethical values of 
the academy, and is not just another hurdle placed in their way by 
academic insiders.”
Dr Ann Hewings, Director, Centre for Language and Communication, 
The Open University

“As stated by Diane Pecorari in the ﬁ rst sentence of this excellent 
volume, ‘plagiarism is a problem in our universities’. The volume 
demonstrates clearly how teachers and students can deal with this 
‘problem’ by developing a better understanding of the phenomenon, 
on the one hand, and developing speciﬁ c skills in dealing with it, on 
the other. Working from the principle that ‘an ounce of prevention is 
worth a pound of cure’, Diane Pecorari argues for a proactive 
approach to handling issues of plagiarism, with an emphasis on the 
need to train students how to deal appropriately with sources. As 
well as a clear exposition of the theoretical issues at stake, the book 
contains a wealth of practical activities and discussion questions 
which will allow readers to develop the sort of competence in dealing 
with plagiarism that is the goal of the volume. “
Professor John Flowerdew, City University of Hong Kong

For Jeff, who helped in so many ways


Contents
Acknowledgements 
xiii
Introduction 
1
Part One Understanding plagiarism 
5
 1 What is plagiarism? 
7
Summary 
7
Introduction 
8
Deﬁ ning plagiarism 
9
Problems in applying the criteria 
17
The incidence of plagiarism 
23
Activity 
26
Questions for reﬂ ection or discussion 
26
 2 Why does plagiarism happen? 
27
Summary 
27
Why do students cheat (by plagiarising)? 
29
Shades of intention 
31
Electronic media 
32
Strategies and skills for reading, writing and studying 
33
Learning the rules of the game 
34
Learning to play the game 
35
Learning the parlance of the game 
37
Learning to be a player 
39
Assessing the causes 
40
Activity 
41
Questions for reﬂ ection or discussion 
42
 3 How do we manage plagiarism? 
43
Summary 
43
Policy and regulation 
45
Prevention 
47

x CONTENTS
Detection 
48
Response 
52
Activity 
54
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection 
54
Part Two Managing plagiarism 
57
 4 What do writers need to know to avoid plagiarism? 
59
Summary 
59
Transparency 
61
Effective source use 
71
Plagiarism is no substitute for skill 
73
Activity 
73
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection 
73
 5  How can teachers support student learning about 
source use? 
75
Summary 
75
Principles for a source-use curriculum 
76
Approaches to teaching source use 
83
Task 1. Extracting content from a source with accuracy 
84
Task 2. Relating content accurately 
85
Task 3. Signalling orientations to content 
87
Task 4. Identifying the author of a work 
88
Task 5. Gathering and reporting bibliographic information 
89
Task 6. Relationships among sources 
89
Task 7. Choosing to quote or paraphrase 
90
Task 8. Producing quotations and paraphrases 
90
Task 9. A paraphrase process 
91
Task 10. Integrating source- use skills 
92
Activity 
93
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection 
93
 6 What support can institutions offer? 
94
Summary 
94
Managing prototypical plagiarism 
96
Managing patchwriting 
99
Unifying the management of textual plagiarism 
100
Activity 
101
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection 
102

CONTENTS xi
Part Three Contextualising plagiarism 
103
 7 International students and second- language writers 
105
Summary 
105
International students and second- language writers: 
 Who are they? 
106
Plagiarism and L2 writers: What are the issues? 
108
Implications for teachers 
115
Activity 
116
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection 
117
 8 Differences across academic subjects 
118
Summary 
118
Writing in the disciplines 
121
How are sources cited? 
123
Signalled and unsignalled quotation 
126
Learning to meet disciplinary conventions 
129
Disciplinary variation in a broader perspective 
130
Activity 
131
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection 
132
 9 Diversity and change 
133
Summary 
133
They come from non- traditionl backgrounds 
134
They’re Millenials 
136
They are learning in different ways 
138
Implications for teaching about plagiarism and 
 source use 
139
Activity 
140
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection 
140
10 Plagiarism in a broader context 
142
Summary 
142
Practicing what we preach? 
143
Preach something practicable 
146
Getting real 
150
Conclusion 
155
Activity 
155
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection 
156

xii CONTENTS
Appendix A Training teachers in a good source- use pedagogy 
157
Appendix B Case studies 
160
Appendix C Sources of examples 
177
Notes 
181
Bibliography 
182
Index 
189

Acknowledgements
This book is situated at the intersection of my research and teaching practice, 
and would not have been possible without the contributions of the many 
gifted individuals with whom I have collaborated in both domains.
My colleagues at Mälardalen University inspired and supported me for 
nearly a decade as I applied my research in the classroom. Karin Molander 
Danielsson was endlessly willing to discuss issues related to source use and to 
help develop and try out ways of addressing problems in student writing. 
Thorsten Schröter and Elisabeth Wulff- Sahlén provided daily reference points 
for the term ‘reﬂ ective practitioner’. My new colleagues at Linnaeus University 
(whom I shall not mention individually, for fear of leaving someone out) have 
been warmly welcoming, and patient while I ﬁ nished this book.
Avoiding plagiarism is part of learning to write effectively from sources, and 
that in turn is part of the larger question of language learning, particularly 
within the university context. Especially warm thanks go to my colleagues on 
the English Vocabulary Acquisition project, who have explored these broader 
issues with me. Better collaborators than Aileen Irvine, Hans Malmström, Špela 
Mežek and Philip Shaw would be difﬁ cult to imagine.
Philip Shaw in particular has accompanied me on my journey of discovery 
about plagiarism, source use and intertextuality virtually since its inception. 
He has been willing and enthusiastic in his contributions to our projects, 
gentle but insightful in his critique, and endlessly generous with his time.
All of these people, and others who are too numerous to name, have 
contributed to my understanding of the phenomena this book treats, and I am 
grateful to them.


Introduction
Plagiarism is a problem in our universities, and many teachers feel that dealing 
with it is a heavy and troublesome part of their role. The purpose of this book 
is to provide university staff with a better understanding of plagiarism and 
improved skills for dealing with it, so that they can be more effective and feel 
more conﬁ dent in doing so.
Plagiarism is a complex phenomenon and an understanding of its 
complexities is a precondition for being able to respond to it effectively. 
Chapter 1 thus presents deﬁ nitions of plagiarism and analyses its constituent 
components. This chapter introduces key understandings which lay the 
foundation for the rest of the book.
A key to solving any problem is understanding its causes; outlining the 
sources of plagiarism is the task of Chapter 2. Chapter 3 examines the ways 
plagiarism is currently dealt with in universities. This chapter has two 
objectives: to orient teachers to the sorts of practices in place, and to highlight 
problematic aspects which make current practices a poor ﬁ t for some types of 
plagiarism.
A recurrent theme in this book is that an ounce of prevention is worth a 
pound of cure, and that efforts in handling plagiarism should be proactive, 
rather than reactive, to the greatest extent possible. A key element in helping 
students avoid plagiarism is helping them learn how to use sources well. Setting 
forth what students need to know in order to avoid plagiarism, and what staff 
can do to help them to that understanding, are the topics of Chapters 4 and 5 
respectively. The wider role of academic institutions is addressed in Chapter 6.
The ﬁ nal four chapters in the book set plagiarism in a broader context. 
Chapter 7 deals with second- language writers and international students. 
What constitutes better and worse use of sources varies to a great extent 
across academic disciplines, and these differences are the topic of Chapter 8. 
Chapter 9 discusses the changing nature of the university classroom, and the 
implications for the source use/plagiarism problem. Chapter 10 then concludes 
by placing the issues dealt with in the book in the broader higher education 
perspective.

2 INTRODUCTION
Two domains related to plagiarism are not explored in any detail in this 
book. One is the intersection of intellectual property and copyright 
infringement. While plagiarism can overlap with these concepts, in the context 
of higher education it usually does not. (For a discussion of the ways in which 
copyright infringement and plagiarism are distinct, see Stearns, 1999.) The 
other is academic integrity, which is a broad area, but although it subsumes at 
least some instances of plagiarism, it is clear from the research literature that 
plagiarism is a more complex question than most other violations of academic 
ethics, and deserves separate treatment. The review of the causes of plagiarism 
in Chapter 2 does, however, discuss the research literature on academic 
dishonesty, and the reader who is interested in pursuing that area further will 
ﬁ nd the references there a good starting point.
This book, like any volume addressing the continuing professional 
development needs of university staff, will be used in a variety of settings, but 
it is assumed that most readers will have a common goal: to learn to handle 
plagiarism more effectively. The ideas in this book provide a starting point for 
that objective, but achieving it entails applying these ideas to teaching practice. 
To this end, this book contains a series of activities which enable readers to 
deepen their understanding, experience some of the practical challenges of 
dealing with plagiarism and measure the ideas introduced in the book against 
the reality of the reader’s institutional context.
The starting point for the activities is that reactions to plagiarism differ, in 
part because institutions vary in their local rules, policies and practices, and in 
part because individuals also differ in their understandings of, and reactions 
to, plagiarism. While the chapters in this book describe how plagiarism occurs 
and how it is, can and should be addressed, the activities link these ideas to the 
reader’s speciﬁ c institutional context. They ask readers to gather policy 
documents, analyse student writing and interview staff and students in order 
to build a portrait of their local situation, and what that implies for dealing 
with plagiarism and source use issues.
Teachers, writing centre consultants and administrators who are reading 
this book as a solo enterprise are encouraged to work through the activities, 
as that will help solidify the ideas presented here. When this book is used as 
part of a staff development course the activities can form the basis of an 
assessment task, if one is needed. Although presented chapter by chapter, the 
activities are connected by a coherent thread and lend themselves to being 
written up in report form. Because the answers produced in response to each 
task will vary according to the speciﬁ cs of the reader’s teaching context, no key 
is provided.
Some readers of this book will be staff developers, and will want to arrive at 
a better understanding of this phenomenon in order to help colleagues 
improve their teaching practice. In addition to the activities, each chapter 
concludes with several questions which can be used for discussion on the 
learning platform, in a seminar, or as a basis for reﬂ ections in a learning log. 
The book concludes with an appendix giving a plan for a staff- development 

INTRODUCTION 3
seminar on plagiarism and source use, and another with case studies which can 
be used as the starting point for discussion in such a seminar.
Plagiarism is not only a concern for teachers; staff who work in writing 
centres, study- skills resource rooms, as student advisors, etc., need to tell 
students about plagiarism and source use, and to do so they need to have a 
good understanding of the phenomenon. This book is intended to be used by 
anyone in a student- facing role. When for simplicity’s sake I say ‘lecturers’ and 
‘teachers’, I am writing for that wider group.
Plagiarism is difﬁ cult and unpleasant when teachers confront it in the 
classroom, and may therefore appear an equally unpleasant matter to read 
about. However, this complex and multi- faceted phenomenon relates to core 
academic values. These go beyond the simple issue of intellectual property and 
the right of the author to be acknowledged as such, and touch on more 
fundamental questions such as how we know which ideas are our own and 
which other inﬂ uences deserve to be acknowledged. Improving teaching 
practice in the area of plagiarism and source use is therefore not only a process 
of ﬁ nding a solution to an educational problem; engaging with plagiarism 
intellectually has an exciting potential to illuminate broad areas of the 
academic enterprise.


Part One
Understanding 
plagiarism


1
What is plagiarism?
Summary • Introduction • Deﬁ ning plagiarism • Problems in applying the 
criteria • The incidence of plagiarism • Activity • Questions for reﬂ ection 
or discussion
Summary
Most university lecturers know what plagiarism is but many struggle with unclear 
cases or the complexities of applying deﬁ nitions to speciﬁ c cases of potential 
plagiarism. University regulations routinely provide deﬁ nitions and examples of 
these are taken up and discussed in this chapter. Four criteria for plagiarism are 
identiﬁ ed. The fourth of these, the intent to deceive, is contentious, and is thus 
discussed extensively, concluding that policies which exclude intention as a criterion 
may do so to avoid providing a loophole, rather than out of a conviction that it is 
irrelevant.
University teachers have been shown to have difﬁ culty deciding if writing is 
plagiarised, and thus to reach inconsistent determinations about where the threshold 
for transgression lies. Their process of reasoning often involves the four criteria but 
subjectivity involved in evaluating work against these criteria places signiﬁ cant 
pressure on staff and creates a difﬁ cult situation for students.
While it is challenging to provide evidence for an increase in the incidence of 
plagiarism, it is undoubtedly widespread, so action is needed. Focusing efforts on 
detection and punishment is necessary but insufﬁ cient. University students need 
the skills to use source materials appropriately and properly in their writing.
When you have ﬁ nished reading this chapter, you will be able to discuss how 
plagiarism can be deﬁ ned and characterised, and identify some of the difﬁ culties 
involved in applying this theoretical understanding to speciﬁ c cases. You will also 
have a sense of the scale of the problem, and what that implies for preventing and 
responding to plagiarism.

8 WHAT IS PLAGIARISM?
Consider what you know and believe about plagiarism in relation to the 
quotations below. The ﬁ rst two point to different understandings of 
plagiarism. Which matches your understanding more closely? The third 
and fourth suggest that plagiarism, while a matter of concern for most 
teachers, may not be a problem on which many have reﬂ ected extensively 
or have expertise. How closely does that match your experience?
Textual ownership means ‘These thoughts and phrasings are mine, 
not yours, and if you use them without attributing them to me, you 
have committed the worst academic sin of all, plagiarism’.
(Elbow, 1999: 330)
Many novices struggle to ﬁ gure out exactly how to incorporate 
others’ work into their own, whether in quoting, paraphrasing, 
summarizing, echoing, or engaging in other forms of conscious and 
unconscious incorporation.
(Blum, 2010: 26)
Even without being able to articulate a precise deﬁ nition, many 
people ﬁ nd it easy to recognize plagiarism – as with pornography, 
they know it when they see it.
(Stearns, 1999: 7)
In fact, most of us have little knowledge of the ‘discipline’ of 
plagiarism – its deﬁ nitions and theories – even though most of us 
must teach our students about it. Granted, the concept of plagiarism 
is not a discipline of its own, but the amount of attention we in the 
academy are devoting to the issues surrounding it warrants some 
careful thought beyond who is guilty and what we can do about the 
perceived problem.
(Day, 2008: 46)
Introduction
The overarching purpose of this chapter is to explore the concept of 
plagiarism, to survey the deﬁ nitions and understandings associated with it. 
This is necessary in part because plagiarism is understood in greatly divergent 
ways, as the quotations above illustrate. Not only do they frame plagiarism 
differently – as a sin or a misunderstanding – there is an implication that 
different processes – committing an inappropriate act, or struggling towards an 
understanding – underlie the distinction.

DEFINING PLAGIARISM 9
To the extent that diverse and even contradictory understandings of 
plagiarism exist (and it will be seen later in this chapter that this is the case), it 
may come about in part because plagiarism is a side issue for most teachers; an 
unfortunate by- product of the main focus of their efforts, which is teaching 
and assessing student learning in their professional areas.
Thus, while plagiarism is a familiar concept, and most university 
teachers feel reasonably conﬁ dent that they know what it is, that certainty 
can be eroded when less clear- cut cases present themselves, and knowing 
how to respond to plagiarism requires something more than an instinctive 
recognition of it. The purpose of this chapter is to examine the way plagiarism 
is deﬁ ned in academic settings and the features which characterise it, as 
well as some of the difﬁ culties involved in recognising it in practice. This 
will lay a foundation for the discussion of causes and solutions in later 
chapters.
Deﬁ ning plagiarism
The following deﬁ nitions are taken from university policy and regulatory 
documents, and are broadly typical of the ways universities deﬁ ne and 
explain plagiarism. (Please note: all errors and other non- standard features in 
the examples were present in the originals. For sources of examples, see 
Appendix C.)
Example 1.1
Academic Integrity Statement: Appendix 1
Plagiarism is the reproduction or paraphrasing, without acknowledgement, 
from public or private (ie: unpublished) material (including material downloaded 
from the internet) attributable to, or which is the intellectual property of, 
another including the work of students.
Plagiarism may be of written and also non- written form and therefore would 
also include the unacknowledged use of computer programs, mathematical/
computer models/algorithms, computer software in all forms, macros, 
spreadsheets, web pages, databases, mathematical deviations and 
calculations, designs/models/displays of any sort, diagrams, graphs, tables, 
drawings, works of art of any sort, ﬁ ne art pieces or artefacts, digital images, 
computer- aided design drawings, GIS ﬁ les, photographs, maps, music/
composition of any sort, posters, presentations and tracing.**
** (this is not an exhaustive list).

10 WHAT IS PLAGIARISM?
Examples of plagiarism are:
• Including in your own work extracts from another person’s work without the 
use of quotation marks and crediting the source.
• The use of the ideas of another person without acknowledgement of the 
source.
• Paraphrasing 
or 
summarising 
another 
person’s 
work 
without 
acknowledgement.
• Cutting 
and 
pasting 
from 
electronic 
sources 
without 
explicit 
acknowledgement of the source of the URL or author and/or without 
explicitly marking the pasted text as a quotation.
• Submitting a piece of work entirely as your own when it was produced in 
collaboration with others, and not declaring that this collaboration has 
taken place (this is known as ‘collusion’).
• Submitting appropriated imagery or creative products without indicating 
the source of the work.
As one means of detecting plagiarism, some Schools now use software to 
check assignments for evidence of plagiarism.
(From a set of university- wide regulations at a British university)
Example 1.2
Plagiarism – the presentation of another’s words or ideas as if they were one’s 
own, including but not limited to:
• Submitting, as your own, through purchase or otherwise, part of or an entire 
work produced verbatim by someone else
• Paraphrasing ideas, data, or writing without properly acknowledging the 
source
• Unauthorized transfer and use of another person’s computer ﬁ le as your 
own
• Unauthorized use of another person’s data in completing a computer 
exercise
(From a student guide on academic integrity from a US university; the same 
deﬁ nition is found on a resource guide to ‘avoiding plagiarism’ from the 
university’s library.)

DEFINING PLAGIARISM 11
Example 1.3
What is Plagiarism?
Plagiarism is presenting someone else’s work as if it were your own, whether 
you mean to or not.
‘Someone else’s work’ means anything that is not your own idea. Even if it is 
presented in your own style, you must still acknowledge your sources fully and 
appropriately. This includes:
• material from books, journals or any other printed source
• the work of other students or staff
• information from the Internet
• software programs and other electronic material
• designs and ideas
• the organisation or structuring of any such material.
Plagiarism undermines academic integrity simply because it is a form of lying, 
stealing and mistreating others. Plagiarism involves stealing other people’s 
intellectual property and lying about whose work it is. This is why plagiarism 
is prohibited at [University].
(From an on- line study guide at a New Zealand university)i
Although different in level of detail and in some of the speciﬁ cs that they 
include, these deﬁ nitions are in broad agreement with each other. One 
important point which is illustrated by the more detailed deﬁ nitions in 
particular is that plagiarism can involve a wide range of types of materials: ideas 
and words, but also programming code, images, or indeed an organisational 
structure. In short, anything which can be said to be original, proprietary, the 
brainchild of a speciﬁ c creator, can be plagiarised. As Chapter 8 will discuss, 
there is a cross- curricular element to this as well; since the sorts of materials 
used as sources or produced as assessment work vary across academic disciplines, 
so do the kinds of sources which are likely to be plagiarised. A feature of all 
plagiarism, though, is that it involves material of some sort which has been 
appropriated, resulting in a new text. (‘Text’ is used here in the broadest sense 
possible, to mean all language, whether written or spoken, as well as non- 
linguistic material, such as music, photographs, charts, and so on. Because of a 
practical need to avoid repeatedly referring to the plagiarised product and its 
sources as ‘words, ideas, images, music, etc.’, the term ‘text’ will be used 
throughout this book, but should be understood in this broader sense.) Simply 
thinking about taking someone’s idea, or words, etc., is not plagiarism; the 
plagiarism is not complete until the source material is expressed in some way.

12 WHAT IS PLAGIARISM?
The deﬁ nitions above state or imply four criteria which are fundamental to 
plagiarism, and which can be used to identify it. First, and somewhat obviously, 
there must be a relationship of similarity between two texts. The question of 
whether Agatha Christie’s Murder on the Orient Express plagiarises Shakespeare’s 
Hamlet is not a relevant one; they are fundamentally different works. Although 
this criterion is very straightforward as a matter of principle (and therefore 
requires little discussion), the next section will show that it can be difﬁ cult to 
determine in practice when it has been fulﬁ lled.
Second, the similarity exists because the later work (Text B) was based on the 
earlier one (Text A). This criterion is evidenced in the deﬁ nitions above in 
phrases such as ‘including in your own work extracts from another person’s 
work’ (emphasis added). This criterion excludes, for example, the ‘inﬁ nite 
monkey theorem’, the idea that if a monkey played with a typewriter for an 
inﬁ nite period of time, typing letters at random, eventually the monkey would 
produce Hamlet. If the monkey did so, the result would be a coincidence, not 
plagiarism.
In addition to coincidence, this criterion excludes the similarities which 
come about because two texts are on the same topic and/or are exemplars of the 
same genre. Any two guidebooks to South Africa, selected at random, are likely 
to have sections on Johannesburg, Cape Town and Kruger Park, and pictures of 
elephants and giraffes, but those similarities are determined by the topic itself. 
They are also likely to have introductory sections on the history of the country, 
and that shared characteristic is dictated by the convention of the genre that 
says that guide books typically begin with a potted history of the country in 
question. These likenesses are not in themselves indicative of plagiarism.
A third criterion is that the intertextual relationship is not appropriate. This 
is seen in language in the deﬁ nitions such as ‘without acknowledgement’ and 
‘you must still acknowledge your sources fully and appropriately’. This criterion 
excludes properly executed references to other sources, which are of course a 
standard feature of academic writing. There are many ways, more or less direct, 
in which earlier texts can appropriately inﬂ uence newer ones, and many ways 
in which the inﬂ uences can be acknowledged.
Examples of direct relationships include the ones which are indicated by 
citations or references such as those in the examples below. In Example 1.4, 
the numbers in square brackets correspond to entries in the reference list at the 
end of the article. In Example 1.5, the endnote indicated by the superscript 
numeral gives the page reference for the source which is named in the text, and 
the reference list gives full bibliographical details. Both of these references 
fulﬁ l the ﬁ rst two criteria for plagiarism in that there is a similarity between the 
articles from which the examples are taken and their sources, and that 
relationship exists because an assertion (in the case of 1.4) and words (in the 
case of 1.5) derive from those sources. However, because this relationship is 
signalled according to the conventions of the writers’ respective disciplines 
and the requirements of the publications in which they appeared, these are 
examples of appropriate source use, not plagiarism.

DEFINING PLAGIARISM 13
Example 1.4
In- text reference
Considering the diversity of in vitro resistance to antifungal drugs shown by 
different species of yeasts, their correct identiﬁ cation is a critical aspect of 
therapeutic planning [7,8].
Reference list entries
7 Kitch TT, Jacobs MR, McGinnis MR, Appelbaum PC. Ability of RapID Yeast 
Plus System to identify clinically signiﬁ cant yeasts within 5 hours. J Clin 
Microbiol 1996; 34(5): 1069–1071.
8 Schuffenecker I, Freydiére A, DeMontclos H, Gille Y. Evaluation of four 
commercial systems for identiﬁ cation of medically important yeasts. Eur J 
Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1993; 12(4): 255–260.
Example 1.5
In- text reference
As Haakonssen has argued, Thomasius (1655–1728) ‘formulated a theory of 
natural law as the speciﬁ cation and rule of the passions that make social life 
possible’.6
Endnote
6 Haakonssen, “German Natural Law,” 252.
Reference list entry
Haakonssen, Knud. “German natural law.” In The Cambridge History of 
Eighteenth- Century Political Thought, ed. M. Goldie and R. Wokler 
(Cambridge 2006), 251–90.
The conventional nature of the examples above comes from the fact that the 
sources they use are acknowledged directly. A range of less explicit relationships 
are also frequently and appropriately used. One of these is allusion, a reference 
to a source which is unnamed because the reader is expected to be able to 
recognise it. Thus the authors of Example 1.6 expected the reader to recognise 
the opening line of Pride and Prejudice: ‘It is a truth universally acknowledged, 
that a single man in possession of a large fortune must be in want of a wife’ 
(Austen, 1813/1995: 3).

14 WHAT IS PLAGIARISM?
Example 1.6
It is a truth universally acknowledged that a medical intervention justiﬁ ed 
by observational data must be in want of veriﬁ cation through a randomised 
controlled trial.
In her engaging volume about students and plagiarism, Susan Blum spells out 
the conventional status of allusion:
[Students] are trying to fulﬁ l so many different purposes, believing many 
more than six impossible things before breakfast. (That’s an allusion to 
Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking Glass – assumed to be common 
knowledge, and therefore not in need of citation. So my quoting it is not 
plagiarism, even though I did take it directly from Carroll without crediting 
my source (2010: 6).
The conventions regarding what sorts of source use are appropriate vary across 
domains. Journalists, for instance, frequently identify their sources only by 
name, or indeed allow them to remain anonymous, a situation which is very 
different from the detailed information which academic writers must usually 
provide. Further, within the academic community, there are signiﬁ cant 
differences across subject areas (for example, allusion is much more common 
in some ﬁ elds than others), a topic taken up in Chapter 8. Despite differences 
in the speciﬁ cs, the basic principle is the same across disciplines and domains: 
textual re- use which has been rendered appropriate according to the applicable 
conventions is not plagiarism. Plagiarism requires that material be re- used in 
an inappropriate way.
The fourth criterion is that plagiarism requires intention. In fact, it requires 
intention of two sorts. First, the plagiarist must be aware of having copied. A 
legitimate error in copying and pasting (always assuming that it can be 
demonstrated that a legitimate error was involved) is not plagiarism. Second, 
the plagiarist must have intended the copying to be transgressive, i.e., to be a 
deceptive act. An allusion to a source which is not recognised by the reader is a 
misjudgement, not plagiarism.
The idea that this second sort of intention is criterial in identifying plagiarism 
is to some extent contentious; in fact, deﬁ nition three, above, explicitly states 
the opposite: ‘plagiarism is presenting someone else’s work as if it were your 
own, whether you mean to or not’ (emphasis added). In a survey of university 
plagiarism policies (Pecorari, 2001), intention was the sole point on which 
policies were found to be contradictory, with some including language such as 
that found in the third deﬁ nition. There are nonetheless a number of reasons for 
concluding that plagiarism in its central sense involves intentional deception.

DEFINING PLAGIARISM 15
One reason is that this appears to be the majority view; in the study cited 
above, policies stating that intention is irrelevant were in the minority. Other 
commentary on plagiarism deﬁ nitions agrees: ‘common themes emerge in 
most expositions of the construct, usually involving the notions of intent, 
deliberate deception and failure to acknowledge sources’ (Bennett, 2005: 138).
The sense that the received view of plagiarism involves intention is reinforced 
by the manner in which teachers react to speciﬁ c instances of inappropriate 
source use. In interviews with Australian academics, Bretag found that they 
‘spent considerable time attempting to distinguish between deliberate and 
unintentional plagiarism’ (2004: 5). In another study, university teachers were 
shown student writing and asked to say whether it was plagiarised, and their 
process of decision- making usually took intention into account. When some 
other reasonable explanation for unacceptable source use presented itself, for 
example, if they thought that the student was unfamiliar with what the rules 
required, they disassociated themselves from the label ‘plagiarism’ (Pecorari 
and Shaw, 2012).
This conclusion is also supported by the wording in deﬁ nitions. All but the 
ﬁ rst of those above use the phrase ‘as if it were your own’, or some close variation 
on it (e.g., ‘as one’s own). Using something ‘as one’s own’ (when, by clear 
implication, it is not actually one’s own) is necessarily an act of pretence. Other 
words which frequently arise in policies are ‘making use of’, ‘presenting’, and 
‘passing off’, and all of these actions involve a degree of conscious awareness. 
‘Passing off’ is a common euphemism for fraud or deception. This is acknowledged 
implicitly by Example 1.3. After declaring that intention is not relevant, it goes 
on to say that ‘Plagiarism undermines academic integrity simply because it is a 
form of lying, stealing and mistreating others’. Lying, however, is stating what 
one knows or believes to be untrue. If plagiarism is a form of lying, then it must 
also be a sort of deception. Stealing is also an intentional act. Thus, even 
deﬁ nitions which assert explicitly that intentional deceit is not criterial in 
identifying plagiarism nonetheless appear tacitly to accept that it really is.
If this is the case, it is both reasonable and consistent with the frequent 
metaphorical treatment of plagiarism as a crime. Policies use the rhetoric of 
crime and punishment, and ofﬁ cial procedures for handling the act are often 
quasi- judicial in nature, with disciplinary boards listening to, and weighing 
up, the evidence from the ‘accuser’ and the ‘accused’. A fundamental precept 
in English common law, adopted by those countries whose legal codes are 
based on common law (e.g., Australia, the US), and also found in other 
countries, is that mens rea, the state of mind of an offender, must be taken into 
account in most criminal offences, and the absence of an intention to commit 
the crime in question means that no crime occurred. If a student takes a 
classmate’s copy of their textbook by mistake, because two copies of the same 
book are easily confused, the taking is not an act of theft because the student 
did not intend to deprive the classmate of his or her property.
What, then is the basis for the stipulations found in some policies that 
intention is not relevant? Discussing the process of revising a university 

16 WHAT IS PLAGIARISM?
plagiarism policy, Devlin reports that it was decided ‘to remove the 
phrase “with intent to deceive”, which was seen by both staff and students 
as a loophole’ (2006: 4) and it seems likely that that reasoning may be 
widespread. If plagiarism policies proclaimed that the same use of text from a 
source was either an act of academic misconduct or an honest mistake, then 
every student accused of plagiarism would claim the latter explanation. The 
stipulation that plagiarism can happen unintentionally may not be motivated 
so much by a belief that an honest mistake should be treated as plagiarism, as 
by a desire to prevent the guilty from avoiding punishment by claiming that 
they did not mean to offend. Intention, after all, is extremely difﬁ cult to 
establish, and it is as difﬁ cult to prove that an offender did not mean to do 
wrong as it is for the offender to prove the opposite. In saying ‘whether you 
mean to or not’, policy makers may actually mean ‘(claimed) ignorance of the 
law is no excuse’.
Thus, while acknowledging that there are a variety of views on the topic, and 
some individuals may view intention as irrelevant, there are good reasons to 
believe that the common understanding of plagiarism in its prototypical sense 
involves wilful deception. Throughout this book, the need will arise from time 
to time to distinguish between these two senses of plagiarism. The term 
prototypical plagiarism will be used to refer to textual re- use which meets all four 
of the criteria above, including an intention on the part of the writer to repeat 
the earlier text, and an intention to deceive the reader thereby.
To indicate source use which meets the ﬁ rst three criteria but not the 
fourth, the term patchwriting will be used. This term was coined by Rebecca 
Moore Howard (1995) to describe the strategies of inexperienced writers 
who feel they need support in order to produce academic writing, and lean 
too heavily on their sources for that support. In Howard’s usage, patchwriting 
has a number of speciﬁ c causes (which are discussed in Chapter 2). Here 
the term will be extended slightly and used for any sort of unintentional 
plagiarism. The importance of this distinction will be seen especially in 
Chapters 4 and 5, which deal with learning and teaching as a means of 
preventing plagiarism, as prevention requires an understanding of the source 
of the problem.
However, it is not always possible to understand what a writer’s intentions 
were, and in some cases intention is not directly relevant in deciding 
the best way to respond to inappropriate source use. Where it is not necessary 
to distinguish between prototypical plagiarism and patchwriting, the 
term textual plagiarism will be used, to indicate writing which meets the 
ﬁ rst three of the criteria outlined above – those which can be established 
on the basis of textual features, without reference to the writer’s intention. 
Textual plagiarism disregards the issue of intention, and is used as 
umbrella term, with both patchwriting and prototypical plagiarism as 
subtypes. Where the word plagiarism, unqualiﬁ ed, is used, it refers to this 
broader concept as well. Table 1.1 shows the characteristics associated with 
these three terms.

PROBLEMS IN APPLYING THE CRITERIA 17
Problems in applying the criteria
The criteria identiﬁ ed above, taken together, cover the characteristics which 
the act of plagiarism is commonly understood to have, and with the possible 
exception of intention, there is broad agreement on them. However, if deﬁ ning 
plagiarism is fairly straightforward, applying deﬁ nitions of it to speciﬁ c cases is 
not. University teachers have been shown to behave inconsistently in 
determining when a text constitutes plagiarism (Roig, 2001). When attempting 
to reach a decision, they frequently explain their difﬁ culty in deciding with 
reference to the four criteria. Speciﬁ cally, it may not be clear whether one or 
more of them is present (Pecorari and Shaw, 2012). Because a suspicion of 
plagiarism must be resolved, whether by a teacher who wonders whether it 
should be taken to another level, or by a disciplinary panel that must decide on 
a case, this uncertainty is problematic, so it is worth reviewing some of the 
aspects which present difﬁ culty.
Examples 1.7, 1.8 and 1.9 feature an extract from a piece of student writing 
(above in each example) and the student’s source (the second in each pair). 
Before reading further, look at each pair and consider whether in your view it 
exempliﬁ es acceptable source use or not. If unacceptable, does it constitute 
plagiarism or not?
Example 1.7
Student
The genus Mentha (Laminaceae) is composed of 19 geographically widespread 
species and 13 named natural. Peppermint (Mentha × piperita) and spearmint 
Table 1.1 Working deﬁ nitions of plagiarism
 
Textual plagiarism
Prototypical plagiarism
Patchwriting
Text A and Text B are similar.
yes
yes
yes
The similarity is caused by 
Text B being based on Text A.
yes
yes
yes
The re- use of Text A is 
appropriate.
no
no
no
The writer of Text B
not known
yes
no
 • intends to re- use Text A,
 •  and in doing so intends to 
deceive.
 
 
 

18 WHAT IS PLAGIARISM?
are grown world- wide as perennial herbs, and produce different essential oils 
which are used as ﬂ avourings.
Source
Mentha is a genus of wide distribution and considerable economic importance. 
Shoots and leaves of several species are often used as a condiment. The 
essential oils, which are steam distilled from the herbage, are processed into 
ﬂ avourings for food, medicine, mouthwash, toothpaste and powder, chewing 
gum, and candy. In modern taxonomic treatments of the genus (Harley and 
Brighton, 1977), there are ﬁ ve sections (Mentha sect. Audibertia, sect. 
Eriodontes, sect. Mentha, sect. Preslia, and sect. Pulegium) containing 19 
species and 13 named hybrids involving species of M. sect Mentha.
Example 1.8
Student
Reed (1999) reported that 50% of the mint cultures in National Clonal 
Germplasm Repository (NCGR) under slow growth conditions were lost due to 
the fungal or bacterial contamination.
Source
Some clonal crops are kept in slow- growth storage as in vitro cultures for 
germplasm conservation (Ashmore, 1997; Engelmann, 1991; Withers, 1991; 
Withers et al., 1990). Previously, mint cultures held at the National Clonal 
Germplasm Repository (NCGR) were stored at 4 ºC in darkness in 13 × 100 
mm glass tubes on MS (Murashige and Skoog, 1962) medium. Under these 
storage conditions, 50% of the cultures were lost to fungal or bacterial 
contamination (Reed, unpublished data).
Example 1.9
Student
Brassica oleracea is an important vegetable crop species, which includes fully 
cross- fertile cultivars or form groups with widely different morphological 
characteristics, such as cabbage, broccoli, cauliﬂ ower, Brussels sprout and 
kohlrabi. Genetic studies has been limited because long generation time of 
the biennials, the complex inheritance patterns of some trait, and the difﬁ culty 
in overcoming self- incompatibility.

PROBLEMS IN APPLYING THE CRITERIA 19
Source
Brassica oleracea is an important vegetable crop species which includes fully 
cross- fertile cultivars or form groups with widely- differing morphological 
characteristics (cabbage, broccoli, cauliﬂ ower, collards, Brussels sprouts, 
kohlrabi, and kale). Genetic studies of B. oleracea have been limited in part 
by the long generation time of the biennials, the complex inheritance patterns 
of some traits, and the difﬁ culty in overcoming self- incompatibility.
Establishing similarity between two texts
The pairs of extracts in each example above have a topic in common, and as a 
result also have some shared wording. However, this is the relationship which 
will always exist between any source and the text which cites it. Citations serve 
to support an idea which has been articulated in the new text. If there were no 
point of contact between the two, a citation to the source would be irrelevant. 
The question here then becomes ‘How similar is similar?’ This leads naturally 
to examining the next criterion; is it similar enough to suggest a causal 
relationship?
Establishing a relationship between two texts
An element which teachers draw on when trying to decide whether the 
similarities between two texts came about because one was based on the other 
is often quantity: how much of the source is repeated in the new text; and what 
proportion of the new text is made up of material from the putative source? 
There is a sense that, all other things being equal, the greater the similarity of 
content or language, the greater the likelihood that the newer text was based 
upon the earlier one. Describing the degree of similarity is not difﬁ cult. (Indeed, 
a quantitative measure of similarity is what text- matching software, sometimes 
called ‘plagiarism detection’ tools, rely on. This topic is taken up in Chapter 3.) 
From a purely quantitative perspective we can say that Example 1.7 consists of 
37 words, of which 16, or 43%, also appear in the source. In Example 1.8 there 
are 28 words, and 21 of these, or 75%, are in the source. Example 1.9 is longer, 
with 55 words, of which 50, or 91% can be found in the source. However, while 
it may be the case that more people would be willing to believe that the 
similarities in 1.7 are coincidental, and fewer would believe that the similarities 
in 1.9 are coincidental, there is likely to be disagreement. This is because there 
is no established ‘threshold level’ which can be taken to be indicative of 
copying, rather than coincidence (the absence of a ‘threshold level’ constitutes 
a limitation on the usefulness of ‘plagiarism detection’ software; this will be 
addressed in Chapter 3).
In addition, all other things are rarely equal. That is to say, some language is 
more likely to be repeated coincidentally than other. This contradicts to some 
extent the idea that most language use is original and creative. The linguist 

20 WHAT IS PLAGIARISM?
Steven Pinker calls this idea ‘the sheer vastness of language’ and proposes this 
experiment to demonstrate it: ‘go into the Library of Congress and pick a 
sentence at random from any volume, and chances are you would fail to ﬁ nd 
an exact repetition no matter how long you continued to search’ (1994: 85). 
However, much of the language we produce is formulaic in nature, so while 
that statement may be true for any given sentence found at random, it is not 
at all difﬁ cult to identify sentences which may be found in multiple places.
Our daily language is full of expressions like ‘I’m sorry, would you mind . . .’ 
and ‘If you’ll just excuse me . . .’ and ‘Would it be possible to . . .?’ Academic 
language is similarly full of formulaic units such as ‘it remains to be seen 
whether’ or ‘an important distinction to make is between’. Consider a sentence 
like this: ‘The strains used are shown in Table 1’. Searching for that exact string 
on Google Scholar produces 86 hits (or did in mid- 2012). If the table number 
is not speciﬁ ed, the number of hits rises to 122. Yet there is no reason to believe 
that the authors of these 122 research articles copied the phrase from each 
other, or from some common source; identifying the strains of an organism 
used in research is a common function in a research article in biology, listing 
them in a table is also common, and therefore a reference to the table is to all 
intents and purposes mandatory. There are other expressions which would 
accomplish the same task (for example, ‘the strains used in this experiment’ or 
‘in these experiments’ can also be found) but the phrase is such a standard one 
that it is bound to recur again and again.
Standard, formulaic expressions may be thought to be less indicative of 
copying than unusual, creative, less frequent wordings, and by the same token 
facts which are less well known than others. The fact that the essential oils 
derived from mint are used as ﬂ avouring is not a closely guarded secret; 
however, the ideas found in Example 1.4 about drug resistance in some species 
of yeast are probably less widely known, and their co- occurrence in two texts 
may be considered a stronger indication of a direct relationship. However, 
once again, while the status of words and ideas as more or less common may 
be a factor in deciding whether Text B was based on Text A, there is no litmus 
test to indicate where texts should be placed on that continuum.
Other factors could be added to this list; for example, 1.9 not only shares 
more words with its source, it contains longer strings of words found in the 
source in the same order than 1.7 or 1.8. However, any observations about 
the degree of similarity between two texts runs up against the same wall: 
there is no formula for working out what sort of similarity can coincidentally 
occur. The uncertainty arises because this criterion – that Text B was based on 
Text A – is related to the writing process, but evidence for or against that direct, 
causal relationship is, like the factors discussed in this section, about the 
product. Any attempt to look at the written product and try to infer what 
process produced it will be necessarily impressionistic. This can be a source of 
discomfort for teachers and others (for example, members of disciplinary 
boards) who are in the position of having to draw inferences about a process 
indirectly from the product in order to decide whether student writing is 

PROBLEMS IN APPLYING THE CRITERIA 21
plagiarised. They may reach their conclusions only tentatively, and feel less 
than fully conﬁ dent about them.
Establishing an inappropriate relationship
It is a widely accepted academic principle that sources should be acknowledged, 
that intellectual debts should be recognised. However, beyond this broad 
principle, the speciﬁ cs of what constitutes an appropriate, and appropriately 
signalled, relationship between two texts is subject to debate, and between the 
fully acceptable and the manifestly wrong there is the less than ideal, which 
may be acceptable or not.
To some extent this is because variation exists across academic contexts as to 
what or how sources can or should be used. There is also considerable variation 
in the conventions about how to signal the appropriate relationships to the 
reader. Academic disciplines differ greatly from each other in these respects, 
and Chapter 8 examines that variation in detail.
However, even within the same academic community, different individuals 
hold greatly differing views as to what is and is not acceptable. When a number 
of established academics were asked to comment on ﬁ ve examples of source 
use, including Examples 1.7 and 1.8 above, they disagreed about which ones 
were appropriate (Pecorari and Shaw, 2012). Several judged 1.7 as acceptable 
without hesitation or elaboration, but one thought that a reference was needed 
both because some information and some words derived directly from the 
source. Another respondent was unable to say whether 1.7 was appropriate or 
not. The response to 1.8 was similar, though the academic who called it clearly 
inappropriate was not the same person who thought 1.7 was.
The disagreement about these and other examples was not because there 
were individual outliers who took a much stricter or much looser view of what 
is acceptable. The source of their disagreement was that they looked to different 
factors to help them make their decisions. For example, one looked at the 
presence or absence of a citation to a source author, while another considered 
the length of chunks repeated from the source to be an important criterion, 
and another still tried to weigh up whether the ideas and words which were 
repeated from the source were commonplace or unique and particular. In 
other words, they reached different conclusions about the acceptability of a 
particular way of using a source because they looked to different features in 
making their judgements.
Disagreement was also the result of a large- scale survey of university teachers 
in the US who were asked to pass judgement on six paragraphs. Four of the 
paragraphs had been designed by the researcher to reﬂ ect varying degrees of 
plagiarism while two were intended to exemplify plagiarism- free writing. No 
paragraph received a unanimous response, and the two paragraphs which were 
intended to be seen as appropriate were in fact judged to be plagiarism by a 
small number of respondents (Roig, 2001). In another survey, when academics 
in a range of roles as well as students were asked to decide whether four 

22 WHAT IS PLAGIARISM?
paragraphs were plagiarised, there was disagreement both across and within 
the groups (Julliard, 1994).
Not only do academics disagree with each other, they also ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to 
decide. In Roig’s investigation, up to nine per cent of participants (varying 
according to the paragraph in question) said they couldn’t determine whether 
plagiarism had occurred. In our study, ﬁ ve of the eight teachers interviewed 
found it impossible to say whether or not an example was acceptable, in at 
least one case. Once they had concluded that an example was not acceptable, 
deciding whether it was plagiarism was harder still.
Establishing intention
Intention is the most difﬁ cult of the criteria to establish, in part because it, like 
the question of whether a source- based writing process was used, cannot be got 
at directly. Only the writer actually knows whether he or she intended to 
transgress, and there is a tendency to discount the writer’s account, at least if 
deceptive intention is denied. ‘I didn’t mean to’ is very easy to say, and very 
difﬁ cult to prove or disprove.
In fact, the problem is even more complex because there are two distinct 
sorts of deliberate behaviour related to plagiarism. The ﬁ rst is whether the 
re- use of language from a source was intentional. One means by which 
unintentional plagiarism can arise is through a phenomenon which has been 
described in the psychology research literature as cryptomnesia (e.g. Brown 
and Murphy, 1989). Cryptomnesia occurs when a writer reads a source, forgets 
having done so, and at a later date produces parts of the source in the mistaken 
belief that it is his or her new and original creation. Writers may also copy and 
paste from a source into their notes and then later mistakenly believe that they 
had paraphrased, summarised or otherwise signiﬁ cantly altered the wording of 
the source. If they then copy directly from their notes into their ﬁ nal text, the 
ﬁ nal text may contain verbatim wording from the source, but the writer may 
be unaware of it. In cases like these, the writer may lack the most basic sort of 
intention, the intention to re- use material from a source.
Beyond that, a writer may be aware of having copied or otherwise re-used 
material from a source, but may not intend it to transgress rules, or to be 
deceptive about the textual re-use. In other words, copying may not be perceived 
as a cheating behaviour. Anecdotal accounts exist of students copying from their 
lecture notes or the textbook and believing that no citation is necessary because 
the lecturer would recognise the source, so a citation would be superﬂ uous. 
Another often heard (and often contested) idea is that students from some 
cultures view copying from a source as a laudable study skill. Chapters 2 and 7 
address the factors leading to unintentional plagiarism more fully.
Teachers trying to understand what a student’s intentions were often try to 
infer them from the textual evidence available. An experienced university 
teacher commented ‘I don’t think I’ve ever discovered intentional plagiarism. 
Do you know what I mean, someone really taking . . . a whole essay, I’ve never 

THE INCIDENCE OF PLAGIARISM 23
seen that’. For this teacher, length – ‘a whole essay’ – would have been an 
indication that the copying was not accidental. For other teachers, factors such 
as whether the source is named somewhere in the student text, or how common 
or unique the language is, may be weighed up as evidence for or against 
deceptive intent. The point, once again, is that they cannot really know what 
the writer’s intention was, and are forced to come to a determination based on 
circumstantial evidence.
The act Howard (1995) described as patchwriting involves more or less 
elaborate changes to the source: various sources may be combined, with 
superﬁ cial changes such as substituting synonyms for key words, making 
active verbs passive and vice versa, or adding to, subtracting from or re- ordering 
the items in a list. Some teachers view the considerable effort these changes 
take as evidence that the student was not trying to shirk the time- consuming 
task of writing: if they were looking for an easy way out, they would have 
copied a whole text, and skipped the process of changing it. Others, though, 
see making changes as analogous to ﬁ ling the serial number off stolen property, 
as evidence of writers attempting to cover their traces, thus suggesting that 
they have something illicit to hide.
Teachers frequently take into account their impressions of a student’s 
character. One university lecturer in nursing recounted the experience of 
ﬁ nding extensive textual plagiarism in the work of a student who was just 
about to ﬁ nish her degree. The lecturer concluded that it was an honest mistake 
and implied that this was because the writer was ‘a good student and very 
ambitious’. The lecturer talked to the student and concluded ‘I can’t take this 
further, because really you should take [something like this] further’ as a matter 
for the disciplinary board. Under the procedures in place at that university, 
taking the matter further would likely have resulted in the student being 
suspended and concomitant delays, potentially long ones, in completing her 
degree. Because the lecturer concluded that intentional deception was not 
involved, she was correct not to report the matter to the disciplinary board, 
according to the rules in place at that university. However, the difference in 
outcomes for the student was considerable, and, signiﬁ cantly, the outcome 
was entirely dependent on the teacher’s individual and unsupported assessment 
of the highly subjective evidence for and against intentional deception. The 
importance of intention and the subjectivity involved in evaluating it place a 
heavy burden on staff and create an unstable situation for students.
The incidence of plagiarism
From the preceding discussion it is clear that identifying plagiarism is a 
problematic, contentious and sometimes haphazard affair, so it is not surprising 
that pinning down the frequency of plagiarism is very difﬁ cult, and ﬁ gures and 

24 WHAT IS PLAGIARISM?
estimates diverge considerably. What is clear, though, is that plagiarism is not 
rare. In a UK study of students’ self- reported behaviour, a majority of students 
were found to have engaged in acts which were equated with plagiarism, 
although various sorts of textual re- use were reported at different frequencies. 
Only 20% said they had never copied ‘a couple of sentences’ while 75% said 
they had never turned in an entirely plagiarised work (Bennett, 2005: 150). A 
study of university students in South Africa found plagiarism in a quarter of 
the 151 essays checked (Ellery, 2008b). Studies which analysed student source 
use in detail among students writing in their ﬁ rst language (Howard, Serviss 
and Rodrigue, 2010) or a second language (Pecorari, 2003) have found that all 
or nearly all repeated language from source texts, with or without minor 
changes to the wording, produced results which many teachers may describe 
as plagiarism. A survey of lecturers found that 72% had found plagiarism 
among their students’ work within the last year, and those reported on average 
approximately three cases per person (Pickard, 2006).
A frequently heard idea is that plagiarism is not only a persistent problem, 
it is becoming more frequent. It is easier to ﬁ nd this idea asserted than it is 
to ﬁ nd it supported with evidence. Among the limited data is a 2003 survey of 
31 universities carried out by the BBC Radio 4 ‘World at One’ news programme. 
According to the report, ‘nearly eight out of 10 said more students were passing 
others’ work off as their own. A third said they were having to deal with many 
more such cases compared with a few years ago’ (‘High Costs’). Another survey 
of UK universities got responses from nine institutions, and ‘only one suggested 
that there had been no increase in the incidence of plagiarism since the mid- 
1990s’ (Larkham and Manns, 2002: 342). Internationally comparisons are 
difﬁ cult because statistics are not always gathered, and when they are, are not 
fully comparable. However, in Sweden, where statistics of university disciplinary 
cases are kept nationwide, they show that the number of reported cases of 
plagiarism rose from 68 in 2001 to 406 in 2010 (Högskoleverket, 2011: 13).
Apart from the limited number of studies, there are several factors which 
make it difﬁ cult to reach any conclusion about either frequency or trends. One 
is the difﬁ culty of getting information from the relevant sources. The Larkham 
and Manns study cited above attempted to survey a sizeable and representative 
group of universities but many ‘simply refused to respond to some or all of the 
questions on the grounds that such disciplinary actions were conﬁ dential’ 
(2002: 342). The methods used for gathering data vary, and include surveys of 
students’ self- reported behaviour and staff reports of the frequency with which 
they encounter plagiarism, as well as automated and manual analyses of 
student writing, thus leading to results which are not fully comparable. 
Operational deﬁ nitions of plagiarism also differ across studies, and the accuracy 
of self- reporting depends in part on a shared understanding of plagiarism 
which – as noted above – is lacking.
A way around this obstacle used in some studies is to ask not about plagiarism, 
but about the speciﬁ c acts that are grouped under that label. One, for example, 
asked students whether they had included ‘a couple of’ or ‘several’ sentences in 

THE INCIDENCE OF PLAGIARISM 25
their work without acknowledgement (Bennett, 2005: 148). However, this 
approach requires students to apply an abstract description to their writing 
practices, leaving room for misunderstanding or inconsistency. For example 
students who have included sentences from a source in their assignments but 
have replaced some words with synonyms may have difﬁ culty knowing 
whether they should answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’.
Text- based studies comparing student writing to their sources avoid this 
difﬁ culty but face another, the impossibility of knowing whether all the 
sources have been found. In addition, for ﬁ ndings to be meaningful, observed 
similarities between student texts and their sources must be described in terms 
which allow them to be compared with each other and with working deﬁ nitions 
of plagiarism, and this re- introduces the difﬁ culty that different types of source 
use are viewed very differently by different individuals. In other words, 
whatever labels or categories are used to describe ﬁ ndings (e.g., ‘40% repetition 
from source’ or ‘no citation present’) will subsume information which some 
individuals would feel they need to see in order to decide whether that degree 
of repetition, or the absence of a citation, is acceptable or not.
Using statistics of reported cases as an index of frequency has the signiﬁ cant 
limitation that there is no way to know what proportion of cases are found 
and reported. Deceptive plagiarists try to hide what they’ve done, and 
patchwriting is not always detected either. Some teachers who detect plagiarism 
opt to resolve it outside their university’s formal procedures. The number of 
cases reported represents, therefore, only a proportion of the total incidence of 
plagiarism. There is, however, no reason to believe that the proportion 
reported is stable, so that the total can be extrapolated from it. Indeed, it 
seems likely that the more attention plagiarism receives, the more likely staff 
are to be aware of it, to be proactive in detecting it, and to be vigilant in 
reporting it, so a rise in the number of reported cases could both reﬂ ect and 
cause changes in staff behaviour, rather than indicating an increase in student 
plagiarism.
In all this uncertainty about the prevalence of plagiarism, there are two clear 
implications for how we deal with it. First, we do know that it is not an isolated 
phenomenon. If plagiarism were a rare event, there might be a case to be made 
for treating it entirely or primarily with post facto measures, focusing efforts on 
detection and punishment. Given that it is in fact widespread, addressing 
plagiarism must involve signiﬁ cant efforts to be proactive.
In addition, as Blum notes, the sheer frequency with which it occurs indicates 
not ‘moral turpitude on a vast scale but . . . evidence that plagiarism is a 
fundamental and correctable stage of learning how to write’ (2010: 27). In 
other words, efforts to combat it cannot be purely punitive: plagiarism demands 
a pedagogical response.
The uncertainty around plagiarism and its identiﬁ cation creates a situation 
which places students in a perilous position, and staff in an uncomfortable 
struggle with subjectivity, and as a result threatens consistency in assessment 
and therefore quality in higher education. The focus of the remainder of this 

26 WHAT IS PLAGIARISM?
book is on equipping staff with the knowledge and skills necessary to cope 
with this situation and improve outcomes for students.
Activity
An analysis of institutional deﬁ nitions of plagiarism. Find a deﬁ nition of plagiarism 
in use at your university, and analyse it from the perspectives taken up in this 
chapter. Here are some things to think about.
• Where was the deﬁ nition: in a discipline policy, in a study guide, etc.?
• How much time did you spend looking for the deﬁ nition?
• How likely is it that students will ﬁ nd and read it?
• Did you ﬁ nd one deﬁ nition or several? If the latter, were they mutually 
consistent?
• In what respects is the deﬁ nition similar or dissimilar to those presented in 
this chapter?
• To what extent and in what way does the deﬁ nition address the four criteria 
for plagiarism, either directly or by implication?
• If you have encountered something you thought might be plagiarism at ﬁ rst 
hand, imagine applying the deﬁ nition you found to that case. To what 
extent would the deﬁ nition be helpful to you in deciding whether plagiarism 
was involved, or convincing someone else that it was (or was not) plagiarism?
Questions for reﬂ ection or discussion
1 Some of the factors which can contribute to an understanding of whether 
plagiarism has occurred were discussed above. Are there other factors which 
can help make that determination? For example, is the level of the student 
relevant?
2 How do the ﬁ gures for the frequency of plagiarism (above) compare with 
your experience? How frequently have you identiﬁ ed plagiarism in student 
work? Does your experience suggest that some types of plagiarism are more 
common than others?
3 If you discuss plagiarism in your teaching (for example, at the beginning of 
a course), what questions do students have about it? If you have had a 
conversation with a student about suspected or detected plagiarism, what 
explanations for it were offered? To what extent does your understanding of 
plagiarism match the ideas and beliefs students typically have?

2
Why does plagiarism 
happen?
Summary • Why do students cheat (by plagiarising)? • Shades of intention 
• Electronic media • Strategies and skills for reading, writing and studying 
• Learning the rules of the game • Learning to play the game • Learning 
the parlance of the game • Learning to be a player • Assessing the causes 
• Activity • Questions for reﬂ ection or discussion
Summary
This chapter discusses the causes of textual plagiarism in both its forms: prototypical 
(deceptive) plagiarism, and patchwriting. The role of electronic media and the 
Internet and the key aspects of study and academic writing skills which contribute 
to plagiarism are discussed as causes. Not understanding principles for good source 
use is shown to be an issue, as is a lack of the skills needed to put those principles 
into practice. While lecturers may have evidence of plagiarism, establishing the 
reasons for it with certainty is challenging. Nevertheless, an understanding of the 
possible causes is useful in developing preventive measures; it can also help 
the teacher and regulator to avoid assumptions about the motivations of the writer, 
and thus take a balanced view of the situation, increasing the chances of a 
constructive response to plagiarism when it occurs.
After reading this chapter you will have an understanding of the wide range of 
factors which can contribute to plagiarism, as well as the complex ways in which they 
interact. This will serve as a foundation both for evaluating the solutions proposed in 
the second section of this book, and for helping guide and shape your understanding 
of and response to plagiarism when you encounter it in your teaching practice.

28 WHY DOES PLAGIARISM HAPPEN?
The two quotations below describe two different forms of plagiarism. 
The ﬁ rst is Rebecca Moore Howard’s description of what she found in her 
students’ writing. The second is from an account by a ghostwriter who 
published his experiences under a pseudonym. Have you knowingly 
encountered either of these forms of plagiarism? How common do you 
believe they are at your institution?
In 1986, one third of the students in my General Education class at 
a prestigious liberal arts college plagiarized an assigned paper. The 
sort of plagiarism they committed is what I have come to call 
‘patchwriting’: copying from a source text and then deleting some 
words, altering grammatical structures, or plugging in one synonym 
for another. The practice is uniformly banned in composition 
handbooks and in colleges’ academic codes. Even when patchwriting 
is accompanied by citation and documentation, our standard 
academic rules label it a transgression subject to punishment.
(Howard, 1999: xvii)
In the past year, I’ve written roughly 5,000 pages of scholarly 
literature, most on very tight deadlines. But you won’t ﬁ nd my name 
on a single paper. . . . I’ve written for courses in history, cinema, 
labor relations, pharmacology, theology, sports management, 
maritime security, airline services, sustainability, municipal 
budgeting, marketing, philosophy, ethics, Eastern religion, 
postmodern architecture, anthropology, literature, and public 
administration. I’ve attended three dozen online universities. I’ve 
completed 12 graduate theses of 50 pages or more. All for someone 
else. You’ve never heard of me, but there’s a good chance that you’ve 
read some of my work. I’m a hired gun, a doctor of everything, an 
academic mercenary. My customers are your students. I promise you 
that. Somebody in your classroom uses a service that you can’t 
detect, that you can’t defend against, that you may not even know 
exists.
(Dante, 2010)
The previous chapter distinguished between two forms of plagiarism: 
prototypical plagiarism is a form of cheating, an act of deception in an attempt 
to gain unearned credit; patchwriting is a merging of sources which is not 
intentionally deceptive but is indicative of a developmental stage in learning 
the skills and techniques of academic writing. This distinction suggests that 
the causes of plagiarism are likely to resolve into two separate questions: why 
do students cheat? and what causes patchwriting? This chapter begins by 
addressing the ﬁ rst, with a review of the causes of academic dishonesty.

WHY DO STUDENTS CHEAT (BY PLAGIARISING)? 29
However, in practice the causes of these two types of plagiarism often blur 
together, in part because the distinction between dishonest and appropriate 
behaviour is not always clear for students: they perceive grey areas in which 
they are unsure of the expectations placed upon them; or they perceive ethical 
behaviour differently than staff do (Ashworth, Bannister and Thorne, 1997). 
Thus a writing strategy which a teacher sees as over- reliance on the language of 
a source (for example) may be caused either by a belief on the part of the 
student that the strategy is appropriate, or by a need to cut corners. The second 
half of this chapter thus conﬂ ates these two types of plagiarism and discusses 
the causes of strategies which exist in the shadowlands of academic writing 
practice. One issue – the role of culture/second- language status – falls under 
this category but will be discussed in Chapter 7.
Why do students cheat (by plagiarising)?
The research literature on academic ethics has demonstrated a variety of 
reasons why students engage in dishonest behaviour in general, and in 
plagiarism as a form of cheating in particular. A broad distinction can be made 
between two sorts of explanations: the reasons which impel students to cheat, 
and the reasons they feel can justify or excuse cheating behaviour.
The risk of negative consequences is a factor militating against cheating. 
Warnings that cheating will be punished (Davis and Ludvigson, 1995) and a 
belief that they are likely to be detected (Selwyn, 2008) makes students report 
that they are less likely to cheat. The perception that staff do not detect it was 
offered by students as a cause of plagiarism in LoCastro and Masuko’s (2002) 
study.
The penalties attendant upon detection have also been identiﬁ ed as a factor. 
‘I knew if I got caught nothing would happen’ was given as a reason for cheating 
in one study (Davis, Grover, Becker and McGregor, 1992: 17), and Bennett 
(2005) found that concern about penalties caused students not to plagiarise. 
However, McCabe and Trevino (1997) found the opposite relationship in their 
large- scale survey: severe penalties correlated with more cheating behaviour, 
not less. They suggest, though, that this may be because students who have 
cheated have paid closer attention to the penalties than those who have not, 
and indeed have possibly suffered them.
Having insufﬁ cient time has been identiﬁ ed as a cause of plagiarism (Locastro 
and Masuko, 2002) and cheating more generally (Franklyn- Stokes and 
Newstead, 1995), and this may be particularly true if students are working at 
paid jobs in addition to their studies (Bennett, 2005). Time management issues 
take other forms as well. The balance between the difﬁ culty of course content 
and the time allotted to it may leave students stretched. This can lead them to 
form study groups which unintentionally edge over the boundary into 

30 WHY DOES PLAGIARISM HAPPEN?
collusion, or to them feeling sufﬁ cient pressure to make deliberate cheating 
seem justiﬁ able.
Grades also exert a pressure; to attain a better grade is one reason students 
give for cheating (Franklyn- Stokes and Newstead, 1995) and having poor 
grades was found to correlate with a greater likelihood of plagiarising (Bennett, 
2005). This is, naturally, a factor which interacts with others: an ambitious 
student who has his or her sights set on top marks but feels a course expects too 
much in too little time may perceive unattractive alternatives: to cheat or to 
shed ambitions.
Some students feel less a part of the university, and more hesitant to subscribe 
to its values, than others. Another ﬁ nding from Bennett’s study (2005) was 
that the absence of ‘academic integration’ correlated with a greater likelihood 
of plagiarising. Alienation may be one effect of the commercialisation of higher 
education, the idea that ‘the discourse of “consumer” has partially replaced the 
discourse of “student”’ (Ashworth, Freewood and Macdonald, 2003: 258), and 
that in turn may lead some students to feel less of a vested interest in complying 
with academic rules and upholding standards.
The role of peers appears to be a mixed and complex one. McCabe and 
Trevino (1997) found that peer disapproval made it less likely that students 
would cheat, and that they were more likely to cheat if they thought their 
peers did, or if they were members of a fraternity or sorority (and a reasonable 
assumption is that the latter category entails the former). The students in 
Sutton and Taylor’s (2011) survey reported that they felt under pressure to 
share their work with friends, and other studies have found that friendship was 
seen as a good reason for letting a friend cheat (Davis et al., 1992; Franklyn- 
Stokes and Newstead, 1995).
Blum explains this in terms of the value university students have been taught 
to place on social relationships:
Students have been raised to be sociable, and they like to work together, to 
be in groups. One of the greatest forms of praise, which I heard over and 
over, is that someone is ‘really outgoing’. When young people spend time 
together living, studying, preparing, eating, partying, they are less 
concerned about tracing inﬂ uences from one person to another. After all, 
haven’t we told them since early childhood that one of the primary virtues 
is sharing?
(2010: 5)
Interestingly, though, while agreeing that ‘to help a friend’ was a reason to 
cheat, in the Franklyn- Stokes and Newstead study (1995), ‘peer pressure’ was 
not. This suggests that students see a distinction between an independent 
decision to help a friend, which is legitimate, and being pressured into doing 
so, which is not.
That implies that student views of cheating and appropriate behaviour are 
not always aligned with those of staff, and indeed that is the case. One aspect 

SHADES OF INTENTION 31
of this situation is that students report being unclear about what sort of 
behaviours are acceptable (Locastro and Masuko, 2002; Sutton and Taylor, 
2011; Yeo, 2007). Another is that students have different perceptions from 
staff. Norton, Tilley, Newstead and Franklyn- Stokes (2001) found a positive 
correlation between students’ self- reported behaviour with regard to acts 
which are legitimate behaviours but were strategic efforts to get a high mark, 
such as using polysyllabic words to impress the lecturer, and some cheating 
behaviours. It is possible that students see these acts as being on a continuum 
rather than belonging to two discrete categories, honest and dishonest.
This resonates with Ashworth, Bannister and Thorne’s (1997) ﬁ nding that 
students saw cheating and plagiarism as moral issues, but put their own 
interpretation on the morality, with the result that they believed that ‘some 
punishable behaviour can be regarded as justiﬁ able and some ofﬁ cially 
approved behaviour can be felt to be dubious’ (187). Thus, while cheating is 
real and is the cause of some plagiarism, much behaviour which staff wish to 
discourage is seen by students as something other than a deliberate ﬂ outing of 
the rules.
Shades of intention
Despite the fact that academics hold diverse views about which acts constitute 
plagiarism, a stable perception in academia is that plagiarism (however we 
conceive of it) is an act of serious wrongdoing, and one which is frequently 
condemned in strong language: ‘plagiarism is widely thought of as perhaps the 
most grievous academic crime’ (Rosamond, 2002: 167); Kolich quotes a 
colleague ‘in a rage of indignation’ as declaring ‘nothing is so vile or obscene 
as the insult of plagiarism. It’s the worm of reason!’ (1983: 144). This applies to 
researchers as well as teachers: ‘this crime refers to stealing someone else’s work 
or ideas, and passing it off as one’s own. For a researcher, this form of scientiﬁ c 
misconduct represents fraud of the worst order’ (Peh and Arokiasamy, 2008: 
965); ‘incidents of plagiarism . . . corrupt the souls of the perpetrators’ (Betts, 
1992: 289).
However, for students those perceptions may not be equally categorical, or 
equally strong. Students have unclear ideas about what they are and are not 
allowed to do with their sources. One implication of this is that those who 
know that there is an act called plagiarism which they are supposed to avoid 
may not understand how seriously it is viewed by their teachers and other 
gatekeepers. Relative newcomers to the academic community may produce 
textual plagiarism, and may even do so intentionally, but the intention may 
not be as extreme as to commit a soul- corrupting act. If plagiarism can be 
equated with a crime, as the quotations above suggest, it should be remembered 
that not all crimes are equally serious, nor the circumstances equally aggravated. 

32 WHY DOES PLAGIARISM HAPPEN?
What a teacher sees as the scholarly equivalent of murder, deserving ‘the 
academic death penalty’ (Howard, 1995) may be perceived by the student as 
being on a par with crossing against a red light: technically wrong, but not so 
very wrong.
Thus it is clear that the boundary between unintentional and deliberate 
plagiarism is not always sharply demarcated. The sections which follow 
describe causes which can explain plagiarism of both sorts.
Electronic media
The idea that the Internet and other forms of electronic communication cause 
plagiarism is one reason offered for the often- asserted claim that there has 
been a dramatic increase in the incidence of plagiarism. Like that claim, it is 
easier to ﬁ nd articulations of this idea than evidence to support it. As Ellery 
notes, while ‘a number of authors contend that this ease of access to information 
from electronic sources has contributed to the increase in student plagiarism at 
tertiary institutions in recent years. . . . . no empirical studies in this regard 
have been located’ (2008a: 607). In fact, one study of Internet plagiarism found 
students reporting approximately balanced use of the Internet and print 
sources for textual plagiarism (Selwyn, 2008; it must be noted that things 
change quickly on the Internet, and patterns of usage may have altered since 
that study was conducted).
The rise of Internet- based paper mills, sites where students can either order 
bespoke assignments written to the terms of their assignment, or download 
essays ‘off the rack’, has garnered a great deal of attention. In 2010, when the 
Chronicle of Higher Education published the account of a writer who earns a 
living producing assignments for students who cannot, or choose not, to write 
their own assessment work (quoted above), it provoked outraged reactions. 
However similar practices – handing in a ‘recycled’ paper written by a friend or 
older sister who took the course earlier, or commissioning a custom- written 
assignment from a bright fellow- student – predate the Internet and currently 
co- exist with electronically mediated plagiarism.
A reason frequently offered for the supposed popularity of the Internet as a 
source for less wholesale plagiarism is the sheer ease of it: the mechanics of 
copying and pasting are less labour- intensive in the computer age, and the 
wealth of material out there to be copied from is vast, and available at the click 
of a mouse, saving would- be plagiarists the effort of a trip to the library. While 
both these things are true, they only help explain those forms of plagiarism 
which are motivated by an intention to cheat, and can presumably only be an 
enabling factor. After all, typing material from a plagiarised source by hand 
may require greater effort than copying and pasting, but is still less strenuous 
than composing an assignment autonomously, and if it is easier for the student 

STRATEGIES AND SKILLS FOR READING, WRITING AND STUDYING 33
to ﬁ nd sources from which to copy, Google makes it equally easy for the teacher 
to ﬁ nd them.
However, a number of less direct relationships between electronic media and 
textual plagiarism have been demonstrated or plausibly suggested. Ellery 
(2008a) found that the preponderance of writers who plagiarised had done so 
from Internet sources. However, she also found that they were more likely to 
make notes from print sources than from electronic ones, and points out that 
note- taking requires some degree of engagement with the source text, while 
copying and pasting do not. It may not be cheating which electronic media 
facilitate, but an absence of the critical attention which, when present, leads to 
good source use.
The status of web- based texts may also be an issue for some students. At the 
very pragmatic end of the spectrum of potential problems, Ashworth, Freewood 
and Macdonald (2003) report a student who had a strong determination to 
avoid plagiarism but was worried that it was possible to plagiarise inadvertently. 
In this student’s view, avoiding plagiarism was all about providing references, 
and the referencing conventions for web- based materials are less straightforward 
than those for printed texts, making mistakes in referencing – and thus, as he 
saw it, plagiarism – more likely.
If it is more difﬁ cult to reference electronic sources than print ones, it is due 
in part to the fact that much of the information which is included in a 
conventional reference – author, title, date, page numbers – can be missing. 
Students may have a sense that a web page does not have the same proprietorial 
status as a book or research article (Bloch, 2001), and if so, they may be right. 
It is hard to argue that the multiple authors and editors of a Wikipedia article, 
people who are not credited in the article and may only be identiﬁ ed by 
pseudonyms if they are searched for, deserve acknowledgement for their 
unique creative work in the same way that Dickens does for Great Expectations. 
The hypertextual links among web resources contribute additionally to making 
‘the role of the author rather murky for students’ (Belcher, 2001: 142).
The special status of electronic texts appear complex and not always intuitive 
to teachers (Bloch, 2012); for example, photocopying an article and distributing 
it to a class may be allowed under ‘fair use’ rules while e- mailing an electronic 
version of the same article to the class may not. It is reasonable to think 
that students are no less likely to be puzzled by these complexities, and this 
may add to overall uncertainties about which sources to acknowledge, and 
how and when and why.
Strategies and skills for reading, writing and studying
Bennett (2005) found a relationship between poor study skills and self- reported 
plagiarism behaviour, and Ashworth, Bannister and Thorne (1997) suggest at 

34 WHY DOES PLAGIARISM HAPPEN?
least one mechanism for this: students may take notes as they read which 
inadequately distinguish between ideas from a source and their own thoughts 
on the source, so that when the notes are later used as a basis for writing, what 
are effectively unsignalled quotations from the source may creep into the 
student assignment. A similar explanation was implied by a postgraduate 
student in the UK in commenting on passages of repeated language in a draft 
of her MA dissertation:
if possible, you know, when I ﬁ nish all the writing and when I feel more 
conﬁ dent about what I’m writing I might be able to adapt some of them 
[extracts from the source] into kind of paraphrasing. . . . so I might be able 
to do that at the end, do the revision part.
(Pecorari, 2008a: 111)
For this student, copying source language into the dissertation was apparently 
a conscious and normal part of the writing process, and the time for formulating 
original wordings and paraphrases was during revision. However, it seems 
more than possible that when the time for revision comes around, the student 
may have lost sight of which chunks had been copied from the source and 
needed paraphrasing.
Paraphrasing from a source, summarising it, or in some other way 
reformulating it presupposes a number of things on the part of the student: it 
requires the time and willingness to do so and the awareness of what needs to 
be paraphrased. It also requires that the student have understood the source, as 
well as possessing sufﬁ cient linguistic resources to ﬁ nd an equivalent 
formulation. In other words, demands are made on the student’s skills in 
both reading and writing. Difﬁ culties at this stage in the process have been 
linked to textual plagiarism by a range of researchers. A participant in Shelly 
Angélil- Carter’s classic study of plagiarism worried that ‘if I put it in my 
own words then it’s not going to give the same meaning’ (2000: 98). Students 
who, rightly or wrongly, are not conﬁ dent of their abilities to understand 
the source, or to rephrase its ideas, have a strong motivation for repeating from 
it directly.
Learning the rules of the game
A distinctive feature of academic writing is that it is heavily intertextual; most 
academic genres make frequent reference to other, earlier texts. Avoiding 
plagiarism can therefore not be accomplished simply by avoiding using other 
texts at all; the challenge for novice writers is to learn to use sources, but to do 
so appropriately. However, this involves understanding a complex set of rules 
for source use, which many students report they lack. A respondent in 

LEARNING TO PLAY THE GAME 35
Ashworth, Bannister and Thorne’s study reﬂ ected on the early days of university 
study:
It’s difﬁ cult when you start out in academia. . . . So when I ﬁ rst started I 
was again unsure about what to do in terms of references and that sort of 
thing. So you could say that in some of my essays I did things wrong 
unknowingly because I didn’t reference it right. But that was something to 
do with my lack of experience in academia.
(1997: 192)
The process of learning how to use sources may be an uneven one, and along 
the way students may develop ideas and conceptions with which their teachers 
and other gatekeepers would not agree. Ellery (2008b) documented a range 
of such beliefs, including the idea that a source need only be cited once, and 
that quotation marks were unnecessary if the source of a quotation were 
named. A similar idea was expressed by a participant in another study:
As long as you give the source – showing it’s not your work – it’s OK 
even if you copy a paragraph – sometimes you modify more, other times 
less – depending on your circumstances. The key is you give source and 
show it’s others’ work or results, not yours.
(Flowerdew and Li, 2007: 453)
These students had ‘learned’ facts with which many gatekeepers would not 
agree; more widely agreed- upon rules are that quotation needs to be signalled 
by quotation marks (or offset margins or some other similar device) and that 
simply naming the source is not an adequate signal of quotation. If a source is 
drawn on multiple times in a text, it may require multiple mentions.
The ‘rules of the game’, what academic conventions say about how source 
use should be signalled, is a considerable body of knowledge (Chapter 4 
describes it in more detail). It is not surprising if students have misconceptions 
about it. It should be noted, though, that these ‘rules’ represent just one area 
of source use, the declarative knowledge of a set of facts.
Learning to play the game
Beyond the possession of facts, there is also a need for procedural and 
conditional knowledge: the ‘how to’ and ‘when to’ skills. A student who knows 
to place quotation marks around language repeated from a source does not 
necessarily know how to avoid quotation by paraphrasing, or when a quotation 
is more or less appropriate than a paraphrase. A piece of information frequently 
offered to students is that no citation is needed for information which can be 

36 WHY DOES PLAGIARISM HAPPEN?
considered common knowledge (Chapter 10 explores this idea in greater 
depth). However, a student who knows this fact may not have the skills to 
distinguish between an idea which is common knowledge and one which is 
not, and requires a citation.
Learning how to reference is, in the words of a student, a ‘hard- won 
competence’, and one he was not sure he had fully mastered. He was 
worried about his own ability to avoid plagiarism, ‘convinced that 
plagiarism can happen by accident. People can reference inadequately 
through lack of skill’.
(Ashworth, Freewood and Macdonald, 2003: 268)
Many students arrive at university without signiﬁ cant previous experience in 
the sorts of skills which are required to use and report sources according to 
academic conventions. This may be because their earlier writing experience 
has been with narrative and personal response tasks which did not require 
them to develop skills in citing sources (Bloch, 2001; Ellery, 2008a) or because 
they come from educational systems based on lectures and exams, with little 
or no assessment writing (Timm, 2007a and 2007b; Pecorari, 2008a).
With writing, as with any skill, possessing knowledge about how it is to be 
done is a necessary but not a sufﬁ cient condition. As anyone knows who has 
ever tried to master a complex skill such as riding a horse or playing tennis or 
driving a car, simply possessing declarative knowledge about the skill does not 
guarantee good performance. Indeed, if it did, coaches and teachers would not 
be needed. Their reminders of ‘keep your heels down’ or ‘don’t charge the net’ 
or ‘signal before pulling out’ would not be needed, at any rate. Novice riders 
need to be reminded to keep their heels down, but not because they do not 
know that they are supposed to, the reminder is necessary because they forget to 
do so, and one reason they forget is because they must simultaneously 
remember to do a number of other things, such as keeping their backs straight, 
their shoulders back, and their hands just above the horse’s withers. The 
reminders will be needed until these procedural skills have become automatised; 
i.e., until they can be performed automatically, without conscious thought.
Novice riders also often hear that they should ‘shorten up the reins’, and 
while the need for this reminder may also depend on the process of adjusting 
the reins not having been automatised, it may also be caused by a lack of 
conditional knowledge. It is not the case that reins should always be short; 
they should be relatively short when more control is needed, and longer 
when less is needed. Procedural knowledge is knowing when to apply the 
‘short rein’ rule. Thus students who understand what plagiarism is often still 
have difﬁ culty acting on that knowledge in order to avoid it (Breen and 
Maassen, 2005) and instructing students in good source use practices (i.e., 
providing declarative knowledge about how to use sources) can improve their 
performance, but it does not eliminate problems altogether (Ellery, 2008b; 
Klitgård et al., 2010).

LEARNING THE PARLANCE OF THE GAME 37
An additional layer of complexity arises because many of the issues around 
what can and cannot be done with sources are considerably more complex 
than keeping your heels down, or keeping your eye on the ball. A case in point 
is, again, the question of common knowledge. In writing handbooks and 
plagiarism guides it is easy to ﬁ nd the assertion that no reference is needed for 
common knowledge. However, what precisely constitutes common knowledge 
can be unclear to students and teachers both (Errey, 2002) – not because they 
are uninformed about the principles for good source use, but because the 
concept genuinely is complex and highly contingent.
If common knowledge is understood to mean facts that ‘everybody knows’ 
(as it is frequently deﬁ ned), then the onus is placed on the student to know 
what facts everyone else knows. If it is interpreted to mean knowledge which 
is held in common by the writer and the anticipated reader (Pecorari, 2008b) 
then the ability to make predictions about the information needs of the 
reader is required. The ability to predict the response of a speciﬁ c or 
hypothetical reader is central to good writing, but it is difﬁ cult to acquire. 
Questions like this, which cannot be answered with a simple, clear- cut 
rule, make it difﬁ cult for students to understand how they are to use sources, 
and, as Chapter 4 discusses, the act of including a reference in a new text 
so that the two ﬁ t together makes signiﬁ cant demands on the linguistic skills 
of the writer.
Learning the parlance of the game
Another expectation of academic texts is that they will be, well, academic in 
tone. Yet usually this does not come easily. As Bourdieu and Passeron have 
observed, academic discourse is ‘jamais pour personne, même pour les enfants des 
classes cultivées, une langue maternelle’ [never anybody’s ﬁ rst language, not even 
the children of the cultivated classes – translation mine] (1965: 18).
Imitation is a powerful source of learning, and the desire to acquire 
an academic voice leads writers to imitate those who have it. This can lead 
to a writing strategy which is often identiﬁ ed as plagiarism, patchwriting: 
‘copying from a source text and then deleting some words, altering 
grammatical structures, or plugging in one synonym for another’ (Howard, 
1999: xvii). Patchwriting is ‘a primary means of understanding difﬁ cult 
texts, of expanding one’s lexical, stylistic, and conceptual repertoires, of 
ﬁ nding and trying out new voices in which to speak (xviii). Sources of 
patchwriting may be
uneven reading comprehension: the student doesn’t fully understand 
what she is reading and thus can’t frame alternative ways for talking about 
its ideas. Or the student understands what she is reading but is new to the 

38 WHY DOES PLAGIARISM HAPPEN?
discourse. She merges her voice with that of the source to create a pastiche 
over which she exercises a new- found control.
(Howard, 2001: 1)
Another text- based strategy used by novice writers is a sort of academic- 
discourse cluedo: they observe the features of published texts and try to work 
out what underlying rules have led the writers to make the choices they have. 
For example, Ingridii, a postgraduate at a UK university, explained that she had 
worked out a guiding principle for knowing what needed a citation. If she 
reported an original ﬁ nding from a research article, a citation was needed. If, 
however, she reported something which she understood was ‘background 
information’ in that article – a category which seemed to include virtually 
anything in the introduction – no citations were needed (Pecorari, 2008a). She 
said that she had deduced this rule from what she read, and believed that this 
was how published writers in her ﬁ eld worked. Importantly, she added that she 
had been applying this rule in her own writing, and since her supervisor had 
not criticised her source use, she assumed the rule and her application of it 
were both acceptable.
This points to an additional issue in learning to do academic writing which 
can lead to textual plagiarism. Ingrid had drawn the wrong conclusions about 
how the authors she was reading had used their sources, because it is not 
usually possible to know how sources have been used simply by reading the 
text that cites them. In order fully to understand the relationship between a 
new work and the sources it has recourse to, it is necessary to conduct a 
comparison. However, that is not a normal approach to academic reading. 
Ingrid’s supervisor took part in an interview in which he looked at her writing 
side by side with her sources. He said in no uncertain terms that her source use 
was not acceptable, but, because he had not made a direct comparison before, 
he did not realise the writing strategy she had been using.
Karin, a lecturer at another university, recounted a story of a nursing student 
whose ﬁ nal dissertation was found to contain plagiarism. When confronted 
with it, the student ‘was completely shattered and said “I’ve been doing this all 
through my nursing training”’. Contributing to her shock was that staff had 
given her positive feedback on the high standard of language use in her writing 
assignments (Pecorari and Shaw, 2012: 156).
The knowledge gap that affects all readers about the way a text has used 
sources thus works to confuse the process of learning to write from sources in 
two ways. Inexperienced writers will take their cue from the way they see 
sources used, but only some aspects of source use are visible. Ingrid could see 
that in the research articles she read, mentions of other scholars’ research 
ﬁ ndings were followed by references. The rule ‘if you report someone else’s 
research ﬁ ndings, cite the source’ had been observed, and had left visible traces 
in the works Ingrid read, and therefore Ingrid could deduce the rule. However, 
some statements in the same articles were not accompanied by references. It 
may be thought that the statements which were not referenced did not need to 

LEARNING TO BE A PLAYER 39
be, for example, because they constituted original observations on the part of 
the authors. If so, another rule had been observed: ‘if you make an original 
observation, no citation is necessary’. But the observance of that rule left no 
visible traces about the logic underlying it, and so Ingrid had less information 
to work on, leading her to infer something different: some types of information 
require no citation, even if they come directly from a source.
The fact that some intertextual relationships are more visible than others 
creates a knowledge gap for teachers as well as for students. If a student cites 
relatively old sources, the teacher will be able to see that and comment that 
there are newer ones which should be cited. But if the student copies a 
paragraph from a source without citing it, provided the language is not 
suspiciously elegant or a poor ﬁ t for the surrounding text, it may not be obvious 
to the teacher that textual plagiarism has occurred. Unaware of the problem, 
the teacher cannot give negative feedback about the textual plagiarism, and 
the absence of critical comments about source use can cause students to assume 
that their source use is above criticism.
Learning to be a player
Learning a distaste for plagiarism is part of learning academic values and 
orientations, part of the process of academic acculturation. In Malcolm 
Bradbury’s classic campus novel Eating people is wrong, the central character, 
Treece, listens to a conference paper and recognises it as plagiarised, something 
which his ‘upbringing’ in the academy had trained him to regard as just 
not on:
Treece knew that Willoughby was getting all this from a book by Edmund 
Wilson, and he hoped that Willoughby was at least going to credit his 
sources (the ﬁ rst thing Treece had been told in the academic world, as a 
simple freshman, had been: a gentleman always credits his sources).
(Bradbury, 1959: 248)
A central theme in the novel is that, at the time Bradbury was writing, 
universities were only beginning to become the heterogeneous places they are 
today. Students – and they were indeed mostly gentlemen – could be assumed 
to arrive at university with good preparation for the academic literacy tasks 
with which they would be confronted. Today staff may assume that students 
know how to use sources, but the students themselves are much less certain 
(Love and Simmons, 1997).
In a much cited essay on the experience of coming to a US university from 
China, Fan Shen describes the shift in identity which English academic writing 
required, in order to follow

40 WHY DOES PLAGIARISM HAPPEN?
the dictum of English composition: ‘Be yourself’. In order to write good 
English, I knew that I had to be myself, which actually meant not to be my 
Chinese self. It meant that I had to create an English self and be that self.
(1989: 126)
Fully mastering the discoursal conventions for academic writing requires a 
shift in perspective and identity to become someone with an audience- 
appropriate message to convey and a sense of the forms in which academic 
readers are prepared to receive it. The process which brings about that change 
is a process of cultivating a new identity, a new self, as Fan Shen explained it, 
and it is a slow and gradual one, and the skills and proﬁ ciencies described 
above are necessary but not sufﬁ cient conditions for it to happen. A case study 
of a remedial writer in the US found that although she was aware to some 
extent of the implications of copying, her writing skills were not up to the task 
of producing an independent summary. As a result, she repeated parts of her 
source. However, she made some changes, in order to cause her reader to 
perceive her the way she perceived herself, as a serious academic writer, but 
one who was not yet fully successful: ‘If some parts from there I change a little 
bit, they know I’m not really that kind of student that would copy, ’cause 
another student would copy’ (Hull and Rose, 1989: 147).
Assessing the causes
Thus far this chapter has presented factors which have been identiﬁ ed as 
potential causes of plagiarism as if they were discrete phenomena with clear 
boundaries. In fact, they interact with and merge into each other. Students 
with weaker reading skills may feel motivated on the one hand to reproduce 
the language of the source because they understood it poorly and fear distorting 
it, and on the other hand are likely to have spent more time on the task of 
reading than stronger students, and therefore look for time efﬁ ciencies by 
borrowing language from the source. Students who have not yet acquired an 
academic identity may both experience difﬁ culties in producing the texts that 
are expected of them, and feel that the task of trying is not fully incumbent 
upon them as outsiders.
This blurring of boundaries is especially real with regard to the distinction 
between prototypical plagiarism and patchwriting. Students can have an 
awareness that reproducing part of a source is not best practice, and yet not 
realise that for many academics it is a violation of an ethical principle. The 
result is neither purely ‘innocent’ nor truly an act of conscious wrongdoing.
Understanding the causes of plagiarism is an important element in both 
prevention and response, and the distinction between deceptive and 
unintentional plagiarism is especially important, as the two acts deserve 

ACTIVITY 41
fundamentally quite different treatments. Students who intentionally attempt 
to circumvent assessment by deceiving the examiner about the origin of their 
work deserve, and should receive, sanctions. Responding to prototypical 
plagiarism thus involves recognising that the usual and desirable relationship 
between student, teacher and institution, in which all three are willing 
collaborators in the project of advancing learning, does not obtain, and 
invoking a disciplinary mechanism which presupposes a refusal on the part of 
the student to engage with the academic enterprise. On the other hand, 
students who engage with that project but do not know how to produce 
assessment work which meets the examiners’ expectations need to learn how 
to do so. Enabling that learning is the reason academic institutions exist. 
Responding to patchwriting is thus a matter for pedagogy.
Yet, despite the importance in understanding the causes of plagiarism which 
these fundamental differences imply, reaching that understanding is very 
difﬁ cult. This is illustrated by two symmetrical responses to student plagiarism 
often heard from teachers. Those who interpret textual plagiarism as having 
benign origins frequently say ‘they can’t have known’. Those who believe 
dishonesty is involved conclude ‘they must have known’. The deduction 
implied by ‘can’t’ and ‘must have’ is a token of the fact that any understanding 
of motivation is ultimately based on inference. This lack of certainty can be 
very frustrating for the staff who deal with plagiarism.
This uncertainty is something that teachers and other gatekeepers should be 
quite consciously aware of. An implication of it is that it is necessary to be 
extremely cautious in imputing that most dangerous of intentions, deception, 
to any writer. This idea is developed further in Chapter 3.
However, a reluctance to assume guilty intent does not mean that plagiarism 
can or should be shrugged off. An understanding of the causes of textual 
plagiarism is helpful in identifying an appropriate response, but a diagnosis 
of benign causes is not a reason to do nothing at all. Any textual plagiarism 
is potentially risky for the writer who produces it, and so there is a need 
to respond to it in a way which draws the student’s attention to the problem 
and to solutions. Outlining approaches to doing this is the task of Chapters 4 
and 5.
Activity
An interview study of teacher and student perceptions. Interview a teacher from 
your institution (but not necessarily from your department or unit) and ask 
these questions:
• What is your working deﬁ nition of plagiarism?
• Why do students plagiarise?

42 WHY DOES PLAGIARISM HAPPEN?
• Can plagiarism be unintentional?
• Ask about some of the speciﬁ c causes discussed in this chapter.
Next, interview a student at your institution (but not one of your own students). 
Ask the same questions. What themes emerge from these two interviews? 
What views do the teacher and student share, and what differences are there?
A note about interviewing. Several of the activities in other chapters ask you to 
conduct interviews as well, and it can be useful if you interview the same 
people each time (though by no means necessary).
Before you begin the ﬁ rst interview, establish ground rules. For example, do 
your interviewees want to be anonymous when you write up your answers? If 
you’re reading this book as part of a course, you may need to share your answers 
with others. What is the likelihood that your respondents may be recognised 
by someone else, from the responses they give, or from your description of 
them? Discuss this possibility with them and understand how they would like 
you to handle it. Are you able to offer your participants conﬁ dentiality and 
anonymity? If not, encourage them to answer your questions generally, 
without giving speciﬁ c examples of actual cases they have been involved in.
Questions for reﬂ ection or discussion
1 Think about a particular case of plagiarism you’ve encountered. Can you 
identify some of the factors which caused it? How did the student account 
for it? How closely did the student’s account match your own perceptions?
2 Of the causes described in this chapter, which have you encountered? Are 
there some which you believe to be more or less common among your 
students?
3 What types of evidence point to deceptive intention as a cause of plagiarism? 
Do they point only to deception, or can some of them indicate patchwriting 
as well?
4 If plagiarism is non- deceptive – that is, if the student did not intend to break 
rules – then he or she must have intended to follow the rules, but been 
unable to. Among the students at your institution, what factors might 
explain patchwriting?

3
How do we manage 
plagiarism?
Summary • Policy and regulation • Prevention • Detection • Response 
• Activity • Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection
Summary
This chapter explores universities’ approaches to plagiarism in the form of the 
policies and procedures used to address it, the ways in which it is discouraged, 
how it is detected and diagnosed by staff and how the university acts when 
potential cases of plagiarism are identiﬁ ed. The ‘quasi- judicial’ approach of many 
institutions and the frequent emphasis on the breaches of the rules is set 
against the limited measures taken to improve the use of source materials. 
The methods used by universities to detect plagiarism and the beneﬁ ts and risks 
of these processes are discussed. The actions taken when possible plagiarism 
is discovered and the challenges for staff and policy makers are described. 
The conclusions reached are that policies and procedures tend to focus on 
prototypical plagiarism but that there is a signiﬁ cant need to distinguish between 
this and patchwriting and measures for dealing with patchwriting need to be 
enhanced.
After reading this chapter you will have an understanding of the processes used by 
universities to manage plagiarism and their strengths and weaknesses which should 
enable you to effectively participate in their application and contribute to their 
enhancement.

44 HOW DO WE MANAGE PLAGIARISM?
The quotation immediately below describes teachers’ perceptions of a 
distinction between a police- like response to plagiarism and a teacherly 
one. The second discusses aspects of the latter. From your experience, 
which of these responses does plagiarism call for? What circumstances 
make one or the other more appropriate?
The ongoing issues for teachers in plagiarism detection generally 
relate to their roles and responsibilities. Some are disturbed that they 
are becoming more ‘plagiarism police’ than teachers, other are 
uneasy that the plagiarism administration takes focus away from the 
teaching and learning relationship. Yet others are concerned about 
the ways in which the issue of plagiarism in the universities is 
progressing – more towards a punitive and over- regulated outlook of 
education rather than a truly educative perspective. Some fear that 
the widespread use of electronic detection for plagiarism sends the 
wrong message to students and encourages them to seek ‘alternative’ 
technologies to subvert this process.
(Sutherland- Smith, 2008: 185–186)
A pedagogy for plagiarism and referencing needs to begin with 
negotiation of shared meaning around the intricate problems of 
deﬁ nition of plagiarism, in the context of the intensely social nature 
of language and cognition. It needs to move through the development 
of policy and demonstration materials as a reference point for 
practice and mediation within the curriculum. Finally, as the 
acquisition of academic discourses is often not supported by 
students’ prior literacy practices or approaches to knowledge, and 
such acquisition can of necessity only occur within the academy, an 
appropriate pedagogy needs to approach plagiarism and referencing 
constructively, and developmentally, as a way in to an understanding 
of the nature of academic discourse and the construction of 
knowledge.
(Angélil- Carter, 2000: 132)
The overarching purpose of this chapter is to describe the ways in which 
universities typically address plagiarism, in order to highlight the implications 
for teaching practice, as well as identifying problem areas which require 
awareness as a ﬁ rst step toward arriving at better practices. Presenting this 
description necessarily entails some generalisations, and it is clear that some 
will be a better ﬁ t than others for any individual reader’s institutional reality. 
The details of the speciﬁ c institution are important, though, since those are the 
ones teachers must follow. In the activity at the end of this chapter you are 

POLICY AND REGULATION 45
encouraged to ﬁ ll out this composite portrait by investigating the situation in 
your context.
Efforts to address plagiarism are part of a process which can be described as 
consisting of four stages: 1) regulation (i.e., the production of deﬁ nitions, 
policies and the establishment of procedures); 2) prevention, which often 
takes the form of information and/or warnings directed at students; 
3) detection, which was once a laborious ad hoc process but now has 
been automated and made a routine procedure at many universities; and 
4) a response to those cases of (possible) plagiarism which the detection process 
reveals. This chapter examines each of these four stages in turn, describing the 
features which commonly characterise them, and discussing the helpful and 
problematic aspects of each.
Policy and regulation
In the English- speaking world and in much of Europe it is very common for 
university- wide policies to deﬁ ne plagiarism and set forth the processes which 
are to be set in motion when a case of (suspected) plagiarism is found. Surveys 
of policies (Pecorari, 2001; Sutherland- Smith, 2010) have shown that while 
they vary in terms of level of detail, a common feature is that they tend to draw 
on legalistic language and describe processes in quasi- juridical terms, speaking 
of the ‘accused’, ‘due process’, and otherwise using terminology which is part 
of the legal system.
Policies typically include features such as deﬁ nitions (a selection of which 
were seen in Chapter 1); examples of speciﬁ c acts or types of texts which can 
be involved in plagiarism; details of the processes which staff should use to 
prevent it or (more commonly) respond to cases which arise; details of the 
processes to which students will be subject if accusations are brought against 
them; and the range of punishments which may apply to students who are 
determined to have contravened university rules by plagiarising.
The documentation relating to plagiarism is often part of larger policies on 
academic misconduct or academic ethics. These typically cover cheating 
behaviours not classed as plagiarism, such as bringing disallowed aids to an 
exam, or fabricating evidence of having taken part in a work placement. In 
some cases regulations about plagiarism and academic ethics generally are 
embedded in sets of broader regulations which cover behavioural issues such 
as whether, where and when alcohol and tobacco may be used on university 
premises, or even safety information and procedures.
Culwin and Lancaster (2001) distinguish between a proactive and a reactive 
stance toward plagiarism, and the tone in which many policies are written 
shows them to be primarily reactive, in that they set forth the rules and 
procedures which will be brought to bear upon offenders once a violation is 

46 HOW DO WE MANAGE PLAGIARISM?
suspected. When students are suspected of plagiarism, the stipulated procedure 
tends to be quasi- judicial. It is common to require that some or all cases be 
referred to a disciplinary board which will ultimately make the determination 
about whether a breach of rules has occurred. This has the effect of creating 
a structure reminiscent of a court of law, with the disciplinary panel taking 
on the role of judge and the staff member who made the accusation (and 
who may have been required to prepare a formal, written complaint, 
supplemented with evidence) in the role of the accuser. Other aspects of 
courtroom formalities are also typically present, such as the right of students 
to defend themselves against the accusations, and to have representation to 
help them do so.
The penalties for students who are found to have plagiarised vary enormously 
and range from warnings to the lowering of a grade to suspension to expulsion 
or the withdrawal of a degree. Less frequently there may be a stipulation that 
the student must attend a workshop or lecture on using sources appropriately. 
By formal policy or informal practice, some types of plagiarism are regarded as 
more serious than others, and the harsher penalties are reserved for more 
serious cases. Some policies, though by no means all, make an attempt to 
describe the characteristics of more or less serious types of plagiarism, and 
some advocate a tariff of penalties, a scale intended to facilitate consistently 
heavier penalties for serious cases and lighter ones for the less offensive cases 
(e.g. Carroll and Appleton, 2005).
What is worth noting is that university policies proscribe, rather than 
prescribing. They detail behaviours which are not allowed. If they touch 
upon the question of what students should do, it is typically to mention (often 
perfunctorily) the importance of acknowledging sources in order to 
avoid plagiarism. If they address academic values, it is through negative 
statements about the values which plagiarism is seen to erode, rather than 
positive statements about the values academic writing should pursue. 
Example 1.3 from Chapter 1 illustrates this tendency; it explains that 
‘plagiarism undermines academic integrity simply because it is a form 
of lying, stealing and mistreating others’. It is much less typical for policies to 
affront the matter from a positive perspective and explain (for instance) that 
providing references for claims facilitates the reader’s process of critically 
evaluating the claim, and critical and independent thought is an important 
academic value.
At one level this emphasis on prohibition rather than the positive is neither 
surprising nor problematic. Institutions must have rules, and any regulatory 
framework needs to contain the ingredients listed above: a deﬁ nition of acts 
which constitute transgressions and a set of procedures for handling them, 
including consequences for the transgressors. However, by treating plagiarism 
exclusively from this perspective, policies take a narrower view than that 
adopted by many teachers and students for whom plagiarism is an unsuccessful 
attempt to use sources, and one aspect of the complex task of academic writing. 
Hunt (n.d.) notes that

PREVENTION 47
Scholars – writers generally – use citations for many things: they establish 
their own bona ﬁ des and currency, they advertise their alliances, they bring 
work to the attention of their reader, they assert ties of collegiality, they 
exemplify contending positions or deﬁ ne nuances of difference among 
competing theories or ideas. They do not use them to defend themselves 
against potential allegations of plagiarism.
Abasi and Graves’ (2008) ethnographic study set in a university environment 
found that teachers had as their objective to introduce students to the ways 
of writing which were prized in their academic discipline. However, ‘the tone 
and authoritative stance of the university plagiarism policies created 
considerable anxiety that seemed to have distracted [students] from the more 
important aspects of academic writing’ (228). Thus, by virtue of this narrow 
perspective, policies are not only restricted in their applicability to prototypical 
plagiarism, they may draw attention away from patchwriting as well as good 
writing skills.
Prevention
While policies deﬁ ne rules and describe the consequences of violating them, 
material aimed at preventing plagiarism is typically presented to students in 
the form of guides, information sheets and resource pages, often on the website 
of a study centre or the university library. Efforts at prevention fall into two 
broad categories: warning and informing. Warnings draw on discourses of law 
and ethics, and attempt to deter plagiarism by categorising it as a violation of 
rules, as morally wrong, and as an act which can incur severe penalties.
A subcategory of warning strategies involves asking students to attest in 
some way that they will adhere, or have adhered, to the rules. This can come 
in the form of an honour code or code of conduct signed at the beginning of a 
course of study and/or an assignment cover sheet certifying the work as free of 
plagiarism.
Informative approaches tend to focus on knowledge about referencing. A 
typical example appears on the site of a Canadian universityiii. Headed ‘How 
not to plagiarize’, the two- page document (in its PDF form) begins with a 
quotation from the university’s regulations. It then proceeds, in three 
paragraphs written in an informal and accessible style, to make the connection 
between disciplinary offences and documenting sources, raising the subjects of 
the reasons sources are cited in academic writing and referencing conventions. 
This is followed by ﬁ ve bullet points which pose common questions about 
source use and then answer them. The last of these questions is ‘so what exactly 
do I have to do to document?’ and the 440- word answer offers three categories 
of material that need referencing and examples of how to produce mechanically 

48 HOW DO WE MANAGE PLAGIARISM?
correct references according to various common formats. Links to further 
information are also provided.
What can be noted about these prevention strategies is that they all have the 
intended effect of raising student awareness of plagiarism as an issue. All other 
things being equal, awareness should be a positive ﬁ rst step in educating 
students to avoid plagiarism, and there is some evidence to suggest that this is 
the case. A survey of students before and after the introduction of a university 
policy requiring the use of cover sheets (Sims, 2002) found that students 
became more critical in their attitudes toward various acts identiﬁ ed as 
plagiarism, and this may indicate that they also became less likely to engage in 
those acts.
These approaches to prevention are thus not bad in and of themselves, but 
they have limitations which mean that they are also not sufﬁ cient. If a student 
is not certain what plagiarism is (and as Chapter 1 showed, even their teachers 
frequently are not), signing a cover sheet certifying an assignment to be free 
from plagiarism shows little more than good intentions. There is also a question 
about how many students are reached by warnings. Because plagiarism is 
characterised as a norm- defying behaviour, students who perceive themselves 
as honest and rule- abiding may not see that warnings apply to them. The more 
strident the warnings, the greater the risk that students who have no 
transgressive inclinations will tune out.
Yet another important limitation is that measures such as the ones described 
above provide only declarative knowledge about plagiarism and source use. 
Yet as was seen in Chapter 2, the ability to use sources effectively and 
appropriately also requires procedural and conditional knowledge. These 
approaches to prevention can at best hope to keep students from daring to 
plagiarise and from being unaware that acknowledging sources is important. 
They cannot aspire to provide a cure for patchwriting.
Detection
While plagiarism is nothing new, the way it is detected has undergone a 
revolution. As recently as the mid- 1980s an academic could describe the 
detection process like this:
There is, ﬁ rst, the moment of suspicion, reading along in a student’s paper; 
then the veriﬁ cation of the hunch, the tracking down of the theft, most 
exhilarating when it involves a search through the library stacks; then the 
moment of ‘confrontation’ when the accusation is made and it is no 
longer the student’s paper but his face which is read for signs of guilt, 
moral anguish, contrition, whatever.
(Hertz, 1985: 148)

DETECTION 49
Today, though, the hunt for sources which indicate plagiarism increasingly 
dispenses with the ‘search through the library stacks’ and involves text- 
matching software, products which are often referred to somewhat inaccurately 
as ‘plagiarism- detection tools’. Teachers who use such products upload, or 
have their students upload, assessment work to a server. The student work is 
then compared to other texts from which it may be plagiarised. Comparisons 
are typically carried out against texts from three sources. One is anything on 
the open Internet; that is, web pages which are freely accessible, not password- 
protected, and do not require a subscription to access. Another is student work 
submitted at the same time or earlier. Assignments which are submitted 
become part of the service’s database, and therefore become part of the pool of 
potential sources for the next round of uploaded assignments. Finally, if the 
service provider has reached an agreement with closed databases or publishers 
of materials such as electronic books or academic journals, those will be 
compared. After the process of comparison has been completed, the teacher 
and/or the student receives a report saying whether the assignment was 
matched to any possible sources, usually showing the source(s) identiﬁ ed, and 
providing some sort of quantitative measure of the number of words shared by 
the student assignment and the putative source(s).
The advantages these products are said to offer range from helping maintain 
educational standards to saving teachers time to improving the quality of 
student work itself. The website of one such product, Turnitin, says that it 
‘improves the student writing cycle by preventing plagiarism and providing 
rich feedback to students’ (Turnitin, n.d.). A competitor states that ‘URKUND 
is an excellent way of adding to the quality assurance of an education’ and that 
‘The teachers do not have to manually check documents for plagiarism or track 
down sources. Instead they save valuable time’ (URKUND, n.d.).
There is no doubt that a computer can compare texts to each other much 
more quickly than a human can, so if there are comparisons to be made, 
there are also potential time savings. Or to turn it around, since time is less of 
the essence, more comparisons can be made. In the days when identifying the 
sources of a plagiarised work meant hunting through the library, it was done 
only when a suspicion had arisen. Automatising the process of comparison 
means that those teachers or institutions which use comparison software 
frequently run routine comparisons of all submitted assignments.
However, these products, like all things, have the defects of their merits, and 
these are compounded by unrealistic expectations on the part of the users, or 
by the law of unintended consequences (Hayes and Introna, 2006). While the 
automatised comparison of texts is far more systematic and quicker than a 
manual comparison could be, the process is not fully automated (nor could it 
be). Work needs to be uploaded for comparison; reports need to be downloaded; 
work found to have matched one or more possible sources must be checked by 
the teacher, who needs to decide whether the relationship is an appropriate 
one. Despite considerable efforts on the part of their producers, comparison 
tools cannot always distinguish between language which has been copied 

50 HOW DO WE MANAGE PLAGIARISM?
without acknowledgement and language which has been signalled as 
quotation; this is a task for the teacher. In these and other ways, comparison 
tools require the expenditure of teacher time. In an analysis of the use of such 
products, Culwin and Lancaster conclude that
Any department considering the introduction of a pro- active policy [using 
text comparison tools] must take care to compare the costs incurred, 
primarily valuable staff time, with the beneﬁ ts obtained, mainly ensuring 
that only students doing their own work receive academic credit.
(2001: 39)
Text- comparison tools are not magic bullets, then, so the choice to use them or 
not involves a cost- beneﬁ t analysis. The potential beneﬁ t identiﬁ ed above – 
making sure that credit is only received where it is due – depends on the 
effectiveness of the tools both at identifying plagiarism and at deterring it. In 
a multi- year study of plagiarism rates at a university which was implementing 
a text- comparison tool, detection rates were found to fall in the second year, a 
ﬁ nding which the authors suggest indicates the tool was having a deterrent 
effect, although the authors acknowledge that the decrease was not statistically 
signiﬁ cant (Badge, Cann and Scott, 2007). However, they also note that the 
product they tested ‘does not always detect copying from peer- reviewed 
subscription journal articles’ (437) and this is often the case. Other sources 
which comparison tools will not ordinarily access include ‘paper mills’ or 
‘cheat sites’ which sell assignments to students, and which do not allow access 
to the content until the fee has been paid.
‘False negative’ results (that is, a report suggesting that an assignment was 
entirely ‘original’ when it fact it contained textual plagiarism but the sources 
were not found) can also be caused because the comparison conducted is at the 
word level. A student who appropriates an idea for an assignment, or who 
writes a literature review by using the sources in somebody else’s literature 
review rather than conducting a proper literature search, or who inappropriately 
re- uses any of the many things which the deﬁ nitions in Chapter 1 said can be 
plagiarised apart from words, will not be detected.
Thus, while there are potential beneﬁ ts to using these tools, there are also 
limits on their utility. How do the costs weigh up? Culwin and Lancaster were 
quoted above as saying that the primary cost is teacher time, but there is also 
the cost of buying in comparison services, separately or in conjunction with a 
learning platform. Given the ﬁ nancial pressures under which most institutions 
of higher education labour, the ﬁ nancial costs can only be meaningfully 
weighed up by setting them against what else could be funded with the same 
money. To be good options, text- comparison tools need not only to provide a 
helpful means of providing some information about submitted work; the time 
a teacher spends using them needs to be more beneﬁ cial than if the same time 
had been spent on writing conferences, or offering an extra tutorial on 
source- use skills.

DETECTION 51
Another set of costs which must be weighed are the pedagogical ones: what 
lessons do we teach students when we use text comparison software? As already 
noted, some comparisons will result in a false negative result. If the work 
involved was deceptive plagiarism, then the student will escape the 
consequences, and that is unfortunate. The consequences are still more 
unfortunate if patchwriting was involved. As was noted earlier, students who 
feel uncertain that they know how to use sources often make their best effort 
and count on getting feedback if they got it wrong. If a text- matching tool 
discovers no problem, students will understand that to be conﬁ rmation that 
there really was no problem.
There may also be an effect by which feedback is lost. Before comparison 
tools existed, experienced teachers kept a weather eye out for potential source 
use problems when they read student work. Teachers who have outsourced the 
detection of plagiarism to software may assume that they no longer need to be 
concerned about detection, and may miss problems which should be caught.
The pedagogical lesson involved in routinely scrutinising all student work to 
see if it violates rules may also offer students a subtext not of their teachers’ 
conscious choosing. The teacher may intend routine checks to signal something 
like this: ‘the work of the honest students is so valuable to me that I will leave 
no stone unturned to eliminate the possibility that their accomplishments are 
tarnished by dishonest students’. However, the message received by students 
may be something entirely different; for example, that students are so dishonest 
as a group that their work is always and automatically suspect. An interview 
study asked about automated detection systems and got this response from 
one participant:
the student initially took this software to be an aid to student referencing. 
If work were to be scanned by anti- plagiarism software, that would make 
apparent the rules of referencing and would be beneﬁ cial to the student. 
But, on being told by the interviewer that the software was intended as a 
detection device rather than a pre- submission check for the student to 
ensure referencing was right, this led to change in attitude. He was shocked 
by the idea. It would distort the process of marking so that it would become 
policing of plagiarism rather than assessing the student’s grasp.
(Ashworth, Freewood and Macdonald, 2003: 269)
In fact, one possible message embedded in routine and systematic checking is 
that textual plagiarism is such a very bad thing that it outweighs any 
accomplishments on the part of the student, making it pointless to assess 
student work until the risk of plagiarism has been eliminated. Once again, that 
is a much more reasonable response to prototypical plagiarism than to 
patchwriting. If a student has purchased an essay from a cheat site, then there 
can be no meaningful assessment of it. But if a student has conceived of an idea 
and identiﬁ ed evidence and sources of information and fundamentally built 
an original structure but furnished it with paragraphs borrowed from the 

52 HOW DO WE MANAGE PLAGIARISM?
sources, then the patchwriting needs a response, but so do the aspects of the 
work which are positive.
A ﬁ nal lesson which may unwittingly be taught by the use of text comparison 
tools is that academics are inconsistent and unclear in their beliefs about 
intellectual property rights. As noted above, student work which is submitted 
to a comparison service ordinarily is added to the database and becomes a 
potential source against which future work is compared. The size of the 
database is an important selling point for these tools. Turnitin describes its 
database as ‘vast’, saying that it contains ‘over 250 million papers . . . Each day, 
the Turnitin student database grows by 150,000 papers’. Students who submit 
their work to Turnitin are therefore contributing to its ﬁ nancial success, 
without any ﬁ nancial consideration accruing to them. However, the choice to 
do so is rarely a free one for students; universities or individual teachers who 
routinely use text- comparison tools typically require submission to the service 
as a precondition for work to be assessed, and student requests that their work 
not be archived by the service after the comparison has been conducted have 
not always been respected (e.g., Glod, 2007). Any valid objection to plagiarism 
must be based on the idea that there is such a thing as an original creation, and 
the rights of the creator must be respected by, at a minimum, appropriate 
acknowledgement. To sacriﬁ ce the intellectual property rights of students in 
order to combat plagiarism is an oddly inconsistent position for academics to 
adopt.
Response
In responding to plagiarism teachers at many institutions are bound to follow 
procedures speciﬁ ed by policy. For example in Sweden, the regulations which 
govern higher education, and which have the force of law, stipulate that 
anyone who has a well founded suspicion that a student has attempted to 
deceive during the course of assessment must report that ‘expeditiously to 
the Vice Chancellor’ (HSF 1993: 100. Chapter 10, paragraph 9). Even if a 
teacher is not bound to follow a certain course of action, institutional support 
is likely to be available only for the type of response that ofﬁ cial policy speciﬁ es. 
It is therefore only possible to generalise about a response to plagiarism at the 
policy level.
At that level, though, many teachers feel dissatisﬁ ed or let down. Stipulations 
of ofﬁ cial policy may seem unrealistic, making it impossible or impracticable 
to follow them uniformly. In a response to a survey of plagiarism policies 
internationally, an Australian academic ﬁ rst described the policies in place at 
his university but then added ‘while the penalties seem very harsh, and they 
have been invoked, the way in which they are run depends very much on the 
level of the student in the system. . . . I would leave most of the issues . . . to be 

RESPONSE 53
dealt with by my tutors and not involve the university at all’ (Pecorari, 2001: 
232–233). This view was shared by the Australian teachers Sutherland- Smith 
interviewed, who said that it was better ‘if cases of plagiarism are handled by 
teachers and not through formal academic processes’ (2005: 93). In a North 
American study, Abasi and Graves found that
most faculty members complied [with policy] by copy- pasting a section 
from the university brochure or by incorporating the URL of the electronic 
version of the brochure in their course outlines. They did so, however, 
with a large degree of discomfort as they believed that including these 
admonitions about plagiarism interfered with their pedagogical goals.
(2008: 229)
Another respect in which teachers may feel unsupported by policy is at the 
point of deciding what action is needed and when. The usefulness of policy as 
a guide for action stands or falls on the strength of the deﬁ nitions of plagiarism 
associated with them. Deﬁ nitions, as noted in Chapter 1, are a common feature 
of plagiarism policies, but they are written in general and abstract terms. When 
teachers are confronted with student assessment work which may be 
plagiarised, they struggle to apply the deﬁ nitions, asking themselves questions 
such as whether someone else’s words have been taken and used, or whether 
similarities are coincidental; or whether an idea is common knowledge or 
requires a citation (Pecorari and Shaw, 2012). Whether the procedures speciﬁ ed 
in a policy need to be invoked depends in part on whether the teacher believes 
the offence of plagiarism as deﬁ ned in the policy has been committed, and 
crossing the gap between a theoretical understanding of the deﬁ nition and 
applying it in practice is difﬁ cult.
When a decision has been made to report a case of plagiarism, teachers often 
report feeling exposed. The additional work involved in detecting plagiarism 
and preparing a case for the disciplinary board can be considerable. If the 
teacher believes a student to be guilty of plagiarism – which is likely if a formal 
report was made – but the decision of the ethics board, academic standards 
ofﬁ cer or other relevant authority is different, then feelings of exposure can 
turn into frustration. Teachers may feel undermined or even victimised by the 
institutions they work for, and whose rules they were trying to uphold (Bretag, 
2004; Sutherland- Smith, 2005). There may also be a sense that the decision 
constituted criticism, implied or explicit, of their handling of the issue.
It is perhaps inevitable that many of these difﬁ culties should exist. The adage 
that hard cases make poor law may have a parallel here, at least as far as 
deceptive plagiarism goes. As a form of cheating, a violation of a rule which 
exists to protect certain institutional ideals, plagiarism will always be a ‘hard 
case’; that is, it constitutes a problem to solve outside of the usual mechanisms 
and processes of normal academic activity. If plagiarism cases occurred and 
were detected and reported only rarely, then the less than smooth working of 
the mechanisms to deal with it would have minimal impact in the large picture.

54 HOW DO WE MANAGE PLAGIARISM?
Most of the problems raised in this chapter come about, though, ﬁ rst because 
plagiarism is not a rare phenomenon, and second because it frequently occurs 
in a non- deceptive form. Patchwriting is the evidence of as- yet incomplete 
learning attainments, and as such it requires a pedagogical response. However, 
the institutional procedures typically in place are tailor- made for prototypical 
plagiarism, and ill suited for dealing with patchwriting. The problem is thus 
not primarily with the procedures themselves; problems arise when the 
procedures are applied to cases for which they are a poor ﬁ t. In order to deal 
effectively with patchwriting, a parallel set of measures with a focus on teaching 
and learning, rather than detection and punishment, are needed. Describing 
them is the task of the next two chapters.
Activity
A report on procedures and how they are explained. Start by reﬂ ecting on how you 
would handle a case of plagiarism if you discovered one. What do the policies 
and procedures at your institution say?
• If you think you know, describe what you understand to be the correct 
procedure, and then consult the relevant sources of information to see if 
your understanding was correct.
• If you’re not sure, ﬁ nd that information and then describe it.
Then consider these questions:
• Where and how was information about handling plagiarism available? How 
did you go about ﬁ nding it?
• How do the procedures speciﬁ ed match what staff actually do in your 
experience?
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection
1 This chapter characterised many plagiarism policies as engaging in a 
discourse of legality and/or morality. Is this true for your university’s policy? 
If so, what language supports that conclusion? If not, how would you 
characterise its tone?
2 If you have had the experience of reporting a case of suspected plagiarism to 
a disciplinary authority, what was the outcome? Were you satisﬁ ed with the 
outcome? Were there aspects of the case which you think were not fully 
understood by the body which made the decision?

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION OR REFLECTION 55
3 This chapter quoted a student as perceiving that text- comparison software 
was a ‘policing’ effort with which he was uncomfortable. Are there ways of 
introducing the use of such software to students without provoking that 
response?
4 In a report on a trial at her university using Turnitin, Emerson (2008) 
illustates the issues by drawing a parallel between the student experience of 
plagiarism and her experience with an aspect of crossing cultures. As a New 
Zealander travelling to the US, she struggled to come to grips with customs 
for tipping in restaurants, and despite her best efforts, knew that she did not 
always get it right. She considers what the same level of partial failure would 
mean for a student struggling with rules for source use:
Had I known that moral censure, personal and family shame, and failure 
to achieve lifelong dreams might ensue from a single error in grasping 
these culturally determined practices, then the stress would have been 
considerably higher. I wanted to be able to tip – it wasn’t that I didn’t 
care or didn’t try. But I sometimes failed out of frustration at my inability 
to grasp the complexities. If we had added to the situation a device that 
would unerringly detect every error I made, I would probably have 
taken the safe route (McDonald’s every day?) or tipped excessively at 
every possible moment.
(2008: 192)
 
For students learning to use sources, what is the equivalent of ‘the safe 
route’, the ‘McDonald’s every day’ option? If taking the ‘safe route’ causes 
students to avoid textual plagiarism, is it problematic if they follow it? Why 
or why not? Emerson implies that ‘moral censure, personal and family 
shame, and failure to achieve lifelong dreams’ might be the consequence if 
a student makes a mistake with plagiarism as she did with tipping. Is that 
too dramatic a view of the situation, or is it realistic?


Part Two
Managing plagiarism


4
What do writers need 
to know to avoid 
plagiarism?
Summary • Transparency • Effective source use • Plagiarism is no 
substitute for skill • Activity • Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection
Summary
This chapter explores patchwriting, i.e. the inappropriate use of sources resulting 
from limitations in the student’s knowledge or writing skills. The solution is to give 
the student the information he or she needs and the opportunities to develop and 
practice the skills required to use and cite sources appropriately. The principles that 
source use should be transparent to the reader and sources should serve as a 
necessary function in the text are discussed. Three aspects of transparency are set 
forth: reporting content from the source transparently; identifying the sources 
which have informed the new text; and indicating the source of the language used. 
Examples are provided to illustrate good and less good practices. While the use 
of the principles and practices provided should enable the reader to avoid 
plagiarism, it is acknowledged that further development will be required to enable 
the reader to develop the knowledge and skills required to become a proﬁ cient 
academic writer.
When you have ﬁ nished this chapter you will be aware of key principles and the 
speciﬁ c skills which apply to the use of sources and be able to convey that 
understanding to your students.

60 WHAT DO WRITERS NEED TO KNOW TO AVOID PLAGIARISM?
Consider the ideas expressed in the quotations below about successful 
and unsuccessful source use. Are they fundamentally in agreement or 
disagreement?
Quotation, paraphrase, incorporation, argumentation, inﬂ uence, 
and provision of support and authority: all of this is supposed to 
occur in citations, even while students acknowledge the point of the 
class for which the assignment is due, indicated that they have done 
class readings and more, and demonstrate that they have their own 
original perspective, different from everyone else’s, including the 
experts. References are where the academic action is, and quotation 
with proper citation is the proof that a student has joined the club. 
When students fail at some aspect of this daunting task – when they 
consult outside works but neglect to cite them correctly – they are 
accused of committing plagiarism. Even in the best of situations, 
this is a skill that cannot be learned without meticulous attention. . . .
(Blum, 2010: 40)
Immature poets imitate; mature poets steal; bad poets deface what 
they take, and good poets make it into something better, or at least 
something different. The good poet welds his theft into a whole of 
feeling which is unique, utterly different from that from which it 
was torn; the bad poet throws it into something which has no 
cohesion.
(Eliot, ‘The Sacred Wood’, 1920)
This chapter is concerned with the sort of plagiarism that occurs when a writer 
is willing to follow rules but unable to write in the way the rules prescribe, i.e., 
patchwriting. This sort of textual plagiarism is caused by limitations on the 
writers’ knowledge and/or skills, and the solution to it is to teach students the 
things they need to know, and the things they need to be able to do. In this 
sense, the problem is not really one of avoiding plagiarism but of learning to 
write well from sources, so that plagiarism becomes a non- issue. Although 
handling prototypical plagiarism, the deceptive kind, is not primarily the 
subject of this chapter there are nonetheless relevancies for it. Chapter 2 
showed that the causes for cheating include pressures which lead students to 
believe that there is no other alternative, and that justiﬁ cations for cheating 
can be found. Students who possess the necessary knowledge and skills to 
produce sound academic texts will, presumably, be less likely to feel that either 
the pressures or the justiﬁ cations apply.
The focus in this chapter is on what the writer needs to know (while Chapter 
5 addresses how it can be delivered). However, in a sense explaining all that a 

TRANSPARENCY 61
writer needs to know about using sources is an impossibly ambitious enterprise. 
To be able to write an academic text which makes appropriate and effective use 
of its sources, a writer needs to have identiﬁ ed sources which can inform the 
subject at hand, and have read and understood not just their content, but how 
they relate to the current topic, to each other, to the existing body of literature 
on the subject, and to key concepts in the area. The writer must then be able to 
construct a strong text with an original idea at its heart, and draw on sources 
which make relevant contributions to illuminating that idea. Depending on 
disciplinary practices this can involve an elaborate network of carefully crafted 
quotations, paraphrases and summaries or a spartan restatement of facts with 
straightforward numbered references, but in either case the writer needs both 
the disciplinary knowledge of what is required and the rhetorical abilities to 
deliver it. 
In short, to produce work characterised by appropriate source use, student 
writers need to become mature, experienced writers in their area of study, 
requiring subject- speciﬁ c knowledge and skills. While this speciﬁ c knowledge 
is something that can only be learned within the context of the subject 
curriculum, some general principles can guide that learning, and those are the 
focus of this chapter. The activity at the end of the chapter will add further 
detail to this picture from the perspective of the individual reader’s context. 
The application of these principles should shorten the student’s journey to a 
sound landing place. Once there, the student should have good preconditions 
for developing the skills and techniques of mature academic writing.
This description of the principles that underlie good source use and thus 
permit students to avoid plagiarism takes a conservative approach. Given the 
diversity of views which exist about what, speciﬁ cally, constitutes plagiarism, 
it is a virtual certainty that some readers will think this approach is too 
conservative, and will believe that it blocks the use of some writing strategies 
which are legitimate, at least in some circumstances. The rationale for 
approaching the question with an extra grain of caution is precisely this 
diversity of views. Students need to know what they can do to be safe from the 
accusation of plagiarism. Achieving that safety means remaining above all 
serious criticism. Producing work which a given teacher deems acceptable is 
not enough; students need the ability to write texts which no gatekeeper could 
reasonably call plagiarism.
Transparency
An essential principle guiding all appropriate source use is that the ways in 
which sources have informed the new text should be transparent for the reader. 
That is to say, the impression a reader forms about how sources have been used 
should be the correct one. A corollary of this principle is that it is the writer’s 

62 WHAT DO WRITERS NEED TO KNOW TO AVOID PLAGIARISM?
responsibility to make sure that transparency is achieved. The reasons for this 
lie in the nature of academic writing. While academic texts are meant to 
contain something that is original, they are not exercises in creative writing; 
the original contribution must be contextualised in the existing literature in 
the area. A piece of writing which failed to take note of what has already been 
done on a topic would be fundamentally unacademic. Thus academic writing 
is ‘multi- voiced’ – the voice of the writer is joined by the voices of the authors 
of the sources he or she cites, and the readers of academic texts need to be able 
to distinguish their individual contributions. As Groom puts it, ‘it is a 
conventional expectation among readers of all but the most playfully 
postmodern of Anglophone academic texts that it will be clear at any given 
point whose “voice” is “speaking”’ (2000: 15).
This creates the demand for transparency; the need for the writer to take 
responsibility for ensuring transparency comes about because so much about 
the ways that sources are used would be hidden from the reader’s view if the 
writer did not assume that responsibility. This can be illustrated with reference 
to the quotation immediately above. The fact that it is recognisable as a 
quotation at all is because of the devices used to signal it, which include 
quotation marks, the name of the author, a year identifying which of the 
author’s publications the quotation is from, and the number of the page on 
which it is found. If these were missing, few readers would be likely to 
understand that that paragraph drew upon any sources at all. (If any did, it 
would be because they had themselves read that source and retained a 
sufﬁ ciently clear memory of it to make the connection.)
Importantly, because the reader usually cannot see how sources have been 
used without the writer’s help, achieving transparency rests not only on the 
writer’s willingness and ability to signal the real relationships between the new 
text and its sources, it also depends on the reader’s ability to interpret the 
signals. Most readers will have drawn certain inferences about the end of the 
last paragraph but one: that the statement beginning with ‘it is a conventional’ 
and extending as far as ‘speaking’ appears in another work, worded in that 
way; that the author of the work was called ‘Groom’; that the work was 
published in 2000; that, if the reference list is consulted, full bibliographical 
details of the quoted work can be found; and that the quotation appears on 
page 15 of that book.
If those are the inferences you drew, you are correct, but they were inferences; 
the only way you could be certain would be to turn to the references at the end 
of this book, and, using the bibliographic information there, ﬁ nd the 
source and check. The noteworthy point is that the accuracy of the inferences 
depends on the use and understanding of rather compact signals. The ﬁ ve 
inferences listed above, which took 62 words to spell out, are actually 
signalled in the text by nothing more than a name, two numbers and a few 
punctuation marks. 
Readers may have drawn other inferences as well. The reference to Groom 
was the ﬁ rst citation to another source in this chapter, so if you stopped to 

TRANSPARENCY 63
think about it, you may have concluded that I am asserting that the other 
ideas up until that point are mine; that I am averring them, claiming them 
as true on my own authority, rather than attributing them to another author, 
to use Tadros’ (1993) distinction. Averral is the default assumption in 
academic writing, and is not explicitly signalled at all; the way we know a 
writer is averring an idea is that the writer does not use any signals to indicate 
attribution.
In this case the accuracy of the inference depends as well on a shared 
understanding of what it means for an idea to need, or not need, attribution. 
For instance, the idea that academic writing is ‘multi- voiced’ in the sentence 
preceding the quotation to Groom is one which I feel comfortable averring 
because I know it to be true, of my own experience, and not because I read it 
somewhere, although I have in fact read it somewhere; indeed, many places, 
and Groom’s work is one of them. My belief that I do not need to attribute that 
idea is based on an understanding that this is a widely accepted fact which has 
been noted proliﬁ cally in my professional literature, and is indeed merely a 
speciﬁ c instantiation of the fact that most texts are multi- voiced in the sense 
that they have intertextual features, as noted by Bakhtin (e.g., 1986) and 
Kristeva (e.g.,1980), among many others.
My conclusion is that while there are very many names that could be 
cited for the assertion that academic texts are multi- voiced, the reader would 
not be well served by a list of them, and the principle of transparently 
revealing my sources does not require me to cite them, because none of 
them is directly the source of my assertion: the source of my assertion is my 
conﬁ dent understanding of the nature of academic texts. This conclusion is 
based partly on my reﬂ ections about the sources which have inﬂ uenced me, 
but also partly on my interpretation about where the boundary between 
that which can be averred and that which must be attributed falls, and it is 
possible that some readers may not agree with me. However, without this 
detailed explanation, it is likely, again, that few readers would be aware of the 
question at all.
The purpose of this excursion into a speciﬁ c example of my own citation 
practices is to illustrate one source of difﬁ culty in putting the principle of 
transparency into practice: some of the decisions which must be made are 
highly subjective. This means that the decision I made is not necessarily the 
one another writer would have made. How challenging is the decision- making 
for a novice academic writer, who is equipped with less experience as well as 
less conﬁ dence?
Compounding that challenge is the issue noted above, that even where the 
nature of what is to be signalled is more straightforward, the signals used are 
small, and compress a great deal of meaning into small symbols, and require 
interpretation, and all of this means that even when a writer makes a good- 
faith effort to reveal the ways that sources have inﬂ uenced the new text, there 
is room for the signals to be given imprecisely by the writer, or interpreted 
incorrectly by the reader.

64 WHAT DO WRITERS NEED TO KNOW TO AVOID PLAGIARISM?
Example 4.1a
Evaluation of a degree programme may be conducted at several different 
levels – at the level of ‘a single teaching episode, at the level of a set 
of teaching episodes, at the level of a course section/unit, or at the 
level of the total course.’ (Pyle and Sayers, 1980). This study is 
principally concerned with the last level, and the style of evaluation 
employed might be broadly described as illuminative. (Parlett and 
Hamilton, 1972).
Example 4.1a, written by an MA student at a UK university to introduce 
the work she intended to undertake for her dissertation, illustrates that 
the relationships signalled by student writers can in fact be misleading. The 
student appears to combine averral with attribution to two sources, and only a 
relatively small part of the paragraph is signalled as quotation. A reasonable 
interpretation of the inﬂ uence her sources have had on her work is that the 
large idea that different levels or aspects of education can be evaluated comes 
from Pyle and Sayers, while the part that is not signalled as quotation is her 
own wording. In the context of a description of proposed research, ‘this study’ 
may be understood to refer to the student’s own research, and thus the 
statement that it ‘is principally concerned with the last level’ would be an 
averral, a statement of the intention she has herself developed for her project. 
The reference to Parlett and Hamilton at the end of the sentence may suggest 
that they use the term ‘illuminative’ for the sort of evaluation she proposes.
In fact, as Example 4.1b (taken from Pyle and Sayers) shows, many of these 
assumptions are wrong. The entire paragraph comes virtually verbatim from 
Pyle and Sayers, and the reference to Parlett and Hamilton is also taken from 
them. The comment about ‘this study’ which appeared to be an averral also 
comes from that source, though in the original context it referred to Pyle and 
Sayers’ study. 
Example 4.1b
Evaluation of a degree programme may take place at several different 
levels – at the level of a single teaching episode, at the level of a set of 
teaching episodes, at the level of a course section/unit, or at the level of 
the total course. This study is principally concerned with the latter two 
levels, and the style of evaluation used might be broadly described as 
illuminative (Parlett and Hamilton, 1972).

TRANSPARENCY 65
In an interview about her source use, the writer who produced Example 4.1a 
made frequent reference to the rules, as she understood them, governing 
source use, and what she believed was required and prohibited. Getting her 
source use right was very much on her mind. However, if she had asked a 
different set of questions – not ‘What am I required to do to avoid plagiarism?’ 
but ‘What is the best way to help the reader understand what I’ve done?’ – it 
might have been clearer to her that her referencing was misleading.
The principle of transparency, along with the reasons why it is needed, and 
why transparency can be so hard to achieve, are things that students need to 
learn. In addition, they need to learn how to achieve transparency with respect 
to three features of source use: the content reported; the identity of the source 
used; and the source of the language in which the content is transmitted.
The identity of the source
The broad principle of transparency says that the reader should be able to 
understand how sources have informed the new text. As far as the identity of 
the source, this means that they should understand which sources have had an 
inﬂ uence. In simplest terms this amounts to saying that writers should 
acknowledge their sources.
The primary means by which this is done is through some form of in- text 
reference. These, of course, come in many shapes and sizes. Two different 
systems were illustrated in Examples 1.4 and 1.5 in Chapter 1, and many others 
exist; for example, version 3.0 of the Zotero referencing tool offers a menu of 
12 styles according to which references can be prepared, including those of the 
American Psychological Association (APA), the Modern Language Association 
(MLA) and the Harvard system. Student writers are often asked to adopt one of 
these conventions, particularly when presenting works which, like dissertations 
or theses, are expected to reach a relatively high level of formal precision.
Students are often concerned about getting the technical details of these 
referencing conventions right, and the ‘how not to plagiarise’ information 
which many universities offer to students frequently describes these systems 
and the differences among them in great depth. This may be because the details 
of referencing systems are thoroughly described (in some cases, exhaustively: 
the sixth edition of the APA Publication Manual runs to 290 pages, a signiﬁ cant 
proportion of which, approximately 55 pages, is dedicated to in- text 
referencing, reference list entries, and other aspects of documenting source 
use). This detail offers a seductive appearance of order and certainty which 
students and teachers crave.
However, it is important to keep in mind that the details of citation 
conventions are nothing more than the mechanics of referencing (see also 
Jamieson, 2008, for a discussion of this point). Getting the mechanics right can 
be important, but it is a lower- order question than the principle behind the 
reason the references are there at all, i.e., to ensure that the inﬂ uences on a text 
are signalled for the reader to see. Making a mistake about the mechanics of a 

66 WHAT DO WRITERS NEED TO KNOW TO AVOID PLAGIARISM?
reference will at worst make the work look sloppy; failing to identify sources 
which have materially inﬂ uenced the new work can on the one hand deprive 
the work of the beneﬁ ts of effective source use, such as showing that the writer 
is aware of what has been written on the topic, and may on the other hand be 
diagnosed as plagiarism.
Although the principle that sources should be acknowledged is a fairly 
straightforward one, inexperienced writers have difﬁ culty with some aspects of 
it. An issue which is the source of many student questions is second- hand 
citation. For example, while preparing an assignment, the writer reads a work 
by Jones; Jones quotes Smith on a point which the writer wants to cite in her 
work. Students are often unsure how to do this, and frequently resolve the 
matter by citing one or the other of the sources: the original and not the work 
which cites it, or the other way around (the writer in Example 4.1b above did 
the latter).
There appears to be consensus that second- hand citation is relatively 
undesirable. One good reason for not citing sources indirectly is to avoid 
starting a round of the academic equivalent of the birthday- party game 
‘whispers’ (the ﬁ rst person whispers an idea into the ear of the person sitting 
next to her, and so on, and by the time the message comes full circle, the 
cumulative effect of the small distortions which were introduced along the 
way is seen to have changed the message radically). The best alternative under 
ideal circumstances is to consult the original source, in which case it can be 
cited directly. 
However, going back to the original is not always practically possible. 
The original may be a book which is checked out from the library or an article 
from a journal to which the institution does not subscribe, so that by the 
time it is ordered and arrived the deadline for the assignment has passed. 
The principle of transparency suggests that the best solution in that case is 
to use the idea, but to cite it in such a way that the reader understands 
which sources have actually been used (e.g., ‘Smith, as cited in Jones’). In 
that way the reader is aware of the ‘chain of custody’ of the idea, and in 
evaluating it can take into account the fact that Jones may have distorted 
Smith’s idea.
Another potential problem area related to source identity is the ability to 
gather bibliographic information in order to report the correct information 
about the source. For example, students who refer to a chapter in an edited 
volume (or anthology) often cite the editor of the work, rather than the author 
in question. Example 4.2, also from a draft of an MA dissertation, does precisely 
this (as well as other things which violate the transparency principle). In this 
example (and elsewhere) she cites Fullan and Hargreaves, who were the editors 
of the collection but not the authors of this paper. At one level this is a fairly 
trivial matter, a mistake which, if made, can easily be corrected. At another 
level, though, it may be symptomatic of larger problems in understanding the 
relationship among scholars working within a ﬁ eld, and thus, potentially, the 
relationship among ideas. Using this approach it would be possible, for example, 

TRANSPARENCY 67
for a writer to cite diametrically opposed ideas from two different authors in the 
same collection and attribute them to the same person, the editor.
Example 4.2
Student
An interesting characteristic of culture as Fullan and Hargreaves put it, 
questions the concretness [sic] of the above deﬁ nition, as they both claim 
that culture is invisible. However, they do take the argument even further 
to explain that culture is indeed invisible ‘but it is made visible only 
through its representation’ (Fullan and Hargreaves, 58–60).
Source
‘Culture is not itself visible, but is made visible only through its 
representation’ (Van Mannen, 1988:3). Culture is constructed reality. It 
is known by its representation.
To avoid this problem and be able to identify the relevant information about 
sources, students need to be familiar with the various forms of academic 
publications, such as journal articles, monographs and anthologies. This is also 
necessary in order to be able to satisfy the requirement at the purely mechanical 
level for giving different sorts of bibliographic information for different types 
of sources. Once that familiarity is gained, though, it will also help students 
understand the roles that various actors play in creating them, and what that 
implies for the relationships among works of various types. For example, while 
the papers in an anthology are typically linked by a very tight theme, the 
papers in any given issue of a research journal (unless it is a themed issue) are 
related only by being examples of work within the same broad subject area. 
Journal articles are generally published more expeditiously than books, so 
research journals are a good place to look for the latest research ﬁ ndings.
It has been suggested (e.g., Belcher, 2001; Bloch, 2012) that the increasing 
prevalence of electronic texts, the Internet as a source of information and, 
concomitantly, hypertext, leads to a situation in which authorship may be 
increasingly masked, especially for inexperienced academic writers. If so, 
identifying the identity of sources will become more of a problem over time, 
rather than less.
A further issue which novice writers in particular ﬁ nd problematic is 
understanding which sources inﬂ uenced them directly enough to require 
a citation. A typical question, and one which reveals a sophisticated 
understanding of the problem of writing from sources, is along the lines of 
‘I’ve read a lot. How do I really know which sources have inﬂ uenced me?’

68 WHAT DO WRITERS NEED TO KNOW TO AVOID PLAGIARISM?
The most relevant point about this question is that there is no possible answer 
which is categorically and unproblematically correct. There are, however, good 
processes and strategies for trying to ﬁ nd the best possible answer. At the 
pragmatic end, good note- taking strategies require writers to articulate more 
consciously what they have learned from which sources. Some understandings, 
though, come not from reading fact A in source X, but from having read widely 
and pieced together facts and views in new constellations. This is in fact the 
best- case scenario, the intended purpose of reading one’s way into a new topic.
As the discussion of multi- voiced texts earlier was intended to indicate, this 
is not a question which has a single right answer. It is a question about which 
the writer must reﬂ ect and reach a decision. This can be frustrating: imagine 
learning to speak Spanish or do quadratic equations, and attempt an exercise 
and not be able to check whether the answer was right. However, the process 
of getting to the best possible answer, of reﬂ ecting on the reasons for or against 
doing it this way or that, raises awareness of the principles which underlie the 
decisions and is therefore beneﬁ cial in itself. 
Content from a source
The aspect of transparency which regards the content of the source has two 
strands to it. The ﬁ rst is that content which derives from a source must be 
reported accurately. This is not a conceptually difﬁ cult principle, but it throws 
up a number of practical problems. In order to report the propositional content 
from a source accurately, students must, obviously, understand it. However, 
the sort of reading which students do at university level is often challenging 
(and indeed is intended to be, and should be). Further, a thorough understanding 
of an academic text requires understanding of how the ideas it treats are 
positioned in relation to others in the same ﬁ eld. Are the ideas it presents 
established, or does it challenge the received view? Is it a logical outcrop of 
earlier developments reported in earlier texts? This understanding requires a 
degree of experience which develops slowly, and which new members of a 
discourse community cannot be expected to possess.
Another aspect of transparently reporting content is presenting it in terms 
which tell the reader how it is to be interpreted and used. In Example 4.3 a 
proposition attributed to Weber is introduced with ‘argues’, while Krippendorff 
‘suggests’ a different idea. These two verbs convey fundamentally different 
messages about how the source authors regard the reported ideas. Suggesting 
that something is true leaves open the possibility that it also may not be, and 
this degree of hesitance is conﬁ rmed later in the example: thematic units ‘may 
be preferable’.
‘Argue’, though, carries a different message. First, it gives the impression that 
Weber’s commitment to the proposition is greater than Krippendorff’s, because 
Weber is prepared to put up an argument to defend it. Second, it classiﬁ es the 
proposition as something contentious: there is no need to argue for something 
which everyone accepts. 

TRANSPARENCY 69
Example 4.3
Weber (1990, p. 37) argues that word categories inferred from covariation 
among high- frequency words are more reliable than themes. However 
Krippendorff (1980, p. 63) suggests that for many content analyses, 
thematic units, requiring user judgment in the determination of the 
hidden messages conveyed in the narratives, may be preferable despite 
difﬁ culties in application which have restricted the use of this approach 
to content analysis in practice.
By selecting ‘argues’ in one case and ‘suggests’ in the other, the authors of the 
research article from which this example was taken have made a meta- 
commentary on the content, but it is one where accuracy is at least as important; 
to portray an author as having a strong commitment to an idea which he or 
she only puts forward tentatively, for example, would be as serious a distortion 
of the source as confusing the facts reported in it.
Reporting verbs not only can indicate what the author thinks of the cited 
propositions, they allow the writer to evaluate the proposition as well (Thompson 
and Ye, 1991, call these ‘author stance’ and ‘writer stance’ respectively). If the 
source ‘notes’ something, that indicates that the writer agrees with it, while 
‘states’ or ‘says’ withholds this positive evaluation, and words like ‘confuses’ 
indicate that the writer thinks the source author was wrong. 
In fulﬁ lling the responsibility to report source content transparently, then, 
writers need not only to be able to understand the source and convey ideas 
from it in such a way that the propositional content is not distorted, they must 
also be able to use reporting language in such a way that what the author and 
the writer think about the content emerges clearly and (in the case of the 
author’s evaluations) accurately.
The source of the language
In reporting material from a source, writers have two choices, to quote it (i.e., to 
repeat it verbatim and accurately) or to paraphrase, conveying the idea in an 
original wording. In fact, some researchers in this area distinguish a third option, 
summary. If this distinction is made, summary is used to indicate a greatly 
condensed retelling of the large themes in an extended part of the source text, 
while paraphrase is reserved to indicate a rewording of a speciﬁ c idea. While this 
distinction is a valid one, both involve some fundamental transformation of the 
language of the source while staying faithful to its idea, so for the sake of 
simplicity, ‘paraphrase’ will be used here for both sorts of rewordings.
Here too there are some relatively straightforward principles to do with the 
mechanics which students need to know. These include the ways that minor 

70 WHAT DO WRITERS NEED TO KNOW TO AVOID PLAGIARISM?
changes can be made to quotations, such as the use of an ellipsis (. . .) to signal 
words which have been omitted and square brackets to show that a word has 
been changed. Other conventions include the need to give a page reference for 
quotations (in APA style, preceded with ‘p.’ but not in MLA style) and the use 
of quotation marks for shorter quotations, while longer quotations are 
separated from the main text and have narrower margins. 
However, here too the mechanics are of less importance than the principle 
that the reader should be able to make the right inferences about where the 
language in a text comes from: is it the writer’s, or the source’s? (This principle 
can also be seen to shape the mechanical rules. For example, not only must 
words removed from a quotation be signalled with an ellipsis, if they are 
removed, it should not have the effect of distorting the meaning, so that the 
reader gains a misleading impression of what the original said.)
The challenges in realising this transparent relationship are, logically 
enough, related to language use. Quotation tends to be less problematic, 
although introducing a quotation so that it ﬁ ts smoothly into the text around 
it presents certain rhetorical difﬁ culties. However, paraphrasing poses a 
linguistic challenge of the highest order: the writer must be able to encapsulate 
an idea (and, in academic writing, possibly a complex and difﬁ cult idea) in 
language which is both grammatically correct and appropriately academic 
sounding, without distorting the meaning of the original. 
The distinction between paraphrase and quotation is a distinction between 
two discrete categories; it is not a distinction between two points on a 
continuum, with other legitimate strategies in between. However, when writers 
lack conﬁ dence in their abilities to produce accurate and appropriate- sounding 
representations of the ideas in their sources, they often adopt a strategy that is 
neither quotation nor paraphrase. In Example 4.4 much of this passage from a 
student text is worded in the same way as the student’s source, but she has 
made some changes: for example, ‘has increased signiﬁ cantly in recent years’ 
becomes ‘has recently been increased’. This fails to achieve transparency 
because the changes are clearly just that: the student has taken the language of 
her source as her starting point and not acknowledged it. Making the changes 
more thorough- going still would not address the transparency issue, because 
the nature of the relationship, that the source provided a start on the wording, 
and not just the propositional content, would not be signalled to the reader. 
Example 4.4
Student
Much work has been carried out on the evaluation of INSET in a local, 
national and international basis, and such work has recently been 
increased as a result of increasing emphasis on accountability of the 
provision of INSET. 

EFFECTIVE SOURCE USE 71
Source
Much work has been carried out on the evaluation of INSET, on a local, 
national and international basis; and the volume of this work has increased 
signiﬁ cantly in recent years as accountability has become more prominent.
This strategy of stitching together elements from one text with elements from 
another and making some superﬁ cial changes to the language is what Howard 
has called patchwriting, and it is very common (Pecorari, 2003; Howard, Serviss 
and Rodrigue, 2010). It is also probably the aspect of source use which attracts 
the greatest variation of opinions across disciplines and individually. As 
Chapter 8 will show, some disciplines make little or no use of explicitly 
signalled quotation, but may have a greater tolerance for unsignalled near- 
quotation, and as Chapter 1 discussed, this is a strategy which has been 
defended as fully legitimate, at least under some conditions, by some academics. 
However, many others class it as a form of plagiarism, so to be fully safe from 
accusations of plagiarism, students must have the writing skills which will 
enable them to abandon patchwriting. This puts an especially heavy burden 
on students writing in subject areas in which explicitly signalled quotation is 
not a viable option.
Effective source use
Understanding the principle of transparency and having the skills to act on its 
implications will keep writers from doing things which can be identiﬁ ed as 
plagiarism, but adherence to that principle alone will not produce good written 
assignments, and neither will understanding the principle provide answers to 
all the questions students have about source use. Another important idea that 
students need to understand is to do with the role that sources play in the 
larger purpose of their text.
The ﬁ rst step in this understanding is the realisation that texts should have 
a purpose. For experienced academic writers this is an obvious assertion. For 
students who are accustomed to think of writing as something they have to do 
in order to pass a course, it is less obvious. Having a purpose also implies having 
something to say, and expecting newcomers to a subject to have things to say 
about it is a moderately big ask. Writing for assessment means ﬁ nding 
something to say about a topic to the teacher, who knows much more about the 
topic than the student does, and that can be a daunting prospect indeed.
In academic writing, the purpose typically is to communicate original 
content in the context of what is already known about the topic. In the case of 
research articles, or theses and dissertations, the new content is typically 

72 WHAT DO WRITERS NEED TO KNOW TO AVOID PLAGIARISM?
research ﬁ ndings. In assessment writing the new element is likely to be the 
student’s own understanding. 
Regardless of the speciﬁ c purpose of the text, references to sources have an 
important role but one which is secondary to the main task of the text. In the 
case of research writing, this includes describing the existing research on the 
topic, in order to be able to argue for the need for the new work. Reference to 
sources can also serve functions such as providing support for the writer’s 
assertions, demonstrating that there is a diversity of thought on an issue, etc. 
The point, though, is that they do have a purpose, a speciﬁ c role to play. This 
too may be an eye- opener for students who think of references as a requirement, 
something to include in a piece of writing to demonstrate the reading that has 
been done, or simply because everyone else does.
Once in place, this understanding can be a powerful tool for making the 
decisions which writers must make in using sources transparently. For example, 
it provides insights into the nature of which sources to use. Not only are web- 
based sources a potential source of confusion about authorship, as noted above, 
they are an area that students often ask about. However, questions are often 
couched in terms which suggest that there are clear rules which can be learned 
and followed. A typical question might be ‘Am I allowed to cite Wikipedia?’. 
Some teachers have such strong feelings about Wikipedia that they do not allow 
students to cite it, so a rule- based answer is available there. However, a more 
helpful response would be to encourage students to think of the choice in terms 
of the reason they want to cite it. If the purpose of the reference to Wikipedia is 
to establish that a given fact is true, then there are probably more credible 
sources available, and the reference will be more effective in accomplishing its 
purpose if a more authoritative source, instead of Wikipedia, is chosen.
The effectiveness of source use also helps explain why both patchwriting 
and an excessive reliance on quotation are to be avoided. However close the 
relationship in terms of topic between the source and the new text, it will not 
be identical (ideally; asking students to write on topics which have already 
been addressed in identical form will not encourage them to write independently 
of their sources, a point which is taken up in the next chapter). An idea from a 
source most often needs to be worded in a new way to ﬁ t into a new text.
A number of questions about source use are genuinely difﬁ cult to answer 
from the perspective of what writers are required to do. A case in point is this: ‘I 
had an idea, and then when I was doing a literature search I found the same idea 
in a source. Do I have to cite the source?’ The best answer to this question is 
usually in terms of what the writer will ﬁ nd it advantageous to do. Even if it is 
not necessary to credit the source with providing the idea, a reference will 
provide additional support for it, and thus allow the writer to make the same 
point more strongly. Reporting language can be used strategically to signal that 
relationship to the reader as well. ‘Smith states . . .’ conveys the message that 
the assertion comes entirely from Smith, and additionally positions Smith as an 
authority, but ‘As Smith notes . . .’ places the writer in a position of independent 
authority; it means something like ‘Smith said it, and I know that it’s true’. 

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION OR REFLECTION 73
Plagiarism is no substitute for skill
To avoid plagiarism, writers need to understand the two closely related 
principles that source use should be transparent to the reader and serve a 
function in the text. In order to be able to implement these ideas, they must 
also possess a body of declarative knowledge and procedural competences 
about how sources are and are not used in academic writing, as well as more 
general writing skills. While listing all of those skills is properly the task of a 
writing manual, this chapter has sampled some of them.
In addition, writers also need to know about plagiarism. They need to know 
how it is deﬁ ned, and what it looks like in practice, and they need to know that 
the consequences of plagiarism are serious. They also need to know that there 
are complexities in understanding what plagiarism is. However, the best 
prevention for plagiarism is to provide writers with a viable alternative. Ways 
of delivering the skills and knowledge needed to shape that alternative are the 
subject of the next chapter.
Activity
A survey of information given to students. Find the information about plagiarism 
and source use that is given to students at your university, and in your 
department or programme.
• Where is it? Is it part of the university rules, or study information on the 
library’s website, or part of a study guide within a particular course?
• How is it delivered to students, and how are students made aware it exists?
• What sort of information does it provide about plagiarism? Does it offer a 
deﬁ nition of plagiarism? Information about how to tell if a piece of writing 
is plagiarised? 
• What sort of information does it offer about good source use? Does it 
describe referencing conventions? The reasons writers refer to sources? How 
to tell reliable sources from less reliable ones?
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection
1 Can you remember having a difﬁ cult decision to make in your own writing 
about whether (or what sort of) a reference was needed? What caused the 
difﬁ culty, and how did you resolve it?

74 WHAT DO WRITERS NEED TO KNOW TO AVOID PLAGIARISM?
2 When you read published work in your ﬁ eld, is it easy to infer how the 
writers have used sources? If not, why not?
3 At what point in their education do students in your department learn 
things such as how to paraphrase, how to introduce a quotation, how to 
prepare reference lists, etc.?
4 Does the transparency principle articulated in this chapter provide an 
explanation for the types of source use you do not want your students to 
use? Does it prevent any source use strategies you think they should be able 
to use?

5
How can teachers 
support student learning 
about source use?
Summary • Principles for a source-use curriculum • Approaches to 
teaching source use • Activity • Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection
Summary
This chapter describes how teachers can best support their students to gain the 
skills needed to avoid plagiarism. It describes how teachers can determine what 
their students need to learn about plagiarism and good source usage, and how an 
appropriate curriculum may be developed. Presenting students with declarative 
facts about source use is seen to be a limited approach and an argument is made for 
a process- based skills development approach. The framework for such an approach 
is discussed, including importance of explicit learning objectives for source- use 
skills. The use of text- matching (‘plagiarism detection’) software is explored. The 
chapter concludes with ten sample tasks provided for teachers which teach the key 
aspects of transparency, i.e. accurately reporting the content of a source, clearly 
signalling to the reader the identity of the source, choosing when to quote and when 
to paraphrase and how to paraphrase. The tasks are designed to be useful in a range 
of teaching contexts, and suggestions for adapting them to others are provided.
When you have ﬁ nished this chapter you will understand how to plan and carry out 
instruction which will enable your students to develop the skills required to use 
sources well and make effective decisions about how to report material from a source 
and how to signal it to the reader.

76 HOW CAN TEACHERS SUPPORT STUDENT LEARNING ABOUT SOURCE USE?
Setting aside the risk of committing, or being suspected of, plagiarism, 
what do your students need to know about the role that reporting the 
earlier literature plays in constructing a successful new text? What are 
the most important of the ‘assumptions and methods of scholarship’ 
which Hunt refers to below? How much of that do they typically learn on 
their own, and how much do you teach them?
. . . by facing this challenge [Internet plagiarism] we will be forced to 
help our students learn what I believe to be the most important 
thing they can learn at university: just how the intellectual enterprise 
of scholarship and research really works. Traditionally, when we 
explain to students why plagiarism is bad and what their motives 
should be for properly citing and crediting their sources, we present 
them in terms of a model of how texts work in the process of sharing 
ideas and information which is profoundly different from how they 
actually work outside of classroom- based writing, and profoundly 
destructive to their understanding of the assumptions and methods 
of scholarship.
(Hunt, n.d.)
The previous chapter argued that the most effective cure for all patchwriting 
and some prototypical plagiarism is for students to learn the skills in using 
sources which will not only make their texts more effective but will offer a 
viable alternative to plagiarism as well. This chapter addresses the ways in 
which teachers can support that learning. The ﬁ rst section offers a generalised 
view of a learning environment which offers appropriate support, with reference 
to concepts related to teaching and learning which are especially relevant. The 
second part of the chapter consists of learning activities and tasks designed to 
help students master one or more skills related to learning to use sources.
Principles for a source-use curriculum
Any body of learning can best be delivered when there is progression across the 
degree programme, with consideration given to the abilities students already 
have when they begin it and their needs when they leave it. Taking progression 
into account involves asking, and ﬁ nding the best pedagogical answers, to four 
questions:
1 What do students need to know (about source use, here) upon completion 
of their studies?

PRINCIPLES FOR A SOURCE-USE CURRICULUM 77
2 What do they already know about it when they arrive at university?
The answers to these questions provide a framework for answering the third:
3 What do they need to learn during their programme?
That then provides a starting point for identifying speciﬁ c curricular 
implications:
4 When and how during their studies should the individual items included 
under (3) be introduced?
This idealised picture does not take into account several very real constraints 
and obstacles. First, it assumes that it is possible to deﬁ ne the knowledge and 
skills that students possess on arrival at university with a reasonable degree of 
accuracy, but in today’s increasingly heterogeneous university classroom, this 
is not always the case (Chapters 7 and 9 take up aspects of this situation). 
Second, it assumes that it is possible to plan a transition between learning at 
university and its applications in the workplace. However, with respect to 
writing skills, including but not limited to source use, this is very often not 
the case. Students often produce assessment genres – the essay, the critical 
response to a book, reﬂ ections on a learning platform – which bear little 
relation to the sorts of workplace writing they will do. Speciﬁ cally, the ways 
in which many workplace genres use sources is at sharp odds with the 
conventions and principles of academic writing (Devitt, 1991; Shaw and 
Pecorari, 2013).
Finally, the luxury of large- scale planning is not one which belongs to most 
university teachers. Many are limited in the extent of their practical ability to 
change practice to the course or courses on which they teach, and even there 
constraints are likely to exist. So while an ideal approach to teaching source 
use would involve distributing the content discussed in Chapter 4 across the 
length of a degree programme, a more realistic approach for many teachers 
involves thinking about what their students need to learn within the framework 
of a speciﬁ c part of a course, while maintaining the greatest awareness possible 
of what else students will learn, and need to learn, and where and when in 
their studies that will happen.
A precondition for good source use has already been seen to be a set of both 
knowledge and skills. For many teachers, imparting facts about this area is 
more comfortable than developing skills, because it makes it easier to present 
clear rules and unhedged assertions. However, the clear- cut declarative facts 
about source use which can be presented to students without excessive 
qualiﬁ cation are primarily those which relate to the mechanics of citation, and 
they are only a small part, and the least problematic part, of what must be 
learned.
The alternative, teaching skills as well as facts about source use, takes more 
planning and management on the part of the teacher. Learning a skill requires, 
in addition to input, opportunities to practice, feedback on performance, and 
fresh opportunities to practice in the light of the feedback. When teaching the 
basics of source use, it is tempting to avoid raising areas of uncertainty, 

78 HOW CAN TEACHERS SUPPORT STUDENT LEARNING ABOUT SOURCE USE?
particularly given that a failure to use sources appropriately may be interpreted 
as a matter of academic dishonesty. This raises the spectre that any 
acknowledgement that there are uncertainties to source use may be used as a 
defence against an allegation of wrongdoing. However, addressing the 
uncertainties is essential if students are to develop the skills of good source 
usage and proﬁ cient academic writing.
A useful concept in structuring these opportunities is constructive alignment 
(Biggs, 1996). Constructive alignment is the idea that there should be a thread 
of coherence linking learning objectives, learning activities and assessment. In 
other words, the planned outcome of a course should dictate the content of 
lectures and seminars, what students read, the formative tasks that scaffold 
their learning etc. At the end of this chain, the assessment activities should 
measure the attainment of the learning objectives, and the question a teacher 
brings to the assessment work is ‘to what extent does this work demonstrate 
that the student has achieved the course objectives?’
Constructive alignment is a particularly useful model for shaping practices 
for teaching source use in that it requires that learning objectives be explicitly 
articulated. Objectives related to source use, or indeed any other aspect of 
academic writing or professional discourse, are only infrequently expressed as 
planned learning outcomes (although an exception exists for the language 
subjects, in which the ability to communicate in various forms is a primary 
focus of instruction and assessment). In most ﬁ elds, though, assessment 
writing is a means to an end, the tool which exposes students’ knowledge 
of the course content so that it can be assessed, rather than an objective in its 
own right.
While writing and source-use skills must necessarily take second place to 
other content in the majority of courses, there are problematic aspects to them 
being absent from the stated objectives altogether. There is not, for one thing, 
an absolute divide between language and content. For example, understanding 
terminology used in a particular subject requires an understanding of the 
underlying concepts, and an inability to use appropriate terminology can 
expose an insufﬁ cient understanding of the content. The ability to engage in 
professional discourse is one which will be necessary in the workplace, and is 
in fact an objective which many teachers say they pursue in their teaching, 
though in most cases it is an informal, unstated objective rather than a formally 
articulated one (Pecorari et al., 2011). Importantly, objectives which are 
unstated rather than directly named are less likely to be planned for, and 
therefore much less likely to be reached.
Learning objectives
A pedagogy for promoting good source use and thereby eliminating plagiarism 
would then have as its starting point a set of learning objectives relating to 
what students should be able to do on completion of the assignment, the 
module, the degree course, etc. Chapter 3 described policies and procedures 

PRINCIPLES FOR A SOURCE-USE CURRICULUM 79
typically in place at universities, and students most certainly need to know 
them. Learning objectives related to plagiarism and what one may not do with 
sources can be summarised like this:
Students should be able to:
• articulate an understanding of what plagiarism is;
• identify it;
• demonstrate familiarity with the rules about plagiarism in place at their 
university;
• show an understanding of the procedures used at their university for 
detecting and responding to plagiarism;
• know where they can turn for more information.
The positive knowledge which will enable students to avoid plagiarism by 
using sources appropriately and effectively (as presented in Chapter 4) can be 
summarised like this. Students should be able to:
• identify reasons why sources are used in academic writing;
• ﬁ nd sources of information which are relevant to a particular writing 
topic;
• read and understand sources of a range of types;
• understand how sources have been used in texts which signal them 
transparently;
• paraphrase ideas from a source;
• summarise sources;
• make use of reporting language;
• integrate quotations, summaries and paraphrases smoothly into a new text;
• understand the relationship among sources and the new text;
• identify aspects of the writing topic which beneﬁ t from support from 
sources;
• report propositions from sources in a way which strengthens the 
new text;
• ﬁ nd out authorship and other bibliographical information from a source;
• signal to the reader which content is from a source and which is original to 
the writer;
• convey an accurate impression of what the source said;
• signal which sources have made a material contribution to the new work;
• signal whether the language in which content from a source is expressed is 
also from the source or an original reformulation.
Because these objectives relate to the performance of a skill – writing academic 
texts – achieving them requires scaffolded opportunities for practice with 
feedback. Although the speciﬁ cs of what this entails will differ from one 
teaching context to another, several central ideas can serve to structure such an 
approach.

80 HOW CAN TEACHERS SUPPORT STUDENT LEARNING ABOUT SOURCE USE?
Learning activities
One key idea is that there is a logical progression in the learning of source-use 
skills. Not only are there a great many subskills which are part of learning to 
write from sources, some of them build upon others. For instance, the ability 
to paraphrase successfully is dependent on the ability to read a source actively 
and critically and understand its content thoroughly enough to offer an 
independent retelling of it. In order to be able to relate ideas from different 
sources to each other, the writer must have been able to ﬁ nd a range of sources 
on the same topic. This observation has two important implications for 
classroom practice. One is that it can be useful to teach the subskills of citation 
separately, before addressing them in the context of a large writing assignment. 
The exercises in the second half of this chapter are one way of doing this. The 
second implication is that the order in which subskills should be presented 
should be determined by conscious decision, in the light of the desired 
outcomes (what students must learn by the end of their degree course, or in 
ability to complete a piece of assessed work, etc.) and bearing in mind what 
skills they (are likely to) possess already.
When source use is practiced as part of a larger writing assignment, care in 
crafting the assignment is needed. A task which offers students a foothold so 
that they can develop a thesis and genuinely have something to say will make 
it easier for them to place that message as the centrepiece of the writing 
assignment and use sources to support it. A vague or uninspiring writing task 
about which writers have little they want to communicate is an invitation to 
introducing reference after reference to sources to ﬁ ll space. It is possible to 
avoid plagiarism in such an assignment, but it is not possible to use sources 
effectively, when a clear sense of the text’s purpose, and the sources’ intended 
effect, is lacking.
The terms of the assignment are also important in shaping good preconditions 
for diagnosing problems when they arise. The responsibility of transparency 
was shown in the previous chapter to be important precisely because many 
aspects of source use are ordinarily invisible to the reader. The reason a great 
deal of textual plagiarism is undetected is because there is nothing in the text 
to signal a problem, to raise warning ﬂ ags. Yet the absence of comments about 
source use will be taken by students to mean that they are doing the right 
things. For feedback to be effective, then, it must either identify problems or 
make a clear statement that there are none. 
For this to happen, teachers must read actively in the awareness that there 
may be problems and try to spot them, and not assume that all problems will 
make themselves visible. Many teachers are, of course, skilled at recognising 
signs that there may be a problem. A familiarity with the student’s previous 
performance on writing assignments or in class discussions can help. In 
addition, patchwriting often leaves visible traces at the seams where the 
source’s language is stitched together with the student’s and this style shift can 
alert teachers to a problem. However, giving good feedback requires a greater 

PRINCIPLES FOR A SOURCE-USE CURRICULUM 81
accuracy in identifying problems than even the most experienced teacher can 
be expected to provide, relying only on instinct.
One way of achieving the preconditions for identifying problems is to create 
writing assignments which involve the students drawing upon a small selection 
of sources, possibly just one, with which the teacher is familiar. Such an 
assignment must be speciﬁ c and structured in such a way that students, in 
their responses, will have a communicative purpose. A ‘purposeless’ assignment, 
such as summarising a book or an article, is an invitation to patchwriting. 
(Task 10 at the end of this chapter gives an example of a successful assignment.)
Another approach is to use a writing conference or time in class to invite 
students to show each other and you how they have used their sources. They 
should bring their sources, to make side- by- side comparisons possible and 
describe how they have used sources (e.g., by paraphrasing or quoting), which 
sources they have used and why, and what purposes each reference to sources 
serves in their text. This creates a setting in which questions about uncertainties 
are likely to be asked and problems stand a good chance of being exposed.
Text- matching software can be used to identify problems before they reach 
ﬁ nal draft stage. Chapter 3 gave a number of caveats relating to the use of these 
products, and they apply to their use for formative assessment as well as 
summative. There are risks of false negatives as well as false positives, and the 
additional risk that students may take away the message that good source use 
can be equated with a number of a text- matching reports. When close 
similarities with a source are identiﬁ ed, a student approach to addressing them 
is often to make extensive superﬁ cial changes: substituting more synonyms, 
changing more active verbs to passive, etc., and while these changes do indeed 
have the effect of lowering the proportion of their work identiﬁ ed as copied, 
they amount to a sort of thorough- going patchwriting, not good writing from 
sources.
A risk of using text- matching software as a training aid is thus that it can 
conﬁ rm patchwriting strategies rather than discouraging them. In addition, 
students who are attempting, or are likely to attempt to cheat learn from 
practice how to produce texts which will not reveal an awkward degree of 
similarity to sources. In other words, they can learn to game the system. If 
products like these are used as part of the writing process, it is essential that 
these issues be problematised. Rather than presenting the results of a 
comparison as if they provided an answer on which further work can be based, 
results can serve as the basis of a classroom discussion in which students are 
made aware of the limitations of such a report, and thus come to a more mature 
understanding of source use in academic writing.
Any sort of formative feedback presupposes a multi- draft writing process in 
which students will be given a chance to revise, and this has many concomitant 
positive effects. One of these is that it models an effective way to write: revision 
is just as important in good writing as the initial drafting. Another is that it 
creates a situation in which students’ decisions about revision can be made 
with reference to the central thesis and the goals they want the text to 

82 HOW CAN TEACHERS SUPPORT STUDENT LEARNING ABOUT SOURCE USE?
accomplish. They can be urged make their decisions about revision not in 
the absolute (‘is it better to use this word or that?’) but in terms of which 
alternative will be most helpful in making readers understand what the writer 
wants them to.
A multi- draft process may also create a space for teachers to respond 
pedagogically to textual plagiarism which they would not otherwise have. At 
some institutions, teachers are required to report suspected plagiarism to some 
authority. This situation can force an uncomfortable decision on them: to 
report or ignore. By contrast, early drafts can be considered exercises rather 
than part of the formal assessment, and therefore can be a possible terrain in 
which the rules do not apply. 
Finally creating a training space for source use is only fully effective if the 
teacher is prepared for the reality that some source use will be inappropriate, 
and some of that will constitute textual plagiarism. By virtue of the fact that 
plagiarism is associated with cheating and other acts of academic dishonesty, 
some teachers have a strong emotional reaction to it when they identify it, 
understanding it to be indicative of a breakdown of trust, or a sort of betrayal. 
An implication of source use being a skill is that some students will get it 
wrong, even after they have been told, possibly repeatedly. A dispassionate 
reaction to textual plagiarism which puts the student’s achievement of the 
learning objectives in the centre is the one which offers the best opportunity 
for success.
Assessment
Forms of assessment vary, naturally, from course to course, and may or may 
not be within the control of the teacher to change. In contexts where formative 
assessment is used, writing tasks as discussed in the preceding section may be 
both learning activities and the assessment for the course. Two additional 
ideas relate exclusively to the written work as assessment, and, given that the 
constructive alignment model shows assessment to be a development of 
learning objectives, both are connected to objectives.
The ﬁ rst concerns the role of intention. Intention is both central in 
understanding whether an instance of problematic source use should be seen 
as evidence that the student has more to learn, or evidence that the student is 
attempting to cheat. At the same time, guilty intent is difﬁ cult both to be 
certain about and to prove. A constructive alignment framework for teaching 
about source use can to some extent alleviate this difﬁ culty. If aspects of source 
use are part of the learning objectives, then they must also be part of the 
assessment criteria. If assessment criteria include items such as demonstrating 
the ability to formulate ideas from a source in independent wordings, signal 
the content which comes from a source transparently, and use references to 
sources to support an original thesis or argument which is of the student’s own 
making, then both patchwriting and prototypical plagiarism are signs that the 
student has not attained the learning objectives. This means that, regardless of 

APPROACHES TO TEACHING SOURCE USE 83
whether deceptive plagiarism attracts a punishment, it will not trigger a reward 
in the form of a grade.
It is very important to distinguish this from the use of a lowered grade as a 
form of punishment. A lowered grade as a response to deceptive plagiarism – a 
common practice – sends two signals: that a rule was violated, but the violation 
was relatively trivial (in that lowered grades are at the small end of the 
continuum of punishments for plagiarism which range up to suspension or 
even expulsion, and, after the fact, the withdrawal of a degree). That must be 
done within an institutional regulatory framework which speciﬁ es that grades 
can be used as a form of punishment (and the soundness of that as a pedagogical 
method can be debated). However, if signalling source use transparently is part 
of the learning objectives for a course, then there is a basis for saying that a 
student who has done it partially, but not entirely successfully can receive a 
grade for the work, but not the highest one.
A further, closely related issue is to do with student expectations. Developing 
source-use skills (along with other sorts of academic writing skills) is, to repeat 
a point made earlier, more often an implicit and unstated objective than an 
explicit one. The institutional implications of this will be addressed in Chapter 
6. In the classroom, it is important that teachers make all objectives explicit. 
Making students aware that they will be expected to develop good source-use 
skills greatly increases the likelihood that they will be able to meet those 
expectations.
Approaches to teaching source use
The previous section provided a principled description of an effective way 
to plan for, deliver and assess instruction in using sources effectively, in 
order to empower students to avoid plagiarism. This section offers speciﬁ c 
tasks and assignments which can be used to teach aspects of source-use skills. 
These may need to be adapted for some teaching contexts, and suggestions 
are given for how this may be done. One alternative, which is highlighted in 
some tasks but can be exploited more broadly, is to select texts from your 
subject area to analyse with students. Both good examples of polished, 
published writing and more and less successful student assessment work can be 
used to show students how sources are used, to better and less good effect, in 
the subject area.
These tasks also serve as illustrations of the ways in which the subskills of 
source use can be worked with, and may offer ideas for further activities. Tasks 
1–3 deal primarily with aspects of transparent reporting of source content, 
tasks 4–6 with signalling the identity of the source, and tasks 7–9 with 
transparency of language. Task 10 is a description of a writing assignment 
which gives the opportunity to practice a range of source- use skills.

84 HOW CAN TEACHERS SUPPORT STUDENT LEARNING ABOUT SOURCE USE?
There is a sequential nature to the tasks, so that within each group, the ﬁ rst 
task lays a foundation for the others. Task 1, for example, asks the student to 
read and derive information while task 3 involves active choices about wording 
for reporting source content. 
Task 1. Extracting content from a source with accuracy
Objective: The purpose of this exercise is to raise awareness of the need to 
read actively and critically. It aims to underscore the fundamental importance 
of reading as a learning activity by highlighting the ways that components of 
the reading process, such as extracting main ideas and relating speciﬁ c facts 
to each other, lead to a better understanding of the text.
Procedures: Distribute this extract from an undergraduate textbook in 
psychology in advance of a class meeting, and ask students to read it and 
bring it to class. Ask them to answer the questions below, one at a time. After 
each question, ask some people to share their answers and discuss what the 
components of a good answer would be.
For our discussion in this chapter, we will deﬁ ne aggression as physical or 
verbal behavior intended to cause harm. This deﬁ nition excludes 
unintentional harm such as auto accidents or sidewalk collisions; it also 
excludes actions that may involve pain as an unavoidable side effect of 
helping someone, such as dental treatments or – in the extreme – assisted 
suicide. It includes kicks and slaps, threats and insults, even gossip or 
snide ‘digs’; and decisions, during experiments, about how much to hurt 
someone, such as how much electric shock to impose. It also includes 
destroying property, lying, and other behavior whose goal is to hurt.
The deﬁ nition covers two distinct types of aggression. Animals exhibit 
social aggression, characterized by displays of rage; and silent aggression, 
as when a predator stalks its prey. Social and silent aggression involve 
separate brain regions. In humans, psychologists label the two types 
‘hostile’ and ‘instrumental’ aggression. Hostile aggression springs from 
anger; its goal is to injure. Instrumental aggression aims to injure, too – 
but only as a means to some other end.
Questions
(a) What is the overall purpose of these paragraphs? Answer in not more than 
one sentence. 
(b) What does the second paragraph add to the ﬁ rst one?
(c) What does the author see as the key elements in this deﬁ nition of 
aggression? How do you know?
(d) Are there other ways to deﬁ ne aggression? How do you know?
Task 1. Extracting content from a source with accuracy
Objective: The purpose of this exercise is to raise awareness of the need to
read actively and critically. It aims to underscore the fundamental importance
of reading as a learning activity by highlighting the ways that components of
the reading process, such as extracting main ideas and relating speciﬁ c facts
to each other, lead to a better understanding of the text.
Procedures: Distribute this extract from an undergraduate textbook in
psychology in advance of a class meeting, and ask students to read it and
bring it to class. Ask them to answer the questions below, one at a time. After
each question, ask some people to share their answers and discuss what the
components of a good answer would be.
For our discussion in this chapter, we will deﬁ ne aggression as physical or
verbal behavior intended to cause harm. This deﬁ nition excludes
unintentional harm such as auto accidents or sidewalk collisions; it also
excludes actions that may involve pain as an unavoidable side effect of
helping someone, such as dental treatments or – in the extreme – assisted
suicide. It includes kicks and slaps, threats and insults, even gossip or
snide ‘digs’; and decisions, during experiments, about how much to hurt
someone, such as how much electric shock to impose. It also includes
destroying property, lying, and other behavior whose goal is to hurt.
The deﬁ nition covers two distinct types of aggression. Animals exhibit
social aggression, characterized by displays of rage; and silent aggression,
as when a predator stalks its prey. Social and silent aggression involve
separate brain regions. In humans, psychologists label the two types
‘hostile’ and ‘instrumental’ aggression. Hostile aggression springs from
anger; its goal is to injure. Instrumental aggression aims to injure, too – 
but only as a means to some other end.
Questions
(a) What is the overall purpose of these paragraphs? Answer in not more than
one sentence.
(b) What does the second paragraph add to the ﬁ rst one?
(c) What does the author see as the key elements in this deﬁ nition of
aggression? How do you know?
(d) Are there other ways to deﬁ ne aggression? How do you know?

APPROACHES TO TEACHING SOURCE USE 85
Note on answers
(a) The purpose of the two paragraphs is to provide a deﬁ nition of aggression. 
The framing of this question is important because it puts an emphasis on 
the writer’s objectives and encourages students to understand the writer’s 
task as relating content for a purpose.
(b) It articulates two subcategories of aggression and shows how they each 
meet the criteria of the broad deﬁ nition but are distinct from each other. 
Some students may provide more general answers such as ‘it adds more 
detail’. The purpose of this question is to encourage students to relate 
ideas in their sources to each other, so they should be urged to develop 
such general statements until that happens.
(c) The most obvious answer is that the author sees ‘harm’ and ‘intention’ as 
the key ingredients. Evidence for this conclusion comes from the fact that 
both those components are present in the ﬁ rst, most general deﬁ nition; 
both are present as well in the deﬁ nitions of the subcategories of aggression 
(‘its goal is to injure’; ‘aims to injure’); and the acts which are excluded 
from this deﬁ nition are ones in which the harm is accidental or 
unintentional. It is important to encourage students to provide evidence 
from the text for their conclusions, to underline the idea that a close 
reading can produce a better understanding of the text.
(d) The qualiﬁ cation at the beginning ‘for our discussion in this chapter’ 
suggests that there are other ways aggression could be deﬁ ned. Here too, 
it is important that students ﬁ nd this textual evidence for their answers, to 
demonstrate that they can draw fact- based conclusions from what they 
read.
Task 2. Relating content accurately
Objective: To encourage students to think critically about whether a paraphrase 
of a source is an accurate retelling or a distortion.
Procedures: Distribute the following examples of student writing which 
includes a reference to a source. Do these students convey the content of their 
sources transparently? That is, would a reader who saw only the student’s 
work, and not the source, form the correct view of how the writers had used 
their sources? Why or why not? Follow up with an example from your ﬁ eld, 
giving the students both the report of a source and an extract from the original. 
The discussion may turn up criticisms of the paraphrases which you think are 
unfounded, as well as criticisms that are. There may be questions which are 
difﬁ cult to resolve, but the process of thinking critically about whether two 
expressions of the same idea are equivalent will be beneﬁ cial.
Note on answers
(a) The purpose of the two paragraphs is to provide a deﬁ nition of aggression. 
The framing of this question is important because it puts an emphasis on
the writer’s objectives and encourages students to understand the writer’s
task as relating content for a purpose.
(b) It articulates two subcategories of aggression and shows how they each
meet the criteria of the broad deﬁ nition but are distinct from each other. 
Some students may provide more general answers such as ‘it adds more
detail’. The purpose of this question is to encourage students to relate
ideas in their sources to each other, so they should be urged to develop
such general statements until that happens.
(c) The most obvious answer is that the author sees ‘harm’ and ‘intention’ as
the key ingredients. Evidence for this conclusion comes from the fact that
both those components are present in the ﬁ rst, most general deﬁ nition; 
both are present as well in the deﬁ nitions of the subcategories of aggression 
(‘its goal is to injure’; ‘aims to injure’); and the acts which are excluded
from this deﬁ nition are ones in which the harm is accidental or 
unintentional. It is important to encourage students to provide evidence
from the text for their conclusions, to underline the idea that a close 
reading can produce a better understanding of the text.
(d) The qualiﬁ cation at the beginning ‘for our discussion in this chapter’ 
suggests that there are other ways aggression could be deﬁ ned. Here too,
it is important that students ﬁ nd this textual evidence for their answers, to
demonstrate that they can draw fact- based conclusions from what they
read.
Task 2. Relating content accurately
Objective: To encourage students to think critically about whether a paraphrase 
of a source is an accurate retelling or a distortion.
Procedures: Distribute the following examples of student writing which
includes a reference to a source. Do these students convey the content of their 
sources transparently? That is, would a reader who saw only the student’s 
work, and not the source, form the correct view of how the writers had used
their sources? Why or why not? Follow up with an example from your ﬁ eld, 
giving the students both the report of a source and an extract from the original. 
The discussion may turn up criticisms of the paraphrases which you think are
unfounded, as well as criticisms that are. There may be questions which are
difﬁ cult to resolve, but the process of thinking critically about whether two 
expressions of the same idea are equivalent will be beneﬁ cial.

86 HOW CAN TEACHERS SUPPORT STUDENT LEARNING ABOUT SOURCE USE?
Student
Watkins says that the main contribution of pastoral care may be that it 
brings ‘attention to the personal and interpersonal dimensions and to 
give a pupil- centred focus’ (1985: 179). 
Source (Watkins, 1985: 179)
The broad ambition of pastoral care is to help pupils beneﬁ t more 
extensively from their school experience. But this is surely the broad 
aim of any school, so is it worth saying? Yes, if we go on to say that the 
more speciﬁ c contribution of pastoral care is to bring attention to the 
personal and interpersonal dimensions, and to give a pupil- centred 
focus.
Student
‘Teachers are part of a very complicated social system . . . which 
determines at times, his or her view of self and of the system and of the 
teaching techniques’ (Sarason, p. 32).
Source (Sarason, p. 32)
First, the university critic is part of a very complicated social system 
that, in diverse ways, determines his or her view of self and that 
system.
Note on answers: A signiﬁ cant difference between the ﬁ rst student’s report 
and the source is that the source speaks of the ‘more speciﬁ c contribution’ of 
pastoral care, while the student says it is the ‘main contribution’. Some 
students may feel that this is justiﬁ ed because this writer has been more 
cautious in her claim about the contribution: while the source says that a 
‘more speciﬁ c contribution . . . is . . .’, the writer says it ‘may be’. However, 
this hedging arguably introduces greater inaccuracy, rather than mitigating 
the ﬁ rst. The author of the source makes a direct claim, while the report of the 
source makes him appear to be more hesitant than he was (albeit about a 
different proposition).
The second student has taken a claim from the source but applied it to a 
different concept. What the source says about the ‘university critic’ appears in 
the student’s work to apply to teachers. While the claim may be true and may 
even be one with which the author of the source would agree, it gives a 
misleading impression of what the source actually said.
Student
Watkins says that the main contribution of pastoral care may be that it
brings ‘attention to the personal and interpersonal dimensions and to
give a pupil- centred focus’ (1985: 179).
Source (Watkins, 1985: 179)
The broad ambition of pastoral care is to help pupils beneﬁ t more
extensively from their school experience. But this is surely the broad
aim of any school, so is it worth saying? Yes, if we go on to say that the
more speciﬁ c contribution of pastoral care is to bring attention to the
personal and interpersonal dimensions, and to give a pupil- centred
focus.
Student
‘Teachers are part of a very complicated social system . . . which
determines at times, his or her view of self and of the system and of the
teaching techniques’ (Sarason, p. 32).
Source (Sarason, p. 32)
First, the university critic is part of a very complicated social system
that, in diverse ways, determines his or her view of self and that
system.
Note on answers: A signiﬁ cant difference between the ﬁ rst student’s report
and the source is that the source speaks of the ‘more speciﬁ c contribution’ of
pastoral care, while the student says it is the ‘main contribution’. Some
students may feel that this is justiﬁ ed because this writer has been more
cautious in her claim about the contribution: while the source says that a 
‘more speciﬁ c contribution . . . is . . .’, the writer says it ‘may be’. However,
this hedging arguably introduces greater inaccuracy, rather than mitigating
the ﬁ rst. The author of the source makes a direct claim, while the report of the
source makes him appear to be more hesitant than he was (albeit about a 
different proposition).
The second student has taken a claim from the source but applied it to a
different concept. What the source says about the ‘university critic’ appears in
the student’s work to apply to teachers. While the claim may be true and may
even be one with which the author of the source would agree, it gives a 
misleading impression of what the source actually said.

APPROACHES TO TEACHING SOURCE USE 87
Task 3. Signalling orientations to content
Objectives: An element in reporting the propositional content from a source is 
indicating the way that the source author positions him – or herself in relation 
to it. The writer’s own evaluation of the content can be visible in the report of 
the source, or withheld. The purpose of this activity is to raise awareness of the 
way that language choices when reporting content from sources can shape the 
way the content will be received by the reader.
Procedures: Distribute to students the following sentence and the verbs which 
appear below it. Ask them to ﬁ ll in the blank with each of the reporting verbs 
in turn, and discuss how the impact of the sentence changes as a result. 
Speciﬁ c questions to consider are
(1) Which versions of the sentence make the author (Gorgonzola) appear to 
agree, disagree, or remain neutral about the idea (i.e., that the moon is 
made of green cheese)? Do some of them convey their meaning more 
strongly than others?
(2) Which versions make the writer of this sentence appear to agree with 
Gorgonzola, disagree, or remain neutral?
Gorgonzola __________ that the moon is made of green cheese.
acknowledges 
argues
asserts
believes
concludes
demonstrates
denies
hypothesises
posits
states
suggests
Note on answers: The author’s commitment to the idea: denies indicates that 
Gorgonzola disagrees with this idea; the others describe some kind of 
agreement. Of these, hypothesises, posits and suggests imply a relatively 
weaker commitment on Gorgonzola’s part toward the idea. By hypothesising, 
for example, Gorgonzola indicates that the idea is something which can be 
tested and may be disproved. The writer’s evaluation of the idea: Acknowledges 
and demonstrates indicate that the writer believes Gorgonzola is right. The 
others reveal little about what the writer thinks. Note that this is true even of 
denies, which casts Gorgonzola in opposition to the idea, but does not say 
whether the writer thinks that opposition is founded.
Task 3. Signalling orientations to content
Objectives: An element in reporting the propositional content from a source is 
indicating the way that the source author positions him – or herself in relation 
to it. The writer’s own evaluation of the content can be visible in the report of
the source, or withheld. The purpose of this activity is to raise awareness of the
way that language choices when reporting content from sources can shape the
way the content will be received by the reader.
Procedures: Distribute to students the following sentence and the verbs which
appear below it. Ask them to ﬁ ll in the blank with each of the reporting verbs
in turn, and discuss how the impact of the sentence changes as a result. 
Speciﬁ c questions to consider are
(1) Which versions of the sentence make the author (Gorgonzola) appear to
agree, disagree, or remain neutral about the idea (i.e., that the moon is
made of green cheese)? Do some of them convey their meaning more
strongly than others?
(2) Which versions make the writer of this sentence appear to agree with
Gorgonzola, disagree, or remain neutral?
Gorgonzola __________ that the moon is made of green cheese.
acknowledges
argues
asserts
believes
concludes
demonstrates
denies
hypothesises
posits
states
suggests
Note on answers: The author’s commitment to the idea: denies indicates that
s
Gorgonzola disagrees with this idea; the others describe some kind of
agreement. Of these, hypothesises, posits and
s
suggests imply a relatively
s
weaker commitment on Gorgonzola’s part toward the idea. By hypothesising,
for example, Gorgonzola indicates that the idea is something which can be
tested and may be disproved. The writer’s evaluation of the idea: Acknowledges 
and demonstrates indicate that the writer believes Gorgonzola is right. The
s
others reveal little about what the writer thinks. Note that this is true even of
denies, which casts Gorgonzola in opposition to the idea, but does not say 
whether the writer thinks that opposition is founded.

88 HOW CAN TEACHERS SUPPORT STUDENT LEARNING ABOUT SOURCE USE?
Alternative: If this particular selection of reporting verbs is not typical of those 
in your ﬁ eld, take a few paragraphs from the introduction to a research article 
in your ﬁ eld, remove the reporting verbs, and use the resulting sentences and 
list of verbs to do this exercise. Another alternative still is to distribute a 
complete text and ask students to ﬁ nd the reporting verbs and discuss 
differences in their meanings, as well as the reasons the author may have 
chosen the forms he or she did.
Task 4. Identifying the author of a work
Objective: To make students aware of the variety of forms of publication, 
enabling them to understand who should be credited as the originator of a 
work, and what possible sources of information are available.
Procedures: Have students work in groups of 3–6. Provide each group 
with an example of three or four types of publications which are commonly 
referred to as sources of information in your discipline, for example, 
an academic journal, a monograph, a technical report, an anthology. Ask 
students to discuss similarities and differences among the works and then 
to say, for each one, who wrote it. Follow up by asking why the differences 
they identiﬁ ed exist; that is, why do there need to be different forms of 
publication?
Note on answers: Answers will of course vary, but there are several 
important points which need to come out of students’ exploration of these 
works. One is that not all publications are the work of a single author; a 
monograph may be, although it may have multiple authors, while an issue 
of a research journal contains multiple articles, each of which may have 
one author or several. The answer to the question ‘who wrote it’ will therefore 
be ‘many people’. Technical reports, on the other hand, may not identify 
an author at all. The discussion of similarities and differences among 
the publications should lead to an answer to the question about why there 
are different sorts of publications: periodicals offer a relatively fast way 
to disseminate new research ﬁ ndings, anthologies or edited collections 
allow individual works to be published together with other, thematically 
linked papers which inform them. Conclude by noting that searching key 
words in the library catalogue will identify books on a topic but not journal 
articles, and recommend a course on information searching at the university 
library.
Alternative: If this particular selection of reporting verbs is not typical of those
in your ﬁ eld, take a few paragraphs from the introduction to a research article
in your ﬁ eld, remove the reporting verbs, and use the resulting sentences and
list of verbs to do this exercise. Another alternative still is to distribute a 
complete text and ask students to ﬁ nd the reporting verbs and discuss
differences in their meanings, as well as the reasons the author may have
chosen the forms he or she did.
Task 4. Identifying the author of a work
Objective: To make students aware of the variety of forms of publication,
enabling them to understand who should be credited as the originator of a 
work, and what possible sources of information are available.
Procedures: Have students work in groups of 3–6. Provide each group
with an example of three or four types of publications which are commonly
referred to as sources of information in your discipline, for example,
an academic journal, a monograph, a technical report, an anthology. Ask
students to discuss similarities and differences among the works and then
to say, for each one, who wrote it. Follow up by asking why the differences
they identiﬁ ed exist; that is, why do there need to be different forms of 
publication?
Note on answers: Answers will of course vary, but there are several
important points which need to come out of students’ exploration of these
works. One is that not all publications are the work of a single author; a
monograph may be, although it may have multiple authors, while an issue
of a research journal contains multiple articles, each of which may have
one author or several. The answer to the question ‘who wrote it’ will therefore
be ‘many people’. Technical reports, on the other hand, may not identify
an author at all. The discussion of similarities and differences among
the publications should lead to an answer to the question about why there
are different sorts of publications: periodicals offer a relatively fast way
to disseminate new research ﬁ ndings, anthologies or edited collections
allow individual works to be published together with other, thematically
linked papers which inform them. Conclude by noting that searching key
words in the library catalogue will identify books on a topic but not journal
articles, and recommend a course on information searching at the university
library.

APPROACHES TO TEACHING SOURCE USE 89
Task 5. Gathering and reporting bibliographic information
Objectives: This task builds on the previous one and teaches ﬁ nding and 
presenting bibliographic details.
Procedures: Use the same selection of texts as for the previous task, and a 
description of the correct formatting for a reference list entry for each one, 
according to a set of style conventions frequently used in your ﬁ eld. Teach the 
format for one type of source and ask students to practice by writing a reference 
list entry for one of the works in front of them. Then move on to another type 
of source.
Note on answers: Answers will naturally vary, but some information is often 
hard for inexperienced academic readers to ﬁ nd initially, and may prompt 
questions. For example, the date of publication typically appears prominently 
in a research article, but in a book it may appear only as the copyright date on 
the colophon (behind the title page). The editors of an anthology are speciﬁ ed 
in reference- list entries but the editors of a journal are not. Point out that the 
sort of information included in an entry is the information a reader would need 
to ﬁ nd the source.
Alternative: Following up by contrasting with a different set of conventions 
(e.g. MLA and APA) has the advantage of underscoring the idea that 
referencing conventions are a largely arbitrary set of rules which exist to allow 
the higher- order function of signalling source use to be carried out consistently 
within a publication.
Task 6. Relationships among sources
Objectives: The collection of sources referred to in a literature review can be 
partially or entirely in agreement with each other, in opposition to each other, 
or pursuing different aspects of the same problem. These relationships are 
often clearer to experienced writers in the area than they are to students. The 
purpose of this activity is to illustrate the relationships among sources by 
looking at one such relationship, self- citation.
Procedures: Select the title page and reference lists from one or more 
publications in your subject area. Ask students to work in pairs to identify how 
often the author has cited him-  or herself. If any of those citations are 
co- authored, ask the students then to ﬁ nd how many other times the co- authors 
are cited.
Task 5. Gathering and reporting bibliographic information
Objectives: This task builds on the previous one and teaches ﬁ nding and
presenting bibliographic details.
Procedures: Use the same selection of texts as for the previous task, and a
description of the correct formatting for a reference list entry for each one, 
according to a set of style conventions frequently used in your ﬁ eld. Teach the 
format for one type of source and ask students to practice by writing a reference
list entry for one of the works in front of them. Then move on to another type
of source.
Note on answers: Answers will naturally vary, but some information is often
hard for inexperienced academic readers to ﬁ nd initially, and may prompt 
questions. For example, the date of publication typically appears prominently
in a research article, but in a book it may appear only as the copyright date on 
the colophon (behind the title page). The editors of an anthology are speciﬁ ed
in reference- list entries but the editors of a journal are not. Point out that the 
sort of information included in an entry is the information a reader would need 
to ﬁ nd the source.
Alternative: Following up by contrasting with a different set of conventions
t
(e.g. MLA and APA) has the advantage of underscoring the idea that 
referencing conventions are a largely arbitrary set of rules which exist to allow 
the higher- order function of signalling source use to be carried out consistently
within a publication.
Task 6. Relationships among sources
Objectives: The collection of sources referred to in a literature review can be
partially or entirely in agreement with each other, in opposition to each other,
or pursuing different aspects of the same problem. These relationships are
often clearer to experienced writers in the area than they are to students. The
purpose of this activity is to illustrate the relationships among sources by
looking at one such relationship, self- citation.
Procedures: Select the title page and reference lists from one or more
publications in your subject area. Ask students to work in pairs to identify how
often the author has cited him-  or herself. If any of those citations are 
co- authored, ask the students then to ﬁ nd how many other times the co- authors 
are cited.

90 HOW CAN TEACHERS SUPPORT STUDENT LEARNING ABOUT SOURCE USE?
Note on answers: This activity works best if the publications selected are those 
which have some self- citation, but to a degree which is normal, rather than 
excessive, in the ﬁ eld. If alphabetically ordered reference lists are used, this 
task will take less time than if numbered end references are used, and with the 
former systems the fact of self- citation will also be more evident in the body 
of the text itself. 
Task 7. Choosing to quote or paraphrase
Objective: To make students aware of the frequency with which quotation and 
paraphrase are used in their subject area, and of some of the factors which 
guide that decision.
Procedures: Supply students with a text which you consider to be a good 
example of source use in your discipline. Ask students to identify quotations 
and paraphrases, and to discuss in small groups why the author chooses to 
introduce an idea from the source in that form.
Note on answers: Draw students’ attention to the fact that paraphrases are 
identiﬁ ed by eliminating ideas which are attributed to a source but which are 
not signalled as quotation. Although it is not possible to answer the question 
of the author’s choices deﬁ nitively, there is a tendency to quote only when a 
paraphrase will not do, for example, if an idea is a very sensitive one and 
subject to distortion, or when not only the idea but the form in which it is 
expressed is important to conveying the idea, or when it is expressed in a 
succinct way which communicates the message clearly. In most areas in the 
humanities and social sciences quotation is used in a minority of cases, but a 
signiﬁ cant minority. In a few ﬁ elds, such as comparative literature, the form 
of expression has particular importance and quotation is the dominant form. 
In the natural sciences and engineering quotation is used exceedingly rarely. 
If you teach one of these ﬁ elds, this activity is useful only in abbreviated form 
for the purpose of illustrating the rarity of quotation.
Task 8. Producing quotations and paraphrases
Objectives: To illustrate that quotation and paraphrase serve partially distinct 
purposes; to offer practice integrating both forms into a larger text.
Procedures: Provide students with a short excerpt from two or three of the 
sources referred to in the text used in task 7. Then ask them to turn a quotation 
Note on answers: This activity works best if the publications selected are those
which have some self- citation, but to a degree which is normal, rather than
excessive, in the ﬁ eld. If alphabetically ordered reference lists are used, this
task will take less time than if numbered end references are used, and with the
former systems the fact of self- citation will also be more evident in the body
of the text itself.
Task 7. Choosing to quote or paraphrase
Objective: To make students aware of the frequency with which quotation and
paraphrase are used in their subject area, and of some of the factors which
guide that decision.
Procedures: Supply students with a text which you consider to be a good
example of source use in your discipline. Ask students to identify quotations
and paraphrases, and to discuss in small groups why the author chooses to
introduce an idea from the source in that form.
Note on answers: Draw students’ attention to the fact that paraphrases are
identiﬁ ed by eliminating ideas which are attributed to a source but which are
not signalled as quotation. Although it is not possible to answer the question
of the author’s choices deﬁ nitively, there is a tendency to quote only when a
paraphrase will not do, for example, if an idea is a very sensitive one and
subject to distortion, or when not only the idea but the form in which it is
expressed is important to conveying the idea, or when it is expressed in a 
succinct way which communicates the message clearly. In most areas in the
humanities and social sciences quotation is used in a minority of cases, but a
signiﬁ cant minority. In a few ﬁ elds, such as comparative literature, the form
of expression has particular importance and quotation is the dominant form.
In the natural sciences and engineering quotation is used exceedingly rarely.
If you teach one of these ﬁ elds, this activity is useful only in abbreviated form
for the purpose of illustrating the rarity of quotation.
Task 8. Producing quotations and paraphrases
Objectives: To illustrate that quotation and paraphrase serve partially distinct
purposes; to offer practice integrating both forms into a larger text.
Procedures: Provide students with a short excerpt from two or three of the
sources referred to in the text used in task 7. Then ask them to turn a quotation

APPROACHES TO TEACHING SOURCE USE 91
into a paraphrase, and a paraphrase into a quotation. Have them discuss the 
decisions which had to be made in the process. Was it difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd a good 
candidate for a quotation? How did they decide where to start and stop the 
quotation? Was anything of value lost in turning a quotation into a paraphrase?
Notes on answers: Allow ample time for this activity as it will give rise to a 
number of procedural questions which will need answering. Draw these out 
and present the answers to the class as a whole. Use this occasion to check 
that the paraphrasing process involves independent rewording of an idea, not 
just substituting key words (see also the next task). Most students will 
experience greater difﬁ culty integrating the quotation into the text than the 
paraphrase, since the language of the quotation must be retained, and 
therefore the surrounding text must be shaped to accommodate it. If your 
students have a tendency to overuse quotation, raise this point to illustrate 
that quotation is not necessarily an easier rhetorical task than paraphrase.
Task 9. A paraphrase process
Objectives: To illustrate that paraphrase builds on a conﬁ dent understanding 
of the source, and the form a paraphrase takes will depend on the purpose 
which the reference to the source serves in the new text.
Procedures: Ask students to read a research article which you assign before 
class. It should be an exemplar of clear and concise writing in your ﬁ eld. In 
class ask them the following questions, one by one, and ask them to write a 
single sentence in response to each question. They should not look at the 
article while answering the questions.
(a) What question did the researcher set out to answer?
(b) How did the researcher investigate that question?
(c) What did the researcher ﬁ nd out in answer to the question?
(d) What does that ﬁ nding mean? That is, what implications does it have?
After students have written their one- sentence answers to these questions, ask 
them to put the sentences away and take out the article, and ask them to check 
whether the answers they gave were the best possible ones. After a suitable 
interval, ask them to put away the articles and take out the one- sentence 
answers and offer them a chance to revise them. Then ask some students to 
share their responses, and put one or more good answers on the board.
Notes on answers: By requiring students to write without direct reference to 
the source, this task illustrates that the task of paraphrasing is one of explaining 
into a paraphrase, and a paraphrase into a quotation. Have them discuss the 
decisions which had to be made in the process. Was it difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd a good
candidate for a quotation? How did they decide where to start and stop the 
quotation? Was anything of value lost in turning a quotation into a paraphrase?
Notes on answers: Allow ample time for this activity as it will give rise to a
number of procedural questions which will need answering. Draw these out
and present the answers to the class as a whole. Use this occasion to check 
that the paraphrasing process involves independent rewording of an idea, not
just substituting key words (see also the next task). Most students will
experience greater difﬁ culty integrating the quotation into the text than the 
paraphrase, since the language of the quotation must be retained, and
therefore the surrounding text must be shaped to accommodate it. If your
students have a tendency to overuse quotation, raise this point to illustrate 
that quotation is not necessarily an easier rhetorical task than paraphrase.
Task 9. A paraphrase process
Objectives: To illustrate that paraphrase builds on a conﬁ dent understanding 
of the source, and the form a paraphrase takes will depend on the purpose 
which the reference to the source serves in the new text.
Procedures: Ask students to read a research article which you assign before 
class. It should be an exemplar of clear and concise writing in your ﬁ eld. In 
class ask them the following questions, one by one, and ask them to write a
single sentence in response to each question. They should not look at the
article while answering the questions.
(a) What question did the researcher set out to answer?
(b) How did the researcher investigate that question?
(c) What did the researcher ﬁ nd out in answer to the question?
(d) What does that ﬁ nding mean? That is, what implications does it have?
After students have written their one- sentence answers to these questions, ask 
them to put the sentences away and take out the article, and ask them to check 
whether the answers they gave were the best possible ones. After a suitable 
interval, ask them to put away the articles and take out the one- sentence 
answers and offer them a chance to revise them. Then ask some students to 
share their responses, and put one or more good answers on the board.
Notes on answers: By requiring students to write without direct reference to
the source, this task illustrates that the task of paraphrasing is one of explaining

92 HOW CAN TEACHERS SUPPORT STUDENT LEARNING ABOUT SOURCE USE?
what the writer knows about the source rather than making minor changes to 
the source. Asking for a one- sentence response requires students to distil the 
main ideas out of each of the four areas canonically addressed in research 
articles: introduction, methods, results and discussion.
Alternative: If a research article will be too difﬁ cult for your students, or if it 
does not ﬁ t into the format of the class for some reason, this basic activity – 
asking students to answer questions about content without reference to the 
source – can be done successfully with other sorts of texts, but most easily 
with texts which exemplify a well deﬁ ned genre whose form can be used to 
structure the activity.
Task 10. Integrating source- use skills
Objectives: To develop students’ abilities to draw on a variety of source- use 
skills to support a claim within a longer text.
Procedures: Students are asked to read a book and write an assignment 
responding to a particular aspect of it. The assignment must be speciﬁ c and 
involve the student developing, and putting forward, an argument or thesis. 
For example, students can read Bill Bryson’s book Down Under, and write 
about the three key words which Bryson would agree capture the nature of 
Australia, supplying evidence for the claim from the book. (A variation of this 
assignment can work well with any book- length text which has a relatively 
clear thesis, is written at a level that students can understand, and ideally has 
some relationship to the course content. The question in the prompt must, 
naturally, be tailored to ﬁ t the book.) Students should submit a ﬁ rst draft and 
receive feedback on it, including speciﬁ cally how appropriately and effectively 
they refer to the source, and an opportunity to revise based on feedback.
Notes on answers: Because Bryson does not identify three key words in the 
book, the task requires students to identify overarching themes in the book, 
and develop claims which they can then support with textual evidence. This 
puts the references to the source in a supporting position in relation to 
the larger text. Because the book and the student assignment are on different 
if related topics (Bryson’s book is about Australia, while the assignment is 
about the book) it is very difﬁ cult to incorporate patchwritten chunks, provided 
the student focuses on the topic and answers the prompt, and writes about 
Bryson’s view of Australia, rather than getting sidetracked with a thesis about 
his or her own perceptions of Australia. (This activity was developed by Karin 
Molander Danielsson, who has generously allowed it to be used here.)
what the writer knows about the source rather than making minor changes to
the source. Asking for a one- sentence response requires students to distil the
main ideas out of each of the four areas canonically addressed in research
articles: introduction, methods, results and discussion.
Alternative: If a research article will be too difﬁ cult for your students, or if it
does not ﬁ t into the format of the class for some reason, this basic activity –
asking students to answer questions about content without reference to the
source – can be done successfully with other sorts of texts, but most easily
with texts which exemplify a well deﬁ ned genre whose form can be used to
structure the activity.
Task 10. Integrating source- use skills
Objectives: To develop students’ abilities to draw on a variety of source- use
skills to support a claim within a longer text.
Procedures: Students are asked to read a book and write an assignment
responding to a particular aspect of it. The assignment must be speciﬁ c and
involve the student developing, and putting forward, an argument or thesis.
For example, students can read Bill Bryson’s book Down Under, and write
r
about the three key words which Bryson would agree capture the nature of
Australia, supplying evidence for the claim from the book. (A variation of this
assignment can work well with any book- length text which has a relatively
clear thesis, is written at a level that students can understand, and ideally has
some relationship to the course content. The question in the prompt must,
naturally, be tailored to ﬁ t the book.) Students should submit a ﬁ rst draft and
receive feedback on it, including speciﬁ cally how appropriately and effectively 
they refer to the source, and an opportunity to revise based on feedback.
Notes on answers: Because Bryson does not identify three key words in the
book, the task requires students to identify overarching themes in the book,
and develop claims which they can then support with textual evidence. This
puts the references to the source in a supporting position in relation to 
the larger text. Because the book and the student assignment are on different
if related topics (Bryson’s book is about Australia, while the assignment is
about the book) it is very difﬁ cult to incorporate patchwritten chunks, provided
the student focuses on the topic and answers the prompt, and writes about
Bryson’s view of Australia, rather than getting sidetracked with a thesis about
his or her own perceptions of Australia. (This activity was developed by Karin
n
Molander Danielsson, who has generously allowed it to be used here.)

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION OR REFLECTION 93
Activity
A case study of an assessment activity. Select a course at your institution which is 
not one on which you teach, and which has a form of assessment which 
requires students to read and refer to other sources.
• What expectations do teachers on this course have about how students 
should use sources? Interview one or more teachers to ﬁ nd out.
• What instruction are students on this course given about how they should 
use sources in this assignment? Gather any written documentation they are 
given, and ask the teacher(s) if they tell students things that are not included 
in the written instructions.
• What are students told about plagiarism? Is there anything that they are 
expected to know about writing from sources which is not taught in this 
course? If so, where is it taught (e.g., was it part of an earlier course?).
• Are there formal assessment criteria for this assignment? If so, do they deal 
with source use?
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection
1 What source- use skills, and other writing skills generally, do students need 
to produce the assessment tasks you commonly work with?
2 Which of those skills do they know when they reach your classroom, and 
which do they still need to learn?
3 Which of the skills for writing from sources that students must demonstrate 
in order to ﬁ nish a degree at your institution, will be directly useful later in 
the workplace? Which will have indirect, transferable outcomes?

6
What support can 
institutions offer?
Summary • Managing prototypical plagiarism • Managing patchwriting 
• Unifying the management of textual plagiarism • Activity • Questions 
for discussion or reﬂ ection
Summary
Given the costs, time and reputational damage that can be caused by plagiarism and 
the disputes often attendant on it, academic institutions need to take all reasonable 
steps to avoid them. The policies, regulations and deﬁ nitions not only need to enable 
plagiarism to be detected and the appropriate responses applied, they also need to 
require that sources are used appropriately so that plagiarism, and the unfortunate 
consequences for the university, the teacher and the student, are avoided.
Essential to achieving this are good policies. Policies need to be clear about where 
the responsibilities lie for making students aware of what plagiarism is and for 
teaching good source use. The institution must take responsibility for seeing that 
appropriate materials and instruction are available and delivered at the most effective 
points in the curriculum. A further area of institutional responsibility is ensuring that 
teachers have the required skills and training to help their students with these issues 
(particularly in regard to interpreting the output of text matching tools). Resources 
and support are needed by both students and teachers. Policies and practices must 
provide for effective handling of both prototypical plagiarism and patchwriting. While 
penalties for intentional plagiarism are required, where deception is not involved, the 
use of penalties is counterproductive. Alternative remedies are therefore needed.
After having read this chapter you will be able to be able to assess and contribute 
to the improvement of your institution’s policies on plagiarism and the responses to 
it for the beneﬁ t of the university, the teachers and the students.

SUMMARY   95
What expectations does your institution place on teachers in terms of 
preventing, detecting and responding to plagiarism? What support does 
it give them in doing those things? Speciﬁ cally, does it do the things 
Sutherland- Smith calls for below? If not, what are the obstacles? Does 
your institution go further and provide forms of support not named 
below?
Universities also charge academic staff and students with the 
responsibility for appropriate citation practice education. This raises 
questions about the university’s responsibilities in a number of 
ways. Universities must provide sufﬁ cient training for staff (including 
casual and part- time academic staff involved in teaching and 
assessment), particularly where anti- plagiarism software programs 
are used. It is not sufﬁ cient for the institution to merely place the 
additional workload of teaching students about citation and 
attribution concepts and mechanics without attention to the need 
for staff professional development in this area and also the additional 
time taken to fulﬁ l such requirements.
(Sutherland- Smith, 2010: 9)
This book so far has addressed teachers (and people in related roles, such as 
consultants working in writing centres and study skills workshops), who are at 
the front line of meeting student concerns about source use and plagiarism. 
The present chapter discusses the role academic institutions can play in 
preventing plagiarism and promoting good source use, and as a result, it speaks 
primarily to administrators and other staff who have the ability and 
responsibility to shape policy and standards for practice and steer the allocation 
of resources.
If you are reading this chapter as an educational administrator, you have a 
problem with plagiarism. You have a problem because academic institutions 
want to eliminate plagiarism, and yet it happens at your university, and you 
know it happens more often than it is detected. You have a public image 
problem, because an increase in reported cases of plagiarism can make your 
student body appear dishonest, and a decrease can make your staff look soft on 
plagiarism. You have a ﬁ nancial problem because convening disciplinary 
boards and buying in ‘plagiarism- detection’ software is expensive, in addition 
to the invisible cost of the hours staff spend on detecting and reporting cases, 
which is time they cannot spend teaching. You also have a problem because 
staff experience stress when they have to initiate formal procedures against a 
student, and feel exposed and undervalued if they believe the wrong outcome 
is attained. You have a problem because some students plagiarise deliberately 
and get away with it, and others, who do not intend to cheat are bewildered 

96 WHAT SUPPORT CAN INSTITUTIONS OFFER?
and frustrated to be punished for what they did not know was wrong, and a 
third group are angry because they know some students plagiarise and are not 
caught. Tuition fees and the commodiﬁ cation of higher education means that 
students who think they have been treated unfairly are increasingly likely to 
vote with their feet and study somewhere else, or even sue their universities, 
and that is a problem too.
If the administrative problems caused by plagiarism are easy to set forth, the 
solutions are less so. This is in part because there is no magic bullet to cure 
plagiarism. It occurs at the intersection of a number of complex educational 
phenomena. Responding to plagiarism involves a constellation of structural, 
economic and legal issues which vary from country to country, and to some 
extent from institution to institution. The latitude which universities have to 
decide their own policies and procedures, the forms of assessment which are in 
use and the proclivity of students to go to law if they feel unfairly handled are 
all examples of the factors which must shape an institutional response to 
plagiarism. 
The solution, then, must be tailored to the individual institution. The 
purpose of this chapter is to describe the areas in which institutional action 
can be effective in eliminating plagiarism and promoting effective source use, 
and to outline key elements of good practice. Chapter 1 described two sharply 
distinct forms of plagiarism which, by virtue of having different causes, 
demand different responses. This chapter addresses institutional responses 
ﬁ rst to prototypical plagiarism, and then to patchwriting.
Managing prototypical plagiarism
Chapter 3 described the usual response to plagiarism as a quasi- judicial one: 
rules are made, and made public; more or less formal detection methods are 
put in place; and when cases of plagiarism are suspected, there follows a process 
of deciding whether or not the suspicions are founded, and if so, penalties are 
decided. This mechanism is reasonably well suited to dealing with prototypical 
plagiarism, plagiarism which is the result of a student’s deliberate effort to gain 
advantage by concealing the ways sources have been used. Opportunities for 
improving the response to plagiarism lie in reﬁ ning the way each of these steps 
is carried out.
Policy and regulation
Successful policies, including the deﬁ nitions of plagiarism within them, have 
two key characteristics. First, they need to reﬂ ect the institution’s shared 
understanding of plagiarism. There are, for example, differences across 
academic subject areas in how sources are appropriately used, and therefore 

MANAGING PROTOTYPICAL PLAGIARISM 97
possible differences in how plagiarism is understood (see Chapter 8). If policy 
describes an act which some staff do not understand to be wrongdoing, the risk 
is that they will not enforce the policy. Good practice in the area of policy 
therefore includes seeing that it is the result of broad consensus following a 
serious consultation process so that the resulting rules and deﬁ nitions are ones 
with which staff will engage.
A second characteristic of good policy is that it be speciﬁ c enough to leave 
staff conﬁ dent that they know how to apply it. A characteristic of many policies 
seen in Chapter 1 is that they deﬁ ne plagiarism in such general terms that staff 
experience difﬁ culty knowing whether speciﬁ c instances of student work 
should be regarded as plagiarism. While applying any rule to a given case 
requires an act of judgement, effective policy should provide staff with good 
tools for that judgement.
Spreading the word
The most desirable outcome for a policy on plagiarism is that it is so effective 
in providing both a carrot and a stick, telling students what they will gain by 
not plagiarising and what they will lose if they do, that students never consider 
plagiarism. One precondition for this is the clarity and speciﬁ city of rules and 
deﬁ nitions mentioned above. If staff have difﬁ culty understanding whether 
student work is plagiarised (and they do), it cannot be easier for students. In 
addition, the information needs to reach them in a form which they will 
notice, read, and engage with.
Detection
Detecting deceptive plagiarism is important, not only so that students do not 
receive academic awards based on efforts that were not their own, but so that 
the work of honest students is not devalued. Increasingly universities purchase 
subscriptions to text- matching (‘plagiarism- detection’) services in the hope 
that routinely scanning student work will result in more consistent responses. 
It is important to understand the limitations on what these services can do and 
the need for staff training if they are used. Chapter 3 details the pros and cons 
of text- matching services and describes other methods as alternatives or 
complements.
Mechanisms
It is customary in the English- speaking world and in many other countries for 
procedures to require some or all cases of suspected plagiarism to be referred to 
a disciplinary panel, an academic integrity ofﬁ cer, or some other individual or 
body who is not the teacher. A very sound reason for such procedures is to 
avoid a situation in which the teacher is simultaneously prosecutor, judge and 
jury. However, the success of a set of procedures which require the teacher to 

98 WHAT SUPPORT CAN INSTITUTIONS OFFER?
refer the case elsewhere depends on a number of elements which are often 
either absent or perceived by staff as absent.
First, the procedures should be known to all staff and as easy as possible to 
comply with. Since many teachers, fortunately, encounter plagiarism only 
infrequently, they may not know how to start the process. A clear step- by- step 
description of the process needs to be available where staff can ﬁ nd it easily 
and information to the effect that there are procedures needs to go out 
regularly, insuring that new and temporary staff are kept informed. Staff 
frequently perceive the reporting process as being time- consuming (Day, 2008; 
Sutherland- Smith, 2010), and as requiring ‘extra time’. This may or may not 
match the reality from an administrative perspective; for example, the teacher 
time allocated to any given course may be intended to cover eventualities such 
as the need to report a case of plagiarism. However, if the procedures are 
perceived as putting an unrealistic burden on staff, they may not always be 
followed.
Second, the process should leave staff feeling that their efforts in following it 
are appreciated. However, too often this is not the case. Particularly when the 
accusation of plagiarism is not upheld, staff report feeling undermined and 
under attack. Not infrequently there is direct or implied criticism of the staff 
member; for example, if the accusation could not be upheld because the 
required warnings or information about plagiarism had not been supplied at 
the beginning of the course. However, such criticism should be delivered as 
tactfully as any formative feedback, for the purpose of ensuring improved 
performance in the future. Again, a process which is perceived to have a negative 
backlash against the member of staff who initiates it risks not being followed.
Finally, it is at the point of starting a disciplinary process that prototypical 
plagiarism and patchwriting merge in potentially risky ways. Frequently the 
possible outcomes of formal proceedings are binary: the student is either found 
guilty or is not. However, this results in an inappropriate outcome for many 
students produce work which is overly reliant on its sources in inappropriate 
ways but which is not motivated by intentional deception. Responding to such 
work is the subject of the next section, but it should be noted here that a safety 
valve should exist in the system for such writers in one or both of two places: 
at the point when a decision is made to make a formal report of possible 
plagiarism, and at the point when a decision is made.
Penalties
Penalties for plagiarism vary greatly across institutions and according to the 
perceived seriousness of the offence, and extend from a warning to a lowered 
grade at the small end of the spectrum, to suspension or expulsion or the 
revocation of a degree at the serious end. Particularly in the UK, a current effort 
is aimed at establishing ‘penalty tariffs’, sliding scales for certain predeﬁ ned 
categories of plagiarism intended to make punishment ﬁ t the crime, and to 
create greater consistency in the process.

MANAGING PATCHWRITING 99
While this is a laudable objective, there are two potential pitfalls for 
institutions adopting a tariff system. The ﬁ rst is that to be implemented 
consistently, there must be a consistent view among all regulators as to what 
constitutes minor and serious plagiarism, and that must be grounded in broad 
consensus among the institution’s staff. However, university teachers are 
inconsistent in deciding how to regard potential plagiarism (Pecorari and 
Shaw, 2012; Roig, 2001; Sutherland- Smith, 2008). Developing a tariff system 
which can successfully be applied is therefore not an easy matter.
A second essential point is, again, that there needs to be a response to 
plagiarism which is not deceptive in nature. Possible responses are suggested 
below, but an essential point is that there be an alternative which is not 
punitive in nature. Responding to unintentional plagiarism with any 
punishment, however mild, is akin to treating a cold with surgery. Minor 
surgery may cause the patient less discomfort than major, but it is no more 
appropriate a response.
Managing patchwriting
Patchwriting was deﬁ ned in Chapter 1 as a form of textual plagiarism which is 
not caused by the intention to cheat. There is a lot of patchwriting (Pecorari, 
2003; Howard, Serviss and Rodrigue, 2010), and preventing and responding to 
it effectively require fundamentally different measures than those which 
address prototypical plagiarism.
The very best prevention for patchwriting is good teaching, and Chapter 5 
described ways in which teachers can work with this issue. The role of the 
larger institution in supporting them is twofold: providing resources and 
coordinating. Teaching students not to misuse sources means teaching them 
how to write effective academic texts which use sources appropriately. 
However, many teachers perceive that they are not adequately resourced to 
teach academic writing. They see teaching about writing as being in competition 
for time in their courses with the main content of their disciplines, and they 
have to prioritise the latter. They may also feel that while they are good at 
writing up their own research, teaching writing requires a skill set they do not 
have. An effective institutional response consists both of providing the 
resources so that students from all subjects can learn important writing skills, 
and in professional development efforts which help teachers across the 
curriculum learn to be skilled teachers of writing in their ﬁ elds.
Such efforts can be complemented by obligatory or mandatory writing 
courses, writing centres, study support etc. These are more common at some 
institutions than others, and exist in a range of forms with different levels of 
resourcing but a general principle is that any writing support is better than 
none at all. However, writing skills develop slowly and after practice, and a 

100 WHAT SUPPORT CAN INSTITUTIONS OFFER?
single course, or even a series of writing courses cannot be expected to do away 
with students’ need for writing support. It is therefore important that all staff 
who use writing for assessment purposes be equipped, both in time resources 
and skills, to guide students through the process of understanding and meeting 
expectations about how they will use sources.
Another important domain for institutional support is coordination. The 
skills students need to use sources effectively and appropriately – and thereby 
avoid plagiarism – develop incrementally, and to some extent according to a 
logical progression, as discussed in Chapter 5. As a result the expectations that 
can reasonably be placed on student performance and the input that is needed 
to ensure good preconditions for success depend on what input and 
opportunities for practice the student has had to date, and best planning for 
teaching source use takes into account the student’s progression across the 
entire course of study. This is not a level of planning, though, which individual 
teachers can all engage in, or even be aware of. Nor can they reinvent the wheel 
and teach students everything they need to know about writing from sources 
each term. Regardless of where and when the provision of teaching about 
source use happens across the curriculum, then an important role for the 
institution, then, is to see to it that it does happen; that longsighted planning 
is in place to ensure that all students across all subjects have the opportunity 
to learn the things they need to complete their assessment writing tasks.
Unifying the management of textual plagiarism
The two sections above dealt with the two forms of textual plagiarism, 
prototypical plagiarism and patchwriting, separately, because they are very 
different acts and deserve different responses. The ﬁ rst, a form of cheating, 
requires sanctions; the second requires a pedagogical response. However, two 
opportunities for institutional response are equally effective against both.
The teacher is the key actor in preventing and responding to plagiarism of 
both sorts, and must perform a wide range of functions: informing students 
about rules and policies, providing instruction in source- use skills, detecting 
textual plagiarism, deciding what response to it is most appropriate, etc. A 
useful support function for teachers is a point of consultation, a conﬁ dential 
advisor who can help them decide whether a particular case of plagiarism is 
deceptive or not, advise on designing assignments which encourage an original 
response, etc. Such a resource could also support teachers who report cases of 
plagiarism in the process so that it becomes a less negative experience.
Another valuable institutional function is shaping admissions procedures. 
The need exists to coordinate instruction in source use and writing to see to it 
that all students are equipped for their writing tasks because in many contexts 
systematic instruction in subject- based writing is not common. Source-use 

ACTIVITY 101
skills along with other writing skills are something which students are expected 
to pick up en passant while pursuing their course of study, or to already possess 
when they arrive at university, or some combination of the two, i.e., that they 
arrive sufﬁ ciently well prepared to be able to learn an unstated agenda of 
academic proﬁ ciencies together with a body of course content.
This may have been a sustainable strategy at some earlier time. When a 
much smaller proportion of the population went to university, and therefore 
university students represented the best prepared of their generation, and the 
societal resources which support higher education were not spread so thin, so 
that (for example) maintenance grants obviated the need for students to hold 
jobs, it may have been realistic to expect university students to learn a 
curriculum of academic discourse skills as a side dish to their studies. 
Those circumstances no longer obtain, though, for the vast majority of 
teaching contexts. In western countries, a larger proportion of the population 
is attending university than ever before, not just the elite of each generation. A 
growing number of students are learning through the medium of a second or 
foreign language, adding an extra layer of difﬁ culty to the academic writing 
task. In countries where the higher education sector has expanded, universities 
have a strong pressure to ﬁ ll places, even if it means admitting students who 
have relatively poorer preconditions for success. 
In this context, a model which expects students to develop skills in source 
use which they have not been explicitly taught in a systematic, thorough and 
adequately resourced way is a recipe for increasing the incidence of plagiarism. 
Holding them accountable for those skills, by detecting plagiarism and 
punishing offenders, is something like shooting the horses which fail to jump 
over the hurdle. It is a workable strategy if the only objective is to have a pool 
of horses which can make it over the hurdle and wastage is not an issue. 
However, that is not the mission of a higher education institution, nor a 
tenable position for one to be in.
Activity
Conducting an institutional audit. This chapter has identiﬁ ed areas in which 
university administration can act to prevent plagiarism. What is the situation 
at your university in each of these areas? What scope exists for improving 
them?
• Regulation and policy
• Information
• Detection
• Procedures
• Penalties

102 WHAT SUPPORT CAN INSTITUTIONS OFFER?
• Resourcing staff to teach source use
• Student resources to learn about writing and source use
• Coordination of instruction across subjects
• Staff support for plagiarism and source use
• Admissions criteria
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection
1 This chapter suggested that policy at the university level is often concerned 
only with deceptive plagiarism and patchwriting and other non- deceptive 
source use issues are dealt with by the teacher. Does that match the reality at 
your institution? Is that an effective division of responsibility?
2 In a survey of Australian universities Sutherland- Smith found that it is 
regulated centrally and thus ‘plagiarism is not something that is able to be 
deﬁ ned or administered differently across the institution’ (2010: 7). Is a 
central solution or a devolved one preferable?
3 Some institutions make the use of ‘plagiarism- detection’ software 
compulsory, in at least some circumstances. Is a decision of that nature one 
which should be made by university administration or teachers?

Part Three
Contextualising 
plagiarism


7
International students 
and second- language 
writers
Summary • International students and second- language writers: Who are 
they? • Plagiarism and L2 writers: What are the issues? • Implications for 
teachers • Activity • Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection
Summary
It is frequently asserted that students whose ﬁ rst language is not English are more 
likely to plagiarise, or do so for reasons related to a different understanding of 
plagiarism prevalent in their home culture. This chapter presents and weighs up 
the evidence for and against such differences which has been presented in the 
research literature, and explores the aspects of the international student experience 
which have relevance for issues related to source use and plagiarism in academic 
writing. Other factors which are connected to plagiarism in the writing of international 
students include their language skills in conjunction with the heavy burden of 
writing academic texts in a second language, and the degree of experience with 
academic writing in any language with which they arrive at an English- medium 
university. The implications for teachers are discussed and the chapter concludes 
that while the knowledge and skills which international students need to avoid 
plagiarism and use sources effectively are not fundamentally different from those 
which any student needs, their starting points when arriving at university in the 
English- speaking world are more diverse, and support needs to be tailored 
accordingly.

106 INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS AND SECOND- LANGUAGE WRITERS
When you have ﬁ nished this chapter you will be better able to understand the 
needs and challenges of international students and be able to adjust your approach 
in the classroom to meeting them in ways which will be maximally effective in 
developing their knowledge and skills for good source use.
Many people believe that students who do not have English as a ﬁ rst 
language are especially likely to write in ways which are associated with 
plagiarism. Is that an idea you have heard, and if so, what explanations 
for it have been offered? The two quotations below present rather 
different perspectives on this question. Which matches your own 
experience most closely?
Korean students copy from various kinds of sources from books and 
magazines to Internet. . . . Western teachers get indignant over 
foreign students [sic] copying behavior . . . Asian students get then 
confused at these western teachers’ emotionally charged reactions.
(Moon, 2002: 1351)
I know what plagiarism is. We have it in Korea too, and we take it 
seriously.
(Student quoted in Errey, 2002: 19)
An idea about plagiarism which is often heard, and which some appear 
to accept as a truism, is that students with English as a second or foreign 
language are more likely to plagiarise than others, but do so because of cultural 
differences which lead to them not perceiving plagiarism as wrong. Plagiarism 
is related on the one hand to values and on the other hand to language 
production; this is therefore an apparently plausible view. However, another 
well represented view challenges these proposed differences. After brieﬂ y 
outlining what is meant by second- language speakers and international 
students, this chapter will examine the arguments for and against differences 
in an understanding of plagiarism, or a proclivity to commit it, and then 
conclude with recommendations for good practice in handling plagiarism 
with this diverse group of writers.
International students and second- language writers: 
Who are they?
Much of the commentary and research which has addressed this question (and 
there is more of the former than the latter) has either conﬂ ated international 

INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS AND SECOND- LANGUAGE WRITERS: WHO ARE THEY? 107
students with second- language writers, or been based on groups of students 
who are both. They are, however, two distinct and only partly overlapping 
groups, each of which is quite heterogeneous.
The group of individuals studying through the medium of Englishiv as a foreign 
or second language is broad and diverse, and subsumes a number of distinctions 
related to language background and learning. The ﬁ rst of these is between English 
as a foreign language (EFL) and English as a second language (ESL), and the 
related distinction between language learning and language acquisition. When 
this distinction is observed (and it is not always), language learning refers to what 
happens with a foreign language in a classroom- based setting while acquisition 
is what happens in a more naturalistic setting, as for example the case of an 
immigrant who ‘picks up’ a language from exposure to it ‘on the street’. While 
these categories are useful in that they indicate real differences in the mechanisms 
for and conditions around learning (or acquisition), they are not always distinct, 
as for example in the case of many international students, who have learned 
English as a classroom language in their home countries and then travel abroad 
to study entirely through the medium of English. These categories will therefore 
be conﬂ ated here, and the term ‘second- language (L2) writer’ will be used 
primarily because it is one most commonly used in the research literature on 
academic writing.
Another factor which distinguishes non- native speakers and can inﬂ uence 
their experience of learning to produce academic texts in English is the context 
in which they have encountered the language. English has a global spread, but 
its status differs from country to country. A student from China may arrive at 
an English- speaking university having had years of classroom- based instruction 
in the language with an emphasis on grammar and vocabulary, but have limited 
experience using English for real communicative purposes. A student from 
India, on the other hand, may have had similar experiences, but alternatively 
may have been educated primarily or entirely in English, and possibly even had 
it as a home language. Students who immigrated to the English- speaking world 
during their primary or secondary education may have strong language skills by 
virtue of prolonged exposure to the language, but are likely not to be classiﬁ ed 
as international students if they completed secondary school in that country, 
with the result that the fact that they do not have native- like proﬁ ciency (if this 
is indeed the case) may not be visible in their enrolment records, etc.
As the last two examples indicate, there is not perfect overlap between 
international students and second- language speakers. Some international 
students may have grown up with the language, while some second- language 
speakers of English may, by virtue of permanent residence in a country, not be 
classed as international students. However, the overlap is substantial enough 
that for the purposes of this chapter the two terms will be used interchangeably.
The phenomenon of students from other countries and language backgrounds 
travelling to English- speaking countries such as the US, the UK and Australia 
is long- established. According to statistics from the Organisation for Economic 
Co- operation and Development, the number of non- citizen students in tertiary 

108 INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS AND SECOND- LANGUAGE WRITERS
education in the UK rose from 209,550 in 1998 to 534,555 in 2010, and as 
early as 1991, commentators on the situation for international students in 
Australia noted that 
[ELL students] must be assessed by the same criteria as used for ﬁ rst language 
students, and yet the problems presented by their work are fundamentally 
different from those encountered in the work of native students
(Ballard and Clanchy, 1991: 19)
The phenomenon of non- native speakers of English studying through the 
medium of English is, however, no longer conﬁ ned to international students 
coming to countries like the US and the UK. Alternatives include distance 
courses and branch campuses of English- speaking universities in other 
countries. The British Council concluded in 2011, based on ﬁ gures from the 
UK’s Higher Education Statistics Agency, that the number of students studying 
in the UK had been outstripped by the number studying through UK 
institutions offshore.
Nor is the provision of English- medium courses the exclusive purview of the 
countries typically thought of as ‘English- speaking’. In places such as the 
Netherlands and Scandinavia, English occupies a strong position generally, 
and is becoming the language of instruction on an increasing number of 
courses, making them attractive destinations for study. In 2008, according to 
OECD statistics, the ﬁ ve countries with the largest proportion of international 
students at their universities were, in descending order, Australia, Austria, the 
UK, Switzerland and New Zealand. 
Outside of the traditional core of English- speaking countries, English is used 
at universities as part of what has been called a ‘parallel- language environment’, 
in which English is used in parallel with a local language. In one form, entire 
courses are taught in English; in other forms, English is a presence in some 
components of courses and assessment writing may be done in English. There 
are therefore many university students around the world who must learn to do 
academic writing – and therefore to use sources appropriately and effectively – in 
English. Given the widespread perception that L2 status contributes to textual 
plagiarism, it is important to understand the relationship between linguistic and 
cultural background on one hand, and plagiarism and source use on the other. 
Plagiarism and L2 writers: What are the issues?
Two different aspects of the international student experience have been 
associated with an increased tendency to plagiarise. The ﬁ rst is cultural 
background in terms of the ideas, beliefs and values which vary across national 
boundaries. According to this explanation, the idea of plagiarism is understood 

PLAGIARISM AND L2 WRITERS: WHAT ARE THE ISSUES? 109
differently in some cultures, or indeed is an alien concept altogether. Students 
who come from those countries therefore may not know what plagiarism is, or 
may not understand that it is considered a serious violation of academic ethics, 
or in some other way may not be able to understand the Anglo- Saxon perspective 
on plagiarism. A second explanation points to a speciﬁ c feature of a culture, 
its educational system, and the fact that differences in educational practices 
can leave students unprepared for some of the tasks they will be required to 
take on at an English- medium university. The third explanation is that most 
international students have a ﬁ rst language which is not English, and therefore 
face challenges related to working through the medium of another language. 
Cultural attitudes and perceptions of plagiarism
A frequently encountered idea is that international students simply are 
not equipped with an understanding of plagiarism, that ‘in some cultural 
traditions plagiarism is not recognised as a sin: it is a normal academic practice 
to gather together what others have said into a sort of pastiche’ (Cammish, 
1997: 153). This explanation in its simplest form posits a simple lack of 
declarative knowledge. In a study of Hong Kong university students, only a 
small minority – four out of 170 – reported that the word ‘plagiarism’ had ever 
been explained to them (Deckert, 1993: 137). A knowledge gap like this is in 
principle something which could affect any student, regardless of cultural 
background, but a link is sometimes made with educational systems which, 
unlike those in the English- speaking world, do not perceive plagiarism as an 
issue worthy of classroom time:
Korean students copy from various kinds of sources from books and 
magazines to Internet. And it has been allowed. More precisely, it has been 
ignored because plagiarism is not a concern of teachers in academic 
settings in Korea.
(Moon, 2002: 1351)
A variation on this theme is that students may have heard a deﬁ nition of 
plagiarism and know in theory that they are not supposed to do it, but lack a 
full awareness of the sorts of acts which must be avoided. This explanation, 
too, is one which could in principle apply to any student but the literature on 
plagiarism features many anecdotal accounts of international students in this 
position. Leki, for example, (1992) documented a case involving students who 
assumed that they could avoid plagiarism by memorising a text and reproducing 
it from memory, rather than directly from the printed page.
This possible difference is attributed to a variety of factors, one of which is a 
culturally speciﬁ c orientation toward authority: that
in a number of countries, particularly in Asia, there is considerable respect 
for the printed word and those in authority. Consequently, it is quite 

110 INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS AND SECOND- LANGUAGE WRITERS
normal for students to quote from authorities/books without feeling the 
need to acknowledge the source; nor is it necessarily expected.
(Jordan, 1997: 100)
This idea, that in some cultures ‘humility is valued as a personal characteristic’, 
is said to lead
many ESL composition students [to] hold fast to their image of themselves 
as students, tending to see themselves as apprentices and nonexperts, and 
not perceiving themselves as having any real authority, even over their 
own texts’
(Benson and Heidish, 1995: 322)
and has frequently been articulated as the source of the ‘stereotype of the 
“plagiarizing overseas student”’ (Ballard and Clanchy,1991: 3).
Another explanation is to do with cultural variation along a cline which has 
‘collective’ orientations at one end and ‘individual’ at the other (e.g., Hofstede, 
1984). In individualist cultures, it is said,
copying is an offence and dealt with as such. . . . To a student from a 
collectivist culture, however, there is nothing morally wrong with collusion. 
It does not contravene the moral code; indeed it may be construed as 
cooperation. In such a culture resources, including intellectual ones, are to 
be shared; opinions expressed are those of the group, not the individual.
(Barker, 1997: 115)
This idea was one issue covered in Deckert’s (1993) investigation of Hong Kong 
students’ knowledge about, and attitudes toward, plagiarism. While a similar 
study at a US university (Kroll, 1988) found that a quarter of students 
mentioned intellectual property rights as the most important reason for 
objecting to plagiarism, under 14% of Deckert’s ﬁ rst- year university students 
gave a similar response, although the ﬁ gure rose among third- year students.
Other cultural values or beliefs which have been suggested as an explanation 
include the idea that there is one, absolute truth, making citation unnecessary 
(since eternal truths are not the intellectual offspring of any particular person) 
and paraphrase dangerous (since, if the truth is absolute, altering the language 
in which it is expressed risks altering the facts). Deep respect for the teacher or 
other reader may dictate omitting references since the teacher, an expert in his 
or her ﬁ eld, will recognise the sources. Speaking of sources of plagiarism in 
Korean students’ writing, Moon says that traditionally ‘knowledge was 
conﬁ ned to a small circle’ which was
supposed to obtain knowledge from the approved authorities. It was 
shared knowledge. Therefore, even though there was no citation, a 
knowledgeable reader would ﬁ gure out where the sources came from. And 

PLAGIARISM AND L2 WRITERS: WHAT ARE THE ISSUES? 111
if a reader was not able to identify the source, it was his fault, which is the 
ignorance of his knowledge in the ﬁ eld.
(2002: 1353)
Although many of the culturally based explanations have contrasted Western 
and Eastern values, textual plagiarism by Italian students has been attributed 
to a cultural cause as well: speciﬁ cally, the desire to produce a polished and 
smooth piece of writing has been connected with a general importance placed 
on making a good impression, a bella ﬁ gura (Sherman, 1992).
There are, therefore, many voices arguing for the idea that cultural differences 
predispose L2 writers to write in a way which is likely to be called plagiarism. 
There is not universal agreement on this, however; in the second- language 
writing literature, assertions of cultural differences have been met by vocal 
disagreement, some of it from scholars embedded in the very cultures in which 
Western commentators have claimed these differences exist. According to a 
Vietnamese academic,
plagiarism is never allowed or made legitimate by Vietnamese culture or 
education. For example, even at primary school level, if a pupil copies 
another pupil’s ideas to reproduce them in his/her very basic compositions 
(such as a description of one’s favourite pet), his/her teachers and 
classmates will criticize and help that pupil realize that it is unacceptable 
to copy others’ ideas for one’s assessment purposes. Also, it is not unusual 
for school teachers to require students found plagiarizing to write down 
100 times the same promise ‘I will never steal others’ ideas/writing again’. 
These practices show that plagiarism is viewed as unethical.
(Ha, 2006: 76)
A Chinese scholar takes essentially the same position:
Based on my educational experience as a native of China and the research 
I have conducted, I would like to argue that the claim that copying others’ 
writing as one’s own is allowed, taught and/or encouraged in China is not 
accurate.
(Liu, 2005: 235)
Students from the cultures concerned share this view, or appear to. In a study 
of Japanese university students, LoCastro and Masuko (2002: 22) found some 
students believed that cultural differences were real, saying for example that 
‘in Japan, people are not generally aware of plagiarism’ but also found others 
who were upset when fellow students plagiarised, suggesting that they both 
were aware of plagiarism and held negative perceptions of it. Another study set 
in Japan (Wheeler, 2009) asked students to comment on a piece of writing 
which was clearly plagiarised, and they were highly critical of it. At a UK 
university, Errey (2002) found that staff offered culture as an explanation for 

112 INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS AND SECOND- LANGUAGE WRITERS
plagiarism in their international students (as did staff in Australia in Bretag’s 
2004 study), but the students themselves distanced themselves from that 
explanation.
The difference between the views of staff and students may provide a partial 
understanding of why the idea of cultural causes for plagiarism is so persistent, 
despite reasons to be cautious about accepting them. Teachers who identify 
what looks like a form of cheating in the work of students they do not believe 
are cheaters search for a reason elsewhere, and culture is a convenient one. It is 
also a well intentioned one, and yet there is a need to be wary of it. Buranen 
notes that 
conﬁ dent assertions like ‘Asian students don’t believe so and so’ . . . are as 
inaccurate and misleading as any stereotype, and the effect is often 
condescending or patronizing, revealing an arrogance that says in essence, 
‘your culture is simple and transparent enough to be contained in a few 
pat phrases’ . . .
(Buranen, 1999: 73)
Bloch attributes a concurring view to Alton Becker: ‘when you tell someone 
that they are different, they think you mean they are inferior’ (2008: 220). A 
more practical danger in adopting the cultural- difference position is that the 
source of the problem is put down largely to knowledge: students from culture 
X do not know that plagiarism is wrong. A concomitant of that is that once 
they’ve been told ‘don’t plagiarise’, staff members may see repeated problems 
with using sources as evidence of deceptive intent.
And yet for all the reasons not to rush headlong into adopting this explanation, 
a considerable body of literature persistently asserts that perceptions or 
experience of plagiarism vary across cultures (e.g., Hayes and Introna, 2005; 
Hirvela and Du, forthcoming; Rinnert and Kobayashi, 2005), making it difﬁ cult 
to discard the idea altogether. Is the cultural explanation right or wrong? The 
reality is very likely, as Bloch concludes, more complex than that:
there is not today, nor ever has been, a single Chinese perspective on 
imitation, originality, and plagiarism, but . . . there is a different sense in 
how these concepts interact. Studying this relationship in a cross- cultural 
perspective reminds us of the danger of dichotomizing these concepts 
across cultures, so that only one culture is viewed as the ‘other’.
(2008: 228)
It may be then that the value of connecting plagiarism and culture is not that 
the latter can explain the former, but that the phenomenon of varied 
understandings of plagiarism, and approaches to using the words and ideas of 
others, can be a lens through which teachers can obtain a clearer view of the 
meaning of cultural differences and similarities in their relationship with their 
students.

PLAGIARISM AND L2 WRITERS: WHAT ARE THE ISSUES? 113
Language and writing skills
An alternative connection between plagiarism and international students has 
considerably stronger support in the research literature: academic writing in a 
second language is a challenging task, and students who are not able to produce 
academic language which is as ﬂ uent as they would like it to be may rely on the 
language of their sources. Writing for assessment purposes is very common in 
the English- speaking world, but is not equally common everywhere (e.g., Bloch, 
2001; Dryden, 1999; Hayes and Introna, 2005; Timm, 2007a; Timm, 2007b).
Nor is writing conceived of in similar terms around the world. It has been 
suggested that some educational systems encourage students to use 
memorisation or copying as a study practice (Matalene, 1985; Porte, 1995). An 
anecdotal account describes students from Malaysia being accused of plagiarism 
on an exam because they had memorised the textbook in preparation for the 
exam and were later able to produce extracts from it from memory (Leki, 1992). 
This story, offered as an illustration of different perspectives on plagiarism, 
demonstrates different abilities as well. It is difﬁ cult to imagine that many 
students from the US or the UK have such a facility for memorisation. If 
students are accustomed to such reproductive learning strategies, they may be 
likely to apply them to writing tasks.
In a detailed exposition of the instruction French students receive about 
writing and using sources, Donahue (2008) describes a system with an internal 
logic but one which emphasises different aspects of using sources than the 
Anglo- Saxon academic culture does. Students are taught to summarise, but 
their summaries can contain ‘key phrases’ (2008: 93) from the source without 
signalling them as quotation, and paraphrase is not only not the focus of 
instruction, it is actively discouraged with regard to literary texts. This serves as 
an example of the ways that international students’ prior literacy practices can 
leave them ill- prepared for the sorts of academic writing they will do in the 
English- speaking world.
A range of factors in international students’ academic backgrounds may 
therefore cause them to look favourably upon repeating the language of the 
source as a writing strategy, and by the same token they have an extra 
motivation for doing so. Most people, from undergraduates in their ﬁ rst term 
to senior and frequently published scholars, ﬁ nd academic writing challenging, 
because of the high degree of accuracy and precision of expression it requires. 
The ideas which academic texts express are often complex, and their language 
equally so. Producing academic writing in a second language only adds to the 
difﬁ culty, and students frequently report that the desire to produce smooth 
texts and the perception, right or wrong, that they are unable to do so unaided, 
is a force leading them to use cut- and- paste strategies (e.g. Barks and Watts, 
2001; Currie, 1998; Pecorari, 2008a).
One element in the problem is productive language abilities: having the skill 
to choose the words and structures which convey a message clearly, while 
avoiding errors in grammar or word choice. Receptive abilities also play a role, 

114 INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS AND SECOND- LANGUAGE WRITERS
and in the case of source use, the ability to read in particular. Good reading 
skills are, naturally, necessary in order to be able to understand sources and 
texts (and understanding them is a precondition for being able to use them in 
effective ways, and to summarise and paraphrase appropriately and without 
distorting the meaning). Reading in a second language also takes more time 
(e.g., Shaw and McMillion, 2008), with the inevitable result that less time is 
available for writing.
It is worth stressing that the pressures of working in a second language are not 
felt only by those who are inadequately prepared for it. The language proﬁ ciency 
of prospective international students coming to an English- medium university 
is most frequently benchmarked against one of two instruments, the Test of 
English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) or the International English Language 
Testing System (IELTS). A common minimum score for university admissions 
is 6.0 on the IELTS (corresponding approximately to 550 on the paper- based 
TOEFL or 80 on the Internet- based test). Some universities and programmes 
accept lower scores still. The band descriptors for the IELTS say that a score of 
6.0 indicates a ‘competent user’ who
has generally effective command of the language despite some inaccuracies, 
inappropriacies and misunderstandings. Can use and understand fairly 
complex language, particularly in familiar situations.
However, few students wish to hand in an essay – much less a dissertation or 
thesis – with ‘some inaccuracies, inappropriacies and misunderstandings’. Most 
students aspire higher than that. They want their written work not only to avoid 
grammatical errors, but to sound like a scholarly work; they want to make use of 
the stock of phrases and expressions which characterise the academic texts 
which they are reading. In this respect they are no different from writers with 
English as a ﬁ rst language, but they have further to go to close the gap between 
their current skills and those they need to develop. Seen from this perspective, 
patchwriting can be seen to serve an important function for the L2 writer.
This view was widespread among the Hong Kong science students interviewed 
by Flowerdew and Li. They actively searched for models of ‘repeatable’ 
language, because the obstacles to composing a piece of research writing in 
English from scratch were insuperable:
The ﬁ rst draft – we have to build up a framework – make it look like a 
paper; if you write it all by yourself, you deﬁ nitely cannot produce a paper 
if you all do it by yourself . . . we may take from different sources, synthesize 
them, and express our own meaning. If we see a particularly good 
expression, we’ll deﬁ nitely use it.
(2007: 450)
Disregarding for a moment concerns about plagiarism, this is likely to be an 
effective strategy for producing good writing, at the level of language. It is also 

IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHERS 115
likely to be an effective strategy for their future learning; the efﬁ cacy of 
repetition in language learning is well established. However, English L2 
researchers caught in public plagiarism scandals (e.g., Li and Xiong, 1996) 
would probably advise these students not to disregard concerns about 
plagiarism; accusations can be fatally damaging to a scholarly career. Yet many 
L2 writers distinguish between copying ‘good expressions’ and appropriating 
results, and feel licensed to do the former provided they avoid the latter. Two 
Chinese researchers who were accused of plagiarism in a case reported in Nature 
offered this explanation: ‘“There is a signiﬁ cant degree of identity in the 
wording”, they admitted, but the charge of plagiarism is not valid “because we 
have all the original data”’ (Li and Xiong, 1996: 337). For writers in their 
position, a prohibition against patchwriting is perceived as a tax on being a 
second- language writer.
Implications for teachers
This chapter has highlighted some of the aspects of plagiarism which have 
particular resonance for international students. The role of cultural differences 
is contested, but the possibility that they contribute to an understanding 
of plagiarism cannot be discounted. On the other hand, skills in using 
sources as part of academic writing, and language skills more generally are 
undoubtedly an important issue. They exert opposing pressures to shape a 
difﬁ cult situation for the second- language writer. On the one hand, study 
through the medium of a second language adds to the already considerable 
demands of learning to write academic texts. On the other hand, their previous 
educational background may have put them further away from the ﬁ nish line 
from the outset.
What does this mean for teachers who have international students and 
diagnose, or want to prevent, textual plagiarism in their work? International 
students need clear explanations of, and illustrations of plagiarism
• to know how textual plagiarism is handled at their university;
• to know what expectations teachers have of their source use, including the 
writer’s responsibility to use sources transparently;
• to have support in learning the skills which are necessary to source use, 
but which are made more difﬁ cult by the fact of working through a 
second language, including (but not limited to) reading academic texts; 
reformulating ideas from them; using reporting verbs; etc.
• to have opportunities for practice, feedback and revision;
• to be met by teachers who understand that textual plagiarism can have 
non- deceptive causes, and are thus willing to extend the presumption of 
innocence to them.

116 INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS AND SECOND- LANGUAGE WRITERS
In short, international students need nothing which home students do not; 
they simply need more of it, and tailored to their ability level, which may not 
be that of ﬁ rst- language speakers.
However, despite the fact that there are clear and undoubted costs working 
through the medium of a second language, particularly when carrying out the 
rhetorically complex tasks of which assessment writing consists, it does not 
always follow from that that second- language writers are necessarily in a deﬁ cit 
position with respect to their ﬁ rst- language peers. International students are a 
diverse group, and their diverse backgrounds may have equipped them with 
beneﬁ cial knowledge, skills and perspectives which their home- country 
counterparts lack. Further, the clearest sources of problems for international 
students are those linked to the difﬁ culties of producing academic discourse. 
However, this is not an issue unique to them. Producing academic writing is 
part of entering academic culture, and plagiarism can be one of the consequences 
of this ‘culture clash’ for any novice academic writer. This is a theme that will 
be returned to in Chapter 9.
Activity
Documenting the situation for international students. This investigation consists 
of two parts: documenting rules and procedures, and interviewing an 
international student about perceptions and experiences. First, use your 
university’s website, or contact the admissions ofﬁ ce, to ﬁ nd out:
• What admissions criteria apply to students who have a ﬁ rst language other 
than English (or than the language of instruction at your institution)? 
Which test(s) are accepted as a measure of English proﬁ ciency and what 
score do students need to achieve on it?
• Are there any groups of international students or second- language users 
who are not required to provide a test score?
Next, interview a student with English (or your institution’s teaching language) 
as a foreign language.
• Why was he or she motivated to study at your institution?
• Before beginning this course, how much experience had he or she had of 
using English in daily life? And in academic settings?
• Before starting this course, how much experience had he or she had of 
assessment writing? In which language(s) was it done?
• How difﬁ cult or easy is it to study through the medium of another 
language? What about listening to and understanding lectures? Doing 
assigned reading? Doing coursework?

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION OR REFLECTION 117
• What score did that student get on the English proﬁ ciency test used for 
admissions?
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection
1 What are the language backgrounds of your students? Is it possible to group 
them into the categories international student/home student or ﬁ rst- 
language/second- language user, or do the categories blur?
2 Do the reading section from a sample IELTS test (http://www.ielts.org/
test_takers_information/test_sample/academic_reading_sample.aspx) 
in 
the time speciﬁ ed in the instructions. How does the difﬁ culty of the task 
compare to the reading you assign or recommend to your students? If 
English is your ﬁ rst language, imagine taking a test like this in the foreign 
language which you know best. Would your skills be sufﬁ cient?
3 As discussed in this chapter, there is a widespread belief that cultural 
differences may make it more likely that international students plagiarise. If 
this is the case, to what extent might it be appropriate to respond differently 
to plagiarism by international and home students?

8
Differences across 
academic subjects
Summary • Writing in the disciplines • How are sources cited? • Signalled 
and unsignalled quotation • Learning to meet disciplinary conventions 
• Disciplinary variation in a broader perspective • Activity • Questions for 
discussion or reﬂ ection
Summary
Academic integrity policies tend to disregard the differences between the academic 
disciplines (especially with regard to plagiarism) and the features of academic texts 
that are valued and conventional. As a result, institutions routinely have a single set 
of university- wide plagiarism policies. Examples of the differences in source use and 
what constitutes good academic writing practice across the academic disciplines are 
used in this chapter to illustrate the nature and scale of the variations. Examples 
that reveal different points of view between members of the same disciplines and 
different disciplines on the signiﬁ cance of copied text, given where it is within the 
submission, and the extent to which the copied text diminishes the original work are 
provided.
This examination indicates a gap between one- size- ﬁ ts all policies and great 
variation across subject areas, and a conclusion reached in this chapter is that staff 
and students both would be better served either by a greater consistency over subject 
borders, or by policies which are sensitive to the differences which exist. Either is 
likely to be an improvement over the existing situation.
When you have ﬁ nished this chapter you will have a sense of the ways in which the 
source- use practices of your subject area differ from those in other parts of the 

SUMMARY   119
university community. You will be able to form a view as to whether your institution 
and subject area are better served by university- wide plagiarism policies, and be able 
to contribute effectively to this debate at your institution.
Because university- wide plagiarism policies tend to be couched in general 
terms, it is easy to miss speciﬁ c differences in practices across subject 
areas. Consider how well the two quotations below reﬂ ect your 
experiences.
I ﬁ rst heard it when we revised our academic integrity policy a few 
years after I started teaching at my small liberal arts college, but I 
didn’t comprehend the signiﬁ cance. I heard it again later in response 
to various cases brought to the Academic Integrity Committee by 
colleagues across the disciplines. What is interesting to me is that 
none of my colleagues said it directly until I sat down to talk one- 
on- one with them. When I did that, this is what they said: Most of 
these rules about how to use and cite sources don’t actually apply in my 
discipline.
(Jamieson, 2008: 77)
All 18 universities in the study have consistently located plagiarism 
in disciplinary or academic misconduct regulations of university 
policy provisions. Plagiarism management processes are generally 
passed by the Academic Board or Academic Council of each 
university and therefore have university- wide standing and apply to 
all staff and students across the particular institution. Hence, 
plagiarism is not something that is able to be deﬁ ned or administered 
differently across the institution, and there is an expectation in the 
discourse of the regulations that there is consistency in managing 
plagiarism across faculties, schools and departments.
(Sutherland- Smith, 2010: 7)
The two quotations above indicate an existing gap between the fact that 
academic integrity policies tend to be colour- blind to academic discipline 
(especially with respect to plagiarism) and the very real differences across 
disciplines in the ways that sources are used. This gap is important to understand 
for several reasons. An awareness of practices within the subject area is 
necessary in order to be able to help students learn what they may and may not 
do with sources. This is especially important for individuals who come from 
another subject area, and in educational contexts in which students take 
courses across the curriculum. To the extent that some regulation and handling 
of source use and plagiarism (e.g., the shaping of policy) happens at a university- 
wide level, an awareness of cross- subject differences is essential to shaping 

120 DIFFERENCES ACROSS ACADEMIC SUBJECTS
good policy and regulatory practices. The implications of differences across 
subject areas, for teachers and policy makers, are discussed at the end of the 
chapter.
A handful of studies have investigated the question of whether there 
are differences in the proclivity of students to plagiarise, and appear to 
give reason to believe that this might be an issue of especial importance for 
students in the STEM disciplines (Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Math). Selwyn (2008) surveyed university students in the UK about the 
frequency with which they had engaged in acts representing various sorts of 
plagiarism, ranging from copying small chunks of text to purchasing an 
assignment. He found signiﬁ cant differences in the frequency of these acts 
across subject areas, with a general trend for students from the arts and 
humanities to report less plagiarism with those in the STEM areas reporting 
more. Julliard’s (1994) study was primarily interested in the area of medicine, 
but some respondents from the English subject were surveyed, and reported 
that they were less likely to use sources in ways that could be considered 
plagiarism.
McCullough and Holmberg (2005) searched phrases from master’s 
dissertations on Google to test the usefulness of the search engine as a tool for 
ﬁ nding plagiarism and discovered the greatest frequency of copied language in 
the STEM ﬁ elds, and lowest in the arts and humanities. In a corpus investigation 
which compared master’s dissertations and PhD theses with the sources they 
used, the STEM texts (and those from the natural sciences in particular) 
contained more textual plagiarism (Pecorari, 2006).
More tentatively, there are suggestions that plagiarism may occur especially 
frequently in the work of business students. McCullough and Holmberg’s 
(2005) study found that business students, whom they grouped together with 
the social scientists, fell between STEM subjects and the arts in the frequency 
with which they copied language from their sources. Selwyn (2008) reported 
differences among groups in the types of behaviour they reported engaging in, 
and found that business students were most likely to purchase or copy an 
entire assignment, but less likely than students in some other ﬁ elds to engage 
in smaller- scale copying (a difference which may come about in part because 
copying entire texts removes the occasion for copying smaller parts of it). 
However, an investigation of cheating behaviour generally, including some 
types of plagiarism, found business students reported engaging in those 
behaviours less often (Iyer and Eastman, 2006). Another study which compared 
students in psychology and business did not directly address cheating or 
plagiarism but did ask about behaviour such as sharing assignments with 
friends, which could easily lead to it (Sutton and Taylor, 2011). There was an 
overall infrequent reporting of problematic behaviours, but it was lower among 
business students than the psychology students.
There is, therefore, reason to believe that subject area is an important element 
in understanding plagiarism, but what, precisely, is its role? Is the conclusion 
to be drawn that STEM students are more likely to cheat, or more likely to be 

WRITING IN THE DISCIPLINES 121
patchwriters? While there is evidence for differences in the ways writers use 
sources across subject areas, there is much less support for any conclusions 
about the causes of these differences (and speciﬁ cally for the idea that the 
frequency of prototypical plagiarism varies across subjects). This chapter 
explores some of the differences across academic cultures which can shed light 
on these patterns, and then concludes by outlining the implications for 
teachers and administrators.
Writing in the disciplines
In his classic work Academic tribes and territories, Tony Becher gives an 
anthropological treatment to the study of academic disciplines, showing how 
differences in approaches across the academy relate to differences in the way 
knowledge is produced and the approaches to understanding which are valued. 
He draws on a population- density metaphor to describe one of the key 
disciplinary differences, describing ‘urban’ and ‘rural’ research areas. Urban 
areas are densely populated; there are relatively many researchers in these 
areas in relation to the topics available. This population density creates a 
pressure to produce ﬁ ndings quickly (before someone else does), thus creating 
a need for channels of publication which disseminate ﬁ ndings rapidly. In 
rural ﬁ elds the competition for research topics is not as great, and thus the 
pace of publication is not as frantic. There is a rough if imperfect correspondence 
between urban areas and the STEM subjects, and rural areas and the arts 
and humanities. Not surprisingly, these differences are seen in the forms 
of publication which are held to be most conventional or prestigious. 
For example, in the natural sciences, research articles – which offer the 
fastest route for disseminating research ﬁ ndings – are a dominant form of 
publication and monographs less so, at least in research writing, while in 
the humanities the proportions are more balanced, or even – in some 
subjects – reversed.
The disciplinary preference for certain forms of publication is reﬂ ected, 
logically enough, in the types of sources cited. A study of disciplinary variation 
in citation in dissertations and theses (Pecorari, 2006) found that in biology 
(an urban area), over 80% of the publications cited were research articles, while 
that ﬁ gure was approximately 20% in engineering, the humanities and social 
sciences. In the other ﬁ elds, monographs and anthologies were more frequently 
cited (and in engineering, reports and standards). These differences in student 
writing approximate the trends in published writing. An informal examination 
of ﬁ ve articles from recent issues of a journal in biology and ﬁ ve from a journal 
in literary history for the purposes of this chapter showed that 95% of the 
sources cited in biology were research articles, as opposed to only 17% in 
literary history. Forty per cent of sources in the latter ﬁ eld were monographs, 

122 DIFFERENCES ACROSS ACADEMIC SUBJECTS
and approximately a quarter were the primary sources which were the object 
of inquiry in the article, the raw data on which the research it reported was 
based.
The speciﬁ c contours of various publication forms differ as well, with journal 
articles being shorter in the STEM disciplines and longer in the ‘soft’ ﬁ elds. An 
examination of recent articles in a journal in biology (Mycopathologia) and one 
in linguistics (Applied Linguistics) showed that the average length of articles was 
2,692 words and 7,569 words, respectively. The explanation usually given for 
this difference is the relative need for discussion. At the risk of generalising, 
the STEM ﬁ elds deal in objective fact, and it is the facts themselves which 
matter; the form in which they are expressed is much less important. Consider 
the following examples from research articles in biology and linguistics, 
respectively:
Example 8.1
It was further shown that resistant transformants could be generated by 
integration of a single copy of a CaIMH3 gene, derived from a MPA- 
resistant strain (Beckerman et al. 2001). CaIMH3R has been used as a 
marker gene for integrative transformation in C. albicans (Staib et al. 
1999; Wirsching et al. 2000; Beckerman et al. 2001), C. tropicalis 
(Beckerman et al. 2001) and C. dubliniensis (Staib et al. 2000).
Example 8.2
In a provocative paper, which served to open up the ﬁ eld of gender 
and humor from a sociolinguistic point of view, Jenkins (1985) claims 
that women’s humor is cooperative, inclusive, supportive, integrated, 
spontaneous, and self- healing, while men’s humor is exclusive, 
challenging, segmented, pre- formulated, and self- aggrandizing – claims 
which Crawford (1989:161) notes are “strikingly congruent” with her 
respondents’ self reports.
Although the two are approximately equal in length, Example 8.1 reports 
content from more sources but says less about each, while Example 8.2 does 
the opposite. The ﬁ rst ﬁ ts in references to six earlier works. The information 
reported from them is, in the case of the ﬁ rst source, an unqualiﬁ ed assertion 
about one of its ﬁ ndings, and in the case of the others, the approach they took. 
On the other hand, 8.2 refers to just two sources, but provides more 
interpretation about each. The ﬁ rst, for example, is categorised as ‘provocative’ 

HOW ARE SOURCES CITED? 123
and its place is the ﬁ eld of research is related, as well as one of its central claims, 
while the second source is related to the ﬁ rst. The need to provide commentary 
at this level is one of the factors which makes the appearance of sources – 
in this case, the relative lengths of examples of the same genre, the research 
article – different across ﬁ elds.
An implication of these differences in the types of sources used and their 
superﬁ cial contours is that the information- searching and reading processes of 
students differ across disciplines, or at least should do if they are to produce 
writing which is consistent with the conventions of their ﬁ elds of study. 
Students in the humanities may begin the search for sources of information 
on a topic in the library catalogue in the reasonable expectation that they will 
ﬁ nd books on the topic, but students in the sciences will need to consult 
databases which index or contain articles from academic journals, while 
engineers may need to ﬁ nd professional standards or technical reports from 
different databases still. The differences in the length of sources, and the 
varying degrees of discursivity which explain some of it, also have implications 
for the reading process both in terms of the time students may have to spend 
on it, and the degree of attention they need to bring to understanding ﬁ ner 
nuances.
How are sources cited?
Signiﬁ cant differences exist across academic disciplines in how sources are 
used, how that use is signalled, and even how conventions are codiﬁ ed. Writers 
in the humanities and social sciences are often asked to prepare texts in 
accordance with the instructions in one of a number of detailed style manuals, 
such as the APA Publication Manual, the MLA Handbook for Writers of Research 
Papers or the Chicago Manual of Style. These give comprehensive explanations 
of style conventions, including instructions for formatting in- text references 
and reference- list entries. By contrast, writers in STEM subjects are often 
referred to the style of an inﬂ uential organisation (e.g., IEEE) or publication 
(e.g., Nature), and these are typically much less detailed; for example, the 
section of the Nature ‘manuscript formatting guide’ devoted to the format of 
references is less than 400 words long. This difference in level of detail reﬂ ects 
the fact that references occur in more varied forms in the humanities and 
social sciences.
Citations can appear in a text in more or less prominent positions. In 
Example 8.1 above, all of the references are relegated to parentheses, and 
while they serve an important function in alerting the reader to the source 
of the information, the text would be equally readable without the references, 
as 8.3 illustrates. References of this sort are what are called non- integral 
citations, and can be contrasted with integral citations (Swales, 1990) in 

124 DIFFERENCES ACROSS ACADEMIC SUBJECTS
which the source is named in a way that makes it an inherent part of the citing 
sentence, as in 8.2, where Jenkins claims something, and Crawford notes 
something.
Example 8.3
It was further shown that resistant transformants could be generated 
by integration of a single copy of a CaIMH3 gene, derived from a 
MPA- resistant strain. CaIMH3R has been used as a marker gene 
for integrative transformation in C. albicans, C. tropicalis and C. 
dubliniensis.
Example 8.4
The insect immune system demonstrates a number of structural and 
functional similarities to the innate immune system of mammals [1] and, 
as a consequence, insects can be utilised as models for assessing the 
virulence of a variety of microbial pathogens [2, 3].
Example 8.5
Plasmids were introduced into S. cerevisiae as described [22]. C. albicans 
genomic DNA was prepared according to [10]. 
In Example 8.4, which uses a system of numbered references common in the 
STEM ﬁ elds, the sources are still less prominent, by virtue of their names being 
absent. Although it is not impossible to combine a numbering system with 
integral references (as Example 8.5 shows), it is less common. Integral citations 
on the other hand require the writer to make a set of subsidiary choices about 
which reporting verb, or other reporting language, to use (see Chapter 4). 
Saying that Jenkins ‘claims’ something about differences in women’s and 
men’s use of humour acknowledges that the idea, while founded on data, 
requires interpretation, and therefore different interpretations may exist. It 
also leaves the option open to the writer at a later point to challenge the claim, 
while an alternative, such as ‘as Jenkins notes’, would imply that the writer 
agrees with Jenkins, and make it impossible to challenge the idea without 
appearing self- contradictory.

HOW ARE SOURCES CITED? 125
It is therefore not surprising that disciplinary differences in the use of these 
forms of citation exist. In one study, 90% of citations in biology were non- 
integral, compared to 65% in sociology and 35% in philosophy (Hyland, 
2004). The subjective humanities subjects take advantage of the opportunities 
which integral citations offer to evaluate the strength of a proposition from a 
source, hedge the writer’s commitment to it, etc., while the fact- oriented STEM 
subjects can content themselves with attributing a proposition to its source. A 
reference like the one in Example 8.6 would not be improved by recasting it as 
has been done in 8.6a and 8.6b to introduce evaluative reporting verbs.
Example 8.6
The measurement of contact angles, formed by sessile drops of three different 
liquids (two polar and one apolar), enables the calculation of the surface free 
energy and the degree of hydrophobicity (van Oss 1997).
Example 8.6a
Van Oss (1997) argues that the measurement of contact angles formed by 
sessile drops of three different liquids (two polar and one apolar), enables the 
calculation of the surface free energy and the degree of hydrophobicity. 
Example 8.6b
Van Oss (1997) subscribes to the view that the measurement of contact angles 
formed by sessile drops of three different liquids (two polar and one apolar), 
enables the calculation of the surface free energy and the degree of 
hydrophobicity. 
This difference in the degree of subjectivity in a research area, and the 
concomitant need (or lack of a need) to hedge, qualify and attenuate claims, is 
also responsible for what is perhaps the most striking difference in citation 
across disciplines, the use of quotation. In the STEM disciplines quotation – 
the signalled repetition of a wording from the source – is used so rarely as to be 
virtually non- existent. In the social sciences it is an unsurprising feature but 
often – depending on the research topic – less frequently used than paraphrase 
or summary. In some publications in the humanities, by contrast, quotation is 
the most common form of reference to a source.

126 DIFFERENCES ACROSS ACADEMIC SUBJECTS
These observable differences in the ways that writers incorporate references 
to their sources across disciplines have signiﬁ cant implications for students 
learning to write academic texts in their area of study. Students in the 
humanities and social sciences have a broader menu of conventional options 
open to them. They can quote or paraphrase or summarise, use integral or non- 
integral citations, and make use of a wide range of reporting verbs. This gives 
them considerable latitude to make choices which will be effective in helping 
them accomplish their textual purposes, but each of these choices implies the 
need to learn to use a linguistic tool, so the rhetorical demands on writers in 
the soft ﬁ elds are higher.
Writers in STEM subjects have a diametrically opposed set of constraints and 
aids. They do not need to develop the ability to distinguish between nuanced 
degrees of commitment to choose appropriately among ‘Jenkins suggests’, 
‘Jenkins posits’ and ‘Jenkins supports the idea that’. Neither do they need to 
debate with themselves whether a paraphrase is appropriate, or whether the 
proposition to be reported from a source is so sensitive that the words of the 
author need to be quoted to avoid the possibility of distortion. Direct quotation 
is rarely likely to be needed. By the same token, writers in these areas do not 
have the option of falling back on openly signalled quotation when they feel 
the challenges of ﬁ nding their own wordings are too great.
Signalled and unsignalled quotation
The brief review of research into disciplinary variation in textual plagiarism 
with which this chapter began showed that there is reason to think that writers 
in STEM subjects may be more likely to plagiarise. Not only do they report 
engaging in speciﬁ c acts identiﬁ ed as plagiarism, text- based studies have 
identiﬁ ed more unattributed copying from sources in their work. Do those 
ﬁ ndings reﬂ ect a greater proclivity in some disciplines to cheat, or a different 
understanding across disciplines about what constitutes plagiarism? It was 
seen in earlier chapters that great individual diversity exists in terms of 
which source- dependent writing strategies are considered legitimate and 
which are considered plagiarism. Do cross- disciplinary patterns exist in this 
respect?
Although too little is known about this, the available evidence would 
indicate that the answer may be ‘yes’. If so, it is likely that a source of these 
differences lies in understandings of what is an original creation and therefore 
the intellectual property of its creator, and what is so widely known or available 
that if it were to be attributed to any given individual, deciding which 
individual to attribute it to would be both difﬁ cult and unrewarding.
This can be illustrated by thinking about the introductions to research 
articles, which is where a great many (though by no means all) references to 

SIGNALLED AND UNSIGNALLED QUOTATION 127
sources appear. In the examples seen earlier the choices to be made about how 
to refer to sources in Example 8.2 had a potentially greater impact on the 
conclusions the reader would draw about those sources than Example 8.1. This 
points to one sort of originality in the review of earlier research: the writer 
makes a series of active decisions about how to portray propositions from the 
source. In some areas, particularly those which are inherently multi- 
disciplinary, there are decisions with real signiﬁ cance to be made as well about 
which existing literature should be reported. Framing an article on the use of 
humour primarily in the literature of pragmatics would put the emphasis on 
the effects of the language in use. Introducing the literature from sociolinguistics 
which deals with differences in how men and women communicate more 
generally gives the work a gendered perspective with an entirely different set 
of implications. All of these aspects require the writer to make choices which 
inﬂ uence the shape the rest of the article will take, and therefore the impact 
the ﬁ ndings will have on the literature, and any two writers approaching the 
same task would be likely to produce rather different introductions. In that 
sense, the introduction to an article can be seen as a creative work, worthy of 
attribution.
This is not a view which is universally shared, though, and there is reason to 
think that some of the differences are related to disciplinary perspective. When 
a group of Turkish scientists were accused of plagiarism on a large scale, their 
response was that the textual plagiarism in their articles, which they did not 
deny, was insigniﬁ cant because it came from the introductions of other works:
Borrowing sentences in the part of a paper that simply helps to better 
introduce the problem should not be seen as plagiarism. Even if our 
introductions are not entirely original, our results are – and these are the 
most important part of any scientiﬁ c paper.
(Yilmaz, 2007: 658)
A similar view was echoed by a student in biology who used a patchwriting 
strategy extensively in a literature review. She explained that she had been 
careful to attribute ideas to the relevant source whenever they were the author’s 
own research ﬁ ndings, but felt that the content of introductions were ‘kind of 
like common knowledge that most people know’ and that it was therefore 
appropriate to copy it without attribution (Pecorari, 2008a: 116). Contrasting 
this, another biology student explained a reference to an article which he had 
not read, but felt obliged to cite. The article described (he said) the composition 
of a medium which the student had used for cultures in his experiments. He 
believed that his practice in citing the article but not reading it was common, 
and had a logical explanation: the medium itself was commercially available, 
and the laboratory he worked in purchased it ready- made. There was, therefore, 
no real reason to read the article that described the making of it. However, the 
researchers who had developed it had done something creative and original 
and should be credited with it.

128 DIFFERENCES ACROSS ACADEMIC SUBJECTS
These researchers are articulating a distinction between ideas and knowledge 
which is not always found in the social sciences and especially the humanities; 
indeed, it does not reﬂ ect a distinction which is always meaningful in those 
subjects. In some research paradigms the act of expressing an analysis (the 
research method) of a text (the research material) are themselves the research 
ﬁ ndings: separating them is impossible. An implication for source use and 
textual plagiarism is that if language and content are inextricably intertwined, 
then all textual plagiarism represents a transgression of an author’s proprietorial 
rights. If they can be separated, however, then language which is used to 
express ‘unoriginal’ content may be free for the taking.
This was very much the view taken by a senior scientist who was interviewed 
about plagiarism and source use as part of a study of staff attitudes. He expressed 
a desire that, in the interests of learning to produce good writing, he wished his 
students and post- doctoral researchers would attempt fewer original words 
and do more copying of certain types of language:
they’ve read quite a lot but that’s reﬂ ected surprisingly little in their own 
[texts] – they come up with their own strange formulations when they’ve 
read descriptions of this a hundred times for sure, why do they write such 
funny stuff themselves? So I’m surprised that people don’t . . . make use of 
functional text, so to speak.
(Pecorari and Shaw, 2012: 154)
This scientist was talking about the sort of formulaic language which was 
discussed in Chapter 1:
From this it can be concluded that . . . 
Little research to date has explored . . . 
The strains used are shown in Table 1.
Results were considered statistically signiﬁ cant at the .05 level.
It would be hard to argue that any of these are the original creation of any 
single writer who should be credited for them. The four phrases above return 
many, many hits on Google (the ﬁ rst is found nearly 1,300,000 times, for 
example!). Nor would paraphrasing be an advantage; neither of the following 
would be an improvement, although they would be decidedly original:
When we saw that there were results at the .05 level, we considered them 
statistically signiﬁ cant.
It was necessary to establish a threshold of statistical signiﬁ cance, and .05 
was it.
While formulaic language is found in all discourse, there is reason to think that 
it may be a particularly common phenomenon in the STEM subjects. The 
frequency of such language, in combination with the fact that quotation is not 

LEARNING TO MEET DISCIPLINARY CONVENTIONS 129
used in these ﬁ elds, presents a number of problems for students in those 
subjects. They have more incentive to copy without attribution than their 
peers in other subjects, because copying with attribution – quoting – is not an 
option to them. However, while some academic gatekeepers, such as the 
scientist quoted above, would endorse this approach, others would categorise 
it as plagiarism.
Another problem is how they are expected to learn what can and cannot be 
done with sources. That, and how teachers can help, are the topics of the next 
section.
Learning to meet disciplinary conventions
Earlier in this chapter, variation in disciplinary conventions for source use 
were described and connected to the values and orientations toward research 
and knowledge which distinguish academic disciplines. These observations 
make explicit something which, for most academic writers at all levels, is 
implicit and rarely consciously observed. Experienced scientists do not mull 
over the choice to quote or not and reject it as running counter to the 
conventions in their ﬁ elds; they have internalised those conventions. For 
experienced academic writers, making the choices which lead to texts which 
conform to disciplinary conventions is instinctive at least as much as it is the 
result of conscious decisions.
Inexperienced academic writers learn what is conventional in part by 
producing texts and receiving feedback on them, and in large part by reading 
the works of published scholars in their ﬁ eld, and observing, both consciously 
and unconsciously how those texts are written. However, some aspects of 
source use are more observable than others. One area of difference noted above 
was a tendency to cite books in the humanities and avoid them in the sciences. 
This is a tendency which novice academic writers can easily observe from the 
reference lists of the works they read. The same is not equally true, however, 
for features such as language repeated from a source, for the reason which was 
pointed out in an earlier chapter: some aspects of source use can only be 
observed if the source and the new text which cites it are seen side- by- side.
The fact that many authors include signalled quotation can alert a writer in 
sociology to the fact that quotation is a commonly used tool in that ﬁ eld. The 
fact that quotation marks are conspicuous by their absence in biology will 
probably alert students in biology to the fact that signalled quotation is not 
used. However, if an author has carefully paraphrased and avoided repeating 
language from a source, there are no overt signals of that fact. Inexperienced 
academic writers are forced to draw their own conclusions about appropriate 
intertextual relationships, and the evidence is that they often draw the wrong 
conclusions. The absence of quotation marks may indicate that language has 

130 DIFFERENCES ACROSS ACADEMIC SUBJECTS
not been repeated from a source, but it may be interpreted by inexperienced 
writers as indicating that quotations do not need to be signalled.
The same problem affects teachers working with student writing. If a student 
refers exclusively to very old sources, a teacher who knows there are more 
recent works on the topic will be likely to spot the problem and direct the 
student to newer literature. If a student uses signalled quotation in a way which 
is unconventional, again, that can be observed, and can be the subject of 
feedback. But patchwriting often goes undiagnosed, and the result is that the 
student interprets the absence of feedback as conﬁ rmation that that is an 
appropriate strategy.
There are several things teachers can do to help students learn about the 
ways that sources are and are not conventionally used in their disciplines. One 
is to make those conventions explicit, and describe the things that students 
can, should, and should not do when writing from sources. This can be done 
effectively not only by telling, but by letting them discover. Giving students a 
reading list and a set of questions (‘How does the writer signal that content 
comes from a source?’ ‘What sort of sources has the writer used?’) will make the 
process of learning by observation more conscious, and therefore more 
effective.
Although some aspects of source- use conventions are arbitrary (there is no 
particularly important principle behind the choice to use ‘p.’ to indicate a page 
number or to omit it), many have reasons behind them. In respect of those 
aspects of source use which vary across disciplines, some of those reasons have 
been discussed in this chapter. Explaining the function of highly evaluative 
reporting verbs or quotation, and the reasons they are or are not important 
rhetorical tools in your ﬁ eld will help underscore an important message about 
references to sources: they are not primarily empty formalities, they exist to 
help the text in which they appear achieve its purpose.
Because any individual teacher’s view of an appropriate way to use sources 
may not match that of the teacher in the next room, giving good advice to 
students involves speaking to your colleagues and ensuring to the greatest 
extent possible that any instructions or advice given to students will serve 
them across their educations, and not just in the framework of a speciﬁ c 
assignment or class. Where that is not possible, the fact that instructions have 
limited applicability, and the rules of the game may be changed in another 
class, or term, or type of assignment, should be acknowledged, and the reasons 
for it given.
Disciplinary variation in a broader perspective
This chapter has devoted considerable space to describing differences in source 
use across subject areas. In addition to helping show how teachers can help 

ACTIVITY 131
their students learn about the conventions of their subject area, there are 
several other important implications of the differences. One is that teachers 
need to be aware of the assumptions that students may bring to the classroom 
if they have previously studied in other ﬁ elds. In other words, not only do 
teachers need to help students discover the standards and conventions for 
source use which apply in the subject, they need to be aware that students may 
have another, contradictory set of beliefs about good practice which they 
learned somewhere else.
In addition, source use and plagiarism often arise as issues at a university- 
wide level. A teacher who sits on a disciplinary panel, or who brings a case of 
plagiarism to a disciplinary panel, or who is appointed to a committee to 
review the university’s policy on plagiarism, needs to be aware that what his or 
her colleagues will see as good practice, or as transgressive, will depend in part 
upon the academic area from which they come.
The diversity of practices described in this chapter raises the question of 
whether university- wide policies and procedures are in fact appropriate. 
Jamieson, quoted at the beginning of this chapter, relates how after having 
heard of cross- subject variation from many of her colleagues, she suggested 
shaping policy tailored to speciﬁ c subject areas. She got a vocal negative 
response: her colleagues felt that even though the university- wide policy was a 
poor ﬁ t for their subjects, it was better than no central regulation at all.
In addition, while subject area explains some of the differences in 
understandings about plagiarism and source use, part of it arises from different 
understandings on the part of individuals within those disciplines. It would 
therefore be premature to call for subject- speciﬁ c policies. It is not, however, 
premature to suggest that the idea be discussed within our universities and 
departments; that indeed, is greatly overdue. At present different standards 
and expectations are in place across the university, with the result that teachers 
respond to student work, and assess it, and even label it as plagiarism, 
inconsistently.
A discussion which acknowledges and exposes our differences on the subject 
of what constitutes plagiarism and good source use could conclude that greater 
harmonisation is needed, or it could end up with a resolve that the academic 
subject areas should each go their own ways. Without advocating either 
solution, it seems that both would be an improvement on the current situation 
of largely unacknowledged differences and the inconsistencies they permit. 
Activity
Disciplinary conventions for source use. Draw on your understanding of practices 
in your ﬁ eld and say whether the following are acceptable and conventional 
features of academic writing. Are these things that a) occur often? b) occur 

132 DIFFERENCES ACROSS ACADEMIC SUBJECTS
sometimes? c) occur rarely? d) are questionable or not acceptable, but are not 
plagiarism? e) are plagiarism?
• using an author- date referencing system
• using a referencing system of numbered end notes
• referring to sources more than ten years old
• referring to sources more than ﬁ fty years old
• citing newspaper articles
• citing web pages
• quoting from a source by repeating language verbatim and putting it in 
quotation marks
• repeating language from the introduction of an article but not using 
quotation marks
Now look at a research article in your ﬁ eld which you consider to be well 
written. Imagine a student reading that article and deducing rules about source 
use from it. Which of the conventions you identiﬁ ed above could be deduced 
from the article? Which could not?
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection
1 How did you learn the things you know about how to write academic texts 
in your discipline? Which things were you told, and by whom? Which 
things did you observe from other people’s writing, and to what extent were 
those observations conscious or unconscious?
2 Identify half a dozen conventions for academic writing in your ﬁ eld, and 
imagine how you would explain them to a student. Which ones, if any, are 
arbitrary, and which have signiﬁ cance.
3 Have you ever encountered a student who experienced difﬁ culty due to 
encountering different source use practices in different subjects or 
departments? How was the difﬁ culty exposed? How did you explain the 
practices in your subject to the student?

9
Diversity and change
Summary • They come from non- traditional backgrounds • They’re 
Millenials • They are learning in different ways • Implications for teaching 
about plagiarism and source use • Activity • Questions for discussion or 
reﬂ ection
Summary
The student population is becoming increasingly heterogeneous and learning in 
different ways. Non- traditional students lack exposure to academic literacy before 
they arrive at university, and the new demands of both reading the subject and 
developing good academic writing skills can present serious challenges for them. 
The millennial generation who have been brought up with constant access to the 
Internet, mobile communications and social media applications, and who routinely 
cut and paste and forward text in their normal day- to- day communications, can ﬁ nd 
the formal citation conventions a serious and unfamiliar imposition. The increasing 
cost of tertiary education is one factor which has made distance learning a more 
attractive option, and for some, the only practical way to obtain a university 
education. The opportunities for teachers to impart the understanding and skills 
of good source use as part of distance learning can be more limited still than 
in traditional classroom- based instruction. There is the potential for a ‘perfect 
storm’ with an increasing number of non- traditional students from the millennial 
generation electing to study on a distance basis. This underscores the necessity 
of being proactive in introducing opportunities to teach effective source use 
and build opportunities for practice into all courses, regardless of the mode of 
instruction.
When you have ﬁ nished this chapter you will understand the aspects of writing 
academic texts and using sources in conventional and effective ways which are 

134 DIVERSITY AND CHANGE
particularly impacted by the heterogeneity which increasingly characterises higher 
education in many contexts worldwide.
Student background has often been offered as an explanatory factory for 
plagiarism. The quotation below takes up one aspect of background 
which may be implicated in this issue. What others are relevant in your 
experience?
It is clear that the students whom I interviewed had very little 
previous experience in writing from multiple sources. Their 
dominant experience was in descriptive or narrative composition 
. . . Only those who achieved high marks in their essays . . . reported 
any experience of writing from multiple sources, with the exception 
of Mangalisu. I think it follows logically from these prior educational 
experiences in writing, that students will encounter enormous 
difﬁ culty in the genres of the academic essay, where they are 
expected to integrate multiple sources, and, underlying that, to have 
some understanding of knowledge as constructed, with multiple 
viewpoints and perspectives being possible.
(Angélil- Carter, 2000: 102)
Today’s university students are a diverse group in terms of their backgrounds, 
their motivations, their experiences and their preparation, and are learning in 
diverse ways at university. This chapter looks at three aspects of that diversity 
which present fundamental challenges to how we teach about plagiarism and 
source use.
Generalisations are always dangerous, and this chapter engages in more 
than a few. This is not to trivialise the students it attempts to describe, or 
suggest that all students ﬁ t in neat boxes labelled with their key characteristics 
and group memberships, and it certainly is not to suggest that teachers 
should meet their students as representatives of a group, rather than as 
individuals. The purpose of this chapter is to paint a portrait of the characteristics 
which many university students share, so that it can inform our understanding 
of the individuals we meet in the (real or virtual) classroom. What are 
they like?
They come from non- traditional backgrounds
In many countries around the world, institutions of higher education are 
seeing an inﬂ ux of students from what are sometimes called ‘non- traditional 

THEY COME FROM NON- TRADITIONAL BACKGROUNDS 135
academic backgrounds’: students whose parents did not themselves attain a 
high degree of education, and who come from homes where books are not in 
plentiful supply, or part of daily life, and whose routes to a place at university 
have been varied. According to statistics gathered by a UK government 
agency, in the 2006–2007 academic year 40% of 17–30 year olds in England 
participated in higher education (DIUS, 2008), and this trend is reﬂ ected in 
many countries where widening participation in higher education is a 
governmental objective. Today’s universities are no longer populated by the 
elite, highly prepared few.
The risk for students from backgrounds where academic literacy was not 
emphasised is that they may arrive at university less prepared to manage a 
heavy reading load, ﬁ nd information in the library, and accommodate to the 
demands of academic writing, compared by Bourdieu and Passeron (1965) to 
writing in a foreign language. Pressures which cannot be managed by legitimate 
means may result in students feeling forced to ﬁ nd shortcuts and this may 
therefore be a partial cause of some cheating behaviours, including prototypical 
plagiarism. By the same token, weaknesses in both reading and writing skills 
are direct causes of patchwriting.
Conventions for academic writing and source use are part of a set of 
‘institutional practices of mystery’ (Lillis, 2001), practices which serve in part 
as shibboleths to distinguish insiders from outsiders. Although such may not 
be their intent, these practices, which are often not made explicit, have been 
shown to cause students from non- traditional backgrounds to feel excluded 
(Lillis,1997) or, more correctly to contribute to the effect of feeling excluded in 
which race, religion, age, social class, etc, can play a role.
Uncertainty about plagiarism in the face of the authority of the published 
text is a concern frequently articulated by students. A study of two UK 
universities found that
students often expressed anxieties about plagiarism in terms of their own 
authority as writers. They were unclear about what actually constitutes 
plagiarism and yet at the same time were concerned about how to 
acknowledge the authority of academic texts. Their overriding concerns 
were that the texts they read were authoritative and that they as students 
had little useful to say.
(Lea and Street, 1998: 167)
These concerns caused them to worry that they ‘would plagiarise unknowingly’, 
and these concerns are well founded particularly for students from diverse 
backgrounds. In an investigation set in South Africa, Angélil- Carter (2000) 
found that students with strong academic backgrounds were more conﬁ dent 
about negotiating these boundaries, and that staff perceived their efforts as 
legitimate, while identifying the hesitant efforts of the non- traditional students 
as plagiarism. Given that plagiarism is a matter in which subjectivity and the 
need for interpretation already provide complications, broader diversity 

136 DIVERSITY AND CHANGE
among students (for all the real and potential positives it offers) appears to 
create opportunities for further problems with plagiarism.
Angélil- Carter identiﬁ es another, more subtle but potentially more powerful 
issue, as well: authority. A good academic writer is a conﬁ dent, authoritative 
one. To be able to construct a strong text, a writer ﬁ rst needs to have something 
to say. Having something to say presupposes knowing something and feeling 
conﬁ dent enough about it to want to spread the word. Using sources effectively 
rests on a conﬁ dent understanding of what they say and how they relate to the 
topic at hand. A problem that staff often identify in the work of inexperienced 
writers is the handing over of responsibility to the sources: texts become full of 
‘Smith says’ and ‘According to Jones’, instead of the more varied, and more 
self- assured ‘As Smith correctly notes’ and ‘While Smith maintains X, Jones 
strikes a contrasting note with Y’.
This authority is linked, for Angélil- Carter, with two other issues, language 
and role in society. Language ability relates to ‘how the student projects herself 
or himself in tutorials, lectures and seminars’ (2000: 130). However, connections 
between authority and language on the one hand, and students’ backgrounds 
on the other, emerge:
it is striking that most of the students struggling deeply with academic 
discourse that I interviewed were women from township or rural backgrounds. 
Also striking is that it was Nothando, a woman, and not Mangalisu, a man, 
who was not given the beneﬁ t of the doubt [by their examiner]. The women 
who were succeeding . . . were of privileged class and background. I do not 
wish readers to conclude from this that academic literacy problems relate 
only to certain groups of students . . . In any multiracial, gendered context, 
however, it may be that . . . authority is granted more easily to certain 
students, by those in positions of power, and withheld from others.
(2000: 130)
Angélil- Carter is right to caution against assuming that the relationships 
between background and academic literacy are rigid and clear. However, it is 
clear that where language and authority matter, those who struggle to express 
themselves will be disadvantaged, as will those whose authority is threatened 
by being visibly different and thereby risking exclusion. (It is interesting to 
note in this connection that many of the issues identiﬁ ed in Chapter 7 to do 
with second- language users of English resonate with description as well.)
They’re Millenials
The Millenials is the name sometimes given to the generational cohort which 
started reaching university in the early 2000s, also called Generation Y. One of 

THEY’RE MILLENIALS 137
the characteristics of this group is their constant plugged- in- ness. A Pew 
Research Center report on this generation was subtitled with three of their 
signal characteristics: ‘Conﬁ dent. Connected. Open to change’, and calls the 
Millenials
leading technology enthusiasts. For them, these innovations provide more 
than a bottomless source of information and entertainment, and more 
than a new ecosystem for their social lives. They also are a badge of 
generational identity. Many Millennials say their use of modern technology 
is what distinguishes them from other generations.
(Taylor and Keeter, 2010: 25)
By every measure in the report, the Millenials’ use of technology justiﬁ es this 
description. Compared to their predecessors they are more likely to hold 
positive attitudes toward technology, to use the Internet and, speciﬁ cally to 
use social networking sites. They are also much more likely to connect to a 
wireless network with a laptop or handheld device when they are away from 
home or the ofﬁ ce. Eighty- three per cent sleep with their cell phone close to 
hand, compared to 50% of Baby Boomers, and they send an average of 20 text 
messages a day, against GenX’s 12.
The Millenials pursue higher education avidly. According to the same report, 
63% either have ﬁ nished or plan to ﬁ nish a university degree. However, the 
current economic situation has been least kind to this generation, and the 
impact has been felt in part on their educational aspirations. Among those 
who are not actively working toward a degree or planning to, ‘more than a 
third (36%) say that they can’t afford [it] right now, and an additional 35% say 
they simply do not have the time’ (Taylor and Keeter, 2010: 40). Time and 
money are not independent of each other, of course, and that affects those 
who are in higher education as well. Twenty- four per cent of Millenials 
combine study with work (as opposed to only 13% who study and do not 
work).
These three strands – time, money and a degree of connectedness such that 
for them media consumption is less about consuming media and more about 
being consumed – were factors Blum’s (2010) study of US students and 
plagiarism identiﬁ ed as being implicated in the phenomenon. Blum explains 
that from an early age the students she and her team interviewed were engaged 
in a frantic schedule of extracurricular activities to make them more attractive 
candidates for a place at a competitive university, and, perhaps out of habit or 
out of a belief that the same image of being ‘well rounded’ will serve them in 
good stead when they look for employment, they continue a hectic round of 
activities once they get to university. Their lack of time means that ‘they may 
dash off a paper, seeking mainly to satisfy requirements regarding number of 
pages, references, quotations’ (2009: 4). Financial pressures cause them to 
work, and in the US context Blum studied, high tuition fees mean that students 
leave universities heavily in debt, and see their degrees as enabling them to get 

138 DIVERSITY AND CHANGE
the jobs which will permit them to pay off the debt they have incurred. In this 
context plagiarism can be a by- product of a need to earn good grades in less 
than favourable circumstances.
Plagiarism can also be the result of a clash of generational cultures. Their 
connectedness has, Blum discovered,
changed how they think of texts. They are engaged with media constantly. 
They spend hours watching TV, maybe whole series on DVD, or watching 
movies. And they quote from them to one another. This kind of 
quotation – one form of what academics call, so multisyllabically, 
intertextuality – shows verbal sophistication, memory, and sensitivity to 
context and appropriateness. This is very much what we ask them to 
do with academic texts, except that when they quote in an academic 
context, they have to slow way down, set up boundaries around each little 
piece of text, trace its origin, and document its source. This slowness and 
deliberateness is at odds with their customary focus on speed and efﬁ ciency.
(2010: 4–5)
The Millenials are accustomed to using the Internet as a primary source of 
information, cutting and pasting content with great facility and little reﬂ ection, 
sharing links, pictures and videos on Facebook and retweeting contributions 
which deserve it, moving from medium to medium, device to device, activity 
to activity, and routinely using capabilities that translate voice to text and vice 
versa. For this generation, relating texts to each other in the way that academic 
writing traditionally prizes and requires is an alien and mysterious activity.
They are learning in different ways
Although the observation that the Internet has changed practices for teaching 
and learning is overworked, it cannot be avoided. Distance courses are growing 
in popularity, often offered by universities on the correct assumption that they 
can market a course more widely that way, and the incorrect assumption 
that distance teaching saves staff time and can therefore be offered more 
economically. They are popular with students, some of whom have living 
or family arrangements which make attendance in person impossible, and 
some of whom unrealistically conclude that while they do not have time to 
be physically present in class, they will be able to make the time for more 
self- directed study.
Campus- based courses feel the effects of new learning technologies as well. 
Learning platforms offer a new meeting place for students and teachers (and 
one where students may expect to be able to ﬁ nd their teachers 24 hours a day, 
seven days a week). In ﬁ elds like the arts, where the number of teaching hours 

IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING ABOUT PLAGIARISM AND SOURCE USE  139
is traditionally small in comparison to the STEM subjects, the learning 
platform is expected to compensate for the much- needed contact hours which 
are not available. In class, transparencies have long been replaced by 
PowerPoint, which is in turn feeling its territory eroded by newer tools like 
Prezi, and increasingly the whiteboard is being replaced by smartboards, on 
which the lecturer’s handwritten notes and prepared lecture slides can easily 
merge, and equally easily be uploaded later to the learning platform.
The factors which have been linked to prototypical plagiarism include a 
sense of detachment, from the educational system or the teacher, pressures of 
time and the sense that nobody is really hurt by it; in other words, balanced 
pressures on the one hand providing a reason to want (or perceive a need) to 
cheat, and on the other hand a justiﬁ cation for it. A distance learning 
environment means less direct contact between teachers and students, and 
among students; physical contact is certainly lost, and they may or may not 
speak directly to or see each other. That may provide the sense that the impact 
of cheating is less personal, and therefore more justiﬁ able.
Difﬁ culty in understanding the boundaries between someone else’s ideas 
and one’s own has been seen to be a contributing factor to patchwriting, and 
it is thought that hypertext and electronic media may exacerbate this effect 
(Belcher, 2001). As more course content exists on servers and in clouds, rather 
than between the covers of a book, the challenges students face in reconciling 
their notions of authorship and due acknowledgement with those of their 
teachers will not grow easier.
Implications for teaching about plagiarism and 
source use
The changes to the composition of the student body mean that if it was ever 
safe to make assumptions about who students are, what their abilities are when 
they start university, and how they position themselves in relation to teachers, 
fellow students, libraries, textbooks and all else that is part of the university 
experience, it no longer is. Many of these changes have the effect of making a 
traditional approach to teaching about plagiarism and source use a poor ﬁ t. 
This is not necessarily a bad thing.
As earlier chapters have shown, our attitudes toward plagiarism and source 
use need revisiting. Academics do not agree with each other about what 
plagiarism is, but have hitherto shown an unacademic lack of interest in 
problematising our differences. We deﬁ ne it in general terms and categorise it 
as an appropriation but identify it in our students’ work by means of a 
quantitative measure of how similarly two texts are worded, produced by a 
machine which is unable to gauge originality in any other terms. We decry 

140 DIVERSITY AND CHANGE
plagiarism as an offence which threatens the fabric of academic values but, as 
the next chapter will show, we engage in intertextual practices which run 
equally counter to academic values, and which we would not allow in the work 
of our students.
Translating our expectations for a diverse group of students, some of 
whom have come from environments which do not prize the text and its 
unitary author the way academics do, some of whom we will only interact 
with via a learning platform, and some of whom are ﬁ rmly entrenched in 
the very different literacy practices of the connected generation will take 
creativity. It will also require us to think more clearly than we are often 
wont to do about what aspects of plagiarism offend, and why. And that will 
be a salutary experience. Thinking clearly, challenging assumptions, basing 
conclusions on evidence rather than accepted practice is what academics 
do – isn’t it?
Activity
Understanding diversity. This chapter made reference to ‘institutional practices 
of mystery’, one of which is the set of rules and conventions for citation and 
source use. The purpose of this activity is to learn about which practices are 
mysterious to students. Interview a student (not one of your own) and ask the 
student to:
• describe a recent piece of assessed course work. What did the assignment 
call for?
• explain what the student believes the examiner was looking for. What was 
necessary for success on the assignment? What would cause it to receive a 
low grade?
• explain whether completing the assignment involved reading and/or 
referring to sources. If so, which ones?
• describe what rules the student was expected to follow in using those 
sources. How did the student learn those rules?
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection
1 Think about your own time as a student. What was a typical week like? How 
many hours did you spend in class, and how many studying outside of class? 
What study materials did you use (i.e., notes from lectures, lecturers’ slides, 
library materials, etc.)? Did you work, and if so how much? What free- time 

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION OR REFLECTION 141
activities did you have, and how much time did you spend on them? How 
do your experiences compare to those of your students?
2 A characteristic attributed by Blum (2009) to the students she studied is that 
they are collaborative. How would you explain to a student where the 
boundary lies between appropriate forms of collaboration and collusion.
3 On distance courses teachers may assess the work of students they have 
never met in person, or possibly never spoken to or seen via webcam. Do 
those circumstances have any implications for the way you usually work 
with plagiarism and source use?
4 The idea was introduced earlier in this chapter that students who have 
grown up as part of a culture of connectedness perceive intertextual 
boundaries differently. Consider this contradictory idea from an essay on 
plagiarism as theft:
My students do know that plagiarism is regarded as transgressive by the 
academic community; they also know a great deal about the details of 
academic norms – that paraphrase and websites need citation, that 
quotes must be exact, that even ideas must be referenced; they know 
that the dominant model for plagiarism is not cooperation of transitional 
textuality, but theft. But for all they do know, many of them don’t believe 
. . . Students routinely download ﬁ les and music illegally, and they 
don’t have much compunction about it.
(Senders, 2008: 196)
Which of these perspectives – that students understand plagiarism differently 
from their teachers, or that they understand it the way their teachers do but 
don’t care – is closer to the reality for your students? If Senders’ description 
seems realistic to you, what is the source of the not caring?

10
Plagiarism in a 
broader context
Summary • Practicing what we preach? • Preach something practicable • 
Getting real • Conclusion • Activity • Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection
Summary
This chapter considers source use in domains other than academic writing. It 
explores whether universities themselves apply the policies they require their 
students to follow. An analysis of the recursive example of university plagiarism 
policies demonstrates clear inconsistencies. The impact of this inconsistency on 
students struggling to know when and how to apply the policies is considered. The 
need to have practical plagiarism policies leads to the topic of common knowledge, 
which is used to illustrate the ways that conventions and principles for source use 
grow out of dynamic intertextual relationships.
Source use practices in academia are steeped in centuries of convention but are 
not those used in all domains. Source use in workplace genres is used as an 
illustration for the often poor ﬁ t between what students are taught to do at university 
and what they need to do in the workplace. That gap is not problematic if the genres 
are different but the skills are transferable. However, an approach to source use 
which casts rules as static also casts genres and writing skills more generally that 
way, reducing the likelihood that students learn writing skills which they can 
translate to other domains.
When you have ﬁ nished this chapter you will be aware of inconsistencies in the way 
academic understandings of, and practices with regard to source use relate to the 
standards to which students are held. You will understand the resulting challenge that 
this entails for students, and be able to address this more effectively in your teaching.

PRACTICING WHAT WE PREACH? 143
Plagiarism has been shown to relate to a number of issues related to 
teaching, learning, writing, and orientations toward knowledge creation. 
The quotation below discusses one such related issue, the question of 
what counts as ‘common knowledge’, and the discussion later in this 
chapter develops the issue further. What other concepts related to 
plagiarism deserve exploration in a broader context?
By framing conversations and instruction about common knowledge 
in the larger context of discourse community conventions and 
expectations, we can help our students move beyond the formulaic 
handbook approach to resolve questions on common knowledge in 
several ways. They will be able to approach common knowledge and 
citation practices from a more informed perspective, one that takes 
into account the effect of their audience on how and what they cite 
. . . resolving questions about the dynamics of common knowledge 
can promote critical thinking, discussion, and reﬂ ection about the 
larger issues of source citation and intertextuality. In short, we can 
help students develop the qualities of academic thinkers and writers 
we set as goals for our classes.
(England, 2008: 112)
So far this volume has treated plagiarism as a phenomenon which impinges 
upon the processes of teaching, learning and assessment at university. Plagiarism 
has also been approached from the assumption that it is a problematic 
phenomenon, and one which must be prevented. Prototypical plagiarism is 
problematic for all the reasons that any form of cheating is. Reasons to be 
concerned about patchwriting include the fact that it can cause students to 
incur precisely the same penalties as for deceptive plagiarism. The book has also 
argued that since the cause of much plagiarism lies in the limitations in students’ 
skills in writing from sources, a pedagogical solution is called for.
This chapter, however, looks beyond the domain of student assessment writing 
to examine source use in other contexts. It shows that the standards and practices 
for source use which apply to student writing are not universal, and that too 
myopic a view on plagiarism in that domain may have negative consequences for 
what students understand about writing within and outside of the university.
Practicing what we preach?
The deﬁ nition of plagiarism in Example 10.1 below appeared in Chapter 1. 
It was taken from the website of a university in the UK which will be referred 

144 PLAGIARISM IN A BROADER CONTEXT
to here as University Alphav, and is part of the University Calendar 
(i.e. regulations). The deﬁ nition appears at the bottom of the page as an 
Appendix to the regulations on academic integrity. A copyright notice appears 
at the bottom, but there is no information about the authorship of the material 
on the page. This is not surprising in that regulations and policies rarely 
identify their authorship, and are in fact presumably most often the result of a 
collaborative writing process in which many people were involved in different 
ways. However, it is noteworthy because a student who wanted to cite the 
regulations for any reason would ﬁ nd that the quick- reference examples given 
in ‘how not to plagiarise’ instructions, which are typically to books or journal 
articles or other materials with an identiﬁ ed author, would not provide a good 
model. This is of course not an insuperable obstacle, but it is an example of 
how the instructions for avoiding plagiarism given to students do not always 
correspond to intertextual realities. 
Example 10.1
Academic Integrity Statement: Appendix 1
Plagiarism is the reproduction or paraphrasing, without acknowledgement, 
from public or private (ie: unpublished) material (including material downloaded 
from the Internet) attributable to, or which is the intellectual property of, 
another including the work of students.
Plagiarism may be of written and also non- written form and therefore would 
also include the unacknowledged use of computer programs, mathematical/
computer models/algorithms, computer software in all forms, macros, 
spreadsheets, web pages, databases, mathematical deviations and 
calculations, designs/models/displays of any sort, diagrams, graphs, tables, 
drawings, works of art of any sort, ﬁ ne art pieces or artefacts, digital images, 
computer- aided design drawings, GIS ﬁ les, photographs, maps, music/
composition of any sort, posters, presentations and tracing.**
** (this is not an exhaustive list).
Further up on the page is a list of bullet points answering the question ‘What 
is academic integrity and why is it important?’ One point offered is that it 
includes ‘fully acknowledging the work of others wherever it has contributed 
to your own (thereby avoiding plagiarism [see Appendix 1])’. In this spirit of 
following the principles articulated in the deﬁ nition and other parts of the 
policy there is an attribution to University Beta.
This is clearly a point on which academic institutions are in agreement, 
because it is also made in the same words, but without the reference to 
Appendix 1, in the ‘Academic integrity regulations’ of University Gamma, also 

PRACTICING WHAT WE PREACH? 145
in the UK (Example 10.2). Large portions of that policy are identical to the 
source of 10.1, or virtually so. For example, ‘software’ has been moved up the 
list of things which are ‘plagiarisable’ and the note from University Alpha that 
‘this is not an exhaustive list’ now reads ‘this list is not exhaustive’. However, 
University Gamma does not attribute any part of the policy to any source. 
Neither does University Delta, located in China – See Example 10.3 for an 
extract from its ‘Regulations for MSc and PhD students’, nor Institution 
Epsilon, a further education college located in London and the source of 
Example 10.4.
Example 10.2
3.1  Plagiarism is the reproduction or paraphrasing, without acknowledgement, 
from public or private (ie: unpublished) material (including material 
downloaded from the Internet) attributable to, or which is the intellectual 
property of, another including the work of students.
3.2  Plagiarism may be of written and also non- written form and therefore would 
also include the unacknowledged use of computer programs or software, 
mathematical/computer models/algorithms, macros, spreadsheets, web 
pages, databases, designs/models/displays of any sort, diagrams, graphs, 
tables, drawings, works of art of any sort, digital images, computer- aided 
design drawings, GIS ﬁ les, photographs, maps, music/composition of any 
sort, posters, presentations and tracing. This list is not exhaustive.
Example 10.3
Plagiarism is the reproduction or paraphrasing, without acknowledgement, 
from public or private (ie: unpublished) material (including material 
downloaded from the Internet) attributable to, or which is the intellectual 
property of, another including the work of students.
Plagiarism may be of written and also non- written form and therefore 
would also include the unacknowledged use of computer programs, 
mathematical/computer models/algorithms, computer software in all forms, 
macros, spreadsheets, web pages, databases, mathematical derivations and 
calculations, designs/models/displays of any sort, diagrams, charts, graphs, 
tables, drawings, works of art of any sort, ﬁ ne art pieces or artefacts, digital 
images, computer aided design drawings, GIS ﬁ les, photographs, maps, 
music/composition of any sort, posters, presentations, etc.

146 PLAGIARISM IN A BROADER CONTEXT
Example 10.4
Plagiarism is the reproduction or paraphrasing, without acknowledgement, 
from public or private (i.e.: unpublished) material (including material 
downloaded from the Internet) attributable to, or which is the intellectual 
property of, another including the work of students. This is a serious offence, 
with severe penalties. You will be given information on plagiarism when you 
begin your studies, and can speak to your personal tutor at any time.
The point of these examples is not to suggest that these universities engaged in 
bad practice (and most certainly not University Alpha, which identiﬁ ed its 
source). It would be for the author or authors of the original document to say 
whether they feel they deserved acknowledgement. However, it is manifestly 
the case that Institutions Beta, Gamma, Delta and Epsilon are guilty of not 
practicing what they preach. And while there is considerable irony in copying 
and pasting off the Internet a policy which says students must not do precisely 
that, the inconsistency of the message is possibly a source of greater concern.
These are not isolated cases; many more examples of ‘policy recycling’ from 
many other universities can be found. Policies are precisely the sort of 
documents which are treated as ‘boilerplate’ and copied, with or without 
adjustments, from one context to another. Nor is recycling wrong (although 
whether or not it is done with permission of the author is relevant). There is no 
reason to re- invent the wheel, and every reason not to: consistency across 
universities would be to everybody’s advantage.
The problem lies in the message that this inconsistent behaviour sends. 
Students struggle to make sense of conventions and rules which are entirely or 
partially new to them when they arrive in an academic setting. They frequently 
perceive those rules as being arcane (Bloch, 2012) and less clear than the 
straightforward assertions of many policies would suggest. They are also 
digitally literate, and turn to Google for information more readily than to the 
university library. It will not escape them that the message they are getting is 
‘do as I say, not as I do’. The interesting lesson which universities can learn 
from, if they choose, is that the reality of how we use and attribute sources is 
considerably more complex than that which we present to students when we 
tell them that we expect them to avoid plagiarism.
Preach something practicable
One piece of information frequently offered to students is that references are 
not needed when the idea in question is common knowledge. What does this 

PREACH SOMETHING PRACTICABLE 147
mean in practice? This is another area in which that which students are told is 
inadequate, and therefore extremely unhelpful. The website of a US university 
has a page headed ‘Plagiarism prevention for students’ (perhaps to distinguish 
the advice offered there from the rules which apply to policy makers, who have 
been seen to consider themselves licensed to copy and paste from the Internet 
without attributing their sources). The page on common knowledge begins 
like this:
Example 10.5
There is no clear boundary on what is considered common knowledge. 
Even experts on plagiarism disagree on what counts as common 
knowledge. For instance, many sources only consider facts – current and 
historical events, famous people, geographic areas, etc. – to be potentially 
common knowledge. Others also include nonfactual material such as 
folklore and common sayings. Some sources limit common knowledge to 
only information known by others in your class, other sources look at what 
is common knowledge for the broader subject area.
A student who had been paying attention to the admonition to attribute the 
source of information would at this point ask ‘Which experts on plagiarism? 
Which sources?’ The discussion continues to offer more unsupported 
assertions, and also to reveal that the writer does not know the singular form 
of ‘criteria’:
Example 10.5 (contd)
The two criteria that are most commonly used in deciding whether or not 
something is common knowledge relate to quantity: the fact can be found in 
numerous places and ubiquity: it is likely to be known by a lot of people. 
Ideally both conditions are true. A third criteria [sic] that is sometimes used is 
whether the information can be easily found in a general reference source.
Example 10.6
As a general rule, a fact can be said to be ‘common knowledge’ when:
• it is widely accessible – you may not know the total population of China, but 
you would be able to ﬁ nd the answer easily from numerous sources

148 PLAGIARISM IN A BROADER CONTEXT
• it is likely to be known by a lot of people
• it can be found in a general reference resource, such as a dictionary or 
encyclopedia
Example 10.6 is from a UK university. According to this ‘general rule’, common 
knowledge is something which may come from a source but which, if retold 
without a citation to the source, exposes the writer to minimal chances of 
detection, because it could have been found in many places. Also according to 
this principle, I do not need to provide a citation for the fact that the derisory 
American term ‘doofus’ may derive from the Scots word doof, meaning ‘dolt’, 
because the source of this fact – unknown to me until a minute ago – is the Oxford 
English Dictionary, surely the deﬁ nitive general reference resource. Another 
source, a US university, gives the examples of common knowledge in 10.7:
Example 10.7
Examples of common knowledge are: 
• There are four seasons in the year.
• There are 365 days in a year.
• The US entered World War II after the bombing of Pearl Harbor.
• The state bird of Georgia is the brown thrasher.
The difﬁ culty with these examples is that it is hard to imagine a context in which 
this advice could be used. It would be surprising if there were many university 
research papers which have based their argument on the idea that there are four 
seasons, or 365 days, in the year, but more surprising still if their writers needed 
advice about whether to provide a citation for the fact. It is perhaps only slightly 
easier to imagine an academic writing context in which naming the state bird of 
Georgia would be relevant, but if I found myself in such a circumstance I believe 
I would want to provide a citation. It is not a fact I know, so I would need to 
consult a source, and having consulted it, would want to cite it.
Another university from the US offers this ﬁ nal explanation:
Example 10.8
Common knowledge needs no internal citation in a paper. Common knowledge 
includes information that is considered a well- established fact veriﬁ able in 
ﬁ ve or more sources.

PREACH SOMETHING PRACTICABLE 149
This explanation founders on all the previous difﬁ culties: the fact that it can be 
found in multiple places does not mean it is widely known. In addition, it 
offers the false promise of a deﬁ nite rule which is in fact not reliable. Google 
offers nearly 200,000 sites which either explain or exemplify the meaning of 
the term ‘fabric- based infrastructure’ but it is not part of my understanding of 
common knowledge. If it is yours, you may ﬁ nd an alternative explanation 
of common knowledge more appealing.
I offer this alternative not because I wish to argue for the fact that this should 
be the accepted deﬁ nition (although I believe it has merit) but to illustrate two 
points about source use: ﬁ rst, that the question of common knowledge (and by 
extension other questions about source use) can be resolved more effectively 
by returning to ﬁ rst principles than by articulating mechanical rules; and 
secondly, that there are explanations to be had which are grounded in critical 
analysis, and therefore ought to be what students are offered, by way of 
modelling good academic practices, rather than uncritically accepted and 
parroted truisms of questionable truth.
This alternative explanation draws on three ideas: 1) transparent source use, 
i.e., the principle that the reader should be able to deduce how sources have 
been used; 2) an informed understanding of what ‘common’ means or can 
mean in a context related to communication; and 3) the assumption that 
avoiding plagiarism is not the only, nor even the primary, purpose of citation.
The principle of transparent source use says that the reader should be able to 
understand which sources have materially inﬂ uenced a new text, and how. 
From this perspective, I would certainly need to provide a citation for the origins 
of ‘dufus’ and the meaning of ‘fabric- based infrastructure’, because I can trace 
my knowledge of them back to speciﬁ c sources. If citation is in part about 
acknowledging an intellectual debt, as the deﬁ nitions above suggest, then I owe 
that debt to my sources, and it is not relevant how many other sources could 
have informed me, any more than it is relevant that, when I left my wallet at 
home, I could have borrowed money for a sandwich from any one of a number 
of colleagues – it is the one who actually lent me the money who wants repaying.
Another understanding of common knowledge comes from reﬂ ecting on the 
word ‘common’, which has a sense which means something like ‘found 
everywhere’ but also has the sense of ‘shared’. This suggests that common 
knowledge is shared knowledge, and in the case of ideas which do or do not 
need references, it is presumably the writer and the (intended) reader who 
should share them. When I lecture on clause structure and tell students that the 
word ‘red’ in the sentence Jeff painted the house red is an object predicative, I do 
not provide a reference. They have read the textbook (or at least we maintain a 
polite pretence that they have). So have I. We have a common source of 
information. In other words, we have knowledge which is common among us.
Finally, the most relevant point might not be whether a citation is needed, 
but whether it is helpful. In identifying ‘red’ an object predicative above, I have 
asserted a fact which I believe to be common knowledge by my ﬁ rst deﬁ nition 
but not my second. It is a piece of knowledge about my subject which I have 

150 PLAGIARISM IN A BROADER CONTEXT
had so long that identifying the source from which I ﬁ rst learned it would be 
impossible. I suspect that some but not all readers of this book know what an 
object predicative is, so in that sense it is not knowledge that is common to 
those of us having this conversation. However, I also assume that if you have 
ever heard of an object predicative, you know why ‘red’ is one in that sentence, 
and if you have not, you probably do not care: you understand it to be of 
importance only to illustrate the point, namely that whether subject- speciﬁ c 
terminology is common knowledge depends entirely on the audience with 
whom it is used. If I am right in my predictions, then omitting a citation is 
considerate to both sets of readers.
However, in the last chapter, in connection with claims about students and 
electronic media, I referenced Joel Bloch’s and Susan Blum’s informative books 
on the topic. The claims for which I cited them are quite uncontroversial in my 
professional literature. They do not particularly need support, nor do I feel an 
intellectual debt in the sense that these are ideas which are ‘in the air’ – I did not 
necessarily learn them from these authors, although they have contributed to 
my understanding of the topic. However, I assume that a reader who has come 
this far in a book about teaching to avoid plagiarism may be interested in 
reading either or both of those important books, and the citations are intended 
as a helpful act to that reader, more than out of a sense of obligation on my part.
To conclude, I propose that common knowledge can be understood by 
interpreting it to mean ‘shared’ and ‘already known’, and when it is both no 
citation is needed, although a reader may ﬁ nd one useful. The ‘already known’ 
criterion – the one relating to transparency – is one about which only the writer 
can speak, based on reﬂ ection on what sources have informed his or her 
understanding of a topic. The other two criteria, what information the reader 
shares with the writer, and what information the reader needs, are more tenuous 
still. They are based on a prediction the writer makes about a reader who may be 
known (e.g., the teacher) or may be only imagined. Asking students to engage in 
acts of mind reading and prediction may seem like setting the bar for them 
rather high, but anticipating the reader’s needs is part of all good writing. Given 
a choice between asking my students to take on the difﬁ cult piece of analysis 
which is anticipating the reactions of the expected reader, or making decisions 
about their writing based on highly hedged, unrealistic and mechanical rules of 
thumb, I will choose the former, as being more consistent with the intellectual 
engagement which ought to characterise a university education.
Getting real
In many educational contexts, and in many subject areas, an important 
purpose of a university education is to prepare the student for their later role 
in the workplace. One means of doing this is by providing transferable 

GETTING REAL 151
outcomes: learning outcomes realised during the years of a university education 
which can be applied to new domains once the student reaches the workplace. 
However, as has been frequently noted (e.g., Dias et al., 2000), the sort of 
assessment writing students do at university offers too little in the way of 
transferable outcomes; the sort of writing done in the workplace is very 
different from the academic essay, and even different in important respects 
from assessment genres which attempt to simulate workplace genres, such as 
the case study or report.
Many of the differences which can be noted are related to intertextual 
practices, and the ways which sources (either earlier texts or collaborating 
co- authors) are involved in the writing process. Students are exhorted to 
conceive of the writing task as a forum for putting forward an original idea, to 
use sources to provide credible support for that idea, to cite the sources they 
use, and to do their own work. The ability to do these things, which has already 
been shown to be so difﬁ cult for students to cultivate, is not always required by 
or prized in workplace genres. A study of the writing which Canadian students 
did at university and on internships (Schneider and Andre, 2005), found that 
in one of the three subject areas studied, students had engaged in collaborative 
writing at university, and this served them well in the workplace, where it was 
expected of them, while students from other subject areas had not had this 
experience, but could have beneﬁ tted from it.
There is clear evidence that many ‘real- world’ genres make heavy use of sources 
without attributing their inﬂ uences as clearly as is expected in academic writing, 
or indeed even at all. Solin (2004) examined journalistic writing, looking at the 
treatment given the same topic by different outlets. She used the metaphor of 
recycling to describe the sorts of text re- use she found, which occurred either 
without attribution or with, she concluded, the wrong attribution. However, and 
quite importantly, it was not a plagiarism free- for- all; the text recycling occurred 
in certain functional sections of articles but not others. This suggests that the 
writers are behaving in a rule- based manner, that they perceive themselves as 
following conventions which permit some types of recycling but not others.
An important business genre is the corporate annual report, and within it, 
the ‘Chairman’s Statement’ which occupies an early and prominent position. 
The annual report is tightly circumscribed by regulation, both in the fact of 
having to produce one and the sort of information which must be provided in 
it. The Chairman’s Statement is used to provide a gloss to the facts and ﬁ gures 
in the report, putting forth the interpretation which the company itself hopes 
will be placed upon them. The practices of this very important genre in using 
and referring to sources bears little relation to the practices of academic writing, 
the practices which are taught to students, some of whom will one day have to 
produce this genre (Shaw and Pecorari, 2013).
Chairman’s Statements make many claims, but rarely support them with 
reference to a source. When they do, the reference may echo the sort of 
information given in a citation in an academic work, but is naturally 
qualitatively quite different. Examples 10.9 and 10.10 illustrate this; they refer 

152 PLAGIARISM IN A BROADER CONTEXT
to a source text (‘my half year statement’ and ‘my report last year’), the ‘author’ 
(in each case the ‘I’ who will sign the Chairman’s Statement, and takes formal 
responsibility for the documents referred to, but would have been extremely 
unlikely actually to have authored either of them); and by inference the date 
of publication of the source can be retrieved (the same year in 10.9 and the 
previous year in 10.10).
In this genre, references to source thus appear in a very different form than 
in academic writing, when they appear at all; more common still, though, is 
the unsupported assertion of a fact, as in Example 10.11. Assertions of the sort 
there would, if produced in a piece of academic writing, require a reference to 
an authoritative source.
Example 10.9
In my half year statement I reported that [name] had retired from the Board on 
18 April. 
Example 10.10
In my report last year I detailed our plan for restoring the fortunes of [company].
Example 10.11
The expansion of illicit trade is a continuing and growing threat to the business. 
Sharp increases in excise duty, pressure on consumers’ disposable 
income, and ill- considered regulation of our industry, are all making life easier 
and more lucrative for traders of illicit products, both contraband and 
counterfeit.
Similarly, the writers of these texts sometimes use a ‘template’ or ‘boilerplate’ 
approach to producing them, with the previous year’s text taken as the 
starting point for producing the new one. This may result in sections of one 
year’s statement being reproduced in identical form the next year, as in 
Example 10.12, or in modest changes to update the factual content which has 
changed from one year to the next, as in Example 10.13. This approach to 
production is in stark contrast to the demands for originality placed on 
academic writers, and additionally suggests that the ownership of the text does 
not rest with the individual or individuals who produced it.

GETTING REAL 153
Example 10.12
From the 2008 report
Once again I have been extremely impressed by the commitment and 
professionalism of all our employees, especially in this challenging economic 
environment.
From the 2009 report
Once again I have been extremely impressed by the commitment and 
professionalism of all our employees, especially in this challenging economic 
environment.
Example 10.13
From the 2007 report
The Board is recommending a ﬁ nal dividend of 5.02 pence per ordinary share 
which, when added to the interim dividend of 3.04 pence, gives a total for the 
year of 8.06 pence, a 20.0% increase on 2006.
From the 2008 report
The Board is recommending a ﬁ nal dividend of 6.28 pence per ordinary share 
which, when added to the interim dividend of 3.80 pence, gives a total for the 
year of 10.08 pence, a 25.0% increase on 2007.
Example 10.14
From the 2000 report
As a company Aggreko is totally committed to enhancing shareholder value by 
delivering consistent growth in quality earnings through an ever expanding 
range of added value services focused on solving customers increasingly 
complex temporary power temperature control and oil free compressed air 
requirements around the world.
From the 2001 report
As a company Aggreko is committed to enhancing shareholder value by delivering 
growth in quality earnings through an ever expanding range of added value 
services focused on solving customers increasingly complex temporary power 
temperature control and oil free compressed air requirements around the world.

154 PLAGIARISM IN A BROADER CONTEXT
The normal, conventional, accepted practices of writers in the workplace are 
therefore very sharply at odds with the practices which are urged upon 
academic writers, and sources are used (or not used) in a range of ‘real- 
world’ genres in ways which would cause academic writers to be criticised. 
There is a fundamental clash in what is expected in these two domains which 
limits the transferability of what is taught about writing, and source use, 
at university.
A paper on collusion in university assessed work begins by observing that ‘an 
increasing emphasis on developing students’ transferable skills, such as group 
working and IT, is creating challenges in ensuring the academic integrity of 
individually assessed coursework’ (Sutton and Taylor, 2011: 831). An alternative 
perspective would be that a heavy emphasis on academic integrity, and on 
preventing plagiarism, and on promoting academic ideals for source use, is 
creating challenges in ensuring the transferability of students’ learning at 
university to the workplace.
It should be noted that the fact that academic genres are not the same as 
workplace genres need not preclude the possibility of transferability from one 
to the other. Indeed, one of the often stated advantages of an education in the 
humanities is that it equips the student with the skills of reading, writing and 
above all critical thinking which are foundational in most enterprises. The 
ability to address a given type of reader effectively should itself be a transferable 
outcome, and confer, or at least help to develop, the ability to address a 
different kind of reader next time.
The difﬁ culty is that that presupposes an instructional model which 
promotes the lateral thinking which remapping one set of writing skills onto a 
new domain requires. As Hunt (n.d.) notes,
a model which assumes that a skill like ‘writing the academic essay’ is an 
ability which can be demonstrated on demand, quite apart from any 
authentic rhetorical situation, actual question, or expectation of effect (or 
deﬁ nition of what the ‘academic essay’ actually is), virtually prohibits 
students from recognizing that all writing is shaped by rhetorical context 
and situation, and thus renders them tone- deaf to the shifts in register and 
diction which make so much plagiarized undergraduate text instantly 
recognizable.
By the same token, teaching a set of mechanical rules for source use (you do not 
need to provide a reference for the state bird of Georgia) discourages 
students from thinking about the sorts of things which they would need to 
think about if, instead of believing in rules for source use, they asked questions. 
Finding answers to questions about what should be cited, when, and how 
involves a sensitivity to readership, textual purpose, genre and the like, and 
it is that sensitivity which permits writers to transfer their skills from one 
domain to another.

ACTIVITY 155
Conclusion
This chapter has set the question of plagiarism in student writing within the 
context of practices inside and outside the university. The source- use practices 
in two domains have been proﬁ led: plagiarism policies and the writing of 
people outside the university. In addition, practices for understanding when to 
cite or not have been examined indirectly through the advice given to students. 
This analysis has revealed that the success or failure of an approach can only 
be judged in context.
The use of more references, and to more authoritative, external sources 
would not improve the effectiveness of a Chairman’s Statement; in fact, a 
greater reliance on citation would limit the ability to make the sort of claims 
which the writers feel it important to make. The advice given to students about 
common knowledge is, I have argued, often deeply ﬂ awed, but not because it 
runs counter to a set of externally validated rules; it is ﬂ awed because it does 
not reﬂ ect the reality of how students use sources. It is not within the scope of 
this book to comment on the ethics of copying an academic integrity policy 
without attributing its source, but the fact of having done so must almost 
certainly affect the credibility with which students will read it, so this use of 
sources too is ﬂ awed because it is ineffective.
It is ultimately the lack of a connection to the realities of writing and the 
context in which it happens which is problematic, not only in these examples 
but more generally. An approach to plagiarism which emphasises simple and 
clear- cut rules and casts plagiarism as primarily a matter of ethical questions with 
clear boundaries is destined to fall short of its mark. An approach which 
understands plagiarism as a particular relationship between the writer, the reader, 
the new text and its sources, treats learning about that relationship as a 
developmental process, and emphasises teaching good skills over punishing poor 
performance will be much more realistic, and will have better chances of success.
Activity
Transitioning from university to workplace. Think about the sort of workplace 
your students may typically wind up in when they ﬁ nish university. Make a list 
of the sorts of writing they will need to do in that environment. 
• What sort of role does reading and reference to sources play in producing 
those texts? 
• How will the expectations for good source use, writing and acknowledgement 
be similar or different? For example, will they be expected to write 

156 PLAGIARISM IN A BROADER CONTEXT
collaboratively? Will they be credited as authors on the documents they 
produce? Will they typically be expected to append a reference list to the 
texts they write?
Now reﬂ ect on the sorts of writing your students do at university.
• Do they write the genres which they are likely to produce later in the 
workplace?
• What proﬁ ciencies do their writing assignments cultivate?
• What target audience(s) do they address? Is there a need to be able to adapt 
to different audiences?
• What purposes do they have for doing written work (apart from passing the 
course)?
• What issues to do with style and register arise in your students’ assessment 
work?
Questions for discussion or reﬂ ection
1 Are there writing tasks to which you would ﬁ nd it acceptable to bring a 
‘template’ or ‘boilerplate’ approach? What are they? In what sorts of writing 
is that approach not acceptable?
2 This chapter suggested a way to understand what common knowledge is, in 
order to understand what sort of ideas do not need to be referenced. What if 
anything might be added to or altered in this interpretation?
3 Some types of texts, such as the policy documents discussed in the ﬁ rst part 
of this chapter, often appear without their authorship identiﬁ ed. Does that 
reduce the need for a writer who uses ideas from them to include an 
attribution to them?
4 In a rich analysis of the difﬁ culties involved in writing policies for plagiarism 
which leave scope for pedagogy, Price (2002) identiﬁ es one of the problematic 
aspects as the idea of ‘one’s “own” work’, which ﬁ gures prominently in the 
policies she studies, and indeed in many, if not most. Among the awkward 
and hard- to- make- sense- of ideas she identiﬁ es are the fact that the notion of 
the unitary author who creates new and original works ‘from scratch’ is a 
modern one, and collaborative learning, which is built on eroding the 
boundaries around ‘one’s “own” work’.
Is distinguishing what is one’s own work problematic for you with regard 
to your students’ writing? Do they have difﬁ culties with the idea? Are there 
pedagogical practices which are effective for learning but approach the 
boundaries of collusion? Do you collaborate with colleagues in your 
professional life in ways which could require the boundaries of ‘one’s own’ 
to be considered?

Appendix A Training teachers in a 
good source- use pedagogy
This appendix describes a possible layout for a staff training seminar on 
teaching to promote good source use and avoid plagiarism. It is planned to 
take three one- hour sessions which can be offered back to back or distributed 
over a longer period, and requires no preparation on the part of participants 
(apart for an optional variation in the third session). However, because the 
content of each hour is based on key concepts presented earlier in this book, 
there are opportunities to coordinate reading portions of the book with the 
seminar sessions, either beforehand as preparation or afterwards by way of 
reinforcing and deepening. It presupposes a general in- service audience (i.e., 
participants from across the curriculum and at various teaching ranks) and no 
prior knowledge of the topic, but with some teaching experience.
Part I What is plagiarism?
This introductory session is designed to take approximately the ﬁ rst hour of 
the seminar and introduces key concepts in the topic.
A Prepare examples of possible plagiarism to distribute to participants, 
possibly Examples 1.7–1.9 from Chapter 1. Ask participants to decide 
whether they are acceptable ways to use sources or not, and if not, whether 
or not they are plagiarism. If participants ﬁ nd it hard to decide about one or 
more examples, ask them to express the reasons for their uncertainty and/
or what additional information they would want to make a decision.
B Deﬁ ning plagiarism. Compare a deﬁ nition of plagiarism in use at your 
university, from as authoritative a source as possible, with others, for example, 
the ones in Chapter 1, or ones taken from other institutions which offer a 
relevant point of comparison or contrast to yours. Do the deﬁ nitions help 
shed light on whether the examples in (A) were plagiarised? Introduce the four 
criteria for plagiarism (Chapter 1) and ask participants to analyse the deﬁ nitions 
for explicit or implicit reference to them. Then return to the examples used in 
(A). Which of the four criteria are, or appear to be, at work there?

158 APPENDIX A TRAINING TEACHERS IN SOURCE- USE PEDAGOGY
Part II How do we handle plagiarism?
This session should equip staff with a good working knowledge of the rules and 
procedures in place at their institution. This being the case, the content will 
vary from university to university, but by the end of this second hour they 
should have answers to the following questions.
• What rules (if any) state what students should be told about plagiarism at 
the start of a class?
• What steps does the university take to inform students about plagiarism? 
What information are they given, and where and how is it made available to 
them?
• What information is given to students about how to use sources 
appropriately?
• Does the university provide a subscription to a text- comparison service? Is 
its use by staff optional or mandatory? May students choose not to have 
their work submitted to it, or are they required to agree to that? What 
training in using and interpreting its results is available?
• What (if anything) do the regulations of this university require teachers to 
do about suspected plagiarism? What are the penalties for not doing it? 
• What discretion do teachers have for deciding what action to take?
• What happens if a formal accusation of plagiarism is made against a student? 
What are the procedures and the possible penalties?
Part III A positive plagiarism pedagogy
Start by presenting the following key features of effective teaching for good 
source use (Chapter 5 elaborates on these), pausing after each for discussion 
about how this already happens in participants’ courses, or how courses can be 
adjusted so that it does happen.
• Students should have clear targets, in terms of both what they are expected 
to do, and what they are not expected to do.
• These should ideally be expressed as anticipated learning outcomes, so that 
student performance in reaching the targets can be taken into account in 
the overall assessment.
• Expectations for source-use skills should be reasonable; students should be 
able to meet them with the skills and knowledge they can reasonably be 
expected to bring with them, and/or what they will be taught about writing 
and source use during the course.

APPENDIX A TRAINING TEACHERS IN SOURCE- USE PEDAGOGY 159
• Assignments should be designed to encourage original responses and to 
permit good feedback.
• Feedback should explicitly address successful and unsuccessful source use, 
which requires the evaluator to know, not guess, how sources have been 
used.
• Opportunities for revision will permit students to reﬁ ne their skills.
Variation: this session can be run effectively workshop- style, with participants 
coming prepared with an assignment they give their students and possibly 
examples of student responses to it. An outcome of the workshop can be to 
adjust the assignment and related procedures to ensure a better and more 
consistent outcome with regard to source use.

Appendix B Case studies
These case studies are intended to be largely free- standing from the rest of the 
book, in the sense that they can be read and worked through in any order. 
However, Case 1 makes a particularly good companion to Chapters 1–2; Case 
2 to Chapters 2–3; Case 3 to Chapter 3; Case 4 to Chapters 4–5; and Case 5 to 
Chapters 7, 9 and 10. One productive way to use Cases 6 and 7 is to work with 
them near the beginning of the book, revisit them near the middle and return 
to them at the end, to see if your impressions change.
The cases are in addition designed to accommodate different purposes, 
interests and time constraints. The ﬁ rst four cases describe a series of events 
around plagiarism in some detail. The ﬁ fth describes a set of attitudes to 
plagiarism and is considerably less detailed. It thus lends itself to use in contexts 
where only a modest amount of time is available for working with or discussing 
the case. The ﬁ nal two are based on student texts as well as interviews with the 
students and their supervisors. They are designed to support a deep, ﬁ ne- 
grained analysis and a fact- based discussion.
Case 1: Disputed responsibility
In 2004, plagiarism from the Internet was discovered in the work of a student at 
a UK university pursuing a BA in English Literature. The student was near the 
end of his degree course, and after the plagiarism was identiﬁ ed in one of his 
later pieces of work, his earlier work was also reviewed. The same strategy of 
interweaving material copied and pasted into written assignments had been 
used throughout. A decision was made within the university to award no marks 
at all to his assessed work, making it impossible for him to receive his degree.
In the wide press coverage which attended this case, the student made the 
following points:
• He did not dispute the university’s characterisation of his work, and agreed 
that he had used a cutting- and- pasting strategy throughout his degree.
• He stated that he had not been aware, until it was pointed out to him, that 
this strategy violated the rules. Having had the rules drawn to his attention, 
he agreed it did.

APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES 161
• He said that the university had a responsibility to tell him earlier in his 
course of study that his use of sources was inappropriate; waiting until the 
end of a three- year course to provide that feedback was unacceptable.
• He made reference to the fact that he had incurred £11,000 of debt during 
his studies, an investment of time and money which was now seen to be 
fruitless.
The Deputy Vice Chancellor of the university was quoted in the Times Higher 
Education Supplement this way:
I would stress that the university has robust and well- established procedures 
in place to combat plagiarism and that our students are given clear 
guidance on this issue . . . in the faculty and department handbooks. 
Departments also supplement the formal documents with detailed advice 
and guidance to students.
The university’s current documentation at time of writing, eight years after the 
case, includes a web page headed ‘What is plagiarism?’ ((1), below) with 
deﬁ nitions very much like those seen in Chapters 1 and 10. It is approximately 
200 words in length and concludes with the advice that ‘What constitutes 
plagiarism for different subject areas may vary’, and refers students to links on 
three faculty web pages.
The link for the Faculty of Humanities, where the student in question was 
presumably enroled, leads to a page headed ‘Information for new research 
students’ (2); (the student in question was an undergraduate). That page is 
approximately four screens long, with plagiarism appearing at the very bottom. 
The information on plagiarism there is a paraphrased version of the information 
in (1), concluding with a link to a page on academic integrity. That page says 
nothing speciﬁ c about plagiarism but links to a page headed ‘How do I avoid 
plagiarism?’ (3).
That page, just under 200 words in length, includes statements like 
‘plagiarism can best be avoided by following good academic practice, which 
invoves correct academic referencing’. Following the links on this page leads to 
examples and deﬁ nitions of quotation and paraphrase, among other things.
Links to the university web pages:
(1) http://www.kent.ac.uk/ai/students/whatisplagiarism.html
(2) http://www.kent.ac.uk/humanities/postgraduate/infopg.html#Plagiarism
(3) http://www.kent.ac.uk/ai/students/avoidingplagiarism.html
Read more about the case from these accounts:
Baty, P. (2004), ‘Plagiarist student to sue university’. The Times Online. 
Retrieved 
January 
19, 
2006, 
from 
http://www.timesonline.co.uk/
article/0,,3561- 1126250,00.html.

162 APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES
Guardian Unlimited (2004, 24 May) ‘Plagiarising student sues university for 
negligence’. Retrieved 18 January 2007 from http://education.guardian.
co.uk/print/0,,4934062- 108229,00.html.
Discussion
The disagreement in this case centred around responsibility: was it the student’s 
responsibility to know the rules and therefore know that he was breaking 
them, or the university’s responsibility to inform the student that the rules had 
been broken. Discuss that question from these perspectives:
• To what extent can a student be expected to take responsibility for applying 
a general rule to his or her coursework?
• Does the ﬁ nancial debt the student incurred alter your evaluation of the 
situation?
• What should or could the student and/or the university have done differently 
to avoid this outcome?
• Given that events unfolded as they did, what solutions might be found for 
this situation?
Case 2: Economies of scale
A master’s student in engineering at a university in the US midwest was 
applying for a PhD studentship, and to understand how he might write a more 
effective proposal, began reading completed theses and dissertations, as well as 
some of their sources. He discovered that many of them repeated language 
from their sources without attributing the copied chunks as quotation. After 
discovering this in a large number of works, he reported his ﬁ ndings to several 
people in authority.
A large- scale scandal which attracted a great deal of public attention ensued. 
The outcomes included:
• Plagiarism was discovered in dozens of engineering PhD theses and master’s 
dissertations. It consisted primarily of material from and in introductions, 
and often the writers were international students.
• Many of the students affected were told to decide whether to have their 
degrees withdrawn, or to admit to the plagiarism and be given an opportunity 
to re- write (an option of challenging the accusation of plagiarism before an 
internal university body was also offered).
• The positions of the supervisors involved were negatively affected in a 
number of ways, including losing the right to supervise research students. 
One lost an endowed chair.

APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES 163
• The professor who lost his chair sued the university, which had to pay him 
signiﬁ cant compensation.
Various actors in and commentators on the scandal put forward the following 
perspectives (their accounts come from a detailed report in the Chronicle of 
Higher Education, Wasley, 2006).
Two academics who were commissioned to investigate and write a report 
concluded that the supervisors ‘either failed to monitor the writing in their 
advisees’ theses or simply ignored academic honesty, integrity, and basically 
supported academic fraudulence’.
One of the students who was threatened with revocation of his degree said 
that the questionable parts of his work were
not plagiarism . . . [arguing] that those making the charges are not familiar 
with engineering theses . . . [and that they] have missed the page in the 
fourth chapter . . . with a crucial reference that explains why the next 
twelve pages of text and calculations are nearly identical to ones in a thesis 
written by another student.
One of the supervisors involved commented that the problem was carelessness 
leading to forgotten references or quotation marks, that ‘there was no intention 
to deceive, and therefore no plagiarism’.
The same supervisor expressed a view that ‘at any university, at any 
department, I think you would ﬁ nd the same’.
Another staff member in the department said that ‘most of the plagiarism . . . 
occurred in introductory chapters describing research methods and reviewing 
the previous literature, for which there is little expectation of originality’.
Discussion
• Four actors mentioned above give ﬁ ve perspectives on the situation, some of 
which are mutually contradictory. According to the facts in the case 
presented here, which perspectives seem closest to reality? 
• Was the response to the affected students a reasonable one? Were there 
alternative approaches?
• How could the situation have been prevented?
Read more about the case
Ohio University Compass (2010) Jay S. Gunasekera public name- clearing 
hearing 
[WWW 
Document]. 
URL 
http://www.ohio.edu/compass/
stories/10- 11/9/Jay- Gunasekera- name- clearing- 814.cfm
Pyle, E. (2011) OU, professor settle plagiarism lawsuit. The Columbus 
Dispatch. http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/local/2011/03/08/OU- 
plagiarism- settlement.html

164 APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES
Wasley, P. (2006) The Plagiarism Hunter, Chronicle of Higher Education, 8/11/2006, 
Vol. 52, Issue 49. http://chronicle.com/article/The- Plagiarism-  Hunter/5109/
Case 3: Who owns student work?
Turnitin is a provider of a text- matching service which was in use at a secondary 
school in the US state of Virginia and at another school in Arizona in 2007 
when students at those schools brought a lawsuit against Turnitin’s parent 
company, iParadigms.
The students had been obliged to submit their work to Turnitin as a condition 
of it being assessed; had they not done so, they would not have received 
a grade on their work. In submitting the work, the students clicked to agree 
acceptance of Turnitin’s terms and conditions. However, they included 
a statement at the beginning of their assignments that they did not want 
their assignments to become part of Turnitin’s database, and thereby be 
used for comparison against work which other students would later submit 
to Turnitin. Despite those statements, the students’ written assignments 
were stored in Turnitin’s archive, and the students claimed copyright 
infringement.
Turnitin entered counterclaims against the students. One of these was an 
attempt to recover from the students the costs they incurred in defending 
themselves against the lawsuit. The basis for this was their usage policy (part of 
a separate document, not part of the terms and conditions) which provided for 
such indemniﬁ cation.
The judgement issued in the case denied both the counterclaims and the 
students’ original claim against iParadigms. A factor in the decision was that 
the students’ proviso that their work could not form part of Turnitin’s database 
was an attempt to modify the agreement they had accepted by clicking, but 
that agreement speciﬁ ed that the terms could not be modiﬁ ed. The judgement 
also found that Turnitin’s use of the students’ work did not constitute copyright 
infringement in that it was transformative:
Plaintiffs originally created and produced their works for the purpose of 
education and creative expression. iParadigms, through Turnitin, uses the 
papers for an entirely different purpose, namely, to prevent plagiarism and 
protect the students’ written works from plagiarism.
(Hilton, 2008: 13)
Discussion
In this case, students brought a complaint against the provider of a text- 
matching tool to which their school had decided student work should be 

APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES 165
submitted. In the context of a discussion between the school and these 
students, what arguments do you imagine the students would present to 
explain their position? What arguments do you think the school might counter 
with, to explain their insistance on the use of Turnitin?
Read more about the case
Hilton, C.M. (2008) AV et al. v. iParadigms. US District Court for the Eastern 
District of Virginia.
Glod, M. (2007, March 29). McLean students sue anti- cheating service. The 
Washington Post. Retrieved from http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp dyn/
content/article/2007/03/28/AR2007032802038.html
Case 4: Deciding what to report
Unlike the ﬁ rst three cases presented in this section, this case is ﬁ ctionalised.
Peter was a lecturer in business management and had assigned his students 
to carry out a project in groups and present the results in a written report. The 
report was to be written up as a draft and read by another group of students 
who would offer peer feedback. Each group would then make an oral 
presentation of their ﬁ ndings to the whole class, followed by a period of 
questions aimed at helping them tighten up their report. They would then 
revise their written report and turn it in to the teacher for a grade. The grade 
would be based only on the report in its ﬁ nal written form, but a precondition 
for the work to be assessed was that the group had gone through each step in 
the process.
A few days before the oral presentations, a group of students came to see 
Peter in his ofﬁ ce. They were concerned and upset because the report which 
they were providing feedback on contained what they believed was plagiarism. 
The literature review contained paragraphs which they had discovered had 
been copied from several sources.
Peter viewed the copied language as unacceptable but did not diagnose it as 
deceptive plagiarism. He told the students that they had done well to spot the 
problem and that they should bring it up in the question period following the 
oral presentation. He believed that members of other groups could beneﬁ t 
from hearing the matter raised as well.
After leaving Peter’s ofﬁ ce, the students discussed the matter amongst 
themselves and became more upset still. They believed that their classmates 
had engaged in deceptive plagiarism and, had they succeeded, would have 
distorted the grading curve, resulting in a relatively lower award for their own 
work. They also believed that it was Peter’s responsibility to report cheating, 
and that he was trying to evade an unpleasant duty.

166 APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES
Instead of bringing the matter up after the oral presentations, the students 
made a formal report against their peers to the ofﬁ ce in the university 
responsible for academic integrity. That ofﬁ ce began an investigation 
against the potential offenders. At the same time, they began an investigation 
against Peter.
The terms of Peter’s contract, like all other teachers at his university, 
stipulated that he was required to report any attempt to cheat. A high- level 
administrator decided that by not reporting the possible plagiarism, Peter had 
breached his contract, and began proceedings to dismiss him. There followed 
a period of months when Peter was called to hearings to explain his actions 
and motivations in the matter. Eventually Peter was issued a warning and 
allowed to keep his job. Although he felt unfairly treated, he accepted that 
outcome as the best way of ending the matter and moving on.
Discussion
The disagreement in this case was not over whether deceptive plagiarism 
should be reported. From Peter’s perspective it was about whether his 
decision that deception was not involved could be second guessed. From the 
perspective of the university administration, whose position implied a ﬁ rm 
conviction that deceptive plagiarism had been involved, it was about 
whether a teacher had inﬁ nite latitude either to reach an unsound decision 
or to avoid taking unpleasant action by hiding behind a pretence that 
deception had not been involved. To the extent that deception is a factor in 
plagiarism, what latitude do, or should, teachers have to make such a 
determination? What scope do, or should, universities have to constrain their 
choices?
Case 5: ‘A hired gun’
In 2010 an article appeared in the Chronicle of Higher Education authored (under 
a pseudonym) by a ghost author, a man who writes student assignments on 
commission. In this article, which attracted a great deal of press attention, ‘Ed 
Dante’ made the following points about the service he provides and the people 
who use it:
• He and his colleagues are very proliﬁ c and very much in demand: ‘On any 
day of the academic year, I am working on upward of 20 assignments’.
• His services are in demand from three groups, the very wealthy, students 
who are not adequately prepared for university education, and speakers of 
English as a second language. About the latter two groups he says: ‘colleges 
are failing them utterly’.

APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES 167
• A common task is doing students’ work on distant courses, from taking part 
in on- line seminars to taking exams.
• The students who use his services are so numerous that all university teachers 
have encountered one: My customers are your students. I promise you that. 
Somebody in your classroom uses a service that you can’t detect, that you 
can’t defend against, that you may not even know exists.
• That the situation is at least partly the fault of staff: ‘For those of you who 
have ever mentored a student through the writing of a dissertation, served on 
a thesis- review committee, or guided a graduate student through a formal 
research process, I have a question: Do you ever wonder how a student who 
struggles to formulate complete sentences in conversation manages to 
produce marginally competent research? How does that student get by you?’
Discussion
• Why are Dante’s services so popular?
• What measures can teachers take to keep students from hiring someone like 
Ed Dante?
• What measures can universities take?
• If universities are failing students from non- traditional backgrounds and 
L2 speakers, what is the solution?
• How reﬂ ective of your reality is his belief that every classroom has a student 
who uses someone like him?
• The implication of the question ‘How does that student get by you?’ seems 
to be that if staff were more alert and challenged students who produce 
surprising results, there might be fewer students who get away with using 
his service. To what extent is that implied criticism a fair one?
Read more about the case
Dante, E. (2010) The Shadow Scholar. Chronicle of Higher Education. URL http://
chronicle.com/article/The- Shadow- Scholar/125329/
Case 6: What kind of plagiarism? Part I
This case study and the next present the work of writers who used their sources 
in ways which many teachers would consider textual plagiarism. They form 
part of the data for a larger study (Pecorari, 2003; Pecorari, 2006). They are 
presented here for you to decide whether they constitute prototypical 
plagiarism. These cases are divided into four parts: background about the 
writer; information about and examples of how sources were used; the writer’s 
responses in our interview about source use; and the supervisor’s view. Pause 

168 APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES
after reading each of these parts and assess what you think about these students, 
and about how you evaluate their source use.
Part A: The writer
Helen was a master’s student from Taiwan studying in the UK when we met. 
She was writing a dissertation on language learning, and volunteered to take 
part in my research which involved interviews with both her and her supervisor, 
and an analysis of part of her dissertation in draft form. Helen was interested 
in how children learn language, and spoke with apparent enthusiasm in our 
interviews about going back to Taiwan and teaching there. For the time being, 
though, she was wholeheartedly engaged in writing her dissertation.
Part B: The dissertation
The text Helen gave me for analysis was 3,510 words long, and was the draft 
that was intended to form part of her master’s dissertation. There were 28 
citations to 16 sources in it. I was able to compare just over 1,000 words of her 
text to her sources. There were several reasons in this study overall why some 
parts of the students’ texts could not be compared to sources. One was, naturally, 
that some portions were averrals, rather than attributions, and there was no 
source, ostensibly, with which they could be compared. Another was that the 
source was not available. A third was that the referencing information was so 
unclear that it was not possible to know what the source was. Where possible I 
asked the student for clariﬁ cation, but they were frequently unsure as well.
Looking at the parts of Helen’s text which I could compare to her sources, 
exactly half of the words in it were taken from her sources. Eleven per cent 
were quotation, and the other 39% were not identiﬁ ed as quotation. Although 
signalled quotations were relatively infrequent in Helen’s work, references to 
her sources were present much more regularly. In addition, she worked with 
the language of her sources, stitching segments from different sources together 
and making changes to them in a patchwriting strategy. These examples give a 
representative cross- section of the passages from her text which were compared 
with their sources. In each of these cases, the source Helen cites is actually the 
one she used.
Helen
In teaching non- native speakers, teachers might introduce new vocabulary 
which learners already know its cultural and linguistic background knowledge 
(Taylor, 1990: 6).
Source (Taylor, 1990)
In teaching non- native speakers, then, we might introduce new vocabulary into 
the context of what our learners already know, culturally as well as linguistically.

APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES 169
Helen
In addition to gap- ﬁ lling, there should be a variety of techniques to practise 
new words, such as word class change, crossword completion, crossword 
creation, multiple choice, sentence creation from a table, etc. (Williams and 
Dallas, 1984: 205).
Source: (Williams and Dallas, 1984)
Each unit of the workbook also contains a ‘Using New Words’ Section, 
employing a variety of techniques in addition to gap- ﬁ lling, such as word class 
change, crossword completion, crossword creation, multiple choice, sentence 
creation from a table, etc.
Helen
Carter and McCarthy (1988) point out eight questions that teachers and 
students often ask about vocabulary and language study. One of them is 
whether some words are more useful than others to beginning learners in 
second or foreign language learning (Carter and McCarthy, 1988:1).
Source (Carter and McCarthy, 1988)
It may be useful, however, to begin this chapter by listing some questions 
which teachers and students have asked, usually quite persistently, about 
vocabulary and language study.//3. In the early stages of learning a second or 
foreign language, are some words more useful to the learner than others?
Part C: Helen’s account
Helen’s perception was that all three of these excerpts from her work were 
examples of paraphrase. She said that she chose to paraphrase the ﬁ rst of these, 
Taylor, because she did not want to have too many quotations in her work. She 
described her process of paraphrasing the Taylor passage: ‘I think I delete some 
unnecessary words’.
Doing a paraphrase like this was hard, she said; she estimated that it would 
take ﬁ ve to ten minutes to convert the passage in Taylor into the form in which 
it appeared in her text. Although the changes to the source are not radical – her 
wording still retains the phrases ‘In teaching non- native speakers’, ‘might 
introduce new vocabulary’ and ‘learners already know’ – in the space of this 
short passage she has introduced a syntactic irregularity (‘which learners 
already know its’) and an unfortunate wording (‘learners know its knowledge’).
Part D: The Supervisor's account
The reaction of Helen’s supervisor could perhaps be called mild, unsurprised 
unhappiness. For example, looking at the middle of the three extracts 

170 APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES
above, he felt she had misrepresented the source to some extent, since 
they were describing a speciﬁ c book and she was using the reference to 
them to support a claim about what books generally should contain. He 
also thought she should have used quotation marks because ‘I mean it is 
lifted. So if she’d put in “there should be a variety”, if she’d put 
quotation around there beginning at “a variety” then you’d have less problem 
with it’.
On balance he did not see the source use in Helen’s text as constituting a 
signiﬁ cant problem:
Overall, the data itself is much more important than getting this stuff 
wrong. Assuming that she’s not lifting . . . she may be, I don’t know, but 
the thing is, she’s not lifting great chunks of the stuff, and not understanding 
it, I mean, that’s the problem. In a sense, if she’s doing it and understanding 
it more or less, which is why it will be interesting to see when she expands 
this, then that would be a problem, but if she’s doing it and she is actually 
understanding it, that’s ﬁ ne.
Like the Turkish scientists and others quoted earlier in this book, Helen’s 
supervisor drew a distinction between her results and her patchwriting, and 
thought the former were ‘much more important’. However, he did characterise 
the language she had repeated from the source as ‘lifting’, which is a common 
euphemism for stealing. He also sent mixed signals about whether it was 
plagiarism, bringing up the word only to dismiss it:
So this sort of lifting, plagiarism, I wouldn’t say, again, especially since 
she has got the quote and the page number, I wouldn’t get terribly upset 
about. I mean, [it] wouldn’t fail the dissertation. But it would bring it 
down a bit.
Discussion
Helen’s discussion of her own source use showed that she was making conscious 
choices, that she was choosing to paraphrase, or to come as close to it as 
possible, because she felt too much quotation would not be appropriate. If we 
accept her account, the changes she made to her sources cost her a great deal 
of time and effort. Helen’s supervisor was not happy about the way she used 
sources, but neither was he terribly unhappy.
• Is Helen’s source use acceptable or unacceptable? If the latter, is it plagiarism? 
• How would you react to it if you were her supervisor? What would you 
tell her?
• If Helen is accurate in her account of the time she spent paraphrasing each 
chunk like the ones above, and considering the problematic language she 
introduced into her text where she tried to make changes, does she have any 
realistic alternatives to this strategy?

APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES 171
Case 6: What kind of plagiarism? Part II
Part A: The writer
Erden was a master’s student in biology at the time he took part in my study. 
He had come to the UK from Turkey, where he had worked as a research 
scientist, and had had some experience writing up his research ﬁ ndings both 
in English and in Turkish.
Erden was writing a demanding dissertation to a tight schedule, juggling the 
writing with coursework and laboratory work, and spending what time he 
could with his family, who had travelled to the UK with him. The impression 
he gave though was that while the demands on his time and abilities were 
challenging, he was rising to them: his did not appear to be a ‘not waving but 
drowning’ scenario.
That spirit of quiet accomplishment of the necessary was what he portrayed 
when we discussed his writing. Writing was laborious, especially so in English, 
but he could do it. His conﬁ dence seemed to be based to a large extent on the 
fact that he felt in control of his research.
Erden provided me with a draft of a literature review which was to be 
incorporated later into his dissertation. After our ﬁ rst interview, when I had 
expressed an interest in his sources, he realised that I would have difﬁ culty 
ﬁ nding many of them as they were pre- prints which had reached him through 
his supervisor. On that realisation, he offered me the loan of his sources, which 
were journal articles and conference paper, so that I could make copies.
Part B: The dissertation
Erden’s text was 1373 words long, and contained 20 citations to 18 sources. I 
was able to compare 80% of it to his sources. In keeping with the highly visible 
convention in the natural sciences, Erden’s text contained no direct, signalled 
quotation. However, within the passages I compared, 73% of the words came 
from Erden’s sources. Parts were more extensively paraphrased than others. 
The examples below give the ﬂ avour of Erden’s processes, and hint at the 
variation in just how source- dependent the components of his text were.
Erden
Van den Houwe, I. (1998) has suggested that cryopreservation is very 
important on the conservation of Musa germplasm.
Source (Van den Houwe et al. 1998 – a header)
The in vitro germplasm collection at the Musa INIBAP Transit Centre and the 
importance of cryopreservation

172 APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES
Erden
Van and Kitto (1990) reported that plant regeneration from callus cultures of 
Mentha depended on explant source, genotype and culture medium 
component. They cultured mature embryo, seedlings, and ﬂ ower parts on a 
MS medium. Cultured shoots regenerated on mature peppermint embryo on 
medium that contained BA 0.5 mg/l and 0.5 mg/l NAA.
Source (Van Eck and Kitto, 1990)
Plant regeneration from callus cultures of mint depended on explant source, 
genotype, and culture medium components. Mature embryos, seedling and 
ﬂ ower parts, as well as chilled or desiccated immature embryos of peppermint 
(Mentha piperita L.) and spearmint (Mentha spicata L.) were cultured on a 
Murashige- Skoog medium containing various combinations of growth factors. 
Shoots regenerated from callus that developed either on mature peppermint 
embryos cultured on medium that contained BA at 0.5 mg/liter –1 and NAA at 
0.5 mg/liter –1 or on immature peppermint embryos
Erden
Faure et al. (1998) determined that in- vitro shoot Organo- genesis of 
peppermint and spearmint was obtained from leaf discs. Best result were 
obtained when explants were cultured for two weeks onto MS medium 
supplementing with 300mm mannitol, 2.0 mm BA and 2.0 mm IBA and then 
transferred on a medium without mannitol and containing 0.5 mm NAA. 9.0 
mm BA and 0.5 mm TDZ. They achieved 78% regeneration for peppermint 
and 49% spearmint.
Source (Faure et al., 1998)
In vitro shoot organogenis of peppermint and spearmint was obtained from 
leaf disks.//Best results were obtained when explants were cultured for two 
weeks onto Murashige and Skoog medium supplemented with 300 mM 
mannitol, 2.0 μM 6- benzyladenine and 2.0 μM indole- 3- butyric acid, and 
then transferred on a medium without mannitol and containing 0.5 μM 
α- naphthaleneacetic acid, 9.0 μM 6- benzyladenine and 0.5 μM thidiazuron. 
Using these culture conditions, percentages of regeneration were 78% for 
peppermint and 49% for spearmint.
Erden
Plant tissue culture storage methodology has been under development for 
some 15–20 years. During that time, considerable progress has been made, 
particularly in the cryopreservation of living organism.
Source (Withers, 1991b)
Plant tissue culture storage methodology has been under development for 
some 15–20 years. During that time, considerable progress has been made, 

APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES 173
particularly in the cryopreservation of living organisms in general and of plant 
material in particular. (Ashwood- Smith and Farrant, 1980; Kartha, 1985; 
Grout and Morris, 1987).
Erden’s use of sources presents several features of note. First, his most common 
strategy is to condense the material he takes from a source, as he has done 
in the second example. Although Erden never signals the use of language 
from a source with quotation marks, he does give a citation to his source in 
most cases, throughout his writing sample. One of the few exceptions is the 
last example, above. Although there are too few passages in Erden’s text 
without a citation to be able to ﬁ nd patterns with any degree of conﬁ dence, the 
last example here may not be atypical in that it – the only one of the four that 
does not name a source – is also the only one of the four which reports 
somebody else’s work. Withers, the source of the last example, makes a 
statement about a trend in recent research in the ﬁ eld and cites three sources 
for it. Erden repeats the claim, but not the citations. However, in the other 
three examples, it is the sources’ own research being reported, and Erden cites 
them.
Although he names his sources in the majority of cases, there are often 
surface inaccuracies. In the ﬁ rst example above he used a paper by van den 
Houwe et al., but gave the authorship as just van den Houwe. The second 
example makes use of a source authored by van Eck and Kitto, but Erden 
identiﬁ es the ﬁ rst author only as ‘Van’. These and other relatively minor 
issues give the impression that he saw this draft very much as a work in 
progress.
Part C: Erden’s account
When we met for an interview to talk about his text, Erden showed me a pack 
of index cards on which he took notes. Each of the articles he had read was 
summarised onto a card, and he said that when he wrote his literature review, 
he generally worked from the index cards, going back to the article only if 
there was a detail he did not remember.
In our ﬁ rst interview Erden had himself introduced the topic of plagiarism 
and said how careful he felt he needed to be to cite sources appropriately. 
Having seen his text in between, I asked him during our second interview how 
conﬁ dent he felt that the had managed to follow the conventions for citation. 
His answer conﬁ rmed that the draft we were discussing was a candidate for 
future revision:
I’ve cited all the literature which I used, but probably at the ﬁ rst stage, 
maybe, I haven’t paid attention if it’s direct citation, maybe altered 
sentence or not. (emphasis added)

174 APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES
There is then presumably going to be a later stage when Erden will work with 
his sources and pay attention to whether he has used direct quotation or has 
altered sentences. However, it may not be an easy process to carry out because 
Erden is ‘not sure’ about the sources of the text we look at:
because I can’t remember, you know, when you are taking a note, 
sometimes you just copied a sentence, or sometimes you summarized a 
paragraph, and after sometimes later you could not remember, you just 
copied this sentence or you just make a summary.
We then turned to the subject of why he had chosen to cite the sources he did, 
and his answers came so easily that it was manifestly a topic he had thought 
about before. One of the references to a method of preserving germ plasm was 
the one he was going to use in his experiments, and so he had mentioned it in 
his literature review to prepare the way for discussing it in his methods section. 
The picture that emerged as we spoke was that he had read relevant sources, 
understood them, and cited them because they served a purpose, but he had 
not arrived at a point in the process of constructing his text where he anticipated 
that would be obvious to the reader. He had done the equivalent of a camper 
who lays a tent, and the tent poles and the stakes and the hammer on the 
ground in approximately the right place. Actually erecting the tent will be a 
last step in the process, and with the preparations made, a minor if an important 
one. With chunks from his sources distributed where they would do most 
good, all Erden had to do was pull them into order and work out whether the 
text he had copied from his note cards into his draft was ‘just one sentence 
[taken directly from the source] or is it summary of the paragraph?’
As we talked, and looked at his text and at his sources, Erden noticed a chunk 
which had been copied, and was slightly surprised – but only slightly:
I just see that now. But it is normal, while we are taking a note . . . you can 
copy it in your papers, sometimes you can copy directly to the sentence 
and sometimes summary.
And while he would like in an ideal world to tidy up these loose ends, it is not 
realistic to think he will. He cannot go back and check every citation
because probably I am going to use hundreds of citations, hundreds of 
articles, I cannot go by sentence and sentence, which is . . . I mean, my 
position, it is impossible.
Part D: The supervisor’s account
If Erden had both an awareness and a resigned acceptance of the fact that his 
source use was less than ideal, he may have inherited it from his supervisor. 
The two were certainly singing off the same page. Very close to the beginning 

APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES 175
of our interview, and before we had a chance to look at Erden’s sources, the 
supervisor commented on the intertextual inﬂ uences which he assumed were 
at work on the draft:
In this case I don’t think there’s a problem but you can clearly identify two 
different forms of the writing here. One is where he’s very much quoting 
in the introduction, the ﬁ rst two paragraphs particularly, from other 
people who might have written similar introductions but obviously when 
he gets into the literature review on Mentha, given that there isn’t very 
much that’s being done speciﬁ cally on Mentha, that’s much more his own 
writing and you can tell by reading it that it is.
The supervisor understood, in other words, that Erden was repeating from 
his sources. In characterising that repetition, he moved nearer to and further 
from the idea of ‘quoting’ several times. Erden was ‘very much quoting in 
the introduction’ but when I asked how he knew it was a quotation (given 
that my background has led me to regard a quotation as something signalled 
as such) he pulled back from the word: ‘well, not a quotation, maybe a precis 
or something like that and a slight modiﬁ cation’. However, in the next 
sentence he readopted it, saying ‘what he’s doing here is quoting Roberts, so 
I would have expected that to be fairly similar to what Roberts has written 
somewhere’.
This is signiﬁ cant for how it clashes with the received view of quotation, 
standardised in instruction sheets and warnings about plagiarism, saying that 
quotation is something which is signalled as such, and further which is a 
verbatim repetition from the source. But what Erden has done, in his 
supervisor’s mind, neither is nor is not quotation, but it is deﬁ nitely a 
modiﬁ cation of the source. A second signiﬁ cant point in this is that the 
supervisor realises that Erden’s work is not literally quotation, at least not in 
the usual understanding of the word; his repeated adoption and denial of the 
word indicates that. However, by adopting it metaphorically, he claims for 
Erden’s work something of the legitimacy associated with quotation, as 
opposed to patchwriting. He is also aware, though, that many people would 
not consider this strategy fully legitimate:
I would be concerned if there were quite a few paragraphs like that 
throughout the thesis which I could speciﬁ cally identify as being word to 
word from somewhere else, then I would be objecting.
Once again, the distinction between the introduction and the ﬁ ndings arises. 
Ideally the dissertation should not ‘sort of paraphrase exactly what other 
people have written’ but Erden’s approach to the task has not been ‘out of line’. 
And when he gets on to writing up his ﬁ ndings, ‘it’s virtually guaranteed to 
have the student’s own work, certainly in this particular case, because nobody’s 
done what he’s done before, so he’s going to be writing original stuff’. Provided 

176 APPENDIX B CASE STUDIES
he has ‘original stuff’ in his ﬁ ndings, a certain amount of patchwriting in the 
introduction is to be tolerated, if not encouraged.
Discussion
Individual understandings of academic conventions for source use vary widely, 
but in this case Erden and his supervisor were in broad agreement that Erden’s 
quasi- quotation from his sources was not ideal but not catastrophic. How do 
you evaluate the way Erden has used his sources in the examples above? Is it 
acceptable or not? If not, is it plagiarism or something else?
If you think that Erden’s use of sources is not acceptable, how would you 
explain to him why not? What would you advise him to do in place of his 
current strategy?
Erden’s supervisor made the point that his patchwriting in the beginning of 
his dissertation had to be considered in the light of his ﬁ ndings, which were 
predicted to be original. To what extent do you agree with that reasoning?
Earlier cases examined accusations of plagiarism against an undergraduate in 
the UK and a large number of postgraduates in the US. If Erden were at either 
of those institutions, would he get the same response to his work as he got 
from his supervisor?

Appendix C Sources of examples
The sources of the examples used in Chapters 1–10 are identiﬁ ed here, apart 
from those which come from students who participated in my research 
and shared their texts with me on the understanding that they would be 
anonymous.
Example 1.1 (and 10.1)
http://www.calendar.soton.ac.uk/sectionIV/academic- integrity- statement.html;
Example 1.2
http://www.studentgroups.ucla.edu/dos/assets/documents/StudentGuide.pdf
The same deﬁ nition also appears here: http://guides.library.ucla.edu/citing;
Example 1.3
http://www.victoria.ac.nz/home/study/plagiarism#what- is- plagiarism
Example 1.4
Milan, E. P., Malheiros, E. S., Fischman, O., and Lopes Colombo, A. (1997) 
Evaluation of the Auxacolor system for the identiﬁ cation of clinical yeast 
isolates. Mycopathologia, 137, 153–157.
Example 1.5
Nokkala, E. (2010) Passion as the foundation of natural law in the German 
enlightenment: Johann Jacob Schmauss and J.H.G. von Justi. European 
Review of History, 17, 113–123.
Example 1.6
Smith, G. C. S. (2003) Parachute use to prevent death and major trauma related 
to gravitational challenge: systematic review of randomised controlled trials. 
BMJ, 327(7429), 1459–1461. doi:10.1136/bmj.327.7429.1459
Example 1.7
The student text is anonymous. The student’s source was:
Chambers, H. L. and Hummer, K. E.  (1994) Chromosome counts in the Mentha 
collection at the USDA- ARS National Clonal Germplasm Repository. Taxon, 
43: 423–432.

178 APPENDIX C SOURCES OF EXAMPLES
Example 1.8
The student text is anonymous. The student’s source was:
Reed, B. M. (1999) In vitro storage conditions for mint germ plasm. HortScience, 
34: 350–352.
Example 1.9
The student text is anonymous. The student’s source was:
Kennard, W. C., Slocum, M, K., Figdore, S. S., Osborn, T. C. (1994) Genetic 
analysis of morphological variation in Brassica oleracea using molecular 
markers. Theoretical Applied Genetics, 87, 721–732.
Example 4.1a
The student text is anonymous.
Example 4.1b
Pyle, D. W. and Sayers, T. A. (1980) A BEd course for serving teachers: 
An evaluation of the ﬁ rst year. British Journal of Inservice Education, 
7, 10–37.
Example 4.2
The student text is anonymous. The student’s source was:
Grimmett, P. P. and Crehan, E. P. (1992) The nature of collegiality in teacher 
development, in: M. Fullan and A. Hargreaves (eds), Teacher development and 
educational change. London: Falmer Press, pp. 56–85. 
Example 4.3
Smith, M. and Tafﬂ er, R. J. (2000) The chairman’s statement: A content analysis 
of discretionary narrative disclosures. Accounting, Auditing and Accountability 
Journal, 13(5), 624–647. doi:10.1108/09513570010353738
Example 4.4
Newton, M. (1993) Styles and strategies of evaluating INSET, in: R. G. Burgess, 
J. Connor, S. Galloway, M. Morrison and M. Newton (eds) Implementing 
in- service education and training. London: Routledge, pp. 8–38.
Chapter 5, Task 1
Myers, D.G. (2007) Psychology. (8th edition) Worth, New York, NY.
Chapter 5, Task 2
The student text is anonymous. The student’s source was:
Watkins, C. (1985) Does pastoral care = personal and social education? Pastoral 
Care, 3 (3), 179–183.

APPENDIX C SOURCES OF EXAMPLES 179
Example 8.1
Du, W., Coaker, M., Sobel, J. D., and Akins, R. A. (2004) Shuttle vectors for 
Candida albicans, Ta: control of plasmid copy number and elevated 
expression of cloned genes. Current Genetics, 45(6), 390–398. doi:10.1007/
s00294- 004- 0499- 3, pp. 390–391
Example 8.2
Holmes, J. (2006) Sharing a laugh: Pragmatic aspects of humor and gender in 
the workplace. Journal of Pragmatics, 38(1), 26–50. doi:10.1016/j.pragma.
2005.06.007 p. 30
Example 8.3
This is a modiﬁ ed version of Example 8.1.
Example 8.4
Mowlds, P. and Kavanagh, K. (2007) Effect of pre- incubation temperature on 
susceptibility of Galleria mellonella larvae to infection by Candida albicans. 
Mycopathologia, 165, 5–12.
Example 8.5
De la Rosa, J., Ruiz, T., and Rodriguez, L. (2000) Cloning and Characterization 
of a Candida albicans Gene Homologous to Fructose- 1,6- Bisphosphatase 
Genes. Current Microbiology, 41(6), 384–387. doi:10.1007/s002840010154
Example 8. 6
Henriques, M., Gasparettl, K., Azeredo, J., and Oliveira, R. (2002) Experimental 
methodology to quantify Candida albicans cell surface hydrophobicity. 
Biotechnology Letters, 24, 1111–1115.
Examples 8.6a and 8.6b
These are modiﬁ ed versions of Example 8.6.
Example 10.2
http://academicregistry.glam.ac.uk/documents/download/215/
Example 10.3
http://wise.xmu.edu.cn/english/viewNews.asp?id=570
Example 10.4
http://helioscollege.com/menu/studying- at- hic/129/129/1?phpMyAdmin=c5
b2348c822a59542c66f24c75b2f043&phpMyAdmin=7190c382d478d57352
bda6a2a7322f8f
Example 10.5
http://library.csusm.edu/plagiarism/howtoavoid/how_avoid_common.htm

180 APPENDIX C SOURCES OF EXAMPLES
Example 10.6
http://www.admin.cam.ac.uk/univ/plagiarism/students/referencing/
commonknowledge.html
Example 10.7
http://www.usg.edu/galileo/skills/unit08/credit08_04.phtml
Example 10.8
http://www.lib.usm.edu/legacy/plag/whatisplag.php
Example 10.9
Associated British Foods (2007) Annual report.
Example 10.10
Marks and Spencer (2002) Annual report.
Example 10.11
British American Tobacco (2011) Annual report.
Examples 10.12 and 10.13
Aggrekko (2007–2009) Annual report.
Example 10.14
Aggrekko (2000–2001) Annual report.

Notes
i 
Examples of policy, guidance about plagiarism, and good, questionable and bad 
citation practice are given throughout this book. The policies and other regulatory 
documents quoted from are identiﬁ ed in Appendix C. Although these are quoted in 
part for the purpose of showing where current practices are inadequate, no direct 
criticism of them is intended; criticism, where it is implied, is aimed at the current 
received practice across universities. The sources of examples of good citation practice 
are also identiﬁ ed in Appendix C. Examples of questionable or poor citation practice 
come from my research corpus and are used with the permission of the writers, on the 
condition that they remain anonymous. Some examples feature both an extract from 
a piece of student writing and the student’s source, but that source is not always 
acknowledged in the student writing. The conclusion that these were in fact the 
sources the students drew on was drawn on the basis of textual evidence and details 
provided by the students themselves. Further details are given in Pecorari, 2003.
ii A pseudonym, as are the names of all of my research participants mentioned in this 
book.
iii http://www.writing.utoronto.ca/images/stories/Documents/how- not- to- plagiarize.
pdf
iv English is dominant as a global lingua franca in academic life, as well as in many 
other domains, and the numbers of individuals working or studying in English as a 
second or foreign language are large. However, in principle nearly everything which 
is said in this chapter about that group is equally true of anyone studying in a 
language which is not their ﬁ rst, whatever that language may be. 
v The sources of these examples are identiﬁ ed in Appendix 2, but the names of the 
universities are not used here because it is my purpose to use them as examples of 
common practice, not to single them out.

Bibliography
Abasi, A. R. and Graves, B. (2008) Academic literacy and plagiarism: Conversations with 
international graduate students and disciplinary professors. Journal of English for 
Academic Purposes, 7, 221–233.
American Psychological Association (2010) Publication manual of the American 
Psychological Association. American Psychological Association, Washington, DC.
Angélil- Carter, S. (2000) Stolen language? Plagiarism in writing. Longman, Harlow.
Ashworth, P., Bannister, P. and Thorne, P. (1997) Guilty in whose eyes? University 
students’ perceptions of cheating and plagiarism in academic work and assessment. 
Studies in Higher Education 22, 187–203.
Ashworth, P., Freewood, M. and Macdonald, R. (2003) The student lifeworld and the 
meanings of plagiarism. Journal of Phenomenological Psychology, 34, 258–278.
Austen, J. (1813/1995) Pride and prejudice. New York: Modern Library. Retrieved from 
http://site.ebrary.com/id/5002014
Badge, J. L., Cann, A. J. and Scott, J. (2007) To cheat or not to cheat? A trial of the JISC 
Plagiarism Detection Service with biological sciences students. Assessment and 
Evaluation in Higher Education, 32, 433–439.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986) Speech genres and other late essays (Vol. 8). Austin: University of 
Texas Press.
Ballard, B. and Clanchy, J. (1991) Assessment by misconception: Cultural inﬂ uences 
and intellectual traditions, in: L. Hamp- Lyons (ed.), Assessing writing in academic 
contexts. Ablex, Norwood, NJ, pp. 19–35.
Barker, J. (1997) The purpose of study, attitudes to study and staff- student relationships, 
in: D. McNamara and R. Harris (eds), Overseas Students in Higher Education: Issues in 
teaching and learning. Routledge, London, pp. 108–123.
Barks, D. and Watts, P. (2001) Textual borrowing strategies for graduate- level ESL writers, 
in: D. Belcher and A. Hirvela (eds), Linking literacies: Perspectives on L2 reading- writing 
connections. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 246–267.
Baty, P. (2004) ‘Plagiarist student to sue university’. The Times Online. Retrieved January 
19, 2006, from http://www.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,3561- 1126250,00.html.
BBC News (2003) High costs “causing student plagiarism”. URL http://news.bbc.
co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/education/3072061.stm
Becher, T. (1989) Academic tribes and territories: Intellectual enquiry and the cultures of 
disciplines. Milton Keynes: Society for Research into Higher Education and Open 
University Press.
Becher, T. and Trowler, P. R. (2001) (2nd edition) Academic tribes and territories: Intellectual 
enquiry and the culture of disciplines. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Belcher, D. (2001) Cyberdiscourse, evolving notions of authorship, and the teaching of 
writing, in: M. Hewings (ed.), Academic writing in context: Implications and applications. 
Birmingham: University of Birmingham Press, pp. 140–149.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 183
Bennett, R. (2005) Factors associated with student plagiarism in a post- 1992 university. 
Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education, 30, 137–162.
Benson, P. and Heidish, P. (1995) The ESL technical expert: Writing processes and 
classroom practices, in: D. Belcher and G. Braine (eds), Academic writing in a second 
language: Essays on research and pedagogy. Norwood, NJ: Ablex, pp. 313–330.
Betts, D. D. (1992) Retraction of an article published in The Canadian Journal of Physics. 
The Canadian Journal of Physics, 70, 289.
Biggs, J. B. (1996) Enhancing teaching through constructive alignment. Higher Education, 
32, 347–364.
Bloch, J. (2001) Plagiarism and the ESL student: From printed to electronic texts, in: 
D. Belcher and A. Hirvela (eds), Linking Literacies: Perspectives on L2 reading- writing 
connections. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI, pp. 209–228.
Bloch, J. (2008) Plagiarism in an intercultural rhetoric context: What we can learn about 
one from the other, in: U. Connor, E. Nagelhout and W. Rozycki (eds), Contrastive 
Rhetoric: Reaching to intercultural rhetoric. John Benjamins, Amsterdam, pp. 257–274.
Bloch, J. (2012) Plagiarism, intellectual property and the teaching of L2 composition. 
Multilingual Matters, Bristol.
Blum, S. (2010) My word! Plagiarism and college culture. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
Bourdieu, P. and Passeron, J.- C. (1965) Introduction: Langage et rapport au langage dans 
la situation pédagogique, in: P. Bourdieu, J.- C. Passeron and M. de Saint Martin (eds), 
Rapport pédagogique et communication. Paris: Mouton.
Bradbury, M. (1959/1976) Eating people is wrong. Secker and Warburg, London.
Breen, L. and Maassen, M. (2005) Reducing the incidence of plagiarism in an 
undergraduate course. Issues in Educational Research, 15, 1–16.
Bretag, T. (2004) Implementing plagiarism policy in the internationalised university, in: 
Educational integrity values in teaching, learning and research. Presented at the 2nd Asia- 
Paciﬁ c Educational Integrity Conference, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, 
Australia.
British Council (2011) New international student trend presents fresh challenges for 
universities [WWW Document]. British Council. URL http://www.britishcouncil.org/
press/new- international- student- trend- presents- fresh- challenges
Brown, A. S. and Murphy, D. R. (1989) Cryptomnesia: Delineating inadvertent plagiarism. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 432–442.
Bryson, B. (2001) Down under. Black Swan, London.
Buranen, L. (1999) ‘But I Wasn’t Cheating’: Plagiarism and Cross- cultural Mythology, in: 
L. Buranen and A. M. Roy (eds), Perspectives on plagiarism and intellectual property in a 
postmodern world. State University of New York Press, Albany, pp. 63–74.
Cammish, N. K. (1997) Through a glass darkly: Problems of studying at advanced 
level through the medium of English, in: D. McNamara and R. Harris (eds), Overseas 
students in higher education: Issues in teaching and learning. Routledge, London, 
pp. 143–155.
Carroll, J. and Appleton, J. (2005) Towards consistent penalty decisions for breaches of 
academic regulations in one UK university. International Journal for Educational Integrity, 
1(1). Retrieved from http://www.ojs.unisa.edu.au/index.php/IJEI/article/view/15/5
Chicago Manual of Style, 16th edition (2010) University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Culwin, F. and Lancaster, T. (2001) Plagiarism issues for higher education. VINE, 31(2), 
36–41.
Currie, P. (1998) Staying out of trouble: Apparent plagiarism and academic survival. 
Journal of Second Language Writing, 7, 1–18.

184 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dante, E. (2010) The shadow scholar. Chronicle of Higher Education. URL http://chronicle.
com/article/The- Shadow- Scholar/125329/
Davis, S. F., Grover, C. A., Becker, A. H. and McGregor, L. N. (1992) Academic 
dishonesty: Prevalence, determinants, techniques and punishments. Teaching of 
Psychology, 19, 17–20.
Davis, S. F. and Ludvigson, H. W. (1995) Additional data on academic dishonesty and 
a proposal for remediation. Teaching of Psychology, 22, 119–121.
Day, K. (2008) Time is not on our side: Plagiarism and workload in the community 
college, in: R. M. Howard and A. E. Robillard (eds), Plagiarism: Identities, contexts, 
pedagogies. Heinemann, Portsmouth, NH, pp. 43–61.
Deckert, G. D. (1993) Perspectives on plagiarism from ESL students in Hong Kong. 
Journal of Second Language Writing, 2(2), 131–148.
Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills (DIUS) (2008) Participation rates in 
higher education: Academic years 1999/2000–2006/2007 (Provisional) ( No. DIUS SFR 
02/2008).
Devitt, A. J. (1991) Intertextuality in tax accounting: Generic, referential, and functional, 
in: C. Bazerman and J. Paradis (eds), Textual dynamics of the professions: Historical and 
contemporary studies of writing in professional communities. University of Wisconsin 
Press, Madison, WI, pp. 336–357.
Devlin, M. (2006) Policy, preparation, and prevention: Proactive minimization of 
student plagiarism. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management, 28, 45–58.
Dias, P. and Paré, A. (2000) Transitions: Writing in academic and workplace settings. 
Hampton Press, Cresskill, N.J.
Donahue, T. (2008) When copying Is not copying: Plagiarism and French composition 
scholarship, in: C. Eisner and M. Vicnius (eds), Originality, Imitation, Plagiarism. Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, pp. 90–103.
Elbow, P. (1999) Individualism and the teaching of writing: Response to Vai Ramanathan 
and Dwight Atkinson. Journal of Second Language Writing, 8, 327–338.
Eliot, T. S. (1920) The sacred wood: Essays on poetry and criticism. London: Methuen. 
Accessed at www.bartelby.com/200/ 2 July (2002).
Ellery, K. (2008a) An investigation into electronic- source plagiarism in a ﬁ rst- year essay 
assignment. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education, 33(6), 607–617.
Ellery, K. (2008b) Undergraduate plagiarism: a pedagogical perspective. Assessment and 
Evaluation in Higher Education, 33(5), 507–516.
Emerson, L. (2008) Plagiarism, a Turnitin trial and an experience of cultural disorientation, 
in: C. Eisner and M. Vicinus (eds), Originality, imitation and plagiarism: Teaching 
writing in the digital age. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI, 
pp. 183–194.
England, A. (2008) The dynamic nature of common knowledge, in: C. Eisner and 
M. Vicinus (eds), Originality, imitation and plagiarism: Teaching writing in the digital age. 
University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI, pp. 104–113.
Errey, L. (2002) Plagiarism: Something ﬁ shy . . . or just a ﬁ sh out of water? Teaching 
Forum, 50, 17–20.
Flowerdew, J. and Li, Y. (2007) Language re- use among Chinese apprentice scientists 
writing for publication. Applied Linguistics, 28, 440–465.
Franklyn- Stokes, A. and Newstead, S. E. (1995) Undergraduate cheating: who does what 
and why? Studies in Higher Education, 20, 39–52.
Gibaldi, J. (2009) MLA handbook for writers of research papers, 7th edition. Modern Language 
Association, New York.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 185
Glod, M. (2007) McLean students sue anti- cheating service: Plaintiffs say company’s 
database of term papers, essays violates copyright laws. The Washington Post, 29 March. 
Retrieved 29 September 2007 from http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp- dyn/
content/article/2007/03/28/AR200703280(2038)html
Groom, N. (2000) Attribution and averral revisited: Three perspectives on manifest 
intertextuality in academic writing, in: P. Thompson (ed.), Patterns and perspectives: 
Insights into EAP writing practice. Centre for Applied Language Studies, Reading 
University, Reading, pp. 14–25.
Guardian (2004, 24 May) Plagiarising student sues university for negligence. Guardian 
Unlimited. http://education.guardian.co.uk/print/0,,4934062–108229,00.html
Ha, L. P. (2006) Plagiarism and overseas students: Stereotypes again? ELT Journal, 60, 
76–78.
Hayes, N. and Introna, L. (2005) Cultural Values, Plagiarism and Fairness: When 
Plagiarism gets in the way of Learning. Ethics and Behaviour, 15(3), 213–231.
Hayes, N. and Introna, L. (2006) Systems for the production of plagiarists? The 
implications arising from the use of plagiarism detection systems in UK universities 
for Asian learners. Journal of Academic Ethics, 3, 55–73.
Hertz, N. (1985) The end of the line: Essays on psychoanalysis and the sublime. Columbia 
University Press, New York.
Hirvela, A. and Du, Q., forthcoming. ‘Why am I paraphrasing?’: Undergraduate ESL 
writers’ engagement with source- based academic writing and reading. Journal of English 
for Academic Purposes.
Hofstede, G. (1984) Culture’s consequences: International differences in work- related values. 
Sage, Newbury Park, CA.
Högskoleverket. (2011) Disciplinära åtgärder mot studenter [Disciplinary actions against 
students] ( No. 2011:10 R). Stockholm.
Howard, R. M. (1995) Plagiarisms, authorships, and the academic death penalty. College 
English, 57, 788–805.
Howard, R. M. (1999) The new abolitionism comes to plagiarism, in: L. Buranen and 
A. M. Roy (eds), Perspectives on plagiarism and intellectual property in a postmodern world. 
State University of New York Press, Albany, pp. 87–95.
Howard, R. M. (2001) Conference on College Composition and Communication, 
Denver, CO (17 March).
Howard, R. M., Serviss, T. and Rodrigue, T. K. (2010) Writing from sources, writing from 
sentences. Writing and Pedagogy, 2(2), 177–192.
HSF (1993) Högskoleförordning [University ordinances] Chapter 10. Accessed 10 June 
2009. Available at: http://www.notisum.se/rnp/SLS/LAG/19930100.html
Hull, G. and Rose, M. (1989) Rethinking remediation: Toward a social- cognitive 
understanding of problematic reading and writing. Written Communication, 6, 
139–154.
Hunt, R. (n.d.) Four reasons to be happy about Internet plagiarism [WWW Document]. 
URL http://www.stu.ca/~hunt/4reasons.htm
Hyland, K. (2004) Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press.
IELTS (n.d.) IELTS band scores [WWW Document]. URL http://www.ielts.org/
institutions/test_format_and_results/ielts_band_scores.aspx
Introna, L. and Hayes, N. (2007) Plagiarism detection systems and international students: 
detecting plagiarism, copying or learning?, in: T. Roberts (ed.), Student plagiarism in an 
online world: Problems and solutions, Idea Group, Hershey, PA.

186 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Iyer, R. and Eastman, J. K. (2006) Academic dishonesty: Are business students different 
from other college students? Journal of Education for Business, 101–110.
Jamieson, S. (2008) One size does not ﬁ t all: Plagiarism across the curriculum, in: 
R. M. Howard and A. E. Robillard (eds), Pluralizing plagiarism: Identities, contexts, 
pedagogies. Boynton- Cook, Portsmouth, NH, pp. 77–91.
Jordan, R. R. (1997) English for academic purposes: A guide and resource book for teachers. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Julliard, K. (1994) Perceptions of plagiarism in the use of other authors’ language. Family 
Medicine, 26, 356–360.
Klitgård, I., Pecorari, D., Shaw, P. and McMillion, A. (2010, May) Summary, paraphrase 
and plagiarism in academic writing. Paper presented at the Symposium on Second 
Language Writing, Murcia, Spain, 20–22 May, 2010.
Kolich, A. (1983) Plagiarism: The worm of reason. College English, 45, 141–148.
Kristeva, J. (1980) Desire in language: A semiotic approach to literature and art. Columbia 
University Press, New York, NY.
Kroll, B. M. (1988) How college freshmen view plagiarism. Written Communication, 5, 
203–221.
Larkham, P. J. and Manns, S. (2002) Plagiarism and its Treatment in Higher Education. 
Journal of Further and Higher Education, 26(4), 339–349.
Lea, M. R. and Street, B. V. (1998) Student writing in higher education: An academic 
literacies approach. Studies in Higher Education, 23, 157–172.
Leki, I. (1992) Understanding ESL writers: A guide for teachers. Heinemann, Portsmouth, NH.
Li, X. and Xiong, L. (1996) Chinese researchers debate rash of plagiarism cases. Science, 
274, 337–338.
Lillis, T. M. (2001) Student writing access, regulation, desire. Routledge, London.
Lillis, T. (1997) New voices in academia? The regulative nature of academic writing 
conventions. Language and Education, 11, 182–199.
Liu, D. (2005) Plagiarism in ESOL students: Is cultural conditioning truly the major 
culprit? ELT Journal, 59, 234–241.
LoCastro, V. and Masuko, M. (2002) Plagiarism and academic writing of learners of 
English. Hermes Journal of Linguistics, 28, 11–33.
Love, P. G. and Simmons, J. M. (1997, November). The meaning and mediated nature of 
cheating and plagiarism among graduate students in a college of education. Paper 
presented at the meeting of the Association for the Study of Higher Education, 
Albuquerque, NM. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 415 826).
Matalene, C. (1985) Contrastive rhetoric: An American writing teacher in China. College 
English, 47, 789–808.
McCabe, D. L. and Trevino, L. K. (1997) Individual and contextual inﬂ uences on academic 
dishonesty: A multicampus investigation. Research in Higher Education, 38, 379–396.
McCullough, M. and Holmberg, M. (2005) Using the Google search engine to detect 
word- for- word plagiarism in master’s theses: A preliminary study. College Student 
Journal, 39.
Moon, Y. (2002) Korean university students’ awareness of plagiarism in summary 
writings. Language Research, 38(4), 1349–1365.
Nature (2012) Formatting Guide to Authors [WWW Document]. URL http://www.
nature.com/nature/authors/gta/#a5.4
Norton, L. S., Tilley, A. J., Newstead, S. E. and Franklyn- Stokes, A. (2001) The pressures of 
assessment in undergraduate courses and their effect on student behaviours. Assessment 
and Evaluation in Higher Education, 26, 269–284.

BIBLIOGRAPHY 187
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2012) Foreign/
international students enrolled [WWW Document]. URL http://stats.oecd.org/Index.
aspx?DatasetCode=RFOREIGN
Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Development (2010) Education at a glance: 
2010 OECD indicators. OECD Pub., Paris, France.
Park, C. (2003) In other (people’s) words: Plagiarism by university students: literature 
and lessons. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education, 28(5), 471–488.
Pecorari, D. (2001) Plagiarism and international students: How the English- speaking 
university responds, in: D. Belcher and A. Hirvela (eds), Linking literacies: Perspectives on 
L2 reading- writing connections. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, pp. 229–245.
Pecorari, D. (2003) Good and original: Plagiarism and patchwriting in academic second- 
language writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 317–345.
Pecorari, D. (2006) Visible and occluded citation features in postgraduate second- 
language writing. English for Speciﬁ c Purposes, 25, 4–29.
Pecorari, D. (2008a) Academic Writing and Plagiarism: A Linguistic Analysis. Continuum, 
London.
Pecorari, D. (2008b) Repeated language in academic discourse: The case of biology 
background statements. Nordic Journal of English Studies, 7, 9–33.
Pecorari, D. (2008c) Plagiarism, patchwriting and source use: Best practice in the 
composition classroom, in: P. Friedrich (ed.), Teaching Academic Writing. Continuum, 
London, pp. 222–241.
Pecorari, D., Shaw, P., Irvine, A. and Malmström, H. (2011) English for Academic 
Purposes at Swedish Universities: Teachers’ objectives and practices. Ibérica, 22, 58–78.
Pecorari, D. and Shaw, P. (2012) Types of student intertextuality and faculty attitudes. 
Journal of Second Language Writing, 21, 149–164.
Peh, W. C. G. and Arokiasamy, J. (2008) Plagiarism: A joint statement from the Singapore 
Medical Journal and the Medical Journal of Malaysia. Singapore Medical Journal, 49(12), 
965–966.
Pickard, J. (2006) Staff and student attitudes to plagiarism at University College 
Northampton. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education, 31(2), 215–232.
Pinker, S. (1994) The language instinct. Penguin, London.
Porte, G. K. (1995) Writing wrongs: Copying as a strategy for underachieving EFL writers. 
ELT Journal, 49(2), 144–151.
Price, M. (2002) Beyond “Gotcha!”: Situating plagiarism in policy and pedagogy. College 
Composition and Communication, 54, 88–115.
Rinnert, C. and Kobayashi, H. (2005) Borrowing words and ideas: Insights from Japanese 
L1 writers. Journal of Asian Paciﬁ c Communication, 15, 15–29.
Roig, M. (2001) Plagiarism and Paraphrasing Criteria of College and University Professors. 
Ethics and Behavior, 11, 307–323.
Rosamond, B. (2002) Plagiarism, Academic Norms and the Governance of the Profession. 
Politics, 22(3), 167–174. doi:10.1111/1467- 9256.00172
Schneider, B. and Andre, J. (2005) University Preparation for Workplace Writing: 
Perceptions of Students in Three Disciplines. Journal of Business Communication, 52(2), 
195–218.
Selwyn, N. (2008) ‘Not necessarily a bad thing . . .’: a study of online plagiarism amongst 
undergraduate students. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education, 33(5), 465–479.
Senders, S. (2008) Academic plagiarism and the limits of theft, in: C. Eisner and 
M. Vicinus (eds), Originality, imitation and plagiarism: Teaching writing in the digital 
age. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI, pp. 195–207.

188 BIBLIOGRAPHY
Shaw, P. and Pecorari, D. (2013). Types of intertextuality in chairman's statements. 
Nordic Journal of English Studies, 12(1), 37–68.
Shaw, P. and McMillion, A. (2008) Proﬁ ciency effects and compensation in advanced 
second- language reading. Nordic Journal of English Studies, 7(3), 123–143.
Shen, F. (1989) The classroom and the wider culture: Identity as a key to learning English 
composition. College Composition and Communication, 40: 459–466.
Sherman, J. (1992) Your own thoughts in your own words. ELT Journal, 46, 190–198.
Sims, R. L. (2002) The effectiveness of a plagiarism prevention policy: A longitudinal 
study of student views. Teaching Business Ethics, 6, 477–482.
Solin, A. (2004). Intertextuality as mediation: On the analysis of intertextual relations in 
public discourse. Text – Interdisciplinary Journal for the Study of Discourse, 24(2), 267–296.
Stearns, L. (1999) Copy wrong: Plagiarism, process, property and the law, in: L. Buranen 
and A. M. Roy (eds), Perspectives on plagiarism and intellectual property in a postmodern 
world. State University of New York Press, Albany, pp. 5–17.
Sutherland- Smith, W. (2005) Pandora’s box: Academic perceptions of student plagiarism 
in writing. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 4, 83–95.
Sutherland- Smith, W. (2008) Plagiarism, the Internet and student learning: Improving 
academic integrity. Routledge, New York.
Sutherland- Smith, W. (2010) Retribution, deterrence and reform: The dilemmas of 
plagiarism management in universities. Journal of Higher Education Policy and 
Management, 32, 5–16.
Sutton, A., Taylor, D. (2011) Confusion about collusion: Working together and academic 
integrity. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education, 36, 831–841.
Swales, J. (1990) Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Tadros, A. (1993) The pragmatics of text averral and attribution in academic texts, in: 
M. Hoey (ed.), Data, description, discourse. Harper Collins, London, pp. 98–114.
Taylor, P. and Keeter, S. (2010) Millenials: Conﬁ dent. Connected. Open to change. Pew 
Research Center, Washington DC.
Thompson, G. and Ye, Y. (1991) Evaluation in the reporting verbs used in academic 
papers. Applied Linguistics, 12, 365–382.
Timm, A. (2007a) Educational practices at undergraduate level in Greece. Paper presented 
at the International Students, Academic Writing and Plagiarism Conference, Lancaster 
University, 5–7 September.
Timm, A. (2007b) Educational practices at undergraduate level in India. Paper presented 
at the International Students, Academic Writing and Plagiarism Conference, Lancaster 
University, 5–7 September.
Turnitin (2012): Products: Overview [WWW Document]. URL http://turnitin.com/en_
us/products/overview
URKUND (nd) [WWW Document]. URL http://www.urkund.com/int/en/uoh.asp
Ward, J. (2001) EST: Evading scientiﬁ c text. English for Speciﬁ c Purposes, 20, 141–152.
Wheeler, G. (2009) Plagiarism in the Japanese universities: Truly a cultural matter? 
Journal of Second Language Writing, 18, 17–29.
Yeo, S. (2007) First- year university science and engineering students’ understanding of 
plagiarism. Higher Education Research and Development, 26, 199–216.
Yilmaz, I. (2007) Plagiarism? No we’re just borrowing better English. Nature, 449–658.

Subject Index
Administration, academic 2, 94–102, 
121, 166
Assessment
criteria 82, 93
formative 78, 81, 82, 98
summative 81
writing tasks for 36, 71–2, 77–8, 
82–3, 93, 113–16, 151
Allusion 13–14
APA style, see Referencing conventions
Attribution 63–4, 67–8, 146, 168, 185, 
188
see also averral
Authorship 67, 72, 79, 139, 182,n185
Averral 63–4, 168, 185, 188
see also attribution
Bibliographic information 62, 66–7, 
89
Boilerplate 146, 152, 156
Cheating 28–31, 33, 45, 60, 81–2, 
120
see also prototypical plagiarism
Chicago style, see Referencing 
conventions
Citation 12, 19, 35–9, 62–8, 121–6, 
148–51
see also Forms of citation
Collusion 30, 154, 156
Common knowledge 36–7, 53, 127, 
143, 146–55
Conditional knowledge, see knowledge, 
types of
Constructive alignment 78, 82, 183
Copyright 2, 164
Criminalisation of plagiarism 15, 31, 
98
Cryptomnesia 22
Culture
academic 116, 121–
as explanation for plagiarism 22, 
106–12
Declarative knowledge, see knowledge, 
types of
Detection 19, 29, 44, 48–52, 95, 97
Disciplines, academic 71, 96, 118–31, 
120–6, 139, 150, 
Dishonesty, see cheating
Diversity 133–136
English 
academic writing in 39–40
as second or foreign language 
105–15, 166
Evaluation in citation 69, 87
Expulsion see Penalties for plagiarism
Formative assessment see Assessment
Forms of citation 121–6
Formulaic language 20, 128
Generation X 137
Genres
assessment 77, 151, 154
workplace 77, 142, 150–4
Ghostwriter 28
Humanities see disciplines, academic
Hypertext 67, 139
Harvard style see Referencing 
conventions
IELTS 114, 117
Integral citations see Forms of citation
Intellectual property 2–3, 52, 110, 
126, 

190 SUBJECT INDEX
Intention to deceive 14–16, 22–3, 
28–32, 40–42, 82, 112
International students 105–16, 162
Internet, as cause of plagiarism 32–3, 
49, 67, 76, 106, 137–8, 
Intertextuality 34, 39, 63, 138, 140
Memorisation 109, 113
Millenials 136–8
MLA style, see Referencing conventions
Non-integral citation see Forms of 
citation
Parallel-language environment 108
Paraphrase 69–71, 79–85, 90–1, 110, 
113–14, 125–26, 169–75
Patchwriting
deﬁ nition of 16–17
as evidence of intent 23 
explanations for 27–8, 37–8, 40–1
responses to 47–8, 51–2, 54, 71–2, 
99–100
Penalties 29, 45–6, 83, 98–9
Policies 14–16, 43, 45–7, 52–53, 96–7, 
144–6
Procedural knowledge, see knowledge, 
types of
Prototypical plagiarism, deﬁ nition 
16
Quotation 35, 69–72, 90–1, 126–9, 
Referencing conventions 33, 65, 70–3, 
89, 123, 132
Reporting verbs 124
Sciences see disciplines, academic
Stem see disciplines, academic
Subject areas, see disciplines, academic
Summative assessment see Assessment
Text-matching software, see detection
TOEFL 114
Transparent source use 61–71, 80–83, 
149–50

Abasi, A. 47, 53, 182
Andre, J. 151, 187
Angélil-Carter, S. 34, 44, 134–6, 
182
Appleton, J. 46, 183
Arokiasamy, J. 31, 187
Ashworth, P. 29, 30, 31, 33, 35, 36, 51, 
182
Austen, J. 13, 182
Badge, J. L. 50, 182
Bakhtin, M. 63, 182
Ballard, B. 108, 110, 182
Bannister, P. 29, 31, 33, 35, 182
Barker, J. 110, 182
Barks, D. 113, 182
Baty, P. 161, 182
Becher, T. 121, 182
Becker, A. H. 29, 30, 184
Belcher, D. 33, 67, 139, 182
Bennett, R. 15, 24, 25, 29, 30, 33, 
183
Benson, P. 110, 183
Betts, D. D. 31, 183
Biggs, J. B. 78, 183
Bloch, J. 33, 36, 67, 112, 113, 146, 150, 
183
Blum, S. 8, 14, 25, 30, 60, 137, 138, 
141, 150, 183
Bourdieu, P. 37, 135, 183
Bradbury, M. 39, 183
Breen, L. 36, 183
Bretag, T. 15, 53, 112, 183
Brown, A. S. 22, 183
Buranen, L. 183
Cammish, N. K. 109, 183
Cann, A. J. 50, 182
Carroll, J. 46, 183
Clanchy, J. 108, 110, 182
Culwin, F. 45, 50, 183
Currie, P. 113, 183
Dante, E. 28, 166–7, 184
Davis, S. F. 29, 30, 184
Day, K. 8, 98, 184
Deckert, G. D. 109–10, 184
Devitt, A. J. 77, 184
Devlin, M. 16, 184
Dias, P. 151, 184
Donahue, T. 113, 184
Du, Q. 112, 185
Eastman, J. K. 120, 186
Elbow, P. 8, 184
Eliot, T. S. 60, 184
Ellery, K. 22, 32, 33, 35, 36, 184
Emerson, L. 55, 184
Errey, L. 37, 106, 111, 184
Flowerdew, J. 35, 114, 184
Franklyn-Stokes, A. 29, 30, 31, 184, 
186
Freewood, M. 30, 33, 36, 51, 182 
Gibaldi, J. 184
Glod, M. 52, 165, 185
Graves, B. 47, 53, 182
Groom, N. 62, 185
Grover, C. A. 29, 30, 184
Ha, P. L. 111, 185
Hayes, N. 49, 112, 113, 185
Heidish, P. 110, 183
Hertz, N. 48, 185
Hilton, C. M. 164, 165
Hirvela, A. 112, 185
Hofstede, G. 110, 185
Author Index

192 AUTHOR INDEX
Holmberg, M. 120, 186
Howard, R. M. 16, 23, 24, 28, 32, 37, 
38, 71, 99, 185
Hull, G. 40, 185
Hunt, R. 46, 76, 154, 185
Hyland, K. 125, 185
Introna, L. 49, 112, 113, 185
Iyer, R. 120, 186
Jamieson, S. 65, 119, 131, 186
Julliard, K. 22, 186
Klitgård, I. 36, 186
Kobayashi, H. 112, 187
Kristeva, J. 63, 186
Kroll, B. M. 110, 186
Lancaster, T. 45, 50, 183
Larkham, P. J. 24, 186
Lea, M. R. 135, 186
Leki, I. 109, 113, 186
Li, X. 115, 186
Li, Y. Y. 35, 114, 184
Lillis, T. 135, 186
Liu, D, 111, 186
Locastro, V. 29, 31, 111, 186
Love, P. G. 39, 186
Ludvigson, H. W. 29, 184
Maassen, M. 36, 183
Macdonald, R. 30, 33, 36, 51, 182
Manns, S. 24, 186
Masuko, M. 29, 31, 111, 186
Matalene, C. 113, 186
McCabe, D. L. 29, 30, 186
McCullough, M. 120, 186
McGregor, L. N. 29, 30, 184
McMillion, A. 36, 186
Moon, Y. 106, 109–10, 186
Murphy, D. R. 22, 183
Newstead 29, 30, 31, 184, 186
Norton, L. S. 29, 31, 186
Paré, A. 151, 184
Passeron, J.–C. 37, 135, 183
Pecorari, D. 14, 15, 17, 21, 24, 34, 
36–8, 45, 53, 71, 77, 78, 99, 113, 
120–1, 127–8, 151, 167, 181, 
186–8
Peh, W. C. G. 31, 187
Pickard, J. 24, 187
Pinker, S. 20, 187
Porte, G. K. 113, 187
Price, M. 156, 187
Rinnert, C. 112, 187
Rodrigue, T. K. 24, 74, 99, 185
Roig, M. 17, 21, 99, 187
Rosamond, B. 31, 187
Rose, M. 40, 185
Schneider, B. 151, 187
Scott, J. 50, 182
Selwyn, N. 29, 32, 120, 187
Senders, S. 141, 187
Serviss, T. 24, 74, 99, 185
Shaw, P. 15, 17, 21, 38, 53, 77, 99, 114, 
128, 151, 186–88
Shen, F. 39–40, 188
Sherman, J. 11, 188
Simmons, J. M. 39, 186
Sims, R. L. 48, 188
Stearns, L. 2, 8, 188
Street, B. 135, 186
Sutherland-Smith, W. 44, 45, 53, 95, 
98–9, 102, 119, 188
Sutton, A. 30, 31, 120, 154, 188
Swales, J. 123, 188
Tadros, A. 63, 188
Taylor, D. 30, 31, 120, 154, 188
Thompson, P. 69, 188
Thorne, P. 29, 31, 33, 35, 182 
Tilley, A. J. 29, 31, 186
Timm, A. 36, 113, 188
Trevino, L. K. 29, 30, 186
Trowler, P. R. 182
Wasley, P. 163, 164
Watts, P. 113, 182
Wheeler, G. 111, 188
Xiong, L. 115, 186
Yi, Y.-Y. 69, 188
Yilmaz, I. 127, 188

WRITING FOR ACADEMIC JOURNALS
Third Edition
Rowena Murray
9780335263028 (Paperback)
September 2013
eBook also available
This book unravels the process of writing academic papers. It tells 
readers what good papers look like and how they can be written. 
Busy academics must develop productive writing practices quickly. 
No one has time for trial and error. To pass external tests of 
research output we must write to a high standard while juggling other 
professional tasks. This may mean changing our writing behaviours. 
Key features:
 •  New material on the politics of publishing
 •  New material on online writing groups and the use of social 
media
 •  A new concluding chapter on next steps in reading, writing and 
researching including use of blogging and tweeting to increase 
awareness of journal articles
www.openup.co.uk 

THE NEW ACADEMIC
A Strategic Handbook
Shelda Debowski
9780335245352 (Paperback)
2012
eBook also available
In today’s academic environment, new and early-career academics 
need to operate strategically as teachers, researchers and leaders 
in order to establish themselves and progress in their careers. This 
book explores the various platforms an academic must straddle, 
providing practical and valuable guidance on how they might best be 
managed in order to achieve career success.
Key features:
•  Explains the way academics are now assessed and evaluated 
•  Explores the key support strategies that can be accessed, including 
mentors and sponsors 
•  Practical checklists and tips on academic practices 
www.openup.co.uk 

Teaching to Avoid Plagiarism
How to promote good source use
www.openup.co.uk
“This book makes a unique contribution to the field of plagiarism 
management... Assessment tasks, broad questions and activities 
are provided at the end of each chapter, encouraging readers to 
understand both policy and practice in their own institution to
better manage plagiarism and source attribution.”
Dr Wendy Sutherland-Smith, School of Psychology, Faculty of Health, 
Deakin University, Australia
“Teaching to Avoid Plagiarism successfully turns attention away 
from the detection and punishment of plagiarism and focuses
instead on understanding and prevention through the promotion 
of good source use… this important book should be required
reading, not only for staff development officers and lecturers, but 
more widely throughout the higher education community.”
Maggie Charles, Oxford University Language Centre
Plagiarism is a serious problem in higher education, and one that the
majority of university teachers have encountered. This book provides the 
skills and resources that university teachers and learning and development 
support staff need in order to tackle it.
As a complex issue that requires thoughtful and sensitive handling,
plagiarism simply cannot be addressed by warnings, detection software 
and punishment alone. Teaching to Avoid Plagiarism focuses on prevention 
rather than punishment and promotes a proactive, rather than reactive,
approach to dealing with the issue. 
Topics covered in this book include:
        -	
The causes of plagiarism
        -	
How universities currently deal with plagiarism
        -	
How teachers can support students in effective source use
        -	
The role of technology 
        -	
Issues for second language writers and international students
Drawing on her teaching experience as well as her academic research, 
Diane Pecorari offers a unique insight into this pervasive problem as well as 
practical advice on how to promote good source use to students and help 
them to avoid plagiarism. With a series of activities to help readers solidify 
their grasp of the approaches advised in the book, Teaching to Avoid
Plagiarism is an essential guide for anyone in 
a student-facing role who wants to handle 
plagiarism more effectively. 
Diane Pecorari is Professor of English
Linguistics at Linnaeus University, Sweden. 

