I D E A S  A N D  T O O L S  F O R  E D  T E C H  L E A D E R S    I    D E C E M B E R  2 0 1 7 / J A N U A R Y  2 0 1 8      I    $ 6
VOLUME 38 / NUMBER 5
TECHLEARNING.COM
MOBILE CARTS TAKE 
TECH TO GO 
See page 48 for more
CROSS-CURRICULUM 
STRATEGIES
See page 40 for more
SPECIAL ISSUE
AWARDS OF
EXCELLENCE
To see more  
Tech & Learning  
scan the code
or visit us online  
at: www.techlearning.
com/jan18

TM
· 10-YEAR WARRANTY ON MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP · 2-YEAR WARRANTY ON ELECTRICAL ·
MAKEYOUR 
SPACE
Join us in 2018 at FETC & TCEA to MAKEYOURSPACE!
Booth 
#1040
Booth 
#1229
•   Protection, security, and storage for 
your 3D printing supplies
•   Fits most 3D printers 
•   Easily moves anywhere you need it
•   Deploy devices quickly and easily
•   Accommodates most goggle/phone 
systems
•   Keeps equipment charged, safe, & ready
•   Easily move for any group or project
•   Flip option for easy storage 
coming soon!
•   Customize with décor-enhancing colors
3D2GO™ Printer Cart
Flex Active™ Table
VR30™ Device Cart
3D2GO™ Printer Cart
Get YOUR FREE!!
MAKERSPACE 
IDEABOOK
From complete Makerspace design to a 
single 3D printer cart. Spectrum Industries 
can MAKEYOURSPACE the most functional 
classroom space available. From early 
childhood development to pre-engineering, 
Spectrum’s quality built furniture will take 
your Makerspace well into the future.
T&L1217
MS
3D2GO™ Printer Cart
See the full line at spectrumfurniture.com/makerspace
STAY CONNECTED
See the full line at spectrumfurniture com/makerspace
STAY CONNECTED
To “make your space” in person,
schedule a demo. 
spectrumfurniture.com/T&L/demo 
or call 800-235-1262

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  3
FEATURES
12 	 PLACE YOUR BETS
Contributing editor Ellen Ullman asks our T&L Advisors for 
their predictions on what they think will be the hottest edtech 
in 2018. 
16 	 2017 AWARDS OF EXCELLENCE
T&L  congratulates the winners of our 35th annual Awards of 
Excellence program. You can find summaries of these winning 
products on the following pages, along with comments from 
our judges.
40 	 READING, WRITING, AND THINKING: CROSS-
CURRICULAR LITERACY INITIATIVES
By Tara Smith
Innovative educators know that students preparing for the 
challenges of work and further study in our ever-changing 
world need to achieve fluency and comprehension—but 
they also need to develop higher-level thinking skills and 
build deep knowledge. The following schools and districts 
are using edtech tools to integrate literacy skills across the 
curricula.
48 	 GUIDE TO K-12 CARTS
Today’s K-12 classrooms continue to host a wide variety of 
tablets, laptops, and Chromebooks, making charging carts 
an essential component of any 1:1 or BYOD program. What 
follows are some of the latest offerings. 
DEPARTMENTS &  
COLUMNS
6 	 EDITORS DESK:  
HAPPY NEW GEAR!
6 	 TRENDING
• Personalized Learning Study
• LMS Market Stats
• The Future of Work: Survey 
Finds Recommendations to 
Achieve Success
12
16
25
Tech & Learning (ISSN-1053-6728) (USPS 695-590) is published monthly (except July and 
December) by NewBay Media, LLC 28 East 28th Street, 12th Floor, New York, NY 10016
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to Tech & Learning, PO Box 8746, Lowell, MA 01853
Periodicals Postage Paid at New York, NY, and additional mailing offices.
Copyright ©2018   NewBay Media, LLC All Rights Reserved. 
Scan here to access 
the digital edition, 
which includes 
additional resources.
D E C E M B E R  2 0 1 7 / J A N U A R Y  2 0 1 8     |   V O L .  3 8  N O .  5
CONTENTS

4   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
EDITOR’S note
D E C E M B E R  2 0 1 7 / J A N U A R Y  2 0 1 8    
V O L .  3 8  N O .  5
HAPPY NEW 
GEAR!
I
t appears that students are still top of mind for the two most 
influential technologists and philanthropists of our time. Last 
month, The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation donated $12 
million to code.org. Said Gates: “The role of philanthropy here 
is not to be the primary funder, but rather to fund pilots, to fund 
new ideas, to let people — it’s always the educators coming up 
with the ideas — to let them try them out and see what really works 
super well and get those to scale.” And in a letter posted last week 
to, yes, Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg detailed the plans of the Chan 
Zuckerberg Initiative: “One challenge we’ve seen in education 
is that there are many brilliant teachers and school leaders who 
create new kinds of schools based on new models of learning — but those schools usually only 
serve hundreds of students, while most children still do not have access to them…Our hope is that 
technology can help with this scaling challenge.” 
This sort of big picture impetus is obviously 
important, but we here at Tech & Learning 
also like to get in the weeds, which is why our 
Awards of Excellence program is such a big deal 
for us (page 16). From laptops and document 
cameras to sensors, to AV, to curriculum 
software, to even mobile carts, these educator-
tested winners are making real change in real 
classrooms right now. Want to help us with 
next year’s program? Shoot me an email and 
we’ll consider you for the 2018 judging panel. 
You will get to play with some of the latest and 
greatest edtech gear and we will benefit from 
your feedback! 
THIS SORT OF BIG PICTURE 
IMPETUS IS OBVIOUSLY 
IMPORTANT, BUT WE HERE 
AT TECH & LEARNING 
ALSO LIKE TO GET IN 
THE WEEDS, WHICH IS 
WHY OUR AWARDS OF 
EXCELLENCE PROGRAM IS 
SUCH A BIG DEAL FOR US.
— Kevin Hogan  
      Content Director
      khogan@nbmedia.com
Publisher: Allison Knapp  aknapp@nbmedia.com;  
(650) 238-0318; Fax: (650) 238-0263
EDITORIAL
Content Director: Kevin Hogan  khogan@nbmedia.com
Executive Editor, Content:  
Christine Weiser  cweiser@nbmedia.com
Senior Art Director: Nicole Cobban  ncobban@nbmedia.com
Associate Art Director: Walter Makarucha, Jr.
Contributing Editors: Ellen Ullman, Judy Salpeter,  
Gwen Solomon
Tech&Learning Leader Editor: Annie Galvin Teich
Editorial Interns: Diana Restifo and Dom Saunders
ADVISORS
Carl Hooker, Andrew Wallace, Marianthe Williams,  
Steve Baule, Leo Brehm, Jean Tower, Hank Thiele,  
Jenith Mishne, Frank Pileiro, Patricia Brown, Phil Hintz,  
Ken Wallace, Rick Cave, Chris Aviles, Diane Doersh,  
Mike Jamerson, Rico D’Amore, Todd Dugan, Grace Magley, 
Andrew Marcinek, John Marcus, Laura Chesson,  
Jon Castelhano, Karen Fuller
ADVERTISING SALES
Account Manager: Joanne Melton  jmelton@nbmedia.com
MARKETING AND EVENTS
Marketing Manager: Stephanie Rubin  srubin@nbmedia.com
Production Manager: Fred Vega  fvega@nbmedia.com
AUDIENCE DEVELOPMENT
Vice President/Corporate Director, Audience Development:  
Meg Estevez  mestevez@nbmedia.com
LIST RENTAL
MeritDirect: (914) 368-1024; jganis@meritdirect.com
REPRINTS AND PERMISSIONS
Wright’s Media: newbay@wrightsmedia.com; (877) 652-5295
EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISING OFFICES
28 East 28th Street, 12th Floor, New York, NY 10016 
Phone: (212) 378-0400; Fax: (650) 238-0263
For general editorial correspondence:  
techlearning_editors@nbmedia.com
NEWBAY—CORPORATE
President & CEO: Steve Palm
Chief Financial Officer: Paul Mastronardi
Chief Revenue Officer: Tom Rousseau
Chief Content Officer: Joe Territo
EVP, Content and Business Operations: Carmel King
Vice President, Content Creation: Anthony Savona 
Vice President, Digital Strategy & Operations: Robert Aames
Vice President, Information Technology: Anthony Verbanac
NEWBAY K-12 EDUCATION GROUP
Executive Vice President/Group Publisher: Adam Goldstein 
Publisher: Allison Knapp 
Editorial Director: Kevin Hogan 
Online Production Manager: Rob Granger 
Web Director: Ragan Whiteside
SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION 
One-year $29.95 (US); $39.95 (Canada and Mexico); $69.95 
(all other countries). Two years $50 (US); $60 (Canada and 
Mexico); $90 (all other countries).
To subscribe: (888) 266-5828 or www.techlearning.com 
www.techlearning.com

BE THE HERO.
BE THE HERO.
Device Management TEACHERS LOVE.
RESULTS ADMINISTRATION NOTICE.
EDUCATION STUDENTS DESERVE.
CALL 877-709-4435
powergistic.com/TL
Get Started today on a modern deployment Strategy
Your gonna deserve a raise.

6   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
NEWSANDTRENDS
THE LATEST NEWS & STATS AFFECTING THE K-12 EDTECH COMMUNITY
TRENDING 
THE LATEST NEWS & STATS AFFECTING THE K-12 EDTECH COMMUNITY
BLOG BITS 
“Used correctly, technology 
can easily move from a weapon 
of mass distraction to a tool of 
engagement.” 
—Lisa Nielsen
“Too often, I see wonderful 
activities that engage students . . . 
but also see important standards 
that could have been incorporated 
not present in the activity.” 
—Michael Gorman
“If technology becomes a 
distraction or otherwise 
impedes learning, it needs to be 
reconsidered.” 
—Steve Baule
@DavidGeurin: Work to create a 
better lesson, then figure out 
if technology can make it even 
better.
@dr_robertbayard: Technology 
won’t fix instruction. Curriculum 
must justify the need for 
technology.
Dr. Roland J. Rios @drrios RT TCEA: “I 
knew exactly what kind of teacher 
I wanted to be, but that’s not how 
things turned out. That doesn’t 
mean I’m not exactly what some 
of my students need.” Read more: 
ly.tcea.org/tetzb. 
TOP 
TWEETS
1
	 2017 Awards of Excellence 
Winners  
Winners include innovative, 
ground-breaking applications 
and products that enhance 
proven education tools.
2
	 Five Essential Media 
Literacy Questions for Kids  
Use these five essential 
questions to help kids 
dig deeper with critical 
questions of their own. 
3
	 20 Innovative Edtech 
Projects from Around the 
World  
Find out about some new 
and intriguing initiatives 
that might illuminate 
emerging edtech trends.
4
	 Three Translation Tools  
Teachers can use these tools 
to facilitate conversations 
with students and families 
who aren’t fluent in English.
5
	 Empowered Digital Citizens 
Guide for Educators  
Help convince your district to 
stop banning and blocking and 
start preparing students to 
become empowered citizens. 
6
	 Should Schools Ban 
Laptops?  
A new study urges 
educational leaders to 
continuously review 
technology’s impact 
in the classroom. 
7
	 Youth Radio Offers Kids’ 
Take on Current Events  
Youth Radio offers top-
notch, NPR-quality 
content created by kids.
8
	 Seeing Math in New Ways  
Innovative educators share 
ideas and best practices 
for adding edtech solutions 
to the equation in K–12 
math classrooms.
9
	 Sometimes I’m Not Very 
Bright  
Whose education is it? 
Reflections on allowing redos 
and penalizing late work.
10
	 How to Measure Tech’s 
Success in Schools  
Move the discussion from 
test scores to a consideration 
of how technology is 
helping students make the 
world a better place.
top10
WEB STORIES
From techlearning.com
FIND LINKS AT WWW.TECHLEARNING.COM/JAN18

Students 
Perform 
Better
In a World They 
Understand
Give 6–12 ELA teachers the 
tools they need for teaching 
the way students like to learn. 
StudySync oﬀ ers a highly ﬂ exible 
curriculum with rich multimedia, 
vast resources, and an ever-
expanding library to advance 
student performance.
Improve the student
ELA experience.
mheonline.com/
understandELA

8   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
TRENDING 
PERSONALIZED LEARNING IN 
MASSACHUSETTS
According to a new report from The LearnLaunch Institute about personalized learning 
in Massachusetts public schools, the Massachusetts Personalized Learning Edtech 
(MAPLE) Consortium wanted to create a baseline in order to develop metrics to measure 
progress in personalizing learning over time—in public schools as a whole and in MAPLE 
Catalyst schools specifically. 
34%
No, but we 
plan to
33%
No
33%
Yes
T&L READER SURVEY
ARE YOU USING AUGMENTED OR VIRTUAL 
REALITY IN YOUR SCHOOLS?
What would be most helpful to better implement personalized 
learning in your district in the near future?
Teacher professional development
Funding and time
0%
40%
30%
20%
10%
Technology resources
Seeing personalized learning in action
Cultural change
Other
FOR MORE SURVEYS, VISIT WWW.TECHLEARNING.COM/JAN18
FOR THE FULL REPORT, VISIT WWW.TECHLEARNING.COM/JAN18
GROWING LMS 
MARKET STATS 
A recent Gartner Report, titled “Market 
Guide for K-12 Education Learning 
Management Systems,” identified the 
following:
* The global K–12 LMS market has been 
on a remarkable growth path for several 
years, with a combined growth rate of 
almost 25% annually estimated through 
2020.
* The LMS implementation was 11% in 
2011 and 48% in 2015.
* The “enterprise LMS” is the standard 
for those wishing to standardize district 
classroom offerings and resources. 
* For those who need more robust user 
management, content management, 
assessment features, or analytics, LMS-
lite options, such as Google Classroom, 
are not a viable option. But they can be 
an acceptable solution on an interim 
basis.
Read more at www.techlearning.com/Jan18
ISTOCK/THINKSTOCK
LEARNLAUNCH INSTITUTE ABOUT PERSONALIZED LEARNING IN 
MASSACHUSETTS’ PUBLIC SCHOOLS.

Turn a single wall outlet into a 
flexible charging solution for the 
entire room with Juice™ Mobile Power. 
Juice Mobile Power, from Bretford, turns a single wall outlet into 
a powerful, flexible mobile charging solution, providing safe DC 
charging for an entire room, at the fraction of the cost of a retrofit.
Active Charging
™  |  Portable  |  Safe  |  Flexible  |  Cost-Effective
bretford.com/juice
Be one of the first to experience this revolutionary product.  
Sign up at bretford.link/juice.
bretford.link/juice

10   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
TRENDING 
APPS OF THE 
DAY FROM 
TECHLEARNING.COM
App of the Day picks are selected from the 
top edtech tools reviewed by Common 
Sense Education.
A Comprehensive Keyboarding 
Solution for All Ages
Typing Pal, a keyboarding curriculum with 
extensive customization features and 
multiple font options, is ideal for schools 
and multiple-age groups.
Boost Student Social Skills with Free 
Top Pick
LearnStorm’s engaging, easy-to-use 
lessons spur self-reflection and a growth 
mindset in students.
Auxy Studio—Music 
& Beat Maker is an 
approachable tool 
for constructing your 
very own digital 
beats and tracks.
Digital Music Making 
App Focuses on the 
Beat
DATA MINING SCHOOL 
SURVEY FINDS 
RECOMMENDATIONS TO 
ACHIEVE SUCCESS 
A recent report from BrightBytes includes an analysis of more than 180 million data 
points about educational technology access, utilization, and effectiveness. These are 
some of the data-driven recommendations based on the findings from the report:
* Schools should embrace diversity by providing real-world experiences to students 
via technology integration, online collaboration, and learning about cultures 
around the world.
* In order to close the access gap, leaders in settings with high free and reduced lunch 
rates need to scrutinize their policies and implement programs that allow students 
to take home school-owned devices.
* Leaders across suburban schools can ensure better access at school by 
implementing policies and procedures for students to bring personal devices from 
home to school.
* Professional development cannot be translated into practice without strong 
leadership to provide the necessary policies, procedures, and practices to 
support the use and application of technology. If teachers perceive leadership as 
unsupportive, this has a negative effect on their desire to use technology in the 
classroom.
TO ACCESS HIGHLIGHTS AND DATA FROM THE BRIGHTBYTES 2017 INSIGHTS REPORT,  
VISIT BRIGHTBYTES.NET/TECHLEARNINGINSIGHTS


12   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
CARL HOOKER
DIRECTOR OF INNOVATION AND DIGITAL LEARNING, 
EANES (TX) ISD
 Virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) 
will finally hit big in schools. We’ve been teetering on 
the edge of this for a couple of years. VR seemed to make 
a big splash some years ago and then quickly died off. 
With mobile devices everywhere and multiple access 
points to educational virtual worlds (e.g., Nearpod and 
Google Expeditions), I think we’re on the brink of shifting from students 
consuming these worlds to students creating them. AR continues to 
improve, and with some far-out-there ideas like this brain band, tinyurl.
com/AREEGTracker, teachers might be able to use it to actually see what 
kids are thinking.
 Data will finally save districts money and help with learning. Another 
concept that we’ve been on the edges of for years is “big data” and what it 
means for schools. With more and more comprehensive, longitudinal data-
tracking tools hitting the market (CatchOn is one I’ve been using), we can 
finally see which apps are being used, when they’re being used, and how they’re 
being used. That data will ultimately help districts make better fiscal decisions 
but will also help guide learning for teachers and students. 
HANK THIELE
SUPERINTENDENT, COMMUNITY HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT 
99, DOWNERS GROVE (IL)
 Increased use of video. I think we’re going to see a 
surge in the use of video as a means for storytelling from 
our students. Teachers and students are becoming more 
accustomed to video as a platform, both in consuming 
and creating. Easy-to-use tools like WeVideo or Explain 
Everything for creation, paired with YouTube or Google 
Drive for sharing, have expanded the possibilities for students to create in this 
PLACE YOUR BETS
T&L advisors predict the hottest edtech trends for the coming year

HEIGHT ADJUSTMENT  
up to 15.75"
with the touch of a ﬁ nger 
Lift and Learn
© 2017 Peerless Industries, Inc. All rights reserved.
peerless-av.com
Peerless-AV’s award-winning Collaboration Cart with Vertical Lift is the perfect solution 
for classroom technology.  Quickly and eﬀ ortlessly adjust the height of interactive 
displays with the simple touch of a ﬁ nger.  A mobile solution used for multiple classrooms 
and conference or huddle rooms that is light as a feather – so easy a child could do it.

14   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
medium. I expect that many more teachers will be assigning fewer essays in 
favor of short, well-produced video stories. 
 A new kind of portfolio. I expect to see a rethinking of portfolios built 
from pictures of artifacts students have created in digital albums as a way 
for students to archive and reflect on their work and projects. Applications 
like Google’s PhotoScan have made it easy for students, even in early grades, 
to scan in and archive their work. I believe that students will begin to build 
personal galleries of their work that they can reflect on as a way of measuring 
growth. 
LISA NIELSEN
DIRECTOR OF DIGITAL ENGAGEMENT AND PROFESSIONAL 
LEARNING, NYC DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Digital badges! We will see an increase in digital 
badges. This is in part because digital badges are a better 
representation of skills and achievements in emerging 
standards than report cards or standardized tests. More 
and more teachers will seek and receive digital badges from 
their favorite edtech companies. We will see them popping 
up in signatures, social profiles, and resumes. Digital badges will also become 
popular with secondary schools because more and more colleges, and even the 
Common Application, will accept digital credentials as evidence of learning.
PHIL HINTZ
DIRECTOR OF TECHNOLOGY, GURNEE (IL) SCHOOL 
DISTRICT 56
 We’ll see more wearable technology and more 
coding in the classroom, particularly involving immersive 
experiences like Google Expeditions in AR and VR, where 
everything you hear and see is right before your eyes, but 
with more interactivity so you can touch and manipulate 
what you’re seeing and hearing. I also predict that there 
will be software platforms for students to be able to build and create these 
environments for other students, similar to a Minecraft environment, but 
with better, more realistic graphics. I think there will be even more emphasis 
on coding for all grade levels in all subject areas, and with more robotic or 
drone automation as a focus, to better prepare students for their futures with 
self-driving cars, trucks, trains, and planes. Lewis University, in the Chicago 
area, is known for its pilot programs; in 2017, the college delivered college-
acceptance letters via drone to local area students who were accepted into its 
flight program.
LEO BREHM
CHIEF INFORMATION AND TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, CENTRAL MASS 
COLLABORATIVE
 Open educational resources (OER) will continue to grow. The demand 
on our educators to differentiate and personalize will tax the already thin layer 
of traditional resources that schools have maintained. As educators sharpen 
their collaboration skills to engage in this curation process, they will better 
model this process for our learners. Look for the use of OER and the process of 
fueling them to increase this coming year. 
 Data, data, data . . . There will be an increase in 
the use of data to personalize learning, and we’ll begin 
to use more learning analytics and less big data. We’ll 
start focusing more on the data about how our children 
are learning and less on their attendance rate. Tools that 
unpack this data and help teachers understand how the 
students in front of them learn will begin to appear more 
and more on teachers’ computer screens.  
 The Tech Titans are sticking around. The focus on the education market 
by the big companies will continue. Don’t be surprised to see more of Google, 
Apple, Microsoft, and even Amazon at smaller, more local edtech events 
and professional-development offerings. Look for the terms “security” and 
“encrypted” to be the main selling points of their solutions. 
STEVEN BAULE
SUPERINTENDENT, MUNCIE (IN) COMMUNITY SCHOOLS
 The move from school choice to course choice. 
Public schools will have to provide alternatives for 
students who want to take courses they don’t typically 
offer. They may do this via online courses or course-
sharing with neighboring schools. 
 Computer science (CS) instruction for most. There 
will continue to be additional pushes from a variety of 
sectors to include more computer science instruction at all levels—particularly 
from early elementary through high school. Since there are not nearly enough 
CS-trained teachers, there will be an additional push for more online CS 
resources to be integrated into traditional curriculum. 
SHAD MCGAHA
CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, WICHITA FALLS (TX) ISD
 Makerspaces will continue to gain popularity in the 
US, and they will continue to proliferate in schools. This 
trend has been really big abroad, and this year I really feel 
like the US will see significant growth.
 The rise of AI and computerized analytics learning. 
These two will be big in 2018. The growth of learning-
analytics content, software, and grading systems will give 
more and more users greater access.
MARIANTHE WILLIAMS
DIRECTOR OF TECHNOLOGY, RIVER DELL (NJ) REGIONAL 
SCHOOL DISTRICT 
 Coding for everyone. My prediction is that coding 
will become embedded within the K–12 curriculum across 
all content areas. As schools recognize the importance 
of coding and computational-thinking skills for real-life 
applications, vendors will help schools with lessons-on-
demand so that districts are not reinventing the same 
wheel.
I THINK WE’RE GOING TO SEE A SURGE IN THE USE OF VIDEO AS A MEANS FOR 
STORYTELLING FROM OUR STUDENTS. TEACHERS AND STUDENTS ARE BECOMING 
MORE ACCUSTOMED TO VIDEO AS A PLATFORM, BOTH IN CONSUMING AND CREATING.

 —HANK THIELE

Our winners used Velocity’s adaptive K–5 ELA 
learning technology to personalize instruction for 
students and extend their reach in the classroom. 
Become an innovator today and learn how Velocity®:
 Differentiates instruction in real time
 Extends the reach of the teacher
 Engages students and boosts confidence
 Provides actionable data and insights
Start your free trial today:  
www.teachvelocity.com
Congratulations  
to our  
Velocity Innovator 
Winners!
Kay Knebel
K–5 Computer Teacher, 
Wall Elementary School, 
Wall, TX 
Julie Wilmer
Fifth Grade Teacher, 
Warroad Elementary 
School, Warroad, MN
Brenda Brill
Third Grade Teacher, 
Gammon Elementary 
School, Wichita, KS

16   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
AWARDS OF
EXCELLENCE
ACER CHROMEBOOK R 11 C738T
ACER
(www.acer.com)
The Acer Chromebook R 11 C738T 
sports the latest MIMO 802.11ac 
wireless technology, boasting very fast 
wireless connection speeds and longer 
signal ranges. It is just 19.2 mm thin 
and weighs less than a mere 1.6 kg, 
making it extremely light and 
portable, and it features 
an HDR webcam that 
supports Dynamic 
Range imaging. 
Judges appreciated its solid 
build, great touch screen, and its speed and 
responsiveness when compared to other Chromebooks. 
ACER SWITCH ALPHA 12
ACER
(www.acer.com)
Another winner from Acer, this laptop 
features Acer LiquidLoop cooling that 
helps maintain CPU performance without 
whining fan noise, a USB 3.1 Type C 
port, 2.50 GHz Intel Core i7 
Processor and 8 
GB of memory, 
along with a 
512 GB solid state drive 
capacity keyboard backlight, and a responsive pen. Judges liked the laptop’s 
form factor and approved of its adjustable keyboard, as well as its overall great 
performance for its price point.
ARISTO EDUCATIONAL PRESS LTD. 
ARISTO EDUCATIONAL PRESS LTD. 
(www.aristo.com.hk)
Aristo Educational Press Ltd. has 
added a geography program to their 
platform that provides students 
the opportunity to learn about 
the land and the planet through 
AR and VR technology, while also 
providing videos to help expand the 
experience. The judges were amazed 
by the unique learning experiences 
it provided, particularly how it also 
helped students think about modern 
world issues like pollution and the changing of 
landscapes. This program is primarily based in 
China.
AVER F50-8M DOCUMENT 
CAMERA
AVER
(www.averusa.com)
AVer’s F50-8M document camera features 
8 megapixels and offers several tools in one 
portable package: a scanner, web-video digital 
camera, lined-graph plain paper, and “best-in-
class” image clarity. It is able to zero in on the 
smallest details and reach students even in the 
back of the class with crisp text, bright images, 
and vivid colors. It can display video quality in 
60 fps. Judges found its variety of connectivity 
options, software features, and portability 
impressive.
Tech & Learning presents the following winners of its 35-year-old Awards of Excellence program. Honored products 
include innovative applications that break new ground as well as those that add significant enhancements to proven 
education tools. “Thanks to the work of our educator judges, Tech & Learning is proud to announce this year’s Awards 
of Excellence awardees,” said Kevin Hogan, Content Director. “Our readers should feel confident that these technologies 
will enable them in the classroom, in the front office, and even off campus.”

Teach the NGSS with
 
   16 modules follow the 5E Instructional Model and  
are organized by NGSS Performance Expectation 
   Hundreds of instructional activities support  
three-dimensional learning 
   Real-time online progress monitoring helps teachers 
pinpoint students who need intervention  
Available for Level 5  
Learn more at mentoringminds.com/NGSS 
844-472-6288
Best  
New 
Product
How does your school 
teach NGSS? 

18   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
AVER S42I+ CART
AVER 
(www.averusa.com)
Another product from AVer, the 
AVer S42i+ Cart is a multipurpose 
charging cart with a fully adjustable 
design that offers a more intuitive 
system. It can manage and charge 
up to 42 Chromebooks, laptops, and 
tablet devices, and it knows when to 
stop charging, sending more power 
to external outlets and allowing 
use for additional technology. 
Judges liked its intelligent charging 
feature, pull-out drawers and cable 
management, and the ease of the 
cart’s movement.
BLACKBOARD CLASSROOM 
BLACKBOARD
(www.blackboard.com)
Blackboard released 
a mobile personalized 
learning management 
system called Blackboard 
Classroom. K-12 oriented, 
it allows teachers to 
automate elements of 
their class to differentiate 
instruction, improve 
student engagement, and 
increase teacher efficiency. 
Judges liked its ability 
to be accessed offline for 
teachers and students 
without wifi at home, the fact that teachers are able to edit and change anything 
from their own dashboards, and the ease it grants teachers when they need to 
plan lessons or assessments.
CALIFONE 1534BK HEADPHONE
CALIFONE
(www.califone.com)
The Califone 1534BK Headphone 
is made for use with all varieties 
of computers and mobile devices. 
It’s ideal for personalized digital 
learning, featuring rugged ABS 
plastic headstrap and earcups 
that resist breakage in high-use 
situations, replaceable padded 
leatherette ear cushions, and 
noise-reducing earcups. Judges 
appreciated its sound quality, 
comfort, and compatibility with 
multiple devices, as well as its 
noise-cancelling qualities. 
CALIFONE PA11 PA PRO
CALIFONE
(www.califone.com)
Another award-winning product 
from Califone, the Califone PA11 
wireless PA system is easy to use 
and can be used for outdoor or 
indoor events for audiences up 
to 150 people. It is portable and 
lightweight, weighing only 5 lbs., has 
a built-in carrying handle, and has a 
100’ wireless range from transmitter 
to PA. Judges liked its variety of 
inputs, long battery life, and its wide 
wireless range being able to work 
even through walls.
CALIFONE THE 
POWERPRO PA920
CALIFONE
(www.califone.com)
Another new product from Califone, the 
PowerPro PA920 is a Bluetooth speaker 
that is a self-contained sound system 
with two built-in wireless mic receivers, 
a CD/USB media player, and Bluetooth 
compatibility for wireless connection to 
Bluetooth devices. A single unit can cover 
crowds up to 1000 people and more. 
Judges loved its great room-filling sound, 
its variety of sound options, and the 
speaker’s wired and wireless capability, 
as well as its six-hour battery life.
CASIO’S LAMPFREE XJ-
UT351WN ULTRA-SHORT-
THROW PROJECTOR
CASIO
(www.casio.com)
The Casio XJ-
UT351WN has a 
good feature set, 
reasonably loud 
built-in speakers, 
good networking 
support, low 
maintenance, 
and great picture 
quality. Claiming 
3,500 lumens, 
this is ideal for 
conference rooms 
and classrooms 
with quite a bit of ambient light, or moderate light and very large screens. 
Judges liked its variety of ports for connectivity, large projected image size that 
is clear from even short distances, and that it is lamp-free, cool, and quiet. 
AWARDS OF
EXCELLENCE


20   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
CATCHON
CATCHON
(www.getcatchon.com)
CatchOn is a 
dashboard that 
helps educators 
streamline all 
their data into 
one place, including all their apps. Educators can use it to analyze trends over 
time concerning the apps, gaps in usage across grade levels, and also receive 
such data in reports that help administrators quantify their investments in the 
technology their campuses are using. Judges liked its ability to provide useful 
information that can help schools save money through insightful data.
CLASSLINK ANALYTICS
CLASSLINK
(www.classlink.com)
ClassLink 
Analytics 
is a custom 
dashboard for 
all connected 
educational apps, showing a summary of logins, users, and apps. Educators can 
view reports and see which apps are strongest or most frequently used, which 
ones are underutilized, and more, to aid in better educational use. Judges liked 
that its graphs were easy to read, that the data was offered in real time, and that 
it helped leadership teams make informed decisions about software purchases.
EPSON BRIGHTLINK 697UI WIRELESS FULL 
HD 3LCD ULTRA-SHORT-THROW INTERACTIVE 
DISPLAY
Epson
(epson.com)
The BrightLink 697Ui touch-enabled, wireless ultra-short-throw interactive 
display delivers supersize full HD WUXGA images up to 100 and features 
4,400 lumens of color and white brightness, turning almost any wall or 
existing whiteboard into a collaborative interactive workspace. Judges liked its 
excellent image and quality size, multi-user and touch screen capabilities, and 
its options for multiple devices and projectors to interact on the same image.
EPSON POWERLITE 685W WXGA 3LCD 
PRESENTATION DISPLAY
EPSON
(epson.com)
Designed for today’s 
BYOD classroom, 
the PowerLite 
685W WXGA 
3LCD presentation 
display shows 100” 
images from just 11” away 
for optimal visibility. Delivering 
3,500 lumens of color and white 
brightness, the 685W ensures stimulating 
presentations. Judges favored its great image 
quality, multi-device connectivity, and its image size option for a variety of 
rooms.
EQUATIO
TEXTHELP
(www.texthelp.com/en-us/products/equatio/)
EquatIO is a Web-
based program 
that lets everyone 
create mathematical 
equations, formulas, 
Desmos graphs, 
and more on 
their computer or 
Chromebook. Judges 
liked that it takes away 
the preliminary task 
of having to convert the equation to digital form to create tests, formulas, and 
worksheets with clear digital equations. They also liked that it lets students 
create their own worksheets or answers for homework with this tool, letting 
them focus on their work. 
HUMAN ANATOMY ATLAS BY VISIBLE BODY ON 
ZSPACE 300 ALL-IN-ONE FOR EDUCATION
ZSPACE
(zspace.com) & (www.visiblebody.com)
Visible Body’s 
application, Human 
Anatomy Atlas, its 
best-selling human 
anatomy general 
reference learning tool 
used to explore the 
systems of the human 
body, is now available 
in zSpace. Through 
the power of zSpace 
immersive virtual reality, students can dissect, manipulate, and explore virtual 
models of the human anatomy as if they were holding them in their hands. 
Judges liked its realistic environment, comprehensive content for learning, and 
its interactivity with the pen and glasses. 
AWARDS OF
EXCELLENCE

Wirelessly mirror 
smartphones, 
Chromebooks™, 
tablets, and laptops 
to share content, 
ideas, and student 
work.
Access and download 
educational and 
productivity apps directly 
from your home screen 
to use for whole class or 
individual learning. 
Connect Bluetooth® 
devices such as musical 
keyboards, digital lab 
sensors, and robots to 
support lessons and 
engage students.
Lowest total cost of 
ownership in its class. 
Upgradeable ActivPanel 
PC for Android enables 
schools to keep 
pace with changing 
computing technology.
The Award-Winning
ActivPanel
FINISHING 2017 WITH HONORS
Wirelessly mirror
smartphones
Access and download
educational and
Connect Bluetoo
devices such as
Lowest total cost of 
ownership in its class
The Award-Winnin
ActivPanel
FINISHING 2017 WITH HONO
Visit us at:
BOOTH #114
January 24-27, 2018
BOOTH #735
February 6-10, 2018
Purpose-Built For the Classroom
tablets, and laptops
to share content, 
ideas, and student 
work.
from your home screen
to use for whole class or 
individual learning.
sensors, and robots to 
support lessons and
engage students.
PC for Android enables
schools to keep 
pace with changing
computing technology.
Visit us at:
BOOTH #114
January 24-27, 2018
BOOTH #735
February 6-10, 2018
For more information on ActivPanel, visit ActivPanel.com/Awards

22   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
INSTRUCTURE CANVAS
CANVAS
(canvas.instructure.com)
Canvas by Instructure is 
a learning management 
system (LMS) that offers 
a variety of features such 
as allowing students to 
receive notifications about 
assignments, submit work, 
and interact with learning 
materials on their mobile 
devices. Teachers can 
grade and assess work, 
provide feedback to students, and more. Judges liked its neat package, the 
variety of personalization and collaboration options, the organization of the 
LMS, and the separate views for teachers, students, and administrators.
KRAMER DIP-31M
KRAMER ELECTRONICS
(www.kramerav.com)
The Kramer DIP−31M is a 4K@60Hz (4:2:0) automatic switcher for HDMI, 
VGA, Ethernet, data, and unbalanced audio signals. It provides full-room 
automation and personalization, including control of lights, screens, shades, 
and many other exciting options. It supports various modes of input selection 
and transmits the signal via HDMI cable to a compatible receiver. Judges 
favored its programmable versatility, audio and video flexibility, as well as its 
shades and light control.
KRAMER VIA GO
KRAMER ELECTRONICS
(www.kramerav.com)
Another winning product from 
Kramer Electronics, VIA 
GO gives iOS, Android, 
Chromebook, PC, 
and Mac users 
instant wireless 
connectivity 
with advanced 
presentation 
capabilities. The 
product features content streaming 
with crystal−clear mirrored images and stunning 
video playback, and includes iOS, Windows, and Android mirroring. Judges 
liked its very fast setup and good interface, its ability to let multiple users be 
connected and display, as well as its smooth and clear quality.
LIGHTSPEED SYSTEMS RELAY FOR CHROME
LIGHTSPEED SYSTEMS
(www.lightspeedsystems.com)
Relay is a Chromebook filter 
that keeps Chromebooks 
safe and CIPA-compliant, 
while also monitoring social 
media to keep students 
safe and on track with a 
Chromebook filter. It also 
protects students by stopping 
inappropriate behavior by 
identifying and remediating 
high-risk Web activities 
using a proprietary flagging 
algorithm. Judges liked its 
Web-based access, allowing it to be used anytime, anywhere, its quick and easy 
deployment, as well as its deep analytics. 
NUITEQ LESSONS ONLINE
NUITEQ
(lessons.nuiteq.com)
NUITEQ Lessons Online is an app 
that connects to a learning 
ecosystem for content, 
classroom management, and 
formative assessment. Lessons 
Online lets users create, play, 
grade, and share engaging 
multi-touch lesson 
activities on any device 
anywhere and anytime, 
enable students to make fun 
activities they can share, and more. Judges 
appreciated its visually rich elements, and liked that teachers could use it to 
create seating charts, lists, and materials to send to students.
OPEN LABS STAGELIGHT EDU
OPEN LABS
(us.openlabs.com)
Stagelight EDU delivers next-generation music education with its in-app 
lessons and virtual classes – built by teachers for teachers. With royalty-
free sounds, customizable lesson plans, state-approved curricula, and more, 
Stagelight EDU brings first-class music education right to one’s device. Judges 
liked that it’s a mobile studio, allowing the music to be available all at one 
place, its simple interface and touch controls, and they also liked its curriculum 
creator for lesson creation. 
AWARDS OF
EXCELLENCE

Great Lessons, No Lamps!
Visit us at FETC in booth # 146 and TCEA in booth # 712
For a chance to win a XJ-V1 LampFree Projector!
Long Lasting Brilliant Images
Dust Resistant Design
No Filters to Replace
MercuryFree
Affordable
www.casioLampFree.com
Go MercuryFree and Be Safe.

24   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
OZOBOT EVO
OZOBOT
(ozobot.com)
Ozobot Evo is a classroom-friendly 
miniature robot that introduces 
coding concepts through 
the bot’s block-based 
programming tool, 
OzoBlocky. It teaches 
introductory to advanced 
programming as students 
use color-coded markers 
and paper to draw 
commands for
the bot. Judges liked its 
easy setup, its variety of 
social features that appealed 
to students, and agreed its 
associated app is great for programming 
as it allows users to control the bot remotely from any device.
PASCO BASIC MODULAR CIRCUITS
PASCO
(www.pasco.com)
PASCO basic circuit modules 
eliminate wires and allow 
students to build circuits that 
end up looking like circuit 
diagrams, strengthening their 
conceptual understanding. 
Each module connects 
by sliding the tabs into 
one another and then a 
jumper clip is inserted, 
both emphasizing that an 
electrical connection has 
been made and allowing for 
easy measurement anywhere 
in the circuit. Judges liked that it makes circuit creation easy, as well as its 
integration with other Pasco products.
PASCO WIRELESS CO2 SENSOR
PASCO
(www.pasco.com)
Another winner from 
PASCO, the wireless 
CO2 sensor can measure 
the concentration of 
carbon dioxide gas in a 
closed system or open 
environment. Students can 
study core topics (including 
photosynthesis, respiration, 
and carbon cycling) with 
this versatile probe. CO2 
data can be logged directly 
on the device for long-term life science and environmental science studies. 
Judges liked its Bluetooth connectivity as well as the powerful data-logging/
sensor capabilities that define the product.
PEARSON CONNEXUS
PEARSON
(www.pearson.com)
Pearson Connexus is a digital 
learning solution that offers 
over 700 proven, standards-
based K‑12 courses at a variety 
of course levels, including Core, 
Foundations, Advanced, and Credit 
Recovery. Connexus provides a 
range of instructional settings, including summer school, online and blended, 
project-based, and more. Judges favored Connexus for its encouragement of 
personalized learning, creation of online and blended learning opportunities, 
and its ability to deploy solutions for a wide range of educational settings.
PLAYMADA GAMES COLLISIONS CHEMISTRY
PLAYMADA GAMES
(www.playmadagames.com)
Collisions is a system of 
interconnected digital 
chemistry games designed 
to give middle and high 
school students a deepened 
understanding of fundamental 
chemistry concepts through 
play. Judges liked its unique focus on teaching chemistry through an interactive 
game, that each game provided immediate and meaningful feedback, that it 
featured helpful guides for every game, and that it also featured postgame 
student quests to extend learning and draw connections between game and 
classroom.
PRESENCELEARNING’S ONLINE 
PSYCHOEDUCATIONAL ASSESSMENTS
PRESENCELEARNING
(www.presencelearning.com)
PresenceLearning 
provides schools with 
a national network 
of licensed school 
psychologists who 
remotely perform 
achievement, 
cognitive and ability, 
social/emotional/
behavioral, and 
adaptive functioning 
assessments, 
live and online via their online psychoeducational assessments program. 
Judges acknowledged it met the need for quality clinicians in a given district, 
that it offered a dashboard for clinicians to allow them to access everything 
immediately, and that it produced quality special education reports and 
assessments. 
AWARDS OF
EXCELLENCE

SERVING YOU SINCE 1984
hallresearch.com
714-641-6607
A New Wave in Connectivity
Wall plate Sender with HDMI and USB inputs
USB Hubs in Wall Plate and Receiver
No Power Supply needed for the Wall Plate
Stores RS232 / IR commands to Control Display
Ideal for Interactive Displays, KVM Extension and 
distance learning  
2.0
EX-HDU
TWO SIMPLE SOLUTIONS FOR K-12 CLASSROOMS
VSA-X21
Patent Pending
USB and HDMI Extension on one CAT6 Cable
HDBaseT Receiver to 150m
Audio Extractor with Integrated 50 Watt Amp
Can directly drive 2 or 4 Speakers
Audio Input for Mixing with HDMI Audio
IP connectivity with conngurable WebGUI
Can Control Peripheral Equipment via RS-232 
Add-Ons to choose from
VSA-UI-DP
UHBX-SW3-WP
UHBX-S-WP
Patent Pending
HDBaseT™ Receiver with Integrated Switcher, 
Audio Amp & Controller with IP

26   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
PROMETHEAN ACTIVPANEL V5
PROMETHEAN
(www.prometheanworld.com)
Promethean’s 
ActivPanel v5 
interactive touch 
screen display 
features InGlass 
Technology that 
helps offer a 
naturally smooth 
writing experience 
with no script-lag or 
response delays, an 
instant whiteboard 
for free-form 
writing, converting to text and palm erasing, and more. Judges favored its 
wired and wireless connectivity, the ability to import a variety of files with 
its easy-to-use software package, as well as the clarity of the display, its good 
sound, great graphics, and responsive touch.
RAZ-PLUS LEARNING A-Z
RAZ-PLUS 
(www.raz-plus.com)
Raz-Plus offers formative 
assessments and data-driven 
reporting to help teachers 
determine the appropriate reading 
level for each student, monitor 
students’ reading growth, and 
determine future instruction. 
Judges liked that teachers 
have access to a variety of report and instructional materials, that it offered 
personalized instruction for students at different levels, and that it lets teachers 
set up student packets and send them to their students with books, resources, 
due dates, and messages.
RUCKUS CLOUD WIFI
RUCKUS WIRELESS
(www.ruckuswireless.com)
Ruckus Cloud 
wifi radically 
simplifies 
WLAN setup and 
management. 
Users can 
provision, 
monitor, and 
troubleshoot 
their entire wifi 
network through 
a single Web 
dashboard or mobile app. The Ruckus Cloud wifi service works with a wide 
variety of Ruckus access points (APs). Judges liked its Web controller interface 
and its accessibility, along with the wifi’s easy setup and configuration of its 
access points.
SHARP PN-C705B/C805B
SHARP USA 
(www.sharpusa.com)
The Sharp PN-
C705B AQUOS 
BOARD interactive 
display system 
has the ideal focal 
point for meetings, 
presentations, or 
lessons. Smart and 
convenient SHARP 
Pen Software enables 
real-time information 
sharing. Thanks to 
multi-touch sensitivity, 
up to four people can write freely onscreen at the same time for effective and 
lively exchanges. Judges appreciated its upgraded functions and lowered price, 
the range and quality of its speakers, and its ability to be used by multiple users 
at once.
TOTAL MOTIVATION SCIENCE FOR THE NEXT 
GENERATION
MENTORING MINDS
(www.mentoringminds.com)
Total Motivation 
Science for the 
Next Generation is 
an award-winning 
resource that delivers 
content in print and 
online formats. Based 
on the 5E Model 
of Learning, this 
curriculum weaves 
together three-
dimensional learning 
experiences to build knowledge across all curricular areas and support NGSS 
implementation and STEM practices. Judges liked how it connected science 
to math and literacy, its variety of assessment items and question formats, its 
addressing of Common Core State Standards, and its science glossary.
TWIG SCIENCE REPORTER
TWIG EDUCATION
(www.twigsciencereporter.com)
Twig Science Reporter is a 
weekly science news service 
for a K‑5 classroom that has 
been created to help teachers 
connect science lessons with 
real world news. Twig Science 
Reporter brings weekly videos and other learning resources together with 
topical news to inspire school children to become more engaged with scientific 
inquiry and reasoning. Judges liked that it let teachers subscribe to weekly 
newsletters, the ease of content coordination, and its alignment with NCSS 
standards.
AWARDS OF
EXCELLENCE

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  27
VERNIER SOFTWARE & TECHNOLOGY VERNIER 
THERMAL ANALYSIS FOR FLIR ONE
VERNIER SOFTWARE & TECHNOLOGY
(www.vernier.com)
The Thermal Analysis app from 
Vernier helps students observe 
temperature changes on the 
skin, illustrate convection, 
track heating due to friction, 
compare heat conduction in 
different materials, analyze 
the transparency of materials 
in infrared vs. visible light, and 
much more. Judges liked that 
it was easy to use and that it 
let users save their work, and that it allows users to track up to four points to 
create real-time temperature versus time graphs.
VIEWSONIC PS750W INTERACTIVE ULTRA-SHORT-
THROW PROJECTOR
VIEWSONIC 
(www.viewsonic.com)
The ViewSonic PS750W WXGA projector delivers an interactive solution 
perfect for any classroom. Featuring an embedded camera, along with an 
included laser curtain module and wall mount 
kit, the PS750W offers a low-cost, big-picture 
alternative to interactive whiteboards 
and displays. Judges liked that it can be 
managed remotely, its quick start guide 
that comes with many illustrations, 
and that it satisfies the need for a 
short-throw projector for hard screen or 
whiteboard use.
VIVITEK NOVOPRO
VIVITEK
(www.vivitekusa.com)
NovoPro is a system for wireless presentation 
and collaboration. It’s designed to take 
business meetings, conferences and 
corporate presentations to a new level 
of collaboration and interaction. The 
presenter can wirelessly interact and 
share digital content with attendees — and 
vice versa — via their PCs, tablets, or other 
portable devices in this modern, smart-meeting environment. Judges preferred 
it for its easy setup, smooth video streaming, and additional features, including 
teacher control and file sharing.
ACCELERATE LEARNING STEMSCOPES PREK-12 
CURRICULUM
STEMSCOPES
(stemscopes.com)
The STEMscopes PreK-12 
curriculum is a comprehensive 
digital curriculum that 
helps teachers refine their 
teaching practices and 
provides supplemental print 
and hands-on kits, alongside professional development, all designed to 
address the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). Judges liked the 
incorporation of traditional quizzes and performance-based assessment 
tasks, the inquiry-based activities that helped students to think like scientists, 
and the curriculum’s ability to make connections between science and other 
disciplines, including mathematics and other 
science-related fields.
ACER CHROMEBOOK 11 N7 
C731T
Acer
(www.acer.com)
Acer’s newest Chromebook 
for education customers, 
the Acer Chromebook 11 N7 
(C731), comes with enhanced durability features. In addition, it provides long 
battery life and a fan-less design, making it an exceptional choice for schools 
and school districts that want a reliable, powerful, and quiet device for student 
learning. Judges appreciated its solid build and its good graphics, and praised 
its overall speed and performance.
ALMA
ALMA
(www.getalma.com)
Alma is a data-driven 
LMS that provides 
understandable analytics 
and graphics to help drive 
educators’ insight into 
their schools, classes, and 
students. It also helps 
educators implement 
progressive and traditional 
instructional practices on 
their own terms, letting 
them make informed 
decisions with the data 
it provides. Judges liked the infrastructure’s easy navigation, its integration 
with G Suite (Google Classroom), and also liked the system’s very good data 
visualization tools. 

28   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
ATOMIC LEARNING/HOONUIT
HOONUIT
(www.hoonuit.com)
Atomic Learning 
and Versifit have 
announced their 
transformation 
to one corporate 
brand: Hoonuit. 
The rebranding 
exemplifies the evolution of the companies into a comprehensive suite of data 
analytics and professional development tools that together provide educators 
the knowledge and insight to maximize success in the classroom. Judges liked 
that it offered multiple models of learning for educators, appreciated Hoonuit’s 
skill in helping teachers build their pedagogical skills, and noted the system’s 
personalized options as well. 
BARRACUDA BACKUP
BARRACUDA NETWORKS
(www.barracuda.com)
Barracuda Backup is a data-protection solution for physical, virtual, and SaaS 
environments and it makes it easier and more cost-effective for users to protect 
their data. It offers cloud-based central management for seamless multi-site 
administration and is available as a virtual appliance that can be deployed 
without requiring additional hardware. Judges loved the cloud-to-cloud 
backup capability and appreciated the archiving and filtering capabilities, 
particularly in their aligning with schools’ safety and security measures.
BARRACUDA NEXT GEN FIREWALL
BARRACUDA NETWORKS
(www.barracuda.com)
Another winner from Barracuda, Barracuda next-generation firewalls are 
designed for the cloud era by automatically offloading resource-intensive tasks 
such as virus and spyware scanning, content filtering, and reporting to the 
cloud so that network performance is not compromised. The cloud-based Web 
Security Service provides real-time updates to ensure continuous protection 
against the latest threats. Judges liked the ability to deploy as a hardware, 
virtual, or cloud solution and appreciated the advanced threat detection.
BARRACUDA WEB SECURITY GATEWAY
BARRACUDA NETWORKS
(www.barracuda.com)
Yet another winner from Barracuda, The Barracuda Web Security Gateway 
lets organizations benefit from online applications and tools without exposure 
to Web-borne malware and viruses, lost user productivity, and misused 
bandwidth. As a comprehensive solution for Web security and management, it 
unites award-winning spyware, malware, and virus protection with a powerful 
policy and reporting engine. Judges commended the Gateway’s full inspection 
of traffic, including SSL-encrypted and social network scanning.
BLOOMZ APP
BLOOMZ
(www.bloomz.net)
Bloomz is a free app 
that saves teachers 
time in all parent 
communications, 
while creating a 
supportive classroom 
community. 
Bloomz allows 
teachers to securely 
share photos and 
classroom updates 
and reach parents 
instantly through 
messaging, as well as 
to coordinate events 
(like PT conferences) 
and signups for 
volunteers. Judges 
appreciated its 
ability to help foster 
community between teachers and parents and its parent feedback option, 
along with the scheduling flexibility the app provides teachers as well.
CURRICULUM ASSOCIATES’ I-READY
CURRICULUM ASSOCIATES
(www.curriculumassociates.com)
Built for the Common Core, i-Ready combines a valid, reliable growth measure 
and individualized instruction in a single online product that saves teachers 
time at a fraction of the cost of similar products. It features an adaptive 
diagnostic for reading and mathematics to help pinpoint student needs, 
downloadable lessons, and more. Judges liked its ease of use, its adaptability, 
and also liked how its personalized learning helped students participate in 
lessons at their own level.
AWARDS OF
EXCELLENCE

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  29
CYPHER LEARNING NEO LMS
CYPHER LEARNING
(www.cypherlearning.com)
NEO is an award-winning LMS for use by schools and universities, known for its intuitive user 
interface, extensive feature set, and strong return on investment. NEO offers a centralized 
environment for creating classes, organizing learning material, assigning and submitting 
homework, taking assessments, collaborating with classmates, and analyzing results. Judges 
liked its user-friendly interface, color-coded data, ease of access, and the dashboard badges 
students can earn while studying that can serve to further motivate them.
DISCOVERY EDUCATION MATH TECHBOOK
DISCOVERY EDUCATION
(discoveryeducation.com)
Math Techbook is a digital textbook that connects students to math through real-world problems 
worth solving. Using a balanced approach to instruction, Math Techbook combines conceptual 
understanding, procedural fluency, and application to help all students develop a long-lasting 
mastery of mathematics. It features digital videos, data manipulation with digital tools, and more. 
Judges thought the professional learning support was rich and full of different models, praised its 
engaging lessons, and also appreciated its user friendliness. 
The Leading Brand of Portable Wireless PA Systems
Simplicity‧Flexibility‧Portability
www.mipro.com.tw
100%  Made in Taiwan
Distributed in USA by Starin
136 Venturi Drive Chesterton, IN 46304
Phone: 800.846.5606 | sales@starin.biz | www.starin.biz
MA-505 wins Taiwan Excellence 2016 and MA-708 wins Taiwan Excellence 2017
MA-708 wins 2016 Red Dot and MA-808 wins 2017 Red Dot

30   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
EDSBY 
EDSBY
(www.edsby.com)
Edsby is a 
comprehensive 
learning and 
analytics platform 
available for K-12 
school districts 
and regional 
governments. It comes with apps that let parents get real-time views on 
what’s happening in class, help administrators assess students according to 
their districts’ policies, terms, and standards, assist students in tracking their 
assignments and classes while providing helpful reminders, and more. Judges 
liked its intuitive interface, user-friendly tools, and the brief but engaging 
tutorials available for all items.
EDTHENA
EDTHENA
(www.edthena.com)
Edthena empowers teachers and 
coaches to collaborate using videos of 
classroom teaching. Educators can put 
Edthena’s video technology onto their 
mobile device with the Edthena app, 
letting them easily record classroom 
video, and then automatically upload to 
Edthena, among other features. Judges 
ranked it well for its ease in video 
uploading, its strong support system for 
users, and for using video and online 
collaboration to put the entire coaching 
process in one place.
GOGUARDIAN FOR CHROMEBOOKS
GOGUARDIAN
(www.goguardian.com)
From cloud-
based filtering 
and self-harm 
alerts to teacher/
student chat and 
screensharing, 
GoGuardian has everything users need for a successful tech program. 
Featuring granular filtering, AI-based monitoring, classroom management 
to aid teachers with classroom-specific tools that assist learning, and theft 
recovery to help find lost or stolen devices, GoGuardian is a versatile tech 
system for educators. Judges liked the system for its easy installation and 
praised its monitoring capabilities.
IMPERO EDUCATION PRO
IMPERO 
(www.imperosoftware.com)
Impero Education Pro is a network management, Internet safety, and 
classroom management cross-platform software solution that’s simple to 
install and easy to use. Providing a suite of tools to support and manage 
technology and users across a 
school or district, Education 
Pro gives IT teams complete 
control of their entire network, 
featuring power management, 
print management, license 
management, remote 
monitoring, and more. Judges 
praised it for its ability to empower teachers while protecting students.
INFOBASE WORLD RELIGIONS 
INFOBASE
(www.infobase.com)
With a dynamic new 
design, new features, 
and expanded coverage, 
World Religions explores 
religion and spirituality 
in an objective manner, 
from the ceremonies of 
the first practitioners to 
the elaborate rituals of 
today. The new, easy-to-
navigate interface puts the 
information users need 
front and center. Judges 
appreciated the wealth of 
primary sources available 
to users and the detail 
behind every religion 
covered, and praised its teaching of media literacy skills such as evaluating and 
analyzing primary sources.
INFOCUS JTOUCH INF6502
INFOCUS
(www.infocus.com)
The Infocus JTouch Whiteboard features a 65-inch, 1080p touch display, a 
built-in whiteboard that lets users save their work, and contains a multi-point 
capacitive touch screen with sleek bezel-less design and effortless gestures – 
just like a phone or tablet. Judges found the JTouch to be a versatile solution 
for K-12 classrooms to share digital content and lessons on the large, bezel-
less, 1080p screen using familiar gestures similar to those used on a phone or 
tablet.
AWARDS OF
EXCELLENCE

35 +72
2 squared
2
square root
square

32   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
IXL LEARNING
IXL LEARNING
(www.ixl.com)
IXL Learning is an 
educational technology 
company that delivers an 
immersive personalized 
learning experience—for 
students PreK-12, across all 
subjects, including math, 
language arts, science, and 
social studies. IXL’s content 
and technology enable fresh, 
captivating experiences 
that spark curiosity and 
build confidence. Judges 
liked that teachers can use 
their platform to help them 
monitor and provide tailored 
instruction for every student, 
allowing students to work 
at their own pace while they 
practice necessary skills.
ITSLEARNING
ITSLEARNING
(www.itslearning.com)
Itslearning is a K-12 
LMS that saves time 
for administrators, 
streamlines workflow 
for teachers, and 
personalizes instruction 
for students. The 
itslearning LMS solution 
allows districts to truly 
personalize learning by putting curriculum resources, instructional strategies, 
objective-based lesson plans, and assessments all in one easy-to-access central 
location. Judges liked that the program integrates with everything like a 
student information system and that it allows for personalized instruction, 
communication, and collaboration.
KRAMER VP-796ASV
KRAMER ELECTRONICS 
(www.kramerav.com)
The Kramer VP−796ASV is a universal 4K@60Hz (4:2:0) presentation 
scaler/switcher for HDMI, DisplayPort, HDBaseT, VGA, composite 
and DVI−U video signals, analog audio, and H.264 streaming video. Its 
HQUltraFast technology switches in typically a quarter of a second. It features 
flexible control options, multiple outputs, and more. Judges loved its fast 
switching, the 4k ultra-HD support, and its ability to handle both digital and 
analog input. 
LIGHTSPEED SYSTEMS WEB FILTER 3: LONGHORN
LIGHTSPEED SYSTEMS
(www.lightspeedsystems.com)
Lightspeed Systems 
has announced 
the release of Web 
Filter 3: Longhorn, 
a new version of 
the market leader 
for content filtering 
in schools. The 
upgrade offers new 
features to ease 
user identification, 
activity reporting, 
and safe Web browsing, as well as hundreds of other enhancements. Judges 
liked its user-friendly interface, flexible deployment options, and the high 
visibility the reporting engine allows across the network.
NEWS-O-MATIC
NEWS-O-MATIC
(www.newsomatic.org)
News-O-Matic is a 
kid-oriented daily 
newspaper. It provides 
an exciting and 
engaging nonfiction 
experience for children, 
complete with valuable 
literacy tools for the 
classroom. The articles are child-appropriate and are adapted for kids at 
various reading levels. Every article features three reading levels for students 
and can also come in Spanish and French. Judges liked its weekly availability, 
approved of its style of presentation, and recommended the program’s digital 
library feature.
NWEA MAP GROWTH 
NWEA
(www.nwea.org)
MAP Growth measures 
what students know and 
informs what they’re ready 
to learn next. By dynamically 
adjusting to each student’s 
performance, MAP Growth 
creates a personalized 
assessment experience 
that accurately measures 
performance—whether a student performs on, above, or below grade level. 
Judges thought it was very suitable for gathering information on student skills 
from general growth and praised its personalized capabilities.
AWARDS OF
EXCELLENCE

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  33
MAP SKILLS
NWEA
(www.nwea.org)
MAP Skills is a skills mastery and progress monitoring assessment that helps teachers drill down to 
the specific skills each student needs to learn. Use it between MAP Growth administrations to see 
exactly what struggling students are missing and advanced students are ready to take on—then adjust 
instruction in the moment and monitor student progress. Judges approved of its suitability for school 
systems, and appreciated its ability to help identify struggling students. 
ODYSSEYWARE DIGITAL CURRICULUM
ODYSSEYWARE
(www.odysseyware.com)
The Odysseyware curriculum is aligned with both national and 
state standards, including Common Core State Standards. In 
addition, the Odysseyware curriculum is regularly reviewed 
to update and confirm the relevancy and accuracy of course 
content. Judges praised the system’s comprehensive digital 
reports, the authoring tool that lets teachers insert lessons 
and quizzes into existing content, and liked that teachers and 
administrators can drill down for data from campus to student 
assignments.
Helping you create the classroom your 
schools, teachers, and students want. 
 
Boxlight products are designed to help students learn more 
effectively and develop the essential skills they need for success. 
Students respond to this enhanced way of learning, and teachers 
find it allows them to do more in the classroom—with less time 
and hassle.
Our technology and software empower both educators and 
students in all forms of learning, enabling real understanding 
and enhancing student achievement. Whether it’s whole-class 
learning, small-group collaboration, formative assessment, 
or STEM-based learning, Boxlight offers services, software, and 
hardware that enable teachers to easily and effectively enhance 
student success. What’s more, our solutions help build essential 
skills such as critical thinking, collaboration, communication,  
and creativity.
Experience what the classroom can be.  
Boxlight.com/classroom or text “CanBe” to 51555. 
What the Classroom  
Can Be.
Interactive
Fun
Collaborative
Effective
Uncomplicated
WHOLE-CLASS
STEM
COLLABORATIVE
ASSESSMENT

34   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
OTUS STUDENT PERFORMANCE PLATFORM
OTUS
(otus.com)
Otus was built 
exclusively for K-12 
by a group of former 
educators and 
administrators who 
wanted to increase 
the efficiency and 
the effectiveness of 
educational technology. 
Otus combines three 
common educator tool 
sets: data management, 
assessment management, and classroom and learning management. Judges 
found it easy for both students and parents to use, liked the teacher’s dashboard 
feature and the administrator’s reporting options, and favored its unique 
connections to external programs that extend the platform’s usability. 
PEARSON AIMSWEBPLUS
CLASSROOM ASSESSMENT PRODUCTS
(www.aimswebplus.
com)
aimswebPlus is a 
powerful, proven tool 
that informs instruction 
and improves student 
performance, 
using standards-
aligned reading and 
math measures to 
screen and monitor 
progress for grades 
K-8. aimswebPlus screening and progress monitoring measures can be 
administered in minutes, so teachers and students can return quickly to their 
regular schedules. Judges favored its upgrades that introduced more options to 
connect testing to the classroom and its thorough data reporting, covering both 
individual students and holistic performance.  
PEARSON ONLINE & BLENDED LEARNING 
PROFESSIONAL LEARNING MODEL
PEARSON
(www.pearson.com)
Pearson provides support in 
online program management 
to help institutions launch or 
expand their online degree 
programs, tailored services, 
including analytics technology 
to help track student data 
performance, and innovative 
digital solutions, offering effective, personalized teaching and learning 
solutions at the institutional, program, and student level. Judges liked its 
comprehensive organization, its ease of use, and the dashboards that let both 
students and teachers connect to everything that they need to do or see.
PEARSON TELL, THE TEST OF ENGLISH 
LANGUAGE LEARNING
PEARSON
(www.pearson.com)
Test of English 
Language Learning 
(TELL), is a touch 
screen-delivered 
language proficiency 
assessment that can 
be used to screen, 
diagnose, and 
progress-monitor 
English language 
learners in grades 
K-12. TELL enables 
consistent and objective scoring on four foundational skills: reading, writing, 
listening, and speaking, and also aids in helping students build up their skill in 
pronunciation, fluency, grammar, and more. Judges liked the interactivity of 
the apps’ videos and the automatic scoring of the assessments.
PEARSON WRITETOLEARN
PEARSON
(www.pearsonassessments.com)
WriteToLearn assesses 
writing and returns targeted 
instructional feedback 
within seconds, providing 
opportunities for students to 
build writing skills and develop 
reading comprehension while 
expanding their vocabulary. 
Features such as embedded 
writing activities, writing tips, 
and more, help scaffold the 
writing process. Judges loved 
the 39 new literature-based 
prompts for essay writing and a 
new automatic scoring feature, 
and they liked the personalized tools students could use to build up their 
writing skills and reading comprehension. 
PREPWORKS LEARNING POSITIONING SYSTEM
PREPWORKS
(prepworks.com)
Prepworks Learning 
Positioning System 
technology employs 
intelligent software 
to deliver prescriptive 
instruction in multiple subject areas. Similar to a GPS, Prepworks LPS locates 
each student on a given path and re-calculates the learner’s progress in real 
time, adjusting the content in every lesson and activity to meet each learner’s 
needs. Judges liked it for its ability to produce guaranteed results while 
providing personalized lessons based on said results, along with its improved 
organization of learning paths.
AWARDS OF
EXCELLENCE

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  35
PROMETHEAN CLASSFLOW
PROMETHEAN WORLD
(www.prometheanworld.com)
Promethean ClassFlow helps teachers build and access interactive lessons 
from any Web browser, share lessons with other peers, and collaborate using 
the latest mobile and student response technology. ClassFlow also helps 
teachers save time in lesson development, allowing educators to better 
facilitate a connected classroom. Judges liked the software’s versatility in 
being usable on any interactive whiteboard, and liked the Desktop feature 
where teachers can add question sets and create tests and quizzes for 
assessments.
RENAISSANCE STAR 360
RENAISSANCE
(www.renaissance.com)
Renaissance Star 360 includes interim assessments for early literacy, math, and reading (also available 
in Spanish), helping educators determine the best instruction to meet the needs of all students. Each 
assessment produces valid, reliable data and can be completed in a fraction of the time it takes to complete 
other benchmark and interim assessments. Judges liked the personalized reading practice and they also 
appreciated the availability of special reports, also featuring Spanish versions.

36   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
RENAISSANCE-U
RENAISSANCE
(www.renaissance.com)
Renaissance-U offers 
flexible professional 
learning through 
personalized 
coaching supported 
by self-paced 
tutorials and activities. This dynamic SaaS platform is consistently updated 
with new content. The system features expert data coaching and self-paced 
online tutorials and activities, helping schools effectively use Renaissance’s 
assessment, math, and reading solutions and the data they provide. Judges 
thought it was a solid product that used good methods to connect data to 
instruction and loved the personalized coaching it provided.
SECURLY
SECURLY
(www.securly.com)
Securly is a 
Web-filtering 
appliance 
that features 
Chromebook 
filtering, offers 
support for Windows, iPads, Macs, and Android/Nexus tablets, and uses 
natural language algorithms to audit student posts on social media such as 
Facebook, Twitter, and Google+, flagging activity that might be indicative of 
cyberbullying or self-harm. Judges loved its social media auditing feature, 
the secure browsing it offered, and the free Chromebook filtering that allows 
administrators to secure their 1-1 program for Windows.
SHMOOP SUBSCRIPTION (TEST PREP, ONLINE 
COURSES, TEACHING GUIDES, LEARNING GUIDES, 
AND STUDY TOOLS)
SHMOOP
(www.shmoop.com)
Shmoop is offering new 
resources like Shakespeare 
in Modern English and 
guides to famous historical 
texts and speeches, and 
their premium resources 
have also been upgraded, 
allowing students to use 
Shmoop’s test prep to 
study for a variety of standardized exams. Judges commented on Shmoop’s 
comprehensive selection of topics, were wowed by the upgraded, user-friendly 
interface, and they loved the interactive overlay feature, enabling students and 
teachers to annotate, draw on, and highlight most file types.
STUDYSYNC 
BOOKHEADED LEARNING
(www.studysync.com)
StudySync is a cross-curricular, core literacy solution with hundreds of texts, 
dynamic video, and multimedia lessons guaranteed to inspire and advance 
reading, writing, critical 
thinking, speaking, and 
listening skills to prepare 
students for college 
and careers. StudySync 
provides digital instruction with print resources to ensure teachers can provide 
students a systematic path to success. Judges liked its comprehensive language 
arts program, its core lessons, and its other instructional reading activities like 
quizzes and spotlight skills.
TECH4LEARNING WIXIE
TECH4LEARNING
(www.tech4learning.com/wixie/)
Wixie is an online publishing and creativity platform that lets students share 
what they know through their writing, voice, and art. The platform blends text 
and voice recording with original art and images. Judges liked that it features 
a user-friendly Web program, praised the over 500 new standards-based 
activities now available, and also liked the teachers’ ability to access student 
accounts from their dashboards, helping them differentiate assignments 
between classes and individuals.
TURNITIN FEEDBACK STUDIO
TURNITIN
(turnitin.com)
Turnitin Feedback 
Studio includes new 
improvements such as 
one-click plagiarism 
checking that compares 
student content to 
Internet sources, new 
feedback features, 
including allowing 
teachers to leave voice 
comments along with 
their summaries, and 
more. Judges liked its peer-to-peer collaboration capabilities, the system’s 
ability to calculate by percentage similarities between submitted work and 
online sources, as well as its grammar check feature that frees teachers up to 
focus on student ideas and concepts versus mechanics.
AWARDS OF
EXCELLENCE

We are pleased to share that the Sharp PN-C705B and PN-C805B AQUOS BOARD interactive display systems have been 
named Tech & Learning’s 2017 Awards of Excellence winners for the “New Product” category.  
Featuring full HD 1,920 × 1,080 pixel resolution, the Sharp 70" Class (69.5" diagonal) PN-C705B and Sharp 80" Class  
(80" diagonal) PN-C805B are the perfect focal point for the classroom. Now also available as the 60" Class (60.2" diagonal) 
PN-C605B!
Other impressive features include:
• Direct Bonding Technology provides a consistent and natural feeling when you write on the screen.
• Front-access buttons can be used for frequent functions such as power on/off and input switching. 
• Handwriting Recognition converts selected onscreen writing into standard text with the special SHARP Pen Software. 
• Connects to popular mobile devices and integrates with leading educational software platforms.
Learn More at SharpUSA.com/AQUOSBOARD
2017
CREATE. LEARN. SHARE.
With These 2017 Awards of Excellence Winners

38   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
BEST USE OF AFTERSCHOOL TIME (BEST ONLINE PD TRAINING)  
RENAISSANCE
Renaissance-U is a blended 
service that pairs an expert 
coach with engaging and 
evolving on-demand 
content in best practices for 
Renaissance's reading, math, 
and assessment solutions. The expert coach helps plan the implementation for 
the school year and provides ongoing expertise for conversations around data, 
implementation roadblocks, and facilitating collaboration among educators 
in the school. The on-demand content offers a variety of videos, tutorials, and 
activities that fit the flexibility of any educator's schedul
BEST EXCUSE TO LEAVE THE CLASSROOM 
(BEST IN-PERSON TRAINING PROGRAM) 
VERNIER SOFTWARE & TECHNOLOGY
Vernier offers more than 70 free, 
hands-on workshops nationwide 
each year. Led by experienced 
classroom teachers, the workshops 
offer novice and seasoned science 
and STEM teachers alike various 
ways to integrate data-collection 
technology into their curricula. During each four-hour workshop, educators 
explore classroom experiments using Vernier’s award-winning technology. 
They also receive an electronic copy of ready-to-use lab handouts and a free 
meal. To learn more and see participants’ reactions to the workshops, go to 
http://www.vernier.com/training/workshops/.  
THE HELP SITE YOU WANT TO KEEP GOING BACK TO (BEST HELP SITE PORTAL) 
SCHOOLMINT
The SchoolMint tech support team provides comprehensive, bilingual tech 
support to both parents and staff at nearly 6,000 district, charter, and private 
schools nationwide. Notably, the team maintains an average 95% satisfaction 
rate on all support 
tickets, offers an online 
help center with 
hundreds of articles, 
recordings, and trainings to help customers become SchoolMint experts, and, 
last school year, provided parent support for the submission of approximately a 
half a million enrollment applications.
SALES SUPPORT YOU CAN BELIEVE IN (BEST SALES SUPPORT)  
BUNCEE
When it comes to Sales 
Support, we consistently 
hear that our service is 
the best ever! Whether 
you contact us via 
our site, social media, 
phone, or email, our priority is to be quick to help! At Buncee, we don’t just 
answer questions. We go above and beyond to provide ideas, resources, and 
encouragement; empowering teachers to create engaging experiences for 
students. Our goal is to ensure that the Buncee experience is an excellent one!
THE ED TECH REP YOU WOULD HIRE IF YOU COULD  
(SALESPERSON OF THE YEAR) 
BRIAN MIHALIK – GOGUARDIAN
“Brian Mihalik always has a smile on 
his face and truly enjoys what he does; 
he has a deep passion for the education 
space and how GoGuardian is helping 
to improve learning in K12 schools. 
His background in education makes 
him ideally suited to understand and 
address the challenges that teachers, 
administrators and schools are facing. I 
believe that Brian is one of the hardest-
working yet friendliest field reps in the 
STELLAR SERVICE
AWARDS
Tech & Learning is excited to announce the winners of the 2017 T&L Stellar Service 
Awards. These awards were established to honor the great achievements in customer care 
and satisfaction in the Ed Tech industry, providing another look at what influences the 
buying decisions. A product and how it performs has to come backed up with a team, a 
website, support, and service. 

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  39
industry and that is something that his partners and customers would attest 
to. Brian puts the customer first and shows excellent communication, ethics, 
values and consideration for all parties involved which makes him well 
deserving of the sales rep of the year title!” —Dave Allison, VP of Channel 
Sales 
THE NUMBER YOU HAVE ON AUTODIAL (BEST TECH SUPPORT)  
CURRICULUM ASSOCIATES
Curriculum Associates’ educator-
first technical support team provides 
direct in-person and remote support 
to schools and districts to ensure a 
quality experience, and resolves 85% 
of cases within the day and 95%+ 
of cases within two days. During 
implementation, the team provides detailed technical training to ensure a 
smooth rollout and to minimize workload for school staff. Every day, the team 
monitors logs to diagnose school network issues and calls schools about any 
potential issues.
THE ULTIMATE REPUTATION SAVER (BEST WARRANTY PROGRAM)  
EPSON AMERICA
Epson’s Brighter Futures program, a unique sales and support initiative, 
makes it easy for schools to put state-of-the art visual displays in every 
classroom. In addition to competitive 
pricing available only for education 
customers, the program provides 
schools with a three-year projector 
warranty, which no other projector 
manufacturer currently offers; a 
90-day limited lamp warranty; a free 
next-business-day replacement program with free shipping each way; toll-free 
tech support; and a dedicated Epson education account manager.
FREQUENT BUYER SMILES (BEST PERKS & EXTRAS.)  
VERNIER SOFTWARE & TECHNOLOGY
Vernier offers more than 70 free, 
hands-on workshops nationwide 
each year. Led by experienced 
classroom teachers, the workshops 
offer novice and seasoned science 
and STEM teachers alike various 
ways to integrate data-collection 
technology into their curricula. During each four-hour workshop, educators 
explore classroom experiments using Vernier’s award-winning technology. 
They also receive an electronic copy of ready-to-use lab handouts and a free 
meal. To learn more and see participants’ reactions to the workshops, go to 
http://www.vernier.com/training/workshops/.  
For more information on these brands and the many others offered from NewBay Media,  
as well as subscription information for all of NewBay’s print and electronic products, visit www.nbmedia.com.
the Power to reach
Yourgoals
NewBay Media provides the information you need to know — and the audience you need 
to reach — in the Broadcast & Video, Professional Audio, Musical Instruments, Systems 
Integration, and K-12 Education markets. Our services help readers, service providers, manu-
facturers, and associations reach their full potential, and exceed their expectations.
one company. one Goal. yours.
We are here to help you succeed in any way we can — whether it is through our unique online 
and print media or our award-wining events and custom publications.
Learn more at www.nbmedia.com, or contact Steve Palm, CEO, at spalm@nbmedia.com.
in print | online | in person
broadcast/video
tv techNology
Radio WoRld
videogRaphy
dv
goveRNMeNt video
BRoadcastiNg & caBle
MultichaNNel NeWs
aUdio
pRo souNd NeWs
pRo audio RevieW
audio Media
Mix
audio solutioNs
mUsic player
guitaR playeR
Bass playeR
keyBoaRd
Music playeR NetWoRk
electRoNic MusiciaN
av/ consUmer 
electronics
systeMs coNtRactoR NeWs
av techNology
ResideNtial systeMs
ReNtal & stagiNg systeMs
digital sigNage
sOUND & vIDEO CONTRACTOR
tWice
     k-12 edUcation
      tech & leaRNiNg
      schoolcio
      tech FoRuM

40   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
By Tara Smith
I
nnovative educators know that students 
preparing for the challenges of work and 
further study in our ever-changing world 
need to achieve fluency and comprehension—
but they also need to develop higher-level 
thinking skills and build deep knowledge. 
The following schools and districts are using 
edtech tools to integrate literacy skills across the 
curricula.
LESSONS OUTSIDE THE BOX 
Students returned to St. Martin East Elementary 
in the Jackson (MS) County School District 
after Thanksgiving break to discover a winter 
wonderland. With lessons from i-Ready (“Penguin 
Chick”) and Ready (“Frozen Desserts”), teachers 
incorporated this magical transformation into 
multisensory instruction to teach reading skills.
As a result of the school’s new PURE 
classroom initiative, which encourages teachers 
to teach with passion, urgency, rigor, and high 
expectations, teachers are including more such 
“outside the box” lessons in their weekly plans. 
Classrooms are coming alive and “multisensory 
lessons and high expectations that integrate 
math, science, social studies, and language arts 
are common in every classroom,” says Assistant 
Principal Jillian Vallo. 
Multiple resources, including live video 
streaming, interactive games (Kahoots), and 
virtual field trips all contribute to creating 
these cross-curricular learning opportunities. 
Using the Ready program, for example, teachers 
can bring literacy lessons using scientific- and 
geography-based passages alive by showing 
videos from around the world.
The increased engagement among students 
is palpable. “We have seen low performing 
students who were apathetic about coming to 
school evolve into higher-performing students 
excited about learning,” says Vallo.
COLLABORATION AND PROFESSIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT ARE KEY
“The cross-curricular initiative at St. Martin 
East sometimes leaves teachers struggling to 
know whether they are teaching standards to 
mastery level,” says Vallo. Encouraging teachers 
to plan with the end in mind, she says, in addition 
to providing time for teacher collaboration 
and increased teacher capacity in all areas 
of technology through PLCs, are essential. 
“Teacher ownership, exposure, and consistency 
are critical for success.”
READING, WRITING, & THINKING: 
CROSS-CURRICULAR LITERACY 
INITIATIVES
KEY TOOLS THEY USE 
ST. MARTIN EAST ELEMENTARY
4	Chromebooks
4	ClassDojo 
4	ClassFlow
4 Flocabulary
4	Google Classroom
4	i-Ready
4	iPads
4	Lexia Learning
4	Newsela
4	Promethean boards
4	Renaissance Learning AR
4	Smart TVs
Above: A third-grade classroom at St. Martin East Elementary is transformed into a waffle house as students 
work on math standards and a related writing project.

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  41
WORKING HARD AT  
THINKING HARD
Thanks to Common Core, “students can’t 
just regurgitate what they read anymore,” 
says educational specialist Lisa Tanner. Even 
struggling students in Tanner’s special ed ELA 
classes at Walnut High School in Los Angeles 
County are learning to analyze, infer, reflect, 
extrapolate, discuss, and cite supporting text. 
Tanner’s students benefit from two-class 
block periods, one of which is dedicated to 
individualized instruction using LANGUAGE! 
Live, an intensive intervention program for 
grades 5–12, and the other to direct instruction. 
It’s a comprehensive, research-based program, 
Tanner says, that teaches all the components 
of being a reader, writer, and thinker so 
that students have a deeper foundation for 
transitioning successfully into general education 
classes. With these gaps closed, many students 
are also able to access other cross-curricular 
classes like history and science. 
BEYOND EXPECTATIONS
The literacy tools and strategies these students 
learn also give them the confidence necessary 
to achieve what they never thought possible. 
Because they’ve always found reading and 
writing such a struggle, many freshmen in 
Tanner’s classes have never thought of college as 
a realistic option. But when they take these key 
literacy skills into general education classes and 
realize they can be successful, many of them go 
on to complete two- and even four-year degrees. 
BUILDING CONFIDENCE AND 
REASONING SKILLS
How can teachers make writing more “hands on” 
and engaging for students while also teaching 
them close reading strategies in all content areas? 
At Corona Arts & Sciences Academy (CASA) in 
New York City, where “literacy is the life blood 
of education,” Principal Beth Hert, Assistant 
Principal Amanda Gardener, teacher April 
Taitt, and team are in their third year of using 
ThinkCERCA with their Integrated Co-Teaching 
(ICT) classes. When students have authentic 
texts at their individual reading levels, “everyone 
has an entry point into the conversation.”
Current eighth graders in the CASA ICT 
class, who have been working on ThinkCERCA 
for three years now, demonstrate “an 
overwhelming build in confidence with both 
their use of technology and their written and 
oral work as opposed to classes who are not 
using the program.” While Hert and her team 
see many students “who support their claims but 
don’t successfully use their reasoning skills to 
synthesize and show how the evidence supports 
their work . . . it just seems more natural for these 
students to support their claims with evidence 
and reasoning.”
CASA teachers are being supported and 
encouraged to design cross-curricular lessons, 
such as a science/ELA collaboration exploring 
GMOs. In addition, CASA students have further 
opportunities to expand their cross-curricular 
learning through new coding and website design 
clubs.
LEARNING IN THE FISHBOWL
Since CASA is a new and growing school, it’s a 
challenge to get new staff up to speed every year 
without overwhelming them with “just one more 
thing.” So they’ve created “lab classrooms” led 
by more experienced teachers. ICT teams will 
float through these “fishbowls” this December 
KEY TOOLS THEY USE 
WALNUT HIGH SCHOOL
4	Big Ideas
4	Chromebooks
4	Google Classroom 
4	Kahoot!
4	Khan Academy
4 LANGUAGE! Fourth Edition
4	Quizlet
4	LANGUAGE! Live
Walnut High School ELA students use their Chromebooks and LANGUAGE! Live to work on literacy skills.
CASA students collaborate on a project.

42   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
to see the work in context and demystify its 
implementation before engaging in their next 
session of professional development. “We have 
found in our practice that showing versus telling 
makes the practice come alive,” Hert says. 
THINKING, LEARNING, AND 
LEADING
Creighton (AZ) Elementary School District aims 
to inspire students to be adventurous thinkers, 
collaborative learners, and kind-hearted 
leaders. A successful capital override recently 
enabled the district to significantly expand 
their technology integration and infrastructure, 
building on a strong foundation of pioneering 
work in technology and flipped instruction, 
says Director of Curriculum, Instruction, and 
Assessment Dr. Eric Dueppen.
Using tech-forward materials including 
McGraw-Hill Education’s Wonders (K–5) and 
StudySync (grades 6–8), the district is seeing 
increased reading achievement and engagement 
among all students. Students, particularly those 
in grades 6–8, are participating in deeper, more 
scholarly cross-curricular discussions sparked 
by engaging materials on current topics from 
StudySync TV and Blasts. Teachers are also 
finding these quality, vetted materials helpful 
for fostering discussions and supporting 
instructional design across the curriculum. 
CURRICULUM AND IT PARTNERSHIPS
In any implementation, Dueppen says, it’s 
important to build an “interconnected, 
interdependent” team including both 
instructional and IT leaders. “They need each 
other very much,” he says. Other key components 
include a “focused but high-level vision and an 
open-ended process that encourages creativity 
but also formulates a clear plan with goals and 
benchmarks,” in addition to including student 
voice as much as possible. 
“It’s important to ensure that layers of 
PD and time for teachers to learn about the 
technology and what it can do are built into the 
implementation timeline,” says Chief Academic 
Officer Dr. Sue Pederson. Integrating ISTE 
standards into ELA and math curriculum 
at all levels has also been key in helping the 
district determine how to leverage the power of 
technology to meet their goals.
COMMUNITY INVESTMENT AND INVOLVEMENT
At a recent Community Town Hall event co-led 
by students with Superintendent Dr. Donna 
Lewis, students shared examples of work they’ve 
done using technology. The conversations 
around the tables between community 
stakeholders and students, Dueppen says, “led 
to a deeper understanding of what’s happening 
in our district” and fostered leadership and 
relationships as these collaborative learners 
shared their knowledge. 
SHOWCASING LITERACY  
AND CREATIVITY
THE CHALLENGE
Last year, the large and diverse Hillsborough 
County (FL) School District set out to create 
a literary event that would motivate students 
in over 225 schools and across all grade levels 
to read great books, to make cross-curricular 
connections by responding creatively to these 
books, and to use technology in meaningful and 
creative ways.
THE SOLUTION
An inclusive and representative cross-
curricular team of people from across the 
district collaborated to create and plan the 
inaugural Student Literacy and Media (SLAM) 
Showcase. Students read books from grade-
level Florida award nominated lists, created 
a diverse array of projects in the two different 
categories (2D and video creative expression), 
and presented them at their schools’ SLAM 
showcase events. Schools then selected 
READING, WRITING, & THINKING
KEY TOOLS THEY USE 
CASA
4	BrainPOP
4	Edperformance
4	Engrade
4	G Suite
4	iPads
4	Kahoot!
4	Khan Academy
4	Laptops
4	MasteryConnect
4	Newsela
4	Plickers
4	Promethean boards
4	ThinkCERCA
KEY TOOLS THEY USE 
CREIGHTON ESD
4	Explain Everything
4	G Suite
4	Seesaw
4	StudySync
4	Wonders
Third-grade students at Biltmore Preparatory Academy in the Creighton Elementary SD collaborate on a 
project.

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  43
representatives to bring their work to the 
district-wide Con-style event at the Tampa 
Convention Center. 
“We were building the plane as we flew it,” 
says Kimberly DeFusco, Supervisor, Library 
Media Services 6–12. Sharing and sparking ideas 
across the district, through PLCs and Twitter 
and other social media outlets, was key to the 
collaborative process of showing educators how 
they and their students could contribute to this 
event. As John Milburn, Supervisor, Library 
Media Services K–5, says, “You make the best 
plan you can and implement it—and then all of 
these other connections open up.” This year’s 
event adds a 3D category, which will further 
expand the creative possibilities to include, for 
example, sculpture, robotics, and 3D prints.
THE POWERFUL RESULTS
While art teachers, for example, immediately 
saw natural opportunities for cross-curricular 
connections as students used a variety of media 
to respond creatively, other connections weren’t 
as obvious at first. At Davidsen Middle School, 
the Computer Applications for Business class 
realized that, since they were already using 
Office Mix, they could create book trailers. At 
Blake High School, a public magnet arts school, 
TV and film production majors wrote, cast, and 
directed trailers “as if that book were a movie.” A 
fifth-grade student at Schwarzkopf Elementary 
created a stop-motion-animation trailer for a 
book she enjoyed using iMovie. Her project was 
tweeted, retweeted, and eventually reached the 
author—who loved it, came to the event, and 
met her young fan. These organic connections, 
particularly with authors who responded with 
excitement to students’ creations, created “a 
powerful symbiosis” that has surprised and 
delighted both DeFusco and Milburn. See more 
at bit.ly/SLAMWEB
PASSIONATE EXPERTS
Students in the rural South Central (NE) 
Unified School District may live an hour and a 
half from Lincoln and two and a half hours from 
Omaha, but thanks to innovative and thoughtful 
educational leaders, a supportive school board 
and community, over a hundred business 
partners, access to University of Nebraska 
resources, and 1:1 devices with an array of rich 
digital resources, the world comes to them. 
Opportunities for cross-curricular learning 
experiences and college and career preparation 
abound here, and a 100 percent college 
acceptance rate and improved test scores across 
the board are only part of the story.
CELEBRATING SUCCESS
Through the Learning in Depth (LiD) program, 
which promotes critical thinking and deep 
knowledge acquisition, each elementary-school 
student studies a topic throughout their time 
in elementary school. Paraprofessional Sharon 
Radabaugh says students connect a passion 
for reading—fiction and nonfiction texts across 
subject areas—to their passion for learning 
about these topics. At a recent event, elementary 
students introduced their topics to their 
grandparents, who gave them three to six more 
questions or ideas for further research.
Quarterly celebrations of student work 
have included a rock concert, trips to museums 
and the movies, and more. And students are 
responding with overwhelming enthusiasm. No 
less than 100 percent have met their Accelerated 
Reader 360 goals over the past year. A shy girl 
who exceeded her goal by 400 percent was 
nervous but proud to be able to participate on 
stage in a “magic of reading” show. Another 
student, who initially was not interested in 
learning about cells, is extracting DNA from 
strawberries. 
EXPERTS IN THEIR FIELDS
High-school freshmen who choose to participate 
in the new NCAPS (Nebraska Center for 
Advanced Professional Studies) can choose from 
over 900 career options in nine different career 
KEY TOOLS THEY USE 
HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY
4	Animoto
4	HP devices
4	iMovie
4	Movie Maker
4	myON
4	Office 365
4	OneDrive
4	OneNote
4	PowerPoint
4	PowToon
4	Soundzabound
4	Tinkercad
4	Windows
Students at Essrig Elementary in 
Hillsborough County SD work on digital 
projects in the library media center.
Students from Hillsborough County SD’s 
Lockhart Magnet Creative Science Centre 
commemorate SLAM Showcase 2017.

44   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
pathways and develop a real-world project 
with a career mentor. Superintendent Randall 
Gilson explains that, with the goal of becoming 
an expert in their field, each student pursues 
this passion throughout high school following a 
design-thinking process. Students read, research, 
explore, and test their goals, culminating in a 
Shark Tank-like public presentation to parents, 
mentors, peers, and an industry panel. 
Tools like Renaissance Learning enable 
students to read with purpose, develop 
problem-solving skills, innovate, and develop an 
entrepreneurial mindset. Students take charge 
of their learning and teachers integrate core 
curriculum with students’ individual projects. 
Many students graduate with career experience 
and connections, college courses completed, and 
a deep knowledge of the process of following 
their passion to become an expert.
ALL BOOKS, ALL THE TIME
All students in the 114 elementary schools in 
the Wake County (NC) Public School System 
have 24/7 access to more than 11,000 leveled 
ebooks. Sherri Miller, Director of K–12 Literacy, 
says Big Universe gives teachers and students 
an incredibly rich resource of texts covering all 
topics in the curriculum, in a variety of genres. 
Big Universe addresses an important literacy 
shift, she says, as it “provides rich texts to allow 
students to read widely in text sets and build 
content knowledge around topics.” 
Third graders attending summer camps 
as part of North Carolina’s Read to Achieve 
legislation, created around engaging topics 
like sports and animals, also find resources for 
independent reading and research. Miller is 
reaching out to community organizations such as 
the Y and Boys and Girls Clubs, where students 
spend time outside of school, to raise awareness 
that students with a connected device can log in 
and continue reading any time.
A PARTNERSHIP
When Wake County adopted a new curriculum 
built on cross-curricular content, the OER 
EL Education, Miller turned to Big Universe 
for help. “They created our own Wake County 
bookshelves with texts around topics that align 
to the curriculum,” she says. “Students can go in 
and see their module bookshelf, and teachers can 
add to it. The resource provides students with 
texts at their fingertips to read independently at 
home and/or at school. Teachers can also use the 
texts within their instruction.”
THE DREAM
Miller’s vision is that one day every child waiting 
in a doctor’s office, at the laundromat, or in the 
car will reach for a parent’s device and, instead 
of a game, the book they’re reading will pop up. 
It will require a cultural shift, she admits, but the 
excitement being generated around reading at 
Wake County and other districts offers hope that 
dream could come true.
READING, WRITING, & THINKING
KEY TOOLS THEY USE 
SOUTH CENTRAL USD
4	Adobe Creative Cloud
4	Artsonia
4	Basecamp
4	CAD
4	G Suite
4	iPads
4	MacBook Airs 
4	Renaissance Learning
4	Scholastic’s Investigators
4	Schoology
At South Central USD, magician Jeff Quinn is joined on stage by an elementary student who exceeded her 
reading goal by 400 percent.
A Wake County elementary student reads an 
ebook on his iPad Mini.
KEY TOOLS THEY USE 
WAKE COUNTY
4	Big Universe
4	Chromebooks
4	Discovery Education
4	EL Education
4	G Suite for Education
4	iPad Minis
4	NC Wise Owl
4	SMART Boards
Students at a Wake County elementary school 
learn about rain forests.

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  45
Educators in eight countries, 47 states, and 
nearly 3,000 districts have experienced the 
power of using data to drive decision making. 
With BrightBytes, educators learn how to 
leverage big data in order to:
 
1
Offer 
the 
specific 
professional 
development your teachers need. “With 
BrightBytes data, we discovered that 
most of our districts needed to focus on digital 
citizenship skills. We created online modules 
to teach those skills, and made them available 
for free to every teacher.” 
—TEELA WATSON, DIRECTOR OF INSTRUCTIONAL SERVICES 
& DIGITAL LEARNING, TEXAS EDUCATION SERVICE CENTER 
REGION 11 (ESC 11)
 
2
Improve communications throughout all 
of your stakeholders. “Our districts are 
using BrightBytes data to show their 
school boards where they are with integration. 
It’s been critical to use clear, communicable 
data to identify challenges.” 
—T.W.
3
Make an immediate difference in a 
student’s life. “With the Early Warning 
module, we can identify a student at 
risk of dropping out and the specific issues 
immediately. With this information, we can 
determine the right interventions.” 
—JEFFREY LUKS, MANAGER, NORTHEASTERN (NY) REGIONAL 
INFORMATION CENTER (NERIC)
4
Target the appropriate intervention 
for each student. “The Intervention 
Management module helps schools 
look at inputs and outputs to determine 
which interventions have the most impact on 
students.” 
—J.L.
5
Identify students early for interventions or 
support. “By analyzing data from multiple 
sources, the Early Warning module 
provides easy-to-understand visualizations to 
help target specific students for support.”
—BRYAN FAIRBROTHER, EDUCATIONAL DATA SERVICES 
LEADER, MOHAWK (NY) REGIONAL INFORMATION CENTER
6
Change the trajectory of students’ 
lives before it’s too late. “The data is 
meaningful, actionable, impactful, and 
clear, so we can see the big picture and take 
action quickly. We can identify students who 
need help instantly.” 
—B.F.
 
7
Help 
teachers 
learn 
to 
integrate 
technology in a way that meets students’ 
expectations. “Teachers report using 
technology a lot, but students say the opposite. 
We have to provide the mindset and the training 
to support a big shift. We started a book series 
and were surprised by how many attended. One 
teacher spent the summer rethinking lesson 
plans.” 
—CHARLOTTE M. GOLDEN, DIRECTOR OF CURRICULUM & 
INSTRUCTION/EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGIES, CARBON LEHIGH 
(PA) INTERMEDIATE UNIT #21
 
8
See how initiatives can be aligned to 
improve the big picture. “Often, districts 
make decisions based on intuition. With 
the Technology & Learning module, we’ve 
been able to connect the dots to see how to 
achieve smaller initiatives. The data helps us 
learn how each initiative supports each other 
toward a common goal.” 
—LISA CALA RUUD, MANAGING COORDINATOR - 
INSTRUCTIONAL SERVICES, NORTHEASTERN (NY) REGIONAL 
INFORMATION CENTER (NERIC)
9
Validate a new initiative. “The data puts 
assumptions in check. There was a lot 
of resistance about blended learning 
from educators who assumed students didn’t 
have devices or Internet at home. After the 
BrightBytes survey, they discovered only a 
small percentage lacked access.”
—L.C.R.
10
Better understand your district’s 
digital equity. “The data serves as a 
jumping-off point for conversations. 
We found most students have devices at home, 
but many of them are shared. That data impacts 
the consistency we can apply instruction at 
home. A teacher needs to be intentional about 
using digital assets at home.” 
—DOUG RENFRO, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF LEARNING 
TECHNOLOGY AND LIBRARY SERVICES, METRO NASHVILLE 
(TN) PUBLIC SCHOOLS
1 
Ways BrightBytes Can 
Help You Turn Big Data into 
Big Benefits for Students
Turn Big Data into Big Benefits for Students!
From integration through analysis, 
BrightBytes is the industry’s leading end-to-
end data management solution. Learn more 
at brightbytes.net!
ADVERTORIAL
BrightBytes End-to-End Data Management Through Analysis
Seamless 
Integration
Educative 
Research
Engaging 
Analysis
Impactful 
Action
www.brightbytes.net

46   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
Q 
Let’s start with the basics. What is the 
problem that ClassLink is trying to 
solve?
We’re living in exciting times in pedagogy.  The 
genie is out of the bottle with regards to 
creation/delivery of learning resources through 
the Internet and low-cost Chromebooks 
and mobile devices. It’s a fantastic time for 
curriculum folks—almost overwhelming, 
actually. So many learning tools and resource 
choices! One of the downsides, however, of 
all these online resources, is that every one of 
them wants an individual login. Individual 
logins may have been feasible in the past, 
when most students and teachers had only a 
few logins to remember, but today, between 
their personal logins and all their school 
logins, it’s crazy to expect EVERYONE will 
remember ALL those logins. Students and 
teachers are drowning in trying to remember 
all those websites, logins, and passwords. 
And when they can’t remember them, it’s 
like putting padlocks on textbooks. All those 
online resources are locked up and accessing 
them becomes a frustrating waste of precious 
classroom time. That’s the problem.
Q
So what is ClassLink exactly?
ClassLink is a single sign-on (SSO) Web 
application. It lets you sign in one time, and 
on the screen are rows of one-click buttons 
that give you instant access to online tools and 
resources. Just click any of those buttons, and 
you are automatically taken to and signed in to 
that application. (SSO is the idea that you can 
sign in once to access everything that requires 
a sign-in.)
I’ve heard people call that screen a ‘portal,’ 
or a ‘dashboard,’ or a ‘desktop.’ You can call 
it whatever you like. We call it ‘ClassLink,’ 
and with it, students, teachers, administrators, 
even parents, can have a personalized 
screen of one-click buttons customized for 
them. We have buttons for online resources 
from companies like BrainPOP, Curriculum 
Associates, Discovery, HMH, McGraw, Pearson, 
Renaissance Learning.  I know I’m going to get 
in trouble for forgetting someone here… we 
have thousands. In fact, our library has over 
5,000 one-click buttons. So there’s an excellent 
chance we already have one-click buttons for 
all the tools and resources you need for your 
school.
Q
So it’s like a learning management 
system?
Nope. We get asked that sometimes. ClassLink 
is not an LMS. True LMSs do a great job of 
managing the entire learning workflow, from 
organizing and assigning content to collecting 
work, delivering assessments, and storing 
grades. We work with many of the great ones 
out there, including Blackboard, Canvas, 
Desire to Learn, Google Classroom, Schoology, 
etc. We don’t do what they do, and they don’t 
do what we do. Our goal is to make access to 
all digital resources, including the LMS, more 
straightforward. We specialize in single sign-on 
(SSO). School districts that use ClassLink tell 
us their LMSs are primarily to organize lessons 
and collect work.  They count on ClassLink for 
one-click sign-in for everything, not only the 
LMS and content resources, but productivity 
and internal business tools, too. They want 
one place to access everything, including 
the LMS, student information system (SIS), 
library databases and catalogs, email, teacher 
professional development resources, facilities 
management tools, back-office tools…really 
anything that requires a login.
Q
Is it similar to Clever?
We get asked that a lot of times. There’s 
certainly a bit of overlap in what they do and 
what we do, but there’s a world of difference 
in how our companies go about it and a bunch 
of things we offer that no one else does. Firstly, 
ClassLink has been specializing in improving 
access to learning resources since our founding 
almost 20 years ago. Over those many years, 
we’ve developed a good deal of insight and 
experience about how to connect students and 
teachers with their resources. We’ve gotten 
numerous awards for both our product and 
SINGLE SIGN-ON IN EDUCATION
A Model for Success
How ClassLink is paving the way for better access to digital learning resources
WITH BERJ AKIAN, CEO
Q&A
ADVERTORIAL

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  47
our services and our hearts are truly 
about making sure everyone wins—
not only the students and teachers 
but also the administrators and all 
the content and platform products 
to which we deliver one-click access. 
We know those tools and resources 
can help improve learning, and if 
we can help make them easier to 
access, we know the students and 
teachers will use them more. And 
that’s great for everyone! 
We also have witnessed the good 
and the bad that school data people deal with. 
They have to extract class enrollment lists from 
the student information systems and deliver 
them to the many companies that need them 
to create student logins (this is sometimes 
called ‘rostering or ‘provisioning’). The bad 
is manually creating individual lists for every 
company or using companies like Clever that 
keep your student data and charge fees to 
transport it using proprietary formats. The 
good is you keeping your data and delivering 
it using secure open data standards, without 
having to pay data access fees. We’re fans of 
the latter. When educators get frustrated with 
‘systems that don’t talk to each other,’ that’s an 
indicator of a place where we don’t have open 
data standards. Open data standards have to 
be how the education industry operates.
Q
I thought I heard ClassLink does file 
access too?
We do, and people love that part. Just like 
one-click access to websites, ClassLink gives 
you one-click access to school network folders 
and cloud drives like Google, Office 365, and 
Dropbox. It sounds like a small thing until you 
experience the ease of searching for, editing, 
and moving files among any cloud drive or 
school network drive. Imagine accessing all 
those drives from any device, like Chromebooks 
and iPads. It’s no secret that Google, Microsoft, 
and Apple don’t always play nice with each 
other. With ClassLink you can access all your 
drives from all your devices. I’ve had school 
district people say to me, ‘Why do only the 
kids get that? I need that too!’ and then I tell 
them, ‘You can have it.’ Students, teachers, and 
administrators can use ClassLink. 
Q
Is there any reporting in the system?
There is. We call it ClassLink Analytics. 
But before I tell people what’s in those 
screens I’d like to begin first with the ‘Why.’ 
(thank you, Simon Sinek!) Let’s say you’re 
a curriculum and instruction person. When 
you look at a custom ClassLink screen with 
all the one-click buttons, you are looking at a 
basket of tools and resources that represents 
a large investment in learning. Many of 
those tools cost money, and so there’s a real 
dollar investment there. I know some of those 
resources might be free, like Khan Academy, 
but I think you are likely still investing in them 
through professional development (PD). So 
even though you’re not paying for the product, 
you still have a true investment. Even for those 
resources that are free and have no PD costs, 
I say you might still have an investment, and 
that investment is ‘hope.’ By selecting and 
putting that resource on the screen for that 
student or teacher, you ‘hope’ there will be 
some benefit. So you have a big investment in 
resources no matter how you look at it. Here’s 
my question that relates to the ‘why’… Don’t 
you want to know utilization details of your 
investment? Wouldn’t you like some awareness 
about where, when, how much, by whom, 
and on what device those investments are 
being used? Today we mostly rely on hearsay 
and snowflake moments of poking heads in 
classrooms trying to catch evidence of resource 
usage. It’s funny to me that it’s almost 2018 
and we’re still doing that.  ClassLink Analytics 
gives you a clear and easy-to-understand usage 
picture of all your online resources.  
Q
Tell me about those login cards. What do 
you call them?
We call them ‘QuickCards,’ and yes, all 
you have to do is wave them in front of the 
computer, Chromebook, tablet, or phone 
camera, and you are automatically signed 
in. Funny story: it’s something I didn’t think 
much of when our R&D team first proposed it. 
Most of the school districts we work with have 
either Microsoft logins or use Google logins 
for everyone; sometimes they have both. So 
from the start, we gave the option to sign in to 
ClassLink using Microsoft or Google, or both. 
Life was good. When we turned on ClassLink 
for your school system, you didn’t have to 
introduce new logins for everyone. You could 
just tell everyone to use the network login they 
already knew, because who wants to learn 
even one additional login and password, right? 
Then Stan, our CTO, said we should offer 
more choices. He said we should 
let teachers create login cards (the 
size of a student ID card) that have 
a QR code so the very young or 
special-need students can just wave 
them in front of the computer or 
iPad camera and instantly login. No 
more spending 20 minutes trying 
to get the whole class of little ones 
signed in. At first, I didn’t think 
much of it, but wow, was I off. It 
turns out many teachers of little 
ones love the QuickCards. We went 
further, though. We created an ability to sign 
in with facial recognition; we call that ‘Faces,’ 
and the ability to use your cell phone to sign 
in to the computer in front of you; we call that 
‘Remote Login.’ Today all of these methods 
are being used, and educators like having 
options. I’ve heard the debate over and over 
about how ‘teaching kids how to remember 
and use a login is an important life skill’ and 
how ‘alternatives like QuickCards hamper 
the building of these important skills.’ Here’s 
what I say to those people: spend a day in a 
kindergarten classroom where the teacher has 
to get 30 kids with 25-character last names 
logged in. Tell that teacher she shouldn’t get to 
use QuickCards.
Q
OK, where can people get more 
information about ClassLink?
I always encourage people to check out the 
videos on classlink.com/videos and classlink.
com/case-studies. The videos that are on 
those pages do a great job of explaining in 
two minutes what it takes me 20 minutes to 
explain. There’s also plenty to read and a few 
guidebooks on the website too. Those are PDF 
documents that you can share.
I think we have plenty of helpful resources 
on our website and we can share PowerPoint 
decks and loads of other materials. In the end, 
school leaders want to talk with other school 
leaders, and preferably someone they know or 
in the same region. We understand, and it’s ok 
with us. Let us put you in touch with someone 
you know and trust who is working with us 
and hear the details from them. 
Of course, people can also email us at 
info@classlink.com, tweet us @classlink, or call 
us anytime at 1-888-963-7550.
This all sounds great. Thanks for sharing and 
always good talking to you, Berj. 
Thanks, Kevin, great talking to you too. 
ADVERTORIAL

48   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
FOR MORE OF THE LATEST PRODUCT RELEASES, VISIT US ONLINE AT TECHLEARNING.COM.
WHAT’S NEW K-12 carts
CARRIER 30 CART BY LOCKNCHARGE  
(www.lockncharge.com)
The Carrier 30 Cart features a 
compact design and comes with a 
lifetime warranty. Featuring 
a top-loading design, it allows 
students to access devices 
quickly and it takes just minutes to 
wire. A two-point locking system and 
heavy-duty steel construction protect 
the devices. The cart comes with an 
external charging display and power 
outlet to easily charge and monitor the 
status of the devices. The Carrier 30 Cart comes 
with Baskets that make deployment faster, safer, and more efficient. 
The Baskets can hold virtually any 13-inch device. The cart has a soft 
closing, sliding lid on top that makes it easy for teachers and students 
to access the Baskets within the cart. To accommodate larger devices, 
the cart has a three-level adjustable storage shelf that allows schools 
to store and charge devices up to 17-inches.
POWERGISTICS 
(www.powergistics.com)
Store and charge devices in less space with the 
PowerGistics 20-shelf wall-mounted towers. This 
tower will accommodate devices in the classroom, 
library, or media center. Device power bricks and 
cords are neatly secured and protected in the back 
spine while the steel door secures the devices 
with a keyed locking system. Towers can easily 
be mounted to any wall, making use of vertical 
space in the classroom while devices safely lie flat 
in their natural position, protecting them from 
spine and cord damage. The PowerGistics cable 
management system saves money in replacement 
cost as well as deployment time. Students can 
easily manage charging of their devices with an 
open vertical design for easy visual inventory 
and charging status. The open door concept allows for quick visual 
inventory of devices, while the steel door ensures security. 
SMARTMOUNT COLLABORATION CART WITH VERTICAL LIFT 
(www.peerless-av.com)
Peerless-AV’s new line of 
SmartMount Collaboration 
Carts with Vertical Lift 
(SR584VL2, SR584VL3) are 
ideal for education settings. 
Offering a maintenance-free 
design with no motors to 
service or replace, the vertical 
lift carts enable a virtually 
seamless interactive experience. Meeting the 
ADA Standards for Accessible Design, Section 308, Peerless-AV’s 
new vertical lift carts allow users to quickly and easily raise or lower 
a display to their preferred height or for wheelchair accessibility 
with the simple touch of a finger. The carts’ mobile solution uses 4” 
lockable casters, corner bumpers to prevent damage to walls and 
doors, integrated handles to help maneuver the cart, and an extension 
cord wrap for fast deployment. 
CHARGE ‘N ROLL 15-BAY PORTABLE CHARGING STATION 
(www.hamiltonbuhl.com) 
Charge ‘N Roll is a convenient, 
compact, durable storing and 
charging cart for tablets and mobile 
phones. With its custom foam interior 
slots and cover, Charge ’N Roll safely 
and securely stores and transports 
up to 15 tablets, sized up to 9.4” x 
6.67”x 0.24”. The number doubles 
to 30 when storing mobile phones 
only. Designed to make charging 
easy, Charge ‘N Roll’s whisper-quiet 
fan ventilates and cools the unit for optimal usability. Built for easy 
mobility, Charge ‘N Roll has a rugged tough exterior, two easy-glide 
K-12 CARTS
Today’s K-12 classrooms continue to host a wide variety of tablets, laptops, and 
Chromebooks, making charging carts an essential component of any 1:1 or BYOD 
program. What follows are some of the latest offerings. 

Innovate learning.
TRANSFORM the future.
The 2018 TCEA Convention & Exposition 
empowers educators at all levels with 
exciting new ideas and best practices for 
engaging students and innovating teaching 
and learning. By providing you with the 
latest in learning strategies and educational 
technology tools, we’ll help you transform 
learning so your students are equipped to 
transform our future.
This year, TCEA will showcase over a thousand sessions 
for educators to choose from, so you can discover exciting 
new ways to implement technology and enhance learning 
in your school or district.
Make your plans today! Register now.
February 5–9   |   Austin, Texas   |   convention.tcea.org   |   #TCEA
Who Attends:
• District and Campus Administrators
• Curriculum and Instructional Leaders
• Classroom Teachers
• Librarians/Media Specialists 
• Technology Leadership
• Ed Tech Supporters
• Education and Technology 
Change Agents
8,000+ 
ATTENDEES
1,000+
SESSIONS
5
DAYS
450+ 
EXHIBITORS

50   |  DECEMBER 2017/JANUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
wheels, and a retractable pull handle. With four secure latch locks (two of which are padlock-capable), 
Charge ‘N Roll makes an ideal transporting, storing, and charging case cart for schools. 
TECHGUARD CONNECT 
(bretford.com/connect)
Introducing TechGuard Connect from Bretford, a 
secure charging locker featuring Bretford Connect, 
the cloud-based portal with real-time locker 
management. Remotely access locker stats, unlock 
bays, and view a full audit trail through data logging. 
Select from RFID or keypad user access, wired 
or wireless data, and  AC or USB power options. 
TechGuard Connect, with its intuitive smart 
platform, Bretford Connect, allows IT teams greater flexibility to manage entire fleets of lockers from 
one central management platform. And, because it is scalable, it can be added to and updated at any 
time. Bretford Connect’s cloud-based service allows schools to take TechGuard Connect off of their 
networks and operate on the go, giving them greater flexibility to manage fleets of devices.
CDI’S MOBILAB SMART CHARGE CART – SC33 BY EDUGEAR 
(https://goo.gl/GjVGa4)
CDI’s mobiLAB SC33 charging cart by eduGear supports 
schools’ 1:1 initiatives. The cart can hold up to 33 devices that are 
14 inches in size. Designed for Chromebooks and Notebooks, it 
features slide-out shelves, smart charge technology, 90-degree 
mounted power outlets to accommodate various adapters, a 
convenient cable management solution, and a small footprint. It 
also comes with wheels, bringing both mobility and convenience 
to the classroom. This cart’s second-generation smart charge technology protects the Chromebooks and 
Notebooks while ensuring the quickest charge. Slide-out shelves make placing and removing devices 
easier and safer. The cart’s small footprint (29 inches wide, 24.33 inches deep, and 40.75 inches high) 
means it takes up less valuable real estate in the classroom. It is UL-certified and includes a lifetime 
warranty on parts and a limited three-year warranty on electrical components.
PREMIUM TECH TUB2 WITH WALL MOUNT  
(www.copernicused.com)
The Wall Mounted Tech Tub is one of the newest members 
of the Tech Tub2 family. This new bracket is sold as a kit 
with a Tech Tub2 that holds six devices, or separately to 
use with previously purchased Tech Tubs. It puts device 
charging up and out of the way and is designed to hold six 
iPads, Chromebooks, or other tablets. The low profile steel 
wall bracket folds away when not in use and offers a versatile 
hole pattern for mounting to brick, studded walls or other 
surfaces. Unlike other wall-mounted storage options, the Tech Tub2 Wall Mount allows for the devices 
to be up and out of the way, or they can simply be unlocked from the bracket and moved throughout the 
classroom or school. The Wall Mounted Tech Tub2 is also useful in 1:1 situations; by placing several 
around the classroom, deployment bottlenecks can be reduced.
K-12 carts
AD INDEX
COMPANY	
PAGE
Boxlight	
33
Bretford Manufacturing	
9
BrightBytes	
45
Canon	
11
Casio	
23
ClassLink	
46-47
CoSN	
35
Curriculum Associates	
52
Hall Research	
25
McGraw-Hill Education	
7
Mentoring Minds	
17
MiPro	
29
Peerless-AV	
13
PowerGistics	
5
Promethean	
21
Sharp	
37
Spectrum Industries	
2
Tab Pilot	
19
TCEA	
49
Tech & Learning Live	
51
Texthelp	
31
Voyager Sopris Learning	
15
ON DEMAND
Check out the following resources from 
our partner sites:
WEBINARS
Fostering Skills for Successful Learning 
in a Blended Environment
Sponsored by: itslearning
 
Mobile Device Management – Strategies 
for Success
Sponsored by: School Dude
 
Motivating Struggling Adolescent 
Readers: Try Relevance and Success
Sponsored by: Voyager Sopris Learning
 
Solving the Digital Equity Puzzle
Sponsored by: Comcast Business
Leading and Learning: Collaborative 
Leadership for K-12 Education
Sponsored by itslearning
Check techlearning.com for updates

Thank you to Frisco I.S.D. for  
hosting Tech & Learning Live!
From Adam Phyall’s keynote to our first EdTech Poetry Slam,  
T&L Live Texas was a great day of learning and networking!
Join us for T&L Live in Boston, April 27, and Chicago, May 11. 
Learn more at  www.techlearning.com/events

Personalized, engaging 
instruction for every student
i-Ready places each student into a personalized learning path based on  
individual assessment data, creating a tailored experience for every learner.
i-Ready.com/Tour

