Hubert B. Keller 
Wolf-Dieter Pilz 
Bernd Schulz-Forberg 
Christian Langenbach
Technical Safety –
An Attribute of
Quality 
An Interdisciplinary Approach
and Guideline

Technical Safety – An Attribute of Quality

Hubert B. Keller
• Wolf-Dieter Pilz
Bernd Schulz-Forberg
• Christian Langenbach
Technical Safety –
An Attribute of Quality
An Interdisciplinary Approach and Guideline
123

Hubert B. Keller
Institute of Applied Computer Science
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe
Germany
Wolf-Dieter Pilz
Former Airbus Defence and Space
Gerolsbach
Germany
Bernd Schulz-Forberg
Former Federal Institute for Materials
Research and Testing (BAM)
Berlin
Germany
Christian Langenbach
Program Directorate Space Research
and Technology
German Aerospace Centre (DLR)
Cologne
Germany
ISBN 978-3-319-68624-0
ISBN 978-3-319-68625-7
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68625-7
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017954286
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or
for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Supporting Organizations and People
The authors would like to express their gratitude to people and organizations who
support this book.
The following persons contributed own textual and editorial inputs for the VDI
(Association of German Engineers) committee “Technical Safety”:
Eschenfelder, Dieter, Dipl.-Ing., Düsseldorf
Gelfort, Eicke, Dr. rer. nat., Köln
Graßmuck, Jochem, Dipl.-Ing., Berlin
Grünberg, Jürgen, Prof., Dr.-Ing., Hannover
Hansen, Michael, PD Dr.-Ing. habil., Hannover
Keller, Hubert B., Dr.-Ing., Karlsruhe
Kunde, Michael, Berlin
Langenbach, Christian, Dr.-Ing., München
Lemiesz, Dieter, Dr.-Ing., Ratingen
Pilz, Wolf Dieter, Dipl.-Ing., Gerolsbach (Chairman)
Rath, Robert, Dr. iur., Berlin
Schulz-Forberg, Bernd, Dr.-Ing., Dir. u. Prof. a.D., Berlin (Deputy Chairman)
Wanduch, Volker, Dipl.-Ing., Düsseldorf
Wilpert, Bernhard, Prof. Dr. phil. Dr. h.c. †
Wingender, Hans-Jörg, Dr. phil. nat., Mömbris
These corresponding companies, institutions and authorities supplied valuable
contributions to the VDI committee “Technical Safety”:
Bayerische Motoren Werke AG (BMW), München
Brandenburgische Technische Universität (BTU), Cottbus/Senftenberg
Bundesanstalt für Materialforschung und -prüfung (BAM), Berlin
Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie (BMWi), Berlin
Eisenbahn-Bundesamt (EBA), Bonn
Gesamtverband der Deutschen Versicherungswirtschaft e.V., Berlin
Katholische Universität Eichstätt-Ingolstadt (KU), Eichstätt
Öko-Institut e.V., Freiburg / Darmstadt/Berlin
Universität Stuttgart, Stuttgart
v

We would also like to express our gratitude for supporting us to:
Mrs. Jennifer Sweety Johnson, Mr. Thomas Ditzinger and Mr. Dieter Merkle (all
Springer Verlag Berlin Heidelberg)
Dr. Martin Wesson (Berlin), Mr. Karl-Heinz Höppner (Dipl.-Graﬁk-Designer
AGD) and Mrs. Sabine Scheer (KIT-IAI, Karlsruhe)
Without the support of the following companies and institutions, we would not
had been able to realize this book:
Ada Deutschland e.V., Karlsruhe
Bundesanstalt für Materialforschung und -prüfung (BAM), Berlin
German Aerospace Center (DLR e.V.), Köln
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe
The VDI committee “Technical Safety” was initiated in 1985 by
Reinhard Menger, Dr.-Ing., Director of VDI, Düsseldorf
Gustav Wagner, Dr. rer. nat., Curator of VDI (and member of the Supervisory
Board of Robert Bosch GmbH), Stuttgart
after the unanimous decision of a high-ranking staffed ad hoc committee, which
was charged to develop a promising and forward-looking interdisciplinary mission
for the VDI.
vi
Supporting Organizations and People

Contents
1
Preamble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Development of Technical Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Interdisciplinary Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1
Need for a Safety Methodically Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
The Need for Action in Safety Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.2
Introduction to the Application Area Safety
Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.3
Reasons for this Publication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.4
The General Framework for Technical Safety . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.5
Legal Basis of Technical Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.6
Ethical Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Generating Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Principles of Safety Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
Procedures for an Interdisciplinary Safety-Methodical
Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.3
Implications of a Safety Methodically Concept . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3
Limits of Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.3.1
Socially Accepted and State-Deﬁned Limits . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.3.2
Unattainability of Absolute Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.3.3
The Understanding of Risk. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.3.4
Factual Relationship Between Risk, Safety Engineering
and Technical Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.3.5
Safety-Engineering Feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.4.1
Limits of Veriﬁability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.4.2
Learning as a Continuous Task. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
3.4.3
Controlling Technical Safety in the Product Life Cycle . . .
64
vii

3.5
Social Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
3.5.1
Prevention of Safety-Critical Failures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
3.5.2
Communication with the Public About
Technical Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
3.6
Recommendations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
3.6.1
The Research Landscape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
3.6.2
Education and Training Options of the Universities . . . . . .
91
3.6.3
Thematic Focuses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
3.6.4
Emergency Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
3.6.5
Internationalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
4.1
Understanding of the Term Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
4.1.1
Safety as a Legal Term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
4.1.2
The Term “Technical Safety” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
4.1.3
Technical Safety as a Requirement for Product Design
and Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
4.2
Introduction to Interdisciplinary Safety Engineering . . . . . . . . . . .
102
4.2.1
Organization and Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
4.2.2
Systematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107
4.3
Generating Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
4.3.1
Safety Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
4.3.2
Implementation of the Safety Concept. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127
4.3.3
Software-Based Functionality and Human Factors . . . . . . .
149
4.3.4
Supportive Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
154
4.4
Safety-Compliant Design in Civil Engineering
and Process Plant Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
170
4.4.1
Notes to the Flow Chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
172
4.4.2
Deﬁnitions with Regard to the Flow Chart . . . . . . . . . . . .
175
5
Proposal of the VDI “Technical Safety” Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . .
177
6
Summary—Lessons Learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
179
VDI “Technical Safety” Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
181
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
183
viii
Contents

Chapter 1
Preamble
Characteristic of our history as human beings is our development and use of tools
and systems which function reliably and are controllable as regards “technical
safety”—ranging from simple devices such as hammers and shovels to complex
systems such as aircraft and mainframe computers. “technical safety” is to be
regarded as an integrated part of the stipulated function (target function). This calls
for a holistic way of thinking and a systematic approach over the complete life cycle
of products and systems. Here, we must go back to the established structures:
“generally accepted rules of technology”, the “state of the art” and the “state of
science and technology”. “technical safety” is an inherent quality attribute whose
characteristics must be created systematically.
At the present time every technical ﬁeld, be it civil engineering, transportation
systems, chemical engineering, energy technology, aeronautical engineering, plant
construction, mechanical or electrical engineering, has its own system of rules for
technical safety. Application-speciﬁc safety concepts are developed for conception,
deﬁnition, development and engineering, production and integration. They contain
detailed building regulations, operating procedures, operating regulations and
maintenance instructions, as well as requirements relating to retroﬁtting and dis-
posal. Even the supervision of the operation by the operating company itself and the
appropriate supervisory authority is prescribed in application-speciﬁc rules and
standards. This means that there is no safety concept which covers all ﬁelds of
application, i.e. interdisciplinary validity. Furthermore, new technologies require
and have to be provided with additional rules and standards. In the light of this
situation and its previous involvement in the creation of the modern standard of
technical rules and safety supervision, the Association of German Engineers
(Verein Deutscher Ingenieure—VDI) has seen the need to take action.
The beginning of the 1970s saw the emergence of sociopolitical visions which
appeared to make a “risk-free” life possible for the population. The common focus
of this development was public discussion of large-scale and technologically
innovative facilities, whose safety or safety capability above all was presented as
questionable. Particularly in the case of technological innovations, there was more
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
H.B. Keller et al., Technical Safety – An Attribute of Quality,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68625-7_1
1

talk about potential risks and—in some cases only ostensibly—undesirable side
effects than about the actual beneﬁts to the population or economic and social
opportunities. As a result, it was no longer the technical assessment alone which
was important in making decisions about the safety of such installations but,
increasingly, a political and legal assessment as well. The reports of technical
experts consulted also revealed the detrimental situation in modern safety engi-
neering, which provides concepts whose particular form depends on the ﬁeld of
application. Even the standards produced by DIN, the German Institute for
Standardization, provide a remarkable number of different deﬁnitions for “safety”
and “technical safety”.
About thirty years ago, the European Union (EU) commenced its efforts aimed at
implementing the free trade of consumer and capital goods. Bound up with this was
the question as to how safety could be ensured for the people using the goods. The
set of instruments for safety supervision and approval, whose character at this time
was mostly nationally oriented, tended to place obstacles in the way of trade rather
than prevent them. With its “New Approach” and “Global Approach”, the
European Commission, therefore, created a catalogue of measures by which a high
degree of independence from national bodies could be achieved on the operative
level. The instrument for this was the Declaration of Conformity which, according
to the resolution of the European Council, could be issued by either the manu-
facturer itself or so-called notiﬁed bodies. The level of safety itself is laid down here
in the European directives and predominantly speciﬁed in detail in mandated
technical standards. Opinions vary as to the effectiveness of this catalogue of
measures. It has clearly already been recognized that both the “New Approach” and
the “Global Approach” have considerable weaknesses and are partly a long way
behind the effectiveness of the system they replaced. These weaknesses, which at
the time of introduction were already known to the experts dealing with safety
issues, are diverse and being tackled by the European Commission, and the extent
to which these shortcomings can be comprehensively remedied remains to be seen.
Over and above the product-related directives, there is the “General Product Safety
Directive” 2001/95/EG dated 03.12.2001, which requires all products being put on
the market within the European Economic Area to be safe. Precisely how this is to
be ensured does, however, call for further regulation.
In both aeronautical engineering and space technology, the New Approach
system is still supplemented by mandatory international or European airworthiness
certiﬁcation schemes or ﬁnal system tests. Similarly, the European Interoperability
Directives introduced in the railways sector stipulate that, when the national safety
authority grants authorization for putting into service, the new concept system
should be supplemented by a ﬁnal system inspection. The same applies in the
process plant sector and, indeed, in other ﬁelds as well.
This fragmentation into a large number of “safeties” is increasingly becoming a
problem since only a few users are able to look beyond their own area of appli-
cation to recognize commonalities as a whole. In addition, different interpretations
of what is required in technical safety are more and more frequently being settled
legally, which in turn can lead to extraneous interference in the technical ﬁeld.
2
1
Preamble

In 1987, the VDI convened a committee to tackle this problem. This committee
of experts agreed in favour of developing a safety concept which could be used on
an interdisciplinary basis. In 1999, following a resolution of the Scientiﬁc Advisory
Board, the VDI “technical safety” Committee was established. The committee was
given the task of working out the hidden commonalities of the safety concepts in
the various specialist technical ﬁelds and presenting a standardized practical guide
applicable to all technical ﬁelds. On 27.09.2013, the draft was intensively discussed
in a technical meeting with recognized safety experts from the most varied spe-
cialist ﬁelds. The results of this discussion have been incorporated in this
publication.
It consists of:
• the preamble,
• the development of technical safety,
• the interdisciplinary approach,
• interdisciplinary safety guideline,
• proposal of the VDI ‘Technical Safety’ Committee and
• summery-lessons learned
1
Preamble
3

Chapter 2
Development of Technical Safety
Technology in the sense of tool developments as aids for humanity has played a
central role for millennia and permanently advanced social development. In this
process, technical failure was fatalistically tolerated for a long time. Nevertheless,
already in 1810, Napoleon issued a decree stating that state ofﬁcials were to carry
out the safety inspection of boilers: this introduced and codiﬁed a turning away
from the acceptance of accidents and catastrophes as twists of fate.
The markedly rapid progress of industrialization in the nineteenth century called
for a comprehensive adaptation of the organizational structures of the technology
used in many different ways in society and the economic system. The roots of this
are to be found in the Royal Commercial Institute of Berlin, amongst others, and go
back as far as 1846. Members of the Academic Association Hütte [Akademischer
Vereins Hütte] in Berlin founded the Association of German Engineers (VDI) on 12
May 1856, in Alexisbad (Harz Mountains). Ten years later, in 1866, the VDI
prompted the foundation of pressure vessel (steam boiler) supervisory associations
as forerunners of today’s Technical Supervisory Associations (Technischer
Überwachungsvereine–TÜV). In addition, parallel developments, such as those
from Mannheim and Bavaria, were taken up and incorporated.
A glimpse into the Bavarian economy of that time makes clear the extent of this
development: not a single one of the 1301 pressure vessels in the meantime suffered
damage following the introduction of supervisory measures. In the USA, on the
other hand, no fewer than 906 of the 2000 or so pressure vessels in Boston alone
exploded during a ten-year period (1867–1877).
In May 1917, the VDI appeared again as co-founder of the “Standardization
Committee for Mechanical Engineering” (today, DIN). Since then, DIN standards
have also served as the measure of ﬂawless technical performance and are, there-
fore, also important within the legal system. These achievements are also of par-
ticular importance to the quality characteristic “technical safety”. Nevertheless, it
should never be forgotten that the safety level of technical products which has
become so taken for granted today is based on the wealth of experience which has
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
H.B. Keller et al., Technical Safety – An Attribute of Quality,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68625-7_2
5

systematically documented the progressive development of technology over the
past centuries. It is common knowledge amongst engineers that:
• 100% safety is unrealizable,
• the quality characteristic “technical safety”—like every other quality charac-
teristic—must be “designed into”, “developed into” and “built into” the tech-
nical product in question via an engineering process,
• the quality characteristic “technical safety” requires a topic-oriented technical
management system (the more complex the structure, the greater the demands
on management),
• technical safety constitutes a legal claim whose fulﬁlment requires a mandatory
proof and
• the speciﬁcation of vague legal terms such as “state of the art” does not sufﬁce in
itself to guarantee safety. It is necessary but not sufﬁcient.
Developments in law and technology move in different spheres and at different
speeds. In order to create a dependable connection here, vague legal concepts are
used in laws and other statutory regulations. When technical safety (the safety of
technical products and equipment) is mentioned in laws and legal regulations it is
always by “indirect reference” to so-called “general clauses” and “vague legal
concepts”. These vague legal concepts are then: “generally accepted sound engi-
neering practice”, the “state of the art” and the “state of scientiﬁc and technical
knowledge”, together with other special forms such as “recognized good engi-
neering practice” and the “state of safety technology”. According to the prevalent
legal opinion, which the leading technology lawyers Prof. Dr. Fritz Nicklisch
(mainly civil law) and Prof. Dr. Peter Marburger (mainly public law) represent and
which has been and will be published widely, legislators and competent authorities
employ these “vague legal concepts”. In case of need (regarding technology),
experts with the relevant qualiﬁcations must render these concepts in speciﬁc terms,
provided the standards to which reference is made can be interpreted or are inad-
equate on their own. In this case, these vague legal concepts are made so concrete
that they become accessible for the application of the law (see [1]). It is part of the
standard practice of appointed and sworn experts in this regard that, when making
the vague legal concepts of “good engineering practice” and the like concrete, they
refer ﬁrst of all to the rules of technology, in other words to technical rules such as
DIN standards, VDI regulations and, increasingly nowadays, standards issued by
CEN and ISO. These standards are prepared by experts from manufacturers, con-
sumer organizations, commercial enterprises, universities, insurance companies,
public authorities and testing institutes which have an interest in the speciﬁc subject
of standardization, in other words, the so-called “interested circles”. They send their
experts to a relevant committee, DIN for example. Standards, like other technical
rules, are created by consensus: the delegated experts agree on the contents with the
aim of achieving a common understanding regarding the subject of standardization.
Technical rules are one of the principal items of reference for ensuring technical
products and equipment are safe when they are put on the market and use is made
of their function. This procedure is standard for existing products and systems.
6
2
Development of Technical Safety

Should there be major expansions of what is technically available and even further
to fundamental innovations, reference to product standards alone will not sufﬁce to
ensure technical safety. In this case, the relevant state of the art or state of scientiﬁc
and technical knowledge must be determined and applied. Guidance in the form of
standards is becoming increasingly available even for these processes.
Once again it was the VDI which, at the beginning of the 1970s, took up the
technical application of probabilistic parameters and prepared them for engineering
use. The VDI handbook on reliability [2], ﬁrst published nearly twenty years ago,
together with its standards VDI 4001 ff., provides a comprehensive introduction to
modern reliability engineering and also renders it practicable. It thus contributes to
making sufﬁciently manageable the technical problems, costs and risks which can
arise from the failures in the functions of technical products and systems that can
never be entirely ruled out. Its application extends to all those areas of engineering
in which problems of environmental resistance (resistance to environmental inﬂu-
ences), lifetime and service life, functional reliability, maintainability and mainte-
nance, availability and also safety are to be expected, have already occurred and
need to be rendered manageable. They are areas in which technically sensible,
appropriate precautionary measures are required in project planning, design and
construction, manufacturing and system integration, etc. The globally recognized
achievements of modern aerospace technology are proof of the exceptionally high
level of performance of these probabilistic methods in engineering.
However, even today it may be observed that probabilistic approaches are being
simpliﬁed in a way which is scientiﬁcally impermissible. Examples of this are
taking redundancies alone into consideration (but ignoring the corresponding fail-
ure probabilities) and equating the (stochastic) “mean time between failures
(MTBF)” with the (deterministic) “lifetime”. In the latter case, it is suggested that
function failure can be excluded by redundant functions or even that spontaneous
failure can be prevented by “diversitary function elements”. In this context, it is
worrying that such simpliﬁcations can even be brought to application when tech-
nical safety is supposed to be the objective.
In engineering, the indispensable basis of any probabilistic method is the sys-
tematic determination of all failure modes of functions and function elements.
However, behavioural analyses of this kind (e.g., FMEA: Failure mode and effect
analysis and also FMECA: Failure mode, effect and criticality analysis) are also
suitable ways of determining (failure) risks. Nevertheless, it is increasingly the case
nowadays that the successful and centuries-old routine practice of making calcu-
lated risks manageable is now all too readily dispensed with. To an ever greater
extent, the generation of technical safety is being replaced more and more by risk
analyses or risk assessments. In such cases, an engineering-based procedure is
terminated prematurely or even entirely neglected. This enables the creation of
scenarios in which technical innovations—often involving an incredibly high outlay
in the media and political spheres—are prematurely disqualiﬁed for safety-related
reasons without there being the remotest reason for casting doubt from the start on,
or denying completely, the safety to be achieved in the future.
2
Development of Technical Safety
7

At the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, deliberation at the VDI resulted in
the approach presented in this publication and in a guideline showing how the
hidden commonalities in the safety-related knowledge available can be made
useful for technological changes and innovations. This concept enables the use of
all safety-related knowledge and good engineering practice not only for time-tested
but also for innovative technologies. This, above all, includes the realization that the
demand for 100% safety—unfortunately still even today—counts as one of the
most persistent misconceptions in the history of technology. Engineering and, in
particular, safety technology must take this realization into consideration. In our
world, there is neither an “absence of danger” nor any “risk-free areas”. However,
well-founded knowledge relating to technical safety need no longer remain con-
ﬁned to separate application in individual ﬁelds of technology but is now available
even for comprehensive interdisciplinary use. With the publication of DIN 31004-1
“Terminology in Safety Technology—Basic Terminology”1 the term “safety” is
deﬁned in a technical regulation on the basis of the concept of “risk”, which is a
probabilistic parameter. Probabilistic concepts thus made their ﬁrst entry into
classic safety technology, which until that time was chieﬂy characterized by legally
motivated causal considerations (if-then relationships). At the time of publication of
this standard, safety concepts based on probability considerations had for several
decades already proved their value in the ﬁeld of aerospace engineering, which
resulted in a much higher level of safety there.
Every technical ﬁeld of application now has its own code of practice for tech-
nical safety and this is, following an accident, often very speciﬁcally expanded.
This large number of “safeties” is increasingly becoming a problem as only a few
safety experts can see the whole picture beyond the limits of their own sphere of
application. In addition, different interpretations of what is required regarding
technical safety are leading more and more often to legal disputes, which in turn
may result in conclusions that are inappropriate in the ﬁeld of technology. The
debate which started on the occasion of the annual politicians’ conference orga-
nized by the VDI main group “The Engineer in Profession and Society” in Trier on
10th and 11th september 1984 has been continued in many ways without any
solution being arrived at yet.
1The provisions of this standard are now to be found in DIN 820-12:2014-06 “Standardization
work; Part 12: Guideline for the inclusion of safety aspects in standards”.
8
2
Development of Technical Safety

Chapter 3
Interdisciplinary Approach
3.1
Need for a Safety Methodically Concept
3.1.1
The Need for Action in Safety Engineering
The last century was marked by epoch-making technological achievements. The
two world wars caused devastating destruction, but reconstruction also accelerated
the technical progress which, above all, characterized the years of rebuilding after
the Second World War. New technologies were developed and are being constantly
further developed. Worldwide air travel has long become a reality; space tech-
nology has become a productive branch of the economy, and microelectronics and
computer technology are now an indispensable part of private life. However, as a
result of this technological progress, the number of engineering ﬁelds has grown—
technical subjects are now taught in the technical universities and colleges whose
existence half a century ago was not even imaginable. Of course, safety technology
has also kept developing continuously parallel to technological progress although
speciﬁcally for the individual ﬁelds of engineering. One of the key reasons for this
application-oriented safety technology structured according to individual ﬁelds of
engineering is to be found in the German legal system since the legal basis for
safety technology is also structured according to engineering ﬁelds: construction
law, railways legislation, air trafﬁc legislation, atomic energy legislation and test
facilities legislation, to name just a few.
To date, the number of technical specialist ﬁelds has already increased to such an
extent that the total ﬁeld of technical knowledge would have become immense and
poorly manageable had not interdisciplinary management methods and system-
technical working procedures been introduced. Planning, tracking (monitoring) and
veriﬁcation are carried out with these methods in the various technical specialist
ﬁelds by following a holistic procedural concept. Over the last forty years, these
interdisciplinary management methods and system-technical working procedures,
grouped together under the term “interdisciplinary teamwork”, have found ever
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
H.B. Keller et al., Technical Safety – An Attribute of Quality,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68625-7_3
9

greater application. No major project, which today could cover many years, is now
undertaken without the input of a central project management system. With
increasing globalization, there is also a greater necessity for internationalized
project management with a multilingual capability and operating over national
borders. The world of technology does not seem to recognize borders any more.
However, these borders do exist, namely in the ﬁeld of safety engineering. Apart
from already existing European regulations (which are, however, principally sup-
posed to ensure the free movement of goods), the provisions of different national
legislation still apply here. What they all have in common is their assumption that
safety technology is structured on the basis of application-speciﬁc ﬁelds of
engineering.
As has already been mentioned, new sociopolitical ideas arose at the beginning
of the 1970s which appeared to make a “risk-free” life possible for citizens (see
Sect. 3.1) Thus, public debate was increasingly more concerned with conceivably
possible side effects than with the technical facility whose implementation process
needed to be managed in the best possible way. Ultimately, it was no longer a
technical but increasingly a legal body which had the ﬁnal say on the safety of the
affected facilities. It is problematic that the very exemplary standards issued by DIN
show a remarkable variety of different term deﬁnitions for “safety” and “technical
safety”.
Around twenty years ago, the European Union (EU) commenced its efforts
aimed at implementing the free movement of consumer and capital goods. Bound
up with this was the question as to how safety could be ensured for the people using
the goods. The instruments for safety monitoring and approval, whose character at
this time was mostly nationally oriented, tended to place obstacles in the way of
trade rather than preventing them. Therefore, the European Commission created
with its New Approach and Global Approach a catalogue of measures by which a
high degree of independence from national bodies was supposed to be achieved on
the operative level. The instrument for this was the Declaration of Conformity
which, according to the resolution of the European Union Council, could be issued
by either the manufacturer itself or a so-called Notiﬁed Body. The level of safety
itself is laid down in the European directives and generally partly speciﬁed in detail
in mandated technical standards. Opinions vary as to the ultimate effectiveness of
this catalogue of measures. It has clearly already been recognized that both the New
Approach and the Global Approach have considerable weaknesses and to some
extent are a long way behind the effectiveness of the system they replaced. These
weaknesses, which at the time of introduction were already known to the experts
dealing with safety issues, are diverse, and improvements are currently being made
by the European Commission. The “General Product Safety Directive” 2001/95/EG
applies over and above the product-related directives. This regulates that all
products being put on the market within the European Economic Area have to be
safe. Precisely how this is to be ensured does, however, call for further regulation.
In both aeronautical engineering and space technology, the New Approach
system is still supplemented, as before, by mandatory international or European
airworthiness tests or ﬁnal system tests. The European Interoperability Directives
10
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

introduced in the railways sector also stipulate in this way that, when the national
safety authority grants authorization for putting into service, the New Approach
system be supplemented by a ﬁnal system test.
There is, therefore, sufﬁcient need for a safety methodically holistic concept in
which the hidden commonalities of existing safety concepts (admittedly limited by
being application-speciﬁc) are joined together into an interdisciplinarily applicable
overall concept. The VDI has the interdisciplinary technical expertise to elaborate
and present such a safety methodically holistic concept.
3.1.2
Introduction to the Application Area Safety
Engineering
In their performance of public services, state bodies and institutions—in Germany
at least—had up to this point carried out safety-related veriﬁcation analyses and, in
this way, actively participated in the control of technical risks. The relevant EU
directives in the meantime envisage these safety-related veriﬁcations being
increasingly left to the free market and only monitored by the state. The expertise
required for this in the ﬁeld of technical safety, which was previously mostly the
concern of governmental agencies, must now be obtained on the free market. The
approach outlined in this VDI publication is intended to maintain and spread this
safety-related expertise by encouraging a safety methodically concept which, by
extensively referring to generally accepted technical regulations and deﬁned
objectives, offers a ﬁrm basis for engineering practice in the ﬁeld of safety engi-
neering. This safety methodically concept is equally applicable to the maintenance
and further development of existing ﬁelds of technology (e.g. civil engineering,
transportation systems, chemical process engineering, energy technology, aviation,
plant engineering and construction, mechanical engineering or electrical engineer-
ing) as to the conceptual design of innovative technologies and their controlled
safety-related development.
The term “technical safety” is understood as meaning that a technical system,
technical facility or product will fulﬁl its intended functions over a planned period
of time (if applicable, its planned lifetime) and, provided it is operated according to
regulations, will not injure or damage any objects of legal protection. This means
that neither persons nor property is injured or damaged in as far as the system, the
technical facility or the product can be responsible for this. Reliability of function
over the envisaged lifetime is not a necessary component of safety, provided loss of
function does not lead to an unsafe state.
In the context of discussing technology, safety means more than just technical
safety. In everyday speech, a person feels “safe” when he/she does not feel
threatened. This threat need not be existential in nature in any way. An impending
loss in the quality of life can already trigger a prejudice against technology. In a
liberal and afﬂuent society, a situation in which one’s own way of living is
3.1
Need for a Safety Methodically Concept
11

determined by others and the associated feeling of being dependent on conditions
not freely chosen (loss of autonomy) can result in aversive reactions in individual
groups when the subject of the limits of safety is raised.
On the one hand, the bases for decisions are more weakly developed here in
some of the engineering sciences, but also in the life sciences. On the other hand,
the public’s notions of safety are so broad that adequate acceptance can only be
achieved on the basis of a risk-minimization imperative—a limitation with an
accepted limiting risk. The expectations of the consumer are manifestly expressed
in the idea behind the purity regulations, which at least cover the immediate
necessities of life such as food, drinking water and air. Technologies, such as those
concerning preservation and processability, which infringe the purity regulations
while still offering clear beneﬁts, are only tolerated for as long as they do not
infringe legally stipulated contamination levels, provided these technologies are
being correctly employed (one example is “good farming practice”). The gap
between these levels and the higher health tolerance threshold can however be
several orders of magnitude. The rule applies to set permissible limit values as low
as necessary but as high as possible.
From this point of view, safety-related technical considerations must, in the
broader sense, also apply to the safeguarding of consumer expectations. Incidents
which result in threshold values being violated are perceived by the public in most
cases as an imminent threat to their physical integrity. Experience shows that the
reaction of state supervisory bodies strengthens this impression, especially when
there is insufﬁcient latitude for assessing the proportionality of the means for hazard
prevention.
In the main features of a general safety methodically concept, the particular form
of dealing with “residual uncertainty” (which is a standard concept or special
characteristic of the life sciences) cannot be ignored in discussions about the uses
and harms in risk management, but it is not examined in greater detail. Clariﬁcation
is needed that this is an interdisciplinary, scientiﬁcally based safety guideline. In the
interests of precise statements, the lines of argument and the terms used in this
publication have been borrowed from the engineering sciences.
3.1.3
Reasons for this Publication
Spectacular incidents and accidents with a great public impact repeatedly raise the
question of adequate safety in technical facilities. In such cases, there is a tendency
for some of the media to respond only to the event itself in their news reports but
also, at the same time, to rush to assign blame. There is a very common attitude of
quickly pointing the ﬁnger at a culprit responsible for the failure. Accordingly, there
will always be technical experts who support these assumptions as far as possible.
In the next step, the question is then immediately asked as to whether the laws,
statutory orders, monitoring requirements and sets of regulations are adequate to
ensure the expected level of safety.
12
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

This typical approach disregards the fact that
• there is no such thing as 100% safety, even though the limits of safety are
always to be observed,
• safety must be generated—in other words, developed and produced—before it
can be maintained and monitored during utilization, and
• complex circumstances do not in most cases allow the identiﬁcation of a
monocausal connection in incidents and accidents. Instead, there are often in the
implementation events, which are not taken into consideration, unknown
inﬂuences or previously unidentiﬁed chains of multiple inﬂuences which result
in damage.
Safety is, in most cases, created by applying relevant standards and codes of
practice and existing legal provisions. Safety concepts are developed with mathe-
matical models and analytical methods. Years of empirical experience gained
speciﬁcally in the most diverse application areas (civil engineering, transportation
systems, chemical process engineering, energy technology, aviation, plant con-
struction, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, etc.) are also integrated in
these concepts. This is one of the reasons why no uniform safety concept as yet
exists which spans all application areas.
The development, construction, design and manufacture of a particular technical
facility are thus determined by different safety concepts. Detailed operating
instructions, operating regulations and maintenance instructions are drawn up for its
operation and requirements formulated for retroﬁtting. Monitoring of operations by
the owner and the other bodies entrusted with monitoring is clearly regulated.
The conceptual design, development, manufacture, operation, decommissioning
and monitoring of technical facilities require in a particular way the skills of
engineers. The VDI addresses these issues with this publication ﬁrstly by presenting
to the specialist community the current situation regarding the safety of technical
facilities. In addition, problem areas are identiﬁed such as:
• legal appraisals, assessments and judgments which have a bearing on safety,
• unforeseeable events and chains of events leading to disturbances and failures of
technical facilities and
• the individual person as a developer, manufacturer, user, operator and moni-
toring agent who, although not working free of error himself/herself, never-
theless has a decisive inﬂuence on safety.
Recommendations for an interdisciplinary safety concept are derived from this as to
how the most diverse safety concepts must be designed and further developed in the
future and how the cooperation of all participants must be organized for this
purpose.
3.1
Need for a Safety Methodically Concept
13

3.1.4
The General Framework for Technical Safety
Insight into and understanding of the limits of technical safety derive from a
number of aspects, e.g. the probability of occurrence and expectation of damage,
failure, perception and risk, whose importance requires fundamental and binding
clariﬁcation. Technical safety is limited by the probability of damage occurring or,
depending on the case, the failure of a technical facility. The circumstances are
usually subsumed under the term “risk”. This is, however, a complex concept (see
Sect. 3.3.3) because it is modiﬁed by a very different and constantly changing
perception.
Dealing with risks which are insufﬁciently known or are not manageable poses a
problem, and difﬁculties also arise when markedly diverse opinions prevail
regarding the assessment of a risk. In such cases, the necessary precautions are
essentially a sociopolitical decision. Primarily taken into consideration are dangers
emerging from nature, the natural environment, the technical environment, human
inadequacy and mistakes:
• hazards from the natural environment may arise, for example, due to:
– climatic inﬂuences in all possible forms at the location (wind, snow, ice,
temperatures, etc.),
– physical inﬂuences (e.g. lightning strikes, earthquakes) and
– reduction in the resistances of construction components due to corrosion,
fatigue and ageing;
• hazards from the technical environment may arise, for example, due to:
– exceeding speciﬁed unladen weights and actual loads,
– inﬂuences from the technical environment (nearby buildings, vehicle colli-
sions, physical exposure, chemical exposure),
– reduction in electrical resistance due to corrosion, fatigue and ageing,
– production-related failure to reach the calculated requirements for con-
struction components and supporting structures and
– exceptional inﬂuences arising from use (ﬁre, explosions).
Human inadequacies and mistakes can be the causative source of a hazard or
impede a successful prevention of hazards. This includes all decisions, actions and
omissions in planning, execution and utilization which a series of factors may be the
basis of, e.g.
• subjectively unrecognized or objectively unknown hazards,
• insufﬁcient knowledge,
• information gaps, misunderstandings,
• incorrect decisions due to political pressure or misconceived thriftiness and
• negligence.
Hazards may also arise through intentional but unfathomable human actions.
14
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

With regard to the possible consequences, the frequency and duration of hazards
and the type of preventive measures necessary, a distinction can be drawn between:
• permanent situations whose duration is of the same order of magnitude as the
useful life of the system or facility concerned (intended course of operation),
• temporary situations of short duration and with a high probability of occurrence
(possibly a rectiﬁable disturbance of intended operation) and
• exceptional situations arising from exceptional inﬂuences or, in the case of local
failures, of short duration and with a low probability of occurrence, with long
recurrence intervals and a great potential for danger (see also Table 3.1 in
Sect. 3.2.1.1).
3.1.5
Legal Basis of Technical Safety
Technical safety is very largely based on the engineering and natural sciences and is
administrated by the relevant regulatory legislation. The safety of technical facilities
is created by methods which provide systematically hierarchized safety precautions
(see Table 3.1). These are formed by both technical measures and organizational
arrangements. Detailed regulations often exist for technical measures and regulate
the requirements for measures such as safety margins, the degree of redundancy, the
diversity to be provided and testing. Limiting values, test speciﬁcations and man-
agement systems are required and implemented in the form of laws and often as
sub-statutory regulations as regards technical and organizational measures. Public
technical safety for the citizen thus generally requires that the utilization of tech-
nology does not
• unacceptably affect the individual in his/her right to life and physical integrity,
• unacceptably, impermissibly—due to hazardous substances, for example—or
irreversibly damage the environment or
• damage other objects of legal protection (property of third parties).
Table 3.1 Hazard categories
Possible consequences of hazards affecting primarily
Properties
Usability
Hazard
category
Large importance of the technical system or
facility for the general public; manifold
threat to life and limb
Large commercial consequences,
large detriment to use; cascade
effects
3
Threat to life and limb and/or respectable
commercial consequences
Extensive commercial
consequences, noticeable
detriment to use
2
No jeopardy for life and limb and marginal
commercial consequences
Marginal commercial
consequences, marginal
detriment to use
1
3.1
Need for a Safety Methodically Concept
15

The guarantee of public technical safety thus falls within the responsibility of the
individual nation state and, in some ﬁelds increasingly, within the responsibility of
the EU and even, if applicable, of the United Nations. Public-technical safety is the
part of safety which is characterized by the systematic individual risk and the
collective risk emerging from the active and, in particular, the passive utilization of
technical products, facilities and systems as well as the associated processes for
whose regulation the state is responsible. All in all, the state has responsibility for
ensuring the safety of its citizens against risks arising from scientiﬁc and engi-
neering research and development especially as regards application of the results
obtained and forms of technical implementation. It is referred to here as
“public-technical safety” and also so understood in general.
Guaranteeing public-technical safety in a constantly changing technological and
industrial environment can in its current signiﬁcance and complexity only be
regarded as the state’s provision for its internal and external safety. Technical
facilities must therefore comply with the objective legal system. It is implemented
by legislation in the ﬁeld of technology, for example, by means of special legal
regulations, provisions, guidelines and technical rules. A danger to public safety or
order exists when circumstances or an event will probably damage an asset under
legal protection if the occurrence objectively expected is permitted to continue
unobstructed (Second Senate of the Federal Constitutional Court in its decision of
08.08.78, File no.: 2 BvL 8/77, the so-called Kalkar judgement).
In principle, a distinction is to be drawn between a concrete, tangible hazard and
an abstract hazard, which is only conceivable. As to the expected occurrence of
damage, the two types of hazard have the same requirements regarding probability.
The distinction between “concrete” and “abstract” hazards lies in the point of view.
Concrete hazards relate to the individual case, whereby the time at which damage
possibly occurs need not be imminent. This time is, however, not so far off that it is
no longer manageable.
A hazard is deemed to exist when observation of certain types of behaviour or
conditions leads to the conclusion that there is sufﬁcient probability that damage
will occur in an individual case. There must therefore be grounds for preventing
such hazards even with general-abstract means, e.g. in technology law itself or by
technical rules. Veriﬁcation of the probability of occurrence can then be dispensed
with in the individual case. Hazards which are detected when generally accepted
threshold values are exceeded are clearly of a concrete nature.
The necessarily vaguely formulated legal requirements regarding the technical
safety of technical systems and facilities must be made concrete with technical rules
drawn up, not by legally competent committees but experts from the relevant
technical ﬁelds.
The necessary governmental measures comply primarily with the inherent
potential for damage of the respective technical products, processes, facilities and
systems, including their subsequent effects. They range from legislative frameworks
covering approval and supervisory functions to direct state intervention.
16
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

In its duty of care, the state has an obligation to do its utmost to prevent or, by all
means, limit injury not only to society as a whole but also to individual humans. In
this matter, however, it is not only the safety requirements of the objects of legal
protection under consideration—humanity and the environment, for example—
which can be determined. It requires, rather, a balancing of their usefulness and/or
necessity for society on the one hand and the risks of technology on the other. This
results in a risk management system.
3.1.6
Ethical Principles
Technical safety is essentially developed by engineers and natural scientists even
though the humanities are becoming increasingly inﬂuential. In their responsibility
for this, they not only comply with the provisions of the applicable legal system but
also, above all, follow the ethical and moral principles which have evolved over the
millennia of Western history. The engineer’s responsibility is thus anchored in
basic ethical standards and the moral obligations developing from them.
In recognizing the engineer’s responsibility, the VDI has committed itself to the
following ethical principles for the profession of engineer (Düsseldorf, March
2002):
“Engineers
• are individually or jointly responsible for the consequences of their professional
work as well as for the diligent discharge of their speciﬁc duties,
• acknowledge their obligation to deliver sensible technical inventions and sus-
tainable solutions,
• are aware of the interrelationships of technical, social, economic and ecological
systems and their effects in the future,
• avoid deeds which result in constraints on and restriction of independent action,
• orientate themselves on the basic principles of general moral responsibility and
respect labour, environmental and technology legislation,
• discuss conﬂicting values on an interdisciplinary and cross-cultural basis,
• seek institutional support when profession-related moral conﬂicts arise,
• participate in the formulation and updating of legal and political guidelines,
• commit themselves to constant further training and
• involve themselves in technological mentoring in basic and further education
programmes in schools, universities, companies and associations”.
In everyday life, however, the distinction between ethics and morality is blurred,
whereas in philosophy a clear line is drawn between ethics and morality. Ethics is
accordingly the scientiﬁc examination of the various aspects of morality, and the
subject of ethics is morality. Ethics deals not only with basic questions relating to
the nature of morality and the possible rationale for moral standards (“meta-ethics”)
but also with questions relating to the content of moral values and standards
(“normative ethics”)—in other words, with good and bad. Among the most
3.1
Need for a Safety Methodically Concept
17

important questions in normative ethics is the question to which extent consider-
ation of consequences may or must play a role in the moral evaluation of human
actions. There is no case when moral standards alone sufﬁce to justify certain
actions and strategies. If damage is to be prevented and beneﬁts created, goodwill
must always be supplemented by expertise and a prognosis capability.
The concept of morality includes both objective and subjective components.
Objective components include the standards, principles and moral concepts which
society lays down for the individual and are partly reﬂected in the legal system.
Included in this are the institutions (family, media, politics, courts) which set,
endorse or enforce these standards (see also [3; 4]). Corresponding on the subjective
side to objectively prescribed standards are personal principles, guiding principles
and ideals on the one hand and the moral attitudes, motives, feelings and will-
ingness to act of the individual on the other. In practice, the borderline between
ethics and morality is blurred. A person who acts morally usually also has an idea of
the sense and function of the moral standards he/she follows and advocates and how
these standards are justiﬁed. Consciously expressed to a greater or lesser extent, this
also of course applies to the responsibility of engineers in their daily work and the
conﬁdence placed in their work.
Longer-term planning must arise from communication processes dealing with
values and strategies for implementing them—they must not be dictated “from the
top down”. One such strategy is already advisable for pragmatic reasons (risk
management). A diktat almost inevitably leads to credibility, trust and legitimacy
crises in industry, politics and bureaucracy and contributes signiﬁcantly to the
polarization of positions. A stealthy introduction of new technologies by admin-
istration with a later assurance of acceptance through suitable public relations
measures does not make sense here.
Rather, acceptance should be secured right from the start by means of a dis-
cursively
conducted
yet
technically
and
strictly
orientated
approach
in
safety-engineering procedure. It sets an essential, maybe even mandatory,
requirement of the acceptability of a democratically legitimized industrial policy.
Many discussions in industrial societies are unsatisfactory since they are based on
preconceived notions and one-sided presentations of the incompleteness of the
current situation and assume indifferent ethical values.
3.2
Generating Safety
3.2.1
Principles of Safety Engineering
3.2.1.1
Safety—An Interdisciplinary Task
With the aid of the technical resources they have created, human beings seek to
expand and perfect continuously their possibilities. This fact, which is veriﬁable in
18
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

our cultural history, represents a well-grounded challenge in itself for every engi-
neer. It consists of regarding one of his/her primary tasks in implementing future
engineering tasks as doing justice to the constant striving of human society to
perfect the safety of technical products. The actual task here is for the human to
adopt technology as a supportive function by creating the connection in the
so-called human–machine systems or socio-technical systems. This challenge
becomes all the more important when engineers are forced to watch an increasing
lack of knowledge in the general public as regards scientiﬁc and technological
correlations, which has resulted in an often frightening distrust of technology.
Engineers should therefore strive to make their technical skills in the safety ﬁeld
generally comprehensible and understandable even for non-technicians and the
layperson. In this way, the unease felt by the public towards technical facilities will
be removed or at least limited to the point where no unthinking technophobia arises.
Accidents and incidents repeatedly give reason to investigate and eliminate their
causes. In this matter, the effectiveness of proven and generally accepted
safety-engineering precautionary measures needs to be examined. The VDI once
again clearly stresses the engineers’ duty of constantly developing further the ﬁeld
of “technical safety”, simplifying its applicability and making it comprehensible to
non-technicians.
In this context, however, questions do arise such as:
• Is insufﬁcient importance being attributed today to the safety of modern, com-
plex socio-technical systems?
• Is proﬁtability increasingly being given priority over safety?
• Are the relevant technical standards no longer being sufﬁciently observed?
• Are the relevant technical standards no longer sufﬁciently productive?
• Are laws and statutory orders being ﬂouted?
• Is there a lack of surveillance by governmental agencies and supervisory bodies?
• What importance does the human being have on the various operating levels?
• Are the understanding and assessment of technical laws underdeveloped (e.g.
due to deﬁciencies in imparting knowledge in schools)?
With regard to the possible consequences of hazards, it seems appropriate to dis-
tinguish three hazard categories in technical systems or facilities within the normal
range of experience (see Table 3.1). In this respect, both the public’s need for safety
(danger to life and limb as well as environmental hazards and the importance of the
system or facility) and the commercial aspects (possible economic consequences,
utilization requirements) must be provided for, whereby priority is given to the ﬁrst
criterion. The overall effort required in the individual hazard categories to determine
countermeasures varies depending on the possible consequences of the hazards.
As a basic rule, plant components and assembly parts must be classiﬁed dif-
ferently according to their importance for the nature and serviceability of a technical
facility or product. In a simpliﬁed form, all important components of a system or
technical facility within the scope of individual measures can be assigned to one of
these hazard categories. Every safety concept should be orientated with its measures
towards these hazard categories.
3.2
Generating Safety
19

Achievements in safety engineering have up until now always been adequate for
the underlying technological innovation achievements. However, it does seem that
safety engineering and safety legislation are gradually being deprived of an ordered
applicability. Particularly in modern, technologically innovative and complex
systems, the following aspects are currently making it more difﬁcult to ﬁnd the most
effective solution in safety engineering:
• the plethora of technical rules and standards, which often exhibit technical- and
application-speciﬁc differences,
• legal regulations which apply in a purely application-speciﬁc way and the
spheres of responsibility of supervisory institutions,
• the wide diversity of opinions among experts in technical and custom-designed
matters and
• the specialist terminology cultivated in every technical discipline.
Even in the sphere of classical engineering, which has been manageable until now,
signs of adverse effects are now emerging because
• experienced specialist personnel are either no longer available themselves or
have not had sufﬁcient opportunity to pass on their own knowledge of basic
principles and contexts to subsequent generations of engineers,
• knowledge concerning aspects of safety-engineering methodology in technical
rules and standards is gradually becoming swamped by the ever-increasing
volume of engineering knowledge, and
• in the course of rationalizing projects, changes in technical concepts may also
have been implemented but without any methodological adaption of the cor-
responding safety-engineering precautionary measures.
Although our legal system lays down legal requirements for safety engineering,
there is no uniform concept covering all applications. This makes it more difﬁcult
for the operating engineers to pursue interdisciplinary cooperation in the ﬁeld of
safety engineering. Political opponents of the expansion and modernization of the
technical–industrial infrastructure now tend to have courts check technical safety
concepts rather than expert engineers as before. This often leads to compromise in
whose politically orientated decision even safety-engineering shortcomings are
accepted.
Can the looming over-regulation and bureaucratization of safety engineering and
safety legislation still be averted and steered down more appropriate paths? Does
the state not even have the duty, during the process of deregulation and liberal-
ization, of compensating for the disappearance of regulations by establishing other
safety principles, such as, for example, a drastic market surveillance in a similar
way?
The VDI also seeks to give answers to these questions. In doing so, the fol-
lowing central aspects are examined:
20
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

• increasing pressure towards interdisciplinary cooperation of all concerned ﬁelds
and in all ﬁelds of technology,
• generalization across all technical ﬁelds of the various safety-engineering con-
cepts by ﬁnding the “hidden commonalities”,
• subsequent feedback and application of the discovered generalization across all
technical ﬁelds to individual technical ﬁelds,
• consideration of the entire life cycle of a product—from the initial idea to ﬁnal
disposal (see Sect. 3.2.1.2) and
• interplay between safety and the limits of feasibility on the one hand and
commercial viability on the other.
As innovative technologies are developed, the corresponding safety-engineering
concepts must also be worked out. For this purpose, already existing safety con-
cepts should be investigated for hidden commonalities and merged into a safety
methodically concept. A concept of this kind should include the tried and tested
ﬁndings of safety engineering, which extend from the primarily empirically
expanding area of application, e.g. railway technology, to the analytically shaped
ﬁeld of application, such as aviation and space technology. The spectrum ranges
from the deterministic concept, which is based on classic if-then relationships with
a directly veriﬁable causality in the occurrence of events (see Sect. 3.2.2.4), to the
probabilistic concept of reliability, which is based on both probability observations
of possible events and consideration of their possible occurrence (see Sect. 3.2.2.4).
The full safety-engineering standardization in the ﬁelds of construction and elec-
trical engineering should just as much be taken into consideration here as safety
engineering based on failure analysis in the ﬁelds of aviation and space technology.
It is a matter here of how concepts in safety engineering and legislation which
are practised in different custom-designed ways and have developed differently over
time can be merged into a single, interdisciplinary safety methodically concept.
Recourse to the methodology presented here for an interdisciplinary concept in the
ﬁeld of safety engineering (see Sect. 3.2.3) facilitates not only communication
capabilities but also interdisciplinary cooperation between the different technical
specialist ﬁelds as well as between engineers, representatives of business, politics
and the judiciary and fellow citizens. This in turn will have an equally beneﬁcial
effect on technological innovation projects, which is beneﬁcial for the under-
standing of safety-engineering concepts. In this way, safety-engineering concerns
which are already properly respected are prevented from being pushed out of the
engineer’s consciousness as soon as improvements or other changes are made to
technical equipment, facilities or systems.
The highly complex technologies with a great potential for utilization, which
were brought to a respectable level of maturity in the latter half of the twentieth
century, proved for the ﬁrst time that even wide-ranging engineering tasks could be
unerringly mastered with working methods on a system-technical basis. The
methodology of working system technically is presented in this publication (see
Sect. 3.2.3). This concept with consistent application enables the implementation of
the frequently non-superimposable objectives of safety, reliability and availability
3.2
Generating Safety
21

cost-effectively in one system. This is an engineering task whose universally
applicable solution needs to be found in interdisciplinary cooperation between
safety and cost-effectiveness as an optimization task not only in the creation of
safety concepts but also in engineering practice.
3.2.1.2
Application of the System-Technical Phase Concept
In order to maintain always sufﬁcient transparency of the technological and orga-
nizational content of complexly structured, technologically innovative and/or
high-standard safety-engineering systems, facilities or products, their complete life
cycle is subdivided into time segments, which hereinafter will be referred to as
“phases”. Such a subdivision into content and time segments allows the setting of
instructions at the beginning of each of these clearly created phases clear objectives,
basic conditions to be observed and other requirements and procedural instructions.
At the end of each individual phase, the results obtained can be checked with regard
to fulﬁlment of the set objectives and requirements. On the basis of the results
determined, the objectives, basic conditions to be observed and other requirements
and procedural instructions are set for each following phase. A phase concept of
this kind not only facilitates technical management but also secures notably the
organizational management measures required and, ultimately, results in it being
possible for the ﬁrst time to track and monitor properly the speciﬁed objectives.
The phases in the product life cycle as shown below will run in chronological
order although it does remain possible, in the event of possible inconsistencies, that
individual phases run recursively (as indicated by the blue recursion arrows in
Fig. 3.1).
Due to the indispensable transparency of these specialist interrelations, the
analysis in this publication is geared towards the phase approach presented previ-
ously. The topic of “technical safety” should be integrated into this phase concept.
This applies not only to the generation of safety in every single phase of the life
cycle but also to its veriﬁability.
Technical safety is one of the outstanding attributes of a technical system,
facility or product. Creating technical safety is a task for engineers and scientists if
necessary, which cannot be accomplished by itself or incidentally. Even more than
any other technical specialist ﬁeld, the generation and veriﬁcation of technical
safety requires not only the specialist knowledge of the engineers and scientists
involved but also special attention and care with the technical–industrial manage-
ment. Therefore, the safety-engineering process requires the same care and attention
as the rest of the project over the entire life cycle of a system, facility or product—
including any possible reﬁtting or measures to extend the service life of the project.
Thus, all aspects and features of technical safety in every single phase of this life
cycle require proper and competent planning, proper tracking and complete veri-
ﬁcation. Such a process of planning, tracking and veriﬁcation extending over the
entire life cycle of a system, facility or product is commonly referred to as “con-
trolling”. Since this case is concerned with controlling in the ﬁeld of “technical
safety”, the appropriate term here is “safety controlling” for this subject.
22
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

3.2.1.3
The Role of the Individual in the Safety of Complex
Socio-technical Systems
Incidents and accidents in recent years have made one thing ever clearer in some
ﬁelds: in view of decades of improvements in this ﬁeld, the possible beneﬁcial
effect of additional improvements in technical system components in highly com-
plex facilities with a high hazard potential is constantly decreasing. In connection
with this fact, the relative importance of human actions in triggering accidents and
incidents is increasing. However, it would be an unacceptable simpliﬁcation to
focus always solely on the operator acting directly at the human–machine interface.
It follows logically from the principle of deeply hierarchized system protection,
which is always implemented in complex technical systems, that an individual
single error must not lead to a serious incident or accident—various technical or
organizational barriers should prevent this. Only where weaknesses lie dormant and
Fig. 3.1 Phases of the product life cycle
3.2
Generating Safety
23

unrecognized in the system and an unfortunate, often stochastically caused con-
stellation of aversive conditions occurs can an incident or accident path be opened
up and followed on account of individual single errors at the human–machine
interface (MMI). This leads to the events assessed as negative.
The so-called phase concept (see Sect. 3.2.1.2) makes it possible to consider the
entire product life cycle of technical facilities comprehensively and in detail. This
applies from conception over deﬁnition, development and construction, manufac-
ture, operation and use up to dismantling including disposal and recycling. In all
phases of this chain, human action makes a signiﬁcant contribution to the (lack of)
reliability and the (lack of) safety of technical systems. Therefore, it is important to
provide quality assurance in all phases of the life cycle of a product or service.
Furthermore, analysis of serious events indicates that extreme importance is also
attached to the control potential of human activity in reducing the possibly adverse
or devastating consequences of accidents. The ﬁeld of “human factors” (HF) is
becoming an ever more intrusive complex of problems which requires speciﬁc
answers. As such, the human contribution to the safety and reliability of
socio-technical systems has a high relative importance.
“Human factors” are therefore to be understood as all those factors over the
entire product life cycle which affect individuals in their interaction with a technical
system or are caused by individuals. In this respect, the unconsidered and frequently
encountered synonymous use of “human factors” and “human error” or even
“human failure” is impermissible just as is the traditional restriction of the ergo-
nomic aspect of the MMI. Organizational factors, division of labour, prior man-
agement decisions and even inter-organizational relations are relevant here in terms
of a comprehensive, holistic understanding of “human factors”.
The human contribution to the reliability and safety of socio-technical systems is
made under general conditions which provide both indispensable potential and
unalterable limitations. Both must be taken into account in the design of the system
since “the human with his/her natural abilities and limitations must take centre stage
in all systems built up by humans for humans” (“Declaration of Saarbrücken” on
the occasion of the “World Congress on the Safety of Modern Technical Systems”,
Saarbrücken, 2001). This ability basically makes the human superior to the machine
—the ability to learn compensates for the susceptibility to error and is an important
component in safety-oriented action.
Operation mistakes are deﬁned as the failure to achieve an operation. It would
therefore be a contradiction in itself to assume that someone could deliberately
make a mistake. Whether a mistake in operation was made can therefore only be
determined with hindsight and following clariﬁcation of the possibility of a “cor-
rect” target-oriented act. Seen in this way, the very common kneejerk reaction of
assigning blame (“human error”) for a mistake contradicts the “human right of
error” which safety researchers call for. A reasonable mistake culture recognizes a
mistake as a learning opportunity and does not ask: “How could you have done
such a thing?”, but rather “How could it have come to this?”
24
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

Operation mistakes originate from many conditions, especially from
• an overtaxed mental capacity for processing information,
• unreasonable attentiveness demands, monotonous work,
• inherent or learnt (inappropriate for the tasks on hand) behaviour stereotypes or
• limited knowledge.
All of these are possibly stresses and strains which exceed the human capacity for
action. In the interest of preventing injury to people and the environment, system
design should take into account both the natural human potential and human lim-
itations. This can be achieved, for example, by fault-tolerant constructions and
design.
The automation of socio-technical systems has particular signiﬁcance here. From
a technical point of view, it often seeks a maximum to rule out the “error-prone”
human as far as possible. In actual fact, the more complex systems become the more
necessary the human contribution becomes. Bainbridge speaks here of the “ironies
of automation” (in [5]). In the ﬁrst place, the developer of a system is, as a rule, a
human, who is also susceptible to making mistakes and can thus have a negative
effect on the correct use of the developed system. In the end, the developer leaves
the operator only tasks which are no longer automatable after his/her maximum
automation strategy. The result is comparable with what psychologists have called
“learned helplessness”: the lack of use of motor or cognitive skills becomes a
problem when an unforeseen event occurs and new behaviour patterns are required
of the inexperienced operator. In a similar way, the purely supervisory function of a
technical facility remaining due to comprehensive automation is negatively affected
due to the proven human weakness in remaining attentive for long periods.
Furthermore, complex situations requiring a decision can become a problem.
Provided all necessary elements of a decision in the production process can be
speciﬁed, the automated, computer-aided decision can occur faster and more
multidimensionally than a decision by the operator. However, the operator is
possibly left with judging the result of a decision on a meta-level whose algorithm
he/she does not or only insufﬁciently understand. Automation can thus mask system
failure and evade carrying out the correct diagnosis and rectiﬁcation. What is
therefore required would be not maximum but rather appropriate automation which
grants the human learning and operational capability so that optimally designed
safety measures are created.
3.2.2
Procedures for an Interdisciplinary Safety
Methodically Concept
3.2.2.1
General Outline
In what follows, a general overview is given of the basic valid procedure in the
required system-related work on safety engineering, especially with regard to public
3.2
Generating Safety
25

safety. The interdisciplinary “safety methodically concept” referred to here is
presented in Sect. 3.4. The following basic principles listed form the basis for its
composition.
3.2.2.1.1 General Agreements on Safety Engineering
As a fundamental rule, technical systems must be designed safety-compliantly such
that they meet the current state of public safety. However, this fundamental
requirement does not apply when, during testing of the system and its components,
safety—according to the needs of a test operation—is temporarily assured by means
of speciﬁc measures.
In designing a technical system which complies with safety requirements, the
following safety-engineering design criteria are to be agreed on:
• The human with his/her natural abilities and disabilities must stand in focus.
Among other considerations, this requires design of technical systems as
user-friendly.
• A single failure must not cause or encourage a safety-critical failure in the
complete system.
Should a technical design meeting these criteria not be possible:
• combinations of failure cases in structural units (failure mechanisms, causal
chains)—including
human
operating
errors—which
could
lead
to
a
safety-critical failure within the entire system must be made recognisable by
active or passive self-inspection.
If a technical design which satisﬁes this requirement is not possible here either (e.g.
because this would impair reliability), the following also applies:
• The probability of multiple failures (e.g. a simultaneous single failure of dif-
ferent structural units) which could lead to a safety-critical failure within the
complete system must not exceed a speciﬁc limiting value relating to the par-
ticular type of operation in each case.
• The deﬁnition of such limiting values is dependent on stochastic conditions of
the failure behaviour of the structural units concerned in each case and the
speciﬁed limiting value considered appropriate for the complete system.
A safety methodically procedural concept for the safety-engineering design of
products and technical facilities assumes that the following basic principles are also
observed in all activities required for safety-engineering reasons:
• The “safe state” or “safe functional behaviour” must be clearly deﬁned and
recorded in the relative speciﬁcation for every structural unit. This may possibly
assume that exact functional and requirement analyses are carried out for
operation activities in due consideration of their feasibility.
26
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

• The technical design should be such that, in the event of multiple failure
interactions in the failure mechanism, the possibility of the function loss of a
sub-system or the entire system is ruled out.
• Limiting values of failure probabilities, which are required for the respective
structural units, must be set so that fulﬁlling the safety requirements applicable
to the entire system is not put into question.
As regards the time response of the failure rates applying to safety-critical failure
events, the requirements relating to service life as laid down in the speciﬁcations of
the particular structural unit will apply.
3.2.2.1.2 Requirements of the Procedure for Safety-Compliant Design
For all safety-engineering activities—including the appropriate veriﬁcation—the
following sequence of methodically appropriate measures applies with respect to
conceivable hazards (see Table 3.1):
1. exclusion of safety-critical failure events (failure exclusion due to natural or
technical integrity),
2. exclusion of the consequences of safety-critical failure events (exclusion of
failure consequences) and
3. limitation of the probability of safety-critical failure events or mistakes by
application of reliability engineering.
This sequence applies to the safety-engineering process and does not represent a
priority ranking for a safety-engineering quality rating of the measures referred to.
The methodical approach, which is determined by the deﬁned sequence above,
assumes that all structural units in the system are veriﬁably in ﬂawless and
trouble-free condition at the beginning of every stage of use and that mistakes,
which can arise not only during the production process and operation but also
during maintenance work, are prevented by the appropriate precautions.
3.2.2.1.3 Safety Methodically Work Steps in Project Management
The safety methodically concept must be applied in project management. In this
matter, the following work steps must always be carried out:
• transfer of the methodically prepared “safety-engineering catalogue of require-
ments” into project or system speciﬁcations covering the entire “product life
cycle”,
• safety-related requirements of the design of the system and its structural units,
which requires the involvement of various safety-engineering-relevant specialist
ﬁelds,
3.2
Generating Safety
27

• planned setting of the implementation steps in terms of human factor
engineering,
• determination of the safety requirements which are subject to veriﬁcation (public
safety),
• determination of the safety requirements necessary to obtain the operation
permit and
• compilation of safety-critical failure modes and preparation of the plan for safety
controlling (goal: “lessons learned” for experience feedback).
3.2.2.2
Modules of the Safety Methodically Concept
The basic principles of safety-engineering design are to be systematically coordi-
nated so as to establish an interdisciplinary procedure. This should be uniformly
applicable not only to the project in question, the new technology thereby created
and the conventional technology employed in practice, but also to the assessment
by the responsible supervisory body. A further, general possibility of application is
offered to damage inspections of technical facilities.
A valid work and evaluation methodology is thus established for the entire scope
of a project. This brings the safety-engineering design criteria essential for getting
authorization into a quantitatively assessable relationship with those design criteria
which are important for cost-effective utilization and, thus, technical reliability.
Disturbances caused by failures originate mostly in the individual component or
in structural units with a low level of integration. However, the safety-critical effects
often become evident only on the basis of the functional interaction, which arises
from the technical design of the overall complete system. The access required here
can only be obtained by means of a suitable information management system.
One basic deﬁciency is, for example, the ambiguity of technical terms as deﬁned
in different technical ﬁelds. Since creating new technologies always requires an
integration of knowledge from several specialized ﬁelds, terms which are not
clearly deﬁned in the technical standards and a universally applicable form should
be systematically avoided. This is because they either can be interpreted differently
depending on the specialist ﬁeld (such as the term “fail-safe”) or are intended only
for use in deliberately restricted areas of application (e.g. the term “signal-technical
safety” in DIN VDE 0831). This is especially true when common language use
already has unambiguous terms in this regard (such as the term “safety”). However,
words such as “safe” or “safety” should not be used as a basic principle in the
designations of structural units, not even when safety veriﬁcation already suppos-
edly exists for the structural unit.
The term “maintenance” is used here speciﬁcally for all measures to preserve
and restore the nominal state of constructions unless a modiﬁcation is involved.
Therefore, this includes terms such as preventive maintenance, inspection and
repair, although a distinction can deﬁnitely be made between maintenance and
repair in terms of content. In everyday speech, “maintenance” includes the
28
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

maintenance and modernization work which in the prevailing public understanding
is necessary to preserve the nominal condition. On the other hand, “repair” means
measures required to restore the nominal condition of a construction after losing it
due to unforeseen events, e.g. a ﬁre or a lack of correct maintenance work.
Maintenance must be correct. This applies to not only the frequency and accuracy
of measures (e.g. maintenance) but also, especially, the form of their implemen-
tation. If special expertise or speciﬁc technical equipment is required, maintenance
can, under certain circumstances, only be correct if the work is carried out by a
tradesman, expert or specialist company.
An appropriate information management system is an indispensable requirement
for the interdisciplinary procedures of a safety methodically holistic concept.
3.2.2.3
Human Factors Engineering
Discussion of the design and engineering of new technical facilities almost
exclusively focuses on technical problems, while aspects of the human factor
engineering (HFE) only play a subordinate role, if any. Of course, basic technical
design criteria must be given priority in the ﬁrst stages of a technical concept. This
is already advised on account of the cost dimensions thus activated.
However, all technical systems and, in particular, complex facilities consist,
without exception, of technical and human components—in other words, they are
socio-technical systems. HFE principles for designing socio-technical systems
require development and design processes in which optimization of human–ma-
chine interfaces as a common optimization of both technical and human compo-
nents starts determining the concept at the earliest opportunity.
Different areas are addressed here which are to be tackled on an interdisciplinary
basis:
(a) Draft of an overall HFE plan
The plan should clarify how and in which phases of the overall design and
construction process of future facilities HFE aspects should be systematically
taken into consideration.
(b) Evaluation of operational experience
As a ﬁrst step, it makes sense from the HFE point of view to carry out an
evaluation of the experiences identiﬁed in already installed, comparable sys-
tems in order to avoid problems encountered there and to incorporate positive
experiences into future drafts.
(c) Functional requirement analysis and task assignment
The objective is to analyse the requirements of the system in its different
functional areas, identify performance requirements and explore the limits and
possibilities of the design for options in the task sharing of the human and
machine. In this matter, particular attention should be paid to the important
principle of the “active operator” gained from HFE experience. Questions also
fall into this category concerning possible new requirements of the operating
3.2
Generating Safety
29

team and the resulting requirements of the qualiﬁcation mix and functional
reallocation of tasks within the team, as well as the development of appropriate
criteria for the design of workplaces. Furthermore, this planning covers the
assignment of tasks between the human and machine, including planning for
automation measures.
(d) Centralization/decentralization of monitoring and control stations
Closely bound up with the problem of functional requirement analyses is the
question of the extent to which decentralized monitoring and control stations
are established, whose personnel in turn require appropriate qualiﬁcations.
(e) Organizational aspects
The mutual assignment and interaction conditions of different required per-
sonnel categories should be analysed together with the dynamic changes in
responsibility for tasks in regular operation, incidents and accidents. There is
also the question of how, for example, the European directives on work and
environment protection require consideration of ergonomics and are relevant to
the work organization of facilities.
(f) Determination of qualiﬁcation requirements
Depending on the division of functions, qualiﬁcation requirements plans would
need to be developed and proposals for their implementation worked out.
(g) Decision support systems (DSS)
Computer-aided DSSs could be used for checking task fulﬁlment on the part of
the personnel and for identifying appropriate procedures in case of need. In this
context, the extent to which the use of computer-aided DSSs would entail
changes in the interaction modes of personnel should be investigated.
(h) Design of control equipment (e.g. control rooms, control centres)
This includes, among other things, questions regarding the role of analogue and
digital signal systems, their redundancy, the use of adaptive displays, trans-
parency of reports and feedback loops for the effects of operator actions.
Another point of investigation would be to examine how the team character of
the work can be consistently taken into account.
(i) Participatory ergonomics
Ways and possibilities of involving experienced operators in the design process
should be investigated. In the interests of an iterative optimization strategy, an
analysis should be made of the possibilities and consequences of implementing
the principle of “ﬁrst the simulator, then the facility”. Likewise, possibilities of
using “rapid prototyping” should be investigated.
The term “rapid prototyping” in this context denotes the rapid creation of
prototypes on the basis of design data. Rapid prototyping processes are thus
manufacturing processes whose aim is to convert existing CAD data directly
and rapidly into work pieces—if possible, without manual detours. These
procedures, known as “rapid prototyping” since the 1980s, are usually
moulding processes which build up the work piece layer by layer from
shapeless or shape-neutral material by using physical and/or chemical effects.
30
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

(j) Internal facility incident and emergency measures
This concerns the implementation of HFE principles when developing tech-
nically correct, comprehensive, explicit and easy-to-handle procedures in the
event of disturbances, incidents and emergencies.
(k) Prevention of operating errors by
– instructions and prohibitions as well as appropriate training and
– built-in interlock devices which, following an operating error, automatically
switch to a safe state or safe functional sequence.
All in all, three models can be distinguished of how HFE experts can be involved in
the process of designing and constructing complex socio-technical installations.
These models are applied differently depending on the need in question:
(a) Integrated model
In this case, the HFE expert (work scientist, psychologist, medical scientist) is
integrated from the outset in the design team so as to participate in the design of
planned workplaces and the functions of personnel working there with regard to
safety and reliability, occupational safety, health aspects and humane design.
(b) Intermittent involvement model
In this case, the HFE expert is consulted in critical design phases to evaluate,
for example, a prototype. In this way, experienced operators (pilots, control
room staff, etc.) can be involved.
(c) Post hoc involvement model
Only in rare cases will all design ﬂaws be detected before the system goes into
operation. It is then necessary to install technical or organizational barriers to
prevent dysfunctional use of the system or hazardous system conditions. Under
no circumstances, however, should post hoc involvement of HFE experts be
chosen for a standard form of participation in the sense of a repair service.
If an event cannot be controlled within the system and system limits are exceeded,
steps must be implemented to deal with the interface. In this case too, the
knowledge of HFE must be deployed in order to incorporate unconditionally the
HFE elements into emergency management planning as well.
3.2.2.4
Evaluation of Failure Prevention from the Interdisciplinary
Perspective
Proven concepts with a systems engineering orientation make it possible to examine
the potential failure behaviour of technical products and both complex installations
and simple devices. In this case, it must always be assumed that a failure of
technical products can just as little be excluded as the assumption might be accepted
that the human working with this technology is infallible. The ﬁndings of such
failure analyses, which count as standard tools of any project and development
engineer, make it possible to detect systematically the crucial failure possibilities of
structural units already in the design or planning stage. This, in turn, creates the
3.2
Generating Safety
31

requirement for preventive measures with which undesirable or unacceptable fail-
ures should be prevented.
For a better understanding of further explanations, the two terms “deterministic
approach” and “probabilistic approach” should ﬁrst of all be clariﬁed here:
• Deterministic approach
The deterministic approach in the engineering sciences corresponds to the his-
torically developed, monocausal plot. It is based on both unequivocal if-then
relationships and the situation when a speciﬁc event occurs at a predetermined
time. In addition, it even still shapes in modern technology the classic procedure
in the conception, design and testing of technical facilities.
This approach was also adopted for safety engineering when it was (or is) a
matter of devising measures as precautions against a safety-critical failure. The
“if” here stands for the safety-critical failure and the “then” for the
safety-engineering precaution. In classical engineering, both conditions repre-
sent a logically unambiguous (in forwardly oriented logic) or even one-to-one
(in forwardly and backwardly oriented logic) connection and relate to mono-
causal active structures.
The deterministic approach to engineering is in line with the equally classical
conceptual and decision structures in the legal system.
• Probabilistic approach
The probabilistic approach is based on theoretical or statistical probability
principles. In contrast to the deterministic approach, the probabilistic approach is
based not on certainty but on the possibility that a speciﬁc event occurs with a
certain probability. The time when the event occurs is not predetermined and
cannot be determined in advance either.
Modern technology (such as plant engineering, civil engineering, energy supply
engineering, information and communication technology, automotive engi-
neering, aerospace engineering) has come to involve highly networked functions
and computer-aided facilities. It is also increasingly seeing service in aggressive
environments (such as space, open and deep seas, deserts, jungle). This inevi-
tably leads to complex and highly integrated structures which are, as far as
safety engineering is concerned, no longer manageable solely by the deter-
ministic approach. They must be supplemented or completed by probabilistic
approaches (such as reliability engineering, for example).
The use of reliability engineering has proven its value for decades now in the
conception, design and testing of such complex technical facilities. Without
using reliability, the achievements of modern global aviation, scientiﬁc and
commercial space travel and even modern automotive engineering would not
have been possible.
The application of reliability engineering has become indispensable for aviation
and (manned) space travel in the safety-engineering design of highly integrated,
complex technical facilities. Nevertheless, its adaption in other technical ﬁelds of
application is only proceeding very slowly on account of established traditions.
32
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

The failure behaviour of technical products can only be fully determined from the
systematics and made usable for engineering-related selective precautionary mea-
sures if its stochastic manifestations are also taken into account in a probabilistic
approach. In addition, it must be taken into account here that the failure behaviour
of systems (e.g. supporting structures, supporting devices, mechanical interlocks,
ﬁre insulation) which are still transparent and equipped mainly with “captive”
attributes (“passive” safety attributes) can usually still be fully determined even
with an exclusively deterministic approach. On the other hand, the failure behaviour
of complex systems equipped mainly with “losable” attributes (“active” safety
attributes)—systems such as energy supply systems, power units, control systems,
cooling equipment, extinguishers—is essentially characterized by its stochastic
manifestations.
If engineers are to work under these conditions focused with probabilistic
approaches as well, they must in all cases have access to probability-related limiting
values. As already mentioned, since the ﬁrst publication of the DIN 31004 safety
standard (see Chap. 2), risk assessment as a probabilistic analysis of the stochastic
failure modes of technical products has come to be regarded as the generally
accepted state of the art.
Consideration of limiting values for a risk assumes that they are also accepted by
the general public (see Sect. 3.3.1). Every limiting value so considered must orient
itself to acceptance by the impartial “public” (public safety). Attempts to determine
the degree of acceptance by public-opinion polls are doomed to failure. At best,
they will reveal the polarization always present in the public between, on the one
hand, admiration of technology and, on the other hand, a sceptical attitude to
technology based in most cases on ignorance but also—due to the unavoidable
occurrence of veriﬁable failings of humans and machines—on justiﬁable doubts. In
this case, the danger cannot be ruled out of this polarization being politically
misconstrued when the results of such surveys are presented to the public.
A different, already taken path should be followed purposefully against this. The
degree of public acceptance should be measured by the stochastic attributes of
technologies which have already been accepted by the public. These are techno-
logical attributes which present themselves in shipping, civil engineering, rail
trafﬁc, aviation, road trafﬁc, power engineering, chemical engineering, process
plants or even in power stations of conventional technology. Acceptance can also
be measured by natural risks, which are, for example, characterized by human life
expectancy. However, the success of this approach assumes that the relevant
institutions make their databases available for general use.
However, deﬁning limiting values of this kind would not lead to a deﬁnitive
solution. It is ultimately essential that the requisite level of safety be integrated into
the technical system. Consequently, it must be proven to the supervisory body to
what extent this has actually succeeded. However, instruments with which this
evidence can truly be supplied efﬁciently are only partially available at present and
would need further development.
This fact in conjunction with the probabilistic approach required results in a
quantitative problem. The numerical values (data) with which safety is to be
3.2
Generating Safety
33

calculated must be very low since safety-critical events may only very rarely be
possible. If numerical values of this kind are to be proven by stochastic methods,
one quickly meets limits which cannot be crossed on account of the necessary effort
involved. Therefore, reference in this context is made to the well-proven
databank-based concepts as they are presented, for example, in the formerly
internationally
used
US-American
standards
MIL-HDBK 217F,
Notice 2,
“Reliability Prediction of Electronic Equipment and NPRD 95, Non-electronic
Parts Reliability Data”.
The probabilistic consideration of stochastic failure modes as a complement to
the deterministic concept of classical safety engineering was developed to make
complex systems, which are predominantly characterized by their multiplicity of
“losable” attributes, also meaningfully controllable by safety engineering. Attempts
are constantly being made to replace the classical deterministic approach so com-
prehensively proven in safety-engineering practice with a probabilistic approach.
This attempt frequently fails due to a lack of suitable, reliable data.
In this interface between deterministic and probabilistic approaches, a lack of
relevant knowledge cannot be entirely ruled out. Deterministic safety measures are
thus based on the idea that, when a safety-critical failure occurs, technical products
must be immediately converted into a safe state. This often consists of blocking a
function (e.g. in the deliberately induced shutdown of an installation)—in other
words, in an unconditionally commanded failure (the deﬁnition of this term is based
on DIN 25424 “Fault Tree Analysis”, 3.8, c). However, in the case of complex
technical systems with their many sub-components, the safety-controlled “switch-
ing off” of individual sub-systems leads to reliability problems which, once a
technical development is completed or a facility built, are almost incapable of
solution.
This behaviour led to the realization that safety and reliability engineering must
remain connected in inseparable logic. Both ﬁelds deal with failure modes of a
stochastic nature, which is why failure behaviour can only be fully determined by
stochastic methodology. Thus, the proposed deterministic support measures should
also be determined stochastically in their effects on reliability.
3.2.2.5
Criteria for an Interdisciplinary Holistic Safety Concept
In the derivation of criteria for a concept usable on an interdisciplinary basis (on the
occasion of a technological innovation project), a deliberate attempt was made to
avoid creating again only a safety concept which applied solely to one particular
area of application. The criteria prepared are therefore universally valid and can
accordingly be used in any ﬁeld or technology. This also applies to the fundamental
principles of the interdisciplinary safety methodically concept presented below (see
Sect. 3.2.3), in which these individual criteria are recorded in their logical con-
nections. Their universal validity offers the following advantages for application:
34
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

• Institutions which in the overall process exercise the speciﬁc governmental
responsibility for public technical safety and conduct tests, approvals, declara-
tions of conformity and tolerances and also carry out surveillance and control
can work according to the same criteria of the same concept. They thus use the
same elements from the perspective of state responsibility, regardless whether
they are practised directly, applied in public commissioning procedures or used
on the basis of structural criteria by recognized (accredited) private bodies.
• In a uniform introduction of the safety concept, application-independent and
clear communication is made possible between the different specialist ﬁelds
involved. This occurs since one of the essential basic principles of the holistic
and interdisciplinary concept from systems engineering has been universalized
for all technical ﬁelds.
• A precondition for a purposive safety-oriented concept is, however, that
– sufﬁciently suitable measures (generating safety, safety management, quality
management, safety-related veriﬁcation) are taken during planning, devel-
opment and manufacturing, and
– during the operational phase as well as disposal and dismantling, further
measures (safety management, safety-related veriﬁcation) are taken which
are appropriate and by means of which the manufactured product truly has a
safety-compliant technical design.
• As with any other interdisciplinary working method, the safety-oriented
approach requires appropriate organizational conditions to make an effective
application possible. In this matter, the following aspects should be taken into
consideration:
– Only a central control facility, responsible for the entirety of the system in
question and equipped with sufﬁcient powers, is practically capable of taking
into account appropriately system comprehensive criteria in safety-related
activities. However, the precondition is that safety can be veriﬁed for all
components of the system under consideration itself.
– This safety-oriented approach guarantees cost-effective usability just as a
safety-compliant technical design does. Therefore, in view of this compre-
hensive objective, overall responsibility can only lie with the design engineer
who is comprehensively familiar with the safety-related characteristic since
he/she was the one who created it for the product in question (typical
example of a matrix organization).
– The engineer working as an expert only has to assess the safety-related
appropriateness of this technical design. Depending on the complexity and
scope of the concept, this requires the appropriate cascade-like activation of
the expert opinion (principle, dimensioning, execution). The principle must
take into consideration the limited nature of consequences, manageability,
accessability of negative effects and reversibility.
3.2
Generating Safety
35

– Observation of the applicable “good engineering practice” and/or legally
qualiﬁed regulations is in itself alone a mandatory if not necessarily sufﬁcient
precondition for conclusive proof of safety.
– In addition, of course, due regard must be paid to the state of the art and, if
required, also to the state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge. (For more
detailed information, see Sect. 3.3.5).
With regard to the nature and serviceability of technical facilities, certain qualities
of the materials, components, systems, facilities, products and implementation form
the basis for their design, dimensioning and construction.
It is crucial that the planning speciﬁcations themselves, their calculative and
experimental veriﬁcations and construction plans be tested as to whether the pro-
duct with these speciﬁcations—as well as with the testing and approval measures
planned during implementation—can be put into execution in accordance with
these requirements (testing and approval of the planning speciﬁcations).
Suitable testing and veriﬁcation measures must be provided in all major phases
of implementation (tracking and testing of the implementation) to prevent imple-
mentation deviating impermissibly from the underlying requirements. Deviations
can occur, for example, due to the variability of material and component properties,
uncertainties in installation and construction or mistakes and errors during the
various production steps.
If qualities are expected to change adversely during service life, periodic
inspections and special maintenance measures may be necessary (ﬁnal inspection
and veriﬁcation before going into service).
Requirements relating to the organization of veriﬁcation
It is only by an appropriate coordination of the designated tests that testing mea-
sures can rationally complement each other, unintended gaps in veriﬁcation be
avoided and the necessary information passed on.
In the appraisal of testing measures, it is important not only to record their
immediate function but also adverse deviations and their indirect effect, namely
their positive or negative impact on important aspects of performance and quality.
Responsibilities for all testing measures, especially for implementing measures
in the event of insufﬁcient test results, need to be regulated clearly and
unambiguously.
All major test results must be recorded.
Establishing a test plan is then necessary if a large number of contractors and
subcontractors are involved in the project and incorrect decisions and gaps in
veriﬁcation can have serious consequences.
36
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

Elements of veriﬁcation
With regard to the nature and scope of veriﬁcation, a distinction can be drawn
between:
• manufacturer testing which is regulated only internally or externally,
• third-party testing by an independent third party carried out either independently
of manufacturer testing or relating exclusively to inspecting the correct per-
formance of manufacturer testing and
• acceptance tests on the part of the purchaser or customer which are used for
assessing and verifying the quality of goods or services at the transfer of
responsibility or ownership.
Manufacturer tests are, in principle, carried out in an ofﬁce or in-house and can,
depending on the importance of veriﬁcation, occur in the form of self-testing or be
conducted by persons not directly involved in the manufacturing process.
Manufacturer tests regulated in an ofﬁce or in-house special measures for con-
trolling production fall within the sole responsibility of the manufacturer.
Planning tests include a clear deﬁnition of rules for assessing quality or a service
and also measures for negative test results.
The importance of the individual elements of veriﬁcation differs depending on
whether it concerns tests on planning speciﬁcations, constructional execution or
tests before the start of operation.
Grading of tests
The grading of test measures for safety-related veriﬁcation depends on:
• the intensity of testing (frequency and extent of tests or inspections),
• the assessment criteria and measures in the event of negative test results,
• the degree of independence of testing the process in question and
• the use of multiple independent tests whereby, depending on quality assurance
requirements, the following gradation is possible:
– only manufacturer tests,
– externally regulated manufacturer tests together with third-party tests or
acceptance tests and
– externally regulated manufacturer tests together with third-party tests and
acceptance tests or a second independent third-party test.
On the basis of this context, the determination of quality assurance levels and their
classiﬁcation in the hazard categories (see Table 3.1) can be deduced. Individual
sub-systems or structural units can be subject to different distinct quality assurance
levels.
3.2
Generating Safety
37

Inspection and approval of the planning speciﬁcations
• Inspection of draft design, dimensioning and structural design
It is important to test whether all decisive hazards have been identiﬁed and
appropriate measures provided for their prevention. This concerns, in particular,
the appropriate choice of the system, the materials and method of production,
the processes and tools used in construction, and also the design of the system or
facility (function testing, accessibility). Among other things, a check should be
made whether all essential organizational requirements, e.g. special trade and
operational qualiﬁcations, can be fulﬁlled, all tests required for implementation
have been provided, and all conditions of use and necessary maintenance
measures have been deﬁned.
The design inspection can be carried out in different ways with different degrees
of effort, e.g. by tests, calculations or analogy observations. Among other things,
it should be checked whether:
– the calculation includes the relevant requirements and actual inﬂuences,
basic conditions and conditions of use,
– veriﬁcations are maintained for all major components,
– the appropriate mathematical models are used,
– the calculation in itself is consistent, and
– all effects are borne correctly by the system.
Whether modiﬁcations of components cause unacceptable malfunctions should also
be checked.
As regards the type of inspection, a distinction can be drawn between:
– a complete recalculation by an independent third party,
– simulation tests and
– prototype tests.
• Inspection and approval of ﬁnal planning documents.
A check must be made whether the ﬁnal planning documents contain all the
information required for implementation, such as, for example, tolerance limits
or instructions regarding the manufacturing procedure. In this case, it is, among
other things, important whether dimensioning results have been communicated
correctly, instructions or drawings correspond to the speciﬁed requirements, and
other basic conditions have been taken into consideration.
Since all information and requirements on the part of planning are mostly
conveyed via implementation plans for production, assembly and integration,
special importance is granted to checking clarity and completeness.
• Inspections of constructional implementation (acceptance inspection)
– Series production—single-item production
As regards the type and importance of tests, a distinction should be drawn
between
38
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

• series production with the objective of consistent quality and
• single-item production with the objective of complying with planning
speciﬁcations.
Preventive measures have priority in single-item production.
The construction of complex technical systems or large technical facilities is
generally a matter of single-item production in which only individual
components or materials are subject to series production. Therefore, quality
assurance
systems,
e.g.
according
to
DIN 55350
“Concepts
in
Quality-Management and Statistics”, which are oriented towards series
production, are not directly applicable to all phases of the construction work.
– Assessment procedures and criteria
Every production unit is tested in the complete assessment. A unit is either
accepted as “good” or rejected as “bad”. If the assessment is carried out
according to quantitative criteria, these generally comply with speciﬁed
tolerances.
– Periodic testing
Time-staggered periodic tests serve to ascertain that a technical product
conforms over its entire service life to the valid conﬁguration according to
which it was planned, developed, constructed, put into service and operated.
3.2.2.6
Passive and Active Safety Measures
The following basic classiﬁcation can be made: when a component, part of a
technical facility or an entire facility is developed to fulﬁl different functions, a
distinction is drawn between active and passive functions.
• Passive functions basically involve “captive or inherent attributes”. These
functions cannot become “lost” in the normal case/operation. No actuator is
operated. Passive functions can carry out holding, supporting and locking
functions, for example. Speciﬁc examples include the ﬂoor of a building storey
or the static properties of an entire structure. Consideration of both the properties
of the hardware and the requirements of the construction components is nec-
essary to maintain these functions. Tests, care and maintenance also play a part
in this.
• Active functions, on the other hand, can basically become “lost”. They are
characterized by the use of an actively operating construction component.
Examples include lighting equipment or a regulator. In the event of loss of these
functions, safeguards are necessary which must be suitably implemented for the
relative possible failure performance.
• Wherever possible, priority must be given to passive safety measures. In the
case of application, active safety measures must be proven to be at least equally
effective for the hazard category concerned (see Table 3.1).
3.2
Generating Safety
39

3.2.2.7
Controlling Failure Mechanisms
If a construction component supporting a passive function fails, the failure is sought
in the ﬁrst approximation in the design or the constructional implementation. If an
active function fails, the important construction components may be in order. In this
case, individual characteristics of a device might have failed because it has been
damaged. Alternatively, the control or the interaction of function elements may
have failed—for example due to an instruction or operator error.
Failure mechanisms can be divided into categories. Seven different types of
failure in total can be categorized and divided into three ﬁelds:
• Failure when installing a function:
– A system lacks the intended function.
– The intended function only partially materializes.
– The function materializes at the wrong point of time.
• Failure in an already existing function:
– There is a total failure of the existing function.
– There is a degradation of a function element, and this element can fulﬁl its
function only partially.
• Failure when terminating a function:
– The function is terminated in an unqualiﬁed way.
– The function is terminated at the wrong time.
In order to generate technical safety, the failure of functions must be weighted.
Different approaches can be taken to reduce the probability of the occurrence of a
possible failure to an acceptable level:
• A function fails, and the technical state of the system or facility still remains
safe. Despite the intended function becoming inoperative no damage results.
This “fallback state” is called “fail-safe”. In this case, the system is switched off
towards a safe state despite the failure of a system component with care being
taken that the ﬁnal state arrived at in the fallback is safe. No injury to persons or
damage to property occurs, but the function is no longer available—not even
with limitations. The system “comes to a standstill”, so to speak.
The triggering of emergency braking in a railway train is given here as an
example of the “fail-safe” approach.
• However, if a function of a system or technical facility should be maintained or
must stay at least partially maintained despite the failure of a component sup-
porting that function, this state is called “fail-operational”. In this case,
restrictions are applied by emergency programmes (automatically or selected by
humans) which maintain particularly important functions. Catastrophic beha-
viour can hardly occur with implementation of this strategy. A systematic
approach to establishing appropriate strategies is particularly important here.
40
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

The technical and organizational precautionary concepts in a ﬂying plane are
given here as an example of the “fail-operational” approach.
• If neither “fail-safe” nor “fail-operational” strategies can be applied, the appli-
cation of reliability engineering offers the possibility of reducing the risk,
although only for Hazard Category 1 (see Table 3.1). This term means the
application of probability considerations which examine the possibility of a
failure by using empirical values, expert reports, theoretical studies, failure
observations and other methods. If the probability of damage is low enough, the
system or technical facility can be put into operation.
The safety-related reliability concept as used in attitude control systems for
vertical take-off aircraft or in the landing computer for the lunar module is given
here as an example.
3.2.2.8
Generating Safety According to the Phase Approach
Achieving appropriate safety conditions requires different provisions and steps in
the various phases of the life cycle of a system, technical facility or product by the
individuals involved (see Sect. 3.2.1.2).
Designers and developers of the hardware and software, suppliers, operators,
personnel for installation, operation, maintenance, repair and disposal, and the
competent supervisory institutions (authorities) must therefore develop and discuss
appropriate and realistic measures and ways and discuss what can prevent the
failure of functions or changes in properties to the greatest possible extent. The
development of international solutions is worth pursuing since many products are
developed and used not only on a national level. Worldwide acceptance of good
safety solutions, which can differ quite considerably, is helpful.
It is wise to develop suitable and adapted processes for the development of
safety-relevant systems and functions in order to achieve the different requirements
of safety properties. Such processes may include the following topics, which can or
must be adapted to the function and purpose of the systems:
• system deﬁnition,
• hazard analysis,
• risk disclosure statement,
• derivation of safety requirements,
• implementation phase,
• documentation,
• management tasks,
• interdisciplinary processes,
• support processes and
• supplier relations.
Due to the rapid further development and innovation of technologies, there must be
parallel
work
which
tests
and
implements
the
necessity
of
extensions,
3.2
Generating Safety
41

specializations and changes of existing regulations and standards. Innovations result
in technical ﬁelds being entered which, in many cases, could not be taken into
account in previous concepts. The use of electronics, in particular, for putting
innovative functions into practice needs such new basic conditions which cannot
always be adopted from the past. The utilization of functions depends decisively on
legal security for the manufacturer, and this is described by, among other things, the
state of the art.
A so-called safety case (safety report) is required for complex systems and
technical facilities. The same applies when public-technical safety is concerned. In
addition, the safety case should be a selectable option for all cases but, in the ﬁelds
listed above, must be part of the safety culture practised. Based on the procedures in
aerospace engineering, chemical engineering or comparably complex installations
in the energy sector, it must be demanded that a factually appropriate safety
management system be devised, presented and applied. This means that the doc-
umentation for a “safety-engineering requirements catalogue” must be initiated
from the very beginning—in other words, with the ideas and ﬁrst considerations of
design. Updating must be continuous and all changes and modiﬁcations docu-
mented in revised editions. It applies to all technical ﬁelds that a system description
forms part of the safety case. It also contains the safety management and/or safety
plan, a risk assessment, an emergency plan and documentation instructions too.
Depending on the speciﬁc case, more component- and phase-related parts can be
added in high division of labour production—for example, so-called production and
test sequence plans. The safety case starts with the product idea and grows over
time and with the phases of the life cycle.
In principle, similar requirements apply to the phases of the life cycle of a system
(a technical facility or product). Suitable procedures, processes and instructions are
worked out during operation, maintenance, repair, decommissioning and disposal
which generate and maintain safety. Careful formulation of such procedures ensures
optimal results and high safety standards in this ﬁeld too. However, a guaranteed
high level of safety in the long term depends on operators and users complying with
the methods and processes established. Understanding and sensitivity are to be
solicited here too by means of suitable communication. The human being stands
here in a key position in the process for generating safety.
Technical safety is one of those attributes of a technical system, facility or
product which is not only to be speciﬁcally generated by a controlled process but
which also always requires veriﬁcation. It is not important whether this occurs by
testing or inspection at the manufacturer’s own responsibility (ﬁrst party), by
possible clients/customers (second party) or independent third parties. The nature of
the parties involved here plays an important part in the validity of the tests or
inspections.
When life phases are considered in Sect. 3.2.1.2, the role played by tests and
inspections is therefore presented. A critical assessment should be made here
whether the veriﬁcations can be regulated solely by market participants or to what
extent testing and inspection must be carried out by independent third parties since
the market does not offer a sufﬁciently suitable regulatory framework. As regards
42
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

independent third parties, it must be examined to what extent the monitoring
function can be privatized (e.g. in the form of private-sector auditing systems) and
which responsibility is better assumed by the state itself. It should be taken into
consideration here that the higher the hazard category according to Table 3.1, the
more emphatically the responsibility must be observed by the state. It must be
considered with this view that an absolute responsibility of guarantee on the part of
the state should only be permitted with Hazard Category 1 (see Table 3.1).
3.2.3
Implications of a Safety Methodically Concept
The obligation to design technical facilities that are safe results from both ethical–
moral reasons and legal requirements. This working method, which essentially is
still practised today, is based on a wealth of experience that has built up in the
course of technical development to a considerable extent. This happened, however,
mainly under the pressure of damaging events that occurred.
Engineers who design, develop and build technical facilities also have the duty
in the framework of their overall responsibility to design these technical facilities
safety-compliantly. However, the residual safety risk, which can never be com-
pletely ruled out when dealing with technical facilities, always remains for factual
reasons with the operator and/or user. From this situation, which is characterized by
a polarization arising from the factual circumstances, the problem inevitably
emerges: “What and how much is safe enough?” Even in the application of new
technologies, this problem ought to be made amenable to a holistic solution.
Therefore, the technical design and required veriﬁcation should be undertaken
methodically
so
that
the
damage-preventing,
risk-minimizing
character
of
safety-related precautionary measures is taken into account by a correspondingly
oriented approach which is predominantly analytical preventative.
A precondition of effective safety-engineering activities is a correctly engineered
structural design which offers a guarantee that the technical facility will not expect
any damaging event if it is operated or used as intended under real-life environ-
mental inﬂuences. In this context, special mention should be made of the design
principles commonly applied in aerospace engineering in particular. Lifetime
concepts on freedom from damage, redundant design, fail-safe design and
damage-tolerant design have, despite their sometimes ambiguous word interpreta-
tion and partially overlapping modes of action, made a signiﬁcant contribution to
constructive design regarding safety not only in aircraft construction. A further
precondition is the structural completion of a technical facility in faultless condi-
tion. “Fail-safe design” means fail-safe engineering—in other words, conscious
dealing with design principles which make technical safety an integral component
of the product composition and behaviour.
Mistakes, disturbances and failures in technical facilities cannot be ruled out in
principle—whether because they occur at random times, unpredictable inﬂuences
cannot be adequately controlled (e.g. lightning strikes) or unintentional operating
3.2
Generating Safety
43

errors cannot be unconditionally avoided. A safety-compliant technical design must
therefore include not only the correct structural design but also precautionary
measures by which such mistakes can be effectively dealt with. An example of this
is safety interlock devices which can reliably prevent every kind of operating error.
These fault possibilities, which can by no means be presupposed in new tech-
nologies, must be analysed systematically in order to be able to determine cause and
effect of fault possibilities as far as possible.
The complexity of technologically innovative systems makes it necessary to
determine analytically stochastic failure behaviour too so as to be able to test and
verify the effectiveness of safety-oriented precautions. The tried and tested methods
of reliability engineering are available for this purpose. It deﬁnitely conforms with
the currently existing “State of Scientiﬁc and Technical Knowledge” (Atomic
Energy Act Art. 7 II No. 3) when preference is given to the veriﬁcation of
appropriate and adequate reliability as regards safety; the possible effort here can
yield statistically veriﬁed results, and no coherent result can be expected of an
alternative safety-oriented veriﬁcation. Even such ﬁndings of reliability engineering
which are not exclusively based on its numerical methods can be usefully included
in safety engineering. They are applicable to determine those basic conditions for
redundant facilities required from the safety-engineering point of view.
The state of safety engineering was traditionally shaped by learning from
experience (see Sect. 3.4.2.2). This means that it is comparably easy to transfer
safety-engineering experience to products and technical facilities which are tech-
nologically comparable with previous and current products and facilities. However,
it always proves to be problematic when “safety based on past experience” should
be transferred to products and facilities which have been further developed tech-
nologically or are entirely new. In this case, forward-looking approaches in risk
assessment become necessary which identify the possible failure modes with
probabilistic methods and implement the appropriate precautionary measures in the
design (“feed-forward control”). In many cases, a combination of both approaches
will be necessary. This will be described in more detail below.
3.2.3.1
Transfer of the Safety Standard to Technologically
Comparable Products
If the development and manufacture of a product or technical facility are limited to
the existing state of the art, the product in question will neither contain any serious
technological innovations nor constitute as a whole a technological innovation. The
existing legal and technical regulations will then sufﬁce to be able to guarantee
safety for this product. Either
• the relevant and valid statutory orders include a general reference to the tech-
nical rules and standards or an undeﬁned reference to the state of the art, or
• the building and executory ordinances already include a direct reference to the
relevant applicable technical rules and standards.
44
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

In engineering, the possibilities used here are described by two focus points:
– on the one hand, safety through full standardization (as in electrical and civil
engineering) and
– on the other hand, safety engineering based on failure analysis (as in aero-
space engineering).
Hybrid forms of both focus points are also increasingly being used.
• Different assignments of safety responsibility are also common in the
application of law: manufacturer, owner (registered keeper), operator and
government agency.
• The potential for modiﬁcation is primarily limited to the technical rules and
standards or, depending on the circumstances, to the state of the art.
3.2.3.2
Transfer of the Safety Standard to Technologically Further
Developed Products
In the case of technologically further developed products, safety engineering takes
this form:
• Legal bases can be assigned unambiguously here as well.
• Supervisory bodies or institutions are also determined for the application in
question.
• Application of the state of the art turns out to be problematic here to a certain
extent:
– Statutory orders (with reference to the state of the art) remain valid.
– The safety-engineering applicability of the standards is nevertheless ques-
tionable and requires in each individual case clariﬁcation by safety engi-
neering based on failure analysis, which is always possible.
– There is no legal obligation to clarify the safety-engineering applicability of
the standards.
– There is the problem of the always present diversity of opinion in the exe-
cution of supervision.
• Different allocations of safety responsibility in the application of law: manu-
facturer, owner, registered keeper, operator, registered keeper and government
agency.
3.2.3.3
Transfer of the Safety Standard to Technologically Innovative
Products
With technological innovation projects, virgin territory must also be entered in
connection with safety engineering (e.g. in the development of magnetic levitation
3.2
Generating Safety
45

train technology) since the existing state of the art cannot cover the new, previously
unknown technology. The use of forward-looking probabilistic methods of risk
assessment is required here:
• Legal bases are not readily assignable:
– Stopgap solutions arise, such as the German legislation on the construction
and operation of test facilities testing the engineering for track-guided
transportation systems (Test Facility Act), without which a test facility
testing this innovative technology is not legally permitted.
– Supervisory bodies or institutions do not exist as yet and are to be deter-
mined separately for the individual application. In the case of the magnetic
levitation train, responsibility lays with the Ministry for Economics and
Transportation of Lower Saxony.
• Application of the state of the art is not possible here:
– Neither exhaustive legal regulations exist (the sole reference to the state of
the art is dubious here from the safety-engineering point of view),
– nor does any standardization exist from which a necessity for safety engi-
neering based on failure analysis arises.
– The problem is that, when experts are brought into provide assistance, a
diversity of opinions arises since there are no rules for an orderly, inter-
disciplinarily coordinated approach (see Sect. 3.2.2.1.1).
• The assignment of responsibility for safety here almost always remains with the
developer or manufacturer since the legal system does not as a rule provide for
other bodies which would assume or even only share such a safety
responsibility.
3.3
Limits of Safety
The limits of safety are blurred. They are determined, on the one hand, by the basic
conditions of development, production, and utilization processes and also by costs.
On the other hand, they result from the progressive state of scientiﬁc and technical
knowledge. Setting limits is necessary. This means proﬁt. As an ethical obligation
sensible renunciation is neither a weakness nor a deﬁciency. At the same time,
tendencies towards extreme relocations of limits are observed. The following
threatening scenarios emerge from this:
• endangerment of the foundations of nutrition (“purity” of food, animal feed and
drinking water),
• speciﬁc disturbances caused by criminal activity (sabotage, assassinations, ter-
rorist acts),
• war damage, acts of God, natural disasters,
46
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

• hazard from medicaments (deterrent warning of unexpected side effects) as well
as consumer goods, household chemicals and cosmetics and
• dangers of new technologies, e.g. pest control, use of genetic engineering and
nuclear energy technology.
From the ethical point of view (see Sect. 3.1.6), we should also add the fact that
humanity is not only responsible for preserving the foundations of its own existence
and that of subsequent generations but also the preserver and protector of all forms
of life (animal protection, preservation of biodiversity and protection of the bio-
sphere). On the other hand, a people on the subsistence level will and must ﬁght
exclusively for its self-preservation. Therefore, a reﬁned feeling for the effects of
technology may be regarded as a characteristic of a satisﬁed society. Views on the
drawbacks and beneﬁts of technology and its safety standards are therefore
inhomogeneous.
If the limits of safety are to be understood in the converse argument as a measure
of the threat to individual freedom, only a rational balance of protection of the
individual and protection of the community in a democratic process can deﬁne a
limit of safety. It must always be made clear in the process that this is a balancing of
interests between the intended and indisputably created beneﬁts and the damage
which is conceivable within the context of residual risk. Whatever the case, the
beneﬁciary is the solidarity community, which proﬁts as a whole.
In every case, the following basic ideas apply in deﬁning a safety concept:
• Absolute safety in the sense of zero risk cannot be demanded of the legislator or
regulation provider (risk ban) because it is not possible in principle.
• However, all possibilities should be used from this point of view so that there is
a well-balanced relationship between the risk of conceivable damage and the
beneﬁts created for the legal interests to be protected with different technical
products, processes, facilities and systems (risk equivalence).
• The measure for the largest damage still acceptable is determined not only by
the need for protection of the legal interests under consideration but also by the
intention to satisfy social needs (beneﬁts). In this process, a trade-off in the
social consensus is generally needed (risk management).
3.3.1
Socially Accepted and State-Deﬁned Limits
In a state governed by the rule of law the citizen may reliably expect that decisions
affecting life and health are publicly legitimized. This is not possible without
communication. The aim of this process cannot be to convince the other party that a
borderline risk is acceptable or unacceptable. The citizen should much more be put
in the position of implementing the right of co-determination in a “risk awareness”
as it were. This addresses the ability to make a personal judgement on the basis of
knowledge of the factually veriﬁable consequences of events or activities resulting
3.3
Limits of Safety
47

in damage, the residual uncertainties and other factors relevant to risk. This ability
should or will on the whole correspond to both the values for shaping the individual
life and the personal criteria for judging the acceptability of these risks for society.
In recognizing the co-determination of the individual citizen, it is the duty of
political institutions to set up and care for the communication basis required for this.
Risk communication calls for all forms of communication, from the simple docu-
mentation of results to speciﬁc information offers followed by dialogue and par-
ticipation in decision-making.
In a society in which pluralistic values prevail and political actions are always
under high pressure to justify themselves, setting limits and risk assessment often
meet with scepticism or suspicion. Statements about risks therefore rely on plau-
sibility and conﬁdence in the so-called regulatory bodies. The more individuals and
groups have the opportunity of active participation in risk assessment, the greater
the chance of them developing trust in political institutions and also taking on
responsibility themselves.
Participation, however, cannot and may not be a substitute for effective risk
management, and participation is solely a decision-making aid. Above all, the
responsibility of the legal decision-makers should not be obscured or softened by
this. Participation should be understood as
• a two-way ﬂow of information (as an indispensable precondition of proper
decision-making),
• early involvement of the parties involved and relevant social groups (if appli-
cable with a—justiﬁable—veto right) and
• co-decision.
The postulate “practical thinking” as a measure of the decision-makers requires that
the occurrence of a damaging event can “practically” be ruled out in accordance
with the state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge. Unlike “theoretical thinking”,
“practical thinking” does not, however, aim at a mere awareness of ideas but
simultaneously provides feasible orientations for action which are based on the
realization that there will always be a residual risk.
In view of the theoretically inﬁnite number of possibilities of damage precaution,
a corrective is seen in the form of “factual” and “rational” criteria and limits. In
terms of content, absolute exclusion of damage is not required. Rather, it is sufﬁ-
cient that the damaging event seems to be ruled out in practice according to the state
of knowledge of scientists and engineers including human discretion. Applied to
technical safety law, the demand for safety systems, for example, with reduced
failure probability presents such orientations for action. All design-engineering
precautions against multiple failures, especially simultaneous ones, are part of this.
What scientists and engineers often regard as incomprehensible is nevertheless
rational from the viewpoint of different social groups. The rationality of social
decisions in a highly complex system means serious challenges because all
democracies secure their legitimacy by close correspondence with public opinion.
Where under special circumstances the will towards practical rationality is, for
example, lacking because sociopolitical requirements are in the foreground, the
48
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

instruments of practical rationality are either not being used at all or not in
accordance with their inherent possibilities.
In general, the limiting risk cannot be determined quantitatively. It is usually
described indirectly by safety-engineering stipulations. This speciﬁcation or
determination of the limiting risk assumes that the probability of a damaging event
occurring and the extent of damage associated with particular technical products,
processes, facilities and systems are adequately known and qualitatively describ-
able. Describing and evaluating technical risks are thus also among the duties of
regulatory bodies or the state, which evaluates and includes the contributions of
affected parties (see Sect. 3.3.5.4).
3.3.2
Unattainability of Absolute Safety
Absolute safety cannot exist for several reasons:
• Technical processes never run with 100% reliability, in other words without any
incident, and therefore, the technical facilities concerned also cannot be immune
in themselves to every failure (safety devices such as “fail-safe” and
“fail-operational”).
• Material properties cannot be comprehended 100% and are therefore not entirely
reliable. (This awareness is taken into account in engineering by, for example,
worst-case scenarios and so-called safety factors.)
• The current state of knowledge is never completely and exhaustively
comprehensible.
• Economic feasibility sets limits to efforts for maximum safety.
• Human action is always subject to the possibility of error and mistakes.
Ignorance and the imperfection of technical safety can, however, be restricted.
However, the effects of safety-oriented measures compared to absolute safety can
only be described as an asymptotic approach. A damaging event can then only be
ruled out with absolute certainty if it is impossible by the laws of nature. Therefore,
the possibility of failure is basically inherent in every technical safety system.
Absolute safety can be achieved by no technical facility. There is always a residual
risk, although this must be lower than a speciﬁc limiting risk. Thus, a demand for
absolute safety or faultless solutions in complex technical systems leads in the
wrong direction.
Behind the classic question in safety engineering—“How safe is safe
enough?”—are hidden conﬂicting objectives: technical safety and practicability on
the one hand and ﬁnancial feasibility and social notions of safety on the other.
Where there is orientation solely towards a maximum in technical safety, it can
even be harmful to the user in cases of doubt. An excessively high level of technical
safety sometimes leads to a loss in practical manageability. Thus, increased com-
plexity in safety systems even brings with it the danger of an increase in risk.
3.3
Limits of Safety
49

Accordingly, from both the safety-engineering and the environmental, economic
and legal point of view, it is essential to generate optimized (in other words,
relative) safety. In this respect, the residual limiting risks of technical facilities,
products and operating modes should be determined and compared with the risks of
proven safety engineering, alternative products, other human environmental
impacts and the natural risks in life. The result should be guided by communica-
tions management towards extensive acceptance.
It is only by such comparative risk assessments that it is possible to identify the
scientiﬁc, technical and legal importance of the optimal safety of a technical
facility, product or operating mode. Protection of humans and their environment by
technical safety can and must be very well optimized but will always remain
relative.
3.3.3
The Understanding of Risk
The term “risk” is understood and used in different ways and is a frequently used
word nowadays. Therefore, it will be clariﬁed and deﬁned here in the context of this
publication on technical safety.
Risk is both the quantitative and the qualitative characterizations of damage with
regard to the possibility of its occurrence and the consequences of the damage
effect.
According to W. Bons [6], “risks are a typical modern way of dealing with
uncertainties”. A look at the historical origin of the risk concept shows that it
originated in mediaeval Italian cities in the context of long-distance trading.
Long-distance trading was just as much a tactical as an uncertain issue. These
uncertainties were not called dangers but rather seen as threats against which
nothing could be done but which were identiﬁed as risks (the Italian verb rischiare
means to risk being challenged). The merchant did not bow down to the uncer-
tainties but calculated on them and gambled on success. However, he no longer
regarded the uncertainties he encountered as fate-dependent threats but rather as
calculable risks—in other words, as problems which only manifested themselves
negatively when he had erred in his calculations and taken no precautionary
measures.
The complementary terms “risk—opportunity” describe the risk that an action,
activity or event will result in harm or beneﬁt, loss or gain, disadvantage or
advantage. The concept of risk has been discussed in more detail in connection with
the Atomic Energy Act, the legislation dealing with the peaceful use of atomic
energy and protection against its hazards. In this matter, the Atomic Energy Act,
with reference to the state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge, assumes a sepa-
ration between the dangers to be repelled and the probability of damage. The
probability of occurrence, the extent of certain damage and the associated
50
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

evaluation have a decisive inﬂuence on the classiﬁcation in the category-based
framework of hazard prevention, risk provisioning and limiting risk. Beyond hazard
prevention and risk provisioning the ﬁeld of so-called limiting risk begins, which
can at best be reduced to a “residual risk” and is borne by all citizens as a rea-
sonable social burden. The limiting risk implicitly derives from the sum of technical
regulations and responsible action in accordance with these regulations while
making use of the accumulated body of knowledge.
Accountability for the limits of safety lies in the readiness of the parties involved
to deal appropriately with risks following consideration of the technical, economic,
ecological and ethical aspects, to assess and evaluate the risks and to accept or reject
them when there is an overall result. Safety, rendered precisely here as technical
safety and deﬁned by a limiting risk, must be seen in a series of interactions—from
the aim and then over implementation and usefulness up to monitoring—and be
taken into account in risk perception.
Scientiﬁcally based risk analyses are useful and necessary tools in a rational
approach. Risks can only be understood with their help and options selected with
the lowest damage expectancy values. The public, however, perceives risk much
less scientiﬁcally than emotionally. If their feelings are to be listened to, it is
entirely rational to open scientiﬁcally logical risk analyses to these feelings.
However, in such a case, risk analysis could no longer be regarded as scientiﬁcally
logical. Analysis therefore remains in the ﬁeld of specialists. The general public
should, however, be involved in risk communication by which the results of
analysis can be made accessible to interested groups in society.
3.3.4
Factual Relationship Between Risk, Safety
Engineering and Technical Safety
Global events in our world are usually linked randomly and multi-causally and
therefore are neither foreseeable with mathematical accuracy nor determinable
beforehand. The complexity of these natural events offers the human very few, if
any, possibilities for inﬂuencing them. Locally limited interventions in nature are
possible to a very restricted extent, but the consequences resulting from them can
often not be estimated at all or only insufﬁciently. The human remains largely
exposed to natural events whereby a nature-related life hazard occurs. Natural risks
appear to be matters of fate.
The human has learnt to create technical devices ranging from the prehistoric
hand axe to the modern industrial complex and from the simple hearth to modern
energy supply. Unlike natural risks, the human can very well and even largely
manage the risks involved with the technical equipment he/she has created for
his/her own service. The whole arsenal of methods in safety engineering is at the
disposal of the human to control these technical risks. When these methods are used
3.3
Limits of Safety
51

competently and correctly, an extremely high level of technical safety can be
achieved. Technical equipment is deemed “technically safe” when the risk asso-
ciated with the presence and utilization of this technical equipment can be
demonstrably controlled so that a speciﬁc limiting risk is not exceeded (see
Sect. 3.3). The attributes of technical equipment which has been proven to be
technically safe are meant by the term “technical safety”.
This factual relationship can be summarized as follows:
• Natural risks can only be controlled to a limited extent, while technical risks can
be controlled just as the technology itself can.
• Safety engineering is the body of methods for controlling technical risks.
• Technical safety is generated and veriﬁed by application of safety engineering.
3.3.5
Safety-Engineering Feasibility
Technical safety is generated and maintained. The state must respond administra-
tively to the possibility of damage and technical risks in order to prevent harm to its
citizens. Technical safety legislation is used for this which reacts as a whole to the
special characteristics of technology and engineering in the form of the following
attributes:
• The time necessarily elapsing between the completed development of a new
technology and its legal regulation, which is only subsequently implemented,
has resulted in application-speciﬁc legal provisions. Technology legislation is
fragmented and applies in every case only to speciﬁc technical ﬁelds of appli-
cation (engineering ﬁelds).
• Putting into concrete terms the demand for technical safety, which for good
reasons is vaguely formulated, is shifted by the legislator to the legal users level
of the experts, authorities and courts.
• Legal demands for technical safety are deﬁned by vague legal terms such as
“generally accepted sound engineering practice”, “state of the art” or “state of
scientiﬁc and technical knowledge”. In this way, safety-engineering conditions
and behaviour requirements are formulated.
Technical products may only be put on the market if the technical facilities made of
them and properly maintained satisfy the safety objective of all relevant legal
regulations over an adequate, reasonable period. They must also be utilizable.
Technical safety is based, on the one hand, on the relevant knowledge of the active
individuals and those organizations directly involved in the ﬁeld of safety. On the
other hand, it is largely based on technical rules and standards, legal regulations and
load limits which differ according to the application orientation for historical rea-
sons and are often characterized by different technical languages.
52
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

3.3.5.1
Generally Accepted Sound Engineering Practice
The term “generally accepted sound engineering practice” is a legal term which has
long been used in criminal law as well. For example, under Article 323 of the
Criminal Code (Constructional Hazard), one is prosecuted who violates generally
accepted sound engineering practice and thereby endangers life and limb of another
person when planning, managing, executing or discontinuing construction work.
Generally accepted sound engineering practice is not only achieved when a rule is
regarded as correct according to scientiﬁc ﬁndings but must also be generally
recognized—in other words, by being consistently applied by the engineers con-
cerned and recognized in practice as correct.
This means that it is neither a question of whether science has recognized and
taught a rule nor, in addition, whether it has been recognized in the relevant specialist
literature. Rather, the architecture involved, engineering and building industry,
system (facilities, products) and process design—in other words, practice—must be
convinced of the necessity. This conviction must have established itself in such a
way that for the purpose of the law it is possible to speak of general acceptance.
According to the prevailing view, there is a factual assumption that a standard
reﬂects the “state of the art” at the time of its publication. Very frequently, however,
there is still a lack of practical application at the time of publication, especially
when the implementation of new technologies is concerned. In the case of very
lengthy standardization procedures for complex matters, it can also not be ruled out
that the standard at the time of publication no longer conforms with the general
opinion and the rules it sets and, therefore, no longer corresponds to the state of the
art. Nevertheless, there is a real presumption, which can be disproved at any time,
that the relevant standards reﬂect the “good engineering practice”, which is gen-
erally recognized.
“Generally accepted sound engineering practice” has been developed by
experts in consensus. It can be in written form or not but is, as a general rule,
codiﬁed. A standard can be generally accepted sound engineering practice but
does not have to. The prevailing opinion is that there is only a factual sup-
position that a standard is generally accepted sound engineering practice at
the time of publication, especially when it was produced in the process
according to DIN 820 “Standardization”. Technology legislation shapes its
demands with vague legal terms in order to form technical developments
efﬁciently within the legal framework. In order to make it more concrete, it is,
therefore, based on generally accepted sound engineering practice, these rules
also being grouped under the term “sub-statutory regulations”. The corre-
sponding legislation expresses, for example, the entirely refutable ﬁction that
all technical rules which are generally introduced and made known in leg-
islation are regarded as generally accepted sound engineering practice.
3.3
Limits of Safety
53

3.3.5.2
State of the Art
The “state of the art” is a vague legal term and represents the technical possibilities
at a certain point in time based on the established ﬁndings of science and tech-
nology. It is found in many regulations and contracts and is precisely deﬁned by the
regulations relating to legal formalization. The term is used to designate measures
which fall between generally accepted sound engineering practice and the state of
scientiﬁc and technical knowledge as regards their requirements of content.
The state of the art is the state of development of advanced processes, facilities
or operating modes which demonstrates that the practical suitability of the measure
for attaining a high standard in the desired objectives is safeguarded on the whole
(e.g. occupational health and safety, environmental protection, safety for third
parties, cost-effectiveness). It has, however, not yet been tested enough over a
sufﬁcient time period and is mostly only known to specialists. Therefore, in
building and plant engineering, for example, compliance with generally accepted
sound engineering practice is usually contractually required.
3.3.5.3
State of Scientiﬁc and Technical Knowledge
In contrast to the “state of the art”, the “state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge”
refers to a technical state of development in which processes and facilities are tested
in test and pilot facilities but have not yet been put into service (see Fig. 3.2).
Linking legal terms to the concept of the “state of scientiﬁc and technical
knowledge” relieves the legislator of detailed safety regulation for which it is
competent neither in the allocation of duties in the separation of powers nor in its
Fig. 3.2 State of the art-code of practice
54
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

expertise. By making reference to the “state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge”
(e.g. in Article 7 Sect. 2.3 of the Atomic Energy Act), the legislator thus requires
observance of scientiﬁc and technical development against the background of legal
regulation. Precaution for the minimization of technical risk must be taken, which is
regarded as essential according to the latest scientiﬁc ﬁndings.
In both ﬁelds of hazard assessment and hazard control, determination and
evaluation of the “state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge” must take into
consideration the scientiﬁc and technical principle of “balance”. A risk can be
ignored if it:
• occurs in isolation,
• is assessed as only minor,
• does not add up with other similar risks to a noteworthy risk contribution and
• would not, however, cause other greater risks under certain circumstances in the
case of its consideration.
The state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge is, however, used widely in tech-
nical regulations drawn up by different committees. The current state of research
and development within a speciﬁc scientiﬁc discipline is intended by the term “state
of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge”. It must be based on conclusive evidence
which will bear up against veriﬁcation by third parties. Specialists ﬁrst come to
agreement in this matter in scientiﬁc discussions in order then to make it accessible
to an expert public.
3.3.5.4
Methodology for Determining the Limits of Safety
The transference of limiting values for large-scale industrial facilities into
sub-statutory rules and regulations poses various problems. To begin with, there is
the question of legitimization of committee work, its membership and the procedure
for the knowledge acquired. Following this, it is often difﬁcult to get an overview of
the entire set of rules due to the large number of such committees and regulations,
and there are also overlaps and, in some cases, even contradictions. It is not uniform
in structure, systematics and wording and thus makes orientation difﬁcult in
application of the law. This happens to be dangerous in a ﬁeld where there is heavy
investment on the one hand and considerable risks for possible affected third par-
ties, including the burden of litigation, on the other hand.
An additional problem arises from the mixture of the objective ﬁndings of
research into truth and their evaluation. The aforementioned committees are regu-
larly qualiﬁed and legitimized for the truth-ﬁnding process and consequences
derived from this but not for the sociopolitical assessment of risks (see Sect. 3.3.3).
The safety-engineering feasibility in its step sequence and processing passes
more or less clearly through the phases of the product life cycle as described in
Sect. 3.1.5 (see also Fig. 3.2). This phase-based approach not only facilitates
3.3
Limits of Safety
55

technical management but also notably secures the necessary organizational mea-
sures and ﬁnally results in risk management.
The following two phases are assigned to the planning process in the product
life cycle:
• Conception phase
• Deﬁnition phase
The following two phases of the product life cycle are assigned to the imple-
mentation process:
• Development and engineering phase
• Production phase
Finally, the operation process comprises these two phases:
• Operation and utilization phase and
• Dismantling, disposal and recycling phase.
If new legislation and stricter regulations are required to tighten limiting values in
safety and environmental protection, this will not go unwelcomed in many coun-
tries throughout the world. In reality, noticeable improvements are already being
achieved at best in the medium and long term due to the time needed for the
legislative process and, consequently, transition periods. In this process, the effect
remains completely disregarded that every additional complication of the already
confusing body of legislation and rules increases the risk of the legal application
being impaired due to excessive demands and lack of knowledge. It would be
preferable to make today´s applicable laws and regulations relating to safety and
environmental protection considerably more transparent. This alone would make
for a signiﬁcant improvement in the standard of safety and environmental protec-
tion without a new law needing to be passed.
Reducing the complexity of technical installations, uncertainties and risks is
always
pursued
in
technical,
economic
or
environmental
problem
cases.
Compromises are therefore already inevitable here since the resources for imple-
mentation are limited and available information incomplete. By its very nature, a
compromise cannot represent an optimum but only what is feasible under the
circumstances and, therefore, does not claim absolute truth.
Risks must be minimized in a socially acceptable way and a balance always
found between individual and social beneﬁts. Compromises are unavoidable here
that are nevertheless ethically justiﬁable. It can be stated that determination of the
limits of safety is based on responsibility, acceptance, compromises, the measure of
practical thinking, political feasibility, economic opportunities and, ultimately, on
ethical standards. The deﬁnition of technical safety calls for practical feasibility and
cost awareness and is committed to progress in research and development. It is
determined by the current state of knowledge and social acceptance.
56
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
Safety can only be assured to the extent that it can be veriﬁed. It is shown here how
limits of veriﬁability are set, which methodical approaches exist for its improve-
ment, and which instruments have proven their worth for verifying the technical
safety of a technical product or system over the various phases of its life cycle.
3.4.1
Limits of Veriﬁability
3.4.1.1
Responsibility
3.4.1.1.1 Types of Responsibility
Technical processes, especially veriﬁcation of their safety, take place under the
responsibility of humans. The individual can take responsibility for veriﬁcation of
safety when it is manageable for him/her. However, more complex forms of
responsibility often occur in technology. Institutions or corporations have a speciﬁc
duty with respect to their customers, members, shareholders or society in com-
prehending this responsibility.
The responsibility of the individual arises, on the one hand, from the
responsibility of his/her role as a duty to the optimal fulﬁlment of assigned
tasks. Therefore, everyone is ﬁrstly responsible for the result and direct
consequences of their own actions. This also includes the results and con-
sequences of neglected acts. One special case of role responsibility is pre-
vention responsibility, which obligates a test engineer, for example, to search
a facility systematically for weaknesses and thus proactively prevent acci-
dents and malfunctions. On the other hand, everyone has the quite general
obligation beyond assigned obligations to respect and comply with basic
rights, such as the right to life, the right to private property.
Institutions themselves cannot bear responsibility in their legal function as
juristic persons. Responsibility must therefore be transferred to the persons acting in
each case who represent these institutions. The complexity of the tasks does,
however, call for a clear division of overall responsibility into ﬁelds whose scope
should be adapted to the possibilities of the individual.
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
57

3.4.1.1.2 Conﬂict Between Economic Constraints and Technical Necessity
A frequent case of conﬂict is between the responsibility of the institution man-
agement for invested funds and the responsibility for safety. The starting point is the
idea that the quantity and quality of goods and services are obviously better con-
trolled by the regulatory mechanisms of the market than by state control.
Optimization processes are encouraged by the inherent principle of competition
which, if not implemented, would lead to displacement from the market. In the case
of the usual goods and services, the regulating effect of the market provides for a
balance between the quantity and quality of a product and customer satisfaction. As
long as the customer is in a position to assess, check or experience the quality,
he/she can intervene in the market.
Should the market, however, be disrupted by external effects (outside inﬂuences)
or an uneven distribution of knowledge on the part of market participants, the state
must intervene in the free market by laying down target speciﬁcations for the
quality of products. In most cases, higher levels of quality are stipulated than would
arise in the free play of the market. The state thus takes precautions in the general
public interest. It enforces the constitutional principle of physical integrity for
technical safety. In addition, it fends off the high consequential costs for the public
sector which would be expected in the case of non-regulation.
Due to a number of reasons, the market principle can only be applied to a limited
extent to the ﬁeld of public-technical safety. In addition, the interesting main factors
here should be individually checked by the experts before a technical product is put
on the market.
Only a limited number of products have solely a safety function (e.g. ﬁre
extinguishers, safety valves, safety belts). The purchaser cannot always assess their
properties. It is important how frequently and in what situations the products in
question must prove their function: in routine use, normal use including common
incidents, accident situations or emergencies.
The customer cannot judge the quality of a ﬁre extinguisher which, in the ideal
case, never needs to be used. However, if the quality of a safety-relevant product
cannot be assessed, the regulating inﬂuence on the market is lost. Unsuitable
products threaten to survive on the market or, if there are price advantages, even to
dominate it.
It is much more common for goods to have a safety function in addition to their
utilitarian feature (e.g. process/transport containers, pipelines, truck brakes). In
these cases, the selling interest is overlaid by the safety function. If the selling
interest and the public safety interest move in the same direction, the market
supports the implementation of safe goods.
As experience shows, however, this principle fails in the case of shared or
unclear responsibilities. Negative customer experiences do not then make an impact
on the manufacturer of the goods. Safety deﬁciencies typically also occur when the
economic beneﬁts of a product or service decline in relation to duties or obligations.
Therefore, dangerous goods transports with high-quality products must deﬁnitely be
regulated differently from waste transportation.
58
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

3.4.1.1.3 Priorities in Deciding Responsibility Conﬂicts
There can be an optimum balance between economic expenditure and the safety
achieved, but this must be with the moral reservation of adequate safety. According
to Lenk and Maring [7], the following priorities arise in deciding conﬂicts of
responsibility and roles:
(a) Weighing the moral rights of every affected individual (see Sect. 3.1.6).
(b) Seeking a compromise which takes everyone equally into consideration in the
event of an irresolvable conﬂict between basic rights of equal value.
(c) Voting for a solution which results in the least harm to all parties may and
should occur only after weighing up the moral rights of every party.
(d) Only when points (a)–(c) have been applied are beneﬁts weighed against
drawbacks.
(e) In the event of practically irresolvable conﬂicts between the parties involved
fair compromises should be sought for the various parties with regard to harm
and beneﬁts (“Fair compromises” are, for example, an approximately evenly
distributed or justiﬁably apportioned distribution of burdens and beneﬁts).
(f) Universal moral responsibility usually has priority over task and role
responsibility.
(g) The public greater good and common welfare should precede all other speciﬁc
and minority non-ethical interests.
(h) Priority principles are also formulated in technical rules and standards.
According to DIN 31004-1:1982-11 (see Chap. 2), for example, in the case of
the term “safety” the following rule can be formulated with the aid of the
probabilistic parameter “risk”: “In safety-compliant design, preference should
be given to the solution with which the safety objective is best achieved in a
technically meaningful and cost-effective manner. In case of doubt, it should
ﬁrst be assumed that safety-related requirements take priority over economic
considerations”. On the other hand, it has been demonstrated, particularly in
civil aeronautical engineering, that such safety-related solutions are also usually
possible which are not necessarily in conﬂict with economic solutions.
(i) In the case of “urgency”, ecological compatibility overrides economic
application.
(j) Concrete humanity takes precedence over abstract requirements and universal
principles (precise human and socially acceptable weighing of goods).
3.4.2
Learning as a Continuous Task
Disturbances or accidents, even near-accidents (including negligently caused
deviations from intended operation), are unintentional, unexpected system states.
Since they are unexpected, there is also no possibility of their veriﬁability. It could
be shown in many event analyses that, although the action of the operator may have
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
59

triggered the disturbance, this alone does not sufﬁce for an “explanation”. Design,
construction, maintenance and management errors are frequently a long time before
the single action which triggered the disturbance and are also to be regarded as
necessary preconditions. These errors must be avoided or eliminated by systematic
experience feedback. In principle, there are three strategies for this objective.
3.4.2.1
Feed-Forward Control of Safety and Reliability
Probabilistic approaches to risk assessment, which also cover the actions of per-
sonnel in terms of a human reliability analysis (HRA), have long been systemati-
cally applied in diverse industrial sectors (among others, in the nuclear industry,
civil aviation and engineering). However, these methods leave something to be
desired. Although the necessary statistical data about failures in technical compo-
nents are comparatively good, the same is not true of the underlying statistical
information and the quality of the selected model concepts of human action. It must
be borne in mind that these methods only permit partial statements and thus have
certain weaknesses. Statistically sound databases are lacking, and these methods
thus largely work with expert opinions (“informed guesses”). However, this does
not have to detract from the possibilities of probabilistic methods. During the design
and engineering of technical facilities, these methods are useful in gaining
hypotheses and increasing awareness of human factor aspects (HF aspects) and
should be developed further. Nevertheless, they are not sufﬁcient on their own for a
resilient statement on safety.
3.4.2.2
Feedback Control of Safety and Reliability
People learn from experience, mainly from mistakes, and organizations learn from
events, including near-occurrences, which need to be analysed systematically. An
event-related reporting system with a direct relationship to systematic root-cause
analysis must be installed. The very few industries with a high risk potential have
an efﬁcient reporting system for incidents and accidents. Wherever supervisory
authorities prescribe a system of this kind and enforce a reporting obligation, it on
the basis of criteria is often felt to be burdensome. Incident reports beyond a
prescribed reporting threshold are even more rarely gathered, documented and
analysed, although exactly these reports would enable especially instructive
learning. Thought should be given to how such reporting systems are to be designed
and implemented below and beyond the reporting obligation so as to enable the
emerging maximum yield of knowledge demanded. This calls for a reorientation of
the error culture in Germany which culminates ultimately in communicating the
error occurring for the ﬁrst time and only punishing its recurrence.
60
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

3.4.2.3
System of Organizational Learning
The learning process must be institutionalized in the sense of organizational
learning. Both forms of safety control (“feed-forward” and “feedback”) can be
mutually enriching when brought into a systematic relationship. Such a relationship
must be created by setting up analysis and reporting databases. The following
should be taken into account here:
• standardized category systems,
• periodic analyses of several events,
• derivation of appropriate prevention concepts and
• up-to-date ascertained feedback of results to persons affected.
3.4.2.4
Determination of the State of the Art as Learning Scheme
Determining the state of the art is often the precondition for acting in conformity
with the law. Due to this prominent importance, various attempts were made to
systematize this (learning) process for determination of the requirements. It begins
with specifying for what the state of the art is to be determined, why and by whom.
In individual cases, this means the following:
• For what (for what object):
It can deal with a particular type of technical facility, speciﬁc facility, part of a
facility or facility component of safety-related importance.
• Why (for what purpose, from which cause):
The reason (context, background) is enquired into here, e.g. the implementation
of an approval procedure for a new facility, change (expansion, increase in
capacity, reduction in pollution emissions) or upgrading of an existing facility.
• By whom (person/ institution):
The type of business should be stated here (e.g. small-/medium-sized enterprise
or large company), which internal organizational units and external bodies are
involved and, in particular, who the decision-making is established with.
To determine whether a technical facility is state of the art, the following insights
can be used:
• comparable procedures, installations and operating methods,
• combination or linking of different safety measures and
• safety precautions in other types of technical facility which, in regard to their
technology and materials used, are comparable with the facility under
consideration.
Perception of the safety obligation should be implemented in three stages. These
steps make it clear that certain safety-related measures can be applied in deter-
mining the state of the art without an obligation already being derived from this.
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
61

These particular measures do not have to be implemented in the technical facility
being assessed since it is only a question of correspondence with the reference
parameter.
• In the ﬁrst stage, the state of the art is to be determined for a speciﬁc
safety-related assignment of tasks (e.g. in the context of a pilot or demonstration
installation) in order to serve as a reference parameter for the speciﬁc facility
under assessment.
• In the second stage, an evaluative consideration is carried out as to whether the
speciﬁc technical facility corresponds to the state of the art as determined.
A check is made to see whether the safety objectives are attained with the
designated measures for the speciﬁc technical facility (correspondence check).
• In the third stage, a decision is made—on the basis of the results of the
aforementioned stages—regarding the approval or supervisory procedures (legal
consequence).
3.4.2.4.1 Conditions for the Determination Process
Determination of the state of the art must take into account what has proved itself in
other comparable technical facilities in normal or test operation, or what the general
engineering stage of development demonstrates as practically suitable. If none of
these three criteria applies, a determination process should be initiated. In this case,
the following ﬁve conditions must be satisﬁed:
• All of the steps in the determination process must be completed, some steps
being repeated if necessary (iteration loops).
• The persons involved must be suitable.
• The sources of knowledge consulted must cover the subject area thoroughly.
• The methods and investigations applied must be suitable and sufﬁcient.
• The decisions must meet the legal standard of the state of the art.
Compliance with the state of the art is an obligation of the technical facility
operator. Failure to meet or comply with this obligation can have serious conse-
quences. Therefore, it is necessary to design the determination process method-
ologically and transparently and perform it with due diligence.
In certain cases, it is possible to determine the state of the art for a technical
facility on the basis of technical rules, administrative regulations or guidelines.
Such cases can occur when the boundaries of the technical facility, existing
materials and purpose of operation largely correspond to a technical facility
described in a technical rule, etc. The rules, guidelines or administrative regulations
consulted must be up-to-date and the necessary safety measures sufﬁciently
described. Special technical facility related or environmental hazard sources must
be excluded.
62
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

In general, the state of the art results from the basis of technical rules and the
results of discussions among experts.
3.4.2.4.2 Steps in the Determination Process
To determine the state of the art, the following seven process steps must be com-
pleted (corresponding to the ﬁrst stage in Sect. 3.4.2.4):
(a) deﬁnition of the task,
(b) gathering
the
safety-relevant
documents
and
data
of
the
technical
facility/process,
(c) determining the safety-relevant ﬁelds (process steps and technical facility
components),
(d) analysing possible hazard sources,
(e) determining and selecting knowledge sources,
(f) evaluating the knowledge sources collected and
(g) decision-making.
In this matter, the order of process steps (b) to (f) can vary depending on the
particular application case.
The process steps should be run in iteration loops until sufﬁcient certainty about
the state of the art is available. Iteration loops can comprise single or several
process steps.
Determining the state of the art is only to be regarded as one step in developing a
safety-engineering view. The following points are to be added:
• implementation of the state of the art with regard to the particular task,
• documentation of its implementation,
• investigation into and description of the residual risks and
• emergency planning.
3.4.2.4.3 Decision-Making
As a rule, different possibilities will arise as to how the state of the art can be
implemented in a speciﬁc technical facility. The design option ﬁnally selected must
be justiﬁed and explained in a comprehensible way.
By deﬁnition, processes, equipment and operating modes must
• have proved themselves in operation,
• have been successfully tested or
• have provided proof of their practical suitability
so that they can comply with the state of the art. Furthermore, the processes,
equipment and operating modes must correspond to the advanced state of
development. In this matter, a careful balancing of the effectiveness and
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
63

reliability of a safety measure with respect to the speciﬁc hazard source is a
basic requirement for preventing errors which could increase the likelihood of
hazardous incidents.
3.4.3
Controlling Technical Safety in the Product Life Cycle
It is known from quality management that the later a fault is discovered in the
planning or production process, the more it costs to eliminate it. This is certainly
also applicable to safety-related errors. To achieve optimum cost-effectiveness, one
must therefore demand to carry out the safety-related observation from the very ﬁrst
phase of development. This evaluation function can be integrated into the devel-
opment team or, whenever milestones are reached, take the form of an external
check by, for example, a central department (safety/quality) and, if necessary, a
third party.
The safety-related information collected and decisions made should be kept
available at all times in the subsequent phases of the product life cycle for
target/performance comparisons in terms of technical safety controlling. There is an
opportunity to structure this controlling information for the continuous installation
of the “safety case” in a hierarchy with safety objectives.
3.4.3.1
Phase-Based Pursuance of Technical Safety
A comprehensive hazard analysis should be performed for the entire object (system,
technical facility, product) in interdisciplinary collaboration (see Sects. 3.2.1 and
3.2.2). This should take into account technical facility-based and environmental
hazard sources, including natural conditions and events and interference by unau-
thorized persons.
The hazards and their causes should be analysed by means of a recognized,
proven test method. In this way, a sufﬁcient measure of thoroughness and depth of
testing can be assured. The object under investigation should therefore be limited to
manageable ﬁelds.
The criteria for terminating the hazard analysis should be recorded. Termination
criteria can concern, for example, the depth of testing, exclusion of particular
individual hazard sources, material properties and process parameters.
Both the collected documents and data and information from facility and site
inspections serve as a basis for the work. Should hazard analysis cover one or more
hazard sources, it should be determined which measures should be taken according
to the state of the art. Independently of this, the possible consequences of never-
theless conceivable disturbances should be determined, their risk assessed and
protective measures taken.
64
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

3.4.3.2
Organization of Veriﬁcation
In the organization of veriﬁcation, a distinction should be drawn between internal
and external inspections. External inspections can be organized under private law or
carried out on basic legal principles as required by the state (governmental agencies
or bodies authorized by the state).
Only by coordination of a body endowed with adequate authority can inspection
measures be reasonably augmented, unintentional gaps in veriﬁcation prevented
and the required information passed on. Its immediate task is to identify not only
adverse deviations important for the evaluation of inspection measures but also their
indirect effect of exerting a positive or negative inﬂuence on performance and/or
quality.
3.4.3.2.1 Elements of Veriﬁcation
With regard to the nature and scope of veriﬁcation, a distinction can be drawn
between:
• manufacturer inspection or testing, whether regulated only internally or also
externally,
• third-party inspections by an independent third party carried out either inde-
pendently of manufacturer inspections or relating exclusively to verifying the
correct performance of manufacturer inspections and
• acceptance inspections by the purchaser which are used for assessing and ver-
ifying the quality of goods or services at the transfer of responsibility or
ownership.
Manufacturer inspections are always carried out in-house. Depending on the
importance of the veriﬁcation, they can take the form of a self-check or be carried
out by persons not directly involved in the manufacturing process.
Internally regulated manufacturer inspections—like special measures for
checking production—fall within the sole responsibility of the manufacturer.
Planning veriﬁcations include both the clear deﬁnition of rules for the assess-
ment and corrective and/or preventive measures in the case of negative inspection
results. The importance of the individual elements of the veriﬁcation requires
documentation.
3.4.3.2.2 Grading of Veriﬁcation
The effectiveness of veriﬁcation measures depends on the following factors:
• degree of independence of inspection from the process concerned,
• qualiﬁcation of the inspection personnel,
• intensity of checks (frequency and scope of inspections),
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
65

• evaluation criteria and action taken in the event of negative inspection results
and
• use of multiple independent inspections.
Quality assurance stages and their assignment to hazard categories can be deﬁned
based on these factors, and individual items can come under different quality
assurance stages.
3.4.3.3
The Modular Concept of the European Union
There is strong pressure to privatize the inspection and monitoring functions per-
formed up to now by the state. This is often justiﬁed by the potential to increase
efﬁciency or the responsibility of the manufacturer. Another reason is to be found in
the process of European integration: the EU member states are acting on the
assumption that barriers to free trade in the internal market can be dismantled more
quickly by a private approval body. In the early 1990s, in particular, these ten-
dencies to shift risk to the private sector (in conjunction with the transference of
responsibility) have resulted in a real explosion of formal quality management
systems and the associated auditing. For this reason, the costs and beneﬁts of
quality management systems and their audits have become a central point of dis-
cussion in the veriﬁcation of technical safety.
The EU’s New Approach1 and the Global Approach for conformity assess-
ment2—including subsequent module decisions3—are a prime example of the
privatization and grading of control procedures in technical safety law. The Global
Approach and the module decisions of the EU describe control procedures to be
used in the EU’s legislative proposals for the free movement of goods. The modules
constitute a graded system which ranges from the manufacturer’s declaration
(Module A) to the individual approval of the product by an independent third party
(Module G) and comprehensive quality assurance (Module H). The EU directives
and the national legislation derived from these contain a selection of modules which
take into account the risk of the regulated product. To qualify their product for the
1Resolution of the Council 90/C10/010 dated 07.05.85 regarding a “new approach” in the ﬁeld of
technical harmonization and standardization, Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Community,
No. C 136 dated 04.06.85, pages 1–9.
2Resolution of the Council 90/C10/010 dated 21.12.89 regarding a “global approach ” for con-
formity assessment, Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Community, No. C 010 dated 16.01.90,
pages 1–2.
3Decision of the Council 90/683/EEC dated 13.12.90 regarding the modules to be used in the
technical harmonization directives for the various phases of conformity assessment procedures,
Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Community, No. L 380 dated 31.12.90, page and the Decision of
the Council 93/465/EEC dated 22.07.93 regarding the modules to be used in the technical har-
monization directives for the various phases of conformity assessment procedures and the rules for
afﬁxing and using the CE conformity marking, Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Community,
No. L 220 dated 30.08.93 pages 23–39.
66
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

EU internal market, the manufacturer can select from these modules the one which
best meets their production needs unless otherwise speciﬁed by a product-speciﬁc
directive.
With the creation of the EU internal market, the previous limits of national
security structures have been shifted to the borders of Europe itself. In the case of
global activities, there must be mutual adjustment of the various safety structures
(compatibility clauses or reconciliation).
Germany has, until now, actively participated in risk minimization by govern-
mental agencies or bodies authorized by the state to carry out, in their sovereign
function, safety veriﬁcations or participate in them (implementation responsibility
of the state). The relevant EU directives, on the other hand, want even these
state-conducted veriﬁcations to be left to the free market and only monitored by the
state (pure guarantee responsibility of the state). Although it used to be possible for
safety-related professional expertise to remain linked with state agencies, it must
now be procured on the open market. A safety methodically concept is presented
with this VDI publication (see Chap. 4) which makes it possible, in any techno-
logical ﬁeld of application, to systematically generate, verify and maintain technical
safety for technical systems, facilities, processes and products. In this matter, due
regard is to be paid to the risk-controlling function of the state—in other words, the
necessary contribution to implementation responsibility and the possible share of
guarantee responsibility are to be speciﬁed.
3.4.3.4
Control Directive of the European Union
The European Union (EU) is committed to promoting within its territory the free
market through the free movement of goods, capital, services and individuals. On the
one hand, it has laid down quality requirements for the marketing of products with
safety- or health-related attributes and has intervened in the market to this extent. On
the other hand, it has opened up the market for services in connection with the
conformity certiﬁcate. Testing, certiﬁcation and monitoring are in principle—subject
to national restrictions—open to anyone and are thus open to free competition.
To secure the aims of the EU, instruments have been created in the form of
independent conformity certiﬁcates. With its New Approach, the EU is increasingly
replacing existing responsible authorities and ofﬁcially recognized experts with
“notiﬁed bodies” with rights and obligations in testing and certiﬁcation. This new
concept assumes that the services of these notiﬁed bodies are subject to the free
market (liberalization).
3.4.3.5
Planning Process
The planning process includes the conception phase and the deﬁnition phase (see
Sect. 3.3.5.4). The following objectives and purposes are pursued in these two
phases.
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
67

3.4.3.5.1 Objective and Purpose
Objectives are characterized by the fact that they are uniquely qualiﬁed and
quantiﬁed by content, time and scope. Individual objectives for the responsible
employees are derived and developed in a process of agreement about objectives
and are appropriate for the level concerned. Depending on the employees’ ﬁelds of
responsibility, these might be objectives relating to proﬁt contribution, costs or
performance. By combining them, consistent target systems can be developed
which are suitable with regard to both responsibilities and decision-making.
Guidance by agreement about objectives is clearly superior to simply specifying
objectives since employees are included in the process of identifying objectives.
The safety-related part of the design phase is the collection and analysis of
available information about safety. The programme in which it is basically possible,
from the safety-engineering point of view, to develop new products (and also
systems and technical facilities) is deﬁned by external requirements. These
requirements derive from sales markets, society, legislation, technological devel-
opment, supplier and raw materials markets as well as from the internal capabilities
of the company, such as the workforce and their qualiﬁcations, the existing product
range and production resources.
An agreed quality requirement must be reﬂected in the result of the product life
cycle. It consists of the totality of relevant individual requirements relating to the
quality of the product. The most important aspect for the requirements which
determine quality is for them to be measurably included in test plans and provided
with tolerances (see Sect. Fehler! Verweisquelle konnte nicht gefunden werden).
As regards safety, the focus of the design phase is on the following activities:
• organization of safety-related activities taking into account the state of scientiﬁc
and technical knowledge,
• deﬁnition of responsibilities and competences in the ﬁeld of safety,
• gathering together all technical requirements relevant to safety from, for
example,
technical
standards,
relevant
legislation
and
other
rules
and
regulations,
• evaluation of the “lessons learned” from previous events,
• determination of hazard potentials,
• deﬁnition of the higher-level “safety requirements catalogue” for the entire
system or entire technical facility
• statement of safety requirements,
• deﬁnition of a rough structure for performing the safety task and
• veriﬁcation that this higher-level safety requirements catalogue is coherent in
itself and satisﬁes the relevant regulations and that the safety requirements
stipulated in this catalogue can always be tested and veriﬁed.
In the deﬁnition phase, the same activities are basically included for safety as in the
conception phase—but, in many cases, in a more concrete form and with the
addition of traceable archiving:
68
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

• assessment of the organization of safety-relevant work and likewise, where
appropriate, its adaptation to alterations in the deﬁnition phase,
• conﬁrmation or redeﬁnition of responsibilities or competences in the ﬁeld of
safety where changes in responsibilities and competences emerged for the
deﬁnition phase,
• continuation in the collection of all technical requirements relevant to safety
from, for example, technical standards, relevant legislation and other rules and
regulations,
• continuation of the “lessons learned” aspect and evaluation of every structural
unit to be deﬁned here,
• hazard analysis, determination of limiting risks and risk equivalents,
• deﬁnition and release of the safety requirements catalogue and the corre-
sponding safety-related limiting values,
• deﬁnition of the subordinate safety requirements catalogue for each structural
unit to be deﬁned here in a logical continuation of the higher-level safety
requirements catalogue for the entire system or entire technical facility,
• application of the safety methodically concept for every structural unit to be
deﬁned here,
• traceable archiving of the documentation which has been created and
• veriﬁcation that the safety requirements catalogues deﬁned here for the subor-
dinate structural units are coherent in themselves, do not conﬂict with the
higher-level safety requirements catalogue and satisfy the relevant regulations.
The safety requirements laid down in these catalogues must also be demon-
strably veriﬁable.
3.4.3.5.2 Materials and Sampling Procedures
In order to evaluate the homogeneity of the materials to be used, the manufacturer
must make a statistically random selection from an internally homogenous totality
(from a production batch, for example)—in other words, a random sample. It
must come from a representative number of samples from a batch of reference
materials in question. This evaluation procedure should be implemented and doc-
umented in compliance with recognized, uniform sampling plans (according to
DIN ISO 2859-1 “Sampling procedures for inspection by attributes”).
In the case of production of single items (one-offs), the suitability of the material
must be indicated on the basis of an analogous procedure with a speciﬁc method of
veriﬁcation.
3.4.3.5.3 Veriﬁability of Requirements
It must be ensured that only suitable products and services are procured which can
also comply with requirements. In this case, a check must be made of all
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
69

subcontractors and suppliers to ascertain whether they have the necessary quality
capability, and the procurement documents must contain all relevant data and be
veriﬁable. Traceability should make it possible to track the creation process, uti-
lization or location of a structural unit on the basis of its identiﬁcation, which has
also been recorded. Traceability relates in particular to
• the origin of materials and structural units,
• the processing history of the product and
• the distribution and whereabouts of the product after delivery.
3.4.3.5.4 Consideration of the Potential Conﬂict Between Cost-Effectiveness
and Technical Safety
The proﬁt-oriented market principle is not a sufﬁciently suitable safety instrument
for the ﬁeld of public-technical safety and can, for a number of reasons, only be
applied to a limited extent here. In this case, the main factors of interest should be
individually examined and taken into consideration:
• The product “safety”
In addition to other factors affecting technical safety—such as training or
expertise, the general safety culture and the degree to which regulations are
observed—safety is here classiﬁed under goods and services.
• The user
In evaluating the products and services on offer, the user makes decisions pri-
marily for himself/herself and normally does not taken into consideration the
interests of the common good. Therefore, this case cannot be included as a
robust variable in safety-related analyses. Taking into consideration, the inter-
ests of third parties or the general public must therefore be enforced or achieved
through positive incentives.
• The public interest
The state intervenes in the market in order to protect the general public and the
environment. It thus implements precautions for the common good and public
safety and order. In order to enforce this, requirements are made regarding
quality and operation and a graduated control system is also provided with
instruments for independent proof of conformity.
• Governmental supervision (market surveillance)
In the liberalized testing and certiﬁcation market in Europe—possibly the
intended future of the majority of the countries participating in the EU—it
cannot in some cases be assumed that goods and services with a safety function
are provided for the public beneﬁt. In such cases, the instrument of market
surveillance is an indispensable element in safeguarding the public safety
interest. Setting up a market surveillance body is a necessary though not suf-
ﬁcient instrument for the ﬁeld of technical safety. Safety is both an individual
and a collective need which cannot be consistently satisﬁed by market forces.
70
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

This is especially true of forward-looking collective needs. Therefore, Germany
as a state must regulatively intervene in the market—in other words, be in
disagreement with a change in the possibly intended future of the majority of
European countries.
3.4.3.5.5 Responsibilities
The responsibilities for all veriﬁcation or inspection measures, especially as regards
the implementation of measures when veriﬁcation or inspection results are inade-
quate, must be clearly and unambiguously regulated. All veriﬁcation or inspection
results must be recorded. If several contractors and subcontractors are involved in
the manufacturing or production process and wrong decisions or gaps in veriﬁcation
can cause signiﬁcant consequences, a veriﬁcation or inspection plan will be
necessary.
3.4.3.6
Implementation Process
The implementation process consists of the development and engineering phase and
the production phase. The basic objective of the implementation process essentially
coincides with that of the planning process (see Sect. 3.3.5.4). In the production
phase, however, it is only possible to work with the instrument of agreement on
objectives under very speciﬁc constraints, and the instrument of deﬁnition of
objectives will have to be applied more often.
3.4.3.6.1 Objective and Purpose
The main points of emphasis in the development and engineering phase (see
Sect. 3.3.5.4) as regards safety are the following activities:
• checking the organization of safety-relevant work and, if necessary, its adjust-
ment to any possible changes during the development and engineering phase,
• setting up quality and safety management with a redeﬁnition of responsibilities
and competences in the safety ﬁeld if changes in responsibilities and compe-
tences have arisen for the development and engineering phase,
• continuation in the collection of all technical requirements relevant to safety
from, for example, technical standards, relevant legislation and other rules and
regulations,
• determination of probabilities of occurrence and the extent of damage for each
type of failure,
• continuation of “lessons learned” and evaluation for each technical component
to be developed or engineered,
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
71

• involvement of relevant institutions (authorities, public-interest bodies, notiﬁed
bodies, experts, etc.) in the generation and veriﬁcation of safety insofar as this is
legally and factually necessary for effective supervision,
• application of safety requirements and their implementation for every structural
unit to be developed or engineered here by the safety methodically concept,
which is applied precisely for this purpose,
• veriﬁcation that the safety requirements applied and implemented here
– are effective for subordinate structural units,
– are not in conﬂict with the higher-level safety requirements catalogue,
– comply with the relevant regulations and
– comply with the safety requirements as deﬁned in detail:
• optimization of speciﬁed safety precautions (e.g. inhibition of the utility func-
tion, fail-safe, fail-operational),
• Checking and veriﬁcation of the speciﬁed safety requirements for the individual
concepts concerned here and doing so during the course of qualiﬁcation (type
test, etc.) and
• submission of a safety report (as the formal conclusion of safety veriﬁcation)—
if necessary, as a component of the safety case (see Sect. 3.2.2.8).
As regards the main focus of the production phase (see Sect. 3.3.5.4), there are
the following activities in the ﬁeld of safety which, in part, represent a further
detailing of activities from the development and engineering phase but are, for the
most part, speciﬁc to the production process:
• review of the organization of safety-relevant work and its adaptation to possible
changes in the production phase where necessary,
• within the framework of quality management, redeﬁnition of responsibilities and
competences for the ﬁeld of safety should changes have arisen in responsibilities
and competences for the production phase,
• involvement of the appropriate quality assurance organization (either in-house
or external) in the production process with emphasis laid on safety requirements
and attributes,
• ensuring that the manufacturing processes used are not only cost-effective but
also always reproducible—and that with the emphasis on safety,
• involvement of relevant institutions (authorities, public-interest bodies, notiﬁed
bodies, experts, etc.) in the generation and veriﬁcation of safety insofar as this is
legally and factually necessary for effective supervision,
• implementation in production of the relevant state of the art or application in
production of generally accepted sound engineering practice and, in all cases,
paying due regard to technical requirements relevant to safety: for example, in
technical standards, production and quality regulations,
• veriﬁcation that the safety requirements applied and implemented here
– are effective for subordinate structural units,
– are not in conﬂict with the higher-level safety requirements catalogue,
72
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

– comply with the relevant regulations,
– meet the detailed safety requirements and
– are checked, veriﬁed and traceably documented during the course of tech-
nical acceptance (acceptance testing or similar).
During acceptance testing, veriﬁcation is required of the conformity of the manu-
factured products (or system or technical facility) with the safety requirements
worked out and laid down in the preceding phases.
3.4.3.6.2 Hazard Analysis
Hazards and their causes must be analysed using a tried and tested method of
investigation. In this way, sufﬁcient thoroughness and depth of testing can be
assured. The structural unit to be investigated may need to be divided into man-
ageable sections.
A comprehensive hazard analysis should be carried out for the entire structural
unit. This should take into account facility-speciﬁc and environmental hazard
sources, including natural conditions and events and interference by unauthorized
persons.
The documents and data which have been collected together with information
from facility and, where applicable, site inspections will serve as a basis for the
work.
If hazard analysis covers one or more hazard sources, it should be determined
which measures should be taken according to the state of the art. Independently of
this, the possible consequences of nonetheless conceivable disturbances should be
determined and evaluated with regard to the risk of damage occurring and its
effects. Safety measures should be taken while paying due regard to the normative
requirements applicable to the limiting risk.
3.4.3.6.3 Veriﬁability of Requirements
The requirements emerging from the preceding phases are veriﬁed as follows:
• As regards the type and importance of tests and inspections, a distinction should
be drawn between serial production with the objective of consistent quality and
single-item production with the objective of complying with planning
speciﬁcations.
• Deviations detected can be managed by corrective measures. With regard to
control of the manufacturing process, attention should be paid to the repro-
ducibility of the production process (non-conformities) in the case of series
production while priority is given to preventive measures in single-item
production.
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
73

3.4.3.6.4 Inspection and Approval of the Planning Documents
• Examination of draft design, dimensioning and structural design
It is important to check that all relevant hazards have been identiﬁed and
appropriate measures provided for their prevention. This particularly concerns
the appropriate choice of the system, materials and designs, processes and
auxiliary resources for both the execution and the layout (accessibility). Among
other things, a check should also be made whether
– all essential organizational requirements, such as speciﬁc trade and opera-
tional qualiﬁcations, can be met,
– all tests or inspections required for the execution are provided, and
– all terms of use and, where applicable, necessary conservation measures are
speciﬁed before commissioning.
• Planning documents can be inspected in different ways with different amounts of
effort. Among other things, a check will be made to see whether
– the calculation includes the relevant requirements and actual inﬂuences,
boundary conditions and conditions of use,
– veriﬁcations are maintained for all major components,
– suitable computational models are used,
– there are no contradictions in the calculation,
– all design assumptions are correctly tracked through the system, and
– no damage is caused by modiﬁcations of either components or the system.
As regards the type of inspection, a distinction may be drawn between:
– a full comparative calculation carried out independently of the present cal-
culation and in which important dimensioning results are compared,
– a partial checking calculation in which only crucial parts of the calculation
are checked in detail by recalculation or comparative calculation and
– inspection of manufacturing/construction documentation.
• The manufacturing/production documentation must contain all information
necessary for the execution, such as tolerance limits or changes as well as
instructions relating to the course of production. In addition, it is important here
that dimensioning results were correctly transferred, the drawings meet given
requirements, additional necessary constraints must be observed, and the plans
are clear and unambiguous.
3.4.3.6.5 Traceability of Documentation
The manufacturer must have a quality management system which typically includes
the following items:
74
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

• documentation and traceable archiving of design documents,
• provisions to ensure an appropriate selection (e.g. sample matrix, particle size,
concentration range) of possible reference materials,
• preparation methods,
• assessment and quantiﬁcation of the required degree of homogeneity of the
material,
• evaluation of the stability of the material, even continuously if necessary,
• procedure for characterization of the required properties,
• practical implementation of the traceability of legal units of measurement to
national or international standards,
• assignment of attribute values, including preparation of certiﬁcates or statements
in accordance with ISO Guide 31 “Reference materials” if appropriate,
• provision of suitable production facilities and
• regulations regarding suitable possibilities for identiﬁcation, labelling and
packaging, packing and shipping procedures, as well as after-sales service.
The documentation and archiving system must clearly indicate which activities
are to be carried out by the manufacturer and which by collaboration partners. It
must also contain the regulations and procedures being used by the manufacturer.
3.4.3.6.6 Approval Procedure
The manufacture of certain important safety-related products may already be sub-
ject to mandatory ofﬁcial approval or authorization. These obligations (approval
process) must be included in the quality management system and complied with.
The safety management system should, in all cases, be considered a constituent
part of the quality management system. Approvals also often stipulate that con-
sideration must be given to protection against unauthorized access (“security”).
The quality management system itself is subject to a periodic certiﬁcation pro-
cess by third parties, the so-called accredited certiﬁers.
3.4.3.6.7 Utilization of Materials
• Quality assurance system (in-house and external monitoring with documentation
for traceability):
– Several factors can cause the actual performance to deviate unacceptably
from nominal speciﬁcations. These factors include, for example, changes in
material and component properties, uncertainties in installation or con-
struction or faults and errors in the different manufacturing steps. To combat
this, control measures should be included in all major phases of execution
(precautionary monitoring of the execution of work).
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
75

– If there is a risk of attributes changing impermissibly or contrary to expec-
tations during the utilization phase, special conservation measures may be
necessary (accompanying monitoring before commissioning).
• Compatibility of the components
The manufacturer must conduct internal audits of his/her activities at regular
intervals and in accordance with a previously deﬁned plan and procedure. By
doing so, he/she demonstrates that the activities still comply with the require-
ments of the quality management system.
The internal auditing programme of must address all elements of the quality
management system described in the quality management manual. This also
includes the technical and production activities which result in attribute values
being assigned to a reference material (material compatibility, “ﬁt, form, func-
tion”). It is the responsibility of the quality assurance representative to schedule
and organize audits in accordance with the established programme and at the
request of management. Such audits must be performed by trained and qualiﬁed
personnel. Where resources permit, the personnel must be independent of the
activity being audited.
Personnel may not audit their own activities unless this is necessary and its
effective performance can be demonstrated.
3.4.3.6.8 Market Surveillance/State Supervision
The instrument of market supervision is an indispensable element of the state’s
regulatory action for enforcement of public safety concerns in legal aspects.
Availing itself of its legal options, the state can intervene in the market and elim-
inate undesirable developments. The state does this in a variety of ways, either by
retaining suitable supervisory ofﬁcials or by using “appointed contractors”.
The manufacturer must create transparency (traceability) for the action of (state)
market surveillance.
3.4.3.7
Operation Process
The operation process includes the operation and utilization phases into which, at
the completion of utilization, the dismantling, disposal and recycling phases can
also normally be integrated (see Sect. 3.3.5.4).
3.4.3.7.1 Objective and Purpose
As an instrument for achieving objectives, the objective deﬁnition by which
cost-effective, reliable and safe operation is to be achieved stands to the fore.
76
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

In the operation and utilization phase (see Sect. 3.3.5.4), a distinction should be
drawn between products (technical facilities, goods and services) not requiring and
those requiring an approval before going into operation. In either case, the fol-
lowing aspects must be taken into consideration:
• safety management,
• safety monitoring and
• safety during the course of retroﬁtting work.
The same procedures apply, in principle, to the dismantling, disposal and recycling
phases (see Sect. 3.3.5.4) as described in the preceding phases but, due to a frequent
lack of relevant sound engineering practice, with a greater testing or surveillance
effort. Making matters more difﬁcult is the fact that the processes involved in the
dismantling, disposal and recycling phases are not standard processes and, there-
fore, the personnel concerned must perform their duties with special attention and
responsibility. Above all, managerial staff must set up an appropriate and suitable
quality management system oriented to the special process steps in the dismantling,
disposal and recycling phases.
As regards safety, the focus in the dismantling, disposal and recycling phases is
on the following activities:
• organization of work relevant to safety,
• deﬁnition of responsibilities and competences in the ﬁeld of safety,
• evaluation of the “lessons learned” from previous events in order to determine
preventive measures,
• grandfathering from earlier limiting values,
• deﬁnition of the higher-level safety requirements catalogue for the entire dis-
mantling, disposal and recycling phases and
• veriﬁcation that this higher-level safety requirements catalogue is coherent in
itself and satisﬁes the relevant regulations and that the safety requirements
stipulated in this catalogue can also always be tested and veriﬁed.
3.4.3.7.2 Approval
Industrial plants and business enterprises which are sources of environmental
pollution or important as regards safety require an approval in accordance with the
relevant legislation. The approval procedure should ensure that
• employees and, where applicable, the neighbourhood and even general public
are protected against injurious environmental inﬂuences and other hazards,
• necessary precautions are taken against injurious environmental inﬂuences and
other hazards as well as against signiﬁcant disadvantages or annoyances,
• waste is avoided, recycled or, if not avoidable or recyclable, properly disposed
of, and
• energy is used thriftily and efﬁciently.
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
77

A check is also made during the approval procedure to see whether other regula-
tions under public law (such as nature conservation legislation, legislation relating
to water and building code legislation) have been observed and measures for
occupational health and safety implemented.
An approval can include numerous other ofﬁcial decisions (concentration effect).
The ofﬁcial procedures are bundled by, for example, building permits, permits
for installations requiring monitoring as required in the Equipment and Product
Safety Act and declarations of suitability for facilities used for storing, ﬁlling,
trans-shipping, manufacturing, treating or using substances hazardous to water.
3.4.3.7.3 Status Checks
All operational procedures need to be systematically checked at regular intervals. In
this way, it is possible to identify not only potential sources of non-conformities but
also all possibilities for improvement, either of a technical nature or within the
quality management system. Flow charts must be developed, implemented and
monitored so as to reduce the probability of the occurrence of non-conformities and
to observe the beneﬁts arising from the improvements. The results of the preventive
measures must be submitted for purposes of management review.
3.4.3.7.4 Instructions for Use
Instructions for use help in maintaining quality during operation and must be
prepared in writing and in detail in the quality agreements and handed over to the
user by the manufacturer. Instructions for use are a constituent part of quality
planning on the basis of the quality management system. Due observance should be
given here to the Equipment and Product Safety Act and relevant legal regulations.
3.4.3.7.5 Maintenance
In order to meet the requirements applicable to technical facilities, products only
need to contribute to the extent that these facilities are also properly maintained.
According to standard DIN 31051:2012-09 (see Chap. 2), maintenance is
understood as all the measures taken to maintain or restore the nominal condition of
technical systems and facilities in as far as they are not modiﬁed. This includes
terms such as routine maintenance, inspection and repair.
3.4.3.7.6 Retroﬁtting
For complex systems and industrial goods with a long service life (such as com-
mercial aircraft, rail track networks, large-scale chemical plants and power stations),
78
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

efforts are often made to secure an extension of their service life. Depending on the
extent of the necessary retroﬁtting, subordinate measures undertaken during the
various phases of the life cycle may need to be repeated so that the same operational
and service condition is secured with a return to service as was present before
retroﬁtting.
In certain areas, the law requires retroﬁtting in accordance with the state of the
art or the state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge.
3.4.3.8
Quality Management in Safety Engineering
3.4.3.8.1 Role and Beneﬁts of Quality Management Systems
The systematic evaluation and realization of technical requirements is the basis of
every
quality
management
system
such
as,
for
example,
according
to
DIN EN ISO 9000 “Quality management systems”. These requirements apply to
all phases. Since they are already included in the planning process, this situation
represents a decisive step for quality management as the costs arising from mistakes
increase with every subsequent step.
A quality requirement which can be fulﬁlled involves well thought-out quality
planning consisting of the following main elements:
• planning for the identiﬁcation, classiﬁcation and prioritizing of the quality
characteristics
of
the
product,
speciﬁcation
of
objectives
and
quality
requirements,
• planning management and implementation activities, such as preparing the
application of the quality management system with ﬂow charts and time
schedules,
• preparation
of
quality
management
plans
with
utilization
of
the
non-conformities management system and
• establishment of a process for continuous quality improvement (e.g. “lessons
learned”).
Provided the quality management system is applied consistently, achievement of
the required product quality may be expected. This expectation must be able to
assume a high degree of reliability in the system used. The successful conformity of
the product with the requirements and the relevant documents is an outward indi-
cation of this expectation.
For laboratories, for example, which determine the characteristic data of mate-
rials, there is an auditable management system in the form of the Good Laboratory
Practice (GLP) standards of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD). A directive has made this mandatory for the members of
the EU.
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
79

3.4.3.8.2 Quality Management System and Qualiﬁed Personnel
At predeﬁned intervals, the product supplier must audit the quality management
system. These intervals should be chosen in such a way that suitability and effec-
tiveness can be ensured in complying with both requirements and the established
quality policy and its objectives. For the purpose of traceability, the corresponding
records must be kept and archived to a sufﬁcient extent.
The manufacturer must set up, implement and maintain a quality management
system—usually according to DIN EN ISO 9000 “Quality management sys-
tems”—appropriate to his ﬁeld of activity and including the type, scope and scale of
production. The manufacturer must deﬁne and document his/her quality manage-
ment policy, objectives and commitments.
The quality management must further engage in producing reference materials.
These must comply with the deﬁnitions given in ISO Guide 30 “Reference mate-
rials—selected terms and deﬁnitions” and the characteristic values evaluated by
using approved statistical methods. The quality management system must also
commit itself to complying with the provisions of ISO Guide 31 “Reference
materials” with regard to material certiﬁcates and the provision of the corre-
sponding information to users. Furthermore, quality management must also specify
the intended use of the supplied material and commit the manufacturer’s organi-
zation to ensuring that customers are fully informed.
The obligations of the manufacturer in detail:
• The manufacturer must have at his/her disposal managerial staff supported by
technical staff who, in turn, must have the powers and resources to perform their
duties. The technical staff must also identify deviations from either the quality
management system or the procedures for preparing the reference material and
be able to initiate processes to prevent or minimize such deviations.
• The manufacturer must have arrangements in place which ensure that his/her
management and personnel are free from any commercial, ﬁnancial or other
internal or external pressures which could adversely affect the quality of their
work.
• The manufacturer must have regulations and procedures in place to ensure that
conﬁdential information and the ownership rights of customers are protected.
• The manufacturer must have regulations and procedures in place which prevent
any involvement in activities that lower conﬁdence in his/her competence,
impartiality, judgment or operational integrity.
• With the aid of organizational charts, the manufacturer must deﬁne his/her
organization and management structure, his/her position within a supporting
organization and the relationships between management, technical processes,
support services, collaborative partners and the quality management system.
• The manufacturer must describe the responsibilities, powers and mutual rela-
tionships of all of the personnel who manage, carry out or check the work which
inﬂuences the quality of the production of the reference materials.
80
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

• The manufacturer must have a technical management team which has overall
responsibility for technical operations and providing the necessary resources to
ensure the required quality of production processes.
• The manufacturer must have an archiving system for traceable documentation
– for control of documents (speciﬁed requirements, release and change
management),
– for control of records (veriﬁcation Nachweisführung, inspection reports),
– for internal audits (scheduled, ad hoc),
– for control of non-conforming products (non-conformities management
system),
– concerning corrective measures and
– concerning preventive measures.
The competences and responsibilities for all veriﬁcations, especially for the
enforcement of measures in the event of unsatisfactory inspection results, should be
regulated clearly and unambiguously. If a large number of contractors and sub-
contractors are involved in a construction project and incorrect decisions could have
serious consequences, it makes sense to prepare an inspection plan for integrated
veriﬁcation. All of these individual measures must also pursue the common goal of
an integrated safety management system.
The operator must, as a minimum, comply with the manufacturer’s conditions of
use with safety requirements having absolute priority here. To this end, he/she must
set up, implement and maintain a suitable quality management system appropriate
to his/her ﬁeld of activity and including the type, scope and scale of the business.
Manufacturer and operator must deﬁne objectives and obligations and, where
appropriate, document them. Quality can thus ensure and maintain
• all aspects of production,
• material properties (e.g. strength, homogeneity and other characteristics),
• characterization (e.g. equipment calibration and the validation of measurement
methods),
• assignment of attribute values (e.g. the use of suitable statistical methods) and
• procedures for material handling, storage and transportation.
The operator must have sufﬁcient personnel who have both the necessary education
and training and the technical knowledge and experience for their assigned tasks.
The operator must ensure that operating personnel are, in cases of doubt, given
additional training to ensure competent performance of measurements, operation of
equipment and other activities affecting quality. If possible, the achievement of
competence should be assessed by training courses on the basis of objective
standards.
If management systems are required, they must comply with the requirements.
The quality management system may integrate other systems such as safety or
safety management systems.
3.4
Veriﬁability of Safety
81

3.5
Social Considerations
3.5.1
Prevention of Safety-Critical Failures
3.5.1.1
National and International Developments
On the national level, target values for public technical safety are laid down in
regulations ranging from the Basic (Constitutional) Law, laws and ordinances to
standards and codes of conduct. Its society-dependent form on the international
level implies differences in its structures in the various states and regions.
Increasing interaction in economic areas crossing state and regional boundaries
makes it necessary to adjust and open up regulations which previously have been
predominantly national. The scale of the measures to be taken extends from the
mutual recognition of structures which have further differences regionally to
globally uniform, harmonized structures and regulations for hazard control in
speciﬁc sectors. In both form and content, veriﬁcations in inspection and safety
engineering are undergoing a radical change whose implications need to be
assessed.
The transfer of national powers to supranational institutions is bound up with a
change in national practices in matured and often well-proven traditions, even in
technology and business. These changes should be reviewed with regard to negative
effects on safety and countermeasures to be taken if necessary.
The conclusion to be drawn from this is that not only the established German
system but also other systems should be comparatively analysed and evaluated in
the European and, ultimately, global requirements for a further development of
public-technical safety. The legal background, state of the art and needs of the
economy must be taken into account when determining a suitable system for
ensuring public-technical safety. This future-looking problem analysis must also
include the activities of independent third parties against a background of the full
span ranging from organizations authorized to conduct testing on behalf of the state
to service providers acting in the market (problem area: the state’s guarantee and
implementation responsibilities).
The technical risk should ﬁrst be examined and analysed to develop approaches
for solutions which can be agreed on for systems that are incontestably safe.
Whatever the case, engineering must take the forefront in any discussion about
consensual solutions and the forms taken by organizations in the safety landscape.
3.5.1.2
Safety and Legislature
Ensuring technical safety should not be regarded in its importance as anything other
than the responsibility for internal and external safety. One of the core tasks of the
state is to establish a suitable general framework for this. The state and the public
are called on to answer the question as to which risk is acceptable and which not
82
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

(where risk means opportunity). The state does this through the appropriate legis-
lation, such as the Atomic Energy Act, Chemicals Act, Carriage of Dangerous
Goods Act and Explosives Act. Ordinances express the necessary precautions in a
concrete form, and this regulatory system is completed by the standards and rules to
which reference is made.
Direct governmental activities within the regulatory system are being supplanted
by market surveillance procedures which are being increasingly applied. In this
case, a risk-dependent balance of role apportionment between the state and the
private sector must be found in the future.
3.5.1.3
Safety and Deregulation
In ﬁelds of relevance to safety, the state should not limit itself to issuing regulations
and punitive sanctions. It should, rather, concern itself with actively specifying
standards and structures to the extent required and simultaneously ensuring they are
implemented and complied with. The political will is for tasks previously per-
formed by the state to be increasingly passed over into the hands of private bodies
or the business sector. Maintaining the required balance calls for an appropriate
orientation of state tasks within the changing testing and approval systems.
Structures in the ﬁeld of safety engineering must be balanced between the state
and business just as the balance is to be maintained between precautions, prevention
(hazard prevention) and repression (punishment for damaging events). This grading
of the necessary requirements proﬁle by the potential for endangerment or damage
does not relate solely to technical requirements but also to measures in the ﬁelds of
approval and surveillance. The inclusion of all interested groups (manufacturers and
operators as well as the state and independent third parties) and their active par-
ticipation must be organized systematically. This means that the state must play its
part in a level-headed manner in the duties of approval and supervision. It must also
act within the overall context of the mechanisms which ensure that the maximum
still acceptable risks is not exceeded.
3.5.1.4
Safety and the Economy
The establishment of standards and rules which are as uniform as possible and
assigned to major economic ﬁelds is of great importance to the economy. In efforts
to ﬁnd a balanced compromise for the different aims of the groups involved,
adjustments may need to be made which no longer adequately reﬂect the original
national implementation of standards and regulations. The regulations must be
formulated all the more carefully if public-technical safety within the overall system
is not to suffer any impairments.
Organizational aspects (behavioural requirements in operation and detailed
activity-related rules) are more strongly emphasized in the Anglo-American eco-
nomic sector than in Germany, where more stress is laid on product-related safety
3.5
Social Considerations
83

(quality requirements concerning construction and ﬁttings). A weighted balancing
of these aspects in comprehensive systems could bring beneﬁts, and simply
adopting more organization and fewer constructional requirements would be dis-
advantageous. Whatever the case, in the future the desired level of public-technical
safety will need to be veriﬁed by looking at the interfaces of quality and behaviour
requirements. This is all the more so since, as part of the Europeanization of safety
legislation, the requirements applicable to technical products are increasingly being
laid down on the European level, this being done with the aim of ensuring the free
movement of goods.
3.5.1.5
Safety and Assignment of Competences
Not only is a well-balanced inclusion of manufacturer and operator interests nec-
essary but also the participation of specialized agencies and independent experts.
Attention must be paid to the risks of damage occurring and its effects and also to
differences in the structures for products on the one hand and technical facilities on
the other. Codes of conduct are thus very visibly gaining great importance in the
European area and in the American interpretation. This is happening against a
background in which standards relating to components and products can represent
compromises within which existing German objectives cannot be entirely
accommodated.
Since the stringent enforcement of the Basic Law’s precautionary imperative is
no longer implemented by state institutions or institutions acting directly on behalf
of the state, another necessity arises: for the sake of neutrality and objectivity as
well as continuity and its consequences (legal uniformity, legal certainty), the state
must entrust independent bodies with the tasks of coordinating and ensuring the
sharing of experiences among private bodies.
3.5.1.6
Safety as a Paramount Quality Characteristic
The quality management measures practised today in some areas of application are
not sufﬁcient by themselves to enable timely discovery and correction of
safety-critical quality defects and potential causes of failure. Notwithstanding this,
many people do not seem sufﬁciently aware of the fact that a system cannot be
classed as safe unless there is certainty that the safety-related quality characteristics
actually correspond to their required form. In this case, the necessary awareness
must be created among engineers and scientists: quality management is the
approach which adequately describes technical safety attributes and, thus, ﬁrst
provides those responsible with the possibility of making the necessary interven-
tions, corrections and improvements.
84
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

3.5.1.7
Quality Management as a Concept for Safety Management
As with any other quality characteristic, safety must be planned, monitored and
veriﬁed. In this regard, however, it is possible to fall back on the tried and tested—
that is, the DIN EN ISO 9000 standard “Quality management systems”. In the
demands this standard makes regarding quality management, a description is given
of the requirements for a reliable safety system on which a potentially successful
quality management system depends or, in connection with technical safety, a
reliable safety management system. A corporate management system certiﬁed in
accordance with the requirements of this standard is deemed to have quality
capability, and a safety management system geared to the requirements of this
standard may thus be regarded as having safety capability. DIN EN ISO 9000 was
introduced in the European airlines sector. The question is to what extent this
standard has also been introduced and practised in other ﬁelds of application with a
connection to public safety.
In the ﬁeld of civil engineering, this system has been anchored in a similar way
in the building codes of the German federal states and must be applied to all
building products with a major safety aspect (see Model Building Codes,
Articles 20 ff. and the inspection, surveillance and certiﬁcation regulations of the
German federal states). Safety or quality management systems are mandatory in
other ﬁelds of engineering for technical facilities coming under the Hazardous
Incident Ordinance, production of hazardous goods packaging. In this case, how-
ever, the choice of a quality management system is left to the individual in charge,
provided the system is effective.
Safety methodology and engineering are implemented for complex systems with
safety management. It must be possible within this context to direct to a central
contact point not only unanswered questions regarding all organizational,
methodological and safety-related problems but also suggestions for improvements
to speciﬁed stipulations.
3.5.1.8
Conﬁguration Control and Change Procedures
A general speciﬁcation for “safety” must, like any other speciﬁcation, be subject to
a formal approval and change procedure. This must be on the basis of a proper
conﬁguration control system, whose principles and processes can be speciﬁed in a
guideline on conﬁguration control.
3.5.1.9
The Individual as a Criterion for Safety Management
Technically complex systems are usually included among human–machine systems
in which the personnel employed are entrusted with crucial operational functions.
These functions also include safety-related ones. In human–machine systems of this
3.5
Social Considerations
85

kind, particular attention should be paid to the involvement of the personnel in
operations.
In this matter too, the requisite awareness must be created among engineers and
scientists. Personnel who
• know about the practical side of safety,
• have unlimited access to the necessary safety-related facilities,
• are kept constantly and comprehensively informed about the current operating
status and safety environment and
• are always being re-evaluated with regard to their “operational function”
should not become weak links in the chain of operational and safety functions.
With his/her natural abilities and shortcomings, the individual is an essential
factor in safety management in the context of human–machine systems.
3.5.2
Communication with the Public About Technical
Safety
The scientiﬁc world strives to provide enlightenment about difﬁcult topics, espe-
cially those which could even produce fear in the general public. This is true of
medicine, the environment, urban planning, the labour market, tax policy, energy
supply and the safety of technical facilities. The representatives of science tackling
these issues often slip unintendedly into a role in which they are supposed to
legitimize various vested interests and lobbies. The ideal of scientiﬁc consistency,
the consensus of science, is lost as a result of the conﬂict among scientists thus
created, and this comes to be seen by the public as scientiﬁc helplessness. This
conﬂict arises in most cases from the complexity of many current unresolved
problems. “Proof” is then necessarily hypothetical in nature. Different conclusions
can be drawn depending on the selected hypotheses and the boundary conditions in
place.
The ambiguity and opaqueness of the terminology used means that the public
becomes more unsettled than enlightened. Let us take the term “safety” as an
example here. The competent scientist would have to correctly point out that there
has never been 100% safety anywhere. Figures cited for the probability of occur-
rence of 10−7 (1 in 10 million) evoke only a blank response in the layperson. The
term “frequency”, by which of course “rarity” is meant here, has a different
meaning for the specialist engineer than it does for the general public. For the
public, there is a qualitatively quite different content of associations: danger, the
catastrophic potential of the damaging event, the presumed horriﬁc nature of the
damage, personal impacts, effects on one’s own children, being helplessly exposed
and lack of controllability. In this respect, the two levels of discourse remain
dissociated. Since science has the obligation of risk communication in an
86
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

understandable way, it must recognize and take into account at least ﬁve important
psychological factors of risk perception:
(a) Voluntariness
Hazards to which one exposes oneself voluntarily tend to be underestimated.
This applies to smoking as well as driving a car.
(b) Controllability
Hazards which seem to be controllable by one’s own skills tend to be under-
estimated. One example is the work of the roofer.
(c) Disaster potential
Hazards with a high potential for disaster tend to be overestimated, such as the
possibility of many fatalities in a plane crash.
(d) Concern
Hazards which affect oneself tend to be overestimated, such as the possible side
effects of taking medicaments.
(e) Awareness and familiarity
Hazards of which one is aware tend to be underestimated. Smoking may serve
as an example here.
Risk communication requires constructive handling as well as factually based
argumentation in the assessment of risks. Playing down risks, glossing over sus-
ceptible disturbances, covering up accidents or acting contrary to one’s own
statements are examples of risk communication which destroys the conﬁdence of its
audience. Similarly negative in effect is a delayed response to public allegations
instead of proactive information or the publication of misleading information.
Risk communication must therefore seek new paths. Appropriate strategies of
risk communication include:
• Certain forms of representing low probabilities: the signiﬁcance and realization
of probabilities in the form of numbers, including boundary conditions, must be
explained in each case.
• Risk comparisons such as, for example, comparing the risks inherent in a waste
incineration plant and the risk of a railway accident: only when dimensions such
as controllability, voluntariness or disaster potential can actually be compared
can risk comparisons have a chance of being understood.
• Risk compensation: in this case, expected risks and expected beneﬁts are
compared with each other (construction of a chemical plant and its impact on the
local labour market).
• Conﬁdence and credibility only develop when there is an intelligible and
consistent preparation of information, a respectful treatment of those whom risk
communication addresses and an information policy in which nothing is
withheld.
Since risk communication is becoming increasingly important in our society, risk
concepts as a whole must be presented which are not entirely oriented towards
limiting the probabilities of accidents and incidents occurring. Expressed in
3.5
Social Considerations
87

conventional engineering terminology, they are basically very hard for the
layperson to understand. It is much more a matter of emphasizing the reduction in
the extent of damage and taking into account both the psychological insights into
risk perception and the conditions of successful communication.
Communication between interest groups with opposing objectives is futile
without an arbitrating body when openness to compromise within these groups is
interpreted as weakness in asserting one´s own interests. It is therefore no longer a
balancing process between risks and opportunities for the community—however
that is deﬁned—when the welfare of the individual is “the measure of all things”.
Representatives of interest groups have, nevertheless, a clear mandate. When they
appear under the banner of their group, their role in public discourse will generally
be recognized.
The position of the administration is more difﬁcult to deﬁne. According to the
general understanding, the administration is assigned the role of mediator between
the accepted state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge and the need of the public
for safety. In practice, however, policy institutes are sometimes in a relationship of
dependency on a higher-level political entity (which may be only a “perceived”
one). In such a case, it is not necessarily their task to pledge themselves to scientiﬁc
objectivity alone. They are in some measure biased, and their task is the almost
unswerving pursuit of speciﬁc objectives (public safety, health and environmental
protection). The drive to success to which they are or believe they are committed
results, in the most unfavourable case, in a clash of opposing maximum require-
ments which will be decided on the expediency principle in a detached political
arena. The essentially desirable balance of interests, which, on an interdisciplinary
expert level, should result in a fact-based report for political options, will be missing
in such a case.
We should therefore welcome the trend towards solving this problem of repre-
sentative democracy wherever it is possible. The ﬁrst thing to do is to inform the
public in advance of a safety-related decision by giving it the facts about oppor-
tunities and risks. The public must be put into a position where it recognizes the
consequences of the options in all their aspects so that any interested party can
make a decision in the light of his/her personal background. In this matter, the idea
should be discarded that a collectable debt of the individual is concerned and that
there is always the possibility of involvement. The “silent majority” is to be ani-
mated by an offer which cannot be overlooked of taking an active part in the
consensus of the informed.
This option does, in principle, exist. The public media could take on the role of
an educational institution and be the forum for risk communication if they were not
already also generally following the trend in journalism that only “bad” news is
“good” news. Today’s partly trivialized talk shows could be replaced by a readily
graspable transfer of knowledge within a discourse whose participants were com-
mitted to the culture of dialogue (if necessary, using generally accessible techniques
88
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

of information and communication). If there were success in establishing as a
routine this form of debate about the consequences of scientiﬁc and technological
innovation, there would be increased pressure on the experts to make their specialist
knowledge available to the public and be measured by the response of the audience.
Risk communication within a discourse regarded as democratic in nature is an
arduous undertaking and, in addition, one with an uncertain outcome. Nevertheless,
this is the only serious way of problem-solving.
3.6
Recommendations
Although a different impression may currently prevail among the general public, we
engineers notice again and again that the development of technical safety has
always kept in step with the overall development of engineering. It should, how-
ever, also be noted that interdisciplinary cooperation, with which increasing spe-
cialization in engineering is countered, is found in safety engineering only in a
rudimentary form. In general engineering, generalistic approaches and systems
engineering management procedures have long proven themselves and, with their
help, specializations based on the division of labour can be brought together again
in an interdisciplinary approach. On the other hand, safety engineering, safety
legislation and the relevant standards seem to have remained unaffected by this
today. There is an urgent need for action in bringing generalistic approaches and
systems engineering management procedures into safety engineering in the same
way as has been common practice in general engineering for decades. The
safety methodically concept mentioned in this publication may serve as a gen-
eralistic concept for safety engineering and DIN EN ISO 9000 “Quality man-
agement systems” might be used as a suitable systems management procedure.
The VDI can offer the interdisciplinary working platform for both elaborating the
outlines presented here to the extent necessary and keeping them up to date.
The preceding sections have shown how technical safety is planned, generated
and permanently maintained. Descriptions were also given of how different inﬂu-
ences, be they of technical or human origin, affect a production process. The
persons responsible for the product must be aware of the level of safety achieved in
every planning and production step since each successively builds on the previous
step (and therefore progresses). Undetected errors would otherwise be carried
forward. However, it is evident in this matter too that one only sees and attends to
what one knows.
The society which pays for teaching and research and promotes technology has a
right to information. There is, therefore, an obligation on the part of engineers and
scientists to supply information about interrelationships in technical safety. The
relevant areas are addressed below.
3.5
Social Considerations
89

3.6.1
The Research Landscape
The research landscape can be divided into four ﬁelds:
• tertiary education institutions (universities, colleges and music and art schools,
predominantly under the legal and ﬁnancial responsibility of the federal states),
• research
(and
research
funding)
organizations
(the
German
Research
Foundation, the Helmholtz Association, the Max Planck Society, the Fraunhofer
Society and the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibnitz Scientiﬁc Association),
• research centres in industry, including small- and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs), and
• research centres and institutes of the federal and state governments.
Research in Germany thus has a high potential, which is evidenced by the share of
gross domestic product taken by research and development. In a press release of
December 2013, the Federal Ministry for Education and Research wrote: “In 2012
expenditure on research and development (R&D) in Germany rose to a record level
of more than 79.5 thousand million euros. The R&D share of the gross domestic
product (GDP) thus reached its highest value of 2.98% for the ﬁrst time in
Germany. […] Germany is investing in the future to a degree higher than ever
before. Together with business and science we are reaching the 3% target for the
ﬁrst time. It is now a matter of securing this positive development in the long term.
This cannot succeed unless business and the state together continue to invest
strongly in research and development—in other words, in the future of our coun-
try”. The press release continues: “Germany has signiﬁcantly strengthened overall
its position as one of the world’s leading innovation hubs, also via the successful
high-tech strategy. Its strong position in international competition is reﬂected in, for
example, global trading in R&D-intensive goods, scientiﬁc publications and
transnational patents”.
While taking account of both the isolated areas of focus in economic research on
products and the small quotas devoted to safety research, it is still, however, nec-
essary to point out the present deﬁcit in research as regards the solution to obvious
problems in the ﬁeld of safety engineering. The VDI offers with this publication on
technical safety an approach soundly based in professional knowledge and expertise
by which these obvious problems can be properly solved.
If we assume that not only quality but also safety are expected of products from
Germany—almost like a trademark—and that a market expectation is expressed
thereby, research must again devote itself more strongly to questions of safety.
• First of all, an evaluation of safety research can help to clarify whether quality is
at the required level.
• In response to this, a reorientation must begin. The Dechema/GVC research
committee “Safety technology in chemical plants” accordingly complained, for
example, about
90
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

– the lack of public-sector sponsorship for issues in safety engineering,
– the trend which has seen university departments and institutes that used to
have primarily a safety orientation now increasingly turning to other research
ﬁelds,
– the restrictions in course content and possibilities linked with the decline in
university research capacity in the ﬁeld of safety technology,
– the lack of an adequate fund of basic knowledge in the ﬁeld of safety
engineering on the part of graduates, who then have to acquire this from
in-house or external technical seminars,
– a marked drop in students studying process engineering and technical
chemistry, which in turn also limits the propagation of safety-related
knowledge, and
– the increasingly more limited freedom of action of German industry in
research and development, even in safety engineering, among other things as
a result of global competition which is, in part, becoming more ﬁerce due to
a lack of uniformity in general conditions at the international level.
This is also the case in general and reinforces our recommendation for a reorien-
tation of safety research.
Complexity, economic integration, the necessary depth of detail and the new
ﬁelds in the dynamic progress of innovation call for research in Germany to be
integrated into international networks, in particular those of the EU. New organi-
zations are constantly coming into existence here, such as the European Technology
Platforms (ETPs). The “Safety for Sustainable European Industry Growth” platform
alone has several focus groups dealing with topics relating to risk and human
factors engineering.
The international integration of German safety research must be deﬁned and
managed, and the appropriate structures must be designated and set up.
The subject of internationalization is dealt with in more detail in Sect. 3.6.5.
3.6.2
Education and Training Options of the Universities
Courses can be maintained at the required high level only in conjunction with sound
research if industry is to be provided with sufﬁciently qualiﬁed engineers. Safety
technology must therefore equally form an integral part of the curriculum at all
polytechnics, technical colleges and universities and be a subject of training and
further training courses at private institutes.
The training measures necessary for offering a basic course in safety engineering
must be the responsibility of technical colleges and universities within the frame-
work of the engineering curriculum. The content of courses which must be offered
by tertiary education will, above all, include:
3.6
Recommendations
91

• technological impact assessment and risk analysis,
• risk communication,
• inﬂuences of human behaviour on safety (human factors),
• interdisciplinary cooperation competence,
• emergency planning,
• the role of national and international regulatory efforts and
• vocational ethics in engineering activities.
In view of the range and social signiﬁcance of the courses required here, the
currently observable cutback in qualiﬁed teaching capacities and the rededication of
safety-oriented departments to other ﬁelds in technical colleges and universities are
not satisfactory. In the interests of ensuring technical safety in the future, the
cultural administrations responsible for the universities are urged to stop rapidly this
decline and reverse it. Private business would have to consider setting up endow-
ment chairs in safety engineering as an immediate measure to counteract the
associated shortage of competent teaching staff.
It is, in particular, up to the private educational institutions in the industrial
sector to make long-term provisions for securing competence in safety engineering
and adapting this competence to new technical and social challenges. It is a wel-
come fact that setting up academies and other training institutions (such as simu-
lator centres for the periodic review and further development of the necessary
competences) has already been promoted for a long time now in some branches of
industry. However, questions relating to safety only play a subordinate role in the
curricula, and this needs to be corrected urgently. Private business is therefore
called on to train and employ personnel with safety-engineering qualiﬁcations and
do so on a long-term basis in order to ensure that no shortages in safety competence
arise due to the natural retirement of experienced personnel coupled with a possible
lack of growth in the numbers of younger technical staff. This presupposes that a
future-looking management of knowledge and information is effected via a thor-
ough documentation of technical decisions and the corresponding measures for the
further dissemination of accumulated knowledge (in this connection, see Sect. 0).
3.6.3
Thematic Focuses
3.6.3.1
The Public
Acceptance of technology by the general public depends largely on how the ben-
eﬁts for the individual and society are made clear and a preferably comprehensive
understanding of the conditions and limits of safe technological development is
achieved for the people affected by technical factors. In the sense of a debt to be
discharged, all experts and institutions (scientists, research institutions, engineers,
the courts, industry and the public sphere) are under an obligation to implement
92
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

comprehensible information and communication strategies in order to inform the
public of the demands and possibilities of safe technology.
Multipliers and opinion leaders have a special value in conveying factual
information to the public: media representatives, senior members of political par-
ties, teaching staff in schools, universities and other private and public-sector
educational
institutions
and
representatives
of
engineering
and
industrial
associations.
To make it possible to transfer appropriate information from the “producers” of
technology to the “end users”, consideration should be given to setting up networks
for technical safety with topic-speciﬁc contact desks (“nodes”). These nodes should
be staffed by not only media professionals but also qualiﬁed experts in their par-
ticular ﬁelds in order to meet the needs of an interested general public for infor-
mation or handle referrals to the appropriate technically competent bodies.
3.6.3.2
Technology Council
Safety technology must be treated holistically and considerably more systemati-
cally. The boundaries of technical ﬁelds must be overcome, just as the ﬁelds of
responsibility of organizational units must be open in the event of questions of
safety. Today, the structure of safety engineering historically developed on the basis
of application-oriented specialist and technical areas is leading to the emergence of
countless committees. In the case of interdisciplinary technology projects, their
ﬁeld-speciﬁc regulations are bringing about a multitude of interfacing problems.
As a vision, a “safety engineering” code would be an ideal solution for
increasing the efﬁciency of activities in engineering and, in this case, for all of the
business sector, including the “safety” evaluation of the corresponding elements of
engineering activities. The target—the long-term creation of a “safety engineering”
code—could be a primary task of a Technology Council, which would be created
analogously to the Science Council.
This Technology Council would advise the federal government and federal state
governments. One main focus would be the development of universities, science
and research. It would make recommendations and statements in two core areas:
scientiﬁc institutions and questions spanning the scientiﬁc system. A Technology
Council should, of course, inform and advise not only the federal government and,
where applicable, the federal state governments but also trade, industry and social
groups about questions relating to dealing with engineering and technology.
As one of its ﬁelds of operation, the Technology Council could take over
responsibility for the “safety engineering” code mentioned above and, with the
appropriate structures, guide and support it. Another ﬁeld of operation could then be
safety engineering, which would have an optimal overall view of all elements of
technology and engineering with this section of the Technology Council. Other
ﬁelds, such as ethics and science, are conceivable and should be deﬁned and set up
in consultation with private business. Both the potential for innovation in engi-
neering and the transformation of research ﬁndings into marketable products in the
3.6
Recommendations
93

technical area certainly belong to this area of additional ﬁelds of operation
((Lenhart: Aussage muss noch geprüft werden.)).
The entities responsible for the Technology Council would be both the state,
represented by the federal and federal state governments, which would look after
the interests of their citizens, and private business and other non-governmental
bodies such as trade unions and environmental organizations.
Since it is not a simple matter with more complex systems to describe and easily
control technical safety concepts and human–machine interfaces, the documenta-
tion and communication of technical and organizational sub-concepts have become
an important component of the holistic safety concept. The ﬁeld of information or
knowledge management provides useful tools for documentation and communi-
cation. The term “information management” was introduced in the mid-1980s in the
USA in connection with the idea of the paperless ofﬁce. Nowadays, “knowledge
management” is a synonym although, strictly speaking, the knowledge which is in
the minds of people cannot be managed. What is referred to as “knowledge man-
agement” is, in the ﬁnal analysis, information management and is used for creating
the general conditions for knowledge work. For historical reasons, the term
“knowledge management” has, however, prevailed. The discipline of information
or knowledge management has its roots in information technology with a focus on
documentation and the electronic exchange of information. Information manage-
ment instruments have been heavily supplemented by contributions from not only
economics and the social sciences but also cybernetics, behavioural and commu-
nication psychology. It is probably not coincidental that safety and hazard pre-
vention management have been introduced parallel to information and knowledge
management in the last 30 years. This means that information management tools
can gradually be used for safety management too. Highly sensitive safety systems,
such as in commercial aviation or nuclear and chemical plants, could not be kept at
the high level of safety required in an industrial society without perfect manage-
ment. In the ﬁeld of technical safety, information management instruments must be
used more intensively in those technical and economic sectors in which, due to their
structure (e.g. small and medium-sized enterprises), variety and individuality in
safety issues (e.g. in process plants), modern information management tools are
only being partially used. A new special focus must be placed on “technical safety”
for the future-oriented project in the Industry 4.0 high-tech strategy of the German
federal government.
The objective of information management is sometimes strikingly expressed by
the slogan “the right information at the right time in the right place”. Ultimately,
only the aspect of efﬁciency is missing here since the outlay on information
management must be commensurate with the security-related question. This is so
on account of not only the risks and their various facets but also the economic
constraints within which a company, testing organization or public authority must
operate.
Various questions can be derived from this slogan relating to the speciﬁc
challenges to information management:
94
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

• For the task in question, have all safety-relevant aspects been taken into
account? Nowadays, it is not difﬁcult to gather all of the necessary information
from libraries or the Internet.
Nevertheless, more questions arise:
• How can information relevant to the speciﬁc task be ﬁltered out and condensed
task-speciﬁcally?
• Have all data, even those relating to peripheral ﬁelds, been collected?
In the search for safety solutions, increasing specialization of technical disciplines
makes it necessary to look more and more frequently at neighbouring disciplines—
ultimately, the age-old question remains:
• Are the data and information collected correctly?
Technical experts have always been, and will remain in the future, the key to
success in solving questions of this kind. Although there is broad consensus that
suitable IT platforms, such as the intranet and Internet or databases and research
systems, are necessary requirements here—as pen and paper and printed matter
once were—the success of information management does, nevertheless, depends on
whether and how the individual is placed at the centre. If this realization is pursued,
current work in the ﬁeld of information and knowledge management can be
focussed so that there is support for interactions between the individuals involved. It
no longer matters in this regards to what extent the people who belong to open
expert networks or closed “communities” are experts or stakeholder groups, or
whether they are communicating within a company or public authority or between
different institutions or stakeholder groups. In this matter, there are both national
networks and European and international networks. For example, the EU encour-
ages the creation of European networks especially with the aim of not only
strengthening the economy but also securing the level of safety which is expected
by society. However, networks focussed predominantly on safety-related aspects
are struggling since the funds for supporting networks mainly ﬂow into projects
which promise immediate economic success. Therefore, we appeal to the competent
bodies, companies, politics and administrations to take into account the special
importance of technical safety in an increasingly complex society and provide the
necessary funds to enable the right safety-related information to be in the right place
at the right time.
3.6.4
Emergency Planning
Emergency planning for large-scale damaging events must also be organized on a
more international basis. In the case of only Germany, numerous products and
systems, despite their inherent safety having been adequately demonstrated and
documented, do nevertheless reveal additional risks during their utilization phase.
3.6
Recommendations
95

Hazard sources of this kind can signiﬁcantly overstep the product’s or system’s own
boundaries and endanger a broader area of the environment which is not causally
linked to the product or its operation. In such cases, the safety philosophy behind
product management must also include emergency planning for the potentially
affected environment. In addition to bodies within companies and associations, this
usually involves not only bodies in the government executive (such as district
authorities, county council chairpersons and mayors) but also agencies directly
responsible for disaster protection (such as the ﬁre brigade and the technical relief
agency). The entire network needs to be deﬁned more clearly in its structure and
responsibilities, and the interface with the planners and operators of products,
systems and technical facilities needs to be more institutionalized.
Not only are cross-border effects possible—they are increasingly to be expected.
The clearer structuring of the network recommended for Germany must analo-
gously be transferred into a recommendation for the international structuring of
relief organizations. Some good approaches to this are already in place in Germany,
Poland and the Czech Republic and need to be strengthened from the institutional
point of view and expanded.
3.6.5
Internationalization
Globalization of the markets also calls for the internationalization of safety engi-
neering among product and system manufacturers. Goods and their production must
increasingly conform to safety principles which ensure their free circulation and
safe utilization in all recipient countries. Market forces are not strong enough on
their own to adequately secure the necessary safety attributes of products and
systems as they are often opposed by economic aspects. Therefore, a safety
structure is required which will establish the minimum standard of technical safety
in the market and also avail itself of state supervision and effective sanctions.
Cross-border agreements at governmental level are indispensable for this.
96
3
Interdisciplinary Approach

Chapter 4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline
4.1
Understanding of the Term Safety
4.1.1
Safety as a Legal Term
After incidents and accidents, the call is heard over and over again for “more
safety”. In the wake of such events, politics and the media often point out that
people were endangered, injured or even killed and objects of legal protection
threatened or otherwise affected. The call for better rules often gets loud but without
an analysis being done ﬁrst to see whether existing rules have been inadequately
implemented. Aside from the general mood of alarm, the next step is generally a
scheduled review of the rules and enforcement provisions with the corresponding
options for action, including optimization of legal orders. In the German-speaking
world, the legal term “Sicherheit” covers the two terms of “safety” and “security” as
used and differentiated in the English-speaking world. The English term “security”
principally stands for protection against (unauthorized) access (or entry), while the
term “safety” is, on the other hand, understood as “technical safety” in the sense of
“freedom from unacceptable risks” (as an example, see DIN EN 61508-4:2010
“Functional safety of safety-related electrical/electronic/programmable electronic
systems”—Part 4: Terms and abbreviations, Sect. 3.1.8). The German term
“Sicherheit” covers diverse issues, such as “internal and external security”, “social
security”, “collateral”, “public security” or even “law and order”. This VDI pub-
lication dealing with technical safety does not include the idea of security which is
inherent in the German term but, as far as technical products are concerned, refers
only to “safety”. It should, however, be noted that security problems—the security
of information—do lead to safety problems, and this, therefore, has to be taken into
account as well.
As already mentioned, the German legal system provides “indeterminate legal
concepts”, so-called general clauses, for legal norms (laws and statutory orders) and
the drafting of contractual documents. In many ﬁelds of technology, it is sufﬁcient
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
H.B. Keller et al., Technical Safety – An Attribute of Quality,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68625-7_4
97

to refer to the relevant applicable design product development, design and pro-
duction in order to be sure that no unacceptable risks will arise during utilization
and operation of the product in question.
However, not all ﬁelds of technology are covered by normative codes of practice
with whose aid the safety of technical products can be comprehensively determined.
Each ﬁeld today has its own code of practice for technical safety. Irrespective of
whether civil engineering, transportation, chemical engineering, power engineering,
aeronautical engineering, plant engineering, mechanical engineering, electrical
engineering and so on, application-speciﬁc safety concepts determine the concep-
tual design, deﬁnition, development and engineering, production and integration of
the technical equipment in question. Detailed constructional regulations, operating
instructions and regulations and maintenance instructions are drawn up for its
operation and conditions formulated for retroﬁtting. Even the monitoring of oper-
ations by the owner and supervisory bodies is regulated in an application-speciﬁc
ﬁeld. However, this is far from being the case everywhere: there are also analytical
methods relating to failure such as, for example, in the ﬁeld of aerospace engi-
neering. As yet, there is no safety concept which covers all areas of application, in
other words, with interdisciplinary validity.
This has a particularly obstructive effect for innovative technologies since the
state of the art and state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge in this case are
supposedly to be extended beyond their current boundaries. The guideline pre-
sented here lays the foundation for an orderly approach by means of its
cross-application validity and the particular attention paid to innovative projects. In
this matter, it is necessary to regard safety as no longer being solely a legal term.
“Technical safety” is one of the outstanding features of a technical product. The
generation of technical safety is a particularly demanding task for primarily engi-
neers and often scientists too. More than any other technical discipline, the gen-
eration and veriﬁcation of technical safety also call for the special care and attention
of industrial management and the administration in general.
4.1.2
The Term “Technical Safety”
Technical products are characterized by properties which manifest themselves as
quality and functional attributes that are individually manageable from the engi-
neering point of view (such as dimensions, colour, performance parameters,
switching times and displays). Attributes of special importance on account of
ethical, legal or contractual requirements are referred to as “quality characteristics”.
Every quality characteristic relevant to technical safety needs not only the special
care and attention of technical management throughout the entire design and
manufacturing process but also to a greater degree, veriﬁcation from state super-
visory institutions (as a “competent lawyer” in the generally uninformed public) so
that the product in question is free of unacceptable risks and will remain so.
98
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

4.1.3
Technical Safety as a Requirement for Product Design
and Implementation
At the suggestion of its Scientiﬁc Advisory Council, the VDI set up the VDI
“Technical Safety” Committee with an interdisciplinary membership. The VDI
entrusted the committee with the task of identifying the hidden commonalities of
the safety concepts in individual ﬁelds of application—such as civil engineering,
transportation systems, chemical engineering, energy technology, aviation, plant
construction, mechanical engineering or electrical engineering—and putting toge-
ther a safety concept valid across all applications which can be used on an inter-
disciplinary basis. This task was ﬁrst presented to the public in the VDI
memorandum “Technical Safety”, an Attribute of Quality (Düsseldorf, June 2010,
ISBN 987-3-931384-68-5). The safety concept is now presented in its entirety (with
the present VDI publication Technical Safety). A product is deemed to be “tech-
nically safe” when the safety-relevant measures mentioned below are veriﬁably
implemented during the design and realization of a product or any other technical
facility.
The requirement for a product to have “freedom from unacceptable risks” is
fulﬁlled when the safety-relevant quality characteristics of the product comply with
this requirement. The design and implementation of the product are thus to be
oriented speciﬁcally to these quality characteristics—as also to every other quality
characteristic. The safety-relevant quality characteristics of a product include its
emission behaviour, passive quality characteristics and active functional
characteristics. The procedures necessary in each case do, however, differ and
should be methodologically aligned to the function structure (function tree) with
main functions, subordinate sub-functions and the corresponding function elements.
In this matter, the following aspects must be taken into consideration.
4.1.3.1
Emission Behaviour
The material, chemical and physical emissions for a technical product must be
demonstrably kept within the limits speciﬁed by law or in the individual contract by
means of a technical design appropriate to the operating state in question. A clear
distinction should be drawn here between “unwanted side effects” and “necessary
utility functions”:
• “Unwanted side effects” include, for example, leaks (such as gas and
nanoparticles), losses in efﬁciency in energy conversion, function-related noise
emissions and residual radiation. They can be limited by means of seals,
energy-related or acoustic insulation measures, radiation protection or similar
protective measures. The nature and scope of the protection measures which
may be necessary can basically be determined on the basis of “generally
accepted sound engineering practice”. In certain special ﬁelds, such as
4.1
Understanding of the Term Safety
99

immission control and radiation protection, speciﬁcation of what protection is
necessary may, where applicable, be made by direct reference to the “state of
safety technology” and “state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge”.
• “Necessary utility functions” include, for example, “transmission radiation”—in
other words, electromagnetic data transmission waves for terrestrial or
satellite-based radio and television technology, telephony, ground-based or
airborne radar technology, satellite communications and navigation (GPS,
Galileo). There are not only low-risk and risk-free but also risky or hazardous
propagation areas for these utility functions. This distinction between risk-free
and risky or hazardous propagation areas is drawn in the relevant legal regu-
lations on the basis of “generally accepted sound engineering practice”, the
“state of the art” or “state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge”. Clear safety
provisions are deﬁned here for risky or hazardous propagation areas which must
be strictly observed in practical operational application. These provisions may
be supplemented by a general minimization requirement for utilisation as e.g.
applied in the Radiation Protection Ordinance.
4.1.3.2
Passive Quality Characteristics
Passive quality characteristics are characterized by the fact that they do not change
over time and neither “deplete” nor are subject to any physically or chemically
veriﬁable “ageing”. With a proper constructive design, they can be relied on per-
manently. Passive quality characteristics are deemed to be “captive”.
• If these characteristics are captive on account of their natural origin—for
example, as a result of the effects of gravity, decay of radioactive substances,
magnetic ﬁeld of the earth or speed of light—the corresponding characteristics
of a product are deemed to be naturally captive. On the basis of the principle of
operation, this natural captivity is present permanently. It should nevertheless
be noted that the product (technical product) with which natural inﬂuences
interact is still subject to a process of degradation or ageing. Regular compliance
checks are therefore indispensable.
• If these characteristics are captive on account of the technical design, the
corresponding characteristics of a product are deemed to be technically captive.
Examples include holding and support functions, standardized shrink ﬁttings,
secure fasteners, forced guides, permanent magnets and guided, unbreakable
compression springs as well as adequate creep and ﬂashover distances from
high-voltage equipment. On the basis of the principle of operation, this captivity
can be permanent (taking a process of degradation or ageing into consider-
ation) or even temporary (taking a process of functional depletion into con-
sideration). Regular compliance checks and maintenance inspections are
therefore essential.
100
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

• Permanently or temporarily, captive quality characteristics of a product or
technical product which are relevant to safety can be grouped under the term
“inherent safety”. Regular compliance checks and maintenance inspections are
relevant to safety, normally require state supervision (state supervisory agencies
such as the Rail Ministry or Air Ministry) and, for this reason alone, require
traceable documentation and archiving.
Products or technical facilities to which safety-related design regulations must
apply are not deemed to be “inherently safe” unless their “inherent safety” has
also been demonstrated and approved.
4.1.3.3
Active Functional Characteristics
Any “active functional characteristic” can fail. They are deemed to be losable since
it should be assumed that their function or function elements can, in principle, fail at
any time. This is stochastic failure, which can in turn be handled with method-
ologically appropriate procedures.
4.1.3.3.1 Safety Precautions Against Function Failure
The quasi-classic precautionary measures taken against stochastic failure are the use
of safety devices (redundant elements or even diversitarily redundant elements),
operational safety measures (load-dependent precautionary replacement of ele-
ments) or utilization restrictions laid down in operating regulations. Two safety
concepts are applicable in this context:
• Fail-safe:
When an active functional characteristic fails, the technical product must be put
immediately into a “safe state” (fail-safe) as deﬁned during the course of the
planning process (e.g., an automatic train stop). The result of such a safety
measure is termination of the current operating function (possibly temporarily).
• Fail-operational:
In the event of an active functional characteristic failing, the technical product is
put into a state of “safe functional behaviour” (fail-operational) as deﬁned
during the course of the planning process. With this type of safety measure, the
current operating function continues but normally only in a limited form (e.g.,
an emergency landing at the nearest airport).
4.1.3.3.2 Controllability of the Probability of Failure
For the purpose of safety precautions, it is vital in subsequent operation (in uti-
lization) to make not only the probability of failure controllable but also the extent
of potential damage—in other words, to keep it within acceptable limits.
4.1
Understanding of the Term Safety
101

This safety-related approach of reliability engineering has proven itself over six
decades or so in both aviation and space travel and has made a major contribution to
the outstandingly high level of safety in civil aviation throughout the world. It is
now being applied increasingly in other ﬁelds of engineering, too.
4.2
Introduction to Interdisciplinary Safety Engineering
4.2.1
Organization and Management
Technical safety not only is one of the properties of a technical facility but,
alongside the actual functional purpose, also represents the outstanding quality
characteristic. Trust in the functioning of a technical facility is the essential basis of
modern technology. During conceptual design, deﬁnition, development and engi-
neering, manufacture, trials, utilization, maintenance, retroﬁtting, decommissioning
and subsequent disposal, special care and attention must always be devoted to this
quality characteristic. Not only the individual’s interest in his/her personal integrity
but also the state’s interest in safety and public order demands this safety, which
must be present throughout the entire life cycle of a technical facility, technical
product or even technical system.
It is notable that, with regard to the quality characteristic of “technical safety”, it
is largely the purchaser alone who decides what speciﬁc level of safety should be
implemented. This affects not only relationships in civil law but also public
safety/security. Both of these are based on the corresponding legal foundations,
compliance with which is mandatory and non-compliance generally punishable.
The demand for technical safety in legislation largely takes the form of so-called
indeterminate legal concepts such as “generally accepted sound engineering prac-
tice”, the “state of the art” and the “state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge”.
The following basic principles form part of the general state of knowledge in the
ﬁeld of safety engineering:
• Absolute (100%) safety does not exist in engineering.
• A legal demand for technical safety is not capable by itself of creating safety or
guaranteeing it—irrespective of how harsh the penalties are for non-compliance
with this requirement.
• The quality characteristic of “technical safety“ must be both generated and
demonstrated for every technical facility and preserved during the course of
maintenance work. “Technical safety” is one of those quality characteristics
generated as the result of an engineering process of analysis and design. Safety
requirements and safety inspections alone do not sufﬁce here.
What is needed in this matter is a methodologically appropriate approach in
deﬁning a suitable safety concept and thereby preventing weaknesses or defects.
102
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

This means that the well-proven technical organization structures and manage-
ment procedures are also applied in the context of safety engineering:
• uniform project and system structure with assignment of responsibilities and the
corresponding powers,
• establishment of central departments for cross-system topics, such as product
planning, human factors engineering, technical safety, environment engineering
(original and object-inﬂuenced environment, electromagnetic compatibility,
lightning protection), reliability/dependability, operation and maintenance reg-
ulations, personnel qualiﬁcation and certiﬁcation, environmental compatibility
and immission control, ofﬁcial and other approvals and permits, manufacturing/
assembly/integration,
supervision
on
site,
commissioning
and
trials/test
operation/demonstration,
• project planning and tracking through all project phases of the entire product life
cycle,
• centralized conﬁguration and interface management with uniformly structured
veriﬁcation,1
• centralized quality management system based on generally accepted technical
rules (such as DIN EN ISO 9001), which is usefully supplemented by a suitable
product and quality assurance system
[Note: The quality of corporate and project processes is regulated with a quality
management system as per DIN EN ISO 9001. In addition, both the product
quality and technical safety can be made controllable by means of a product
and/or quality assurance system] and
• centralized phase- and milestone-oriented release and reporting system (where
applicable, with progress payments based on payment milestones).
Practices of this kind have been in general use for decades in the various ﬁelds of
engineering and technology, although they take different forms. However, it must
be noted that, when setting up a management organization of this kind, the overall
system is more than the sum of its constituent parts.
In the case of complex products, such as technical facilities or systems, a suitable
set of management instruments is essential. In this matter, it has proved useful for
decades to combine
1Conﬁguration and interface management assures that:
•
the technical speciﬁcations of the subordinate structural units meet the contractuable speciﬁ-
cations of the higher-level system (project) speciﬁcation,
•
all persons involved and all responsible persons are notiﬁed of changes to these speciﬁcations,
•
interfaces between structural units are deﬁned systematically between those responsible and
laid down contractuably and
•
safety attributes are fully captured, adapted to the extent necessary and veriﬁed.
4.2
Introduction to Interdisciplinary Safety Engineering
103

• the “conceptual design phase” and the “deﬁnition phase” (grouped here under
the term “planning process”),
• the “development and engineering phase” and the “production phase” (grouped
here under the term “implementation process”),
• the “operation and utilization phase” and
• the “dismantling, disposal and recycling phases” (grouped here under the term
“operation process”)
into a single centrally directed conﬁguration management system. The quality
characteristic “technical safety” is to be included within conﬁguration management
in the sense of a safety management system. In this case, the quality characteristic
“technical safety” or the safety management system must be placed in an area of
responsibility of its own which centrally covers all levels of the project or system
structure. The phases of the product life cycle are illustrated in Sect. 3.2.1.2
in Fig. 3.1.
To ensure that sufﬁcient transparency of technical and organizational issues is
maintained in these complexly structured, technologically innovative and (from the
safety point of view) exacting products, technical facilities or systems and their
entire life cycles are divided into time periods (phases). A subdivision of this kind
into content- and time-based segments means that it is possible, at the beginning of
each of these transparently presented phases, to deﬁne clear objectives, the con-
straints to be observed and other requirements and procedural instructions. At the
end of each phase, the results obtained can be checked with regard to how the
objectives and requirements have been met. Should objectives not have been
reached, the phase in question must be repeated. This recursive process is indicated
in Fig. 3.2 by blue arrows. On the basis of the results achieved, the objectives,
constraints to be observed and other requirements and procedural instructions can
be speciﬁed for the next phase. A phase approach of this kind not only facilitates
technical management but also secures to a special extent even the organizational
management measures required and ultimately results in it being possible for the
ﬁrst time to properly track and monitor the speciﬁed objectives.
To this end, this guideline illustrates the basic principles behind the procedure
for generating safety in the form of safety ﬂow charts during
• the planning process with conceptual design and deﬁnition phases,
• the development and engineering phase.
The safety requirements generated in these ﬁrst phases of the product life cycle
must be observed and applied during the production and operation phase. Since the
dismantling, disposal and recycling phases call for an autonomous treatment of
safety, the generation of technical safety must be adjusted here to speciﬁc
requirements and delivered but designed analogously in a methodological way to
the preceding phases.
The product life cycle covers both the planning and implementation processes
and the operation process, for which the procedure required for securing technical
safety is described in each case. It is the intention here to cover the needs of all
104
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

technical disciplines and formulate common features relevant to safety—in other
words, hidden commonalities—as regards both technology and language. In this
regard, reference is made to the principles of a systems engineering phase approach
(see Fig. 3.1) as presented in this memorandum (see Sect. 3.2.1.2).
In the example of the phase concept, the requirements are emphasized of safety
controlling, safety-related documentation (the “safety case”), the state of the art, the
state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge and the assignment of responsibilities
and powers in the respective phases. In addition to the necessary documentation of
the individual steps and decisions, the loading assumptions2 together with the
intended and possible operating conditions and scenarios, the service life of the
products and the safety level are shown as a function of the consequences arising.
Finally, the path to the risk assessment is deﬁned and the necessity for public
involvement is described on the basis of the risk level determined and the necessary
involvement of the individual in the development and manufacturing process.
In the event of changes in the technical requirements (as already laid down in
speciﬁcations), a check should be made within the change management procedure
as to the extent to which the quality characteristic of “technical safety” is affected. It
may be necessary to repeat the decision and action steps taken in all previous
phases.
Top priority should be given to ensuring that, from the systems engineering point
of view, the structure and shape of the safety documentation (the “safety case”, also
termed the “safety assessment” according to IEC 1508 or “technical documents”
according to DIN EN ISO 12100) satisfy the following eight requirements:
• The technical requirements in all phases must be unambiguous, clear and
comprehensible.
• The conditions under which the answers for putting together the safety case are
given must be clearly described with the reasons provided by the competent and
responsible individuals for each phase.
• The evaluation criteria used must be clearly presented, and the underlying set of
rules, consisting of legal provisions and technical regulations, must be speciﬁ-
cally named. Any reference which may be necessary to the state of the art or
state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge should be integrated.
• Answers to phase-speciﬁc questions must clearly distinguish between facts,
information from the people involved, calculations, assumptions, test results and
conclusions. Furthermore, the evaluation must be carried out separately.
• Differences in the evaluations in the phases must be clearly emphasized by the
responsible individuals and reasons given.
• Conclusions must be transparent, fully veriﬁable and consistent.
• The safety case arises from the individual phases of the product life cycle and
must be understandable and veriﬁable in itself.
2All loads acting from both the outside and inside come under the term “loading assumptions”. All
other effects which do not come under the loading assumptions are accordingly referred to as
effects coming from the original or the object-inﬂuenced environment.
4.2
Introduction to Interdisciplinary Safety Engineering
105

• The documentation must be complete and, in particular, include all recursive
iteration steps. Transparency must be continuously guaranteed over all three
processes (see Fig. 3.1). Protection of interests can make special organizational
measures
necessary
while
not
unacceptably
impairing
the
interests
of
public-technical safety.
The importance to be attached to technical safety makes it essential to secure in the
documentation not only the requirements but also veriﬁcation with regard to
effective traceability. Agreement with approval or licensing authorities or super-
visory bodies must be secured with respect to both requirements and veriﬁcation
and this traceably documented. With a view to removing trade barriers, the EU is
pursuing a strategy of deregulation and liberalization following which responsi-
bilities previously exercised by the state will, as far as possible and permissible, be
transferred to the market. The extent to which the standard of technical safety will
be affected by this calls for vigilant and thorough tracking so that timely counter-
measures can be initiated if necessary.
The following may be cited as components of a target-oriented conﬁguration
management system:
• model speciﬁcation (formal template for project deﬁnition),
• general speciﬁcations (deﬁnition for central departments such as project man-
agement, systems engineering, human factors engineering, technical safety,
environment engineering/EMC,3 environmental protection and immission
control),
• project and process guidelines (project structure and organization, tasks and
responsibilities of project management on all levels of the system structure,
position and responsibilities of central project management and central
departments),
• system,
subsystem
and
component
speciﬁcations
(uniformly
structured
according to the model speciﬁcation),
• commissioning instructions (local site management, procedure strategy),
• manufacturing, assembly, integration and testing speciﬁcations,
• general and individual instructions for trials, test operation and system
demonstration,
• operation and maintenance instructions,
• rules relating to personnel qualiﬁcation and certiﬁcation and
• central documentation of ofﬁcial and other approvals and licences.
“Technical safety” is a cross-system quality attribute which even cuts across
interfaces in the system between parts which are otherwise kept clearly separated. If
competences and responsibilities for technical safety are to remain clearly dis-
cernible even in the case of complex systems, special care will be required with
regard to interface management within the context of conﬁguration management. In
this regard, it is particularly important to ensure that the interaction of different legal
3EMC—electromagnetic compatibility.
106
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

persons is regulated clearly and unambiguously. Individual components may,
however, be dispensed within the case of simpler technical facilities or systems, or
the form taken by interactions may be given in less detail. However, in all cases it
must be ensured that the competences and responsibilities for technical safety are
clearly described and assigned and the technical safety aimed at is not limited by
simpliﬁcations or omissions.
Every ﬁeld of technology still has its own code of practice, and this results in a
large number of different “safeties” in, for example, civil engineering, transporta-
tion, chemical engineering, power engineering, aeronautical engineering, plant
engineering, mechanical engineering and electrical engineering. All six phases of
the product life cycle (conception, deﬁnition, development and engineering, man-
ufacture, operation and utilization, as well as dismantling, disposal and recycling)
are determined by speciﬁc security concepts. Detailed constructional regulations,
operating instructions, operating regulations and maintenance instructions are
drawn up and conditions formulated for retroﬁtting for each of these ﬁelds of
technology. Even the monitoring of operations by the owner (self-monitoring) and
supervisory bodies (external monitoring) is regulated in an application-speciﬁc set
of rules. However, this is by no means everywhere: there are also analytical
methods relating to failure such as, for example, in the ﬁeld of aerospace engi-
neering, where developers, manufacturers and operators work closely with the
supervisory authorities. At the moment, there is no single safety concept which has
cross-application validity.
What is required is a “uniform safety”—in other words, a uniform concept and
evaluation of safety and a uniform deﬁnition of safety.
The following analysis will show how the “hidden commonalities” in the
individual safety philosophy can be worked out from the engineers’ wealth of
experience with safety issues. On the basis of this preparatory work, a uniform and
interdisciplinarily applicable framework for a safety concept is feasible in which all
ﬁelds of technology can ﬁnd room. Interaction between these extremely diverse
ﬁelds is facilitated in the same way as communication is with non-technical dis-
ciplines and the general public interested in technology.
4.2.2
Systematics
4.2.2.1
Insights into Safety Engineering
4.2.2.1.1 “Technical Safety” as a Quality Characteristic
“Technical safety” is a quality characteristic which, within the context of product
design engineering activities, must be speciﬁcally generated, justiﬁed and veriﬁed
(see Sect. 4.2). Technical safety can be neither “decreed into” (e.g., by laws or
other legal regulations) nor “tested into” (a technical product). Technical safety can
only be generated by being “conceptualized into”, “developed into”, “engineered
4.2
Introduction to Interdisciplinary Safety Engineering
107

into” or “built into” the technical product in question (e.g., into a technical facility,
system or component) during the course of product design and retained over the
entire product life cycle. The same applies to the case of retroﬁtting or modernizing
measures applied to technical products. Technical safety requires a functionally
structured organization which has a centrally located system architect who controls
a management hierarchy with clear assignment of authority and responsibility.
Unlike other quality characteristics whose veriﬁcation may be at the discretion of
contractual parties, “technical safety” is the quality characteristic which always
requires veriﬁcation.
4.2.2.1.2 The Term “Risk” in Safety Engineering
Since the initial publication of the DIN 31004-1 safety standard (see Sect. 4.2), the
term “safety” has been deﬁned in a technical code of practice on the basis of the
concept of “risk”—that is, of a probabilistic parameter. In this way, risk assessment
as a probabilistic analysis of the stochastic failure modes of technical products is
now regarded as generally accepted sound engineering practice.
In deﬁning a safety concept, we should remind ourselves once again of the
following basic ideas:
• Absolute safety in the sense of a zero risk cannot be demanded by legislation or
regulations (risk prohibition) because it is not possible in principle.
• However, all possibilities should be explored with this point of view so that
there is a well-balanced relationship between conceivable damage and the
beneﬁts created for the objects of legal protection (risk equivalence) with dif-
ferent technical products, processes, facilities and systems.
• The yardstick for the greatest still acceptable damage is determined by not only
the scope of protection of the relevant objects of legal protection but also the
intention to satisfy social needs (beneﬁts), whereby this generally requires a
trade-off within the social consensus (risk management).
4.2.2.1.3 Inherency and Losability of Attributes
The quality characteristic “technical safety” is achieved on the basis of very speciﬁc
attributes of the product in question or generated in its design as a quality char-
acteristic. The way in which a property is anchored in a product basically deter-
mines the captivity, presence under certain conditions or losability of this property.
“Inherent safety” is such a fundamental property of a product that it is founded in
the internal design of the product and is thereby a captive property and, thus,
inevitably present. The product in question is therefore, in principle, safe at all times
since it necessarily falls back into a safe state as long as it is not actively brought out
of this state into another. Without an explicit external supply of energy, the unsafe
functions running in a system of this kind come to a standstill.
108
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

A system which was originally not inherently safe can be brought into a state of
inherent safety by the addition of certain components or properties. For example, an
exothermic process can be terminated and thus put into a safe state by the addition of
a forced cooling feature. A distinction is to be drawn here between a passive
operating component (forced cooling without active coolant feeding) and an actively
operating component (the component does not operate unless energy is supplied).
It follows from this that the “losability” determines how the quality characteristic
“technical safety” is to be designed. In this regard, the following aspects should be
taken into consideration:
• Inherently captive natural attributes (or constitutional characteristics):
– On the one hand, these are the passive functional and state-related properties
of an assembly which are by their nature captive if they can—assuming
utilization as intended—be traced back to characteristics which not only
correspond to known laws of nature but are also constantly and uninter-
ruptedly effective. They can be affected by neither other natural inﬂuences
nor inﬂuences originating in the overall system in which this assembly is a
part of. Proper operation must be designed from the outset so that possible
deviations through negligent handling (such as failure to comply with
obligations or omissions) do not lead to a safety-critical failure in the system.
This situation is referred to as “natural integrity”. These constitutional
characteristics include, for example, the effect of gravity, radioactive decay,
the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld and the speed of light.
– On the other hand, these are also the passive functional and state-related
properties of an assembly that are, due to their technical nature, captive when
they can be traced back to characteristics which were veriﬁably taken as a
basis for the technical design and which cannot change over the course of the
intended service life. However, ageing processes, wear or other inﬂuences on
the basic nature of the assembly must be taken into account in this matter.
This situation is referred to as “technical integrity”. The constitutional
characteristics have, for example, holding and support functions, secure
fasteners, forced guides, permanent magnets and guided, unbreakable
compression springs as well as adequate creep and ﬂashover distances from
high-voltage equipment.
The captive constitutional characteristics of an assembly can be retained
without limitation of time provided regular compliance checks are carried out
to ascertain how long this can be depended on or alternatively, maintenance is
carried out to ensure that this condition continues without interruption.
• Inherently losable technical attributes:
– These inherently losable attributes (or constitutional characteristics) can only
be relied on for a limited time. Since properties are linked here to the
corresponding object or facility, they are only dependable to a limited extent
due to their inherent capacity, which can be made usable from the safety
4.2
Introduction to Interdisciplinary Safety Engineering
109

point of view. In this case, we are concerned with expansion with passively
operating components.
This situation is referred to as “technical inherency”. These constitutional
characteristics are, for example, typical of the following: storage capacity for
cooling water, charging cycles of operationally reserved backup batteries, the
kinetic energy (momentum) in vehicles which can be used for arrival braking
(at a route stop or held in readiness in evacuation and rescue facilities),
lubricant
dispensers
for
central
lubrication
and
grit
containers
for
wheel-to-rail braking devices (to improve the braking effect).
– Although the inherent constitutional characteristics of a structural unit are in
themselves subject to time limitation, they can still be retained as “inherent
safety” without a time limitation provided that regular compliance checks are
carried out to ascertain how long this can be depended on.
• Losable constitutional or functional characteristics:
– These are the active functional properties of a structural unit and their los-
ability—in other words, their functional failure. The function elements in
question can be lost and, therefore, require safety precautions in order to
secure technical safety. In this matter, actively operating components are
used to deliver technical safety.
This situation is due to:
temporally random failure,
environment-related failure or
utilization-related failure possibly caused by unintentional operator error
with the respective function elements.
– In the case of failure, safety precautions (technical safety devices) can be
applied to put the no longer safe function element into a different function
which is safe and which, in turn, leads to a restriction or loss of the actual
operational function (fail-safe). As examples of this prevention of the con-
sequences of failure, we might mention here the initiating of an automatic
train stop or disconnection of the electrical power supply (electric fuse).
– Failures are deliberately reduced in incidence by limiting the probability of
safety-critical failures or faults with application of reliability engineering.
With the reliability engineering toolbox—for example, redundantly designed
function elements or highly reliable components (“hi-rel” parts)—it is pos-
sible to maintain the utility function for longer than the corresponding
operational utilization range. The utility function can even be limited to a
period from the time a failure occurred to the, perhaps premature, conclusion
of the current utilization period (fail-operational) with prolonged utilization
ranges as application examples of this reliability-related limitation of failure
probability.
Manned
and
unmanned
spaceﬂight
technology
or
the
twin-engine long-haul airliners can be referred to here.
110
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

4.2.2.1.4 Relationship Between Deterministic and Probabilistic
“Deterministic” and “probabilistic” are terms of Western epistemology and the
philosophy of science. The basic assumption is that there is no absolute certainty in
human knowledge, and the human is, rather, only capable of gaining knowledge
with a greater or lesser degree of probability (with causally secured underlying
reasoning when there is statistical signiﬁcance in its occurrence). Empirical ﬁndings
are therefore considered probabilistic when gained on a probabilistic or statistical
basis. A difference must be drawn here between purely syntactic (ﬂat) and semantic
(deep) empirical knowledge.
The term “deterministic” means that if the current state and the effect which then
follows are known, the subsequent state and what the system does in this subse-
quent state are unambiguous, predictable and repeatable. Monocausality means that
only one effect underlies the moment initiating the change of state. Multi-causality
means that state transitions are triggered by multiple equivalent effects.
The deterministic approach is based on the axiom that all events—including
human actions—are caused by one or more initiating events, and in this context, the
behaviour of a system is completely determined. The possibility has also been
discussed that there is actually no such thing as free will in biological systems.
Cognitive psychologists, however, see the result as arising from different mutually
interacting processes on different levels of abstraction. The result in question can be
predicted since the initiating cause either is known or has the character of a previous
event. The more complex a system is (this concerns its internal network), the more
massively interaction processes step into the foreground in comparison with the
functions of the individual components. The more strongly the deterministic
approach is closed off, the more dominant will be the stochastic (randomly deter-
mined) failure behaviour. Even in this case, however, the failure of technical
facilities is still always conceivable, but the time and circumstances of the occur-
rence of failure can no longer be predicted—they are no longer deterministically
determinable. Stochastic failure behaviour is no longer adequately manageable
using the classic methods of deterministic precautions against failure (material
selection, manufacturing tolerances, quality assurance).
Methods based on probability theory are collected under the term “probabilis-
tic”. In this respect, we have come a full circle: scientiﬁc knowledge is only to be
gained with greater or lesser degrees of probability. The term “reliability engi-
neering” refers to the application in engineering of the ﬁndings of probability theory
in order to master the failure behaviour of technical equipment. Today, the full
range of probabilistic applications in technology is very extensive. It ranges from
loading assumptions to damage mechanisms, environmental inﬂuences, the
response behaviour of structures and wear behaviour. Probabilistic approaches are
always to be recommended when the details of the physical and technical situation
can no longer be determined with the required accuracy and the uncertainty (scatter)
of the parameter under consideration falls within the order of magnitude of pre-
cisely this parameter. In such cases, reasonable distributions of the scattering
4.2
Introduction to Interdisciplinary Safety Engineering
111

variables are introduced in order to present the parameters in question in a usable
form.
What “usable” means in connection with safety engineering is that, while pos-
sible failure modes are on the one hand imaginable, their parameter values cannot
be unambiguously determined. On the other hand, a failure mode can itself be so
complex that it is no longer possible to determine and understand its causes clearly.
In this regard, reference can be made to the Monte Carlo simulation, a stochastic
method whose basis is formed by the performance of a large number of random
experiments. Using the results so obtained, an attempt is made with the aid of
probability theory (in accordance with the “law of large numbers”) to solve prob-
lems numerically which appear to be insoluble by analysis. These random exper-
iments can be performed either for real or by generating random numbers, possibly
with the aid of a computer. Innumerable computer programs for generating random
numbers are available on the market nowadays, although of varying quality.
On the one hand, in the ﬁeld of software (source code), for example, possible
errors are all predetermined since they are present in the program. However, since
the errors are not known, it is also not possible to predict failure behaviour.
Utilization proﬁles are therefore used and a failure probability statement prepared
on the basis of knowledge of previously detected faults. On the other hand, when
creating execution plans for parallel or concurrent processes in real-time pro-
gramming, deterministically guaranteeing the feasibility of execution is explicitly
demonstrated by means of worst-case assumptions. The corresponding mathemat-
ical procedures are available for this and also applied.
The deterministic analysis of safety is based on a maximum effect in the case of a
damaging event or a maximum inﬂuence in the case of a loading case (worst-case
analysis). For this worst-case scenario, either the dimensioning of the structure is
assessed (technical design) or the necessary safety measures determined.
Example 1: Gas tank and gas pipe—safety clearance larger than or equal to the
effective range of the worst case.
Example 2: High-rise building—design covers not only static loads but also the
dynamic effects of wind load.
Load application and resistance are stochastically distributed and taken into
account with their upper and lower quantiles.
Example 3: Materials in which inter-crystalline dislocations shift in response to
dynamic loading change in their extent and whose frequency distribution can vary
discontinuously (e.g., gear shafts).
This can, where applicable, be countered by recrystallization processes deployed
preventively (e.g., by heat treatment of steel components).
The deterministic analysis of structural processes is based on a macroscopic
consideration of a variety of microscopic elementary processes within the material
and the statistically signiﬁcant and homogeneously occurring properties assumed as
basic.
In the probabilistic analysis of safety, the focus is on the frequency with which a
damaging event occurs (probability assumption) linked with the possible extent of
damage. In this case, it is not the worst case which is considered, but rather
112
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

reference is made to the “maximum still acceptable risk” (consideration of the
limiting risk). However, the greatest still acceptable risk cannot be deﬁned abso-
lutely here. It is rather a product of cultural, social, technical, economic and pos-
sibly insurance-related considerations. Appropriate measures are taken to reduce the
risk actually determined to the point where it is deemed acceptable. In this case,
those individuals involved must always be aware that measures taken to reduce a
risk can generally induce other different kinds of risks which, for their part, lead to
an increase in risk. When manipulating risks, it is, therefore, always important to
assess the resultant risks as well in order to ascertain to what extent the sum of all
original and resultant risks can be assessed as acceptable. Depending on the indi-
vidual viewpoint, this assessment can, however, vary considerably.
Both the deterministic and the probabilistic approaches are recognized funda-
mentals of the engineering sciences, and each in part contains elements of the
other’s approach. As regards safety-engineering application, the approach taken
will follow the previously expressed preference for “worst case” or “limiting risk”.
Once this preference has been selected, it must be rigorously adhered to—with
mutual exclusion on the macroscopic level.
4.2.2.1.5 Monitoring as a Link Between Safety Technology
and Technology Law
The state fulﬁls its citizens need for protection against technical risks by being
responsible for public-technical safety. In meeting this regulatory obligation, the
state makes use of the technical monitoring of particularly risky equipment or
facilities. It is characteristic of current technology law that, although the state’s
regulatory law remains intact, a controlled unburdening of technical monitoring
tasks has, however, taken place which the state itself would otherwise have to look
after. These supervisory tasks have been transferred to independent auxiliary bodies
for technical safety which are entrusted with the task of carrying out state-backed
safety inspections (compliance checks). In the meantime, it has become common
legal practice in many industrialized countries for the state to look after
public-technical safety even in the ﬁeld of technology. In this matter, the state
always arrogates regulatory legislation to itself yet, at the same time, unburdens
itself in a controlled manner of even technical monitoring duties.
The approval or licensing of technical facilities whose operation is in the public
interest does, however, continue to be predominantly exercised by public authori-
ties. In addition to the upper-most federal and state agencies, subsidiary authorities
are also active in this regard, such as, for example, the Federal Railway Authority
(EBA), the German Aviation Authority (LBA), the Federal Ofﬁce for Radiation
Protection (BfS), the Federal Physical Technical Institute (PTB, the German
national testing authority) and the Federal Institute for Materials Research and
Testing (BAM), when so provided by legal regulations.
4.2
Introduction to Interdisciplinary Safety Engineering
113

4.2.2.1.6. Directives of the European Commission
With its New
Approach and Global
Approach
guidelines, the
European
Commission has now in the meantime taken into consideration the needs of the
public for safety in products. However, over and above the purely product-related
directives in this catalogue of measures, the “Directive on General Product Safety”
2001/95/EG dated 03.12.2001 also applies. This requires all products being put on
the market in the European Economic Area to be safe. Violations are also pun-
ishable. However, this directive leaves open the question as to how this “product
safety” is to be generated and secured and is thus in conﬂict with the basic idea of
organized safety engineering (see Sect. 4.2.2.1.1). Rather, this is left to the creators
of the corresponding European standards which, as harmonized documents desig-
nated by the Commission, give rise to a presumption of conformity with the
directive’s basic requirements identiﬁed in the standards.
These EU directives also provide for safety veriﬁcations to be increasingly left to
the free market and only monitored by the state. The expertise this requires in the
ﬁeld of technical safety, which has so far been attached to state-backed bodies, must
now be made available to the free market. Up until now, Germany has actively and
comprehensively participated in risk minimization by governmental agencies or
bodies authorized by the state to carry out in their sovereign function safety veri-
ﬁcations or participate in them (implementation responsibility of the state). The
relevant EU directives increasingly provide for even these veriﬁcations—previously
a responsibility of the state—to be left to the free market. In other words, they are
now only monitored by the state: pure guarantee responsibility of the state
(subsidiarity).
In this matter, a control function must be deployed which, on the basis of the
total risk for which there is responsibility, ﬁnds a balance between the imple-
mentation responsibility and the guarantee responsibility of the state.
4.2.2.1.7 Importance to Safety Engineering of the Interdisciplinarily
Consensual Procedure
Since every ﬁeld of application today still has its own code of practice for technical
safety, application-related constructional regulations, operating instructions, oper-
ating regulations, maintenance instructions and conditions for retroﬁtting are being
developed which include operation. Even state monitoring by state supervisory
agencies or bodies authorized by the state (such as federal institutes or the TÜV) is
regulated in application-speciﬁc regulations, although by no means universally.
Methods based on failure analysis are mostly in the ﬁelds of aerospace engineering
or nuclear engineering. As already stated, there is not yet one safety concept which
has cross-application validity—that is, with interdisciplinary validity.
It would already facilitate safety monitoring today for planners, developers,
manufacturers, operators, regulatory bodies and other supervisory institutions and
their experts if similar and identically worded contents in safety regulations were
114
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

standardized. Furthermore, the public—not only in the event of accidents or inci-
dents—would show more understanding for a uniform safety philosophy than the
current variety of standards. People would react more insightfully to an incident.
This challenge, for which there is no equivalent in the history of technology,
presupposes that the fragmented concept of safety requirements speciﬁc to partic-
ular areas of application is being superseded. To this end, empirical practical
knowledge in the ﬁeld of technical safety must be methodically assembled and the
existing body of regulations systematically codiﬁed.
For this purpose, the VDI “Technical Safety” Committee has developed this
working platform for safety methodology and now offers it for interdisciplinary
application.
4.2.2.1.8. Importance of Safety Veriﬁcation
The manufacturers of technical equipment must pay special care to planning a
well-organized, appropriate and systematic procedure in the generation of technical
safety within the context of the state’s predominant guarantee responsibility. This is
so because conventional structures must be dispensed with in some cases and
replaced by equivalents appropriate for the intended purpose. The approach pre-
sented with this guide to both technical safety and the body of suitable instruments
for generating, preserving and assessing technical safety makes it possible as an
interdisciplinary foundation not only to produce veriﬁably safe technical equipment
but also to make a judgement of accidents and incidents with regard to both civil
and criminal law. This applies in particular to technologically innovative equipment
for which neither sufﬁcient experience nor technical regulations (state of the art,
standards, building codes, etc.) can exist.
4.2.2.2
Objective of Safety Engineering
Safety engineering must ensure a sufﬁcient degree of safety. In the conceptual
design of object-related safety engineering, care should be taken that safety-related
design criteria do not end up in avoidable opposition to reliability-related design
criteria which are essential in achieving the other objectives in relation to economic
reliability.
In this context, the term “technical safety” is understood as meaning that a
technical system, technical facility or product fulﬁls its intended functions over a
planned period of time (as the case may be, its planned lifetime) and, provided it is
operated or used as intended, does not injure or damage any objects of legal
protection. This means that neither persons nor property is injured or damaged in as
far as the system, technical facility or product can be responsible for this. Reliability
of function over the envisaged lifetime is thus not a necessary component of safety
if loss of function does not lead to an unsafe state.
4.2
Introduction to Interdisciplinary Safety Engineering
115

Technical systems must be considered and analysed in their totality to design
them appropriately for safety requirements. A methodical approach therefore
requires total system analyses to be carried out ﬁrst of all. The tools suitable for this
are—depending on the problem and the formulated objective—so-called beha-
vioural analyses (e.g., in the ﬁrst instance FMECA, FMEA or HAZOP analyses4).
A targeted approach to the generation of technical safety in a system calls for the
identiﬁcation and evaluation of the functional dependencies and interactions of its
units, components and assemblies. This applies to not only its intended use but also
the safety required during operation and in commissioning and decommissioning.
Corresponding to the system structure (system breakdown structure), all structural
units are then systematically selected for consideration and the safety-oriented
interaction of the individual structural units5 should also be covered in this process.
4.2.2.3
Purpose of a General Safety Speciﬁcation
Uniform conditions can be created for all safety measures in development projects
for complex systems with a general safety speciﬁcation in order to be able to deﬁne
the requirements necessary for a safety-compliant technical design.
This results in the necessity of organizing such general speciﬁcations on the
basis of the following aspects:
• The safety methodology represents a systematic approach to and a suitable
body of instruments for generating, preserving and assessing technical safety
and includes a procedure by which the possibilities of faults, failures and dis-
turbances are systematically analysed and recorded, assessed with respect to
their impact on the safety of the system and made the basis for safety
precautions.
Safety methodology is a methodological framework for processing and solving
all problems and requirements relating to safe technical systems. This also
includes the procedure, question of recording requirements, documentation.
4Behavioural analyses form part of the set of instruments for safety engineering/reliability engi-
neering with which innovative technologies have been helped in readiness for application for
economic breakthrough for many decades now. Apart from their technological innovation, they
have found less acceptance in Germany than in countries with a comparably high level of
industrial development. Therefore, a reference is provided here regarding its international origins:
FMECA: American standard MIL-STD-1629A “Procedures for performing a failure mode,
effect and criticality analysis”, 24.11.1980
FMEA: technical standard—DGQ vol. 13-11:2012 “FMEA—failure mode and effects
analysis”
HAZOP: British standard BS IEC 61882:2001-08-28 “Hazard and operability studies
(HAZOP studies)—Application guide”.
5In the present publication, the term “structural unit” is used as a generic term for all elements of a
project structure plan (work breakdown structure). The topmost hierarchical level of the work
breakdown structure is the “system” or the “product”, and the “sub-systems” and the subordinate
“structural units” then come under either of these.
116
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

• With the safety concept
– Cross-system relationships are represented.
– Assignment of the causes and effects of safety-critical failure possibilities is
clariﬁed (e.g., on the basis of a function tree).
– The corresponding safety criteria are deﬁned as requirements for the
safety-related design of the system in question and include the corresponding
interfaces.
• Assignment and deﬁnition of the corresponding safety requirements for the
structural units of the system,
• Requirements applicable to veriﬁcation relating to fulﬁlment of the safety
requirements in regard to the approvability and operability of this system as a
necessary condition of any construction or operating licence which may be
required.
4.2.2.4
Area of Application of a General Safety Speciﬁcation
The general “safety engineering” speciﬁcation is used for a fundamental estab-
lishment of safety requirements and as a technical platform for preparing speciﬁ-
cations for all structural units top-down—from the system down to the smallest
function unit. A model speciﬁcation is used in this work which lays down the
editorial structure of the system and subordinate speciﬁcations6 for development
and construction.
At the same time, it serves as an action and decision-making framework for the
execution of all safety-related work and the cooperation of all participating com-
panies (in the sense of “juristic persons”) with supervisory and licensing institu-
tions. Furthermore, this general speciﬁcation can be used as a work-related basis for
the issuance, where applicable, of construction and operating approvals on the part
of the competent supervisory and licensing institutions.7
The requirements laid down in the general “safety engineering” speciﬁcation are
to be incorporated without omissions into the speciﬁcations of the structural units
concerned (or, if applicable, pure functional units). All safety requirements here—
as determined in the model speciﬁcation—must be recorded in the corresponding
same section of the speciﬁcation which is to be prepared. It is quite acceptable to
include such requirements also in a different location in the speciﬁcation if a
higher-level connection needs to be made visible there. In such cases, however, the
corresponding cross-references should be provided.
6“Subordinate speciﬁcations” are the speciﬁcations of the structural units coming under the
(overall) system according to the predeﬁned system structure (system breakdown structure).
7This could be a guideline for interaction between the system manager (general contractor) and
supervisory institution for the purpose of obtaining a building permit or operating licence for the
system concerned.
4.2
Introduction to Interdisciplinary Safety Engineering
117

Application of this general speciﬁcation is restricted to the working ﬁeld, which
includes not only the registration of failure possibilities, the determination of the
corresponding impacts on the overall system, the safety-related design of this
system and its structural units but also the corresponding veriﬁcation. Within this
context, the following types of causes of failure are to be taken into account:
• temporally random failures,
• environment-related failures within the boundary conditions to be expected
under which structural units must function as speciﬁed8 and
• utilization-related failures caused by unintentional operator errors (usability).9 In
this context, use for the purpose intended must be assumed. Improper use of
technical equipment cannot be covered as far as technical safety is concerned
(misuse and sabotage).
The correctly engineered design of all structural units (e.g., regarding natural and
technical integrity) forms a part of the corresponding engineering work and is an
indispensable condition of a safety-compliant design. The corresponding rules of
good engineering practice are to be given in the speciﬁcation applicable to each
structural unit. A general reference to the state of the art or generally accepted
sound engineering practice—as is justiﬁably customary in legal regulations—is not,
however, sufﬁcient on its own for a safety-compliant design of systems in general,
particularly complex systems or innovative technologies.
The user of a general speciﬁcation is requested to make proposals for amend-
ments if a better solution is possible for a safety-compliant design and the economic
reliability of the system in question.
Safety is to be incorporated as a subject in:
• basic and/or speciﬁc stipulations and requirements,
• procedural steps in phases for the entire life cycle (product life cycle),
• responsibilities and roles and
• documentation.
Note: A general speciﬁcation is provided as an aid for the preparation of
speciﬁcations for structural units or as an action and decision-making framework. It
will not, however, be possible to achieve the objective of an appropriate
safety-related design if a general speciﬁcation of this kind is simply handed directly
to subcontractors or suppliers. This is because they normally have neither the
system knowledge required for a correct interpretation nor responsibility for the
entire design and implementation process.
8This would be, for example, a general speciﬁcation regarding environmental inﬂuences and test
methods.
9Deliberate abuse is not covered by the deﬁned safety-methodological procedure and would, where
applicable, be subject to special agreements with regard to protective equipment.
118
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

4.3
Generating Safety
4.3.1
Safety Methodology
4.3.1.1
Overview of the Procedure
The procedure for generating safety includes the following points of emphasis:
• work
breakdown
structure
with
deﬁnition
of
responsibilities
and
accountabilities,
• preparation, release and implementation of a conﬁguration management system
which, in particular, covers the quality characteristic “technical safety”,
• deﬁnition of the quality characteristic “technical safety” for each element of the
work breakdown structure,
• inclusion
of
supervisory
institutions
(e.g.,
the
competent
supervisory
authorities),
• preparation, reviewing and release of the general “technical safety” speciﬁcation
and
• inclusion of all entities involved (e.g., contractors and consultants).
A general “safety” speciﬁcation must lay down uniform procedures by which all
possibilities of failure are systematically registered and their impacts on the safety
of the system evaluated in order to make them accessible for safety precautions.
This means, in particular, that all loads acting from the outside and inside are
evaluated with regard to advisable measures in order to be able to decide about
passive
and
active
precautions.
Effects
coming
from
the
original
and
object-inﬂuenced environment are to be evaluated accordingly.
The schematic diagram (see Fig. 4.1) gives a general overview of the basic
procedure for the necessary system work in safety engineering—especially with
regard to public safety.
It should be noted at this point that safety veriﬁcations do not have unlimited
time validity but rather require a periodic review (e.g., in the form of compliance
checks). Wear, fatigue, ageing and maintenance measures affect the validity of the
initial safety assessment, as shown above. Conversion or retroﬁtting measures (e.g.,
in the form of similar but not identical replacement parts) in all cases require the
control loop for creating technical safety to be repeated. As with any other quality
characteristic, technical safety is also subject to a process of decreasing reliability
(dependability).
4.3.1.2
Requirements for Safety-Methodological Procedures
In what follows, the requirements are speciﬁed for a systematic procedure with
which a safety-compliant technical design can be achieved for all technologies.
These uniform provisions are to be applied to all safety-related activities. In the case
4.3
Generating Safety
119

of new technologies, these provisions require a high level of detail, while for
conventional technologies recourse can often be had to proven forms of structuring.
However, should there be changes in conventional technologies, care should be
taken that there is an adequate depth of detailing.
Note must always be taken of the fact that the quality characteristic of “technical
safety” must be generated for every structural and function element (safety
methodology). This also applies to the next higher system levels in every case.
• Safety deﬁnition:
Requirements are to be gathered in a general “safety” speciﬁcation which forms
the basis for every single technical speciﬁcation (product speciﬁcations, etc.).
• Safety engineering:
The following applies to safety engineering:
– Safety must be created for a product within the context of product design
engineering.
– Requirements relating to technical safety must be implemented in the
manufacture of the product.
– Safety requires the veriﬁcation that safety has actually been established in the
design and manufacture of the product.
– The supplies and services of third parties must be included here.
Fig. 4.1 Basic procedure for safety engineering
120
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

• Safety management:
Tried and tested management tools are available for this:
– safety organization guided by “system architects”,
– critical items list (safety hazard list),
– risk management (with the aid of a risk management list),
– reporting (public safety) and
– regularly scheduled safety reviews regarding conception, deﬁnition, devel-
opment, construction and veriﬁcation (technical qualiﬁcation and technical
acceptance).
4.3.1.2.1 General Agreements on Safety Engineering
Products (including technical systems) must be designed safety-compliantly such that
they meet the current standard of public safety. In order to produce the corresponding
current standard, conversion and retroﬁtting obligations must be incorporated in the
legal framework, and this must include a risk-based balancing of protection of the
status quo (grandfather rights). There is, however, no contradiction of this basic
requirement when during testing of a system and/or its structural units—in accordance
with the requirements of trial operation—safety is temporarily ensured by measures
which do not apply to normal operation. In designing a technical system which
complies with safety requirements, the following safety-related basic requirements
must be satisﬁed and, thereby, their safety-related necessity demonstrated:
• A single failure of a function element must not cause or make possible a
safety-critical failure in the overall system.
In this connection, we may recall the constructive precautions in the sense of
“fail-safe” and “fail-operational” (see Sect. 4.1.3.3.1).
Redundant functions or function elements may be provided as a safety pre-
caution thereby allowing the lost function to be taken over in the event of a
failure. However, care should be taken that multiple failures of the same type
(common mode failure) cannot occur as, in this case, even redundant function
elements can fail spontaneously. To give an example: the shared supply of
energy to redundant structural units (for example, when redundant cooling water
pumps depend on one and the same electrical power supply).
Should a technical design meeting these criteria not be possible:
• concatenations of failures of the function elements of the various structural
units—failure mechanisms such as spontaneous and/or multiple failures of the
same type (common mode failure), causal chains and cascade effects—which
could lead to a safety-critical failure within the overall system must be rendered
discernible by active or passive operator checks.
[Note: Consequences resulting in a failure which is of itself non-critical but which
becomes a safety-critical failure event due to interaction with these consequences
4.3
Generating Safety
121

must be investigated. Safety-engineering methodology thus requires every one of
these individual failure modes to make itself visible or be made visible, although
the individual failure mode is not, of itself, safety-critical.]
If a technical design which satisﬁes this requirement is not possible because, for
example, this would impair dependability, the following will also apply:
• The probability of a multiple failure event (in other words, a simultaneous
functional failure of different structural units) which could lead to a
safety-critical failure within the overall system must not exceed a speciﬁc
limiting value which is in each case related to the particular type of service.10
The deﬁnition of such limiting values depends on the stochastic characteristics
of the failure behaviour of the structural units concerned and the—speciﬁed—
limiting value considered appropriate for the overall system.
The limiting values deﬁned in each case relate to the proper functioning of the
function or structural unit concerned. Reducing the time base (e.g., due to early
mission completion) or limiting the function results in the originally stipulated
limiting value (of the probability of failure) retained does not contradict this
fundamental safety requirement.
In multi-processing or multitasking operation in real-time systems, overload
effects sometimes occur to which the system does not react in good time. The
cause is to be found in incorrect design or lack of proof of meeting worst-case
requirements. This situation occurs randomly but can be deterministically
detected and eliminated by using special methods.
The deﬁnition of limiting values for the maximum permissible probability of
failure must take into account the negative consequences to be expected in the
case of failure (extent of damage). Since this parameter can depend very
markedly on the spectrum of utilization (ﬁeld of application of the system, such
as, for example, the chemical industry, road transport, transportation of haz-
ardous goods, shipping, energy conversion, structural steelwork), requirements
valid for the particular service ﬁeld must be applied. To this end, proper
operation must be designed from the outset so that possible deviations due to
negligent handling (such as failure to comply with obligations or omissions) do
not lead to a safety-critical failure in the system.
In this context, the term “fault tolerance” is readily used. This means
“feed-forward” and “feedback” checks on safety and reliability. Since there is a
lack of the requisite databases with sufﬁcient statistical soundness, these
methods work largely on the basis of expert opinions, so-called informed
guesses. Thought should be given here to how such reporting systems are to be
designed and implemented above and beyond the reporting obligation so as to
obtain the maximum yield of the knowledge deemed to be necessary. This also
calls for a reorientation of the error culture in Germany which culminates
10By “service” is here meant a utilization proﬁle (function, course of time) which is to be deﬁned
in the system speciﬁcation.
122
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

ultimately in communicating the ﬁrst occurrence of an error and only taking
action against its recurrence (legally). Only in this way is it to a certain extent
possible to deﬁne “proper operation” so that it includes negligent and erroneous
action taking place in the belief of it being action as intended.
A systematic and appropriate procedure for safety-compliant design assumes in
addition that the following agreements are also taken into account in all
safety-related activities:
• For the system and every structural unit, the “safe state” (fail-safe) or “safe
functional behaviour” (fail-operational) must be clearly deﬁned and recorded in
the corresponding speciﬁcations.
• The transfer of the affected system into either an operating state deﬁned as safe
(e.g., an automatic train stop) or a function deemed safe (e.g., the emergency
landing of an aircraft at a nearby airﬁeld) is an example of this.
• The technical design should be such that, in the event of multiple failure,
interactions in the failure mechanism which could lead to loss of function of a
sub-system or the overall system are excluded.
• Limiting values for failure probabilities which are required for the respective
structural units must be set such that fulﬁlling the safety requirements applicable
to the overall system is not put into question.
As regards the time response of the failure rates concerning safety-critical failures,
the requirements relating to service life (“useful life”) as laid down in the speciﬁ-
cations of the structural unit in question will apply.
4.3.1.2.2 Sequence in the Procedure for Safety-Compliant Design
For all safety-engineering activities—including the corresponding veriﬁcation—the
following sequence of methodologically appropriate measures applies with respect
to conceivable hazards:
• Exclusion of safety-critical failure events (failure exclusion due to natural or
technical integrity):
These are deterministic actions against a single failure. The basis of the pro-
cedure here is the preparation of “safety-compliant design of technical facilities
in the example of buildings and apparatus engineering installations” (see
Sect. 4.4).
• Exclusion of the consequences of safety-critical failure events (exclusion of
failure implications):
The procedure to be applied here is classic safety engineering (as is known, e.g.,
from railway engineering).
• Limitation of the probability of safety-critical failure events and/or defects by
application of reliability engineering:
The procedural basis for this is the VDI manual on reliability [2] (see also
VDI 4001 Part 1).
4.3
Generating Safety
123

This sequence relates to the safety engineering work sequence and does not rep-
resent a ranking of these measures for a safety rating. Passive or system-inherent
safety functions, which can be grouped under the term “inherent safety” (see
Sect. 4.2.2.1.3), are always to be preferred before active safety functions.
Safety-compliant design requires the exclusion from the outset of processes and
actions which result in effects that are unmanageable and thus cannot be adequately
limited. This is followed by the requirement of choosing from two alternative
possible solutions the one which would produce a lower impact. In the same way,
of two possible solutions the one should be chosen whose effects are better con-
tainable. Finally, the approach to a solution should be selected which comes closest
to making reversibility (in the sense of controllability) of the effects possible. This
procedure, which is deﬁned through the sequence given above, assumes that the
function elements of all structural units in the system are in a demonstrably
fault-free and trouble-free state at the beginning of each utilization segment. Faults
which can arise during not only the production process but also maintenance work
must also be avoided or corrected by means of suitable precautionary measures.
4.3.1.2.3 Agreements About Demarcating Safety Engineering with Respect
to Reliability Engineering
The qualiﬁcation for licensing of a safety-compliantly designed overall system is
based not only on its application maturity, which is characterized by an appropriate
level of safety, but also on economic efﬁciency during practical application, which
requires an adequate level of technical dependability and thus, possibly, of relia-
bility as well. Since precautionary safety measures closely correlate with depend-
ability, a meaningful mutual demarcation of their respective activities is required.
If it is assumed in this context that a technical facility should be designed to be
only safety-compliant, the economic efﬁciency of its operation will remain ques-
tionable. In other words, if the objective of not only a safe but also a reliable or
available overall system is not to be questioned, proposed precautionary safety
measures should not be implemented until corresponding account has been taken of
their effects on dependability. In this context, we might mention “commanded
failure”. One example of this is the automatic train stop initiated by the system
following a safety-critical failure. Although this stop is deﬁned as a “safe mode”, it
does, nevertheless, reduce the dependability of the system, which in turn restricts its
economic usefulness. In this context, we are concerned with those cases in which
there is not even any safety-critical failure but a monitoring device reports a
safety-critical failure even though one as such has not occurred.
The deterministic analysis of safety is based on a maximum effect in the case of a
damaging event or a maximum inﬂuence in the case of a loading case (worst-case
analysis). In the probabilistic analysis of safety, the focus is on the frequency with
which a damaging event occurs (probability assumption) linked with the possible
extent of damage. In this matter, it is not the worst case which is considered but,
while taking probabilities of failure into consideration, reference is rather made to
the “maximum
still
acceptable
risk” (consideration
of the
limiting
risk).
124
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

A “pessimistic” analysis is one in which an attempt is made by costly efforts to
exclude even the smallest risks. In an “optimistic” analysis, the emphasis is on
excluding the really unacceptable risks.
In this context, “precautionary safety measures” are to be understood as all
measures for controlling the development result which are to be applied to counter
special cases of functional failure in structural units: these are failures which cannot
themselves be excluded but which give rise to behaviour in the overall system that,
under the given functional, environmental and utilization conditions can lead to
injury to individuals and/or damage to property. A distinction should be drawn here
between technical and operational precautionary measures on the one hand and
preventive and corrective precautionary measures on the other. Priority should
always be given to measures which can be taken preventively. With the aid of
systems analysis methods (e.g., by means of timely failure analyses), corrective
measures can be reduced to the unavoidable minimum. To reduce the possibility of
human failure, which can never be entirely ruled out during the utilization phase,
technical precautionary measures should be given priority in the safety-compliant
design of systems and their structural units. The personnel operating the system
should be instructed and trained to have cross-system understanding and thus be
able to act as a possible “reserve” in the matter of system safety.
In a systematic approach, precautionary safety measures must, as regards the
particular structural unit and its interplay with other structural units in the overall
system, be selected and adjusted to each other so that the necessary safety veriﬁcation
is coherent. Furthermore, these measures should be so selected that they do not clash
with the further goal of development—demonstrating with this technical facility the
economically efﬁcient utilization possible with the new technology implemented in it.
Observation of “good engineering practice” and legal regulations is a necessary
but not sufﬁcient condition for coherent proof of safety and dependability. Suitable
conditions are rather to be created by which the overall context of possible failure
causes and effects can be perceived and represented in a manageable form so as to
allow them to be taken into account in the technical design. These conditions are
created by the failure analyses11 which are to be conducted as part of a project.
4.3.1.3
Practical Application
By using the global safety-methodological approach, we have presented that it is
possible, in the interest of an increase in efﬁciency, to make it easier for the various
technical disciplines not only to communicate among themselves but also interact
on an interdisciplinary basis. The same applies to the collaboration of engineers,
economists, legal experts and other technical laypersons, such as people working in
the media. This has a beneﬁcial effect in the case of technical innovation projects
11What is referred to here are the corresponding project arrangements, for example, in the form of
a guideline about the performance of failure analyses.
4.3
Generating Safety
125

and is conducive to an understanding of procedural concepts relating to safety. In
this way, it is possible to prevent safety concerns from being thrust out of the
engineer’s ﬁeld of awareness as soon as improvements or other changes are made to
technical equipment, facilities or systems. In summary, it may be observed that
application of the global safety-methodological approach as presented here means
that all safety activities can be designed considerably more efﬁciently. Rescue
routes, rescue facilities, shutdown devices, automatic train stop systems and the
stability of structural units can all be designed more efﬁciently as regards safety
compliance. The suitability of procedural concepts for ﬁre and avalanche protection
and occupational accident prevention can also be checked more efﬁciently.
The global safety-methodological approach presented here also takes into
account the realization, ﬁrst presented in DIN 31004-1:1982-11 (see Sect. 4.2), that
absolute safety cannot exist, not even in technology. The Global Approach forms
the “envelope”, so to speak, which derives from the wealth of experience gathered
over the history of technology. It covers a range extending from the failure-analysis
approach of modern aerospace technology, methodologically appropriate solution
principles and the application of design catalogues in modern construction
methodology to the internationally established quality management system
according to DIN EN ISO 9001 “Quality management systems” (2009). This
methodological global safety approach exposes the hidden commonalities of classic
safety procedural concepts (which are still entirely application-speciﬁc) that, when
examined more closely, are only apparently different. On the basis of this under-
standing, both safety engineering and safety legislation must undergo a constantly
advancing process of integration.
If the present-day quality of life when technical risks have been mastered and
thus the personal safety of citizens is to be preserved in Germany and the EU, it
must be ensured that sufﬁcient creativity is available in industry. The economies of
the EU cannot rely solely on the reduction of raw material reserves or trading in
goods and money. Therefore, quality of life and personal safety can only be
maintained in the long term if technologically creative forces remain effective in
creating innovative systems, products and technical facilities whose usefulness
must be guaranteed. In the creation of innovative technical products, this economic
constraint makes it necessary to an ever greater extent to take objectives such as
“safety” and “economic utility” also into account.
The approach described here also pursues the goal of how interdisciplinary
interaction can be promoted in the ﬁeld of safety engineering on the basis of an
efﬁcient global approach. It is also important to ascertain how the seemingly
contradictory objectives of “safety” and economically reasonable “dependability”
can be tackled as a holistic system concept. Only by means of an appropriate quality
management12 system, the creation of technical safety can be veriﬁed and traced.
12The term “quality management” used in this publication covers primarily the secondary ﬁeld of
“technical controlling”, and this is the sense in which it has most recently been promulgated by
politicians and journalists.
126
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

4.3.2
Implementation of the Safety Concept
The quality characteristic of “technical safety” usually includes—depending on the
extent and complexity of the technical equipment in question—several relevant
individual characteristics. Each of these individual characteristics must be generated
during the design and manufacturing process of the technical equipment in question
(product, technical facility, system). Technical safety must be demonstrated during
the course of quality assurance measures and preserved by means of maintenance
work. The safety concept thus created must be put into practice for the project
design in this way:
• transfer of the systematically developed safety concept into project and system
speciﬁcations,13
• safety requirements relating to the design of the system and its structural units or
function elements,
• determination of the safety requirements which are subject to veriﬁcation
(public-technical safety),
• determination of the safety requirements on which obtaining operational
approval depends and
• collection and evaluation throughout the entire product life cycle of all
safety-critical failure modes occurring as “lessons learned” for “experience
feedback”.
4.3.2.1
Safety-Engineering Flow Chart
The conditions listed above have been coordinated systematically with each other in
such a way that a procedure is established. This is uniformly applicable to not only
the project, new technology thereby created and conventional technology employed
but also the assessment by the competent supervisory body. A further general
possibility of application would be for damage investigations of technical
equipment.
A valid work and evaluation methodology is thus set up for the entire scope of a
project, and it brings the indispensable safety-compliant design criteria for
achieving approval into a quantitatively assessable relationship with those design
13The safety concept worked out within the context of the conceptual design and deﬁnition of a
technical project corresponds to this early state of knowledge which is constantly expanded during
the course of the project. The set of systemic instruments of conﬁguration management ensures
and will keep ensuring that all further ﬁndings emerging from the course of the project are
systematically added to the rolling project deﬁnition and brought to the notice of those involved.
This concerns, in particular, the quality attribute of “technical safety”.
4.3
Generating Safety
127

criteria that are important for the intended utilization and, thus, technical
dependability.14
The procedural and decision-making methodology shown in Fig. 4.2 (ﬂow
chart) forms the appropriate working basis for developing and judging decisions
regarding the adequacy of safety design features.
The procedural and decision-making methodology for creating safety in tech-
nical equipment is included in a legible resolution in this publication.
4.3.2.2
Explanatory Notes to the Flow Chart
4.3.2.2.1 General Structure
The individual elements of the ﬂow chart are given a number as a cross-reference to
the explanatory material. Due to this numbering, the various steps in taking action
and making decisions can be demarcated from each other accordingly in both
safety- and reliability-related works. For reasons of clarity, the elements of the ﬂow
chart are numbered in the form of a grid. The ﬁrst numeral here indicates the nature
of the step in question as follows:
1.n
Action and decision steps in which the causes and effects of failures are
systematically determined in order that the necessary conditions are created for an
effective execution of all safety activities
2.n
Safety-related action and decision steps in which, in the probabilistic approach,
stochastic failure behaviour is dealt with
3.n
Safety-related decision steps in which, in the deterministic approach, failure
behaviour that can be grasped in this form is dealt with
4.n
Action and decision steps which are necessary to be able to deal with the
stochastically determinable effects on dependability of the safety-oriented technical
precautionary measures provided
5.n
Safety-related action and decision steps which are necessary to be able to establish
the deterministically ascertainable effects on dependability of the safety-oriented
technical or operational precautionary measures provided
6.n…
11.n
Assessment of the chosen technical design with respect to its safety-compliant
design and its impact on dependability
14It has become established in some ﬁelds of technology that technical safety is only obtained
when, in the event of a safety-critical disturbance, the system concerned is put into a, by deﬁnition,
“safe state”. This “safe state” is often equated with a switching-off (to be commanded) of the actual
utility function. Switching off the intended utility function does, however, impair the depend-
ability which is essential for the practical application.
Dependability is also the measure of the ratio of the actual usability and the technically
possible (intended) usability.
128
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

Fig. 4.2 Procedural and decision-making methodology (ﬂow chart)
4.3
Generating Safety
129

4.3.2.2.2 Using the Flow Chart for the Technical Design of Products
Firstly, a procedure should always be preferred which is oriented towards deter-
ministically ascertainable relationships in order to achieve a safety-compliant
technical design (keyword: “fail-safe”):
• A safety-compliant design and its assessment can be carried out without the
additional effort required to capture and deal with stochastic failure behaviour.
• The advantage of the deterministic approach comes into play in particular when
changes in the technical design become necessary.
• It is usually assumed that deterministic approaches tend to make it possible to
keep costs within a manageable framework in safety-compliant design. This
advantage—in many cases only a supposed one—is opposed by the fact that
consequential costs will arise which could otherwise have been avoided with
such short-sighted considerations of safety.
Note: The deterministic approach is based on the inﬂuence of stochastic phenomena
being practically negligible (continuity view).
Application of probabilistic approaches for safety-compliant technical design
(keyword: “fail-operational”) does, however, expand the possibilities for providing
proof of safety. Nevertheless, this approach should only be provided for cases
where a deterministically justiﬁable safety-compliant design is not possible,
whereby the following should be noted:
• Proof that the selected technical design ensures adequate safety is usually
combined with greater effort.
• Reliability engineering, which is to be applied for probabilistic approaches,
recognizes the following distinctions with regard to quantitative information:
– the true behavioural parameters,
– the forecast estimated parameter value and
– the observed parameter.
The “true behaviour parameter” is not known until utilization is completed at
ﬁnal decommissioning and is, therefore, not suitable as a criterion for decisions
about the technical design or its assessment.
The “forecast estimated parameter value”, on the other hand, is an entirely
usable criterion by which a decision can be made about the technical design. It is
only suitable as an assessment criterion when—as is the case in space travel in
particular—here is agreement between the system director and supervisory insti-
tution regarding the informativeness of the failure rates of structural units and
elements used for reliability analyses.
130
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

Therefore, the adequacy of a safety design may be judged solely on the basis of
the actual “observed parameters”. The effort required for demonstrating an
appropriate level of safety (mentioned at the beginning) results from the fact that the
low failure probability permissible in this context can only be conﬁrmed by sta-
tistical and, therefore, relatively lengthy, extensive and often quite costly qualiﬁ-
cation testing.
The parameters referred to in this context are stochastic in nature and therefore
can only be quantitatively determined by using statistical methods. Thus, param-
eters derived from actually observed parameters by applying generally accepted
statistical calculation methods are just as suitable for proof of safety as the actually
observed parameters themselves. This does, however, depend on there being a
sufﬁcient level of statistical conﬁdence.
What this means for the practical implementation of proofs of safety is that
“observed parameters”, statistically sound “forecast estimated parameter values”
and, on this basis, “extrapolated estimated parameter values” are to be regarded as
of equal importance.
Independently of the safety analyses explained here, which should be used for
the technical design, even reliability analyses are of course based on the stochastic
failure behaviour of these technical devices.
4.3.2.2.3 Explanations of the Technical Steps in Creating Technical Safety
Before the ﬂow chart can also be used for assessing the individual technical design
steps, detailed explanations of the individual activity and decision steps are nec-
essary. They are listed below in numerical order.
Action Step 1.1
Preconditions for all safety-related activities are that the failure behaviour of all
function elements of the structural unit under consideration is fully and correctly
captured and presented in a clear and unequivocal form.
For this to be possible, both the function elements of this structural unit and its
functional behaviour (according to the function tree) must be deterministically
captured. The following VDI standards may be referred to here:
• VDI 2221 “Systematic approach to the development and design of technical
systems and products”,
• VDI 2222 Part 1 “Design methodology—methodical development of solution
principles” and
• VDI 2223 “Systematic embodiment design of technical products”
in order to determine the function structure (function tree) with main functions,
subordinate sub-functions and the corresponding function elements.
In order to cover stochastic failure behaviour as well, interactions with the
structural units involved in the function (failure mechanisms) must be captured in
the same way and presented in an unambiguous form.
4.3
Generating Safety
131

Action Step 1.2
Performance of failure analyses15 is the decisive action step in systematically
capturing both failure possibilities and their causes and effects. The effectiveness of
each subsequent action step crucially depends on the care with which these analyses
are carried out, especially with regard to the elimination of possible causes of failure
and the selection of suitable precautionary measures. In view of the importance
attached to carrying out failure analyses for safety-related activities, such work
should be performed according to a standard model and uniform criteria. This, in
turn, is a precondition for the results of the individual analyses being directly
comparable without further ado and—if necessary—always transparent. In this
way, the situation is ﬁnally created in which even cross-system aspects can be fully
captured and made accessible to all safety-related activities.
For the function elements determined with the aid of the previously mentioned
function structure, their failure behaviour is analysed by assigning each of these
function elements—where applicable—to one of the following possible failure
modes:
• As regards the structure of the analysed function element:
– untimely function structure,
– unqualiﬁed function structure and
– missing function structure.
• As regards maintaining the function element concerned:
– degraded function and
– lost function.
• As regards termination of this function element:
– unqualiﬁed function termination.
The following categories of possible failure causes must be systematically taken
into account here:
• temporally random failure of the structural unit concerned,
• environment-related failure of the particular function elements of the selected
structural unit
15Failure analyses of this kind are also known under the terms
•
“Failure and fault effect analyses” (FFEA),
•
“Defect mode and effect analyses” (DMEA),
•
“Failure mode, effect and criticality analyses” (FMECA),
•
“Event tree analyses“ DIN 25419) and
•
“Fault tree analyses“ (DIN 25424).
132
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

[It should be taken into account here that environmental inﬂuences can not only
cause a failure in a deterministically transparent manner (e.g., failure occurring
immediately after a lightning strike) but also lead to a higher probability of
failure (failure rate) which can only be captured by a probabilistic approach (as
would be the case, e.g., as a consequence of solar irradiation).] and
• utilization-related failure caused by unintentional operator error.
In order to make it possible to capture stochastic failure behaviour, the generalizing
assumption is usually made that the causes of failure are independent of each other.
Consequently, the safety-compliant design in particular must ensure that unwanted
interactions or so-called cascade effects are prevented (see also Action Step 2.6).
Notwithstanding this, it must be taken into account when capturing stochastic
failure behaviour that even under this condition there can still be dependencies. This
could be the case if the causes lay outside the technical equipment being
designed—in other words, were due to jointly acting environmental conditions.
The independence of multiple failures is often assumed but it must be made (at
least) plausible, for example, by reference to spatial or operational redundancy,
diversity and similar factual contexts. If this is not possible, so-called common
mode or “common-cause” failures should be considered.
Action Step 1.3
A whole series of proven analytical tools are available for carrying out this action
step with which the following aspects can be systematically captured and assessed
on a safety-methodological basis:
• complete deﬁnition of the failure mode,
• causing failures in higher-level functions,
• conceivable effect of failure chains (cascade effects),
• failures “delivered” to the function element under consideration,
• failures triggered by the function element under consideration,
• careful and clear distinction between failure mode, cause of failure and failure
effect for each individual function element,
• the function tree represents the “scaffolding” for the derived fault tree
[Note: The fault tree is independent and only to be drawn up on the basis of the
function tree of the system and its components. In other words, project plans
must already exist into which the results of the ﬁrst FMECAs have been
incorporated and which may have led to changes in the original system struc-
ture. The completed fault tree can then be compared with the original function
tree for the purpose of locating any inconsistencies. The fault tree is a model of
the logic structure of the relationships between possible faults. Furthermore, it is
an interaction model of the possible faults and, ultimately, an algorithm for
4.3
Generating Safety
133

determining the so-called minimal cut sets of events which can lead to various
failure states of the system.
Not until the basic elements of the fault tree have been substantiated by prob-
ability values can a quantitative analysis be considered. Whether an event tree
to which the corresponding fault trees are to be attached should be put ﬁrst is a
question to be clariﬁed in the individual case.] and
• evaluation of the criticality of the effect for every individual failure mode of a
function element:
– safety-critical effect (basis for the conceptual design of safety functions and
failure tolerance—keyword: “fail-safe”) and
– safety- and reliability-critical effects (keyword: “fail-operational”).
The failure possibilities collected are to be classiﬁed as follows on the basis of their
impact on the overall system:
Effect of the
failure mode
Classiﬁcation of
the failure mode
Criteria for classiﬁcation
Supercritical
fault
Class A
Immediate danger since the behaviour unleashed by
the failure cannot be controlled with the prescribed
means
Critical fault
Class B
Hazard which may result in injury to persons or
damage to property if the behaviour triggered by the
failure is not made controllable by suitable
precautionary measures
Major fault
Class C
Utilization is considerably restricted or entirely
prevented
Minor fault
Class D
Utilization is impaired only slightly or not at all
Incidental
fault
No failure
Negligible deviation without affecting functional
behaviour
In this context, the following activity and decision principles apply:
• Class A failures are not permissible according to safety methodology. They
must be prevented by a suitable structural design which complies with “gen-
erally accepted sound engineering practice” (keywords: natural and technical
integrity).
• Class B failures must be combated by technical and/or operational precautionary
methods in accordance with safety methodology. Class B failures are to be taken
into consideration in safety engineering, may be identical to a Class C failures
and usually make repair work necessary.
• A Class C failure is present when, due to this, the envisaged or speciﬁed
utilization proﬁle cannot be maintained. Class C failures are to be taken into
consideration in reliability engineering, can contribute to a Class B safety-
critical multiple failure and make repair work necessary.
134
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

• A Class D failure is present when, despite this failure, the utilization proﬁle can
still be maintained. Class D failures can contribute to a Class B safety-critical
multiple failure and make repair work necessary.
Action Step 1.4
It is recommended for deterministic approaches that initially only the Class B single
failure is to be taken into account within the context of safety activities.
As regards probabilistic approaches, the Class B single failure initially no longer
needs to be taken into account in the context of the safety-methodological proce-
dure. However, all those Class C and Class D failures must be taken into account
which could result in a Class B safety-critical multiple failure. Even a Class B
safety-critical single failure is to be taken into consideration only in cases where
stochastic failure behaviour in interaction with facilities for precautionary safety
measures, so-called safety-engineering or operational safety measures, is also to be
captured.
Class C failures should be taken into consideration for reliability work. Where
Class B safety-critical failures also impact reliability and thus dependability (key-
word: “commanded failures”), they should also be regarded as Class C failures.
This is then always the case when, upon a Class B safety-critical failure occurring,
the safety-engineering equipment provided causes a Class C major fault (e.g., by
shutting down or inhibiting operation).
Decision Step 1.5
In contrast to the single failure, multiple failure often involves more complex and
not immediately comprehensible failure mechanisms. The failure mechanism in
question must ﬁrst be rendered transparent by capturing, without omissions, the
interaction of all cases of single failure involved in the safety-critical multiple
failure.
Note: For the sake of clarity, it is necessary to deﬁne reasonable boundaries as
regards completeness by which the cases of single failure involved in the
safety-critical multiple failure can be captured. It is essential to coordinate these
demarcations with the competent supervisory institutions (public safety/legal
approval).
Action Step 2.6
The following safety-methodological principles must be observed in connection
with the treatment of a multiple failure:
• Every single failure is deterministically predictable, so its effect can also be
determined deterministically in advance (determinable). Although the time
when a failure occurs is always random, in other words stochastic, this has no
relevance to the selection of suitable safety technology since this selection is
also based on deterministic points of view.
• According to the general agreement on safety engineering, a single failure must
not cause or make possible any safety-critical failure (Sect. 4.3.1.2.1). It follows
4.3
Generating Safety
135

necessarily from this that a safety-critical multiple failure can result only from
cases of single failure which are not of themselves safety-critical. It follows from
this in turn that not only the time at which a multiple failure occurs is stochastic
but also the occurrence of the multiple failure itself. This is why a multiple
failure can be properly captured in its full extent in the ﬁnal analysis only by a
probabilistic approach.
• Although probabilistic approaches do require a certain mathematical systematics,
for pragmatic reasons it may be necessary to make simplifying abstractions.
Cases of single failure which are involved in the interaction with a multiple
failure must, as regards their occurrence, be independent of each other. This
independence is present when there are neither technical (function logic) nor
operational (operationally necessary) links (logic operations). However, in this
regard independence also means that no shared causes of failure are to be
expected (see also Action Step 1.2). With the sequential occurrence of cases of a
single failure which are mutually independent, even the (quasi-) “simultaneous”
occurrence of multiple cases of single failure is covered as a borderline case.
Consequential failure is to be treated in safety methodology in the same way as a
single failure, namely in a holistic consideration with the initiating failure as
cause.
• A multiple failure is to be expected when the technical design of the affected
structural unit(s) has at least one of the following function-logic or operational
link characteristics:16
– Deterministically detectable links
Conjunctive link
A deterministically detectable link exists when technical functions and
operational activities substitute for each other. This is usually achieved by
function-logic and/or operational redundancy.
Note: Redundancy is a measure in reliability engineering by which a
reduction in failure probability is always achieved. However, a redundant
arrangement will not ensure appropriate safety unless it can be demonstrated
that the failure probability thereby achieved remains within permissible
limits (see also Decision Step 2.11).
Inclusive-disjunctive link
A link of this kind, which is also deterministically detectable, is present
when technical features and/or operational activities that are not provided as
a redundancy are complementary to the envisaged overall function. In this
case, it is to be assumed that failure of a sub-function will always entail a
failure of the overall function. This type of link is present, for example, in
devices whose function depends on energy supplies.
16The deﬁnitions given in DIN 25419-1 are used here. However, not every possible switching
logic link is also usable for safety-related considerations, such as an “exclusive disjunctive link”.
136
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

Negation link
This type of a deterministically detectable link exists when technical capa-
bilities are mutually interlocked fully or partially. A failure of the overall
function will only occur when the function of the mutual interlock fails. One
example of this kind of link is the mutual interlocking of the electrical
service brake and mechanical backup brake of a maglev train vehicle, which
is provided to ensure that impermissible brake-related force effects on the
vehicle are prevented. (Simultaneous operation of both braking systems
would necessarily result in unacceptable overstressing of the track.)
– Stochastic manifestations
Complex meshing of functions
These are links which, due to their complexity, can no longer be properly
and fully captured by a deterministic approach alone.
The modes of operation of integrated switching circuits come under this
form of manifestation just as dynamic alternating functions do in automat-
ically running open- and closed-loop control processes.
Note: Unlike deterministically detectable links, such complex functional
meshings (Markov chains and Markov processes) are not suitable for the
way in which a function tree is presented.
The failure behaviour of complex meshings of functions can only be fully
captured by a probabilistic approach. The following abstraction is permis-
sible within the context of this approach:
It must be ensured by a design of the structural unit in question which is
suitable from the reliability engineering point of view that, with the func-
tional and/or state features provided (which are taken as input parameters),
the expected output parameter is present with sufﬁcient probability at the
predetermined time and speciﬁed location. It is not necessary here to con-
sider the functional processes in the structural unit itself.
Within the context of safety engineering, an abstraction of this kind does,
however, require additional function-logic plausibility analyses with regard
to the interaction of mutually independent input parameters and the corre-
sponding output parameters depending on them (e.g., non-equivalence,
majority “decision”).
Action Step 2.7
• Deterministically detectable links
The form of representation showing a function tree with all relevant failure
modes (following DIN 25424) is recommended as an aid in determining and
presenting functional logic and operational links. In this matter, a sub-
representation of the higher-level function tree must clearly show as a result of
4.3
Generating Safety
137

which link the failure modes (not in themselves safety-critical) of function
elements of the structural units concerned will lead to a safety-critical failure in
the overall system.
• Stochastic forms of manifestation
The type of representation suitable here is the state diagrams which have proved
their usefulness in reliability engineering (see, e.g., VDI 4008 Part 5 “State ﬂow
graphs”).
Action Steps 2.8.1 and 2.8.2
The interaction of the structural units involved in the safety-critical multiple failure
is obtained from, on the one hand, the fault tree and, on the other, the state diagrams
(see also Action Step 2.7). However, it must be ensured by a systematic (as a rule,
formalized) ﬂow of information that the failure mechanism in question is also fully
and unequivocally captured when responsibility for the structural units concerned
extends over different, legally mutually independent areas.
Note: The difﬁculties here are normally to be found not so much in the factual
capture of the failure behaviour as in the willingness with which the necessary
information is supplied in a comprehensive form that is comprehensible at all times.
Both the capture and the evaluation of the required information about failure
behaviour can be systematized with a general speciﬁcation for the performance
of failure analyses.
Action Steps 2.9.1 and 2.9.2
Before the probability of such a multiple failure occurring can be determined, the
corresponding organizational conditions must be created for this action step as well.
These are used for systematically determining failure probabilities for not only the
structural unit under consideration (Action Step 2.9.1) but also the other structural
units involved in the multiple failure (Action Step 2.9.2). The corresponding
agreements on standardizing procedures while paying due regard to responsibilities
can be regulated in a general speciﬁcation: general speciﬁcation for the work
ﬁelds “reliability” and “dependability”.
Action Step 2.10
The probability values obtained in Action Steps 2.9.1 and 2.9.2 should ﬁrst be
made accessible to the ﬁeld of responsibility for the structural unit in which the
safety-critical effect of the multiple failure in question manifests itself.
This action step cannot on its own offer any guarantee that the failure mechanism
concerned is fully captured or that any further possibilities of multiple failure are
detected. Therefore, a central responsible body (contact point, and focal point) is
essential where all relevant information converges.
Details of cooperation with a central contact point of this kind can be deﬁned in a
general speciﬁcation for the work areas “reliability” and “dependability”.
138
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

Decision Step 2.11
In accordance with the measures for the standardization of project execution,17
safety-engineering requirements must be stipulated in the speciﬁcations for each
structural unit. Should the structural unit be expected to experience a safety-critical
multiple failure, a limiting value for the failure probability should be indicated here
and the corresponding failure modes listed.
This limiting value should be selected such that its fulﬁlment means a level of
safety is guaranteed which is reasonable in an evaluative comparison with systems
already generally accepted by the public. Provided compliance with a limiting value
of this kind can be demonstrated for the technical design of the structural unit
concerned, additional safety engineering can be dispensed with.
However, this will usually not be possible. If a case arises in which the prob-
ability of a safety-critical multiple failure exceeds the permissible limiting value of
acceptability (risk assessment), it will be essential, even with regard to probabilistic
procedures, to provide additional safety technology which is also appropriate from
the cross-system point of view. At least, the consequences of a multiple failure of
this kind are to be controlled by suitable precautionary measures (e.g., by short-
ening the duration of the speciﬁed utilization proﬁle). The factual condition for this
is that each case of single failure, although of itself not safety-critical, manifests
itself early enough.
Note: If additional safety equipment is provided, more technical functional- or
operational-action elements will necessarily be involved in a multiple failure of this
kind than with the technical design originally envisaged. Consequently, it will be
necessary to start again at Action Step 2.7 with the additional safety equipment
included. This recursive process should be repeated until the transition from
Decision Step 2.11 to Decision Step 4.13 is objectively justiﬁed.
original multiple failure
þ
failure of the safety equipment
¼
expanded multiple failure
Decision Step 3.6
The state-related and functional properties of a structural unit will, by their nature,
be captive if they—provided they are used as intended—can be traced back to
characteristics which not only correspond to known laws of nature but are also
constantly and uninterruptedly effective. These properties cannot be affected by
either other natural inﬂuences or inﬂuences originating in the overall system of
which this structural unit is a part. This situation is referred to as natural integrity.
17In this context, please refer to the following management tool: the model speciﬁcation.
4.3
Generating Safety
139

Such characteristics include, for example, the effect of gravity, radioactive decay,
the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld and the speed of light.
Decision Step 3.8
The state-related and functional properties of a structural unit will, by their nature,
be captive if they can be traced back to characteristics which were veriﬁably taken
as a basis for the technical design and which cannot change over the course of the
intended service life.
A prerequisite for the admissibility of the corresponding veriﬁcation is, however,
that, on the one hand, the constructive design complies with generally accepted
sound engineering practice. On the other hand, proof must be provided and doc-
umented that the execution of work actually corresponds to the intended con-
structive design (quality assurance and inspection). This situation is referred to as
technical integrity.
Examples of these characteristics are found in holding and support functions,
standardized shrink ﬁttings, secure fasteners, forced guides, permanent magnets,
guided, unbreakable compression springs and adequate creep and ﬂashover dis-
tances from high-voltage equipment.
The special aspects of the “technical integrity” situation, which is to be con-
sidered deterministically, are presented in more depth in this guideline to “technical
safety” (in this regard, see Sect. 4.4).
Decision Step 3.9
If the constructive design of the structural unit concerned does not permit the
exclusion of a safety-critical failure, precautionary safety measures should be taken
to tackle the hazardous consequences of this failure in an appropriate manner. In
order to keep the effort involved within limits, it is advisable to investigate ﬁrst the
extent to which relevant safety equipment can be incorporated directly into the
structural unit immediately superior in the hierarchy. A failure consequences
exclusion will then be conclusively justiﬁed on grounds of natural and/or technical
integrity when, despite a conceivable failure, a “safe state” is preserved as deﬁned
in the speciﬁcation of the relevant higher-level structural unit (which is not the
structural unit under consideration) or when “safe behaviour”, also deﬁned there,
remains guaranteed.
However, a failure consequences exclusion which is justiﬁed by the function of a
safety device will only be permissible when a failure exclusion or, if applicable,
further failure consequences exclusion18 is justiﬁed for the safety-engineering
equipment itself.19
18Although entirely permissible from the methodological point of view, a further exclusion of the
consequences of failure should, if at all possible, be avoided in order to maintain the clarity of the
function elements of the structural unit in question.
19If this is not possible technically or objectively, the proof of safety may need to be provided with
the aid of probabilistic approaches, such as, for example, the introduction of redundancies.
140
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

Decision Step 3.11
If the decision described under Decision Step 3.9 is not possible—that is, incor-
porating the safety-engineering equipment directly into the structural unit imme-
diately superior in the hierarchy—the corresponding safety-engineering equipment
can also be incorporated into a different and hierarchically non-assignable structural
unit.
As a result of this measure, the corresponding interfaces must be deﬁned as well.
A failure consequences exclusion will then be conclusively justiﬁed when,
despite a conceivable failure, a “safe state” is preserved which arises as a result of
reference to Action Step 2.6. This is to be deﬁned in the speciﬁcation of the
structural unit concerned (which is not the structural unit under consideration). The
aim here is for a deﬁned “safe behaviour” to remain guaranteed in the system.
original single failure
þ
failure of the safety equipment
¼
multiple failure ðreference to Step 2:6Þ
Decision Step 4.13
The following failure modes are to be taken into account within the context of this
decision:
• failure which, although of itself reliability-critical, is, however, involved in a
safety-critical multiple failure,
• failure which, although of itself safety-critical, is, however, reliability-critical in
effect as a result of the safety equipment provided and
• other reliability-critical failures of the structural units in question which need not
be affected by the ﬁeld of activity of safety engineering.
Safety-critical single failures which have no effect on reliability are not taken into
consideration in this context.
Action Step 4.15.1
Where reliability-critical failures are commanded20 for the structural unit concerned
as a result of precautionary safety measures, the probability of their occurrence
should be determined here (see Action Step 2.10).
However, the effort then involved in dealing with possible multiple failures should be taken into
account (see Sect. 4.3.1.2.1).
20Deﬁnition based on DIN 25424-1.
4.3
Generating Safety
141

Action Step 4.15.2
The value of the function-related failure probability of the structural units con-
cerned as obtained in Action Step 2.10 should be accepted here.
Action Step 4.16.1
In this action step, any redundancies which may be required are speciﬁed. At the
same time, the possible common mode multiple failure of the structural units
concerned is determined while taking into account all random (spontaneously
failing), environment-related and utilization-related failure modes.
Possible examples might be “overvoltage” as a cause of spontaneous (but
otherwise random) failure, “lightning strike” as a cause of environment-related
failure and “operator error” as a cause of utilization-related failure.
Action Step 4.17.1
In this action step, the degree of reliability is determined in which commanded
reliability-critical failure is taken into account. All further reliability-critical failures
of the structural unit affected by the multiple failure under consideration which do
not have a direct relation to the safety-engineering equipment are also to be
included here.
Action Step 4.18
The usual procedure in reliability engineering is applied as part of this action step to
determine the overall reliability of that structural unit which, due to its hierarchical
classiﬁcation in the system structure, is affected by the multiple failure under
consideration.21
Decision Step 4.20
In accordance with the measures for the standardization of project execution,22
requirements relating to dependability and, where applicable, reliability are to be
laid down in the speciﬁcation for each structural unit on the basis of a centrally
managed apportionment. The minimum limiting values for dependability and
reliability should be given and the corresponding failure modes listed individually
at this point.
The corresponding limiting value should be selected so that compliance with it
means a degree of economic dependability is assured which is competitive in
comparison with other proven systems.
Decision Step 5.12
Under certain circumstances, Decision Steps 2.11, 3.9 and 3.11 could lead to
safety-engineering equipment having to be provided and used in order to obtain a
21As a working basis, see the VDI handbook on reliability VDI–Handbuch ‘Zuverlässigkeit
(VDI 4001 ff.) [2].
22In this context, please refer to the following management tool: the model speciﬁcation..
142
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

safety-compliant technical design. Safety equipment of this kind cannot usually be a
component part of the structural unit under consideration. In such cases, it will be
necessary to apply the same safety-methodological procedure to this safety
equipment as well. If a failure of this safety equipment cannot, for its part, be
excluded (see Decision Steps 3.6 and 3.8), this failure, which in itself is already a
safety-critical single failure of not only the structural unit under consideration but
also the equipment provided by safety engineering, should be classiﬁed as a
safety-critical multiple failure (see Action Steps 2.8.2 and 2.9.2). This applies even
if other safety equipment is to be provided (see also the assessment according to
Preliminary Result 8.21).
Decision Step 5.13
The general requirement for an appropriate level of safety assumes that there is a
corresponding safety-compliant technical design in accordance with Action Steps 2.
n and 3.n. This demand does, however, make it equally necessary for failures which
lead to deviations from the safety-compliant target state to be made detectable in a
timely fashion so that the technical and/or operational precautionary measures
provided for this situation can become appropriately effective. This is crucial if
deviations from the “safe state” or “safe behaviour” are to be countered at all times.
In this regard, there are deviations from the safety-compliant target state under
the following conditions:
• With failure consequences exclusion (see Decision Steps 3.9 and 3.11):
– Every function-related failure of the structural unit itself is always to be
classiﬁed as safety-critical without taking into account any safety equipment
which may be provided and
– Every failure of the safety equipment provided which renders it ineffective is
also to be classiﬁed as a safety-critical failure.
• With limitation of the probability of failure (see Decision Step 2.11):
– Every function-related failure of the structural unit under consideration
which is involved in a safety-critical multiple failure must automatically
make itself visible. The presentation of the corresponding displays is to be
assigned—appropriately and in compliance with human factors requirements
—to not only the technical precautionary measures becoming effective in
each case but also the operational precautionary measures to be taken.
To ensure that the consequences of a safety-critical failure really can be excluded,
care should be taken in the technical design of the structural unit(s) concerned so
that an adequate response time is left for the technical and/or operational safety
measures provided. Only then can these precautionary measures take effect. For the
treatment of safety-critical multiple failures by reliability engineering methods,
account must also be taken of the response times which must be available to any
safety measures provided depending on the failure mode.
4.3
Generating Safety
143

The foregoing considerations indicate that even after the onset of a failure a
period of time normally remains before the behaviour in the overall system
becomes, with the means available, no longer controllable for countering injury to
individuals and/or damage to property. The following decision depends on this
“safe residual operating time” and the time-related possibilities for failure detection
and (system) safety: whether inhibition of the (system) function is necessary or a
failure (or fault) message (malfunction indication) will sufﬁce for the appropriate
operational safety measures to be initiated. Figure 4.3 shows the corresponding
time relationships.
An envisaged safety measure is not suitable unless the total time span required
for fault detection, tripping of a safety device and the safety response is shorter than
or at least equal to the “safe residual operating time”. This can also be taken to
mean, for example, the amount of time which corresponds to the available braking
distance in a braking operation.
The decision whether an immediate inhibition of function should be initiated or a
message to initiate the appropriate operational measures sufﬁces depends on the
ratio between the safety delay time tS and the critical safety delay time (tS)K. Should
this ratio, taking into account the statistical conﬁdence interval, take a value  1,
the envisaged safety measure is regarded as unsuitable as such.
Fig. 4.3 Time context
144
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

The following classiﬁcation of safety measures applies in general to higher-level
operations:
• Initiation of an immediate inhibition:
– immediately initiated stopping of a function at a non-predetermined place
making use of the normal operational equipment (e.g., electrical emergency
brake in the case of a rail vehicle),
– immediately initiated stopping of a function at a non-predetermined place
making use of operational auxiliary equipment (e.g., mechanical emergency
brakes in the case of a rail vehicle) and
– continuation of the function with the earliest possible destination-related
stopping of the function at a place provided for this purpose, irrespective of
the permissible or possible operational state (e.g., driving speed in the case of
a rail vehicle).
• Initiation of an operational stop or closing down the function:
– Continuation of the function until the current operating cycle23 has ﬁnished
with a destination-related stop at the place provided for this purpose (e.g., a
scheduled stop at a station in the case of a rail vehicle).
– Continuation of the function until the current operating cycle has ﬁnished,
with a destination-related stop at the place provided for this purpose and
followed by the system being put into a maintenance cycle (e.g., a proper but
unscheduled shutdown in the case of a rail vehicle).
– Continuation of the function until conclusion of the envisaged mission cycle
with a reduction of function to the necessary level followed by the system
being put into a maintenance cycle (e.g., in the case of a rail vehicle, a proper
but scheduled shutdown).
On the basis of this classiﬁcation, suitable technical and/or operational safety
measures are to be selected for the technical design of the structural unit concerned
with a view to getting the ratio tS/(tS)K as close as possible to the limiting value of 1.
This is a design criterion which not only ensures an adequate level of safety but also
helps to prevent a disproportionate impairment of the reliability of the overall
system.
Action Step 5.14.2
Unlike the immediate initiation of a function or operation inhibition, the inﬂuence
of operational safety measures on reliability is often not readily apparent.
Safety-critical fault messages (malfunction indications) are often routinely used as a
way to take systems out of operation by means of operational safety measures. This
creates a state corresponding to one with regard to reliability engineering which also
arises following a technical failure (a technical disturbance).
23These cycles should be deﬁned in the project or system speciﬁcation.
4.3
Generating Safety
145

In terms of effective reliability work, it is, however, essential to also take into
consideration reliability-critical states commanded by operational safety measures.
Nevertheless, a comprehensive knowledge of all operational safety measures is
required in order to be able to determine those measures which have reliability-critical
effects.
Signalling devices should be provided as technical safety equipment so that
operational safety measures can be initiated.
Decision Step 5.15.2
Since operational safety measures are executed by individuals, the possibility of a
safety-critical state arising due to erroneous execution cannot be excluded. Since
human dependability or reliability still has its limits, even after comprehensive
training, acknowledgement messages are essential to make even operational safety
measures conclusive in themselves. The technical acknowledgement device
required for this is a logical component of the signalling equipment provided.
Decision Step 5.16.1
This decision-making step should cover those technical safety features with which
reliability-critical failure in the overall system is commanded. These failures should
be attributed to the structural unit under consideration in every case.
It should be taken into account in this regard that the safety device provided to
initiate
inhibition
can,
as a self-contained
structural unit, also
fail.
The
safety-methodological ﬂow chart should also be used for processing failures of this
structural unit.
Decision Step 5.16.2
This decision-making step should cover those operational safety measures with
which reliability-critical states in the overall system are commanded. These
function-related failures should be attributed to the structural unit under consider-
ation in every case.
It should be taken into account in this regard that the signalling and acknowl-
edgement device provided for this as a technical safety device can, as a self-contained
structural unit, also fail. In the same way, the operational safety measure provided in
every case can be executed incorrectly. The safety-methodological ﬂow chart should
also be used for processing failures of the signalling and acknowledgement device.
Action Step 5.17.1
In this action step, the probability should be determined of the occurrence of a
safety-critical failure of the structural unit under consideration which, due to the
technical safety device provided, commands a reliability-critical failure in the
overall system.
Action Step 5.17.2
In this action step, the probability should be determined of the occurrence of a
safety-critical failure of the structural unit under consideration which, due to the
146
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

operational safety measure provided, commands a reliability-critical failure in the
overall system.
Action Step 5.18.1
As part of this action step, the usual procedure in reliability engineering is applied to
determine the dependability or reliability of the structural unit concerned. Those
failures of the structural unit which, due to the operational safety device provided,
command reliability-critical failures in the overall system are also to be included here.
Action Step 5.18.2
As part of this action step, the usual procedure in reliability engineering is applied
to determine the dependability or reliability of the structural unit concerned. Those
function-related failures of the structural unit under consideration which, due to the
operational safety means provided, necessarily lead to a reliability-critical state in
the overall system are also included here.
Action Step 5.19
In accordance with the measures for the standardization of project execution24
requirements, requirements relating to dependability or reliability must be stipulated
in the speciﬁcations for each structural unit. At this point, the minimum limiting
values for dependability and reliability (apportionment) should be given and the
corresponding failure modes listed individually.
Decision Step 5.20
This limiting value should be selected so that compliance with it means a degree of
economic dependability is assured which is competitive in comparison with other,
in some cases proven, trafﬁc systems.
The inclusion of reliability-critical failures commanded by safety-critical failures
of the structural unit in question supplies a comprehensive assessment standard for
the reliability-compliant design of the structural unit under consideration. The
advantage of this approach is that the causes of failures will always remain assigned
to the structural unit in which these failures arise, no matter what impact they have
on the overall system.
Preliminary Result 6.21
If the required dependability cannot be demonstrated for the structural unit con-
cerned, it should be assumed that the result so far achieved is not suitable for the
intended purpose. The technical design selected must be revised with regard to its
reliability. It goes without saying that the failure behaviour of the resulting technical
design of the structural unit concerned will need to be re-examined.
24In this context, please refer to the following management tool: the model speciﬁcation..
4.3
Generating Safety
147

Result 7.21
This result indicates that proof has been furnished that the requirements relating to
technical safety and dependability which were speciﬁed for the structural unit
concerned have been satisﬁed. To what extent this result is ultimately usable for the
overall project depends on the following conditions:
• The experts of the supervisory authority (public safety) conﬁrm from a holistic
perspective the consistency of the safety veriﬁcation for the entire system.
• The objective of usability of the overall system from the economic point of view
is attained by the corresponding adequate dependability of the overall system
being demonstrated.
The security-critical failure modes covered by this result are put together with
the systematically developed safety precautions as “lessons learned” for experience
feedback.
Preliminary Result 8.21
This preliminary result shows:
• An adequate level of safety for the overall system cannot be achieved unless an
additional structural unit is provided as a technical safety device. It goes without
saying that the failure behaviour of even this part of the overall system will need
to be investigated.
• Notwithstanding this, the design objective has been reached for the structural
unit under consideration. A corresponding statement regarding the overall
system is not, however, possible until not only the failure behaviour of the
technical safety devices provided but also the effects on the overall system of the
control operations intended have been investigated.
• If the required dependability cannot be demonstrated for the structural unit
concerned, it should be assumed that the result so far achieved is not suitable for
the intended purpose. The technical design selected must be revised with regard
to its reliability. It goes without saying that the failure behaviour of the resulting
technical design of the structural unit concerned will need to be re-examined.
• The structural unit under consideration does not have a safety-compliant design
and requires revising from the safety point of view. It goes without saying that
the failure behaviour of the resulting technical design of the structural unit
concerned will need to be re-examined.
Result 9.21
This result indicates that proof has been furnished that the requirements relating to
technical safety and dependability which were speciﬁed for the structural unit
concerned have been satisﬁed. To what extent this result is ultimately usable for the
overall project depends on the following conditions:
• The experts of the supervisory authority (public safety) conﬁrm from a holistic
perspective the consistency of the safety veriﬁcation for the entire system.
• Reliability is not affected by this.
148
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

The security-critical failure modes covered by this result are put together with the
systematically developed safety precautions as “lessons learned” for experience
feedback.
Preliminary Result 10.21
The provisional result shows that an adequate level of safety for the overall system
cannot be achieved unless an additional structural unit is provided as a technical
signalling and acknowledgement device with which the corresponding control
operations are initiated. It goes without saying that not only the failure behaviour of
this signalling and acknowledgement device but also the effects of the control
operations on the overall system must be investigated.
Note 11.21
Proof of an adequate level of safety has been provided but there is no impact on
reliability work, which, when necessary, must be carried out independently of
safety-engineering activities.
Result 11.22
This result indicates that proof has been provided that the requirements relating to
technical safety which were speciﬁed for the structural unit concerned have been
satisﬁed. This structural unit is, as regards its safety design, unreservedly suitable
for the intended purpose (see also Note 11.21).
4.3.3
Software-Based Functionality and Human Factors
4.3.3.1
Software and Safety
Modern technology and systems have now come to have a signiﬁcant proportion of
software-based functions. Therefore, software is becoming more and more impor-
tant in technical safety and must be treated like a product.
The safety of software can only be achieved by design and organizational
measures. This means that the production of software must also be planned in a
similar way as regards procedure, project management and the methods and pro-
cesses used.
Reliability is the foundation of technical safety in software. Furthermore, tech-
nical safety requires that, in the event of a breakdown, a safe state can be achieved
through a gradual reduction of function. Redundancy mechanisms, such as both
diversitary redundant hardware and software, can be used for this. In addition, an
integrative analysis of safety and security aspects is necessary. The latter concerns,
in particular, open and networked systems such as, for example, critical infras-
tructures in the ﬁeld of automation.
Security problems‚ such as tampering with data and programs, have a very basic
impact on technical safety. Changes in programs or data due to data or memory
4.3
Generating Safety
149

ﬁelds being overwritten can disable safety mechanisms and create danger to life and
limb. The programming languages used must therefore have properties which
support technical safety.
Implementation
can
be
affected
either
by
automatic
code
generation
(model-driven architecture) or manually by an individual. Essential is a program-
ming language which supports reliability and security, is fully deﬁned semantically
and syntactically, comprehensively supports implementation of the software model
in all aspects and also avoids or detects errors. This calls for strict typiﬁcation,
checking for index areas or range infringements such as division by zero with
exception triggering, syntactic bracketing for readable structures and an error dis-
tance (Hamming distance) in the grammar which detects typos and cannot classify
as syntactically correct. Writing errors must not result in any syntactically correct
code, and in this regard, at least two or more errors must occur. Programming
languages must be designed not only to avoid errors but also prevent malfunc-
tioning even at run-time (exception triggering). Ada is an example of a program-
ming language which meets these requirements.
In this case, the program structure must remain algorithmically controllable and,
accordingly, have a low level of complexity in its structure. Cyclomatic complexity
is a measure of this. Values above ten indicate algorithmic structures which are no
longer comprehensible or testable. Furthermore, operating systems or run-time
systems must be designed such that errors can be detected and appropriately
responded to in the program.
Fault tolerance mechanisms for increasing reliability, such as diversitary soft-
ware, can for reasons of security be used simultaneously for both analysing the
overall behaviour of a function and making comparisons at inspection points in
order to detect data tampering.
Open systems should interact with external software without feedback at the
interface so that external attempts at inward tampering are prevented. For example,
dummy components which do not perform any speciﬁc action can be used here
solely for checking inputs. In addition, both identities for the sources and desti-
nations of information ﬂows and encryption of transport routes should be provided.
A clear and mentally manageable function design should be implemented so that
the complexity of software-based functions can be grasped mentally. Intelligent
behaviour must be both predictable via interpretative algorithms and dependable
(deterministically in the exact context). This applies, in particular, to the combi-
nation of complex functions, such as assistant systems in the modern car.
Examples of inadequate technical safety include a “certiﬁed” infusion pump
implemented in C/C+ with 200,000 source lines of code (kLOC) and safety-critical
requirements which, following several incidents, was taken off the market.
A subsequent statistical analysis revealed an error rate of 127/200 kLOC, whereby
in 29 cases a type conversion changed the value of variables and in 28 cases an
empty pointer was dereferenced. In 36 cases, variables were used without prior
initialization. This all occurred with a safety-critical medical device which had been
successfully certiﬁed. Based on this, the demand necessarily follows for a pro-
gramming language such as Ada, which through its syntactic structure and semantic
150
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

deﬁnition strongly supports the programming of highly reliable software systems.
In the case of a certain automobile manufacturer´s vehicles, there were problems
with the anti-lock braking system due to a faulty software update and also problems
arising from an incorrect interpretation of steering signals and a subsequent
blocking of steering. In cars of the model years 2008–2012 from another manu-
facturer, a software error could result in operation of the belt tensioners or the side
airbags being delayed or not initiated at all. A defence system onboard an aircraft
had a conversion error in time measurement which became larger the longer the
system was working. The defence system thus missed an attacking rocket, and as a
result, several people were killed. In an electric vehicle of the latest generation, a
software error caused the headlights and tail lights not to switch on while the
daytime running lights were not activated automatically when driving from dark
into light conditions.
In software-based systems, safety as a two-sided property (operational reliability
and information security) is vital. The opening of previously closed technical
systems in the safety-critical ﬁeld, combined with the problem of faulty and
unreliable software, requires a stringent review of all safety aspects. SCADA
systems (SCADA stands for supervisory control and data acquisition) for moni-
toring and controlling critical infrastructures above the regulatory level are
increasingly becoming a target for IT attacks. A pumping system used as a lure
provoked 39 attacks in 28 days, with 12 attacks targeted, 13 repeated on several
days and the ﬁrst attack occurring after just 18 h.
Automobiles can also be tampered with via vehicular communication systems.
As experiments have shown, the engine controller for braking and acceleration can
be controlled remotely by text messages with the driver being unable to intervene.
This shows that the technical safety of software-based functions requires an early
integrative examination of software-based functions, and in the case of “open”
systems, even IT security should be considered analogously with its signiﬁcant
implications for technical safety.
4.3.3.2
Human Factors
As was described in Sect. 3.2.2.3, analyses of serious events indicate that extreme
importance is attached even to the control potential of human activity in reducing
the adverse or even devastating consequences of accidents. The domain of “human
factors” (HF) is becoming an ever more intrusive complex of problems which
require speciﬁc answers. As such, the human contribution to the safety and relia-
bility of socio-technical systems has a high relative importance.
Incidents and accidents in recent years have made one thing ever clearer in quite
a few ﬁelds: the possible beneﬁcial effect of additional improvements in technical
system components in highly complex systems with a high hazard potential is
constantly decreasing despite decades of improvements. Connected with this fact is
how the relative importance of human actions in initiating accidents and incidents is
on the increase. However, it would be an unacceptable simpliﬁcation to focus every
4.3
Generating Safety
151

time solely on the operator acting directly at the human–machine interface. It
follows logically from the principle of deeply hierarchized system protection, which
is indeed always implemented in technically complex systems, that an individual
single failure must not lead to a serious incident or accident—various technical or
organizational barriers should prevent this. Only where weaknesses are dormant
and unrecognized in the system and an unfortunate constellation of “adverse”
conditions occurs (often of a random nature) can an incident or accident path be
opened up and be due to an individual single failure at the human–machine
interface (HMI). This will, however, result in events rated as negative.
The so-called phase approach (see Sect. 2.1.2) makes it possible to take the
entire product life cycle of technical equipment into consideration, even in detail.
The product life cycle extends from conception, deﬁnition, development and
engineering to manufacture, operation and utilization and, ﬁnally, to dismantling,
including disposal and recycling. In all phases of this chain, human activity makes a
signiﬁcant contribution to the (lack of) reliability and (lack of) safety of technical
systems. In other words, it is important to take the corresponding quality assurance
into account in all phases of the life cycle of a product or service.
By “human factors”, we therefore mean all those factors over the entire product
life cycle which affect individuals in their interaction with a technical system or are
affected by individuals. To that extent, the thoughtless and frequently encountered
synonymous use of “human factors” and “human error” or even “human failure” is
impermissible, as is the traditional restriction of the ergonomic aspect of the HMI.
Organizational factors, division of labour, prior management decisions and even
inter-organizational relations are relevant here in terms of a comprehensive, holistic
understanding of “human factors”.
The human contribution to the reliability and safety of socio-technical systems is
made under general conditions which provide indispensable potential and unal-
terable limitations alike. Both must be taken into account in the design of the
system since “man with his natural abilities and disabilities must take centre stage
of all systems built up by men for men” (the Declaration of Saarbrücken on the
occasion of the World Congress on the Safety of Modern Technical Systems,
Saarbrücken, 2001). This ability basically makes the human superior to the machine
—his/her ability to learn compensates for his/her susceptibility to error and is an
important component in safety-oriented action.
Mistaken actions are deﬁned as the failure to achieve the goal of an action. It
would therefore be a contradiction in terms to assume that someone could delib-
erately make a mistake. Whether a mistake was made or not can therefore only be
determined with hindsight and following clariﬁcation of the possibility of a “cor-
rect” purposeful action. Seen in this way, the very common kneejerk reaction of
assigning blame (“human failure”) for a mistake contradicts the “human right of
error” which safety researchers call for. A reasonable error culture regards a mistake
as a learning opportunity and does not ask “How could you have done such a
thing?” but rather “How could this have come about?”.
Mistaken actions arise for a variety of reasons, especially from an overtaxed
mental capacity for processing information, unreasonable requirements for
152
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

attentiveness, monotonous work, inherent or learnt behaviour patterns (inappro-
priate for the tasks on hand) and limitations in knowledge. All of these are possibly
stresses and strains which exceed the human capacity for action. In the interest of
preventing injury to people and the environment, system design should take into
account both natural human potential and human limitations. This can be achieved,
for example, by fault-tolerant engineering and design.
The automation of socio-technical systems has particular signiﬁcance here. From
an engineering point of view, it often seeks a maximum level of automation in order
to exclude as far as possible the “error-prone” human. In actual fact, the more
complex systems become, the more necessary the human contribution is.
Bainbridge speaks here of the “ironies of automation” (in [5]). In the ﬁrst place, the
developer of a system is, as a rule, an individual who is also susceptible to making
mistakes and can thus have a negative effect on the engineered system since, by
following a strategy of maximum automation, he/she leaves the operator only with
tasks which cannot yet be automated. The result is something which psychologists
have called “learned helplessness”: the lack of use of motor or cognitive skills
becomes a problem when an unforeseen event occurs and new behaviour is required
of the inexperienced operator. In a similar way, the proven human weakness of an
inability to remain attentive for long periods has a negative effect on the purely
supervisory function remaining to the operator following comprehensive automa-
tion of a technical facility.
Furthermore, complex situations requiring a decision can become a problem.
Provided all necessary elements of a decision in the production process can be
speciﬁed, an automated, computer-aided decision can be taken faster and more
multidimensionally than an operator decision. However, the operator may be left
alone with judging the result of a decision on a meta-level whose algorithm he/she
does not, or only insufﬁciently, understands. Automation may thus mask system
failure and evade carrying out correct diagnosis and rectiﬁcation. What is therefore
required is not maximum but rather appropriate automation which grants the
individual room to exercise his/her learning and functional abilities and thereby
create optimally engineered safety functions.
All in all, three models can be distinguished of how HFE experts can be included
in the process of designing and engineering complex socio-technical installations.
These models are applied differently depending on the need in question:
(a) Integrated model
Here the HFE expert (work scientist, psychologist, medical scientist) is inte-
grated from the outset in the design team so as to participate in the design of
work places and the functions of personnel working there with regard to safety
and reliability, occupational safety, health aspects and humane design.
(b) Intermittent participation model
Here the HFE expert is consulted in critical design phases such as, for example,
to evaluate a prototype. In this way, experienced operators (pilots, control desk
staff, etc.) can be brought in.
4.3
Generating Safety
153

(c) Post hoc participation model
Only in rare cases are all design ﬂaws detected before the system goes into
operation. Technical or organizational barriers then have to be installed to
prevent dysfunctional use of the system or hazardous system states. Under no
circumstances, however, should post hoc involvement of HFE experts be
misinterpreted as a standard form of participation in the sense of a repair
workshop.
If an event cannot be controlled within the system and system limits are exceeded,
steps must be implemented to deal with the interface. In this case too, the
knowledge available in HFE must be deployed in order to incorporate uncondi-
tionally the HFE elements into emergency management planning too.
• Participatory integration of the future user:
The mental manageability of a system is a further basic necessity for safe use of the
system. HFE must therefore include future users in conception and design work to
point out weaknesses undetected early on and make the system behaviour acces-
sible to the user. A deep understanding should be imparted by simulative operation.
According to Dörner, years of dealing with complex systems are necessary before a
mental model develops in the individual. Only this model allows also a targeted and
correctly handled operation under critical situations. Conceptually speaking, three
human–machine relationships can be distinguished:
– The machine dominates, and the competence of the individual is regarded
pessimistically. Interlock systems prevent human intervention but all possible
exceptional situations must be manageable in this case.
– The human dominates and can cancel any interlock and take over control. Such
an approach demands a high level of mental competence of individuals—
something which cannot always be assumed.
– The human and machine are cooperative partners. The possibility of interven-
tion is granted depending on the need. This approach includes the two concepts
above.
4.3.4
Supportive Management
4.3.4.1
General Outline
In regard to the quality characteristic “technical safety”, it is more important than
with any other quality characteristic that planning, implementation and veriﬁcation
are fully and at all times traceably documented. Safety cannot be created and
preserved unless all individual aspects of the quality characteristic “technical
safety” are guaranteed at all times. Every individual aspect of the quality charac-
teristic “technical safety”, which must be created and produced for a technical
154
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

object (product, technical facility, system), must therefore be both veriﬁed during
the course of quality assurance measures and preserved during the course of
maintenance work. This calls for special care and caution in the context of a proper
management system. The procedures required are listed below:
• project management,
• conﬁguration management and project deﬁnition (with project structuring and
speciﬁcation),
• reliability engineering,
• environmental engineering,
• manufacture and testing,
• quality management,
• veriﬁcation,
• an appropriate complaints and non-conformities system,
• maintenance and
• safe operation.
In addition, it must remain assured during operation and utilization that no (oper-
ational) actions take place which run contrary to the technical safety achieved in the
course of the creation process. This applies to not only the technical safety designed
with inherent or passive measures but also to technical safety based on active
measures. For this purpose, it is necessary to create safety rules:
• creation and pursuance of maintenance rules and
• operating rules.
These management measures are presented below as general requirements. Let it be
emphasized that these management measures are necessary for controlling the
quality characteristic “technical safety”. The main criteria and principles are
addressed in the present guideline. Reference should be made to the relevant spe-
cialist literature for a deeper treatment adequate for an appropriate application.
The demand for technical safety (just like safety in general) necessarily means
the proper application of appropriate management practices and use of appropriate
work resources, methods and procedures. These have long proven themselves in the
various ﬁelds of technology but are still not used with blanket coverage. Their
application and use are, however, essential when it is a question of safety being
created, produced and veriﬁed methodically, correctly, systematically and without
deviations during the design of a technical object. The following list should be
regarded as a checklist that helps to determine which of the management procedures
are necessary from the safety point of view. In each case, (not only are) the
organizational responsibilities shown of the purchaser and contractor but also the
corresponding appropriate work resources, methods and procedures.
As with every other characteristic, the quality characteristic “technical safety”—
or simply “safety”—cannot be “tested into” a technical object. Characteristics are
features of any technical object which, during the course of the entire design
process (conception, development, execution of works), must be created system-
atically for this object. However, standardization bodies also offer so-called design
4.3
Generating Safety
155

standards which include requirements relevant to safety among other design
requirements. Examples of this are electrical products in compliance with
Protection Class II (VDE 0100-410, -412.1). These have a reinforced or double
insulation between the power supply circuit and the metal (and thus conductive)
housing and do not then need to be connected to the PE conductor. In the case of
products designed and built in accordance with such safety-relevant design stan-
dards, it will sufﬁce for the proof of safety that their design complies with the
standard in question. In this case too, it would be incorrect to assume that safety has
been “tested into” the product. An inspection of this kind only ascertains that the
actual design of the product complies with the applicable (design) standard. It is the
applicable standard which prescribes how the product is to be designed so that it
may be regarded as “safe”. An inspection of this kind (compliance check) only
afﬁrms that the design rules in the standard and pertinent inspections have been
satisﬁed.
In the sections which follow, the requirements, responsibilities and methods will
be indicated in each case. The following rules and procedures must be complied
with here:
• Safety-related stipulations for the individual management procedures must
always be incorporated in good time in the product life cycle no later than the
start of the phase in question and are applicable to a part or all of the product life
cycle.
• Corrective work is essential in the event of checks ﬁnding gaps.
• All requirements must always be written down in a readily understandable form.
• The necessary proof that the design, constructive execution and operation,
manufacture and testing of a technical object are safety-compliant can thus only
be secured when the management conditions listed above have been met. The
same applies to both safety-compliant reliability and dependability and envi-
ronmental engineering and resistance to environmental inﬂuences. In the event
of gaps being discovered and the consequent safety-related inadequacy,
replanning of the technical object in question is unavoidable.
4.3.4.2
Management Procedures in the Planning Process
4.3.4.2.1 Safety-Related Project Management
• With regard to the management of—and included in—technical safety, the
following aspects must be put in place:
– written deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for
project management at the system level,
– checking that the legal and contractual provisions are consistent in them-
selves and all technical and safety requirements are included in an
156
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

unequivocal form (including establishment of the natural or even juristic
persons responsible for the project management with regard to technical,
scheduling and cost-related responsibilities),
– organization of project planning and tracking with deﬁnition of project
milestones and the nature and scope of the project-related veriﬁcation—
always including the proof of safety and
– obtaining conﬁrmation that the purchaser and supervisory institutions can be
included in project planning and tracking in the event of gaps, imperative
requirement for rectiﬁcation.
• Deﬁnition of organizational responsibilities:
– written deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers on
the part of purchasers and contractors,
– appointment of competent persons and binding assignment of the respective
job descriptions,
– creation of a single project structure for the technical object in question
(product, technical facility, system) and deﬁnition of personnel responsibil-
ities for each structural unit in the project structure,
– explicit and legally binding deﬁnition of responsibility for “technical safety”
in the relevant job descriptions and
– contractually agreed or legal deﬁnition of the monitoring responsibility for
technical safety (such as that of the competent supervisory institution).
• Work resources, methods and procedures to be used:
– stipulation of the safety-methodological procedures in a “technical safety”
general speciﬁcation drawn up for this purpose,
– creation of a model speciﬁcation to serve as a template for every structural
unit which contains the explicit requirements relating to the quality char-
acteristic “technical safety”,
– contractualization of the cooperation of purchaser and contractor with
possible supervisory institutions,
– unequivocal deﬁnition of accountable responsibility for safety inspections on
the part of purchaser, contractor and possible supervisory institutions,
– checking that the speciﬁcations of structural units identiﬁed according to the
project structure (the technical object under consideration) contain clearly
understandable requirements which are in factual agreement with the general
“technical safety” speciﬁcation and
– checking that the speciﬁcations of structural units identiﬁed according to the
project structure (the technical object under consideration) contain clearly
understandable requirements regarding safety veriﬁability which are in fac-
tual agreement with the general “technical safety” speciﬁcation in the event
of gaps, imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation.
4.3
Generating Safety
157

4.3.4.2.2 Safety-Related Conﬁguration Management
• Creation of the necessary conditions for conﬁguration management in general:
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for conﬁg-
uration management at the system and structural unit level,
– appointment of the competent natural or even juristic persons for conﬁgu-
ration management,
– checking that the system speciﬁcation is coherent and all technical and safety
requirements of the contract are included in an unequivocal form and
– checking that the purchaser and supervisory institutions are included in the
information ﬂow of conﬁguration management in the event of gaps,
imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation.
With regard to the conﬁguration management of—and included in—technical
safety, the following aspects must be put in place:
• Deﬁnition of the organizational responsibilities in the company:
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for the
document release procedure (such as speciﬁcations),
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for change
management (in connection with documents),
– deﬁnition of timing and contents regarding regular notiﬁcation or full
interrogation of the conﬁguration status (with the aid of a product-speciﬁc
conﬁguration status list) and
– project-related deﬁnition of personnel responsibility for audits to verify the
effectiveness and traceability of project-related conﬁguration management.
• Work resources, methods and procedures to be used within the company:
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers relating to
safety-compliant project deﬁnitions,
– establishment of the auxiliary resources and procedures required for con-
ﬁguration management (such as IT programs),
– central organization for full coverage of the conﬁguration status (such as
release and changes) of all documents coming under conﬁguration
management,
– establishment of a standardized approval procedure in company regulations,
– preparation, speciﬁcation and release of the project deﬁnition taking safety
requirements into consideration,
– establishment of a standardized change management procedure in company
regulations,
– preparation of the regulations as to how and, if applicable, with what
computer program the conﬁguration status should be made known in the
company and
158
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

– speciﬁcation of the scheduling by which the effectiveness and traceability of
project-related conﬁguration management (such as, for example, the possi-
bility of requesting the conﬁguration status) can be regularly checked in the
case of an audit.
4.3.4.2.3 Reliability Engineering
• Creation of the necessary conditions for reliability engineering in general:
– for a more in-depth treatment, see the VDI handbook on reliability [2] and, in
particular here, the standard VDI 4003 “Reliability management”,
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for relia-
bility engineering at the system and subordinate structural unit levels,
– compilation of all aspects, procedures and veriﬁcations for reliability engi-
neering in a general speciﬁcation “reliability and dependability” with which
all relevant requirements can be both presented and qualitatively and
quantitatively determined,
– speciﬁcation of the procedure in connection with the apportionment of the
higher-level reliability requirement over the structural units of the subordi-
nate project structure levels (“reliability apportionment” and “allocation”)
speciﬁcation of which structural units in the project structure a determinis-
tically based failure exclusion should apply to (the allocated reliability
requirement is set to 1.00 = 100%) so that there is no need for a quantitative
reliability veriﬁcation,
[This applies in the case of technical integrity, such as, for example, in
holding and support functions, standardized shrink ﬁttings, secure fasteners,
forced guides, permanent magnets, guided, unbreakable compression springs
and adequate creep and ﬂashover distances from high-voltage equipment.]
– speciﬁcation of all inspection and testing procedures by which the reliability
is to be veriﬁed of structural units whose function does not permit any failure
exclusion,
– checking that the general speciﬁcation “reliability and dependability” is
coherent and all technical and safety requirements of the system speciﬁcation
are included in an unequivocal form in the case of inadequacies, imperative
requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– appointment of persons responsible for reliability engineering and
– checking that the purchaser and supervisory institutions are included in the
information ﬂow of reliability engineering in the event of gaps, imperative
requirement for rectiﬁcation.
4.3
Generating Safety
159

With regard to reliability engineering, the following aspects must be put in place:
• Deﬁnition of the organizational responsibilities in the company:
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for the
document release procedure (such as the general speciﬁcation “reliability and
dependability”),
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for change
management (in connection with documents),
– deﬁnition of timing and contents regarding regular notiﬁcation or full
examination of the conﬁguration status (with the aid of a product-speciﬁc
conﬁguration status list) and
– project-related deﬁnition of personnel responsibility for audits to verify
regularly the effectiveness and traceability of project-related reliability
engineering.
• Work resources, methods and procedures to be used within the company:
– establishment of the auxiliary resources and procedures required for relia-
bility engineering (such as test equipment and IT programs),
– list of the measuring sensors required stating purpose, accuracy, calibration
cycles and presentation of the measurement result,
– central organization for full coverage of the conﬁguration status (such as
release and changes) of all documents affected by reliability engineering and
– speciﬁcation of the scheduling by which the effectiveness and traceability of
project-related reliability engineering can be regularly checked in the case of
an audit.
4.3.4.2.4 Environmental Engineering
• Creation of the necessary conditions for environmental engineering in general
(for a more in-depth treatment, see also standard VDI 4005 Parts 1–5):
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for envi-
ronment engineering at the system and structural unit level,
– compilation of all aspects, procedures and veriﬁcations for environmental
engineering in a general speciﬁcation “environmental engineering” with
which all requirements relating to the original and object-inﬂuenced
environment, electromagnetic compatibility and lightning protection can be
captured and both qualitatively and quantitatively speciﬁed,
– deﬁnition of environmental limits for all anticipated storage, transport and
operating inﬂuences during full and possibly restricted functioning,
– speciﬁcation of all simulation methods by which the resistance to environ-
mental conditions of the technical objects in question is to be veriﬁed,
160
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

– checking that the general speciﬁcation “environmental engineering” is
consistent in itself and all technical and safety requirements of the system
speciﬁcation are included in an unequivocal form in the case of inadequacies,
imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– appointment of persons responsible for the environmental engineering and
– checking that the purchaser and supervisory institutions are included in the
information ﬂow for environmental engineering in the event of gaps,
imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation.
With regard to the environmental engineering for technical safety, the following
aspects must be put in place:
• Deﬁnition of the organizational responsibilities in the company:
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for the
document release procedure (such as the general speciﬁcation “environ-
mental engineering”),
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for change
management (in connection with documents),
– deﬁnition of timing and contents regarding regular notiﬁcation or full
examination of the conﬁguration status (with the aid of a product-speciﬁc
conﬁguration status list) and
– project-related deﬁnition of personnel responsibility for audits to verify the
effectiveness and traceability of project-related environmental engineering.
• Work resources, methods and procedures to be used within the company:
– establishment of the auxiliary resources and procedures required for envi-
ronmental engineering (such as test equipment for environmental simulation,
IT programs, test reports),
– list of the measuring sensors required stating purpose, accuracy and cali-
bration cycles and presentation of the measurement result,
– list of the structural units whose intended purpose requires proof of resis-
tance to environmental inﬂuences,
– central organization for full coverage of the conﬁguration status (such as
release and changes) of all documents affected by environmental engineering
and
– speciﬁcation of the scheduling by which the effectiveness and traceability of
project-related environmental engineering can be regularly checked in the
case of an audit.
4.3.4.3
Management in the Implementation Process
4.3.4.3.1 Safety-Compliant Manufacture and Testing
The necessary proof that the manufacture and testing of a technical object are
safety-compliant can only be secured when the management conditions listed above
4.3
Generating Safety
161

regarding the safety-compliant planning, manufacture and testing of products have
been met. In the event of gaps being discovered and the consequent safety-related
inadequacy, replanning of the technical object in question is unavoidable.
• Deﬁnition of the necessary conditions for safety-compliant manufacture and
testing (quality inspection for veriﬁcation) in general:
– deﬁnition
of responsibilities, technical competences
and powers for
safety-compliant and traceable manufacture and testing at the system and
structural unit level,
– checking that the construction ﬁle (manufacturing and testing documenta-
tion) is coherent and all technical and safety requirements of the speciﬁca-
tions are included in an unequivocal form and
– inclusion of the purchaser in planning the testing schedule (including
mandatory inspection points).
• Deﬁnition (or conﬁrmation) of organizational responsibilities at the system level
for production, assembly, system integration and quality assurance as a certiﬁed
part of quality management:
– written deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for
the release procedure for manufacturing, assembly and integration planning,
and planning for quality assurance and testing,
– project-related deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and
powers for maintenance of test records (with personnel certiﬁcation and
allocation of inspection stamps),
– checking that the test sequence and test reports (with certiﬁed signature and
inspection stamp) are recorded centrally and fully documented in the event
of gaps, imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– checking that “unintentional deviations” from the individual characteristics
prescribed in the relevant speciﬁcations and construction ﬁle (complaints)
and “envisaged one-off deviations” from the individual characteristics
prescribed in the relevant speciﬁcations and construction ﬁle (non-
conformities) are made known regularly by the testing department (notiﬁ-
cation of complaints or non-conformities within the context of the
complaints system) in the event of gaps, imperative requirement for
rectiﬁcation,
– project-related deﬁnition of personnel responsibility for audits to verify
regularly both the effectiveness and traceability of project-related testing
activities and the complaints or non-conformities system and
– checking
that
test
reporting
(including
logging
of
complaints
or
non-conformities) is always fully accessible (if necessary, using appropriate
IT programs).
• Work resources, methods and procedures to be used on the project level:
– establishment of the auxiliary resources and procedures required for project
deﬁnition (such as IT programs),
162
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

– checking that the release process for manufacturing and testing planning
(construction ﬁle) is deﬁned either in central company rules or project rules
in the event of gaps, imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– checking that both manufacturing and testing planning (construction ﬁle) and
the relevant change management are deﬁned in company regulations or
project rules and applied in the event of gaps, imperative requirement for
rectiﬁcation and
– speciﬁcation of the scheduling by which the effectiveness and traceability of
project-related manufacturing and testing planning (such as, for example, the
possibility of requesting test, complaint and nonconformity records) can be
regularly checked in the case of an audit.
4.3.4.3.2 Safety-Related Veriﬁcation (Quality Inspection for Product
Acceptance)
The necessary proof for safety-compliant acceptance testing of a technical object
can
only
be
delivered
when
the
conditions
listed
above
regarding
the
safety-compliant planning and performance of product or technical object accep-
tance tests have been met. In the event of gaps being discovered and the consequent
safety-related inadequacy, replanning of the technical object in question is
unavoidable.
• Deﬁnition of the necessary conditions for safety-compliant test planning (quality
inspection for veriﬁcation) in general:
– ensuring that the contractors and company responsible for the project are
certiﬁed by DIN EN ISO 9001 (for veriﬁcation of the quality and safety
capability of the contractor),
– ensuring that master data records (material and functional data, acceptance
conditions, etc.) are set up on the system and structural unit level and
released,
– written deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for
safety-compliant and traceable acceptance tests on the system and structural
unit level,
– checking that the construction ﬁles in question (manufacturing and testing
documentation) are coherent and all technical and safety requirements of the
speciﬁcations are included in an unequivocal form and
– inclusion of the purchaser in planning and carrying out the testing schedule
(for product acceptance on the basis of the implemented mandatory
inspection points).
• Deﬁnition (or conﬁrmation) of organizational responsibilities on the system
level for manufacturing, assembly, system integration and quality assurance:
4.3
Generating Safety
163

– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for both the
planning documents release procedure for product acceptance and the
underlying plans for quality assurance and testing,
– project-related deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and
powers for maintenance of test records (with personnel certiﬁcation and
allocation of inspection stamps),
– checking that the test sequence and test reports for product acceptance (with
certiﬁed signature and inspection stamp) are recorded centrally and fully
documented in the event of gaps, imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– checking that complaints and non-conformities (both being deviations from
the individual characteristics required by the corresponding speciﬁcations
and construction ﬁle) are made known regularly by the testing department
(notiﬁcation of complaints or non-conformities within the context of the
complaints and non-conformities system) in the event of gaps, imperative
requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– ensuring that the results of tests for product acceptance are recorded centrally
within the context of “lessons learned”, fully documented and used for
process improvement,
– ensuring that poor results during product acceptance will lead to preventive
measures (product improvement),
– project-related deﬁnition of personnel responsibility which regularly veriﬁes
the effectiveness of test procedures for product acceptance in the case of an
audit and
– checking that recording of acceptance testing (including the decisions of the
complaints and non-conformities system) is always fully accessible (if
necessary, using appropriate IT programs).
• Work resources, methods and procedures to be used on the project level:
– establishment of the auxiliary resources and procedures required for accep-
tance tests (if applicable, using appropriate IT programs),
– checking that the release process for the rules of acceptance testing is deﬁned
in company regulations or project rules in the event of gaps, imperative
requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– checking that the testing rules for both acceptance testing and the relevant
change management are deﬁned in company regulations or project rules and
applied in the event of gaps, imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– checking that measuring and test equipment is suitable for the measurement
and testing tasks required,
– checking that measuring and test equipment undergoes regular calibration
cycles if demonstrably necessary,
– proof (logged veriﬁcation) that measurement and test activities on the system
and structural unit level are laid down in the relevant testing rules,
– ensuring that it has been speciﬁed on the company or project level how the
conﬁguration status list (if applicable, using appropriate IT programs) is
maintained for the inspection regulations for product acceptance and
164
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

– speciﬁcation of the scheduling by which the effectiveness of project-related
planning and the performance of acceptance tests (e.g., the possibility of
accessing acceptance results and decisions relating to complaints and
non-conformities) can be regularly checked in the case of an audit.
4.3.4.3.3 Safety-Compliant Complaints and Non-conformities Management
The necessary proof that the manufacture and testing of a technical object are
safety-compliant can only be secured when the management conditions listed above
regarding the safety-compliant planning, manufacture and testing of products
(technical objects) have been met. In the event of gaps being discovered and the
consequent safety-related inadequacy, replanning of the technical object in question
is unavoidable.
• Deﬁnition of the necessary conditions for safety-compliant manufacture and
testing (quality inspection for veriﬁcation) in general:
– ensuring that the contractors and company responsible for the project are
certiﬁcated according to DIN EN ISO 9001 (for veriﬁcation of the quality
and safety capability of the contractor),
– deﬁnition
of responsibilities, technical competences
and powers for
safety-compliant and traceable complaints and non-conformities manage-
ment on the system and structural unit level and
– informal
or
active
inclusion
of
the
purchaser
in
complaints
and
non-conformities management.
• Deﬁnition (or conﬁrmation) of organizational responsibilities on the system
level for manufacturing, assembly, system integration and quality assurance:
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for quality
assurance within which complaints and non-conformities management are to
be located,
– project-related deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and
powers for decision-making regarding complaints and non-conformities
(with personnel certiﬁcation and allocation of inspection stamps),
– checking that the decision-making sequence and logging (with certiﬁed
signature and inspection stamp) are recorded centrally and fully documented
in the event of gaps, imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– checking that complaints and non-conformities (both being deviations from
the individual characteristics required by the corresponding speciﬁcations
and construction ﬁle) are made known regularly by the quality assurance
department in the event of gaps, imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– project-related deﬁnition of personnel responsibility for regular audits to
verify the effectiveness and traceability of project-related complaints or
non-conformities management and
4.3
Generating Safety
165

– checking
that
test
reporting
(including
logging
of
complaints
or
non-conformities) is always fully accessible (if necessary, using appropriate
IT programs).
• Work resources, methods and procedures to be used on the project level:
– establishment of the auxiliary resources and procedures required centrally for
complaints and non-conformities management (such as IT programs),
– checking that the complaints and non-conformities system are laid down
centrally in either company regulations or project rules in the event of gaps,
imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– checking that the complaints and non-conformities system are laid down in
company or project regulations and applied in the event of gaps, imperative
requirement for rectiﬁcation and
– speciﬁcation of the scheduling by which the effectiveness and traceability of
the complaints and non-conformities system (such as, for example, the
possibility of accessing records relating to decisions) can be regularly
checked in the case of an audit.
4.3.4.3.4 Safety-Compliant Maintenance
The necessary proof of the safety-compliant maintenance of a technical object can
only be delivered when the conditions listed above regarding the safety-compliant
planning of maintenance of products (technical objects) have been met. In the event
of gaps being discovered and the consequent safety-related inadequacy, replanning
of the technical object in question is unavoidable.25,26
• Creation of the necessary conditions for planning safety-compliant maintenance
in general:
– deﬁnition
of responsibilities, technical competences
and powers for
safety-compliant and traceable maintenance on the system and structural unit
level,
– checking that the construction ﬁle (manufacturing and testing documenta-
tion) is coherent and all technical and safety requirements of the speciﬁca-
tions and the construction ﬁle are included in an unequivocal form and
– inclusion of the purchaser, participating companies and supervisory institu-
tions in planning the maintenance (including, where appropriate, general
inspections).
25Hansen, Michael: The effects of monitoring measures on the reliability of concrete elements.
Dissertation, Universität Hannover. IRB-Verlag, 2004.
26Hansen, Michael: Monitoring-based risk assessment of existing concrete structures. Postdoctoral
thesis, Leibniz Universität Hannover. IRB-Verlag, 2014.
166
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

• Deﬁnition (or conﬁrmation) of organizational responsibilities on the system
level
for
preventive
maintenance,
corrective
maintenance
and
general
inspections:
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for the
release procedure for both maintenance regulations and planning quality
assurance and testing (no maintenance without subsequent quality inspection),
– project-related deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and
powers for carrying out maintenance (with personnel certiﬁcation),
– checking that complaints (unintentional deviations from the individual
characteristics prescribed in the relevant maintenance regulations) and
non-conformities (envisaged one-off deviations from the individual char-
acteristics prescribed in the relevant maintenance regulations) are made
known regularly by the testing department (notiﬁcation of complaints or
non-conformities within the context of the complaints system) in the event of
gaps, imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– central, real time/immediate, full capture and traceable documentation of the
conﬁguration status of maintenance regulations,
– project-related deﬁnition of personnel responsibility for audits to verify
regularly the effectiveness and traceability of project-related maintenance
management and
– checking
that
test
reporting
(including
logging
of
complaints
or
non-conformities) is always fully accessible (if necessary, using appropriate
IT programs).
• Work resources, methods and procedures to be used on the project level:
– establishment of the auxiliary resources and procedures required for main-
tenance (such as IT programs),
– checking that the release procedure for maintenance regulations is deﬁned
centrally in the company or project-speciﬁcally in the event of gaps,
imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– checking that not only maintenance planning including the relevant change
management but also the application of maintenance regulations are deﬁned
company- or project-speciﬁcally and applied in the event of gaps, imperative
requirement for rectiﬁcation and
– speciﬁcation of the scheduling by which the effectiveness and traceability of
the project-related maintenance system (such as, for example, the possibility
of requesting test, complaint and nonconformity records) can be regularly
checked in the case of an audit.
4.3.4.4
Organization of Safe Operation
The necessary proof of the safety-compliant operation of a technical object can only
be delivered when the conditions listed above regarding the safety-compliant
4.3
Generating Safety
167

planning of operating regulations for products (technical objects) have been met. In
the event of gaps being discovered and the consequent safety-related inadequacy,
replanning of the technical object in question is unavoidable.
To ensure a safe design also for operation and utilization of the product con-
cerned, the appropriate safety-compliant operating regulations should be planned,
observed and applied in operation.
• Creation of the necessary conditions for planning safe operation in general:
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for planning
a safety-compliant operation on the system and structural unit level,
– checking that all operating regulations (control mode, backup mode) are
consistent in themselves and all technical and safety requirements of the
speciﬁcations and construction ﬁle are included in an unequivocal form and
– inclusion of the purchaser, participating companies and supervisory
institutions in the planning of operation (including, where appropriate,
any
“preoperational
checks”
to
be
provided,
checking
operational
readiness—“preﬂight check”).
• Deﬁnition (or conﬁrmation) of organizational responsibilities on the system
level for operation (appointment of operation managers):
– deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers relating to
the release procedure for operating regulations,
– project-related deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and
powers for the performance of operation (with personnel certiﬁcation such as
a driver’s licence),
– project-related written deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences
and powers for keeping the operating log with full recording of all incidents
and accidents,
– checking that complaints (unintentional deviations from the individual
characteristics
prescribed
in
the
relevant
operating
regulations)
and
non-conformities (envisaged one-off deviations from the individual charac-
teristics prescribed in the relevant operating regulations) are made known
regularly by the testing department (notiﬁcation of incidents and accidents
within the context of the complaints system) in the event of gaps, imperative
requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– central, real time/immediate, full capture and traceable documentation of the
conﬁguration status of operating regulations,
– project-related deﬁnition of personnel responsibility for audits to verify
regularly the effectiveness and traceability of both the project-related control
mode operation and the incidents and accidents reporting system and
– checking that the operating log and logging of the incidents and accidents
reporting system are always fully accessible (if necessary, using appropriate
IT programs).
• Work resources, methods and procedures to be used on the project level:
– establishment of the auxiliary resources and procedures (such as IT pro-
grams) required for operation (control mode, backup mode),
168
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

– checking that the release procedure for operating regulations is deﬁned
centrally in the company or project-speciﬁcally in the event of gaps,
imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation,
– checking that not only the planning of operating regulations including the
relevant change management but also the application of operating regula-
tions are deﬁned company- or project-speciﬁcally and applied in the event of
gaps, imperative requirement for rectiﬁcation and
– speciﬁcation of the scheduling by which the effectiveness and traceability of
the project-related operation (such as, for example, both the possibility of
accessing the operating log and a logging of incidents and accidents
reporting system) can be regularly checked in the case of an audit.
4.3.4.5
Management of Safe Disposal
To ensure a safe design for dismantling, recycling and disposal as well (system,
technical facility, product), the appropriate safety-compliant procedures must be
plannedand observedand appliedin the course of dismantling, recycling and disposal.
• Creation of the necessary conditions for planning a safe procedure in general:
– written deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers for
planning a safety-compliant procedure on the system and structural unit
level,
– checking that all procedure regulations are coherent and all technical and
safety requirements of the speciﬁcations are included in an unequivocal form
and
– inclusion of the purchaser, participating companies and supervisory institu-
tions in planning the procedure, including all necessary preconditions.
• Deﬁnition (or conﬁrmation) of organizational responsibilities for the procedure
(appointment of managers) on the system level:
– written deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences and powers
relating to the release procedure for procedure regulations,
– project-related written deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences
and powers for execution of the procedure (with personnel certiﬁcation),
– project-related written deﬁnition of responsibilities, technical competences
and powers for keeping the process log with full recording of all incidents
and accidents,
– checking that complaints (unintentional deviations from the implementations
prescribed in the relevant procedure regulations) and non-conformities (en-
visaged one-off deviations from the implementations prescribed in the rel-
evant procedure regulations) are made known regularly by the testing
department (notiﬁcation of incidents and accidents within the context of the
complaints system),
– central, real time/immediate, full capture and traceable documentation of the
conﬁguration status of procedure regulations,
4.3
Generating Safety
169

– project-related deﬁnition of personnel responsibility for audits to verify
regularly the effectiveness and traceability of both the dismantling project
and the relevant incidents and accidents reporting system, and
– checking that the procedures log and the logging of the incidents and acci-
dents reporting system are always fully accessible (if necessary, using
appropriate IT programs).
• Work resources, methods and procedures to be used on the project level:
Since all methods have to be very speciﬁcally focused on task and objective,
only general requirements will be made here which must also be made sufﬁ-
ciently speciﬁc for the application case in question. The following are necessary:
– establishment of both the auxiliary resources (such as IT programs) required
for the processes and procedures,
– checking that the release procedure for procedure regulations is deﬁned
centrally in the company or project-speciﬁcally,
– checking that the planning is deﬁned company- or project-speciﬁcally and
applied, and
– speciﬁcation of the scheduling by which the effectiveness and traceability of
the project-related dismantling (such as, for example, the possibility of
accessing the procedures log of the incidents and accidents reporting system)
can be regularly checked in the case of an audit.
4.4
Safety-Compliant Design in Civil Engineering
and Process Plant Engineering
Section 4.3 showed not only how technical safety can be systematically generated
and applied interdisciplinarily but also everything which is to be observed in this
connection. Attention is drawn here to the relevant safety procedures: deterministic
(in the sense of “exclusion of failure”), probabilistic (in the sense of “reliability”)
and safety engineering (in the sense of “fail-safe” and “fail-operational”). The
approach practised in civil engineering and process plant construction also requires
a thorough examination of possible failure causes as it is necessary in safety
engineering in other ways as well. The “exclusion of failure” represented via the
deterministic path must be just as well substantiated as any other precautionary
safety measure. The complexity of modern structures in civil engineering and
process plant construction calls for a correspondingly adapted approach, as is
presented compactly in this section.
As long as classically compensatory approaches in the safety architecture are
conducive to reaching these goals, they will also be best practices. In the case of highly
complex structures as, for example, in the ﬁelds of aeronautical and space technology,
deterministic approaches are not always applicable and probabilistic approaches
therefore more suitable. In many ﬁelds, the approach leading to the best result is a
170
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

combination of deterministic and probabilistic (semi-probabilistic) procedures. In this
case, for example, the distributions of properties and loads are regarded as a con-
vention and inserted into the schema of the classically compensatory approach.
This approach is increasingly pronounced in civil engineering and thus forms the
basis for its safety architecture. In what follows, the procedure for civil engineering
is described and discussed and applied analogously to process plant engineering
and ﬁelds in which a safety-compliant design is a requirement and the distributions
of properties and loads necessarily have to be observed.
The ﬂow chart entitled “Safety-methodological ﬂow chart” (see Sect. 4.3.2.1)
shows how the principles of the safety-methodological approach are used in gen-
erating and securing technical safety. The principle is described in detail in
Sect. 3.2.1.2 of this publication on “technical safety”. The steps and decisions
necessary for generating technical safety are described on the basis of the six phases
of a product life cycle (see Fig. 1 in that section) in which the ﬁrst three phases
describe the planning and implementation and the following two describe utilization
and recycling in real products. An attempt is made to cover all technical disciplines
and formulate safety-speciﬁc commonalities both technically and terminologically.
Generally speaking, the “exclusion of failure” is used for structures in civil
engineering in order to generate technical safety. This exclusion of failure is
deterministically justiﬁable on the basis of technical integrity, and there is thus no
need for a quantitative proof of reliability. In the case of supporting structures, the
exclusion of failure is, however, guaranteed by a so-called semi-probabilistic safety
concept according to DIN 1055-100 “Effects on supporting structures—Basis of
structural design—Safety concept and design rules” (now DIN EN 1990).27 The aim
is to capture the uncertainties in the design at the place where they occur with their
scattering properties. This is done with the aid of partial safety factors on the side of
inﬂuences/loads (such as stress resultants, stresses) and component resistances.
The partial safety factors are directly dependent on the coefﬁcients of variation
on the inﬂuence and resistance sides. By calibration and validation of previous
empirical safety requirements in civil engineering, reliabilities or failure probabil-
ities are laid down as a function of the risk class aspired to (see also the hazard
categories in Table 3.1 in Sect. 3.2.1.1) and a reference period, usually of 50 years
for normal buildings and 100 years for civil engineering works. For risk class RC2
27Formulation and explanation of basic principles:
Construction Standardisation Committee (NaBau) within DIN, “Safety of buildings” working
committee: Basic principles of determining safety requirements for buildings, Berlin, Vienna,
Zurich: Beuth Verlag, 1981
Spaethe, Gerhard: Safety of load-bearing structures. Vienna, New York: Springer Verlag, 1992
Grünberg, Jürgen: Basic principles of structural design—safety concept and design rules for
structural engineering—Explanations for DIN 1055-100 Civil engineering practice, published by
DIN German Institute for Standardization, Berlin, Vienna, Zürich: Beuth Verlag, 2004
Hansen, Michael: On the impact of monitoring measures on the reliability of concrete com-
ponents. Dissertation, Leibniz University of Hannover. IRB-Verlag, 2004
Hansen, Michael: Monitoring-assisted risk assessment of existing solid building structures.
Postdoctoral thesis, Leibniz University of Hannover. IRB-Verlag, 2014.
4.4
Safety-Compliant Design in Civil Engineering and Process Plant Engineering
171

according to DIN EN 1990:2010-12 “Eurocode: Basis of structural design”, this
corresponds to a probability of failure of 10−6 for a reference period of one year or
7  10−4 for a reference period of 50 years.
The safety justiﬁcation for structural safety is presented in the ﬂow chart
“Procedural and decision-making methodology for safety-compliant design in civil
engineering and process plant construction” (Fig. 4.4).
On the basis of the phase concept, the requirements are emphasized relating to
controlling, safety case, state of the art, state of scientiﬁc and technical knowledge
and assignment of responsibilities in the phases in question. In addition to the
necessary documentation of the individual steps and decisions, this shows the load
assumptions with the envisaged and possible operating states, scenarios and service
life of the products and the classiﬁcation of the failure modes as a function of the
consequences arising. Finally, the path to the risk assessment is deﬁned and the
necessity for involvement of the public is described on the basis of the risk level
determined and the necessary involvement of the individual in the development and
manufacturing process (human factors).
4.4.1
Notes to the Flow Chart
1.
Locality,
environment
The inﬂuence of the locality of the wider environment on the
product can be important for its utilization and should, where
appropriate, be taken into account
2.
Public (P)
The product can have an impact on the public, and consumer
protection and, possibly, legal regulations must be observed
3.
Human factors
engineering (H)
The effects of human–machine relationships should be examined
4.
Inspection classes
DIN EN 1990:2010-12 “Eurocode: Basis of structural design;
German version EN1990:2002”
5.
Approval
Approval may come under contract law but consent/release be
formally under public law
6.
Replanning
Replanning will be necessary when, according to the safety
analysis, improvement is not possible with the current data
7.
The standard case in design is a semi-probabilistic analysis with
partial safety factors (Level I). A probabilistic approximation is
achieved, for example, by the reliability method of the ﬁrst order
(FORM) (Level II). A full probabilistic method (Level III) is,
for example, the Monte Carlo analysis
8.
Safety analyses with current data recognized by inspection and
not yet been taken into account
9.
Project controller
The project controller takes over only the functions of the
purchaser during project control but not project management
itself. He/she thus has primarily organizational duties and is not
authorized to make decisions, for example, about changes to the
construction plan
172
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

Fig. 4.4 Procedural and decision-making methodology for safety-compliant design in civil
engineering and process plant construction
4.4
Safety-Compliant Design in Civil Engineering and Process Plant Engineering
173

Fig. 4.4 (continued)
174
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

4.4.2
Deﬁnitions with Regard to the Flow Chart
Action Step 2.1: Ultimate limit states of structural safety—limiting risk
g(b) = 0
Danger: g(b) < 0
Safety: g(b) > 0
• Positional stability, static equilibrium, strength failure, stability failure, fatigue
failure
Action Step 2.2: Determination of failure behaviour
• Component failure, linear elastic analysis,
• Interactions with adjacent components: failure mechanisms, such as kinematic
chains, system redundancies, nonlinear analysis or theory of plasticity.
Action Step 2.3: Safety analysis
• Semi-probabilistic analysis—partial safety factors
Suitable for linear, nonlinear and also plastic structural analysis:
Ed(G  Gk; cQ  Qrep)  Rd (η1  f1k/cM1; η2  f2k/cM2)
• Probabilistic analysis:
– Reliability theory of ﬁrst order (FORM)
Linearized limit state equation, normally distributed basic variables (basic
variables without normal distribution are appropriately transformed by, for
example, the Rackwitz-Fiessler algorithm), approximation
– Complete probabilistic analysis, for example, with the Monte Carlo
simulation.
Fig. 4.4 (continued)
4.4
Safety-Compliant Design in Civil Engineering and Process Plant Engineering
175

Action Step 5.1: Damage—risk
g(b) < 0
• Fatigue (cyclic mechanical effects)
• Corrosion (chemical effects)
• Ageing (physical effects)
Action Step 5.2: Higher impacts—risk
g(b) < 0
– Increased imposed loads (change of use)
– Increased environmental impacts (climate change)
– Unforeseen unusual impacts.
176
4
Interdisciplinary Safety Guideline

Chapter 5
Proposal of the VDI “Technical Safety”
Committee
The Scientiﬁc Advisory Council of the VDI felt called on by virtue of its inter-
disciplinary competence to launch and promote the process of safety awareness. In
exercising this technical expertise the VDI “technical safety” Committee describes
in the present publication the basic principles of a safety-methodological concept
applicable across disciplines.
The presentation of this concept should demonstrate to a broader technical
audience how technical safety is created, and what methodological approaches are
required. The paths shown are realistic and, assuming consistent, ethically con-
sidered actions, feasible in practice for specialists working interdisciplinarily.
A basis of trust between society and technology is important, and this can only be
achieved in an open, honestly conducted dialogue between them. Observable
technophobia on the part of a non-technical public must be reduced by explaining
the risks involved in dealing with technical products and doing so in a manner
understandable to the layperson. This, in turn, can only be successful when ter-
minology and methods in the ﬁeld of safety engineering are interdisciplinarily
harmonized among the experts and can be presented on a sound basis. As with
general engineering, safety engineering also needs both generalistic concepts for an
interdisciplinary approach and systemic management procedures. Great efforts are
still needed here in the ﬁelds of science and business.
The steps taken by the EU Council and EU Commission with the introduction of
the New Approach and the Global Approach are certainly leading in the right
direction. In industrial sectors in which EC veriﬁcation of the products concerned is
not followed by any system inspection conducted by a state agency; these steps do
however have, as far as technical safety is concerned, clear weaknesses in certain
sectors with their emphasis on the free movement of goods within the EU. The
concepts in some cases thus remain a long way behind the effectiveness of the
historical system which met demands and has now been relieved. These weak-
nesses, which at the time of introduction were already known to the experts dealing
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
H.B. Keller et al., Technical Safety – An Attribute of Quality,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68625-7_5
177

with safety issues, are diverse, and improvements are currently being made by the
European Commission. In addition to the product-related directives, the “Directive
on General Product Safety” 2001/95/EG dated 03.12.2001 also applies, which
requires all products being put on the market within the European Economic Area
to be safe. How this is to be secured requires further regulation—however, not only
in the ﬁeld of safety legislation but also, above all, in the ﬁeld of safety engineering.
178
5
Proposal of the VDI “Technical Safety” Committee

Chapter 6
Summary—Lessons Learned
We who have the privilege of living in a civilized, democratic state governed by the
rule of law are well aware that we can depend on the numerous technical facilities
which we use in some form or other in our daily lives. This is ensured by not only
the democratic legal system but also, above all, the centuries of experience of our
engineers which have been systematically collected in technical standards and
guidelines. Nevertheless, time and time again a disturbance or even accident occurs.
An overhasty search for a “culprit” then takes place. Engineers do, however, know
that absolute, 100% safety is impossible. The question still arises: can’t the
occurrence of these—apparently inevitable—incidents and accidents be even fur-
ther restricted?
Almost thirty years ago the realization ﬁrst arose that the subject of “technical
safety” was being handled very differently depending on the ﬁeld of application.
Probabilistic approaches have thus proven themselves over many decades in the
aerospace industry, while many other ﬁelds of application restrict themselves to the
deterministic exclusion of failure, which all too often is still misunderstood as
“absolute safety”. The existing orientation of safety engineering towards the par-
ticular ﬁeld of application constantly creates confusion as soon as interdisciplinary
collaboration is required such as in innovative technology projects. The situation
results here in an absence of a “state-of-the-art”, and the corresponding codes of
practice by which technical safety can be rendered transparent. Knowledge about
what is required from the safety point of view is nevertheless available but until
now has not been readily accessible.
Therefore, the VDI “technical safety” Committee has taken on the task of
identifying the “hidden commonalities” of the various technical safety concepts and
putting together the corresponding—interdisciplinarily usable—procedure in a
single guideline. In order to gain support for the idea behind this “technical safety”
guideline the committee brought to mind a number of examples which have
probably become permanently engraved in the public consciousness. Although all
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
H.B. Keller et al., Technical Safety – An Attribute of Quality,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68625-7_6
179

of these cases of failure could have been avoided with a safety methodological
approach, the causative deﬁciencies were only identiﬁed after the event.
The VDI “technical safety” Committee is of the opinion that even causes of this
kind must be prevented. Undeveloped safety concepts offer no reason for their
continued existence, even when they present what is still common practice and are
tolerated by our legal system.
180
6
Summary—Lessons Learned

VDI “Technical Safety” Committee
The Scientiﬁc Advisory Council of the VDI has tasked the interdisciplinary
“Technical Safety” committee with the objective of providing a transparent pre-
sentation of the situation regarding the various procedures and concepts for
achieving technical safety in all industries and engineering disciplines and identi-
fying possible needs for action. The committee presents its ﬁndings in the present
publication.
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
H.B. Keller et al., Technical Safety – An Attribute of Quality,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68625-7
181

References
1.
Marburger, P.: Die Regeln der Technik im Recht. Köln: Heymann, 1979
2.
VDI-Handbuch Zuverlässigkeit. Berlin: Beuth Verlag
3.
Report 31 “Ethische Ingenieurverantwortung – Handlungsspielräume und Perspektiven der
Kodiﬁzierung”, VDI-Hauptgruppe Mensch und Technik, Düsseldorf, 2000
4.
Ethik und Kernenergie – Expertise für den Fachausschuss Kerntechnik (FA-KT).
VDI-Gesellschaft Energietechnik (VDI-GET), Düsseldorf, Mai 2006
5.
Rasmussen, J.; K. Duncan, J. Leplat (eds): New technology and human error, Chichester:
Wiley, pp. 281–283, 1987
6.
Bons, W.: Zeitschrift “Kunst und Technik” des Deutschen Museums, München, Vol. 4, S.
18, 1999
7.
Lenk, H.; M. Maring Technik zwischen Können und Sollen – Wer verantwortet die
Technik? In: TÜV Saarland Foundation (Hrsg.): Congress Documentation Saarbrücken
2001: World Congress on Safety of Modern Technical Systems. Köln: TÜV-Verlag
pp. 725–738
8.
Ada 2005. Language Reference Manual. Heidelberg: Springer, 2005
9.
Ada Reference Manual ISO/IEC 8652:2012(E), Language and Standard Libraries.
International
10.
Standard ISO/IEC 8652/2012 (E), Series: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 8339,
Subseries: Programming and Software Engineering Taft S.T., Duff R.A., Brukardt R.L.,
Ploedereder E., Leroy P., Schonberg E. (Eds.), 2013, XXVIII, p. 921
11.
Adams, H. W.: Integriertes Managementsystem für Sicherheit und Umweltschutz.
München, Wien: Carl Hanser Verlag, 1995
12.
Alscher, H.; Nowack, S.; Pilz, W.-D.: Projektleitung des Konsortiums Magnetbahn
Transrapid. Schlussbericht für die Vorhaben TV 78684 und TV 82088. Entwicklung, Bau,
Integration und Inbetriebnahme der TRANSRAPID-Versuchsanlage Emsland, 29.03.1985
13.
Aoki, S.: Transport of Radioactive Materials. Nuclear Power Engineering Corporation,
1990. ISBN 4902719-01-0
14.
Apostolakis, G. E.; Farmer, F.; van Otterloo, R. W. (Hrsg.): Reliability Engineering &
System Safety. Elsevier Applied Science Publishers Ltd., 1988
15.
Audsley, N.; Burns, A.; Richardson, M.; Tindell, K.; Wellings, A.: Applying New
Scheduling Theory to Static Priority Pre-emptive Scheduling. Report RTRG/92/120.
Department of Computer Science. University of York, 1992
16.
Audsley, N.; Burns, A.; Richardson, M.; Wellings, A.: Hard Real-Time Scheduling: The
Deadline Monotonic Approach. In: Real-Time Programming (ed. W.A. Halang and K.
Ramamritham). Pergamon Press, 1992, pp. 127–132
17.
Banck, J.; Berg, K. H.; Dyck, H. P.; Gies, H.; Hübschmann, W. G.; Karlsson, F.; Messer,
K. P.; Oeser, H.-R.; Patermann, C.; Roth, K.; Schmidt, M. W.; Viehl, E.: Entsorgung von
Kernkraftwerken. Köln: Verlag TÜV Rheinland, 1981
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
H.B. Keller et al., Technical Safety – An Attribute of Quality,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68625-7
183

18.
Baum, H.; Schnitzler, W.; Schulz, W. H.: Arbeits- und Verkehrssicherheit im Straßengüter-
verkehr insbesondere im Gefahrgutstransport auf einem deregulierten Verkehrsmarkt. Hrsg.:
Bundesanstalt für Arbeitsschutz. Wirtschaftsverlag NW, Bremerhaven 1, 1989
19.
Beck, K.: Extreme Programming Explained. Embrace Change. 1st Edition, Addison
Wesley, 2000. ISBN 0-201-61641-6
20.
Behrens, D.; Gundlach, V. G.: Praxis der Sicherheitsanalysen in der chemischen
Verfahrenstechnik. DECHEMA Frankfurt am Main: Verlag Chemie, 1985
21.
Benra, J.; Keller, H. B.; Schiedermeier, G.; Tempelmeier, T.: Synchronisation und
Konsistenz in Echtzeitsystemen. In: Benra, J. T. (Hrsg.): Software-Entwicklung für
Echtzeitsysteme. Berlin u. a.: Springer, 2009, S. 49–65
22.
Boehm, B. W.: A Spiral Model of Software Development and Enhancement. In: IEEE
Computer. Vol. 21, Ausg. 5, Mai 1988, S. 61–72
23.
Booch Grady et al.: The Uniﬁed Modeling Language User Guide. Addison Wesley, 1999
24.
Bressin, M.: Unfälle beim Transport gefährlicher Güter auf der Straße 1982 – 1984. Hrsg.:
Bundesanstalt für Arbeitsschutz. Bericht der Bundesanstalt für Straßenwesen, Bereich
Unfallforschung. Bergisch Gladbach, 1985. Bremerhaven: Wirtschaftsverlag NW, 1989
25.
BSI-Grundschutzkataloge (siehe: https://www.bsi.bund.de/DE/Themen/ITGrundschutz/IT
GrundschutzKataloge/Inhalt/content/kataloge.html
26.
Buttazo, G. C.: Hard Real-time Computing Systems, Kluwer Academic publishers, 1997
27.
CMMI – Capability Maturity Model Integration CMU/SEI-2002-TR-029, ESC-TR-2002-
029. August 2002
28.
Congress of the United States, Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment. Transportation of
Hazardous Materials. Washington D. C., 1986
29.
Daimler AG (Hrsg.): Der Ursprung der Sicherheit. Stuttgart: Daimler AG, 2008
30.
DeMarco,
T.:
Warum
ist
Software
so
teuer?
…
und
andere
Rätsel
des
Informationszeitalters, München, Wien: Carl Hanser Verlag, 1997 (Titel der englischen
Originalausgabe: “Why Does Software Cost So Much? And Other Puzzles of the
Information Age”, 1995 by Tom DeMarco)
31.
Der Bundesminister für Forschung und Technologie (Hrsg.): Deutsche Risikostudie
Kernkraftwerke – eine Untersuchung zu dem durch Störfälle in Kernkraftwerken
verursachten Risiko. Köln: Verlag TÜV Rheinland, 1979
32.
Deutsche Risikostudie Kernkraftwerke. Köln: Verlag TÜV Rheinland, 1979
33.
Deutscher Verband für Materialprüfung e. V.: Behälter aus Sphäroguss für radioaktive
Stoffe, Seminar der Bundesanstalt für Materialforschung und -prüfung (BAM) in
Zusammenarbeit mit dem Deutschen Verband für Materialprüfung e. V., 1987
34.
Deutsches Atomforum e. V. (Hrsg.): Beförderung von Kernmaterial. Bonn: Wilhelm
Tempelhoff, 1985
35.
Deutsches IDNDR-Komitee für Katastrophenvorbeugung e. V. (Hrsg.): Journalisten-
Handbuch zum Katastrophenmanagement. International Decade for Natural Disaster
Reduction Komitee. Bonn, 1996
36.
DIN 1055-100:2001-03, Einwirkungen auf Tragwerke – Teil 100: Grundlagen der
Tragwerksplanung – Sicherheitskonzept und Bemessungsregeln. Zurückgezogen 2010-12,
ersetzt durch DIN EN 1990
37.
DIN 25419: 1985-11, Ereignisablaufanalyse; Verfahren, graphische Symbole und Auswer-
tung
38.
DIN
25419-1:1977-06,
Störfallablaufanalyse;
Störfallablaufdiagramm,
Methode
und
Bildzeichen. Zurückgezogen, Nachfolgedokument DIN 25419
39.
DIN 25424, Fehlerbaumanalyse; Methode und Bildzeichen
40.
DIN 31004-1:1982-11, Begriffe der Sicherheitstechnik – Grundbegriffe. Zurückgezogen,
jetzt
41.
DIN 820-12
42.
DIN 55350, Begriffe zu Qualitätsmanagement
184
References

43.
DIN 57831:1980-02, Elektrische Bahn-Signalanlagen (VDE-Bestimmung). Zurückge-
zogen, Nachfolgedokument DIN EN 50129, VDE 0831-129
44.
DIN 820-12:2014-06, Normungsarbeit; Teil 12: Leitfaden für die Aufnahme von
Sicherheitsaspekten in Normen
45.
DIN
EN
1990:2010-12,
Eurocode:
Grundlagen
der
Tragwerksplanung;
Deutsche
Fassung EN 1990:2002 + A1:2005 + A1:2005/AC:2010
46.
DIN EN 61508-4:2012-02, Funktionale Sicherheit sicherheitsbezogener elektrischer/
elektronischer/programmierbarer
elektronischer
Systeme
–
Teil
4:
Begriffe
und
Abkürzungen
47.
(IEC 61508-4:2010); Deutsche Fassung EN 61508-4:2010
48.
DIN EN 9100:2010-07, Qualitätsmanagementsysteme – Anforderungen an Organisationen
der Luftfahrt, Raumfahrt und Verteidigung; Deutsche und Englische Fassung EN
9100:2009
49.
DIN EN 50129 (VDE 0831-129:2003-12), Bahnanwendungen – Telekommunikation-
stechnik, Signaltechnik und Datenverarbeitungssysteme – Sicherheitsrelevante elektronis-
che Systeme für Signaltechnik; Deutsche Fassung EN 50129:2003
50.
DIN EN ISO 12100:2011-03, Sicherheit von Maschinen – Allgemeine Gestaltungsleitsätze –
Risikobeurteilung und Risikominderung (ISO 12100:2010); Deutsche Fassung EN ISO
12100:2010
51.
DIN EN ISO 9000:2015-11, Qualitätsmanagementsysteme – Grundlagen und Begriffe (ISO
9000:2015); Deutsche und Englische Fassung EN ISO 9000:2015
52.
DIN EN ISO 9001:2015-11, Qualitätsmanagementsysteme
– Anforderungen (ISO
9001:2015); Deutsche und Englische Fassung EN ISO 9001:2015
53.
DIN ISO 2859-1:2014-08, Annahmestichprobenprüfung anhand der Anzahl fehlerhafter
Einheiten oder Fehler (Attributprüfung) – Teil 1: Nach der annehmbaren Qualitätsgrenzlage
(AQL) geordnete Stichprobenpläne für die Prüfung einer Serie von Losen (ISO
2859-1:1999 + Cor. 1:2001 + Amd.1:2011)
54.
DIN VDE 0100-410 (VDE 0100-410:2007-06) Errichten von Niederspannungsanlagen –
Teil 4-41: Schutzmaßnahmen – Schutz gegen elektrischen Schlag (IEC 60364-4-41:2005,
modiﬁziert); Deutsche Übernahme HD 60364-4-41:2007
55.
DIN VDE 0831 (VDE 0831:2006-04), Elektrische Bahn-Signalanlagen
56.
DIN VDE 31000-2:1987-12, Allgemeine Leitsätze für das sicherheitsgerechte Gestalten
technischer Erzeugnisse; Begriffe der Sicherheitstechnik; Grundbegriffe. (zurückgezogen)
57.
Dombrowsky, W. R.; Hornnczuk, J.; Streitz, W.: Erstellung eines Schutzdatenatlasses,
Zivilschutzforschung. Neue Folge, Bd. 51. Bundesverwaltungsamt – Zentralstelle für
Zivilschutz. Bonn, 2003
58.
Droste, B.; Sorenson, K. (Hrsg.): Brittle Fracture Safety Assessment International Journal
of Radioactive Materials Transport Vol. 6. Nuclear Technology Publishing, 1995
59.
Eisenbahn-Bau- und Betriebsordnung (EBO)
60.
Ensthaler, J.; Gesmann-Nuissel, D.; Strübbe, K.: Gestaltung von Aufsichtssystemen im
Produkt-Sicherheitsrecht. Regensburg: Transfer-Verlag, 2005
61.
Ericsson, A.-M.; Elert, M.; Intertran: A System for Assessing the Impact from Transporting
Radioactive Material. Vienna: IAEA-Tecdoc-287, 1983
62.
Farmer, F. R. (Hrsg.): Reliability Engineering. An International Journal, Vol. 2, No 1, 2 and
3. London: Applied Science Publishers Ltd., 1981
63.
Freiling, F.; Grimm, R.; Großpietsch, K.-E.; Keller, H. B.; Mottok, J.; Münch, I.;
Rannenberg, K.; Saglietti, F.: Technische Sicherheit und Informationssicherheit –
Unterschiede und Gemeinsamkeiten. Accepted for: Informatik Spektrum, GI, Springer,
Ausgabe Nr. 1 (37) 2014, S. 14–24
64.
Gesamtverband der Deutschen Versicherungswirtschaft e. V., Berlin (Hrsg.): Risiko – Wie
viel Risiko braucht die Gesellschaft? Karlsruhe: Verlag Versicherungswirtschaft e. V., 1998
References
185

65.
Gesellschaft für Anlagen- und Reaktorsicherheit (Hrsg): Zur Sicherheit des Betriebs der
Kernkraftwerke in Deutschland. Europäisches Zentrum für Wirtschaftsforschung und
Strategieberatung. Die längerfristige Entwicklung der Energiemärkte im Zeichen von
Wettbewerb und Umwelt. Prognos und EWI für das Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und
Technologie. Berlin, 1999
66.
Gherbi
A.
et
al.:
Software
Diversity
for
Future
Systems
Security.
CrossTalk,
September/October 2011, p. 10 ff.
67.
Grimm, R.; Keller, H. B.; Rannenberg, K.: Informatik 2003 – Mit Sicherheit Informatik.
Lecture Notes in Informatics (LNI). Bonn: Köllen Verlag, 2003
68.
Großmann, G.; Leitung der VdS-Fachtagung Anlagensicherheit und betriebliche Störfal-
lvorsorge: VdS Schadenverhütung im Gesamtverband der Deutschen Versicherungs-
wirtschaft. Köln, 1997
69.
Großmann, G.; Leitung der VdS-Fachtagung Anlagensicherheit und betriebliche Störfal-
lvorsorge: VdS Schadenverhütung im Gesamtverband der Deutschen Versicherungs-
wirtschaft. Köln, 2003
70.
Grünberg,
J.:
Grundlagen
der
Tragwerksplanung
–
Sicherheitskonzept
und
Bemessungsregeln für den konstruktiven Ingenieurbau. Erläuterungen zu DIN 1055-100.
Praxis Bauwesen, Hrsg.: DIN Deutsches Institut für Normung. Berlin, Wien, Zürich: Beuth
Verlag, 2004
71.
Gründer, T.; Schrey, J. (Hrsg.): Management Handbuch IT-Sicherheit. Risiken, Basel II,
Recht. Berlin: Erich Schmidt Verlag, 2007
72.
Guide for the use of the Ada Ravenscar Proﬁle in high integrity systems ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC
22/ WG 9 N 435, Draft for PDTR Approval Ballot, ISO/IEC TR 24718, 14 Feb. 2004
73.
Hansen,
M.:
Monitoringgestützte
Risikobewertung
bestehender
Massivbauwerke.
Habilitationsschrift Leibniz Universität Hannover. IRB-Verlag, 2014
74.
Hansen, M.: Zur Auswirkung von Überwachungsmaßnahmen auf die Zuverlässigkeit von
Betonbauteilen. Dissertation Leibniz Universität Hannover. IRB Verlag, 2004
75.
Hansen, M.: Zur Auswirkung von Überwachungsmaßnahmen auf die Zuverlässigkeit von
Betonbauteilen. Stuttgart: Fraunhofer IRB Verlag, 2004
76.
Harding, A. B.: Tank Container Failures. AEA Technology, Health & Safety Executive.
Warrington, Cheshire WA3 6AT, 1996
77.
Hartwig,
S.
(Hrsg.):
Große
technische
Gefahrenpotenziale.
Risikoanalysen
und
Sicherheitsfragen. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1983
78.
Hauptmanns, U.; Marx, M.: Kriterien für die Beurteilung von Gefährdungen durch
technische Anlagen. Schriftenreihe Recht & Technik. Berlin: Verlag VdTÜV, 2010
79.
Health & Safety Executive. Her Majesty’s Stationary Ofﬁce, Norwich NR3 1BQ, 1997
80.
Heilmund, S. (Hrsg.): World Congress Safety of Modern Technical Systems –
Congress-Documentation. Publisher: TUEV Saarland Foundation by TÜV GmbH. Köln,
2001
81.
Hermann, A. G., Röthemeyer, H.: Langfristig sichere Deponien. Berlin Heidelberg:
Springer Verlag, 1998
82.
Humphrey, W. S.: The Software Quality Challenge. Crosstalk – The Journal of Defense
Software Engineering, June 2008, p. 4 ff.
83.
IAEA Safety Standards No. 6. Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material.
84.
Vienna: IAEA, 1985
85.
Ibrahim, L. et al.: Safety and Security Extensions for Integrated Capability Maturity
Models. Washington: Federal Aviation Administration, 2004 (www.faa.gov/ipg)
86.
IEC 1508: Functional Safety – Safety-Related Systems
87.
INES: The International Nuclear Event Scale User’s Manual Jointly prepared by IAEA and
NEA (OECD). IAEA, 1992
88.
Information Technology – Programming Languages Guidance to Avoiding Vulnerabilities
in Programming Languages through Language Selection and Use. ISO/IEC TR 24772
Edition 2 (TR 24772 WG 23/N 0389), ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 22/WG 23, 2012
186
References

89.
Internationale
Sektion
der
IVSS
für
die
Verhütung
von
Arbeitsunfällen
und
Berufskrankheiten in der chemischen Industrie (Hrsg.): Gefahrenermittlung, Gefahren-
bewertung – Praxisbewährte thematische Methoden. Heidelberg: Berufsgenossenschaft der
chemischen Industrie, 1997
90.
Isermann, H.; Huth, M.; Schröder, K.: Entwicklung eines risikoanalytischen Systemmodells
der Gefahrgutsbeförderung. Forschungs- und Entwicklungsvorhaben 96517/97 des BM V,
2000. Persönliches Exemplar Dr. Hubert B. Keller
91.
ISO Guide 30, Verwendete Begriffe und Bezeichnungen beim Nachweis mit Referen-
zwerkstoffen
92.
ISO Guide 31, Referenzwerkstoffe
93.
ISO/IEC 15939:2007, Systems and Software Engineering; Measurement Process
94.
Jaeger, T. A.: Zur Sicherheitsproblematik technologischer Entwicklungen Qualität und
Zuverlässigkeit, Heft 1 QZ 19 (1974)
95.
Jäger, P.; Haferkamp, K. (Hrsg.): Die Auswirkung des Risikos von Lagerung und Transport
gefährlicher Stoffe auf die Entwicklung verbesserter Transporttechnologien (Straßentrans-
port). Phase I Grundlagenuntersuchung. Der Bundesminister für Forschung und Tech-
nologie, Bonn. Köln: Verlag TÜV Rheinland, 1983
96.
Joint Aviation Requirements of the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASE) on Basic
Regulations, Initial and Continuing Airworthiness (Maintenance), Air Operations, Aircrew
Licensing
97.
Jones, A. V.: The Regulation of Major Hazards in France, Germany, Finland and The
Netherlands.
98.
Keller, H.; Plöderer, E.; Dencker, P.; Klenk, H. (Hrsg.): Sicherheit und Zuverlässigkeit für
automobile Informationstechnik. Aachen: Shaker Verlag, 2010
99.
Keller, H. B. et al.: Programmiersprachen. In: Lang, M.; Scherber, S.: Perfekte
Softwareentwicklung. Düsseldorf: symposion Verlag, 2013
100.
Keller, H. B.: Ada. In: Henning, P.A. (Hrsg.) Taschenbuch Programmiersprachen. Leipzig:
Fachbuchverlag Leipzig im Carl Hanser Verlag, 2004, S. 195–214
101.
Keller, H. B.: Im Kampf gegen Cybercrime. Chemie&more, 6.12
102.
Keller, H. B.; Müller R.; Schiedermeier, G.; Tempelmeier, T.: Programmierung. In: Benra,
J. T. (Hrsg.): Software-Entwicklung für Echtzeitsysteme. Berlin u. a.: Springer, 2009,
S. 129–170
103.
Kolloquium des Technischen Überwachungs-Vereins Rheinland e. V.: Sicherheitstech-
nische Bauteilbegutachtung – Nutzung theoretischer und experimenteller Einzelverfahren.
Köln: Verlag TÜV Rheinland, 1975
104.
Konersmann, R.: Zur Festlegung von Ausschussﬂächen in Start- und Einﬂugschneise von
Flughäfen und Landeplätzen gemäß Störfallverordnung. Dissertation im Fachbereich
Sicherheitstechnik der Bergischen Universität – Gesamthochschule Wuppertal, 1997
105.
Konsortium
Magnetbahn
Transrapid
TVE/P/00000/0/RS/1/007
Rahmenspeziﬁkation
Sicherheit für das Vorhaben TVE 06.03.80
106.
Krause, G.: Maßnahmen zur Verhinderung gefährlicher Vermischungen beim Umfüllen
brennbarer Flüssigkeiten. Hrsg.: Bundesanstalt für Arbeitsschutz und Unfallforschung
Wirtschaftsverlag NW, Bremerhaven 1, 1979
107.
Kreysa, G.; Langer, O.-U.; Pfeil, N. (Hrsg.): Sicherheit bei Lagerung und Transport
gefährlicher Stoffe. DECHEMA Frankfurt am Main, 2001
108.
Kuhlmann, A. (Hrsg.): 1. Weltkongress für Sicherheitswissenschaft. Tagungsbericht Teil 1
und 2. Köln: Verlag TÜV Rheinland, 1990
109.
Kuhlmann, A., Bresser, H.: Einführung in die Sicherheitswissenschaft. Friedr. Vieweg &
Sohn, Verlag TÜV Rheinland, 1981
110.
Kuhlmann, A.: Sicherheitskultur. Köln: TÜV-Verlag, 2001
111.
Lautkaski, R.; Mankamo, T.: Chlorine Transportation Risk Assessment Technical Research
Centre of Finland, Nuclear Engineering Laboratory, 1976
References
187

112.
Leitfaden Informationssicherheit, IT-Grundschutz kompakt. Bundesamt für Sicherheit in
der Informationstechnik – BSI53133 Bonn, 2012, BSI-Bro12/311
113.
Ludwig,
J.;
Feutlinske,
K.:
THEBETA
–
thermische
Belastbarkeit
von
Tanks.
Forschungsvorhaben der Bundesanstalt für Materialforschung und -prüfung für das
Bundesministerium für Verkehr, 1996
114.
Mair, G. W.: Zuverlässigkeitsrestringierte Optimierung faserteilarmierter Hybridbehälter
unter Betriebslast am Beispiel eines CrMo4-Stahlbehälters mit Carbonfaserarmierung als
Erdgasspeicher im Nahverkehrsbus. Düsseldorf: VDI Verlag, 1996
115.
Marburger, P.: Rechtsprobleme der technischen Sicherheit. Berufspolitische Jahrestagung
des VDI “Sicherheit – Wohlstand – Umweltqualität: Zielkonﬂikte in der Ingenieurarbeit”.
Trier, 10.–11.09.1984
116.
Matthees, W.; Brandes, K.; Liu, W. K.; Belytschko, T.; Droste, B. (Hrsg.): Impact – IV.
Extended and Updated Selected Papers from the SMiRT-12 Post-Conference Seminar
No. 12. Elsevier Science S.A., 1994
117.
Messerschmitt-Bölkow-Blohm GmbH: Technische Zuverlässigkeit 2. Auﬂage. Berlin,
Heidelberg, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1977
118.
MIL-HDBK 217F, Notice 2, Reliability Prediction of Electronic Equipment und NPRD 95,
Nonelectronic Parts Reliability Data
119.
MIL-HDBK-217F, Notice 2 (217F-2) Reliability Prediction of Electronic Equipment
Reliability Analysis Center & Rome Laboratory at Grifﬁss AFB, NY., U.S.A. 1995-02
120.
Molnarne, M.; Schendler, T.; Schröder, V.: Sicherheitstechnische Kenngrößen. Band 2:
Explosionsbereiche von Gasgemischen. Hrsg.: Bundesanstalt für Materialforschung und -
prüfung. Bremerhaven: Wirtschaftsverlag NW, 2003
121.
NASA Software Safety Guidebook NASA Technical Standard, NASA-GB-8719.13. Space
Administration March 31, 2004
122.
National Research Council of the National Academies (Editor): Going the Distance – The
Safe Transport of Spent Fuel and High-Level Radioactive Waste in the United States.
Washington: National Academic Press, 2006
123.
Neddermann, W.; Heins, B.; Dally, A.: Der Human Factor in der Sicherheitspraxis der
Prozessindustrie – Aktivierung der Sicherheitsressource Mensch durch Beteiligung. Reihe
Loccumer Protokolle. Rehburg-Loccum: Evangelische Akademie Loccum, 2003
124.
Nohl, J.; Thiemecke, H.: Systematik zur Durchführung von Gefährdungsanalysen. Teil 1:
Theoretische
Grundlagen.
Hrsg.:
Bundesanstalt
für
Arbeitsschutz.
Bremerhaven:
Wirtschaftsverlag NW, 1998
125.
Nohl, J.; Thiemecke, H.: Systematik zur Durchführung von Gefährdungsanalysen. Teil 2:
Praxisbezogene Anwendung. Hrsg.: Bundesanstalt für Arbeitsschutz. Bremerhaven:
Wirtschaftsverlag NW, 1998
126.
Normenausschuss
Bauwesen
(NABau)
im
DIN,
Arbeitsausschuss
“Sicherheit
von
Bauwerken”: Grundlagen zur Festlegung der Sicherheitsanforderungen für bauliche
Anlagen. Berlin, Wien, Zürich: Beuth Verlag, 1981
127.
NPRD-95 Nonelectronic Parts Reliability Data IIT Research Institute & Reliability
Analysis Center, Rome, NY., U.S.A. 1999-10
128.
Paturi, F. R.: 125 Jahre Sicherheit in der Technik. TÜV Bayern Holding AG, 1995
129.
Pilz, W.-D.: Sicherheitsmethodische Arbeitsweisen bei der Entwicklung neuartiger
Verkehrssysteme. 11. Tagung “Technische Zuverlässigkeit”, Nürnberg, 13.–15.05.1981
130.
Pilz, W.D.: Technische Probleme des Sicherheitsrechts. Berufspolitische Jahrestagung des
VDI “Sicherheit – Wohlstand – Umweltqualität: Zielkonﬂikte in der Ingenieurarbeit”. Trier,
10. - 11.09.1984
131.
Pilz,
W-D.:
Versagens-
und
Schadensvorsorge
aus
der
Praxis
technologischer
Entwicklungen.
Symposium
“Arbeitsschutz
im
Ingenieurstudium”.
20.
Deutscher
Kongress für Arbeitsschutz und Arbeitsmedizin. Düsseldorf, 03.–06.11.1987
188
References

132.
Plödereder, E.; Dencker, P.; Klenk, H.; Keller, H. B.; Spitzer, S. (Hrsg.): Proceedings Band
210, Automotive – Safety & Security 2012: Sicherheit und Zuverlässigkeit für automobile
Informationstechnik, Tagung 14.–15.11.2012 in Karlsruhe. Bonn: Gesellschaft für
Informatik e. V.
133.
Programming Languages Guide for the Use of the Ada Programming Language in High
Integrity Systems, ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 22/WG 9 N 359r, 99-07-01, ISO/IEC DTR 15942,
ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC22/WG 9, Technical Report type, 1999
134.
Proske, D.: Catalogue of Risks – Natural, Technical, Social and Health Risks. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2008
135.
Ramberger, S.; Gruber, T.: Error Distribution in Safety-Critical Software & Software Risk
Analysis Based on Unit Tests. Experience Report, WSRS Ulm – 20 Sep. 2004. ARC
Seibersdorf research GmbH
136.
Reaktorsicherheitskommission:
Sicherheitstechnische
Leitlinien
für
die
trockene
Zwischenlagerung bestrahlter Brennelemente in Behältern. Bundesamt für Strahlenschutz,
RSK-Geschäftsstelle, 2001
137.
Richtlinie
2001/95/EG
über
die
allgemeine
Produktsicherheit
vom
03.12.2001
(veröffentlicht im Amtsblatt Nr. L 011 vom 15.01.2002)
138.
Richtlinie 2008/57/EG des Europäischen Parlaments und des Rates vom 17. Juni 2008 über
die Interoperabilität des Eisenbahnsystems in der Gemeinschaft (Neufassung)
139.
Ritzau, H. J.: Kriterien der Schiene. Landsberg: Verlag Zeit und Eisenbahn, 1978
140.
Ritzau, H. J.: Von Siegelsdorf nach Aitrang. In: Zeit und Bahn, Band 1. Landsberg:
Ritzau KG, 1972
141.
Sauter, E.: Grundlagen des Strahlenschutzes. Berlin, München: Hrsg. und Verlag: Siemens
Aktiengesellschaft, 1971
142.
Schäfer, H. K., Jochum, C.: Sicherheit in der Chemie. Hanser Verlag, 1997
143.
Schieler, L.; Pauze, D.: Hazardous Materials. New York: van Nostrand Reinhold Company,
1978
144.
Schneider, A.; Masé, A.: Katastrophen auf Schienen. Zürich: Orell Füssli Verlag, 1968
145.
Schulz-Forberg, B.; Droste, B.; Zeisler, P. (Hrsg.): Erfahrungen und zukunftsträchtige
Verfahren auf dem Gebiet der Lagerung und des Transportes von abgebrannten
Kernbrennstoffen. 1. deutsch-sowjetisches Seminar in Leningrad, Sowjetunion und 2.
deutsch-sowjetisches Seminar in Berlin, Gorleben und Essen, Bundesrepublik Deutschland,
1998
146.
Schulz-Forberg,
B.;
Hübner,
H.W.:
Klassiﬁzierung
und
Sicherheitsreserven
von
Transportbehältern für radioaktive Stoffe. Vom Bundesminister des Inneren gefördertes
Forschungsvorhaben mit dem Kennzeichen SR 35, 1979
147.
Schulz-Forberg, B.; Masslowski, J.-P.: Prüfablaufanalysen an Beispielen – Darstellung von
Grundlagen, Verfahren und Aussagen der Prüfungen. Bundesanstalt für Arbeitsschutz und
Unfallforschung, Sonderschrift Nr. 11. Dortmund, 1983
148.
Schwaigerer, S.: Festigkeitsberechnung von Bauelementen des Dampfkessel-Behälter- und
Rohrleitungsbaues. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1970
149.
Sorbe, G.; Stephan, U.; Strobel, U.: Anlagensicherheit und Störfallmanagement –
praktische Umsetzung der Störfallverordnung im Betriebsbereich und Arbeitshilfen für
Störfall-
und
Sicherheitsbeauftragte.
ecomed
Sicherheit
in
der
ecomed
Verlagsgesellschaft AG, 2003
150.
Spaethe, G.: Die Sicherheit tragender Baukonstruktionen. Wien, New York: Springer, 1992
151.
Steinmetz, G.: Im Marionetten-Theater – Freie Fahrt … aber nicht für den Transrapid? Bad
Wörishofen: Masona-Verlag, 2014
152.
Thierfeldt, S.; Schartmann, F.: Stilllegung und Rückbau kerntechnischer Anlagen. Erstellt
im Auftrag des Bundesministeriums für Bildung und Forschung durch die Brenk
Systemplanung GmbH. Aachen, 2009
153.
VDI 2221:1993-05, Methodik zum Entwickeln und Konstruieren technischer Systeme und
Produkte
References
189

154.
VDI 2222 Blatt 1:1997-06, Konstruktionsmethodik – Methodisches Entwickeln von
Lösungsprinzipien
155.
VDI 2222 Blatt 2:1982-02, Konstruktionsmethodik; Erstellung und Anwendung von
Konstruktionskatalogen
156.
VDI 2223:2004-01, Methodisches Entwerfen technischer Produkte
157.
VDI 4001, Allgemeine Hinweise zum VDI-Handbuch Technische Zuverlässigkeit
158.
VDI 4003:2007-03, Zuverlässigkeitsmanagement
159.
VDI 4005, Einﬂüsse von Umweltbedingungen auf die Zuverlässigkeit technischer
Erzeugnisse, zurückgezogen
160.
VDI 4008 Blatt 5:2014-11, Methoden der Zuverlässigkeit – Zustandsﬂussgraphen
161.
Völkle, H.; Prêtre, S. (Hrsg.): Environmental Impact of Nuclear Installations Proceedings of
the Joint Seminary at the University of Fribourg, Switzerland. Les editions de physique, Les
Ulis Cedex France, 1992
162.
Völzke, H.: Tragverhalten und die Dimensionierung faserverstärkter Druckbehälter.
Dissertation an der Technischen Universität, Berlin, 1991
163.
Wagner, K.: Sicherheit und Vorschrift. Zu zivilen Lufttüchtigkeitsforderungen. Deutsche
Forschungs- und Versuchsanstalt für Luft- und Raumfahrt e. V. Bericht 01972/13
164.
ZVEI Automation 2006: Integrierte Technologie-Roadmap Automation 2015+
190
References

