
This is a stone.

Digital
Mindﬁeld
When choosing MINDFIELD DIGITAL™and our DBMD™
Program for your development services, you can be sure
you will receive an app that will save you money and
resources using the most advanced design and interface
concepts.
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every
step is carried out to maximum perfection. Our application
developers are experienced and knowledgeable, and are
skilled at delivering top high tech Apps.
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in
order to improve our quality, broaden our experience and
create a global range of Apps with the most impressive
conceptual designs, 3D Graphics and Sound FX.
This is a stone.


BIG SELLERS LIKE TOYOTA CAMRY, RAM GETTING UPDATES IN 2018  06
2018 SET TO BE ANOTHER REVOLUTIONARY YEAR FOR APPLE  62
DEEP LEARNING: HOW MACHINES ARE TAKING OVER  82
APPLE PARK: A MASTERPIECE OF ARCHITECTURE  98
HOMEKIT: TECHNOLOGY FOR THE REAL WORLD  114
‘HUMAN PROJECT’ STUDY WILL ASK 10,000 TO SHARE LIFE’S DATA  136
HOW TO SURVIVE DIGITAL ERA OF LOVE  144
GAO: CLIMATE CHANGE ALREADY COSTING US BILLIONS IN LOSSES  160
AUGMENTED REALITY: A NEW GOAL FOR APPLE  168
THE EVOLUTION OF GAME SPORTS  180
APPLE PAY CASH: REVOLUTIONIZING MONEY  196
APPLE MUSIC LAYING THE GROUND FOR FUTURE HIT TV  210
NETFLIX: THE RISE OF A STREAMING GIANT  226

6

After seven straight years of growth, U.S. sales of 
new vehicles could be hitting their peak. That’s 
putting extra pressure on automakers to update 
their vehicles and hang on to their market share.
Some important vehicles are getting revamps 
for the 2018 model year, including the Toyota 
Camry, which has been the best-selling car 
in the U.S. for 15 years. Two of the Camry’s 
archrivals, the Honda Accord and Hyundai 
Sonata, are also new for 2018. The Ram pickup - 
a consistent best-seller - will also be getting an 
update. So will the Jeep Wrangler.
There’s a heavy focus on SUVs, which are 
popular with both Baby Boomers and 
Millennials in an era of low gas prices. There are 
several new full-size SUVs, including the Lincoln 
Navigator, Chevrolet Traverse and Volkswagen 
Atlas. At the other end of the market are new 
compact SUVs like the Toyota C-HR, Hyundai 
Kona and Ford EcoSport.
BIG SELLERS LIKE
 TOYOTA CAMRY, 
RAM GETTING 
UPDATES IN 2018
7

Drivers who want something smaller and 
sportier can find plenty of enticing models, from 
the Dodge Challenger SRT Demon to the Ferrari 
812 Superfast. And electric car sales could get a 
boost with the arrival of the Tesla Model 3 and 
the revamped Nissan Leaf.
Here is a list of new and updated vehicles 
coming out in the 2018 model year. All prices 
listed exclude shipping charges, which vary  
by company.
ALFA ROMEO
STELVIO: Named for a twisty mountain pass 
in Northern Italy, the midsize Stelvio SUV has 
Alfa’s triangular grille and curvy styling. It’s 
powered by a 280-horsepower, 2.0-liter four-
cylinder engine paired to an eight-speed 
automatic transmission. Buyers can also opt 
for the top-of-the-line Stelvio Quadrifoglio, 
which has a 2.9-liter V6 that produces 505 
horsepower. All-wheel-drive is standard on all 
models. The Italian-made 2018 Stelvio went 
on sale during the summer. It starts at $41,995 
excluding shipping.
ACURA
NSX GT3: Acura began selling a racing version 
of its NSX supercar in July. Unlike the street 
version of the NSX, it has no electric motor; the 
twin-turbocharged 3.5-liter V6 engine is paired 
to a six-speed sequential racing transmission. 
Its carbon fiber body also makes it lighter than 
the street version, which is aluminum. The NSX 
GT3 is eligible for more than 25 different global 
racing series. It has a starting price of $547,000, 
making the $156,000 NSX seem like a bargain.
8

9

10

TLX: Acura’s midsize sedan, launched in 2015, gets 
a redesign for 2018. It has Acura’s new “diamond 
pentagon grille,” a more sharply sculpted hood 
and front fenders. Inside, there’s a new touchscreen 
with more intuitive menus that responds more 
quickly than the outgoing screen. A suite of safety 
features, including collision mitigation braking - 
which automatically slows the car when it senses an 
impending collision - and lane departure warning. 
Engine choices - a 2.4-liter, 206-horsepower four-
cylinder or a 3.5-liter, 290-horsepower V6 - remain 
the same, and the TLX gets up to 27 mpg in 
combined city and highway driving. The 2018 TLX, 
which went on sale in June, starts at $33,000.
AUDI
A5/S5 COUPE: Audi debuted a new A4 midsize 
sedan last year. This year, it updates the two-door 
coupe version of that sedan. The new A5 sits 
wider and lower than its predecessor, giving it 
a more athletic look. The A5 coupe is equipped 
with a 2.0-liter four-cylinder turbocharged 
engine that produces 252 horsepower; it’s mated 
to either a seven-speed automatic or a six-speed 
manual transmission. The sporty S5 coupe has 
a new, 3.0-liter turbocharged V6 that puts out 
354 horsepower and 369 pound-feet of torque; 
it flies from 0-60 mph in 4.4 seconds. The S5 has 
an eight-speed transmission. A standard feature 
on both models is a system that lets drivers 
select one of four driving modes - comfort, auto, 
dynamic or individual - and automatically adjusts 
gear shift points, steering and other bits. The 
A5 coupe gets 27 mpg in combined city and 
highway driving; the S5 gets 24 mpg. The cars 
went on sales earlier this year, starting at $42,800 
for the A5 and $54,600 for the S5.
11

Q5: This is the second generation of Audi’s Q5 
midsize SUV, which was introduced in 2009. 
Subtle changes to the design, including a wider 
and less tapered rear, make the new Q5 look 
sportier and more solidly planted than before. 
Inside, there’s increased legroom and cargo 
space. The driver can use a touch pad that 
recognizes handwriting to input telephone 
numbers, addresses and other commands. 
Automatic emergency braking with pedestrian 
detection is standard; optional safety features 
include a vehicle exiting system that warns the 
driver if a vehicle or cyclist is approaching when 
a door is open. The 2.0-liter, four-cylinder engine 
has been tweaked to produce 252 horsepower; 
it’s mated to a seven-speed transmission. The 
SUV gets 25 mpg in combined city and highway 
driving. The Q5, which went on sale in the 
spring, starts at $41,500.
BMW
X3: The compact SUV gets a redesign that didn’t 
change the exterior dimensions, but did add 
2.2 inches between the wheels and equal front-
to-back weight distribution for better handling. 
The X3 xDrive30i SUV gets a new kidney-shaped 
grille with new LED headlights and a roof 
spoiler. Standard with a 248-horsepower 2-liter 
4-cylinder turbocharged gas engine mated to an 
eight-speed automatic transmission. The M40i 
model has a 3-liter inline six-cylinder engine that 
puts out 355 horsepower and can go zero to 60 
in 4.6 seconds. Base model starts at $42,450. On 
sale in mid-November.
5 SERIES: Three new variants, two high-
performance versions and one fast plug-in 
hybrid. The 530e iPerformance has BMW’s eDrive 
12

13

plug-in hybrid powertrain. That means it has a 
95 horsepower electric motor and a 2-liter, four-
cylinder turbocharged gas engine that puts out 
180 horsepower. With both systems it can go from 
zero to 60 in 6.1 seconds and hit a top speed of 130 
mph. On battery power alone it can go 15 miles. It 
went on sale in the spring, starting at $52,400. The 
550i xDrive can go from zero to 60 in under four 
seconds with a top speed of 155 mph. It’s powered 
by a 4.4-liter twin-turbo eight-cylinder engine that 
puts out 456 horsepower. The all-wheel-drive car 
went on sale in the spring with a starting price of 
$73,400. And there’s the sixth-generation M5, the 
fastest M vehicle to date with a zero to 60 time of 
3.2 seconds and a top speed of 189 mph with an 
optional driver’s package. It also has a 4.4-liter twin-
turbo eight-cylinder engine but it puts out 600 
horsepower. The M5 hits showrooms in the spring; 
pricing hasn’t been announced.
I3: Compact plug-in electric car gets a wider and 
sportier look with standard full LED headlights. 
First-ever “S’’ high performance version gets a 
sportier chassis and wider track with a higher 
output motor. The i3S can go from zero to 60 in 
6.8 seconds, 0.4 seconds faster than the standard 
version. Each has a two-cylinder gas engine “range 
extender” as an option. Electric range and price 
were not released. Current version $44,450. It goes 
114 miles per electric charge. Gas engine takes 
range to 180 miles. Available later this year.
640I XDRIVE GRAN TURISMO: The coupe-like 
four-door is new for the coming model year. 
It’s powered by BMW’s 335 horsepower twin-
turbocharged 3-liter inline six-cylinder engine 
mated to an eight-speed transmission. That takes 
the car from zero to 60 in 5.1 seconds, BMW says. 
Available in the fall at a starting price of $69,700.
14

15

16

BUICK
ENCLAVE: The all-new version of the seven-
passenger, three-row family hauler is a little larger 
than the outgoing three-row model, and about 
400 pounds lighter, although the turning radius 
is 1.4 feet tighter for better maneuverability. 
There’s added legroom in the third row plus 
more cargo space in the back. Powered by a 
302-horsepower 3.6-liter V6 with a nine-speed 
automatic transmission. There’s also an Avenir 
version, a luxury brand within Buick. It arrives in 
early October at a starting price of $39,995.
REGAL SPORTBACK: Buick’s slow-selling midsize 
car gets an update with sleeker looks and a 
move to General Motors’ new midsize chassis. 
It’s 200 pounds lighter than the old sedan, and 
comes with a hatchback rather than a trunk. GM 
says that gives owners SUV-like versatility with 
the looks and handling of a car. It’s powered by 
a 2-liter, 250 horsepower turbocharged four. 
All-wheel-drive models get an eight-speed 
automatic while front-wheel-drive versions 
get nine-speed transmissions. There’s also a GS 
performance version with a 310-horsepower 
3.6-liter V6. Available in late November or early 
December. It starts at $24,990.
REGAL TOURX: Press releases for the new Regal 
wagon show a kayak on the roof as the brand 
makes a play for the outdoorsy crowd that 
might consider a Subaru or Volvo. It’s all-wheel-
drive with a higher ground clearance than the 
Sportback, but it has the same 2-liter turbo 
with an eight-speed automatic transmission. 
It’s available in late November or early 
December and starts at just over $29,070. A high 
performance GS version comes later.
17

CADILLAC
XTS: Caddy’s big car gets a mid-cycle refresh 
with updated front and rear fascias and an 
upgraded chassis for less noise and better ride 
comfort. The luxury version of the Chevy Impala 
also gets an infotainment platform that can be 
changed over time. Available in the fall. Price not 
yet released.
CT6 SUPER CRUISE: The acclaimed CT6 
gets GM’s long-delayed Super Cruise semi-
autonomous driving system sometime this fall. 
It allows hands-free driving on the highway by 
controlling acceleration and the distance from 
cars in front of it, as well as keeping the car 
centered in the lane. GM has delayed the debut 
of Super Cruise while it perfects the system. 
No exact date for its release or price have been 
released. The CT6 starts at $54,095.
CHEVROLET
EQUINOX: The venerable, boxy version of 
Chevrolet’s small SUV gets a complete makeover 
with sleek new looks that make it competitive 
in what has become the hottest part of the 
U.S. auto market. The new one is 400 pounds 
lighter, 5 inches shorter and about an inch 
lower than the old model. But it also has slightly 
less front and rear legroom, according to GM’s 
specifications. Gone are the Equinox’s old 3.6-liter 
V6 and 2.4-liter four-cylinder engines, replaced 
by two smaller four-cylinder gas powerplants 
and a diesel. All are turbocharged for better 
acceleration. The base 1.5-liter engine puts out 
170 horsepower, while an upgraded 2-liter four 
cranks out 252. The gasoline models are on sale 
now; the diesel arrives in the fall. Starts at $23,580.
18

19

TRAVERSE: General Motors went small when it 
started revamping its aging midsize people-
hauling SUVs last year with the GMC Acadia. 
But it’s going bigger with the Acadia sibling, the 
Chevy Traverse. The company says Chevrolet 
buyers want more space, so the Traverse will 
seat up to eight and have more cargo room. It 
comes standard with a new 3.6-liter V6 engine 
and nine-speed automatic transmission. A 
2-liter turbo four is available. It’s just arriving at 
dealerships and starts at $30,875.
DODGE
CHALLENGER SRT DEMON: Fiat Chrysler says it’s 
the most powerful production car ever made, 
and no one is disputing it. The Demon has 840 
horsepower that propels the car from zero to 
60 in 2.3 seconds. The car comes standard with 
a mere 808 horsepower, but another $1 buys 
you a crate of parts to set the car up for the 
drag strip. This includes a high-performance 
powertrain control computer with a high-octane 
fuel setting that adds 32 horsepower. The car will 
be available in the fall and starts at $84,995. That 
includes a $1,700 federal gas-guzzler tax.
FERRARI
812 SUPERFAST: The highest-performing 
production Ferrari ever with a 789 horsepower 
V-12 engine and Ferrari’s F1 transmission. Goes 
from zero to 62 miles per hour in 2.9 seconds, 
Ferrari says. The supercar gets improved 
aerodynamics, the first use of electric power 
steering in a Ferrari and a redesigned interior. 
Starts at $335,275. Deliveries estimated to start 
in the fourth quarter of this year.
20

21

22

GTC4LUSSO T: The hatchback is Ferrari’s first four-
seat V-8, which the company says successfully 
marries sportiness and versatility with day-to-day 
driving. The 3.9-liter turbo V-8 pumps out just 
over 600 horsepower. It has rear-wheel-drive and 
four-wheel steering for better handling. Starts at 
$254,313. Delivery date not available.
PORTOFINO: The all-new convertible with a 
retractable hardtop replaces the California 
T. Ferrari says it’s significantly lighter than its 
predecessor and comes with a turbocharged V-8 
engine that produces about 592 horsepower, 40 
more than the California T. The Portofino, named 
after one of Italy’s most beautiful towns, can go 
from zero to 62 mph in only 3.5 seconds. Base 
price and availability not yet announced.
FORD
ECOSPORT: Ford’s EcoSport subcompact SUV, 
sold globally since 2003, is finally coming to North 
America. At 158 inches long, it’s even shorter than 
rivals like the Chevrolet Trax and the Honda HR-V 
in this fast-growing segment. The EcoBoost for 
North America will come with a 1.0-liter three-
cylinder turbocharged EcoBoost engine or a 
2.0-liter four-cylinder; both will be paired to a 
six-speed automatic transmission. Inside, there’s 
an eight-inch touchscreen and 30 different bins, 
hooks and storage options. Ford hasn’t released 
more details. The EcoSport, which will be made in 
India, goes on sale in early 2018.
EXPEDITION: Ford’s eight-passenger SUV gets 
its first full redesign since 1996. Its sleeker body 
is made of aluminum, which helps shave 300 
pounds off the vehicle and improves handling 
and fuel economy. Inside, the Expedition has a 
23

24

wireless charging pad for smartphones - a first 
for Ford - as well as sliding second-row seats that 
can tip and move even if they contain child seats. 
Ford says third row passengers also have more 
leg room and reclining seats. Outside, there’s a 
hands-free liftgate that operates with a wave of 
the driver’s foot and a system that automatically 
guides the vehicle in and out of parking spots. 
Under the hood is a 375-horsepower, 3.5-liter 
EcoBoost V6 engine mated to a 10-speed 
transmission. The Expedition goes on sale this fall. 
It starts at $51,695.
MUSTANG: The Mustang gets its first update 
since it was completely redesigned in 2015. 
There’s a new hood and a leaner, lower front 
end that features standard LED headlights. 
The 3.7-liter V6 engine is no longer offered; 
buyers can choose from the 2.3-liter EcoBoost 
four-cylinder or a reworked 5.0-liter V8 that 
has improved power and fuel economy. A new 
10-speed transmission is available; there’s also 
an upgraded manual transmission for the V8. 
The 2018 Mustang goes on sale this fall starting 
at $25,585.
25

GMC
TERRAIN: The “professional grade” version of 
the Chevrolet Equinox small SUV gets sleeker 
looks and smaller engines including 1.5-liter and 
2-liter turbocharged four cylinders with nine-
speed transmissions. There’s also a diesel option. 
Arriving at dealerships now. Base price of $24,995.
HONDA
ACCORD: The tenth generation of the Accord 
sedan gets more coupe-like styling and its first-
ever turbocharged engines. The base 1.5-liter 
four-cylinder engine puts out 192 horsepower, 
up from 185 in the previous Accord. It’s mated 
to Honda’s continuously variable automatic 
transmission. There’s also a new 2.0-liter with 252 
horsepower. That comes with a new 10-speed 
automatic transmission. A six-speed manual 
transmission is offered on sport trims. A hybrid 
version will also be available. Inside, Honda has 
added 2 inches of rear legroom and 4G LTE WiFi, 
which will allow over-the-air software update. 
A suite of safety features comes standard, 
including automatic emergency braking and 
lane departure warning. Fuel economy and 
pricing hasn’t yet been released. The Accord 
goes on sale this fall.
FIT: Honda’s subcompact Fit gets updated 
styling and a new sport trim with a front spoiler 
and orange pin-striping. The Fit Sport offers 
a six-speed manual transmission. The Fit now 
offers advanced safety features, including 
forward collision warning and a lane-keeping 
system that automatically keeps the car in its 
lane. The 2018 Fit went on sale in July; it starts  
at $16,190.
26

27

ODYSSEY: The fifth generation of Honda’s 
wildly popular Odyssey minivan has several 
new family-friendly options, including a rear 
entertainment system with 4G LTE connectivity, 
a CabinWatch camera that lets the driver keep 
an eye on the rear and a CabinTalk system that 
lets the driver talk to rear passengers through 
the speakers. New optional rear seats have 
multiple configurations and can be moved 
forward to allow third-row access even with 
child seats strapped in. The Odyssey has a 
3.5-liter V6 that produces 280 horsepower, up 32 
hp from the previous model. Base models get a 
new nine-speed transmission; a new 10-speed 
transmission is available. Most versions of the 
van have standard lane-keeping assist and a 
system that automatically slows the van down 
if it senses an impending collision. The Odyssey, 
which went on sale in May, starts at $29,990 
and gets an estimated 22 miles per gallon in 
combined city and highway driving.
HYUNDAI
ACCENT: Hyundai’s subcompact car is all-new, 
but it’s only available now as a sedan. It has a 
more rounded design and an updated interior, 
and Hyundai says it is faster, handles better and 
is quieter than the old version. Powered by a 
1.6-liter, 132 horsepower four-cylinder engine with 
a standard six-speed manual transmission or an 
optional six-speed automatic. Due in showrooms 
in November. Price hasn’t been released.
IONIQ: Hyundai’s versatile fuel-efficient hybrid 
and electric vehicle gets a plug-in version for 2018 
that can go 27 miles on electricity before the gas-
electric hybrid powertrain kicks in. No price has 
been released. It’s due in showrooms in October.
28

29

30

KONA: The rugged-looking car equipped with 
an “urban smart armor” design debuts in 2018 
as a new model. It’s a compact hatchback 
utility vehicle that Hyundai says is fun to drive 
with a rigid body structure for crisp handling. 
Comes with either a 1.6-liter, 175 horsepower 
turbocharged four-cylinder engine with a 
seven-speed automatic transmission or a 
147 horsepower 2-liter four with a six-speed 
automatic. Price hasn’t been announced for the 
Kona, which hits showrooms early next year.
SONATA: Hyundai’s midsize car gets a facelift for 
2018 with a new hood, front fenders and trunk 
as well as front and rear fascia updates and a 
new grille. The 2-liter turbo gets an eight-speed 
automatic transmission instead of the old six-
speed. Hyundai also stiffened up the suspension 
to improve the ride and handling. The hybrid 
and plug-in versions also are being redesigned. 
The Sonata has already gone on sale. It starts  
at $22,050.
INFINITI
Q50: The Q50 sedan gets some styling updates 
for 2018, including a more sharply defined 
grille and narrowed headlights. Engine choices, 
which were updated in 2016, remain the same: 
a 2.0-liter turbocharged four-cylinder, a 3.0-liter 
twin-turbocharged V6 or a 3.5-liter V6 hybrid. 
The Q50 starts at $34,200.
QX80: Infiniti’s seven-passenger SUV, last 
redesigned in 2011, will get a significant update for 
2018. Infiniti says it will release more information 
at the end of this year. The company hinted at 
a slinkier, less boxy design with its Monograph 
concept at the New York Auto Show last spring.
31

JAGUAR
F-TYPE: The F-Type two seater, introduced in 
2012, gets a refresh for 2018. It has a slightly 
bolder design and new all-LED headlights. A new, 
296-horsepower 2-liter four-cylinder engine has 
been added to the lineup, which goes all the way 
up to a 575-horsepower supercharged 5-liter V-8. 
For the 2018 model year only, Jaguar will also 
offer the 400 Sport edition, with a high-output 
version of its 3-liter V-6 that cranks out 400 
horsepower. The F-Type will be available later  
this year, starting at $59,900.
XF SPORTBRAKE: This will be the first XF 
wagon offered in the U.S. It has the distinctive 
chiseled hood and grille of the XF sedan up 
front, but seats five and has a hatchback at the 
rear. An aluminum-intensive body makes it 
stiffer and stronger than the previous wagon, 
improving ride and handling. All-wheel-
drive comes standard. The Sportbrake is 
powered by a 380-horsepower supercharged 
V-6 engine, which is paired with an eight-
speed transmission. Safety features include 
reverse traffic detection, which warns of cars 
approaching as the Sportbrake is backing up. 
The Sportbrake will go on sale this winter, 
starting at $70,450.
32

33

34

JEEP
WRANGLER: The small, rugged SUV is all-new for 
2018, but Fiat Chrysler has been mum on details. 
Since it’s a cornerstone of the profitable Jeep 
franchise, it likely will look like its predecessor 
with military roots, but it’s expected to have 
some modern touches. An updated version of 
the outgoing Wrangler will be on sale until the 
new one is in showrooms by the end of the year. 
A Wrangler pickup truck also is possible. Pricing 
hasn’t been released.
KIA
NIRO: Kia’s Niro hybrid SUV, which was released 
earlier this year, gets a plug-in version with 
longer electric range for 2018. No other details 
have been released about the vehicle, which 
comes out later this year.
RIO: The fifth generation of Kia’s subcompact Rio 
is bigger than its predecessor, and Kia promises 
more headroom and legroom for the driver and 
passengers. A touchscreen with Apple CarPlay 
and Android Auto is available on the highest trim 
level. The 130-horsepower, 1.6-liter four-cylinder 
engine is carried over from the previous model but 
has improved fuel economy; a six-speed manual 
transmission or a six-speed automatic transmission 
are available. Kia says an improved suspension gives 
the car better handling and a more comfortable 
ride. The Rio goes on sale later this fall, starting 
around $14,000. Final pricing and fuel economy 
will be released closer to its on-sale date.
STINGER: Kia breaks new ground with its new 
five-passenger Stinger sports sedan, a BMW rival 
that debuted at the Detroit auto show in January. 
Designed in Germany and based on Kia’s 2011 
35

GT concept, the Stinger has the elegant look of a 
European fastback. The rear-wheel-drive sedan 
is also available in an all-wheel-drive version, a 
Kia first. Kia says a turbocharged 2.0-liter four-
cylinder will produce 255 horsepower; an optional 
twin-turbocharged 3.3-liter V6 pushes that to 365 
horsepower. The engines are paired with an eight-
speed transmission. The interior is sophisticated 
and Kia has packed in numerous safety features, 
including automatic emergency braking, blind 
spot detection and a system that alerts drowsy 
drivers. The Stinger goes on sale later this year. 
Pricing hasn’t been announced, but the Stinger is 
expected to start in the mid-$30,000 range.
LAMBORGHINI
HURACAN PERFORMANTE: If a regular 
Lamborghini Huracan isn’t enough for you, 
here’s the high-performance version. Thanks to 
the use of a specially developed carbon fiber 
composite on the spoiler, bumper and other 
areas, the Huracan Performante has dropped 
about 88 pounds (40 kg) compared to the 
previous model, which improves handling and 
fuel economy. Lamborghini says the naturally 
aspirated V-10 engine is the most powerful 
produced by Lamborghini to date, putting out 
640 horsepower and 440 foot-pounds of torque. 
There’s a seven-speed dual clutch transmission. 
The Huracan Performante can accelerate from 
0-62 mph in a blistering 2.9 seconds and has 
a top speed of 202 mph. Nobody drives a 
Lamborghini for its fuel economy, but this one 
gets 17 mpg in combined city and highway 
driving. The Huracan Performante went on sale 
this summer starting at $274,390.
36

37

38

LAND ROVER
RANGE ROVER VELAR: Range Rover’s new 
midsize SUV is positioned between the Evoque 
and the Range Rover Sport; it competes in 
the same space as the BMW X3. The exterior 
has a striking, sleek design, with Land 
Rover’s narrowest headlights and handles 
that sit flush against the car. Inside, there’s a 
new infotainment system with two 10-inch 
touchscreens and an optional sustainable 
textile that customers can choose instead 
of leather. There are four engine choices: 
a 180-horsepower, four-cylinder diesel, a 
247-horsepower four-cylinder gas engine and a 
380-horsepower V-6 gas engine. Fuel economy 
numbers haven’t yet been released. The Velar 
went on sale in late summer; it starts at $49,900.
LEXUS:
LC 500: The LC 500 coupe was previewed as a 
concept in 2012 and debuted at the Detroit auto 
show in January. It’s a taut, sporty two-door 
coupe with a glass roof and Lexus’ trademark 
mesh spindle grille. The LC has a 5-liter V-8 that 
produces 471 horsepower and 398 pound-feet 
of torque; it gets 19 mpg in combined city and 
highway driving. Also offered is a hybrid version, 
the LC 500h, that pairs a 3.5-liter V-6 with two 
electric motors for 354 horsepower. The hybrid 
gets 30 mpg. The LC 500 has a new 10-speed 
transmission; the hybrid version has a four-
speed. Standard safety features include a lane-
keeping system that automatically keeps the 
car centered in its lane. The LC 500 went on sale 
in May. It starts at $92,000, or $96,510 for the 
hybrid version.
39

40

LS 500: The fifth generation of Lexus’s flagship 
sedan is longer and lower than its predecessor 
with a coupe-like roofline and a prominent, 
spindle-shaped mesh grille. Inside, there is 
ambient lighting inspired by Japanese lanterns, 
and front and rear seats with heating, cooling 
and Shiatsu massage functions. Owners can also 
opt for an advanced right-hand rear seat that 
can be reclined or raised up to help occupants 
enter and exit the vehicle. A new pedestrian 
detection system that automatically brakes 
or steers around the pedestrian debuts on 
the LS. Under the hood is a new 3.5-liter twin-
turbocharged V-6 engine that puts out 415 
horsepower, up from 386 hp with the current V-8 
engine. It’s paired to a 10-speed transmission. 
Pricing and fuel economy haven’t been released. 
The LS 500 goes on sale in January.
NX 300: Lexus’s NX small SUV, which went 
on sale in 2014, gets a refresh for 2018. The 
changes start with its name: It’s now the NX 
300, not the NX 200t. The 235-horsepower, 
2-liter four-cylinder engine is the same; the 
hybrid version also keeps its 2.5-liter engine 
and pair of electric motors. The exterior styling 
is sharper and more angular, with a bigger and 
more aggressive spindle-shaped grille. Inside, 
there’s a larger dashboard screen and upgraded 
materials. Pricing and fuel economy haven’t 
been announced. The 2018 NX 300 goes on sale 
in October.
LINCOLN
NAVIGATOR: Like its Ford sibling, the Expedition, 
the eight-passenger Navigator is 200 pounds 
lighter and nimbler thanks to a new, aluminum 
body. There are luxurious touches throughout. 
41

When the driver approaches, soft lights 
illuminate the door handles and the ground 
in front of the doors. In the daytime, there’s a 
panoramic glass roof. The front seats can be 
adjusted 30 different ways and offer heating, 
cooling and massage functions. Under the 
hood is a twin-turbocharged 3.5-liter V-6 engine 
that produces 450 horsepower; it’s mated to a 
10-speed transmission. Fuel economy hasn’t 
been released for the Navigator, which goes on 
sale later this year. It starts at $72,055.
MASERATI
GRANTURISMO: Maserati’s four-passenger coupe 
gets its first major facelift in a decade. The 2018 
GranTurismo has a new “sharknose” hexagonal 
grille and lower air ducts that improve 
aerodynamics. Its naturally aspirated 4.7-liter V-8 
engine remains, producing 454 horsepower - up 
from 444 hp in the previous version - and 384 
pound-feet of torque. It’s mated to a six-speed 
automatic transmission. Performance has been 
tweaked upward; the GranTurismo Sport now 
has a top speed of 186 mph, while the lighter 
MC version makes it to 187 mph. Inside, there’s 
a new 8.4-inch touchscreen. The GranTurismo 
goes on sale later this year. Pricing hasn’t been 
released, but the current GranTurismo starts at 
$132,825.
MERCEDES-BENZ
E-CLASS COUPE/CABRIOLET: A year after 
the debut of the new E-Class midsize sedan, 
Mercedes is adding a new coupe and 
convertible to the E-Class lineup. Both seat four, 
and are available with either rear-wheel-drive 
or all-wheel drive. The cabriolet comes with a 
42

43

power-operated fabric soft top; the coupe has a 
panoramic glass roof. Like E-Class sedans, they’re 
powered by a 3-liter V-6 that produces 329 
horsepower and 354 pound-feet of torque. The 
engine is paired with a nine-speed transmission. 
The E-Class Coupe starts at $58,900; the 
cabriolet starts at $62,600.
S-CLASS: Mercedes’ flagship sedan gets a 
refresh for 2018, starting with new bumpers 
and headlights. Under the hood are three new 
powertrains: a 362-horsepower 3-liter V-6 for the 
S450, a 463-horsepower, 4-liter V-8 for the S560 
and a handcrafted, 603-horsepower, 4-liter V-8 
for the AMG S63. Mercedes’ semi-autonomous 
driving system, Intelligent Drive, has enhanced 
cameras and radar systems and new capabilities, 
including automatic speed adjustment when 
the car approaches curves or intersections, and 
automatic lane changing when the driver taps 
the turn signal. The 2018 S-Class goes on sale 
this fall starting at $89,900.
MINI
COOPER S E COUNTRYMAN ALL4: BMW’s 
Mini gets its first plug-in hybrid, an all-wheel-
drive Countryman that can travel 24 miles on 
electricity but still go from zero to 60 miles 
per hour in a quick 6.8 seconds. It comes with 
a 1.5-liter, 134-horsepower, three-cylinder 
turbocharged gas engine and an 87-horsepower 
electric motor. Combined, the powertrains put 
out 221 horsepower and can reach a top speed 
of 137 mph. The battery is beneath a slightly 
raised rear seat, so when the seats are full, the 
luggage compartment is only slightly smaller 
than a conventional model. The S E Countryman 
went on sale in June. It starts at $36,800.
44

45

46

JOHN COOPER WORKS COUNTRYMAN: A high 
performance version of the big Mini is new for 
2018. It’s the most powerful Mini ever, with 
a 2-liter, 228 horsepower turbocharged four-
cylinder engine. It’s made for the track or road 
with beefed up brakes and transmissions. The 
John Cooper Works Countryman went on sale 
last spring. It starts at $37,800.
MITSUBISHI
ECLIPSE CROSS: The Eclipse Cross is a new 
compact SUV that’s smaller than an Outlander 
but bigger than the Outlander Sport. It’s 
expected to debut at the Los Angeles Auto 
Show in November. Mitsubishi promises a fun-
to-drive package like the old Eclipse sports 
car. It will have a new 1.5-liter turbocharged 
gas engine with a continuously variable 
transmission that can work as an eight-speed 
manual. It will be available early next year. Price 
and other details will be released later.
OUTLANDER PHEV: Mitsubishi SUV gets a 
rechargeable gas-electric powertrain with two 
electric motors and a 2-liter gasoline engine. It 
will go on sale by the end of this year. Full details 
such as electric range to be released this fall.
NISSAN
LEAF: Nissan planned to unveil the second 
generation of its all-electric Leaf sedan on Sept. 
5. The Leaf, introduced in 2010, is one of the 
world’s best-selling electric cars. But its current 
range of 107 miles on a charge has put it behind 
competitors like the Chevrolet Bolt and Tesla 
Model 3, which get above 200 miles. The 2018 
Leaf is expected to have better range and a new, 
47

48

more aerodynamic design. It will also debut 
Nissan’s ProPilot Assist system, which controls 
acceleration, braking and steering for the driver 
during stop-and-go traffic.
PORSCHE
CAYENNE (Debuting Aug. 29)
RAM:
RAM 1500 PICKUP: Fiat Chrysler’s top-selling 
vehicle will be new from top to bottom for 
2018, but no details about the new pickup have 
been released. CEO Sergio Marchionne says it 
will be revealed at January’s North American 
International Auto Show in Detroit. It’s likely to 
be lighter to compete with an all-new Chevrolet 
Silverado and the aluminum-skinned Ford F-150 
in a highly competitive U.S. market. The current 
version, last reworked for the 2013 model year, 
will be on sale until the new one comes out. No 
release date or price were available.
ROLLS-ROYCE
PHANTOM: BMW’s uber-luxury brand unleashes 
the eighth generation of the Phantom with a 
base price of $430,000. It has an all-aluminum 
frame to make it stiffer, lighter and quieter than 
previous models. Rolls-Royce says it’s the most 
technologically advanced car it’s ever made. It 
says the new dashboard is a work of art. When a 
valet steps forward, the door “whispers” closed 
with the light touch of a sensor. The Phantom 
is powered by a new 6.75-liter twin-turbo V-12 
engine. There’s also a long wheelbase version 
available. Rolls is taking orders now with 
deliveries expected early next year.
49

50

SMART
FORTWO: The big news for the tiny Mercedes 
brand isn’t so much what’s new, it’s what’s going 
away. The brand is getting rid of its gas-powered 
versions in the U.S. and Canada and will be 
exclusively electric after the 2017 model year. 
The electric drive fortwo carries over for the new 
model year.
SUBARU
CROSSTREK: Subaru’s compact wagon is all 
new for 2018, and the company says the 
redesigned version is more agile, safer and 
more comfortable. Looks haven’t changed 
dramatically. It comes standard with a more 
powerful 152-horsepower 2-liter direct fuel 
injection engine paired with a continuously 
variable transmission or a six-speed manual. The 
car has 8.7 inches of ground clearance for off-
road driving. The Crosstrek starts at $21,795, just 
$100 more than the previous model. It’s already 
in showrooms.
LEGACY: The midsize sedan gets a mid-cycle 
update that includes a refreshed front fascia, 
grille, side mirrors and rear bumper. The interior 
also was upgraded, and Subaru says the new 
version will handle better and ride quieter than 
the outgoing model. The refreshed version 
already is in showrooms. It starts at $22,195.
OUTBACK: The wagon/SUV, Subaru’s most 
popular vehicle, also is refreshed for 2018. It gets 
new bumpers, headlights and an updated grille. 
New door mirrors cut through the air better and 
reduce wind noise. The 2018 Outback is already 
in showrooms. It starts at $25,895.
51

TESLA
MODEL 3: Tesla’s hotly anticipated lower-cost 
sedan went on sale in July, but there’s a long 
waiting list; buyers ordering now will likely have 
to wait until the end of 2018 to get one. The all-
electric Model 3 starts at $35,000, about half the 
cost of Tesla’s previous models. For the base price, 
drivers get 220 miles (322 km) of range. But the 
price can rapidly increase from there. Black is the 
only standard color, for example; any other color 
is $1,000 extra. A fully loaded Model 3 with 310 
miles of range and Tesla’s full semi-autonomous 
Autopilot system costs $59,500. Among the ways 
Tesla cut costs is doing away with the instrument 
panel; information that’s normally found there, 
like the vehicle speed, can instead be found on a 
large touchscreen in the dashboard.
52

53

TOYOTA
CAMRY: The midsize Camry, which has been 
the best-selling sedan in the U.S. for the last 
15 years, has a completely new look and feel. 
Tired of the sedan’s practical but bland image, 
designers made the car lower, wider and sportier 
and gave it a more pointed nose. On sport trim 
levels, there’s an aggressive, spindle-shaped 
grille similar to the ones now found on Lexus 
sedans. Toyota says a new, more rigid platform 
and lightweight body materials - including an 
aluminum hood - vastly improve handling and 
driving dynamics. There are two engine choices: 
a new 2.5-liter four-cylinder that produces 
206 horsepower and gets 34 mpg in city and 
highway driving or a newly developed 3.5-liter 
V-6 with 301 horsepower that gets up to 26 
mpg. Both are paired with a new eight-speed 
automatic transmission. The hybrid version of 
the new Camry gets up to 52 mpg. Standard 
safety systems include pre-collision automatic 
braking with pedestrian detection. The Camry 
went on sale in July; it starts at $23,495.
C-HR: Toyota joins the hot subcompact SUV 
segment with the C-HR. True to its name - which 
means “coupe-high rider” - the five-seat SUV has 
a sporty, angular look and a swept-back roofline. 
The CH-R is slightly longer, wider and shorter than 
its chief rival, the Honda HR-V. It also has a little 
more power, with a 2-liter four-cylinder engine 
than puts out 144 horsepower. The engine is 
paired with a continuously variable transmission. 
The CH-R gets up to 29 mpg in combined city 
and highway driving. A suite of safety features 
is standard, including pre-collision automatic 
braking with pedestrian detection. The C-HR 
went on sale in April; it starts at $22,500.
54

55

SIENNA: Toyota’s eight-passenger minivan got a 
new engine lineup in 2017. In 2018, it gets a new 
front end that more closely reflects the brand’s 
other vehicles. It also gets significantly enhanced 
safety; every Sienna now comes standard with 
automatic emergency braking, adaptive cruise 
control and a lane departure warning system that 
can also gently nudge the van back into its lane if 
it starts to drift. The updated Sienna goes on sale 
in November. Pricing hasn’t been released.
VOLKSWAGEN
ATLAS: Volkswagen, which has struggled in the 
U.S. without a full lineup of SUVs, attempts to 
correct that with the seven-passenger Atlas. 
The beefy Atlas has a three-passenger bench 
or available captain’s chairs in the second row 
and a third-row bench that seats two more 
passengers. Both the second and third rows can 
fold flat for 96.8 cubic feet of cargo space. Safety 
features include automatic emergency braking 
and post-collision braking, which applies the 
brakes once an air bag detects a collision to help 
reduce residual energy from the crash. There 
are two engine choices: a 2-liter, turbocharged 
four-cylinder that puts out 235 horsepower or 
a 3.6-liter V-6 that produces 276 horsepower. 
Both are mated to an eight-speed transmission. 
The V-6 gets up to 20 mpg in city and highway 
driving, or 19 mpg if the buyer opts for all-
wheel-drive; the four-cylinder will be available 
later and hasn’t yet been rated. The Atlas went 
on sale in the spring starting at $30,500.
TIGUAN: This is the second generation of 
Volkswagen’s small SUV, which debuted nine 
years ago. Responding to American customers, 
who found the outgoing Tiguan cramped, 
56

57

Volkswagen has made the new Tiguan almost 11 
inches longer and added up to 58 percent more 
cargo space in the two-row model. The Tiguan 
also offers a three-row model that seats seven. 
The Tiguan has spare, clean lines and a lower, 
wider stance than its predecessor. Under the 
hood is an updated 2-liter turbocharged four-
cylinder engine that puts out 184 horsepower 
and an eight-speed transmission. The Tiguan 
gets 24 mpg in city and highway driving, or 23 
mpg with all-wheel-drive. It went on sale earlier 
this summer, starting at $25,345.
VOLVO
XC40: The XC40 is a new compact SUV coming 
out in early 2018 to give Volvo an entry into 
the hottest part of the U.S. market. Details not 
released yet.
XC60: Volvo’s midsize all-wheel drive SUV gets 
redesigned with a more refined, sculpted look 
and three available powertrains: A turbocharged 
2-liter, 250-horsepower four-cylinder gas 
engine, a 316-horsepower supercharged and 
turbocharged 2-liter, or a gas-electric plug-in 
hybrid that puts out 400 horsepower and can 
travel 15-20 miles on battery power. The 2018 
XC60, which is already on sale, starts at $41,500.
S90: Volvo has added 4 inches to its S90 sedan 
for more back-seat legroom. It also added 
all-wheel-drive to the lower-end T5 model of 
the big sedan. Buyers can choose a plug-in 
hybrid powertrain or a 2-liter, 250-horsepower 
turbocharged four cylinder. The plug-in version 
has a 400 horsepower gas and electric system 
that can travel 15-20 miles on battery power. The 
S90 is on sale now, starting at $48,100.
58

59



62

63

2017 was undoubtedly a groundbreaking 
year for Apple. In our last edition, we reflected 
on Apple’s success this year, and now we are 
looking ahead to how Apple might revolutionize 
the technology industry even more in 2018. 
Only time will tell if 2018 will be a trillion dollar 
year for Apple.
According to TechRadar, the PC market will 
continue to decline in 2018 as more and more 
people switch to using smart phones. It is 
likely Apple’s sales will reflect this as they focus 
more and more on their most popular product, 
the iPhone. While tech spending dropped by 
2% in 2016, it is likely to rise by around 4% in 
2018 and Microsoft and Apple, in particular, 
has the to potential to have especially good 
year in 2018. Apple has a massive influence 
on the technology industry, and it continues 
to pave the way for new improvements and 
breakthroughs in technology.
Image: Regis Duvignau
64

65

FACE ID
There are a number of contradictory opinions 
about whether Apple will incorporate both 
Touch ID and Face ID into new models, or 
whether the tech giant will focus solely on Face 
ID. Macworld believes Apple could bring back 
Touch ID by incorporating a fingerprint scanner 
under the glass screen, while Apple Insider 
disagrees. Apple Insider argues that Apple will 
be going all out on Face ID with their new 2018 
iPhone line up. This would be a big move for 
Apple who has used Touch ID on its new iPhones 
since the iPhone 5s, four years ago. It would 
allow Apple to use the full-screen design across 
all new iPhones and would place Apple further 
ahead of its competitors as no one outside of 
Apple has used the TrueDepth camera to the 
extent Apple has. 
If Apple does choose to focus on Face ID, it 
is possible it will feature throughout their 
other products not just their iPhones. Touch 
ID could begin dominating all products and 
come to iPads and Macs. According to Apple, 
66

Touch ID should recognize your face even if 
you are wearing a hat, glasses, a scarf or grew 
a beard. It can even recognize your face at 
night or with the lights turned off using the 
Flood Illuminator located in the TrueDepth 
camera. Apple claims there is a 1 in 1,000,000 
chance someone would be able to open your 
phone using Face ID, unless you are a twin of 
course, whereas there is a 1 in 50,000 chance 
someone has the same fingerprint as you. 
This extra level of security could sway Apple 
towards focusing solely on Face ID.
It is possible that Apple will be bringing out 
the iPad Pro Mini in 2018,  which could include 
Face ID. The iPad mini last had a minor update 
in March 2017 which offered more capacity for 
the same price, 128GB Wi-Fi model for £419. 
However, the iPad mini was last updated in 
September 2015, suggesting Apple is more 
focused on its larger tablets. After all, Apple has 
claimed it’s most popular model is the 9.7-inch 
tablet. If 2018 does bring the iPad Pro, the real 
question is, will it feature Face ID?
67

68

APPLE WATCH iOS UPDATE
The Apple Watch Series 3 was released around 
the same time as the iPhone X and has been 
rebranded as a fitness tracker with lots of 
exciting new features. The most raved about 
feature is its built-in cellular connectivity which 
enables it to be used independently of the 
iPhone. The WatchOS 5 is likely to be unveiled 
in the summer of 2018 and could be launched 
to the public in autumn. This update probably 
won’t run on all watch models, but it could bring 
even more great new features to the Watch. 
Image: Stephen Lam
69

MAC PRO
First orders of the iMac Pro will arrive the 
week after Christmas, and it’s been a long 
time coming after Apple’s teaser video was 
released back in June this year. A new Mac Pro 
is also on the horizon, and we could be released 
before the end of 2018. Reports suggest Apple 
is working on a radical redesign of its Mac Pro 
line and while the current Pro range has been 
tweaked recently, in 2018 we could see a major 
update and redesign. It is possible the Mac Pro 
will be announced at WWDC 2018 in June and 
released in September 2018.
Not only did Apple release the iMac Pro in 2017, 
but the macOS High Sierra also launched on 25 
September, and it is possible 2018 will bring the 
macOS 10.14.
Introducing iMac Pro — Apple
70

Image: Justin Sullivan
71

iPHONE
2017 was a big year for Apple, and possibly the 
biggest product they released was the highly 
anticipated iPhone X. Will 2018 be the year of 
the iPhone XI? We can’t be sure, but reports 
suggest Apple could release this new phone in 
Autumn 2018. However, it is equally plausible 
that Apple could instead release an iPhone 
X plus in 2018. Fortune believes Apple will 
introduce three new iPhones in 2018, however, 
at present, this is all speculation, and it is unlikely 
we will know for sure until WWDC 2018.
72

73

APPLE PAY CASH
In 2017, Apple introduced Apple Pay Cash,  
revolutionizing our relationship with money. The 
new service allows Apple users to not just pay in 
stores using their mobile phones, but they can 
now send and receive money from friends using 
the Messages app or by asking Siri. 
Could 2018 be the year that America becomes 
a cashless society? It does seem unlikely that 
such a revolutionary step would happen so 
Apple Pay Cash Demo in iOS 11.2
74

quickly, but it is not impossible. Currently, 
Sweden is on track to become the world’s first 
cashless society as the Swedish now use bank 
cards for even the smallest purchases, meaning 
there are less than 80 billion Swedish crowns in 
circulation and only 40-60% of this is actually in 
regular circulation. Just six years ago the total 
circulation was around 106 billion. Sweden is on 
track to become a completely cashless society, 
and America could soon follow suit, with new 
technology developed by Apple making online 
payments easier than ever.
75

APPLE CAR
Back in 2016, rumors all suggested Apple was 
developing its very own car, however, in 2017 
it seemed Apple had scaled back its ambitions. 
Apple is now thought to be working on an 
automotive software solution, not hardware. 
According to Macworld, Apple supposedly has 
1,000 developers currently working on Project 
Titan, and while we can’t wait to see what Apple 
is working on, it is more likely that Project Titan 
will be revealed in 2020.
76

77

78

iTUNES COULD BE CLOSING DOWN
Apple Music, Apple’s own streaming service, 
continues to rival Spotify. It features 40 million 
songs, and although Spotify remains the leader 
in streaming music, Apple Music offers some 
unique albums. However, as a result of the 
success of streaming sites in 2017, rumors 
suggest Apple could be shutting down iTunes 
within the next two years, to focus solely on 
Apple Music. This is not a new rumor. However, 
it is starting to seem plausible as, according to 
Financial Times, streaming sites have saved 
the music industry. At the start of 2017, music 
streaming passed the milestone of 100m paying 
subscribers worldwide, and the number has only 
continued to expand.
79

Introducing HomePod — Apple
80

APPLE HOMEPOD
Finally, Apple HomePod will be hitting stores 
early 2018. The home speaker was announced 
back in June 2017, and it was expected it would 
be ready for Christmas, but the official release has 
been delayed until the new year. This speaker 
will have some work to do to compete with 
the likes of Amazon Echo and Google Home, 
however, it does offer some unique features. 
It will be able to adapt to what is playing, and 
it will have spatial awareness, meaning it can 
analyze acoustics and adjust the sound it emits 
according to its location in a room.
While Apple is keeping us in the dark about 
their plans for 2018, rest assured it will be 
another groundbreaking, trillion dollar year 
for Apple with a whole host of exciting new 
developments. Only time will tell if 2018 will be 
the year of the iPhone XI, the Apple Car and the 
end of iTunes. 
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
81

82

83

84

In last week’s issue, we saw just how deep 
learning could be beneficial in a whole range of 
uses. Deep learning, the idea that a machine will 
think for itself when given access to data, rather 
than having to be fed information, enables a 
machine to learn from its mistakes and grow. 
It’s not a new concept, but in recent years, some 
of the world’s biggest companies, including 
Google and Apple, have begun to exploit the 
technology to improve their operations.
Elements of deep learning are already being 
used by Apple, with its personal assistant Siri 
learning from your actions and questions to 
develop an idea of who you are and what you 
like. Further afield, deep learning could be 
used for things like medicine and healthcare, 
potentially saving billions of dollars on 
expensive treatments and ensuring that patients 
are cared for correctly.
85

Her - Official Trailer (HD)
Joaquin Phoenix, Amy Adams
Image: Warner Bros. Pictures
86

DEEP LEARNING: BIG BROTHER IS 
WATCHING YOUR EVERY MOVE
Although there are some significant benefits 
to deep learning, it does bring with it privacy 
concerns, with many suggesting that there 
is little limit on what companies such as 
Apple and Google can find out about their 
users. Google, in particular, keeps hold of an 
unlimited amount of data from its users, with 
the company even scanning boarding passes 
to give users reminders, with seemingly little 
warning or permission.
It seems everything we do online can be traced 
back to us.  Search for some shoes you want 
on Google, an advert for them will appear on 
Facebook. It’s the new world we live in, and it’s 
part of deep learning and artificial intelligence – 
but just how far will it go?
HOW FAR WILL IT GO?
Could deep learning be the beginning of 
something more sinister? The movie HER 
(2013) explores the possibilities of artificial 
intelligence  and follows the story of a lonely 
man in the middle of a divorce, who purchases 
the new OS1, the first artificially intelligent 
operating system. However, this system is more 
than just a computer chip – it’s supposedly 
conscious. The film explores the relationship 
between machine and man and the extent to 
which machine consciousness is possible, and 
is the first signs that deep learning and artificial 
intelligence is taking over.
Fast Company explored the extent one 
individual went to escape online tracking.  To 
do so, he had to create an entirely fabricated, 
87

new identity.  He did not intend to assume this 
identity but experimented the length to which 
you must go to have an untraceable identity.  
Curtis Wallen entirely created Aaron Brown for 
what he refers to as an art project.  He used the 
cryptocurrency Bitcoin, as this does not need to 
be linked to a real person in the way that PayPal 
does.  He finally resorted to creating a new 
identity each time he contacted a new person.  
The lengths he had to go to prove just how hard 
it is to escape online tracking and demonstrated 
that nobody can escape the data collection from 
companies such as Google, Amazon, and Apple. 
WHAT IS DIFFERENTIAL 
PRIVACY TECHNOLOGY?
In recent times, Apple has recognized the 
frightening reality of deep learning and is now 
striving to protect its users. With the release of 
iOS 10 last year, Apple achieved the seemingly 
impossible, finding a way to use customer data 
without compromising on personal security.
By utilizing differential privacy technology on 
its iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS operating 
systems, the company aims to keep data 
“completely private,” writing in a press release: 
“We believe you should have great features and 
great privacy. Differential privacy is a research 
topic in the areas of statistics and data analytics 
that uses hashing, subsampling, and noise 
injection to enable…crowdsourced learning 
while keeping the data of individual users 
completely private.”
In simpler terms, differential privacy is 
essentially a system that allows Apple to learn 
as much as it can about the data its users 
88

89

provide while learning as little as possible 
about the individuals who produce this data. 
Essentially, personal information is stored on 
personal devices rather than the wider Apple 
infrastructure. The technology is mathematically 
proven, which does a lot more than just remove 
names from data. It’s been described as a future-
proofed system by some.
iOS 10 was the perfect time for Apple to 
implement this new system, as the new release 
also brought with it predictive software such 
as QuickType and a more advanced spotlight 
search where personal information like contact 
details, emails, and photographs were to 
be used. For companies like Apple, it is not 
considered an option not to analyze and 
utilize their user’s data, as it is crucial for the 
expansion of their company and for producing 
effective and user-friendly software.  Instead, 
the Cupertino firm has created a solution that 
protects the privacy of their customers, while 
allowing them to exploit this data on a device-
to-device basis for the benefit of the end user.
DEEP LEARNING IN THE WIDER 
TECHNOLOGY WORLD
Apple is not alone in using deep learning and 
providing innovative solutions that will protect 
the data of their customers, however. Some 
of the world’s biggest technology companies, 
such as Uber and Microsoft, are beginning 
to see the advantages and are using the 
technology to power their operating systems 
and smartphone apps.  Uber has ensured that 
they are not exploiting customer data while 
making sure they can offer the best possible 
90

91

services.  Similarly, Microsoft has said that they 
will make their data available to researchers 
and government agencies while ensuring that 
personal information cannot be traced back 
to individuals.
TOO GOOD TO BE TRUE?
Although Apple’s solution to deep learning and 
data protection has been praised by the majority 
of technology critics and security analysts, 
Matthew Green, cryptography professor at 
John Hopkins University, was not convinced. 
“Most people go from theory to practice, then 
to widespread deployment. With Differential 
Privacy it seems Apple cut out the middle step,” 
he tweeted.
Matthew went on to say that he believed 
that Apple’s data protection software was a 
“nice idea” but “it ends up being a tradeoff 
between accuracy of the data you are collecting 
and privacy.”  He argued that the accuracy 
decreases as privacy increases. In his eyes, 
differential privacy is relatively untested and 
even possibly dangerous.
And Green is not alone, with others are 
beginning to take issue with the technology. 
An article by iDownloadBlog states that: 
“Differential Privacy can be a double-edged sword 
and many folks were quick to point out that 
Apple’s refusal to collect huge amounts of data on 
users, like Google is doing, is hurting its ability to 
compete in the AI space.”
Only time will tell exactly how beneficial 
differential privacy can be.
92

Image: Tony Avelar
93

94

THE START OF SOMETHING BIG
In the face of privacy issues, cryptocurrency 
is on the rise.  Originally, Apple was entirely 
skeptical about cryptocurrency and still 
has an extensive approval process for iOS 
applications.  If Apple does not deem a 
cryptocurrency fit, then it does not grant app 
developers with the means to develop apps 
around it.  Apple does now accept Zcash, and 
it is now available for iOS.
At WWDC Apple announced a new feature for 
iOS 11 which allows users to easily send and 
receive money via iMessage, free of charge.  
However, this is thought to be the start of 
something bigger. The Apple Wallet will soon 
feature a new card called Apple PayCash.  
According to an article by The Mission:  “Some 
people thought of it as a gift card because you 
can use this money to pay through ApplePay in a 
cab, at the grocery store, or on the web.”
However, The Mission states that they believe 
this is, in fact, the beginning of Apple’s own 
cryptocurrency.  This is because it is described 
as a digital currency that stores value, which is 
exactly how people describe Bitcoin, the first 
and most famous cryptocurrency.
According to The Mission’s article, people are 
afraid to trust cryptocurrency because you just 
can’t trust them in the same way you can your 
bank. However, “with AppleCash, you would 
gain the benefit of an increasing user base, 
Apple’s stock price, and continued R&D, the 
cash and real assets on their balance sheet,” so 
only time will tell whether the currency will be 
adopted by users.
95

APPLE REMAINS ON THE RISE
Despite doubts over Apple’s deep learning 
and differential privacy solutions, there’s little 
doubt that it is a company on the rise. With the 
release of iPhone 8 this September alongside 
iOS 11 and an array of software releases for 
watchOS, macOS, and tvOS, it’s believed Apple 
will become a trillion-dollar company within 
the next twelve months. According to Wall 
Street analyst, Brian White, Apple has “the most 
underappreciated stocks in the world,”, and 
it’s clear that, as the firm looks at new ways of 
keeping customers within its ecosystem (this 
time with a new cryptocurrency), the giant will 
continue to dominate the technology market 
and keep customers, and dollars, on its side.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
96

97

Image: Dan Winters/Wired
98

99

Steve Jobs might have passed away nearly six 
years ago, but his influence on Apple - and, by 
extension, the tech industry - has long lingered. 
A fantastic case in point is Apple Park - the 
Cupertino firm’s new “spaceship” corporate 
headquarters at which the “iPhone 8” - or 
“iPhone Edition,” as it could be called - is expected 
to be officially announced.  Jobs was heavily 
influential on its design, which ties together many 
of the company’s firmly-held values.
PREPARATIONS FOR 
A SPACESHIP’S ARRIVAL 
Jobs’ last public appearance before his death 
was in July 2011 - when, at a meeting with 
Cupertino City Council, he argued a case for 
the new headquarters. While construction of 
the premises did not start until 2013, Jobs had 
worked on the concept years before his death. 
He cited a need to consolidate his employees 
in a company that had “grown like a weed,” but 
also enthused about creating a landscape where 
nature and man-made structures would blur 
into each other.
Campuses used by other companies, he felt, 
were “pretty boring”; this one, however, would 
primarily feature a circular structure intended 
to hold 12,000 workers. “It’s a pretty amazing 
building,” he told the council, adding: “It’s a 
little like a spaceship landed.” Even more than 
that, like many of the products that he would 
regularly unveil with his trademark confidence 
at keynotes, it was also pitched as standard-
bearing; potentially “the best office building in 
the world.”
Image: Justin Sullivan
100

101

Image: Nigel Young/Foster+Partners
102

NO STONE - OR WOOD - LEFT UNTURNED
One quality of Jobs’ that stayed to the end was 
his diligent attention to detail. We’ve all seen it 
in Apple products that we have cradled in our 
hands every day - and he certainly wasn’t going 
to leave it out of Apple Park. The company’s 
long-time design guru Jony Ive recalls, in an 
interview with WIRED, that - inspired by 
London parks - he and Jobs “began talking 
about a campus where your primary sense was 
that you were in parkland.” 
Many of us will probably already have a good 
idea of what he means, having experienced 
such places for ourselves. Indeed, Ive said that 
the conversation focused on a campus “where 
the connection between what was built and 
a parkland was immediate, no matter where 
you were.” Apple went on to acquire a 75-
acre site close to Infinite Loop, the company’s 
headquarters since 1993 and tasked renowned 
architect Norman Foster with assisting in 
forming the design.
Foster, whose work has included Berlin’s 
Reichstag building and London’s “Gherkin” 
tower, met up with Jobs in September 2009. 
The then Apple CEO certainly didn’t skimp on 
detail when talking to Foster. One associate of 
Foster and an Apple Park project lead, Stefan 
Behling, recalled Jobs discussing the office 
walls he sought: “He knew exactly what timber 
he wanted... He knew it had to be quarter-cut. 
It had to be cut in winter ... to have the least 
amount of sap and sugar content.”
103

Image: Dan Winters/Wired
104

Image: Dan Winters/Wired
105

Image: Dan Winters/Wired
106

HOW APPLE WILL FURTHER ITS 
GREEN CREDENTIALS 
It’s understandable, then, that the gray-haired 
architects at that meeting were more than a 
little daunted. Jobs also wanted trees covering 
the majority of the site; fruit trees from the 
Northern California orchards of his youth were 
particularly insisted upon. Apple is set to plant a 
total of nearly 9,000 trees, though it was decided 
that these should be drought-tolerant varieties 
capable of withstanding a climate crisis. These 
trees should bode well for the productivity of 
Apple employees.
“When I really need to think about something 
I’m struggling with, I get out in nature,” current 
Apple CEO Tim Cook has observed. “We can 
do that now! It won’t feel like Silicon Valley at 
all.” It certainly shouldn’t hurt that the circle-
shaped centerpiece allows for clear views of 
the site, enabling workers to contemplate the 
beautiful landscape and take inspiration from 
it. The campus buildings will also run strictly on 
sustainable power, most of which to be sourced 
from roof-based solar arrays. 
A TANTALIZING LOOK INSIDE THE 
STEVE JOBS THEATER
So, there are clearly rich benefits for the 
employees whose day-to-day work will be at 
Apple Park. However, there remains much for 
us mere mortals outside the company to be 
excited about, too. At the end of August, Apple 
sent out invites for its first-ever press event 
at the Steve Jobs Theater.  A major part of the 
campus, it had been openly pledged - at the 
iPhone SE launch event in March 2016 - to serve 
107

as a space for future product launches... but 
what exactly is it?
It is a theater space located outside the 
physical ring of the campus but also 
underground; from the outside, just a ground 
level lobby, consisting of a carbon fiber roof 
and 20-foot glass walls, can be seen. However, 
as reported by 9to5Mac, the Brazilian 
website MacMagazine has recently shared 
photos - previously user-posted on Google 
Maps - that show the inside of the auditorium.  
This space was still under construction when 
the images were taken, but there remain 
intriguing details...
For example, what looks like many natural 
wood finishes can be seen; it is unclear 
whether, by September 12, these would be 
left bare or given any additional layers or 
coatings. In any case, the seating capacity is 
1,000 - several thousand smaller than what 
other venues used for previous Apple product 
launches have been able to accommodate. 
This suggests that future launch events will be 
more exclusive affairs - rather befitting a firm as 
secretive as Apple.  
Meanwhile, Above Avalon writer Neil Cybart 
has shared some diagrams of the theater, 
revealing more about its layout. He observes 
that, while Apple tends to have its exhibit space 
concealed before an event starts, it is unclear 
how, with the Steve Jobs Theater, attendees 
would be prevented from passing through 
this space before they reach their seats. It 
seems likely that we will get answers to many 
questions about the Steve Jobs Theater come 
September 12. 
108

109

A VERY SPECIAL EVENT FOR THE 
iPHONE’S TENTH ANNIVERSARY
The Steve Jobs Theater has become available 
for use just ahead of the announcement of what 
could be the most exciting and groundbreaking 
iPhone since the very first model back in 
2007. New features we can expect to see 
with that handset include an edge-to-edge 
display, wireless charging capability, and facial 
recognition that might completely replace the 
familiar Touch ID functionality. How apt in what 
is the tenth anniversary of the iPhone!
That this will all be shown at “the first-ever event 
at the Steve Jobs Theater,” to quote directly 
from Apple’s invitation graphic, seems just 
a very fortunate coincidence - and one that 
we don’t doubt is generating a lot of feverish 
excitement both in and outside Apple Park. We 
also shouldn’t forget that the event is rumored 
to include the announcements of various other 
products - including more standard successors 
to the iPhone 7 and iPhone 7 Plus, a new Apple 
Watch with built-in LTE connectivity, and a fifth-
generation Apple TV with which 4K-resolution 
content can be watched. 
All of those details suggest that the event’s 
schedule could, on September 12, be utterly 
packed - as could, obviously, the theater itself. 
On the subject of the theater, that could spring a 
few surprises in itself, given that the previously-
mentioned photos of its interior were originally 
uploaded at the end of June. It’s an amazingly 
exciting time to be an Apple follower.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
110

Image: Dan Winters/Wired
111

112

Image: Dan Winters/Wired
113

114

115

HOMEKIT HAS CHANGED THE GAME
In 2014, with the release of iOS 8, Apple 
announced HomeKit, a new software 
framework that allowed developers to 
connect smart home technology to users’ 
smartphones. Users could design their rooms 
and integrate smart-home appliances as and 
when they wanted them and then enable 
automatic actions using Siri and through taps 
within apps.
Quickly, HomeKit (known as Apple Home on 
iOS) became a hit, and today, despite criticism 
from some technology bloggers, it has 
dominated the smart home market. With vast 
competition from the likes of Google Home 
and Amazon Echo, there’s never been a better 
time for Apple to up its smart home game 
and make it easier for users to connect their 
devices. But how does it work, and how can 
you make the most out of HomeKit without 
spending thousands of dollars on expensive 
light bulbs and thermostats that replace your 
cheaper legacy alternatives?
HOW HOMEKIT WORKS
If you’ve purchased your first HomeKit 
compatible product, the chances are that 
you’re curious as to how it works. Every 
product that features the certification has 
been tested by Apple for both its security and 
functionality – and every product will connect 
with devices like your Apple Watch and 
iPhone so that you can control it using your 
voice, Siri or a tap.
116

117

118

Home App — Welcome Home
119

Image: Justin Sullivan
120

LEGACY APPLIANCES VS. 
SMART HOME TECHNOLOGY
Investing in smart technology can be expensive. 
Indeed, you only have to visit the dedicated 
HomeKit section of the Apple website to 
see how pricey the technology can be. Add a 
thermostat, a couple of ambiance bulbs and a 
lock to your basket, and you can easily spend 
a thousand dollars on making your home 
easier to manage – without installation or 
maintenance. Because of this, many people see 
the technology as “something for the future” 
and that, just like LCD and LED televisions, it 
will one day be cheaper and more accessible. 
For fans and enthusiasts, on the other hand, it’s 
an expensive opportunity to become an “early 
adopter” and pay for the privilege of accessibility 
and innovation.
However, new technology is beginning to 
enter the market which will make it easier than 
ever to make your home smarter – without 
spending a small fortune. The new Leviton 
light controls system, for example, allows you 
to control your existing lamps and lights from 
the same place – and integrates HomeKit in an 
invisible and easy-to-manage way. The device 
removes the need to purchase separate smart 
bulbs and install each one on your smartphone 
– instead, it serves as a “middle man” between 
legacy and new technologies.
Apple’s HomeKit has made it easier than 
ever for developers to create these new 
hybrid technologies and switchboards, which 
effectively save you hundreds of dollars and 
allow you to enjoy the same benefits of smart 
technology without investing in new products 
121

for every room of your property. You can still 
automate and control your home from your 
smartphone – like monitor your temperature, 
CO2, humidity, and smoke – but instead do 
so without separate integrations. The Eve 
Degree takes this one step further, and view 
your temperature and humidity through a 
screen, meaning that you won’t need to reach 
for your iPhone every time you get too warm. 
It works as a hybrid between smart and legacy 
home technology.
122

Elgato Eve Degree - Temperature
& Humidity Monitor
123

124

Elgato Eve - Know your Home
125

THE INTRODUCTION OF HOMEPOD
With competitors like Amazon and Google 
already establishing their smart home hubs 
Echo and Home, Apple was late to the game 
when it announced the HomePod earlier this 
year – but it proved that you don’t always 
have to be first to be the best. Apple’s new 
hub, which is expected to hit the market in 
December, offers unmatched high-fidelity 
sound, which is powered through seven 
tweeters and a high-excursion woofer to 
play a wide depth of deep, rich bass. It’s 
this technology that sets the HomePod apart 
from its competitors – but it, of course, offers 
the same smart assistant and links with smart 
home appliances as the Amazon Echo and 
Google Home.
126

127

When the hub launches, you’ll be able to ask 
Siri to turn off your speaker or open your door, 
and, although Apple hasn’t made any HomeKit 
accessories of its own, there are thousands 
of appliances that you’ll be able to pair it 
with. Earlier this year, the firm introduced a 
new ‘works with Apple HomeKit’ scheme, 
allowing developers to use and test the 
128

technology before they invest in a license. Of 
course, when developers want to send their 
technology to market, they’ll need to submit 
it to Apple for approval as part of their MFi 
(Made for iPhone) licensing, but the changes 
reduce the barrier to entry and make it easier 
than ever for developers to invest in the Apple 
Home platform.
129

130

131

THE FUTURE OF HOMES
With the smart home hub market growing faster 
than ever (the global market is expected to 
clock in at $327 million by 2022), it’s clear that 
the future of our homes is in technology. We can 
already control our temperatures, music, and 
lighting using our smartphones, watches, and 
voices – but what will come next?
Humanoid robots are one of the latest 
developments. Of course, you can already 
purchase robot vacuum cleaners to keep 
your home clean, and Germany has developed 
a fully-robotic bartender named Carl, who’ll 
serve you drinks as and when you request 
them. But what if robots could do more – keep 
your home clean, prepare your food, babysit 
your children and walk your dog? The future 
of robotics is exciting and opens an array of 
opportunities. You only need to check out the 
hit AMC show Humans to see just how much of 
an impact robotic technology could have on our 
everyday lives - but not all of that impact would 
be positive, with many claiming that a human-
robot hybrid could blur the lines between 
technology and human life.
Nowadays, we have more smart appliances 
than ever before – refrigerators, washers, dryers, 
and sensors all allow us to control what we do 
with ease – and they make technology more 
convenient. But the more devices we connect 
to the internet, the more questions we have to 
ask about our privacy and security. Do we really 
want our refrigerator manufacturer to know 
what we’re eating, when we’re eating it and how 
often we restock? It may seem as though there’s 
no harm in letting companies access such data, 
Image: Fabrizio Bensch 
132

133

but giving them control over your shopping 
habits and everyday choices, a la Amazon’s 
smart ‘internet of things’ dash buttons, could 
change the way we live and shop.
There are, of course, benefits to smart home 
technology. Not only does the technology offer 
convenience and time- and cost-savings, but 
increased safety, too. Facial recognition software, 
which is expected to be featured in the new 
iPhone 8, could allow you keyless entry into 
your home or workplace, and make it a safer 
place for all involved.
Whatever the future holds for homes, it’s 
clear that Apple’s HomeKit will play a role. As 
brands invent new, more complex appliances, 
they’ll look to players like Amazon and Apple 
to integrate their technology. It’s obvious 
that Apple is onto yet another winner with its 
HomeKit and HomePod ecosystems – even if 
they come a couple of years late to the party!
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
134

135

Image: Frank Franklin
136

Wanted: 10,000 New Yorkers interested in 
advancing science by sharing a trove of personal 
information, from cellphone locations and 
credit-card swipes to blood samples and life-
changing events. For 20 years.
Researchers are gearing up to start recruiting 
participants from across the city next year for a 
study so sweeping it’s called “The Human Project.” 
It aims to channel different data streams into a 
river of insight on health, aging, education and 
many other aspects of human life.
“That’s what we’re all about: putting the holistic 
picture together,” says project director Dr. Paul 
Glimcher, a New York University neural science, 
economics and psychology professor.
‘HUMAN PROJECT’
 STUDY WILL ASK 
10,000 TO SHARE 
LIFE’S DATA
137

There have been other “big data” health studies, 
and the National Institutes of Health plans to 
start full-scale recruitment as soon as this fall 
for a million-person project intended to foster 
individualized treatment.
But the $15 million-a-year Human Project is 
breaking ground with the scope of individual 
data it plans to collect simultaneously, says  
Dr. Vasant Dhar, editor-in-chief of the journal 
Big Data, which published a 2015 paper about 
the project.
“It is very ambitious,” the NYU information 
systems professor says.
Participants will be invited to join; researchers 
are tapping survey science to create a 
demographically representative group.
They’ll start with tests of everything from blood 
to genetics to IQ. They’ll be asked for access to 
medical, financial and educational records, as 
well as cellphone data such as location and the 
numbers they call and text. They’ll also be given 
wearable activity trackers, special scales, and 
surveys via smartphone. Follow-up blood and 
urine tests - and an at-home fecal sample - will 
be requested every three years.
Participants get $500 per family for enrolling, 
plus a say in directing some charitable money to 
community projects.
Researchers hope the results will illuminate 
the interplay between health, behavior and 
circumstances, potentially shedding new 
light on conditions ranging from asthma to 
Alzheimer’s disease.
Their excitement comes with the responsibility 
of safeguarding the digital savings of a lifetime.
138

139

140

Protections include multiple rounds of 
encryption and firewalls. Outside researchers 
won’t be able to see any raw data, just 
anonymized subsets limited to the information 
they need. They’ll take nothing with them but 
their analyses - by hand, since the analyzing 
computers aren’t connected to the internet, 
Glimcher said.
Lee Tien, a senior staff attorney at the digital 
rights group Electronic Frontier Foundation 
, credits the Human Project researchers with 
taking security seriously. But he wonders 
whether authorities might seek to get at the 
information for investigations, though Glimcher 
maintains that the researchers could protect it 
from anything but major terrorism probes.
Glimcher knows The Human Project aspires 
boldly. In fact, its frequently-asked-questions list 
includes: “Is this possible? Are you crazy?”
He points to one of medicine’s most storied 
research efforts: The Framingham Heart Study, 
launched in 1948. Some 15,000 residents 
of Framingham, Massachusetts, have been 
examined over the years. The initiative has 
fueled more than 1,200 studies and revealed 
that blood pressure, cholesterol and smoking 
were linked to heart disease risk.
“If we could be seen as having contributed 
to American health care and well-being and 
education in the United States in the way that 
Framingham did, but magnified a hundredfold 
by the tools of today’s data, what a fantastic 
accomplishment that would be,” says Glimcher.
Nancy Spinale knows what it takes to be part of 
an accomplishment like that.
141

Image: Samuel Stuart
Her parents joined the Framingham study in 
1948, she in 1971 and her husband and four 
children since then. Now 75 and living on Cape 
Cod, the retired teacher still undergoes an 
hourslong follow-up exam and interview every 
couple of years.
Her loved ones have gotten some personally 
useful information from exams. And she’s gotten 
the pride of seeing studies come out, w ith 
information that could help everyone’s health.
“That’s the ‘wow’ feeling,” she says.
142

143

144

145

While it’s true that the prevalence of dating apps 
in today’s society is helping to make dating more 
efficient, does this mean that there has been an 
influx of successful, long-lasting relationships or 
simply more people who’ve grown dissatisfied 
with their current situation?
THE TECHNOSEXUAL ERA
Right now, we are in a Technosexual Era. 
The term technosexual is used to define 
someone who prefers technology over an 
actual human relationship and is often put 
in place to demean an individual who places 
an interest in technology but does not have a 
romantic partner. These people, who are usually 
men, often face stereotypes such as social 
awkwardness, unattractiveness, and loneliness. 
However, modern sex technology that allows 
the user to customize their experience has 
begun to combat the stereotype that it is single, 
lonely men who are the main users of certain 
devices. Artificial intelligence found in software 
such as dating apps like Tinder, for example, has 
become hugely popular with both men and 
women worldwide to establish a connection. 
Elsewhere, a combination of hardware, software, 
virtual reality and artificial intelligence has led 
to the production of technologies such as VR 
Tenga and RealDoll, which create a virtual 
sexual experience for their users.
However, as well as having some positive 
attributes, technosexuality also presents a range 
of concerns and interesting questions. Questions 
such as “what will happen if humans become 
attracted to robots?” lead us to consider a truly 
dystopian realm of science fiction.
Image: Peter Yang
146

Sex Robots | Kate Devlin | TEDxWarwick
147

THE MOST POPULAR DATING APPS
As members of today’s generation begin 
their search for a soul mate, they have more 
opportunities than ever to find them thanks 
largely to the $2.4 billion online dating industry 
which has expanded over the past few years 
with mobile dating apps. These days, 38% of 
single Americans have used an online dating 
site  and almost a quarter of these find a long-
term partner in this way. It’s not hard to see why 
this craze has taken off. If you’re walking around 
with a dating app in your pocket, you have an 
almost endless supply of single people who are 
looking to date. The only question is: how many 
of them want to date you?
148

Image: Leon Neal
149

TINDER
Launched in 2012, Tinder now has an estimated 
50 million users worldwide with 10 million of 
them using the app every day. Essentially, it is a 
modern game of ‘hot or not’ where users must 
judge pictures from others nearby using left 
and right swipes to say whether or not they find 
them appealing, albeit mostly in a visual sense. 
Tinder is perceived more as a hook-up app than 
a relationship app, but a recent upgrade does 
let you play matchmaker for your friends.
OKCUPID
Great for those looking for either a casual fling 
or something more serious, OkCupid provides 
a complex array of questions that are more 
likely to foster the latter. On this app, you can 
broadcast your date suggestions and rate other 
people’s profiles which for some might seem a 
little daunting. Nevertheless, OKCupid was the 
fourth most popular online dating service in 
2015, and over one million people install the 
app every week.
150

MY FRIENDS HIJACK MY TINDER
(they got me a date!)
#01 – Tinder
By Tinder Inc.
Category: Lifestyle
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad, and iPod touch.
#02 – OkCupid Dating
By OkCupid.com
Category: Social Networking
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad, and iPod touch.
151

Image: Andrew Harrer
152

MATCH.COM
Everyone knows that Match.com was in the 
online dating game long before anyone else. 
Each day, users are provided with personalized 
matches that take your interests and preferences 
into consideration, and you can search through 
the database to find someone that catches your 
eye before you send them a virtual ‘wink’ to grab 
their attention. In 2016, 38% of Match.com users 
said that they began a relationship on the site 
that lasted up to one month, which is the highest 
for any dating service involved in the same study.
COFFEE MEETS BAGEL
The lesser known app Coffee Meets Bagel sends 
you one “bagel” (the profile of a potential match) 
per day then you have 24-hours to decide 
whether to like or pass. If you like, and they have 
liked you, you’ll connect and be able to begin 
a private chat. This service has more specific 
preference options meaning you can narrow 
your searches to things like religious beliefs.
TASTEBUDS
If you’re an iOS user who doesn’t want to be 
matched with an Android user, then Tastebuds 
is for you. This is an app that highlights your 
music preferences to match you with someone 
who is deemed compatible and can be matched 
to your Facebook profile if you wish. Much like 
Tinder, if you’re interested in a person you can 
“like” them and if not, simply “skip,” but unlike 
Tinder, Tastebuds allows you to send a song 
or a message to users even if they haven’t yet 
matched with you.
#03 – Match™ - #1 Dating App
By Match.com, LLC
Category: Social Networking
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad, and iPod touch.
#04 – Coffee Meets Bagel Dating App
By Coffee Meets Bagel, Inc
Category: Lifestyle
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad, and iPod touch.
#05 – Tastebuds - Music Chat and Dating
By Tastebuds Media Ltd.
Category: Lifestyle
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad, and iPod touch.
153

154

Apps like this prove that in this era, the process 
of dating has become “gamified” by technology, 
so we then begin to question – what does this 
mean for the overall influence of the digital 
world on real romance and real relationships? 
HOW HAS THE DIGITAL WORLD IMPACT 
ON ‘REAL ROMANCE’?
Sign up and create a profile on an app like Tinder 
and in the space of a few hours you could end 
up with a date or, in the worst case, a case of 
low self-esteem. A recent study about the 
psychological effects of this particular dating 
app found that those who used the app had 
lower feelings of self-worth, stating that they 
were less satisfied with their looks and more 
ashamed of their bodies. They were also more 
likely to view themselves as sexual objects, 
internalize society’s ideals about beauty and 
compare their appearance to others.
These results were true for both men and 
women. Although dating apps have regained 
a sense of trustworthiness via the connection 
of pictures and basic information from social 
networking sites such as Facebook, they have 
also increased the average level of ‘real-world 
attractiveness.’ A user could spend hours 
curating their profile, uploading a well thought 
out bio and filtered selfies from Instagram to the 
extent that a potential match may wonder how 
he/she is single, to begin with.
This idea that digital eligibility exceeds 
physical eligibility is something that has not 
only advanced the issue of low self-esteem 
among dating app users but also led to the 
dangerous game of ‘catfishing’ – a relatively 
recent word which identifies the creation of 
155

a fictional online persona to lure someone 
into a relationship.
This term was made popular by the 2010 
documentary film of the same name in which 
the online relationship between the filmmaker 
Nev Schulman and a young woman named 
Megan who he “met” after receiving a painting 
from Megan’s younger sister Abby.
Nev connected with Abby and her family over 
Facebook, email, and phone and eventually, 
his relationship with Megan grew. After certain 
questions were avoided by Megan, Nev started 
to have discrepancies with the situation and 
eventually traveled to her home to discover the 
truth. Nev learned that it was actually Abby’s 
mother who was playing the part of Megan by 
fabricating an entire fake persona she had created 
using strangers’ pictures and their information.
On the internet, anonymity is permitted, 
but social networking sites and now dating 
sites/apps encourage a greater degree of 
transparency. When creating a profile, users 
are establishing their online identity, painting 
a picture of what they are without anyone 
questioning their information. Someone with 
the intention of catfishing will shape his/her 
profile to something that they believe another 
will want to see to lure that person into an 
online relationship. Understandably, this can be 
dangerous and leads to much speculation about 
just how beneficial online dating really is.
At the same time, though, dating apps allow 
their users to fulfill a basic evolutionary and 
social need. Much like social networking, dating 
apps allow people to get along (albeit in a sexual 
and superficial way), massaging our competitive 
156

157

instincts, satisfying our curiosity and maximizing 
our dating potential. Critics might not want 
to admit it, but dating apps do mimic modern 
real-world courtship scenarios because just 
like social dynamics, they allow us to assess an 
image and gauge our interest accordingly. Just 
as psychologists have imagined, we really are a 
superficial species, one that would rather spend 
two minutes judging 50 profile pictures than 50 
minutes assessing one potential match.
If anything, dating apps can be an eye-opening 
experience into the modern world and allow 
you to meet like-minded people with similar 
interests and opinions, even if your intentions 
are not romantic at all. The more recent surge 
in friend-finding apps has taken off, too with 
apps such as Bumble BFF, Squad and Meet My 
Dog paving the way for social interactions that 
can remain platonic.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
158

159

160

A non-partisan federal watchdog says climate 
change is already costing U.S. taxpayers billions 
of dollars each year, with those costs expected 
to rise as devastating storms, floods, wildfires 
and droughts become more frequent in the 
coming decades.
A Government Accountability Office report 
released this week said the federal government 
has spent more than $350 billion over the last 
decade on disaster assistance programs and 
losses from flood and crop insurance. That tally 
does not include the massive toll from this year’s 
wildfires and three major hurricanes, expected to 
be among the most costly in the nation’s history.
The Senate on Monday gave preliminary 
approval to a $36.5 billion hurricane relief 
package that would provide Puerto Rico with 
a much-needed infusion of cash and keep the 
federal flood insurance program from running 
out of money to pay claims from hurricanes 
Harvey, Irma and Maria. That’s on top of another 
$15.3 billion aid package approved last month.
GAO: 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
ALREADY COSTING 
US BILLIONS 
IN LOSSES
Image: Karl Mondon
161

The report predicts these costs will only grow 
in the future, averaging a budget busting $35 
billion each year by 2050 — a figure that recent 
history would suggest is a conservative estimate.
“Climate change impacts are already costing the 
federal government money, and these costs will 
likely increase over time as the climate continues 
to change,” the report said.
Calculating just how much of the spending from 
disasters is directly attributable to the changing 
climate is not possible, the report’s authors 
conclude, but the trend is clear: “The impacts 
and costs of extreme events — such as floods, 
drought and other events — will increase in 
significance as what are considered rare events 
become more common and intense because of 
climate change.”
The federal government doesn’t effectively 
plan for these recurring costs, the report said, 
classifying the financial exposure from climate-
related costs as “high risk.”
“The federal government has not undertaken 
strategic government-wide planning to manage 
climate risks by using information on the 
potential economic effects of climate change to 
identify significant risks and craft appropriate 
federal responses,” the study said. “By using such 
information, the federal government could take 
the initial step in establishing government-wide 
priorities to manage such risks.”
GAO undertook the study following a request 
from Republican Sen. Susan Collins of Maine and 
Sen. Maria Cantwell of Washington, the ranking 
Democrat on the Senate Committee on Energy 
and Natural Resources.
162

163

Image: Rich Pedroncelli
164

“This nonpartisan GAO report Senator Cantwell 
and I requested contains astonishing numbers 
about the consequences of climate change 
for our economy and for the federal budget in 
particular,” said Collins. “In Maine, our economy 
is inextricably linked to the environment. 
We are experiencing a real change in the 
sea life, which has serious implications for 
the livelihoods of many people across our 
state, including those who work in our iconic 
lobster industry.”
The report’s authors reviewed 30 government 
and academic studies examining the national 
and regional impacts of climate change. They 
also interviewed 28 experts familiar with the 
strengths and limitations of the studies, which 
rely on future projections of climate impacts to 
estimate likely costs.
The report says the fiscal impacts of climate 
change are likely to vary widely by region. The 
Southeast is at increased risk because of coastal 
property that could be swamped by storm 
surge and sea level rise. The Northeast is also 
under threat from storm surge and sea level rise, 
though not as much as the Southeast.
The Midwest and Great Plains are susceptible to 
decreased crop yields, the report said. The West 
is expected to see increased drought, wildfires 
and deadly heatwaves.
Advance copies were provided to the White 
House and the Environmental Protection 
Agency, which provided no official comments 
for inclusion in the GAO report.
Requests for comment from media also received 
no response.
165

President Donald Trump has called climate 
change a hoax, announcing his intent to 
withdraw the United States from the Paris 
climate accords and revoke Obama-era 
initiatives to curb greenhouse gas emissions. 
Trump has also appointed officials such as EPA 
Administrator Scott Pruitt, Energy Secretary 
Rick Perry and Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke, 
all of whom question the scientific consensus 
that carbon released into the atmosphere from 
burning fossil fuels is the primary driver of 
global warming.
Earlier this month Trump nominated Kathleen 
Hartnett White of Texas to serve as his top 
environmental adviser at the White House. She 
has credited the fossil fuel industry with “vastly 
improved living conditions across the world” 
and likened the work of mainstream climate 
scientists to “the dogmatic claims of ideologues 
and clerics.”
White, who works at a conservative think tank 
that has received funding from fossil-fuel 
companies, holds academic degrees in East 
Asian studies and comparative literature.
166

Image: Pete Saloutos
167

168

Image: David Paul Morris/Bloomberg
169

170

It has long been rumored that Apple is 
developing either a virtual reality (VR) or an 
augmented reality (AR) device, and these 
rumors were somewhat confirmed at the 
Worldwide Developers Conference (WWDC) in 
San Jose earlier this month.  At the conference, 
Apple announced the ARKit, a new kit allowing 
developers to create augmented reality apps.
The ARKit, deemed a “game changer” by 
the CEO of Marxent, who for six years have 
been developing AR apps for Apple, will 
run on the new Apple iOS 11 software and 
is due to launch in the fall on the iPhone 8, 
and on all iOS devices dating back to the 
iPhone 5.  Apple CEO Tim Cook said in an 
interview  augmented reality is “Something 
[Apple] is doing a lot of things on” and it is 
likely to be developed for iPhone first, but it 
has been rumored that Apple is also creating 
smart glasses, similar to Google Glass. As 
demonstrated in the first 40 seconds of the 
video and explained throughout, AR allows 
apps to go beyond the screen and become 
more embedded in the real world in ways 
never seen before.
Tuong Nguyen claims AR marks the beginning 
of a new phase for technology and believes 
it will “eclipse virtual reality” in sales “because 
we deal with the real world all the time.”  
Augmented reality works in ways virtual reality 
cannot by immersing users into the real world 
by overlaying data and images onto a screen 
and interacting with the physical world.  Tim 
Cook labels it as a “core technology, “ and it 
is thought it to be as big as the smartphone, 
something we will soon begin to wonder how 
we ever lived without.
Image: Stephen Lam
171

APPLE RE-ESTABLISHING ITSELF AS A 
GAMING PLATFORM
Developing the use of AG through the iPhone 
camera is likely to be Apple’s focus. Apps are 
already using AG successfully, and Apple’s 
introduction of ARKit will only increase the 
number of apps.
Bloomberg describes how AG has been 
developed for the camera writing that “one 
of the features Apple is exploring is the ability to 
take a picture and then change the depth of the 
photograph or the depth of specific objects in 
the picture later; another would isolate an object 
in the image, such as a person’s head, and allow 
it to be tilted 180 degrees. A different feature in 
development would use augmented reality to 
place virtual effects and objects on a person, 
much the way Snapchat works.”
The question has been raised about how 
Apple will use this new technology to shake 
up the gaming industry.  The precedent has 
been somewhat set by ‘Pokemon Go,’ which 
was downloaded more than 100 million 
times in its first month,  a game which 
works by overlaying animated Pokemon 
onto your screen, so they appear alive in 
the physical world.  During the presentation 
at the Worldwide Developers Conference, 
Apple demonstrated an improved version of 
‘Pokemon Go,’ that will be available exclusively 
on iPhone, as well as demonstrating a new 
‘The Lord of the Rings’ game. It appears 
Apple wants to re-establish itself as a gaming 
platform and will aim do so through this 
new generation of apps as well as revamping 
the App Store.
Image: Stephen Lam
172

173

174

With the increase in popularity for apps of this 
nature, it is unsurprising that Apple appears 
to have chosen to focus on augmented reality 
rather than virtual reality.  One successful app 
is Inkhunter, which uses the simple idea of 
projecting tattoo designs onto the camera, 
allowing the user to see how the tattoo will 
look before they commit. Companies such 
as Lego are already using AR in their stores, 
where televisions demonstrate an animated 
representation of the final product you can 
create from the kit inside the box you are 
holding when you step in front of it.
PRODUCTIVITY INCREASE WITH AR
However, it is not only the gaming world which 
is likely to revolutionize as a result of this new 
technology.  Already, companies such as 
General Electric are using smart glasses in 
their factories to boost productivity.  Previously, 
workers were forced to stop working, spending 
time consulting manuals or experts when 
installing new parts, for example.  But with 
the new smart glasses, they can see the 
instructions in front of them or access training 
videos.  They are even able to live stream 
their point of view, allowing an expert to 
give specific advice.
Workers can receive new orders straight to their 
glasses and the glasses help guide workers 
to the correct storage area in order to quickly 
locate each item in the order.  As a result, an 
initial study by General Electric showed a 34% 
increase in productivity after the glasses were 
introduced in the workplace.
175

MEDICAL ADVANCES USING AR
Similar uses can be applied to the medical 
profession, and AR could advance healthcare 
considerably.  The study of medicine is 
looking to be improved by companies such as 
ARnatomy, who are developing an app that 
will match a bone, for example, with visuals 
and information.  This will make learning more 
informative, and information will be more 
readily available.  Shafi Ahmed has even used 
AR to perform live operations for around 14,000 
students in 32 countries.
Every day procedures are looking to be 
improved by the introduction of apps such as 
AccuVein.  Accuvein is a handheld scanner that 
176

projects over skin to show nurses and doctors 
exactly where veins and their valves are in 
patients’ bodies.  Having blood taken is never 
pleasant, but Accuvein makes finding the vein 
on the first attempt 3.5 times more likely.
An app has been developed measuring a child’s 
ability to stay still for long periods of time.  
This app developed by Current Studios will 
enable doctors to determine if a child would 
need general anesthetics before an MRI scan, 
for which they are required to remain still for 
extended periods of time.  This will reduce the 
chance of a child being sedated unnecessarily 
and prevent time wastage.
177

AR IN OUR EVERYDAY LIVES
AR will certainly affect both the gaming, 
engineering and medical industries. However, 
speculation has already begun about how AR 
could become immersed into our everyday lives. 
Cook sees it as something that will become “a 
significant part of the population, of developed 
companies, and eventually, all countries will 
have AR experiences every day.”
An article by Forbes Magazine also describes 
how augmented reality will become embedded 
in our everyday lives.  The article uses the 
example of shopping where AR can be used to 
retrieve data and images of goods customers 
want to buy.  Facial recognition could also be 
developed to inform users of the name and 
important information about an approaching 
old acquaintance.
Social barriers have also been a concern for 
some, where Nguyen comments that “it’s okay 
to use a tablet or smartphone in public, but 
many people don’t want to be that guy wearing 
a Google Glass headset in public.”  The question 
remains, how long will it be before we are as 
attached to AR as we are to our smartphones?
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
178

179

180

181

When Apple publicly refashioned the Apple 
Watch as a health and fitness-centric wearable 
starting with last year’s Series 2 model, it made 
the device a much more powerful draw for 
athletes. Of course, many Apple Watch features 
can be used to impressive effect by anyone 
who wants to generally improve their physical 
wellbeing. However, if you look much more 
closely at the Apple Watch, the benefits for 
athletes can become especially apparent.
A MAJOR TRANSFORMATION FOR 
THE APPLE WATCH
It was only in September that Apple announced 
the Apple Watch Series 3 - and, soon after 
unpacking one that has just been purchased, 
you could be pleasantly surprised by how much 
you can do with it. While the first-generation 
Apple Watch in 2015 felt basically like a 
smartphone on the wrist, the Series 3 can feel 
much more like a sophisticated fitness tracker.
Many smartphone-like features, including the 
abilities to make calls and send texts from the 
watch, set reminders and receive notifications, 
remain intact with the Series 3. However, you 
can also track how many steps you take, your 
heart rate - including your resting, walking, and 
workout recovery heart rate - and even, thanks 
to a water-resistant design, your swimming 
regime. GPS technology also enables the device 
to independently detect your location - a 
particular boon during hiking.
All of the health and fitness data collected by 
this Apple Watch can be saved to your iPhone’s 
Health app. That app even has a Heart View 
section, which gives a more in-depth overview 
of what the Apple Watch’s Heart Rate app 
Image: Sarah Tew/CNET
182

183

has detected. In the Health app, it’s even now 
possible to see VO2 max data collected by 
the Watch.  This data reveals how much oxygen 
your body can utilise in a minute and, thus, 
your capacity for aerobic work, as iPhone in 
Canada explains.
THE SERIES 3 CATERS FOR MANY 
DIFFERENT ACTIVITIES
The Apple Watch Series 3 is available in various 
forms - including a specially branded Nike+ 
model. It’s a good choice of device if you want 
to use an Apple Watch primarily for use with 
regular running. As well as all of the usual 
features of the Series 3, this watch comes with 
exclusive Nike watch faces and the Nike+ Run 
Club app. This app can intricately track your 
running efforts and provide expert guidance to 
help you get the most out of them.
However, what if swimming, rather than 
running, is the type of physical exercise that 
you want an Apple Watch to help you with? 
The Series 3 has got you covered there, too. The 
device is water-resistant to a depth of up to 50 
metres and can track your swimming activity 
in various intelligent ways, as Popular Science 
has found.  The motion of strokes is tracked 
by the gyroscope and accelerometer, while 
watchOS 4 has made the device capable of 
detecting the start and end of laps.
184

185

Image: Sarah Tew/CNET
186

187

188

A CELLULAR WEARABLE LOOKS LIKE A 
GAME-CHANGER
The cellular version of the Series 3 is the 
first Apple Watch capable of mobile - rather 
than merely Wi-Fi - Internet connectivity 
without any need for an iPhone to be nearby. 
Unfortunately, that functionality could actually 
worsen instances like those of the Boston Red 
Sox recently using the Apple Watch to gain a 
controversial upper hand in baseball games. 
The New York Times reports how it was used to 
steal hand signals from opposing catchers and 
relay these details to Red Sox players.
However, the hugely broadened potential of 
on-the-wrist cellular capability looks set to 
outweigh such controversy. For example, it will 
enable Apple Watch users to listen to music that 
is streamed directly on the device. At the time of 
writing, Apple has yet to activate the software 
necessary for this. However, when the update 
does arrive, it will mean being able to listen to 
curated playlists and radios for music that can 
help keep up that motivation vital to a buoyant 
fitness regime.
A PROMISING FUTURE FOR LIVE SPORTS 
ON APPLE TV
If you are indeed a fitness buff, then what do 
you do when you aren’t physically exercising? 
Well, probably watching other people do it. 
Furthermore, it’s probably with Apple devices 
that you are doing that. For that reason, you 
might have especially good reason to be excited 
by a particular announcement that many 
people could have easily overlooked during 
Apple’s crowded September keynote: enriched 
189

functionality for use with watching live sports in 
Apple’s TV app on Apple TV.
This functionality includes being able to track 
particular teams, be notified on-screen about 
events, and reach everything with a new, sports-
specific section of the TV app. We might soon 
see that section bulked out with contributions 
from a sports editor which Apple has 
intended to recruit.  The company expressed its 
wish for “an experienced editor to lead content 
curation and programming” and “maintain 
a thoughtful, dynamic, and always relevant 
editorial voice for sports programming”.
HOW ARKIT COULD REVOLUTIONISE 
SPORTS WATCHING
When Apple unveiled the iPhone X, iPhone 8 
and iPhone 8 Plus, it was hard to escape the 
strong focus on augmented reality. Of course, 
all iOS devices with an A9 chip or later can 
run apps that use the company’s augmented 
reality framework ARKit. At the September 
presentation, the company particularly showed 
off a new AR feature that was coming to MLB’s 
very popular At Bat app: the ability to hold up 
the device at a baseball game and see stats 
about individual players.
Those statistics will appear above those players’ 
heads on the field, making this a feature that 
could only be used at an actual game. People 
watching the game on live TV or following it 
through some other form of live feed would be 
unable to utilise the feature - and this could give 
more people an incentive to attend games at 
the actual stadium. Should app developers add 
even more such features, it’s easy to see how 
that incentive could snowball in strength...
190

191

192

193

194

Inc. has outlined several other examples 
of how augmented reality could - ahem - 
augment the in-stadium experience.  For 
example, a fan could, after entering the 
stadium, be notified about a nearby poster over 
which they can hover their phone to watch a 
video from their favourite player. That fan could 
even hover their device over a certain part of 
the game program to view a reel of season 
highlights and a direct call-to-action to buy 
merchandise from the team shop.
ARKit also permits fresh promotional avenues 
that, far from coming across as mere “spam”, can 
feel “organic to the experience”, sports lecturer 
Kurt Badenhausen explains in a Forbes article.  
Teams and associated organisations could bring 
up targeted adverts to people who are close to 
the stadium or store. Features like these would, 
says Badenhausen, boost “the sense of community 
that makes attending a game so special and truly 
augments the reality of the experience.”
A WHOLE NEW WORLD WITH 
SPORTS TECHNOLOGY?
While no-one can be certain about how the 
experiences of both playing and watching 
sports will continue to evolve due to Apple 
devices, that reflects on the beauty of 
technology. There is so much potential, but also 
unpredictability. The most effective uses of both 
new hardware like the Apple Watch Series 3 and 
software additions like ARKit could actually arise 
on the initiative of third-party app developers. 
Just how different could sports experiences be 
several years from now?
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
195

196

197

A BRIEF HISTORY OF APPLE PAY
iPhone and Apple Watch users have had access 
to Apple Pay,  Apple’s mobile payments service, 
since October 2014. The feature allows users to 
buy lunch in a café or buy Christmas presents 
in a retail store and you can even make one-tap 
purchases within apps. The Cupertino firm’s 
latest venture, however, is Apple Pay Cash, 
which allows users to send and receive money 
from peers through the Messages app, making 
the process of transferring money even easier.
“Send money for books to your son in 
college. Split a bill. Pay a babysitter. Send 
and receive from across the table — or 
across the country. Instantly.”
No longer are iPhone users just able to pay 
businesses; with Apple Pay Cash, you can now 
send and receive money from friends. You can 
do so using the Messages app, or simply by 
asking Siri; it really is that simple. The best part 
is, you are not required to download an app, and 
instead can use the cards you already have set 
up in your Wallet. With this new technology, it’s 
never been easier to send money, so your most 
unreliable friend no longer has the excuse of 
leaving their wallet at home!
iOS 11.2 BRINGS APPLE PAY CASH
To access Apple Pay Cash, you’ll need to be over 
the age of 18, live in the United States and update 
your iPhone to the latest version of iOS, 11.2. 
Two-factor authentication will need to be set up 
for your Apple ID, and you’ll need to be signed 
in to iCloud. Once you’ve completed these steps, 
you just need to ensure you have a card added to 
your Apple Wallet and you’re ready to go.
Image: JOSH EDELSON/AFP/Getty Images
198

Inside iOS 11: Messages app gains 
Person-to-Person Payments
199

When using Apple Pay Cash on an iPhone, the 
process is simple.  First, open the Messages app 
and start a conversation with the person you’d 
like to send money to. Then, simply tap the small 
Apple Store icon, followed by the Apple Pay 
icon. You will be prompted to enter the account 
you want to send, and once you have verified 
the transfer with Touch ID or Face ID, the money 
will be on its way to your friend. It really is as 
simple as that.
You can also request a payment from a friend 
or family member using the same process, 
however, instead of tapping ‘pay’ after you 
have entered the amount, you instead click the 
‘request’ button. It is important to remember 
that you can only send to another Apple device 
user and you can only cancel a payment if the 
recipient hasn’t yet accepted it.
INSTANT MONEY WITH A VIRTUAL 
BANK CARD
When you receive payment from a friend or 
family member, the money will not go into your 
bank account, but instead will be transferred 
to your Apple Pay Cash Card. This card can be 
found in your Apple Wallet app and is created 
automatically. Think of it as a virtual bank 
account, where you’ll be able to access your 
new money instantly. No longer do you have to 
wait for the transfer to go through before you 
can buy an outfit for tonight’s party; as soon as 
the payment has been sent, you have access to 
the money straight away. You’ll be able to make 
payments via Apple Pay, or through the App 
Store. You can also transfer the funds to your 
bank account, should you wish to do so.
200

201

202

You can add money to your Apple Pay Cash 
Card using the cards you already have set up in 
the Apple Pay wallet. Apple has a very useful 
guide  on how to add money when using both 
an iPhone and an Apple Watch. 
A SECURE PAYMENT TRANSFER SERVICE
Apple Pay Cash has led to some security 
concerns, however, rest assured that before 
sending the first payments you have to agree 
to the terms and conditions and confirm your 
identity, and you can only send payments using 
Touch ID or Face ID.
There are also no fees when you use a debit card 
through the service, but you will have to pay the 
standard 3% fee when using a credit card. The 
service does not affect your credit, but there are 
limits in place on the amount you can transfer. 
Per message, you can receive a minimum of $1 
and a maximum of $3,000, and you the maximum 
you can receive over a 7-day period is $10,000.
You also don’t have to worry about your account 
if your phone is stolen or lost as the payments 
for the Apple Pay Cash Card are saved-off device 
and not stored solely in the Apple Wallet.
THE FUTURE FOR APPLE PAY 
CASH ABROAD
The question on everyone’s lips is when Apple 
Pay Cash will be available outside the United 
States. At present, Apple is giving no clues, 
although Apple Pay’s original rollout suggests 
that the UK will be next to receive the new Cash 
feature, especially when you take into account 
Facebook Messenger’s rival, which launched in 
the United Kingdom.
Image: Jason Cipriani/CNET
203

204

Image: Justin Sullivan
Apple Pay Cash
205

206

THE END OF PAYPAL COULD BE CLOSE
Although Apple Pay Cash may seem a 
revolutionary feature for your smartphone, it 
is not the first service of its kind. Venmo first 
introduced peer-to-peer payments, bringing 
them to PayPal in 2013 during its acquisition. 
Square also added the feature to its Square Cash 
application, while Google Wallet also allows 
users to send cash to one another. However, 
Apple Pay Cash now poses a real threat to these 
services that are also available in the United 
States, as it is a baked-in feature.
The real main competition Apple Pay Cash 
faces is with PayPal. PayPal not only offers P2P 
payments through Venmo but ahead of the 
launch of Apple Pay Cash, PayPal teamed up 
with Facebook to offer a similar peer-to-peer 
payment service. This allows users to send or 
request money using their PayPal account. 
ANDROID AND APPLE PAY CASH
Perhaps one of biggest drawbacks of Apple Pay 
Cash is that it can only be accessed from iOS 
devices – if one user has an iPhone and the other 
an Android, it won’t work. For the immediate 
future, Android users won’t have access to Apple 
Pay Cash, however, just like it did with its Apple 
Music service in 2015, Apple could introduce a 
standalone Apple Pay Cash application to the 
Google Play Store in due course.
APPLE REVOLUTIONIZES OUR 
RELATIONSHIP WITH MONEY 
The way money changes hands has been 
evolving for hundreds of years. In recent years, 
new payment currencies such as Bitcoin have 
207

revolutionized our relationship with money; and 
the introduction of Apple Pay Cash is another 
step up the ladder.
According to Virgin, Sweden could be 
the first completely cashless society, as it 
continued to crack down on organized crime. 
In Sweden, digital payments are accepted 
almost everywhere, including on buses and to 
buy magazines on the streets. This is a result 
of collaboration between major Swedish and 
Danish banks to create a direct payment app.
Cashless societies could entirely change the 
way our children learn about money, with 
Forbes suggesting that e-currency, such as the 
potential e-Korona in Sweden, could be sensitive 
to shocks and could make society vulnerable. 
At the moment, we can only speculate about 
the future of Apple Pay Cash. However, there is 
a potential that the US will follow in Sweden’s 
footsteps, as users begin to see the benefits of 
becoming a cashless society.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
208

209

210

211

If you’ve long been enjoying listening to the 
streaming service Apple Music, you are in very 
good company. Last month, Apple revealed 
to Billboard that it has amassed “well over 
30 million paying subscribers”.  That’s a 
noticeable increase from the 27 million figure 
that Apple reported at WWDC in June - and, 
unlike arch-rival Spotify, Apple Music is on solid 
financial ground. However, there has been 
growing evidence of Apple’s belief that there 
remains much room for improvement.
Apple Music head Jimmy Iovine told Billboard: 
“I don’t believe that what exists right now is 
enough.” He added: “Just because we’re adding 
millions of subscribers and the old catalog 
numbers are going up, that’s not the trick. That’s 
just not going to hold.” He is clearly setting 
his sights high - especially considering an 
August report by Goldman Sachs that, due 
to subscription streaming, the global record 
business will grow by nearly thrice as, by 2030, it 
reaches $41 billion.
Iovine admitted: “I believe we’re in the right 
place, we have the right people and the right 
attitude to not settle for what exists right now.” 
Those people surely include the former Sony 
Pictures Television executives Jamie Ehrlicht 
and Zack Van Amburg, who are reportedly in 
the market for dramas along the lines of the 
huge international hit Game of Thrones.  
Apple Music has already been an exclusive 
outlet for much original content; could more 
such content propel Apple Music even further?
212

213

214

APPLE PLANNING VIDEO CONTENT OF 
“UNPARALLELED QUALITY”
The signs are certainly looking good. In the 
press release that announced the hires of 
Ehrlicht and Amburg, the former insisted: “We 
want to bring to video what Apple has been 
so successful with in their other services and 
consumer products - unparalleled quality.”  He 
and Amburg obviously know a thing or two 
about quality; during their 12-year stint in the 
presidency of Sony Pictures Television, they 
created such publicly acclaimed series as Better 
Call Saul, Breaking Bad and The Crown.
It seems that Eddy Cue, Apple’s senior vice 
president of Internet Software and Services, 
wasn’t overstating the case when he declared: 
“Jamie and Zack are two of the most talented 
TV executives in the world and have been 
instrumental in making this the golden age 
of television”. They could spark a golden age 
for Apple’s own television efforts, Cue having 
enthused that Apple has “exciting plans in store 
for customers” and “there is much more to come.”
Apple could proceed to confidently back up 
those words, as the company has reportedly 
penned a deal with legendary director 
Steven Spielberg to revive his 1980s sci-fi 
series Amazing Stories.  Apple is also said to 
be intent on leasing an 85,000-square-foot 
office development near the Los Angeles 
settlement of Culver City, where Beats is 
headquartered.  The expenditure on this new 
space could come from the $1 billion that 
Apple has reportedly set aside for investing in 
original content.
215

216

AN “AMAZING” DEAL WITH 
STEVEN SPIELBERG
Of course, Apple has already made quite a few 
moves in the original content space. Its first ever 
attempt, a reality show called Planet of the Apps, 
debuted earlier this year on Apple Music and 
saw stars including Jessica Alba and Gwyneth 
Paltrow assessing the quality of various ideas 
for apps. That show has since been followed by 
Carpool Karaoke, a spin-off from the popular 
segment of the same name on The Late Late 
Show with James Corden.
Various behind-the-scenes music documentaries 
have been pegged for exclusive releases on 
Apple Music. Those have included On the 
Record: P!nk - Beautiful Trauma, in which 
interviews and footage provide insight into 
how the artist put together her new album 
Beautiful Trauma.  There’s also On the Record: 
Flicker, which takes a similar look at former One 
Direction member Niall Horan’s making of his 
first solo album, Flicker.  However, has Apple just 
been getting warmed up so far?
Perhaps the most exciting project currently 
on Apple’s original content calendar is the 
aforementioned revival of Amazing Stories. 
Having signed a deal with Amblin Television 
and Comcast Corp’s NBCUniversal television 
production unit, Apple and Spielberg will 
reportedly be responsible for 10 episodes of a 
new Amazing Stories series. At least $5 million 
will be spent on each episode - so, we can 
anticipate high production values and hopefully 
solid scripting for this new series.
However, it might not necessarily be Apple 
Music to which the series is released. The Wall 
Image: Doane Gregory / Disney
217

Image: Ryan Aylsworth
On the Record: P!nk -
Beautiful Trauma Trailer
218

219

Street Journal has reported that Ehrlicht and 
Amburg are “building out a video strategy 
that is expected to include a streaming 
service that rivals Netflix Inc., Amazon.com 
Inc. and others.”  Apple has previously failed in 
negotiations with content providers to form 
a video streaming service, but the company’s 
recently-acquired Hollywood veterans could 
help break that deadlock.
HOW APPLE MUSIC COMPARES TO THE 
MAJOR COMPETITION
Nonetheless, with no specific timeframe yet 
suggested for the debut of a service that could 
plausibly be named “Apple Video”, the more 
immediate focus is, for now, on Apple Music. 
While the music streaming market has become 
crowded with service providers, Apple Music 
compares well to its major rivals. It trails only 
Spotify in its number of paid subscribers - and, 
like that service, offers over 30 million songs for 
streaming. Unlike Spotify, it also integrates with 
Siri on various Apple devices.
Apple Music also charges the same 
$9.99-a-month fee as Spotify’s premium tier. 
Though Apple Music does offer a three-month 
free trial, it departs from Spotify practice in not 
offering any permanently free service that is 
funded by regular advertisements. Both Apple 
Music and Spotify are available on the iOS, Mac, 
Windows and Android platforms; the same can 
be said of Google Play Music and Deezer Music, 
though Spotify also supports Linux and Deezer 
is on Windows Phone.
One music streaming service that has attracted 
a much greater amount of negative publicity 
220

221

222

223

224

than any of the above is Tidal. Despite the strong 
support it has had from leading artists including 
Jay-Z and his wife Beyoncé, Tidal has been mired 
by poor music discovery features, occasional 
bugs, and a series of album release cock-ups. 
At least one respect in which it differs for the 
better is its offering of a $19.99 lossless quality 
high fidelity - or “HiFi” - service on top of the 
standard $9.99 tier.
MUSIC REMAINS A KEY PART 
OF APPLE’S STRATEGY
The recent announcements and reports 
surrounding Apple’s original content plans leave 
us in no doubt that music and culture remain 
strong parts of the company’s identity. Apple 
even recently streamlined its iTunes desktop 
software to bring the focus more firmly onto 
music. That meant abandoning the availability 
of the iOS App Store and ringtones with iTunes 
12.7, though Apple recently restored this 
availability with iTunes 12.6.3, which iTunes 
12.7 users can still install.
Furthermore, with Iovine, Ehrlicht and Amburg 
all now among Apple’s executive ranks, we 
can expect Apple to follow through on its 
ambitious original content plans. Could the 
next TV drama to reach the popularity of Game 
of Thrones debut on an Apple service - whether 
that be the iTunes Store, Apple Music or “Apple 
Video”? We see no reason to rule out the 
possibility - especially if Apple further steps up 
its efforts and investment with original content 
over the next few years.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
Image: Josh Miller/CNET
225

226

227

The video streaming service Netflix initially 
appeared to be overly adventurous when it 
started producing its own content in 2013. 
However, much of it has since attracted 
significant critical and popular acclaim - and 
pave the way for a dramatically different 
business model for Netflix itself. Recently, more 
and more companies have been trying to edge 
into the original content game - but how did we 
reach this point, and what does the future hold 
as Stranger Things 2 wows the world?
SOMETHING OF A QUIET REVOLUTION
Many of Netflix’s content efforts have, when 
launched, come across as relatively low-key. 
Just think of Dear White People, the comedy-
drama which was adapted from Justin Simien’s 
2014 indie film of the same name. We could 
also cite the Netflix original series BoJack 
Horseman - which, despite starring The Lego 
Movie lead Will Arnett and premiering in the 
same year as that film, has been dubbed 
“one of the most underrated comedies ever 
made” by Paste magazine.
Nonetheless, Netflix has been busy releasing a 
raft of original shows over the years - and the 
company clearly has something of a golden 
touch, with plaudits having been forthcoming 
for this content. Some of the shows, such as 
prison drama Orange is the New Black and 
Tina Fey’s 30 Rock spin-off Unbreakable Kimmy 
Schmidt, have become big names far beyond 
the world of Netflix. And then there’s Stranger 
Things, effectively a tribute to the ‘80s material 
of Steven Spielberg.
It’s worth returning to the subject of Stranger 
Things, as it was only in late October that Netflix 
228

229

released the second season - or what is officially 
called Stranger Things 2. Set in the 1980s and 
the fictional Indiana town of Hawkins, the new 
season follows a bunch of young characters 
as they attempt to recover from the events 
of the first, where a boy disappeared amid 
supernatural occurrences. The cast largely 
consists of unknowns, Winona Ryder one 
notable exception. 
As has been customary for Netflix with other 
shows, the company released all of the season’s 
episodes in one go. There were no agonizing, 
week-long delays for people who quickly 
consumed the first episode and were hungry 
for more. This is basically the binge model of TV 
consumption, the popularity of which Netflix 
has helped usher in. Given this and the feverish 
anticipation surrounding Stranger Things 2, it 
shouldn’t surprise that many fans reportedly 
watched it just hours after release.
LOCALIZATION WAS NO EASY TASK WITH 
STRANGER THINGS
Nonetheless, Netflix’s mission to become a 
truly international TV network is fraught with 
difficulty. In fact, acquiring global rights to 
original material before making it available 
online can seem a relatively straightforward 
part of the equation. There’s a huge challenge 
in the form of “localization”, where dialogue 
is translated but in a manner that preserves 
pop culture meaning. This is especially crucial 
for a show like Stranger Things, which has ‘80s 
motifs in abundance.  
Denny Sheehan, Netflix’s head of localization, 
revealed in an interview with Business 
230

Image: Courtesy Netflix
231

Insider that the term “Demogorgon” is one 
example of a term that was problematic for 
his team. The word is taken from Dungeons & 
Dragons; hence, Netflix needed to study how 
Dungeons & Dragons itself translated the term 
in each language. Even the thumbnail used 
to advertise Stranger Things on the streaming 
service can differ depending on what 
community is viewing it. 
Voice actors were chosen carefully for foreign 
markets, too. Sheehan told WIRED that Netflix 
seeks people who both are aurally similar to 
the original cast and “embody the spirit of the 
Image: Courtesy Netflix
232

233

234

character and tone.”  He further explained: “We 
think of the subtitles and dubs as enabling 
access to the story,” adding: “Our goal is to use 
creative intent as the North Star, to really create 
culturally relevant and resonant translations for 
the continent that have a wide global appeal.”
NETFLIX PAINTS A MIXED 
PICTURE FINANCIALLY 
In the wake of hit after hit in the original content 
sphere, Netflix must surely be financially firing 
on all cylinders? Well, not quite. The company 
unveiled its third-quarter earnings in October 
- and, indeed, the subscriber and revenue 
numbers had both grown. However, the 
negative cash flow had tipped just past $450 
million, while earnings and margins remained 
- on the whole - poor. So, how did Netflix react - 
particularly considering its previous pledge to 
spend $6 billion on content in 2017? 
235

236

It actually announced a hike in this budget for 
next year - up to $8 billion. This has left Netflix’s 
content production and acquisition costs 
outpacing its revenue - and, in light of this, it 
isn’t too surprising that Netflix will continue 
borrowing money. Last month, the company 
said it was set to issue bonds of $1.6 billion - and, 
if an expectation from Bloomberg Intelligence 
analyst Stephen Flynn bears out, will borrow an 
additional $1.4 billion during the next year.
Right now, Netflix’s debt stands at almost $5 
billion, and Morgan Stanley anticipates the 
company waiting until 2021, if not later, to reach 
a positive cash flow. It all reveals a risky business 
strategy, given that a future of disappointing 
growth in subscribers and revenue - perhaps 
sparked by competition from Amazon - can’t be 
entirely ruled out. However, in an opinion piece 
for Bloomberg, Joe Nocera says that, “while 
Netflix is taking oversized risks, ... these are risks 
well worth taking.”
Nocera points out, due to the ever-intense 
competition in the original content race, “over 
the next five to 10 years, there will likely be, 
at most, a half-dozen dominant players.” Sure, 
niche players will still exist in the streaming 
space; however, “most people are not going 
to be willing to pay monthly fees for more 
than a handful of content companies”. As a 
result, those streaming services with the most 
impressive portfolios of original content which 
are constantly updated will triumph. 
THE VIDEO STREAMING RIVALRY 
IS INTENSIFYING 
However, if Netflix does establish itself at the 
summit of the video streaming market, it 
Image: Courtesy Netflix
237

238

won’t do so without a fight. Amazon’s budget 
for original content - to be made available 
exclusively to its Prime subscribers - this year 
is $4.5 billion, and chief executive Jeff Bezos 
has revealed that the company has Netflix in 
its sights. Meanwhile, Disney has announced 
its intention to remove its impressive back 
catalogue from Netflix and transfer it to its own 
to-be-launched streaming service. 
That’s before we consider the continuing 
formidable presence of HBO, the original 
content quality of which is unrivalled, and 
YouTube, which isn’t short of TV-standard 
content. There’s also the question of Apple, 
which should make firmer steps into the arena 
after its Apple Music-exclusive early efforts 
Planet of the Apps and Carpool Karaoke: The 
Series. The corporation will lavish $1 billion 
on TV programming next year, though the 
content appears set to be more mainstream 
than Netflix’s.
Still, Netflix can continue having faith in its own 
prowess. Its revenue is twice as high as it was 
only three years ago, while shows and movies 
can be streamed from Netflix in almost all of 
the world’s countries. Typically, each week, 
Netflix customers watch 30 to 40 hours on the 
service. Nocera cites this track record in opining 
that Netflix’s risks will bear fruit. He concludes: 
“Someday we’re going to look up and realize 
that Netflix has become the Facebook or Google 
of online media.”
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
239

ads@techlifenews.com
Digital
Mindﬁeld

TechLife News is an independent publication and has not been authorized, sponsored, or otherwise approved by Apple Inc.
TECHLIFE NEWS© Copyright 2016-2012. All Rights Reserved.
No part of the document may be circulated, quoted, or reproduced for distribution without prior written approval.Proper Trademark
Notice and Attribution iPad™, iPhone™, iPod™, Mac™, iMac™, Macbook™, iOS™, OS X™are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the
U.S. and other countries. Please contact support for additional trademark ownership rights information. The following is a list of
Apple’s trademarks and service marks http://www.apple.com/legal/ trademark/appletmlist.html. All other trademarks are the
properties of their owners.
WRIWRITERS
Precise English Inc.
Benjamin Kerry (UK)
Gavin Lenaghan (UK)
Craig Lenaghan (UK)
Elena Lusk (US)
COLUMNS
COLUMNS
iTUNES REVIEW
Benjamin Kerry
FINANCE NEWS
Associated Press / Bloomberg
REVISION
Gavin Lenaghan
Elena Lusk
PRODUCTION SUPPORT / COLLABORATORS
Rui da Costa
Segolene Vincent
Lise Berda
James Jarvis
Richard Sawyer
Lauren Brown
Matthew Coburn
Jeﬀrey Milks
Gustavo Leite
Susan Kiesling
Raquel Serrano
Robert Fluellen
Lisa Swiniarski
Roger Gayalkar
Gustavo Labanca
Held Souza
PRIVACY POLICY
techlifenews.com/privacy-policy/
TERMS OF USE
techlifenews.com/terms-of-use/
SOCIAL NETWORKS
Twitter
@TechLife_News
twitter.com/#!/TechLife_News
Facebook
facebook.com/TechLifeNews
SUBSCRIPTIONS
SUBSCRIPTIONS
TechLife News Website
techlifenews.com
iTunes App Store™/ Newsstand
itunes.apple.com/app/techlife-news/id529054466?mt=8
CONTACTS
Executive Director - ceo@techlifenews.com
Relationship Management - crm@techlifenews.com
Editor - editor@techlifenews.com
Advertise - ads@techlifenews.com
Social Network - network@techlifenews.com
Promotions - promo@techlifenews.com
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Ivan Castilho
Chief Executive Oﬃcer / Design Conception
MINDFIELD DIGITAL ART & GRAPHIC DESIGN
Glauco Ribeiro
Chief Design Oﬃcer / Art & Graphic Design Director
Michael Danglen
Art & Graphic Design Producer
Anderson Oliveira
Art & Graphic Design Producer
OFFICIAL WEBSITE
Yogh Inc.
WordPress Production & Website Support
Lucas Carvalho
Production Director
Fellipe Giesel
Web Designer / Producer
Filipe Siems
Web Designer / Programmer
TECHLIFE NEWS INTERNATIONAL
TechLifeNews.comMASTHEAD

TechlifeNews.com

