
IET CIRCUITS, DEVICES AND SYSTEMS SERIES 21
TCAD for Si,
SiGe and GaAs
Integrated Circuits

Other volumes in this series:
Volume 2
Analogue IC design: the current-mode approach C. Toumazou, F.J. Lidgey
and D.G. Haigh (Editors)
Volume 3
Analogue–digital ASICs: circuit techniques, design tools and applications
R.S. Soin, F. Maloberti and J. France (Editors)
Volume 4
Algorithmic and knowledge-based CAD for VLSI G.E. Taylor and G. Russell
(Editors)
Volume 5
Switched currents: an analogue technique for digital technology
C. Toumazou, J.B.C. Hughes and N.C. Battersby (Editors)
Volume 6
High-frequency circuit engineering F. Nibler et al.
Volume 8
Low-power high-frequency microelectronics: a uniﬁed approach
G. Machado (Editor)
Volume 9
VLSI testing: digital and mixed analogue/digital techniques S.L. Hurst
Volume 10
Distributed feedback semiconductor lasers J.E. Carroll, J.E.A. Whiteaway and
R.G.S. Plumb
Volume 11
Selected topics in advanced solid state and ﬁbre optic sensors
S.M. Vaezi-Nejad (Editor)
Volume 12
Strained silicon heterostructures: materials and devices C.K. Maitim,
N.B. Chakrabarti and S.K. Ray
Volume 13
RFIC and MMIC design and technology I.D. Robertson and
S. Lucyzyn (Editors)
Volume 14
Design of high frequency integrated analogue ﬁlters Y. Sun (Editor)
Volume 15
Foundations of digital signal processing: theory, algorithms and
hardware design P. Gaydecki
Volume 16
Wireless communications circuits and systems Y. Sun (Editor)
Volume 17
The switching function: analysis of power electronic circuits C. Marouchos
Volume 18
System on chip: next generation electronics B. Al-Hashimi (Editor)
Volume 20
Low power and low voltage circuit design with the FGMOS transistor
E. Rodriguez-Villegas

TCAD for Si,
SiGe and GaAs
Integrated Circuits
G.A. Armstrong
Queen’s University Belfast, Northern Ireland
C.K. Maiti
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
The Institution of Engineering and Technology

Published by The Institution of Engineering and Technology, London, United Kingdom
© 2007 The Institution of Engineering and Technology
First published 2007
This publication is copyright under the Berne Convention and the Universal Copyright
Convention. All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research
or private study, or criticism or review, as permitted under the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act, 1988, this publication may be reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any
form or by any means, only with the prior permission in writing of the publishers, or in
the case of reprographic reproduction in accordance with the terms of licences issued
by the Copyright Licensing Agency. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside those
terms should be sent to the publishers at the undermentioned address:
The Institution of Engineering and Technology
Michael Faraday House
Six Hills Way, Stevenage
Herts, SG1 2AY, United Kingdom
www.theiet.org
While the author and the publishers believe that the information and guidance given in
this work are correct, all parties must rely upon their own skill and judgement when
making use of them. Neither the author nor the publishers assume any liability to
anyone for any loss or damage caused by any error or omission in the work, whether
such error or omission is the result of negligence or any other cause. Any and all such
liability is disclaimed.
The moral rights of the author to be identiﬁed as author of this work have been
asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Maiti, C.K.
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits. - (Circuits, devices & systems; v. 21)
1. Integrated circuits - Design and construction
2. Computer-aided design
I. Title II. Armstrong, G.A. III. Institution of Engineering and Technology
621.3’815
ISBN 978-0-86341-743-6
Typeset in India by Newgen Imaging Systems (P) Ltd, Chennai
Printed in the UK by Athenaeum Press Ltd, Gateshead, Tyne & Wear

Contents
Preface
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
History of device simulation
8
1.2
History of process simulation
10
1.3
Evolution of TCAD
12
1.4
Process flow integration
13
1.5
TCAD and compact model
15
1.6
Parameter extraction
17
1.7
Statistical process control and yield analysis
18
1.8
Virtual wafer fabrication
19
1.9
Optimisation
20
1.10
TCAD for nanoelectronics
20
1.11
Interconnect
23
1.12
Summary
23
References
25
2
IC technology and TCAD tools
31
2.1
Process simulation
32
2.1.1
Oxidation
33
2.1.2
Ion implantation
33
2.1.3
Diffusion
34
2.1.4
Lithography
35
2.1.5
Etching
37
2.1.6
Metallisation
37
2.2
Plasma processing
40
2.3
Chemical mechanical polishing
43
2.4
Synopsys TCAD Tools
44
2.5
SILVACO: TCAD simulation suite
46
2.5.1
ATHENA
47
2.5.2
ATLAS
47

vi
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
2.6
Process-to-device simulation using SILVACO
48
2.6.1
Device generation
49
2.6.2
Device simulation
50
2.7
Simulation example: strained-Si MOSFET
54
2.8
Summary
56
References
58
3
Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
63
3.1
Boron out-diffusion
63
3.2
Diffusion: B in strained-SiGe
65
3.3
Diffusion: P and As in strained-SiGe
70
3.4
Dopant diffusion in SiGeC
75
3.5
Oxidation: SiGe/SiGeC films
79
3.5.1
Oxidation kinetics
80
3.5.2
Plasma oxidation of SiGe films
84
3.6
Summary
88
References
89
4
Strain-engineered MOSFETs
97
4.1
Scaling issues
100
4.2
Mobility-enhanced substrate engineering
102
4.2.1
Orientation-dependent mobility engineering
104
4.2.2
Mobility enhancement by process-induced stress
106
4.2.3
Mobility enhancement by substrate-induced strain
111
4.3
Channel engineering
117
4.4
Gate engineering
120
4.5
Strained-engineered CMOS technology
127
4.6
Layout engineering
132
4.7
Strain-engineered MOSFETs: simulation
136
4.8
Summary
143
References
143
5
SOI MOSFETs
153
5.1
Fabrication of SOI wafers
154
5.2
SOI devices
158
5.2.1
Partially depleted SOI transistors
160
5.2.2
Fully depleted SOI transistors
162
5.3
Double-gate MOSFET
163
5.4
TCAD simulation of SOI devices
165
5.5
Simulation using MASTAR
168
5.6
Strained-Si MOSFETs on SOI
171
5.6.1
Simulation of SSGOI MOSFETs
173
5.6.2
MC simulation of sSOI MOSFETs
180
5.7
Modelling of multi-gate SOI devices
184
5.8
Summary
188
References
189

List of contents
vii
6
Heterostructure bipolar transistors
195
6.1
The first SiGe transistor
199
6.2
Issues related to heterostructure
200
6.3
SiGe materials
204
6.3.1
UHVCVD growth of SiGe films
206
6.4
Physics of SiGe HBTs
208
6.5
Figures of merit of SiGe HBTs
211
6.6
Simulation of SiGe HBTs
213
6.7
Transit time in SiGe HBTs
219
6.8
SiGe HBTs at low temperature
220
6.9
Summary
224
References
227
7
SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
233
7.1
SiGe-BiCMOS technology
238
7.2
IBM SiGe-BiCMOS technology
240
7.2.1
Base-during-gate process
240
7.2.2
Base-after-gate process
243
7.3
SiGe HBTs on SOI
245
7.4
Complementary SiGe HBT technology
247
7.5
SiGeC HBT technology
249
7.6
TCAD: SiGe/SiGeC BiCMOS process
254
7.7
Summary
259
References
260
8
MOSFET: compact models
267
8.1
Charge-based MOSFET models
268
8.2
Surface-potential based MOSFET models
271
8.2.1
SP model
273
8.2.2
HiSIM
275
8.2.3
MOS model 11
275
8.2.4
EKV model
277
8.3
Model evaluation
279
8.4
Modelling of SOI MOSFETs
280
8.5
Modelling of heterostructure MOSFETs
281
8.6
RF MOS modelling
285
8.7
Large-signal MOSFET models
287
8.8
Summary
295
References
295
9
HBT: compact models
301
9.1
Advanced models
304
9.2
VBIC model
305
9.3
MEXTRAM model
310
9.4
The HICUM model
312
9.5
Parameter extraction
314

viii
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
9.6
Extraction algorithm
316
9.7
VBIC model implementation in SPICE
323
9.8
TRADICA
332
9.9
Scalable modelling: SiGe/SiGeC HBTs
333
9.10
Role of TCAD
339
9.11
Summary
341
References
343
10
Design and simulation of high-speed devices
351
10.1
SiGe vs. GaAs HBTs
354
10.2
Device simulation
356
10.2.1
Device simulators
357
10.3
Material parameters
359
10.3.1
Bandgap and bandgap narrowing
361
10.3.2
Conduction band density of states
365
10.3.3
Valence band density of states
366
10.3.4
Si1−xGex mobility
368
10.3.5
Saturation velocity
372
10.3.6
Generation and recombination
373
10.3.7
Impact ionisation
375
10.4
Simulation of III–V devices
376
10.5
Comparison of HBTs
384
10.6
RFMOS vs. HBTs
390
10.7
Summary
394
References
397
11
Passive components
409
11.1
Inductor
411
11.1.1
Inductor model description
414
11.1.2
Quality factor
417
11.2
Parameter extraction
418
11.3
Inductor simulation
421
11.3.1
ASITIC
423
11.4
Active inductors
425
11.5
Capacitors
427
11.6
Varactor
429
11.7
Resistor
430
11.8
Interconnects
431
11.9
Summary
434
References
434
Index
439

Preface
The 2005 International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) predicts
that the use of Technology computer-aided design (TCAD) will provide as much as
a 40 per cent reduction in technology development costs by reducing the number of
experimental lots and shortening development time for the semiconductor industry. In
a highly competitive manufacturing environment, one needs to take the full advantage
of the predictive power of TCAD to reduce cost and time for product development.
Currently, process and device simulation has established itself as an indispensable
tool for developing and optimising device and microelectronic process technologies
in the R&D phase. With the device compact model parameter extraction for circuit
analysis, TCAD can be extended into manufacturing for advanced process control
and parametric yield analysis.
In addition to the rising costs of semiconductor process and product development,
eachtechnologygenerationis drivingtowardshigherperformanceandincreasedcom-
plexity. The challenge of analysing advanced semiconductor processes and devices
through numerical simulations have been our main motivation for this monograph.
The purpose is to bring various aspects of TCAD for microelectronic applications into
one resource, presenting a comprehensive perspective of the field. The aim is also to
provide device and process engineers with examples of the TCAD simulation applied
to a number of different technologies, illustrating a quantitative link between the basic
technological parameters and electrical behaviour of microelectronic devices.
In Chapter 1, the key developments in TCAD from the early research to the
present day, leading to a brief summary of the current status and role of TCAD tools
for nanoelectronic devices, are presented. Chapter 2 describes key technology issues
for microelectronic fabrication and introduces the reader to commercial TCAD sim-
ulation tools. This chapter also considers how process simulation can be linked to
device simulation to determine key indicators of device performance, illustrated by
simulation results of several device structures based on AlGaAs/InGaAs/GaAs and
strained-Si heterostructures. Chapter 3 describes issues relating to oxidation and dif-
fusion modelling for Si heterostructures (SiGe and SiGeC) and their implementation
in Silvaco tool ATHENA.
Chapter 4 deals with the topical field of strain-engineered MOSFETs. Various
strategies for enhancement of electron and hole mobility, including process-induced

x
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
and substrate-induced strain are explained. The impact of both strain and stress in
the performance enhancement of deep sub-micron heterojunction field effect tran-
sistors (hetero-FETs) is considered. Non-classical CMOS device structures (ultrathin
single- and multi-gate devices, such as SOI and FinFET) will play a fundamental
role in assuring a successful continuation of device scaling trends. The significance
of silicon-on-insulator (SOI) MOSFETs for extension of CMOS scaling is covered
in Chapter 5.
Chapter 6 gives the background theory of the heterojunction bipolar transistors
(HBTs), illustrated by simulation of several device structures based on SiGe. A ret-
rospective look at the many years of development and production of SiGe/SiGeC
devices and circuits reveals the significant challenges that have been overcome to
successfully integrate SiGe/SiGeC HBTs and BiCMOS technology into successful
products. Key technology developments including the growth of SiGe/SiGeC mate-
rial and overall integration issues with emphasis on high-frequency performance and
reliability are discussed in Chapter 7.
An important role of the predictive modelling using TCAD is to utilize detailed
process and device simulation to facilitate the interaction between the circuit designer
and process technologist, until the product data is incorporated into the design kit.
The objective of the remaining chapters of this monograph is to bring together the
diversity of activities and the advancements made in compact bipolar, MOS and
emerging device models, as well as models for the active and passive components
for RF circuit applications.
Accurate MOSFET models that include the observed physical phenomena
as well as models for both analog and digital circuits are crucial to design and opti-
mise advanced very large-scale integration/ultra large-scale integration (VLSI/ULSI)
circuits for nanoscale CMOS technology. The number of different devices for which
compact models are required is enormous: ranging from bipolar to MOSFETs, HBTs,
MESFET and high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs). In Chapter 8, we dis-
cuss the currently available MOSFET models and the impact of the new modelling
paradigm on MOSFET circuit simulation with particular attention to RF issues.
Chapter 9 provides an overview of different bipolar device compact models and the
relevance of their associated internal circuit components. This chapter also provides
an overview of d.c./RF parameter extraction techniques for SiGe HBTs for VBIC
model and implementation in SPICE with the help of TCAD.
Chapter 10 presents a comprehensive comparison of three state-of-the-art het-
erojunction bipolar transistors; the AlGaAs/GaAs HBT, the Si/SiGe HBT and the
InGaAs/InP HBT. The trade-offs between the devices are examined, focusing on
their intrinsic properties and electrical parameters, and on how these properties and
parameters relate to the reported and potential device performance.
Device simulation and simulators are reviewed and the electronic properties of
various semiconductors, on which heterostructure devices are based, is discussed.
Models for the lattice, thermal, band structure and transport properties, as well as
models for important high-field and high-doping effects that occur in the devices, are
presented.

Preface
xi
Finally, Chapter 11 gives a broad overview of the impact of TCAD on passive
components design. The design concept and modelling approach of both passive
spiral inductors and active inductors are addressed. Various types of varactor, MIM
capacitors and resistor structures currently in use are also discussed.
Each chapter ensures coverage of up-to-date TCAD research results for state-of-
the-art devices and a comprehensive list of seminal references. In summary, this book
fills a gap in the literature in a rapidly evolving field, as it blends together a wide-
ranging description of TCAD activities in Si, SiGe and GaAs materials, technology,
device and their applications. An extensive reference list provided in each chapter
will help the reader identify the key stages in the development of TCAD from early
research through to its integration in current manufacturing.
Themonographisaimedatresearchanddevelopmentengineersandscientistswho
areactivelyinvolvedinmicroelectronicstechnologyanddevicedesignviatechnology
CAD, and may also serve as a reference for postgraduate and research students in the
field of electrical engineering and solid-state physics, for TCAD users and developers.
We hope the monograph will help the reader to be in a strong position to address future
challenges in semiconductor process, device and circuit development via TCAD.
G.A. Armstrong and C.K. Maiti


Chapter 1
Introduction
Since the invention of the transistor more than 50 years ago [1, 2], the successful
downscaling of silicon devices and advances in processing technologies have now
enabled us to achieve highly complex electronic systems. The microelectronics indus-
try has relied mainly on the shrinking of transistor geometries for improvements
in circuit performance and cost per function for over four decades. Technology
computer-aided design (TCAD) is used in the computer-aided design and engineering
semiconductor device design, fabrication process design, technology characterisa-
tion for circuit design, manufacturing yield optimisation and process centring, and
computer integrated manufacturing [3].
The strong foundation of the Si semiconductor industry and our ability to make
the transistors smaller and smaller (downscaling), have now led the devices to their
fundamental limits and more transistors on a single chip. This trend has led us into
the ultra large-scale integration (ULSI), and the giga scale integration (GSI) era is
approaching. Continued transistor scaling will not be as straight forward in the future
as it has been previously because fundamental materials and process limits are rapidly
being approached in the ‘classical’ bulk-Si CMOS technology. To sustain the silicon
scaling over the next 10–15 years, the industry is currently facing difficult challenges.
The deep submicron technology calls for new design and fabrication methodologies
to cope with the complexity and coupling among different stages of a design and
fabrication.
A chip design starts with the product specification, followed by the front-end and
back-end designs. The design and implementation of an integrated circuit, be it the
whole system on a chip or a circuit, can be represented by five distinctively different
levels of abstraction such as system level, logic level, circuit level, layout level and
technology level. The front-end design usually starts from the system level with a
top-down synthesis approach, which is technology independent (i.e., at this level, it is
‘irrelevant’ whether the design will be implemented in CMOS or bipolar technology).
The design is then transformed into the circuit level, in which the logic functionality,

2
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
timing delays, speed and power, and so on are the primary concerns. Although this
level is technology dependent, it is relatively process-independent.
At the back-end, the final design needs to be translated into the physical layout
representation that is used to be implemented in wafer fabrication. In the ‘conven-
tional’ hierarchy, technology development is relatively independent of the design.
For this phase, electronic computer-aided design (ECAD) tools have been devel-
oped, which are now so powerful that the logic design can be synthesised from a
high-level description language, the circuit netlist can be extracted from the logic
functional description and the layout can be extracted from the circuit and logic-level
descriptions.
Starting from the product idea, several sequential steps are followed in an inte-
gratedcircuitdevelopmentandproductionflow. Thechipdesignandwaferfabrication
involve a complex and iterative process involving the design, simulation, manufactur-
ing, characterisation and verification. The main stages of semiconductor fabrication,
from design to the final product, include mainly the following:
Design: The integrated circuit is designed as a schematic taking into account the
needs for the specific application. It is now a standard practice to use ECAD tools
to simulate the behaviour of any schematic design via detailed circuit simulation
models and design rules that are specific to a particular process.
Layout: The resulting integrated circuit is drawn as a layout on the specific layers,
depending on the available semiconductor process technology. The combination
of multiple layers, like implantation masks and etch masks, defines the shape and
functionality of the electronic devices in the integrated circuit.
Mask: The layout data is processed to fabricate the physical masks that are
generally written using laser- or e-beam lithography equipment.
Processing: With the starting wafer, process flow typical to a technology is
followed in semiconductor fabrication. During this, wafers are subjected to
numerous unit process steps like oxidation, ion implantation, deposition and etch-
ing of semiconductor, dielectric and metal, diffusion of dopants and lithography
to create specific device structure with various deposited layers using different
masks.
Test: After the fabrication cycle, wafers with the functional integrated circuits
are tested electrically. First, on single device level with process control monitors
(PCMs), and second, on integrated circuit level including inking the bad dies.
Assembly: After testing, the good dies are scribed into pieces, and packaging of the
single circuits are done. After the packaging, a final electrical test is performed.
The use of TCAD in semiconductor manufacturing is two-fold: First, it mod-
els the complex flow of semiconductor fabrication steps and ends up with detailed
information on geometric shape and doping profile distribution of a semiconductor
device (see Figure 1.1). Second, the device simulation uses the information of the first
step to calculate the characteristics of semiconductor devices. The resulting device
characteristics are used for fitting circuit simulation models.
InTCAD,abroadrangeofmodellingandanalysisactivitiesthatconsistofdetailed
simulation of IC lithographic and fabrication processes, single- or multiple-device

Introduction
3
Device simulation results 
Electrical parameters and device characteristics
Simulation results 
Geometric (boundary) Dupant distribution
Single process simulation step 
Etching 
Single process simulation step 
Deposition
Single process simulation step 
Implantation
Single process simulation step 
Lithography
Single process simulation step 
Oxidation/diffusion 
Semiconductor process simulation
Circuit simulation
Figure 1.1
A typical process simulation flow
Layout
+
Process
Process 
simulation
TCAD
Device 
simulation
Technology 
characterisation
Circuit 
simulation
Figure 1.2
The conventional role of TCAD in IC processing
electrical performance and extraction of discrete parameters for equivalent circuit
models are involved. TCAD represents our physical understanding of processes and
devices in terms of computer models of semiconductor physics. The conventional
role of TCAD in IC processing is shown in Figure 1.2. TCAD is used to design,
analyse and optimise semiconductor technologies and devices with fundamental and
accurate models.
TCAD is used in the semiconductor industry via two main approaches. The first
approach is in predictive simulation, which is used in a conceptual device design
phase for the prediction of trends in process options, device operation and circuit
behaviour. The second approach is to use experimental data to calibrate the models

4
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
in the simulator and then to use the calibrated tools in the optimisation phase of
the development process. TCAD tools are available at different levels for different
applications. The different tools play different roles in any technology develop-
ment strategy. TCAD also comprises many other elements, including equipment
simulation, pattern transfer simulation and compact modelling.
Process simulation models semiconductor manufacturing processes. Process sim-
ulation methodology requires the detailed semiconductor fabrication process flow
including numerous fabrication details, like angle of incidence of ions implanted in
ion implantation process steps or etch rate distribution as a function of the local angle
of the etched layer surface. The simulation starts with the blank wafer and ends with
device/circuits. Process simulation predicts the structural and doping profiles of the
devices on the basis of the key processing parameters, for example, implant dose,
energy and anneal time and temperature. However, so far the process simulation has
been the weaker element of TCAD. With the maturity of TCAD tools, real wafer
fabrication can now be emulated by process simulation, from which realistic device
structures and doping profiles can be generated, and transistor performance can be
predicted through device simulation with a reasonable accuracy.
One of the challenges of the deep-submicron technology is due to the fact that
as the transistor dimensions become smaller, their performance gets more closely
coupled with the fabrication parameters, and the interconnect delay is becoming
dominant now. However, the interconnect delays can be extracted through technology
characterisation with three-dimensional accuracy, and can provide information for
design rule checker (DRC) and layout parasitic extraction (LPE) tools in the physical
design. SPICE parameters can also be extracted from the ‘virtual device’.
The 2005 International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) predicts
that the use of TCAD will provide as much as a 40 per cent reduction in technol-
ogy development costs. In highly competitive semiconductor product environment,
advantages of use of the predictive power of TCAD is now well established to reduce
cost and time in product development. Through proper calibration with prototype
wafers, TCAD can also accurately predict the behaviour in the manufacturing line
for new technology nodes. This information, coupled with design tools, enables the
manufacturing line to fine tune the process for specific designs and, ultimately, to
achieve higher yields. From a technology and modelling point of view, a combination
of process and device simulation is at the core of TCAD, as it bridges between a given
technology and circuit design. TCAD is now playing an increasingly important role
in virtual wafer fabrication (VWF) approach to design and technology development.
Among various possible approaches for analysing microelectronic systems, the most
common approach may be classified into three levels: device, circuit and systems.
However, in multi-level modelling approach, electrical characterisation and analysis
of analog/digital systems are classified at various levels as follows:
•
Technology Level, is related to the detailed device layer structures and doping
profiles and their dependence on process variations.
•
Device Level is referred to as the analytical description of the device terminal
characteristics.

Introduction
5
•
Circuit Level refers to the solution of linear/non-linear systems of equations by
various matrix solution techniques, such as nodal or modified nodal analysis.
•
System Level refers to digital or analog blocks that make up a given system.
Traditionally, the above four levels are relatively independent or loosely coupled.
However, over the past decade, improved process and device simulation capabil-
ity has become increasingly important in the design and development of complex
integrated circuits. The increased importance has been primarily due to the growing
complexity of semiconductor fabrication processes, ever shrinking device dimensions
and the need to reduce to competitive levels the time and cost associated with very
large-scale integration (VLSI) and ULSI design and development. However, with the
rapid progress in the IC technology, maintaining an advanced and effective simulation
capability requires a sustained commitment of resources. There are three main areas
that need to be addressed for the development of state-of-the-art simulation: namely,
physical model development, software development and experimental verification.
The manufacturing of an IC requires many complex processing steps, many of
which are illustrated in Figure 1.3, with each of these steps containing numerous
possible variations in process controls, and may take several weeks to complete.
During the design stages of a device/circuit, a large number of experiments have
to be undertaken to determine appropriate settings of certain process parameters, as
well as of the layout topology and the geometrical dimensions best suited to meet
the device specifications. Optimising these parameters by experimentation alone,
would be quite impractical. After a process has been well characterised, simulation
can be used to investigate the effect of parameter variation with the necessity of
experimental design. Although the sophistication of process simulation is increasing,
its accuracy remains a problem. There is generally a time lag between the introduction
of a particular process and its accurate modelling and characterisation.
One-dimensional (1D) simulations of IC processes and devices were adequately
sufficient for technologies of the 1970s with deeper junction depths and channel
lengths of several microns. It was possible to extrapolate quasi-two-dimensional (2D)
Ambient
Input
Process steps
Output
Temperature
Pressure
Time
Rate
Structure
Mesh
Layer thickness
Doping profile
Function depth
– Diffusion
– Oxidation
– Ion implantation
– Deposition
– Etching
– Masking
– Epitaxy
– Stress
Dose
Energy
Thickness
. ..
. ..
Figure 1.3
Process steps involved in the manufacturing of an IC. Several hundred
steps are involved

6
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
profiles from 1D profiles. At the end of the 1970s, integrated circuit technology came
to a point where the use of simple ad hoc models to predict the outcome of processing
steps was no longer adequate.
Demand grew for more sophisticated computer-aided design of IC processes
and devices. The 1980s witnessed the onset of aggressive MOSFET downscaling
and the rise of CMOS for VLSI technology, especially as power consumption and
reduced voltage supply issues became critical. With dimensions moving below 1 µm
gate lengths (and commensurate junction and gate oxide scaling), TCAD assumed a
critical role in MOSFET scaling and 2D modelling of effects such as local oxide iso-
lation (LOCOS) and dependency of threshold voltage on channel implant. Numerous
parasitic effects associated with the substrate such as latchup all required coordi-
nated process and device modelling. Moreover, the physical effects such as enhanced
dopant diffusion, due to point defects generated during oxidation and ion implanta-
tion, required new models and extensive characterisation. The challenges of relentless
scaling mandated by Moore’s law pushed lithography (and topography) issues to the
forefront of TCAD challenges [4].
Equipment and topography modelling/simulation tools also became essential to
reduce the technology development time and cost. There are several unit process
areas that have been tackled: chemical mechanical polishing (CMP), chemical vapour
deposition (CVD), physical vapour deposition (PVD) and etch and thermal processing
including rapid thermal processing (RTP). The sophistication of the models used
in the equipment simulators varies greatly from the simple experimentally derived
response surface models (RSMs) for CMP [5] to the computationally intensive and
more physically based etching/deposition models, such as in SPEEDIE [6].
Device simulation is used for obtaining the characteristics, for example, static,
time-dependent, large and small-signal frequency-dependent behaviour of semicon-
ductor devices and their electrical behaviour and also SPICE parameter extraction.
SPICE parameters are subsequently used in circuit simulation. Device simulation
models the electrical, optical, mechanical and magnetic behaviour of semiconduc-
tor devices using structures obtained from process simulation. Advanced multi-
dimensional process and device simulation calls for models that are comprehensive
and physically based. However, this task is usually difficult to achieve, since the
physics of many of the processes of interest is highly complicated. In such cases, an
alternative is to use empirically based macroscopic models, with parameters chosen
that are related to experiment. Both complex and computationally intensive first-
principle models, as well as simple and empirically based models, play important
roles in the simulation of semiconductor-related phenomena. Empirically based mod-
els, although limited in scope, are attractive because they are less computationally
intensive than first-principle models.
Atomistic modelling approaches based on molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo and
quantum chemistry have also been pursued vigorously in the past decade [7]. In
general, although these models are becoming more predictive, their validation is
still an issue. For example, in the plasma-enhanced CVD processes, there are so
many possible chemical reactions that obtaining the reaction rates for the dominant
ones is an extremely difficult task [8]. The ultimate challenge in process technology

Introduction
7
development is presented by the system-on-chip (SoC) in which microprocessor and
analog cores must be implemented in a single chip with several types of memory. The
modular process development strategy has been proven effective in reducing process
development time while satisfying the SoC process specifications [9].
Numerical simulation of semiconductor device/circuit fabrication and operation is
also important to the design and manufacture of integrated circuits because it provides
insights into complex phenomena that cannot be obtained through experimentation or
simple analytic models. Many of the phenomena involved in semiconductor processes
can be described by partial differential equations (PDEs): as a result, much of the
TCAD software is based on the solution of PDEs. Since most of these equations are
intractable except for the simplest geometry and boundary conditions, approximate
methods are inevitably utilized. The most common techniques utilized are the finite
element and finite difference methods, although boundary element and variants of
Green’s method are also used. Finite difference methods approximate the solution to
the governing PDEs with difference operators while finite element methods utilize
an integral form.
Typically, the grid approximation is an orthogonal grid for finite differences and
a triangular or tetrahedral grid for finite elements. The net of the approximation
approach is taken because finite difference grids are much simpler to generate auto-
maticallyandresultinasimplermatrixsolutionscheme; thisapproach(approximation
approach) however, restricts the forms of structures analysed to those of orthogonal
geometrics. Finite elements require much more complex software to create a mesh,
and 2D and 3D mesh editors remain a significant research topic.
Advanced process/device simulation software development calls for programs
that are numerically robust, modular in nature, optimised in their execution and easy to
learn and use. Some features of device simulation tool are shown in Figure 1.4. Much
attention has been given to creation of user-friendly pre- and post-processors, data
storage and retrieval, and other components that are needed for a complete simulation
system. A strong experimentation and characterisation program is vital to successful
process and device model development and verification. The predictive capability of
any model is a strong function of its foundation in reliable experimental data. The
role of predictive modelling is to utilize detailed process and device simulation, or
TCAD, in place of hardware to facilitate the feedback loop between circuit designer
and process technologist.
In this chapter, the development of TCAD and its strategic use for semiconductor
technology development and the technology scaling from the early 1960s until the
late 1990s is first highlighted. A brief history on the progress that has been made
in simulating semiconductor device fabrication processes is indicated. The role of
TCAD in the overall IC design flow, focusing on the design-manufacturing interface
is described. The current state of process modelling is reviewed, and current and
future challenges are discussed. The hierarchy of TCAD simulation tools ranging
from the atomistic level to the equipment and manufacturing simulation levels is then
presented. A discussion on the challenges one has to meet in future transistor design
with the modelling strategies needed to meet these challenges will follow. Then,
one needs to turn to the problem of handling the large amount of data generated

8
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
– Recombination 
– Bandgap/DOS 
– Mobility 
– Statistics
Structure 
Mesh 
Doping
Physical models
Input
Output
Terminal 
characteristics
Process
– Ohmic/Schottky 
– Insulator/Neumann 
– Interface charge/traps 
– Lumped/distributed RC
Boundary conditions
– Decoupled (Gummel) 
– Coupled (Newton) 
– Linear matrix 
– Jacobian matrix
Numerical methods
– Transient 
– Small-signal a.c.
– Impact ionization 
– Gate current
Analyses
Figure 1.4
Steps involved in device simulation
by these programs, as well as the detailed data required as input to the programs.
Focus is then turned to the emerging field of scientific visualisation, which is proving
to be very helpful in analysing the generated data, as well as recent developments
in the geometrical modelling of 3D structures, which is needed for characterising
complicated device structures.
1.1
History of device simulation
The first truly numerical device simulator was reported by De Mari [10] for a one-
dimensional problem and Scharfetter et al. [11] for the two-dimensional problem.
A good early history of device simulation tools can be found in Reference 12. The
advent of the 1970s saw the beginning of attempts to couple numerical process and
devicesimulators, startingwiththeone-dimensionalprogramsSUPREMandSEDAN
at Stanford University [13]. Ouput from SUPREM (i.e., doping profile and geometry)
formed a starting point for electrical simulation. Both programs formed an interrelated
pair and were successfully used at a large number of research institutions. Although
process simulation was a new field at that time, the fundamentals for (more physically
based) device simulation were already established. In SEDAN, devices consisting
of up to five metallurgical junctions could be analysed. SEDAN performed device
analysis by simultaneously solving Poisson equation and transient current continuity
equations to obtain the potential and carrier concentration in silicon. Updated SEDAN
versions can handle SiGe, GaAs and AlGaAs devices.

Introduction
9
During the 1980s a vast amount of literature became available on two-dimensional
device simulation from various universities. Relatively important and widely used
programs were MINIMOS [14], BAMBI [15], PISCES [16], BIPOLE [17] and
HQUPETS [18]. All these programs solve the Poisson equation in two-dimensions
along with the current continuity equations.
Device simulation programs rapidly became useful to process and device engi-
neers. Some of the first detailed two-dimensional transistor device simulations were
carried out by Slotboom [19] and Heimeier [20] at Phillips. Also, some three-
dimensional process and/or device simulators were reported by researchers with
large amounts of computer resources. Since those early days many other institu-
tions have developed their software. These include IBM’s FEDSS/FIELDAY and
Agere’s PROPHET and PADRE. MINIMOS, developed in the 1980s at the Tech-
nical University Vienna, and specifically targeted at a standard MOS transistor was
the first two-dimensional numerical simulator for which the source code was made
widely available. As its name implies, the original version of MINIMOS solved
the fundamental semiconductor equations in a rectangular two-dimensional domain,
where the solution domain was specifically a MOS transistor structure. The numerical
schemes of MINIMOS have since been extended from its initial release in the early
1980s to today’s version MINIMOS-NT, which is available for a number of hard-
ware platforms and can handle planar and non-planar device structures in two- and
three-dimensions. A Monte Carlo module can couple self-consistently to the Poisson
equation and replace the drift-diffusion approximation in critical device areas. The
current version of MINIMOS is capable of simulating Si, SiGe, GaAs and AlGaAs
devices.
BIPOLE is a quasi-two-dimensional device simulator, developed at the Univer-
sity of Waterloo, Canada, which specifically focuses on rapid prediction of terminal
electrical characteristics of bipolar transistors. Programme input comprises fabrica-
tion data such as mask dimensions, impurity profiles and physical parameters such as
carrier lifetime. The calculation is based on the variable boundary regional approach
using one-dimensional transport equations. Two-dimensional and quasi-cylindrical
edge effects are handled by combining the vertical one-dimensional analysis with a
coupled one-dimensional horizontal analysis of the transport equations in the base
region. It is then used to solve the transport equations for diffusion and drift in the pres-
ence of arbitrary recombination in quasi-neutral regions. This scheme is extremely
fast in terms of computing time. BIPOLE can also be used for accurate avalanche
multiplication and breakdown studies in high-speed transistors with shallow collec-
tor regions and heterojunction structures, including graded base Ge fraction in SiGe
devices, and emission across the thin interfacial oxide layer in a poly-Si emitter and
offers a facility for automatic parameter extraction for SPICE models.
PISCES,developedatStanfordUniversitywasthefirstsuccessfulgeneral-purpose
two-dimensional device simulation program applicable to any arbitrary semiconduc-
tor device, whether its dominant mode of operation was MOS or bipolar [21]. It was
subsequently adapted by different TCAD companies such as TMA (now Synopsys)
or Silvaco to form the basis of their early software products released in the mid to late
1980s. PISCES uses a box integration scheme to solve the semiconductor equations

10
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
at each node within the device. From the grid structure of the device and impurity
doping profile, PISCES can provide two-dimensional contours and vectors yielding
additional insight into how to enhance device performance.
Since the early 1980s commercial vendors such as SILVACO, ISE-TCAD, TMA
and AVANTi developed their own graphical user interfaces (GUI) around existing
frameworks, which facilitated the integration of process and device simulation tools
by non-specialists within a wider engineering environment. The concept of general-
purpose–process and device simulators that allows flexible simulation of different
structures in different technologies became a reality.
As a specific example, ATLAS, a Silvaco International product, originally derived
from PISCES, has been extensively enhanced providing general capabilities for
numerical, physics-based, two- and three-dimensional simulation of semiconduc-
tor devices. It predicts the electrical behaviour of specified semiconductor structures
and provides insight into the internal physical mechanisms associated with device
operation.
ATLAS provides a comprehensive set of physical models such as drift-diffusion
transport models, energy balance transport models and lattice heating. It is also capa-
ble of simulating graded or abrupt heterojunctions, hot carrier injection, band-to-band
and Fowler–Nordheim tunnelling, non-local impact ionization, thermionic currents,
optoelectronic interactions, and stimulated emission and radiation. ATLAS has a
modular architecture that includes other simulation tools such as MIXED-MODE,
which offers circuit simulation capabilities that couple compact analytical models to
the device simulator. The increased role of statistically based simulation is reflected in
the commercial interest. Many software platforms with statistical interfaces are now
available from TCAD vendors, for example, Virtual Wafer Fabrication (Silvaco) and
SENTAURUS (Synopsys).
Since the 1990s, there has been an increasing demand for simulators that provide
the capability of modelling in a comprehensive manner for as many different types of
semiconductordevicesandprocessesaspossible(seeforexample, anexcellentreview
on ‘Simulation in semiconductor technology development’ [22]). This goal can either
be achieved by incorporating new features in a simulator or by establishing links
between simulators with different capabilities, such as coupling of electronic design
(ECAD) with technology design (TCAD) (see Figure 1.5). Supporting the process
and device engineers in an efficient and intuitive way in exploring the design space
calls for a number of capabilities of the process simulation environment, such as free
interaction and analysis of all aspects of a device, transparency with respect to real-life
data and control to facilitate the management of large-scale and iterative experiments.
1.2
History of process simulation
Process simulation models manufacturing steps such as oxidation, implantation,
diffusion, etching, deposition and lithography. Process simulation has evolved with
increasing levels of sophistication from the earliest models for process steps. For
example in ion implantation, the LSS theory came to be widely used for describing

Introduction
11
Circuit design and verification
Extraction 
and ERC
SPICE 
models
IC layout
Process 
technology
Device and interconnect 
design
ECAD
TCAD
Behaviour
models
Figure 1.5
Coupling of electronic design (ECAD) with technology design (TCAD)
[After R. W. Dutton et al., Proc. IEEE ISSCC, 1996(78–79)]
the ion range distributions in various materials. According to this theory, an ion
implant profile may be described to first order by a Gaussian distribution. Range
statistics for a variety of ion and target combinations were determined and made
available. In the area of diffusion, some of the progress dealt with dopant diffusion
under extrinsic conditions. Early examples of models reported for arsenic, boron and
phosphorus are provided in Reference 23.
With the trend moving towards smaller devices and more complex processes,
a strong need developed to account for what had originally been considered to be
second-order effects within certain processes. Early models relied primarily on ana-
lytical equations, which became inadequate under more complex circumstances.
Consequently, numerically based models were necessary for general applicability.
The computer implementation of such models led to the evolution of SUPREM sim-
ulator SUPREM I in 1977, followed by enhanced versions up to the two-dimensional
version SUPREM IV [24].
In all versions of SUPREM the various process steps are entered in the order as
they appear in the actual process. Both SUPREM III and SUPREM IV model the mov-
ing boundary between oxide and silicon during oxidation and diffusion. SUPREM
IV offers several models for oxidation to describe the 2D shape of local oxidation
structures. Each program offers advanced models for second-order effects such as
dopant-enhanced diffusion, oxidation-enhanced diffusion, dopant clustering and thin
oxide growth. It has been shown that the process models are sufficiently general
and accurate to be very useful. However, the model coefficients need to be adjusted
to give good agreement for a particular fabrication facility. This is particularly true
for the model parameters related to oxidation rates and implantation profiles. As
the models for ion implantation, diffusion and oxidation were further developed,
more realistic models for etching and deposition were added. An object-oriented
continuum-based modelling of silicon integrated circuit processing has also been

12
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
introduced for implantation, diffusion and material growth [25]. For simulation of
lithography, etching, and deposition steps [4], and other specialist software such as
SAMPLE has been developed [26].
Over the last decade, as the shrinking of device dimensions has continued, 3D
process simulation has become a necessity. Development of such programs were
first reported in the early 1980s [27–29]. The required information about the three-
dimensional doping profiles is usually developed from either analytic models or from
rotations and stretching of doping profiles generated by two-dimensional process
simulations. It should, however, be mentioned that although the ability to simulate in
three dimensions looks impressive, such simulations are generally necessary only for
extremely small devices. Another important aspect of semiconductor device simula-
tion is the availability of accurate doping profiles. Particularly for very small devices,
process simulator (either 2D or 3D) should be capable of predicting the doping profiles
well enough for accurate device simulation purposes. Therefore, measured profiles
should be used in these cases.
1.3
Evolution of TCAD
TCAD modelling based on computer simulations spans the interrelated disciplines of
circuit design, device engineering, process development and integration into manu-
facturing [30]. Computer simulations help in quantifying the details of behavioural
models for ICs at the transistor and circuit levels and show the physical limitations at
the process and manufacturing levels. The current generations of TCAD tools need
to meet (1) heterogeneous device requirements and (2) atomic-scale limits both in the
devices and processing that shift the emphasis to consideration of the complete manu-
facturing process. The introduction of new materials as well as the need to account for
more effects as the technology is scaled (e.g., quantum mechanical modelling of gate
oxide capacitance) require the use of TCAD in a larger scale. Major semiconductor
manufacturers now routinely use TCAD for process and device development [31].
Various TCAD applications and challenges have also been discussed in Reference 32.
Key advantages of a simulation-based approach are rapid prototyping and the abil-
ity to analyse the devices. The ability to investigate individual physical phenomena
and interactions of different phenomena through the huge number of process parame-
ters is especially useful. This leads frequently into more quantitative use of simulation
in the determination of optimum processing conditions. The other use of TCAD is in
exploration studies of new processes and new process sequences. A good example
is the study of the use of isotropic deposition combined with anisotropic etching to
planarise the wafer surface. Another important use of TCAD is the assessment of
the impact of hypothetical and future technology advances. It is also possible to use
TCAD simulation in diagnostic and discovery modes in which the physical models
are modified to create new effects or establish plausible explanations of experimental
observations [33].
The most famous of the Stanford TCAD software programs are SUPREM for
process simulation and PISCES for device simulation. These are general-purpose

Introduction
13
simulators, designed to work with arbitrary semiconductor structures. The first com-
mercial versions of these programs from Technology Modelling Associates (TMA)
were entitled TSUPREM4 and MEDICI (now available from Synopsys). Silvaco
later licensed the same software, and offered a commercial alternative ATHENA and
ATLAS [34,35]. A third major TCAD vendor Integrated Systems Engineering (ISE)
has since offered its own equivalent products DIOS and DESSIS [36,37] and is now
merged with Synopsys.
Also the presence of passive elements poses major challenges to circuit and sys-
tem designers. Now there is a transition from the gate-dominated delays towards
resistance–capacitance (RC) interconnect-dominated delay limitations, and on-
chip inductance will bring still greater complexity to modelling and verification.
Materials and processing issues are becoming critical and the modelling is also
intertwined with systems issues such as chip-scale layout. Earlier generation reli-
ability issues for bipolar and CMOS have shifted now to the role of electrostatic
discharge (ESD) and its interrelationship with I/O circuit scaling [38].
1.4
Process flow integration
In the 1980s, the advent of VLSI created the need to formalise the interface between
the process and design engineers. To develop an IC product, there are number of
engineers involved in the unit process development to the system-level specifications.
Typically, the technology development may be split into two basic regimes: product
design and fabrication process development. There are several aspects of technol-
ogy and product development. The process development is being modularised, and
process integration has now become a more structured process. Current technology
scaling has put a bigger challenge to process simulation than to device simulation.
To simplify the boundary between the product and process development, semicon-
ductor companies standardised on a basic interface of SPICE model cards and the
technology files. On the basis of the technology constraints and the target device
performance, processes have been developed and the device performance has been
abstracted for the product designers.
TCAD has been expanding from the software tools mostly used for technology
development, to the software that is also used to build a bridge between the designers
and manufacturing. The fact that the new interface needs to provide the information
to the IC designer has been examined in detail by Dutton et al. [39]. Truly predictive
process modelling has proven to be an elusive goal, because the controlling physics
is complicated and difficult to investigate experimentally. The complexity of process
variables, especially in coupled fabrication steps and for complex processes such as
plasma etching, require exhaustive experimentation. Design of experiments (DOE)
has now become an integral part of in-depth process/device simulation to avoid costly
fabrication [40].
A key component of the design–manufacturing interface is the employment of
statistical process/device simulation to predict the distributions of electrical proper-
ties and SPICE parameters based on the distributions of equipment controls [41].

14
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Process 
recipe
Doping 
geometry
Effective ‘electrical’
oxide thickness
Layout 
information
Metal
Poly
Contact 
resistance
Low frequency CV on 
Large-are capacitors
4-Probe Kelvin
CGS
VGS
Diffusion
Metal
Process 
simulator 
(PROPHET)
Device simulator 
(PISCES or PADRE)
I–V
New mobility 
model
Figure 1.6
TCAD-based electrical characterisation [After R. W. Dutton et al., IEEE
Trans. Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems,
Vol. 19, 2000(1544–1560). © 2000 IEEE]
The ability to use deterministic algorithms when extracting SPICE parameters is
also a key part of the statistical characterisation process. It has been shown that it
is possible to use the information available from TCAD process simulations (such
as actual dopant profiles) to extract the SPICE parameters in ways that cannot be
typically accomplished from I–V characterisation. Figure 1.6 gives a more detailed
view of the several pieces of data and simulations required to achieve TCAD-based
I–V characterisation. This methodology provides reliable data as well as support for
relating physical effects to controlling parameters that relate directly to either process
recipe or even processing equipment dependencies. This approach has been demon-
strated with 0.25 µm technology with excellent agreement, and one parameter set fits
all devices from 20 µm down to 0.25 µm channel lengths.
On the basis of the technology constraints and the target device performance,
processes have been developed and the device performance has been abstracted for the
product designers (see Figure 1.7). Although the full blown product/process co-design
has not been accomplished yet, there have been several approaches to synthesise the
process to meet the desired device performance objectives.
The design and fabrication of smaller and faster semiconductor devices relies on
the proper numerical simulation of fabrication processes and electrical characteristics.

Introduction
15
Process module 
library
Device/cell performance 
characterisation
Device module 
library
Technology 
specifications:
Device specs
Interconnect specs
Cost constraints
Layout design rule 
development
Process control 
specification
Process module 
characterisation
Process module 
development
Worst-case 
device files
Device structure 
development
Front-end
Back-end
Process integration
Figure 1.7
Process
synthesis
[After
R.
W.
Dutton
et
al.,
IEEE
Trans.
Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 19,
2000(1544-1560). © 2000 IEEE]
The integration of independently developed simulators is achieved by providing a
binding function that makes the tool available to the TCAD framework. Process flows
may either be defined by writing a text file using symbolic names for the simulators to
invoke or by using a graphical process flow editor. Portability, communicability and
modularisation of recipes pave the way for technology knowledge sharing and remote
fabrication (virtual wafer) and have also been attempted. The VISTA framework and
its modules form a programmable simulation environment for TCAD applications.
Within VISTA tool [42], integration activities resulted in a simulation flow control
module [43] that allows the specification of process sequences by means of simulator
calls used in a plug-and-play fashion. A subset of the Profile Interchange Format
(PIF) is used as the basis for an unambiguous wafer state description. DOE methods
are frequently used for automatic generation of experiments. These methods are also
available in other TCAD frameworks, namely, the Virtual Wafer Fabrication [44],
the TMA Work Bench [45] and the NORMAN framework [46]. Although attempts
are being made, no single solution exists that satisfactorily covers all the issues
mentioned above.
1.5
TCAD and compact model
Computer-aided circuit simulation cannot provide reliable results without adequate
specification of circuit elements and device models. The electrical behaviour of the
devices can either be measured or simulated. When performing a device optimi-
sation, fabricating and measuring each optimisation step would be very expensive
as the existing device models use large sets of parameters, values of which must
be determined very carefully to represent device characteristics accurately. Hence,

16
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
device simulators became more and more popular, and the data obtained from these
simulations can be used to extract the parameters of the compact model. However,
the use of different simulators and extraction tools is cumbersome and error-prone.
To overcome these problems several solutions have been proposed where a device
simulator was coupled to circuit simulator such as SPICE [47] or circuit simulation
capabilities were added to a device simulator [48]. In the latter mixed-mode simu-
lation, devices can be characterised by their performance in a circuit as a function
of transport models, doping profiles, mobility models and so forth. This is of funda-
mental importance when investigating the behaviour of advanced submicron devices
like heterostructure bipolar transistors (HBTs) or high electron mobility transistors
(HEMTs) [49], particularly if SPICE models are not available. SPICE has a well-
defined and documented interface and in principle, it is straightforward to implement
a similar interface in the mixed-mode simulator.
Circuit simulation programs have the common feature that the electrical behaviour
of the devices is modelled by means of a compact model, that is generally a set of
analytical expressions for charge or current that are fitted to extensive measured
data. Once a suitable compact model has been developed, its parameters need to be
extracted. For example, in the widely used MOS compact model BSIM3 [50], more
than 100 parameters need to be extracted for calibration purposes. The systematic
identification of these parameters is obviously a time-consuming task, requiring the
use of specialist software.
If the device design is known and further modification is not needed, these param-
eters need to be extracted only once and can be used for circuit design provided the
accuracy of the models is sufficient. When there is a need to optimise a device
using modified geometries and/or doping profiles the compact model parameters
have to be extracted for each different layout. Although physics-based device mod-
elling achieves satisfactory accuracy in a short development time, the associated
computational cost prevents its application to circuits comprising more than a few
devices [51]. Thus, the device modelling for circuit applications faces conflicting
requirements of accuracy, efficiency and development time. Conventional compact
models are based on simple geometry and process-based models as process and geo-
metric factors control much of the device behaviour. This is particularly true in the
predictive modelling mode, which for compact model generation demands simulation
of the complete device structure, including all parasitic capacitances and resistances,
and often represents a considerable expanse of silicon, over a wide range of bias
conditions.
A fundamental difference between digital technology and analog/RF technol-
ogy is the sensitivity of analog/RF circuits to many manufacturability/performance
trade-offs that must be made. RF and microwave applications generally impose
more serious design constraints than digital applications. It also puts continuously
increasing demands on accuracy, smoothness and scaling of the compact models
for RF/microwave devices. Moreover, the RF/microwave circuit design requires,
in an integrated way, advanced compact modelling of active and passive devices
including various parasitic effects, like substrate and thermal coupling as well as
noise.

Introduction
17
Early SPICE semiconductor models cannot model current devices accurately
enough at high speed or high power levels. To meet the challenges of rapidly evolv-
ing semiconductor technologies yielding electronic circuits with higher performance
new improved models are needed. The latest compact models are strongly based on
device physics and can be exceedingly complex. An alternative is the use of macro-
models, empirical models that can be constructed using elements already available
in a circuit simulator. Physical modelling and macromodelling techniques yielding
accurate predictive capability are now available for silicon power devices, gallium
arsenide and silicon-germanium high-speed devices using various circuit simulation
environments, such as ICCAP and APLAC [52].
One potential use of TCAD is in the development of the compact models them-
selves. For example, frequency-dependent compact models for MOS capacitors and
p-n junction have been developed using TCAD to verify the models [53,54]. A SPICE
sub-circuit was developed for ESD protection device with extensive use of TCAD
tools [55]. Other approaches for compact model development based on the direct and
automatic extraction of equivalent circuits from device simulation have also been
reported [56, 57]. Equivalent circuits are automatically generated from device sim-
ulation, and the circuit topology and elements may be directly interpreted in terms
of device physics. The accuracy that can be achieved with this technique largely
depends on the validity of the assumptions made when reducing continuous func-
tions, as obtained from the physical device simulation. Simulation-based compact
models are advantageous for high-frequency effects where analytic formula may not
be adequate [58].
Extension of compact models to process correlation is also necessary, which will
be the key to studying process effects on system performance [59]. A robust circuit
design requires knowledge about the variation in key device parameters and TCAD is
finding applications in the generation of statistical compact models, which are useful
for yield and performance improvement. Starting with a baseline process simulation,
known process variations can be simulated in a TCAD tool to generate statistical
distributions of device or even circuit parameters. A physics-based compact model,
based on technology characterisation, which serves as the building block for a multi-
level circuit simulator (based on subcircuit expansion approach) has been reported, in
which process variation can be captured through device compact models [30]. There
are certainly opportunities for further interactions as devices continue to scale down
and new device structures emerge.
1.6
Parameter extraction
Parameter extraction is an integral part of compact modelling. The goal of parameter
extractionistodeterminethevaluesofdevicemodelparametersthatminimisethetotal
differences between a set of measured characteristics and results obtained by evalu-
ation of the device model. This minimisation process is often called fitting of model
characteristics to the measurement data. Several different approaches to parameter
extraction have been proposed in the literature. They include general or specialised

18
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
anddirectoriterativeextractionmethods. Specialisedmethodsextractsomesubsetsof
model parameters; for example, model resistances, or capacitances or d.c. parameters
only, while general methods determine all parameters of the model. Several programs
for parameter extraction are available on a commercial basis. Hewlett-Packard offers
an integrated circuit characterisation and analysis program (ICCAP) [60].
The most important test structures in an IC manufacturing process are the devices
themselves. It is imperative that these devices are accurately characterised so that the
most accurate model parameter set for the device under test can be extracted. Silvaco’s
Universal Transistor Modelling Software (UTMOST) [61] is a data acquisition and
parameter extraction tool with applications in the areas of device characterisation
and modelling. UTMOST can accept data from direct measurements, measurements
stored in a measurement log file, process and device simulation or from other model
parameter sets in order to create a suitable parameter set for a chosen model.
UTMOST can control a wide range of commercial measurement equipment and
probers, so that a user has maximum flexibility in the configuration of a measure-
ment system. UTMOST supports the simulation of d.c., transient, capacitance and
s-parameter characteristics. UTMOST can incorporate commercial device models,
user-defined device models and macro models. UTMOST also supports the con-
version of model parameter sets from one model to another. This is invaluable in
situations where the model in use has changed and new parameter sets are needed
without the requirement of measuring new data. UTMOST supports eight different
technology modules – MOS, Bipolar, Diode, JFET, GaAs, SOI, TFT and HBT. Using
batch-mode, device characteristics resulting from process and device simulations can
be automatically converted into UTMOST format, and detailed parameter extractions
can be performed. In this way, it is possible to develop nominal and even worst-case
models for a process which is under development.
1.7
Statistical process control and yield analysis
Statistical fluctuations inherent in any IC manufacturing process cause variations in
device and circuit performance. Product yield and manufacturing problems neces-
sitate costly redesign cycles. Inverse modelling of the statistical variations in the
processes by using TCAD methods is becoming important. Presently, by inserting
statistical variations in the compact model parameters from experimental test data
and batch data, design of circuits is generally performed. The main drawback of
this method is the lack of information for the correlation in the statistical data; as a
consequence, too pessimistic designs rules are adopted. TCAD may be used for the
inclusion of process variations into the design of circuits, as it provides realistic input
for the statistical variations as well as their correlation and therefore improves the
yield of the production process.
Silvaco’s SPAYN [62] is a statistical analysis software package specifically
designed for the semiconductor industry for analysing variances from model param-
eter extraction sequences, electrical test routines and circuit test measurements
and their impact on device performance. It offers the state-of-the-art solutions for

Introduction
19
statistical/worst-case circuit design and process control and generates accurate and
realistic worst-case or ‘process corner’ parameter sets and SPICE models, reflecting
variations in process parameters. SPAYN helps to identify the relationship between
device or circuit performance variations and the underlying specific process fluc-
tuations. In SPAYN, model parameters and device characteristics can be stored.
It offers unique and extremely fast relational database search, merge, append and
split capabilities.
SPAYN has many built-in general-purpose statistical analysis features to aid in
the examination of parametric data. Because not all parametric data is adequately
represented by a Gaussian distribution, SPAYN also offers exponential, log-normal
and Gamma distribution options. Scatter plots are used to analyse the relationships
between parameters by using a least squares method to fit one or more of the following
functions: linear, logarithmic, parabolic, reciprocal, hyperbolic, exponential, power,
root, or third-order polynomial. Resulting error residuals, ANOVA information and
correlation coefficients are generated. Resulting variations in circuit performance
caused by process fluctuations can then be predicted early in the design cycle. SPAYN
helps to identify an efficient process monitoring strategy by identifying the minimum
set of dominant factors that must be monitored in production, in order to control
the yield.
1.8
Virtual wafer fabrication
As discussed above, simulation tools have now been developed to follow the actual
wafer fabrication process very closely. Each fabrication step can now be modelled,
and they are incorporated into ‘process simulators’. Hence it is possible to ‘construct’
new semiconductor structures and predict their performance using these simulation
tools. This is often referred to as a ‘Virtual Wafer Fabrication’, which provides a
physical insight and intuition to illustrate physical principles of what real integrated
circuits structures will look like. These tools also provide the ability to ‘look inside’
structures or devices and to visualise physical phenomena that often cannot be easily
observed in traditional experiments.
Currently strong efforts are being made to build simulation platforms for the
predictive simulation of micro- and nanodevices and circuits, as this constitutes the
cost-effective and time-saving alternative to the traditional experimental approach.
Today, the rapid progress in microelectronics technology is strongly supported by
process/device modelling methodologies and dedicated simulation tools constituting
a ‘virtual laboratory’ on the computer, which enables the visualisation and detailed
analysis of the operating behaviour of single device. A virtual IC factory has the
following capabilities:
•
integrated graphical environment for physical simulation;
•
comprehensive data management;
•
post-simulation graphical and statistical data analysis;
•
design of experiment capabilities;

20
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
•
design of experiments for efficient design of simulated experiments based on the
number of input variables;
•
RSM rapid approximation and responses in a design space that can be further
explored for optimisation;
•
split run design comparison and trade-off;
•
easy-to-use GUI.
1.9
Optimisation
The knowledge gained through TCAD simulation can be used to optimise processes
and to identify potential yield problems that need to be addressed in the design before
volume production. In order to minimise the time taken for optimisation, the time
consumed in a single device simulation should be relatively short, since hundreds
of such simulations are often required. With the availability of tools like MATLAB,
attempts are being made for the implementation of the optimisation via MATLAB,
alongside device simulation using commercial packages. High-performance optimi-
sation algorithms, both local and global, are used to achieve an efficient design in
shortest possible time. Such a design tool works with an arbitrary number of design
parameters, such as device dimension, doping level and profile. For device design
tuning, Nelder-Mead (Simplex) optimisation algorithm [63] is preferable as it is
known to be a very efficient local optimisation method.
For its high flexibility, the optimisation tool is often implemented in an object-
oriented way, divided into three independent parts: device, material and optimisation
criteria. With small modifications the optimisation package can be adapted for any
device simulator with text-based user interface. One important feature is the ability
to change the design parameters that are optimised, so that important parameters for
different performance measures can be optimised individually. The tool can be used
for optimisation of different kinds of semiconductor devices using various perfor-
mance measurements. After the implementation of a new device, it can immediately
be optimised on the basis of previously used materials and goals. It has been shown
that optimisation of semiconductor devices by iterative simulations is very efficient
in design and evaluation of new device structures.
1.10
TCAD for nanoelectronics
In the previous sections, the strategic role of TCAD in technology development, both
past and present, and a variety of manufacturing challenges important for scaling
below the 100 nm gate length regime have been discussed. The challenges are now
in terms of new materials and their scaling to atomic dimensions move outside the
domain of currently available technology or tools, and fundamentally new develop-
ments are needed. Atomic-scale limits to device design and manufacturing present a
key challenge for future technology generations.
Transformation of the microelectronics into nanoelectronics is taking place very
rapidlyandasubsequenttransformationshouldalsoaffectthevirtualwaferfabrication

Introduction
21
for the development of future nanodevices. Currently used simulation tools for micro-
electronic technology processes will soon be obsolete since the scaling down of
semiconductor devices requires atomic scale design. The technology roadmap of the
ITRS indicates that TCAD tools will possibly lead to a 30–40 per cent saving of the
overall costs dedicated to the research and development of future devices in the next
decade [64]. However, the currently used process/device simulators implemented in
the different TCAD suites, based on continuum model, will soon become obsolete to
the process development.
The impact of quantisation of charge in metallic or semiconducting structures in
conventional electronic devices is usually apparent in simulation output. However,
when the smallest feature size is less than 10–20 nm and the capacitance becomes
very small and the charging energy is larger than the thermal energy, the change in
free energy associated with the addition or subtraction of a single electron to and
from an island, or a quantum dot, becomes significant. If an electron can enter or
exit islands only via tunnelling, this is often referred to as single electron tunnelling.
Single electron tunnelling phenomenon (Coulomb blockade of single electron tun-
nelling) in the transport of electrons in ultrasmall structures has long been a subject
of condensed matter physics since the 1950s. However, only in the late 1980s was it
realised by Likarev that such Coulomb blockade of single electron could be controlled
by an external gate, and this artificial structure was named as a single electron tran-
sistor (SET) [65]. In SETs and single electron circuits, the change of single electron
can determine the device characteristics, and as a result, the logic level that is now
being considered as a strong candidate for elements of future low power high density
chips.
Single-electron devices show very promising characteristics, such as ultimate low
power consumption, downscaling to atomic dimensions and high switching speed.
Simulation tools can play a crucial part in the development of single electron devices
and circuits. In analogy to existing TCAD software for conventional devices, where
process simulation produces geometry and material-related input data for device
simulation, one needs to develop similar methods for SET simulation. Since sin-
gle electron devices are extremely charge sensitive, making them strongly dependent
on stray capacitances and trapped charges, accurate computation of capacitances in
three-dimensional structures will be needed [66].
There has been a great deal of emphasis in the past few years on examining
nanodevices in Si and Si-based heterostructures. The most extensively studied mate-
rial system in this direction is that of strained-Si, SiGe and SiGeC, which allows the
creation of Si electron quantum wells. In strained-Si/SiGe/Si, which leaves Si quan-
tum wells under tensile strain, the electron and hole transport properties are modified
and allow for investigation of many novel device structures.
Figure 1.8 shows broadly the time and space axes of fabrication processes: at the
highest levels are the equipment models and at the lowest levels are ab initio and
quantum modelling. In contrast to the well-known hierarchical chip design process,
the crossing of boundaries between the hierarchy shown in Figure 1.8 is still very
much a research challenge, let alone able to be automated. Considering a rather spe-
cific example of plasma processing, the equipment level might involve bulk plasma

22
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Equipment and 
    manufacturing 
        sim. models
Time (log)
New TCAD tools 
(Used in other
domains) 
Current TCAD tools 
(PDE based) 
New levels in hierarchy – 
require abstraction of 
information
0.1 nm
1 yr
1.0 nm
10 nm
0.1 m
100 m
10 cm
Length scales (log)
1 day
1 min
1 sec
1 ms
1 ns
1 ps
1 fs
1 s
Continuum 
   sim. models
Microstruct. 
sim.
Atomic- 
scale sim.
Ab-initio 
sim.
Figure 1.8
Simulation tool hierarchy [After R. W. Dutton et al., IEEE Trans.
Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, Vol. 19,
2000(1544–1560). © 2000 IEEE]
simulations, gas flow and thermal modelling, all at the macro-scales (millimetre,
centimetre and metre scales). At the same time, the wafer, die and structure levels of
modellingmoveprogressivelyintheotherdirection(downtothenanometerscale)and
finally the surface chemistry. The above example illustrates a broad range of multi-
scale physical effects that are critical to understanding and control of manufacturing
at the atomic scale.
Two ambitious approaches to SoC technology development via TCAD to satisfy
product requirements have been proposed by Kohyama [67] in which calibrated
TCAD tools are applied to generate an optimised process recipe while Pinto [68]
suggested the integration of several technologies in a mix-and-match manner. To
cope with increasing speed and complexity in digital, analog and mixed-signal circuit
simulation, a hierarchy of simulators and algorithms, together with generations of
device models, and their integration in a TCAD tool has become essential.
For the realisation of atomic-scale devices, TCAD tools need to be developed on
the basis of a reliable theoretical framework essential for accuracy and feasibility.
However, use of an unique methodology is unlikely, since the complete description
of atomic-level devices and physical phenomena occurring in them is beyond the
capability of such a single approach and the choice of appropriate methodology will
depend on the particular problem. In fact, such a task could be achieved by means of
the integration of complementary theoretical investigations allowing the simulation
of system kinetics on the basis of the microscopic material properties [69]. First-
principle computations, based on the density functional theory within the local density
approximation (DFT-LDA) and the tight-binding molecular dynamics (TBMD), are
being employed for such simulations [70–72].
Organic semiconductors have witnessed a considerable development in recent
years, mainly pushed by the realisation of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and displays

Introduction
23
whose cost and performance are potentially lower with respect to more conven-
tional solutions [73,74]. Attention has been given also to organic thin film transistors
(OTFTs). Such devices have been proposed at the beginning of the 1980s [75], but
only since the mid-1990s have they attracted the interest of the scientific commu-
nity [76]. For TFTs the motivations are due to the possibility of realising low-cost,
large-area devices on flexible substrates. Up to now, however, the application of
organic TFTs have been restricted to smart cards, electronic barcodes and low-cost
memory devices. The main limitation to a larger exploitation of TFTs comes from
their poor mobility.
Few attempts have been made to perform a physical simulation of the OTFT.
Alam et al. [77] have analysed the operation of OTFT using a two-dimensional drift-
diffusion simulator. They showed that under certain conditions, one can describe the
electrical characteristics of organic transistor by using tools developed for inorganic
semiconductors. Analytic models predict the overall behaviour of the device, even
though they cannot describe the differences between the OTFTs and the inorganic
ones. Such differences are mainly due to the different transport mechanism involved
in the device operation.
1.11
Interconnect
As the critical dimensions in VLSI circuits continue to shrink, system performance
of the integrated circuits are increasingly dominated by interconnect’s performance.
For the technology generations approaching 45 nm, innovative circuit designs and
new interconnect materials and architecture will be required to meet the projected
system performance. New interconnect materials solutions, such as copper and low-k
dielectric offer only a limited improvement in system performance. Significant and
scalable solutions to interconnect delay problems will require fundamental changes
in system architecture, design and fabrication technologies.
The TCAD analysis of multi-layer interconnects is still in early stages of devel-
opment. Figure 1.9 illustrates a major physical challenge for both modelling and
manufacturing, driven largely by performance constraints of both the intrinsic device
and interconnect layers of ICs. This figure shows both the history and prospects of
candidate materials that are currently in use and may be used in future advanced IC
processes. Problems such as signal integrity coming from inductive cross-talk give
still another example where analysis complexity poses new challenges for TCAD
in the future. Accompanied with these advancements is the evolution of advanced
models and simulators at various levels of abstraction that are used to design and
simulate these ULSIs.
1.12
Summary
Over the past decade, technology CAD has become essential for developing and opti-
mising semiconductor process technologies ranging from nanoscale microprocessors

24
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Low-K
Air (beam lead)
BN (borom nitride)
Polymer
RuO2 (Ruthenium Ox.)
IrO2 (Iridium Ox.)
?
?
Pt
Y1 (Stron. Bi. Titanate)
PZT
PLZT (Ph, Lan., Zirc. Titanate)
Electrodes
Ferro-EL
High-K
Electrodes
Metals
Silicides
Puty Si
1970
Materials used in silicon based microelectronics
1980
1990
2000
w
2010
Year (and technology generations)
A1
SiO2
Si
Si3N4
Ta2O5
TiO2
(Hf,Zr)sixOy
BST (Bar.ST)
ST (Stron. Titanate
TiN
TiN/Ti
Cu/TiN
Cu
PtSi2
CoSi2
TiSi2
MoSi2
TaSi2
{
{
{
{
{
{
{
Figure 1.9
Materials used in integrated circuits [After R. W. Dutton et al., IEEE
Trans. Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems,
Vol. 19, 2000(1544-1560). © 2000 IEEE]
to large-scale, high-voltage power devices. TCAD today plays an important role in the
design and development of modern microelectronics technology. In order to meet the
continuously growing demand of this industry, TCAD software tools are evolving as
huge and complex computer programs for a wide range of individual simulation dis-
ciplines, including process simulation, device simulation, compact model parameter
extraction, interconnection simulation and optimisation. In addition, new processes
and equipment are inevitably utilized for new technologies and present modelling
challenges for process simulation developers.
However, it is increasingly recognised that, with the movement of individ-
ual TCAD tools from predominantly research and development groups to more
production-oriented environments, the usage and maintenance of coupled TCAD
tools becomes cumbersome and requires a significant level of user experience. This
fact has motivated a rapid development of TCAD systems in a uniform framework
that supports the effective usage of multiple simulators with simple user interface,
convenient and standardised data transfers and visualisation.
In this chapter, technology development, based on projections of new and emerg-
ing TCAD tools and methodologies, that offers exciting opportunities in realising
new paradigms for the design-manufacturing interface is presented. It is important
to have a better interface between process and product designers that will provide
both sides with an understanding of how choices affect the overall chip performance,

Introduction
25
reliability and yield. As this new interface is created and explored, TCAD tools will
find a new relevance in the IC design community. This will create new opportunities
for innovation for TCAD research. The role of TCAD in compact model development
was also presented.
Despite the intensive efforts to understand, characterise and model the process
physics, industrial use still requires continual calibration of model parameters, and the
predictive range of any process modelling capability can vary significantly between
process modules. Much like process simulation, device simulation has reached an
advanced level of physical sophistication. The approach used in the pioneering
continuum-based device simulation efforts continues to be the foundation of most
TCAD efforts. It is important to note that the TCAD of the near future will be
challengedbyanumberoffundamentalproblemssuchasmicroscopicdiffusionmech-
anisms, quantum mechanical transport, molecular dynamics, quantum chemistry and
high-frequency interconnect simulation. Next-generation TCAD can and will play a
key role in quantifying potential road blocks, indicating new solutions, and keeping
technology development at par. Thus, the feedback between IC designers and tech-
nologists during technology development is crucial, which, however, is difficult to
realise in practice.
References
1 W. Shockley. US Patent No. 2,569,347, 1951.
2 H. Kroemer, ‘Der Drifttransistor’, Naturwissensch., vol. 40, p. 5789, 1953.
3 M. D. Giles, D. S. Boning, G. R. Chin, W. C. Dietrich, M. S. Karasick, M. E. Law,
et al., ‘Semiconductor wafer representation for TCAD’, IEEE Trans. Computer-
Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems., vol. 13, pp. 82–95, 1994.
4 W. Oldham, A. Neureuther, C. Sung, J. Reynolds, and S. Nandgaonkar,
‘A general simulator for VLSI lithography and etching processes: Part II –
application to deposition and etching’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-27,
pp. 1455–1459, 1980.
5 B. Stine, D. Ouma, R. Divecha, D. Boning, J. Chung, D. L. Hetherington,
et al., ‘Rapid characterization and modelling of pattern dependent variation in
chemical mechanical polishing’, IEEE Trans. Semiconduct. Manufact., vol. 11,
pp. 129–140, 1998.
6 Z. K. Hsiau, E. C. Kan, J. P. McVittie, and R. W. Dutton, ‘Robust, stable and
accurate boundary movement for physical etching and deposition simulation’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 44, pp. 1375–1385, 1997.
7 R. J. Hoekstra, and M. J. Kushner, ‘Comparison of two-dimensional and three-
dimensional models for profile simulation of poly-Si etching of finite length
trenches’, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 16, pp. 3274–3280, 1998.
8 A. J. Strojwas, D. J. Collins, and D. White, Jr., ‘A CFD model for the PECVD of
silicon nitride’, IEEE Trans. Semiconduct. Manufact., vol. 7, pp. 176–183, 1994.
9 D. Chin, ‘Executing system on a chip’s requirements for a successful SOC
implementation’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 3–8, 1998.

26
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
10 A. de Mari, ‘An accurate numerical one-dimensional solution of the p-n
junction under arbitrary transient conditions’, Solid State Electron., vol. 11,
pp. 1021–1053, 1968.
11 D. L. Scharfetter, and H. K. Gummel, ‘Large-signal analysis of a silicon read
diode oscillator’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-16, pp. 64–77, 1969.
12 J. P. Krusius, ‘Process modelling for submicron complementary metal-oxide-
semiconductor very large scale integrated circuits’, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A,
vol. ED-24, pp. 905–911, 1986.
13 D. C. D’Avanzo, M. Vanzi, and R. W. Dutton, One-Dimensional Semiconductor
Device Analysis (SEDAN). Report G-201-5, Stanford University, 1979.
14 S. Selberherr, A. Schutz, and H. W. Potzl, ‘MINIMOS – A Two-dimentional
MOST transistor analyzer’,
IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices,
vol. ED-27,
pp. 1540–1550, 1980.
15 A. F. Franz, and G. A. Franz, ‘BAMBI – A design model for power MOSFETs’,
IEEE Trans. Comp. Aided Design, vol. CAD-4, pp. 177–189, 1985.
16 R. E. Jewell, W. B. Grabowski, and M. R. Kump, ‘TCAD software from tech-
nology modeling associates’, in Software Tools for Process, Device and Circuit
Modeling, Dublin: Boole Press, pp. 121–129, 1989.
17 BIPOLE3, ‘User’s Manual’, 1993.
18 G. A. Armstrong and T. C. Denton, ‘HQUPETS – a two-dimensional simulator
for heterojunction bipolar transistors’, in Proc. IMA Conf. on Semiconductor
Modeling, Loughborough, pp. 16–17, 1991.
19 J. W. Slotboom, ‘Computer-aided two-dimensional analysis of bipolar transis-
tors’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-20, pp. 669–679, 1973.
20 H. H. Heimeier, ‘A two-dimensional numerical analysis of a silicon N-P-N
transistor’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-20, pp. 708–714, 1973.
21 Stanford University, PISCES-2ET 2-D Device Simulator, 1994.
22 D. C. Cole, E. M. Buturla, S. S. Furkay, K. Varahramyan, J. Slinkman,
J. A. Mandelman, et al., ‘The use of simulation in semiconductor technology
development’, Solid State Electron., vol. 33, pp. 591–623, 1990.
23 R. B. Fair, and J. C. C. Tsai, ‘A quantitative model for the diffusion of phos-
phorus in silicon and the emitter dip effect’, J. Electrochem. Soc., vol. 124,
pp. 1107–1117, 1977.
24 C. P. Ho, J. D. Plummer, S. E. Hansen, and R. W. Dutton, ‘VLSI process mod-
elling – SUPREM III’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-30, pp. 1438–1453,
1983.
25 M. E. Law, and S. M. Cea, ‘Continuum based modelling of silicon integrated
circuit processing: An object oriented approach’, Comp. Mat. Sci., vol. 12,
pp. 289–308, 1998.
26 E. W. Scheckler, and A. R. Neureuther, ‘Models and algorithms for 3-D topog-
raphy simulation with SAMPLE-3D’, IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design,
vol. 13, pp. 219–230, 1994.
27 A. Yoshii, H. Kitazawa, M. Tomizawa, S. Horiguchi, and T. Sudo, ‘A three-
dimensional analysis of semiconductor devices’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. ED-29, pp. 184–189, 1982.

Introduction
27
28 N. Shigyo, M. Konaka, and R. Dang, ‘Three-dimensional simulation of inverse
narrow-channel effect’, Electron. Lett., vol. 18, pp. 274–275, 1982.
29 E. Buturla, P. Cottrell, B. Grossman, and K. Salsburg, ‘Finite-element analysis
of semiconductor devices: The FIELDAY program’, IBM J. Res. and Devices,
vol. 25, pp. 218–231, 1981.
30 X. Zhou, ‘The missing link to seamless simulation’, IEEE Circuits Devices Mag.,
vol. 19, pp. 9–17, 2003.
31 J. Mar, ‘The application of TCAD in industry’, in Proc. SISPAD, pp. 64–74,
1996.
32 M. Duane, ‘TCAD needs and applications from a user’s perspective’, Trans.
IEICE, vol. E82-C, pp. 976–982, 1999.
33 R. W. Dutton, and R. J. G. Goossens, ‘Technology CAD at Stanford University:
physics, algorithms, software and applications’, Microelectronics J., vol. 26,
pp. 99–111, 1995.
34 Silvaco International, Silvaco-ATHENA User’s Manual, 2005.
35 Silvaco International, Silvaco-ATLAS/BLAZE, 2005.
36 ISE Integrated Systems Engineering AG., Zurich, Switzerland, Tech. Rep.
DIOS-ISE, Release 6.0, 1999.
37 DESSIS-ISE, Release 8.5, ‘Integrated systems engineering AG, Zurich, Switzer-
land’, 2003.
38 A. Amerasekera, V. McNeil, and M. Rodder, ‘Correlating drain junction scaling,
salicide thickness, and lateral NPN behaviour, with the ESD/EOS performance
of a 0.25 µm CMOS process’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 893–896, 1996.
39 R. W. Dutton, and A. J. Strojwas, ‘Perspectives on technology and technology-
driven CAD’, IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Des. of Integrated Circuits and
Systems, vol. 19, pp. 1544–1560, 2000.
40 A. R. Alvarez, B.L. Abdi, D. L. Young, H. D. Weed, J. Teplik, and E. R. Herald,
‘Application of statistical design and response surface methods to computer-aided
VLSI device design’, IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design, vol. 7, pp. 272–288,
1988.
41 W. Maly, and A. J. Strojwas, ‘Statistical simulation of the IC manufacturing
process’, IEEE Trans. Computer Aided Design, vol. CAD-1, pp. 120–131, 1982.
42 R. Plasun, M. Stockinger, and S. Selberherr, ‘Integrated optimization capabili-
ties in the VISTA technology CAD framework’, IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided
Design Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 17, pp. 1244–1251, 1988.
43 Ch. Pichler, and S. Selberherr, ‘Process flow representation within the VISTA
framework’, in Proc. SISDEP, pp. 25–28, 1993.
44 Silvaco International, Santa Clara, CA, VWF Interactive Tools User’s Manual,
2004.
45 TechnologyModellingAssociates, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA,TMAWorkBenchVersion
2.0 User’s Manual, 1996.
46 R. Booth, L. Dupas, and R. Cartuyvels, NORMAN User’s Manual, 1993.
47 K. Mayaram, and D. O. Pederson, ‘Coupling algorithms for mixed-level
circuit and device simulation’, IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design, vol. 11,
pp. 1003–1012, 1992.

28
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
48 J. R. F. McMacken, and S. G. Chamberlain, ‘CHORD: a modular semiconduc-
tor device simulation development tool incorporating external network models’,
IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design, vol. 8, pp. 826–836, 1989.
49 H. Brech, T. Grave, T. Simlinger, and S. Selberherr, ‘Optimization of pseudomor-
phic hemt’s supported by numerical simulations’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 44, pp. 1822–1828, 1997.
50 Y. Cheng, M.-C. Jeng, Z. Liu, J. Huang, M. Chan, K. Chen, et al., ‘A physical and
scalable I–V model in BSIM 3v3 analog/figital circuit simulation’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 44, pp. 277–287, 1997.
51 C. Fiegna, ‘Physics-based analysis of RF performance of small geometry
MOSFETs: Methodology and application to the evaluation of the effects of
scaling’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 543–546, 1999.
52 M. Valtonen, P. Heikkila, A. Kankkunen, K. Mannersalo, R. Niutanen, P. Stenius,
T. Veijola, and T. Virtanen, ‘APLAC – A new approach to circuit simulation by
object-orientation’, in Proc. 10th European Conf. on Circuit Theory and Design.,
pp. 351–360, 1991.
53 J. Victory, C. C. McAndrew, and K. Gullapalli, ‘A time-dependent,surface poten-
tial based compact model for MOS capacitors’, IEEE Electron Device Lett.,
vol. 22, pp. 245–247, 2001.
54 S. E. Laux, and K. Hess, ‘Revisiting the analytic theory of p-n junction impedance:
Improvementsguidedbycomputersimulationleadingtoanewequivalentcircuit’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 46, pp. 396–412, 1999.
55 J. Rodriguez, M. C. Smayling, and W. L. Wilson, ‘ESD circuit synthesis and
analysis using TCAD and SPICE’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 97–100, 1998.
56 S. Luryi, ‘Development of RF equivalent circuit models from physics-based
device models’, in Future Trends in Microelectronics, (S. Luryi, J. Xu, and
A. Zaslavsky, Eds.), pp. 463–466, Wiley, New York, 1999.
57 A. Pacelli, M. Mastrapasqua, and S. Luryi, ‘Generation of equivalent circuits
from physics-based device simulation’, IEEE Trans. Computer Aided Design of
Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 19, pp. 1241–1250, 2000.
58 P. V. Voorde, ‘TCAD for bipolar process development: a user’s perspective’, in
IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 101–109, 1991.
59 N. S. Rankin, C. Ng, L. S. Ee, F. Boyland, E. Quek, L. Y. Keung, et al., ‘Statisti-
cal SPICE analysis of a 0.18 µm CMOS digital/analog technology during process
development’, in Proc. ICMTS, pp. 19–23, 2001.
60 Hewlett-Packard Company, San Francisco, CA, IC-CAP User’s Manual – High
Frequency Model Tutorials, 1997.
61 Silvaco International, Santa Clara, CA, UTMOST User’s Manual, 2004.
62 Silvaco International, Santa Clara, CA, SPAYN User’s Manual, 2004.
63 J.A.NelderandR.Mead, ‘Asimplexmethodforfunctionminimization’, Comput.
J., vol. 7, pp. 308–313, 1965.
64 Semiconductor Industry Association, ‘International technology roadmap for
semiconductors’, San Jose, Calif., 2005.
65 K. K. Likharev, ‘Correlated discrete transfer of single electrons in ultrasmall
tunnel junctions’, IBM J. Res. and Devices, vol. 32, pp. 144–158, 1988.

Introduction
29
66 Ch. Wasshuber, H. Kosina, and S. Selberherr, ‘SIMON - A simulator for single-
electron tunnel devices and circuits’, IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design of
Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. CAD-16, pp. 937–944, 1997.
67 S. Kohyama, ‘SoC solutions and technologies for digital hypermedia platform’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 8–13, 1999.
68 M. Pinto, ‘Atoms to applets: Building systems IC’s in the 21st century’, in IEEE
ISSCC, pp. 26–30, 2000.
69 A. La Magna, P. Alippi, L. Colombo, and M. Strobel, ‘Atomic scale computer
aided design for novel semiconductor devices’, Comp. Mat. Sci., vol. 27,
pp. 10–15, 2003.
70 P. Hohenberg, and W. Kohn, ‘Inhomogeneous electron gas’, Phys. Rev. B,
vol. 136, pp. 864–871, 1964.
71 L. J. Sham, and M. Schluter, ‘Density-Functional theory of the energy Gap’, Phys.
Rev. Lett., vol. 51, pp. 1888–1891, 1983.
72 W. Kohn, and L. J. Sham, ‘Self-Consistent equations including exchange and
correlation effects’, Phys. Rev., vol. 140, pp. A1133–A1138, 1965.
73 P. E. Burrows, G. Gu, V. Bulovic, Z. Shen, S. R. Forrest, and M. E. Thompson,
‘Achieving full-color organic light-emitting devices for lightweight, flat-panel
displays’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 44, pp. 1188–1203, 1997.
74 A. Dodabalapur, Z. Bao, A. Makhija, J. G. Laquindanum, V. R. Raju, Y. Feng,
H. E. Katz, and J. Rogers, ‘Organic smart pixels’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 73,
pp. 142–144, 1998.
75 F. Ebisawa, T. Kurokawa, and S. Nara, ‘Electrical properties of polyacety-
lene/polysiloxane interface’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 54, pp. 3255–3259, 1983.
76 D. J. Gundlach, Y. Y. Lin, T. N. Jackson, S. F. Nelson, and D. G. Schlom,
‘Pentacene organic thin-film transistors-molecular ordering and mobility’, IEEE
Electron Device Lett., vol. 18, pp. 87–89, 1997.
77 M. A. Alam, A. Dodabalapur, and M. R. Pinto, ‘A two-dimensional simulation of
organic transistors’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 44, pp. 1332–1337, 1997.


Chapter 2
IC technology and TCAD tools
The semiconductor fabrication process involves several steps such as diffusion,
oxidation, ion implantation, etching, deposition and the lithographic steps of image
transfer and photoresist exposure and development. Integrated circuits are manufac-
tured by using these sequential fabrication process steps that have their scientific
foundations in applied physics and chemistry. Each process is a complex physical
phenomenon and, as a result, the exact physics may not always be accurately defined.
A long sequence of fabrication steps are necessary to build up the layers on the sili-
con substrate and to etch them into appropriate shapes to form diodes, transistors and
interconnects. Each step has to be precisely controlled to give the best circuit perfor-
mance and the complete sequence needs to be highly optimised for the production
of ICs.
Today much of the development of semiconductor devices and processes is done
by TCAD as it offers unique possibilities in visualisation of processing steps, descrip-
tion of the physical changes and understanding of the interrelation of the process
variables. Modelling of processes provides a way to interactively explore the fab-
rication process, studying the effects of process choices, leading to a ‘virtual wafer
fabrication’ (VWF) design environment.
TCAD simulation tools provide a controlled and repeatable numerical experiment
that can yield information that cannot be measured experimentally. The main aim of
a TCAD simulator tool is to match the simulation methodology as close as possible
to the fabrication technology and their integration into the actual fabrication. For
TCAD tools to be useful in a practical environment, they must be physically accurate,
computationally robust and usable by semiconductor process engineers. A TCAD
simulation flow generally consists of the following:
•
interface from design and mask layout to generate process simulation input;
•
interface between the process flow description and the process simulation;
•
interface between electrical test and device simulation;
•
interface between device characterisation and modelling.

32
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
In the TCAD process integration scheme, the usual procedure is to measure the
device characteristics on test structures on the semiconductor wafer and compare these
characteristics with device simulation. This approach can relate worst-case predic-
tions to process parameter changes. Statistical variations on specific semiconductor
process step parameters can also be predicted.
After fabrication, it is necessary to generate d.c. and a.c. electrical parameters
such as threshold voltage, effective gate length of MOS transistors or cut-off fre-
quency in a bipolar transistor. Measurements are carried out using automated test
systems (e.g., Agilent or Keithley) at wafer level. The measurement procedures may
hierarchically be oriented for a particular technology node. The interface between
device characterisation and modelling deals with the generation of reliable device
models for circuit modelling.
Simulation of the mechanical effects of the final semiconductor device structure,
including metallisation and interconnection, is also of interest. This interest arises
from the increasing complex and smaller geometries that are becoming quite challeng-
ing due to high stress effects that manifest themselves in the form of cracks, extrusions
of materials, electromigration and other effects. The back-end of the line (BEOL)
modelling consists of mechanical, thermal and field analyses, and electromigration
models.
In this chapter, the modelling and simulation of processes that are involved in the
creation of a device will be discussed. For example, the modelling and simulation
methodology for plasma processes in the context of how models have evolved and the
metrics for their application will be addressed. Modelling and simulation can make an
important contribution to process engineering of each particular plasma process step
as design of experiments (DOE) become more costly. The concept of VWF, which
is becoming increasingly popular in the semiconductor industry, is then introduced.
Then, several commercially available process and device design tools, illustrating
their use for specific design, will be discussed.
2.1
Process simulation
Semiconductor process simulation involves the numerical solution of equations
describing the physics of dopant diffusion, oxidation, lithography, ion implantation,
etching and deposition steps, resulting in the creation of data files that describe the
geometry and doping profiles that define a device. Each process step requires solu-
tion of a specific set of equations that are often non-linear and require specification of
physical constants, some of which may have to be calibrated for a particular process.
The realisation of better physical models depends on the accuracy of
the knowledge of materials and process parameters. The limitations in direct
measurement methods for the determination of some key parameters is one of the
challenges that needs to be addressed. For example, measurement techniques for
dopant profiling have led to a better understanding and development of models for
diffusion and ion implantation. However, while simple techniques are capable of
measuring 1D profiles, more complex procedures offer quantitative determination of

IC technology and TCAD tools
33
2D and 3D profiles [1]. Such techniques may greatly aid in the development of multi-
dimensional models for ion implantation and diffusion, which then provide higher
accuracy in predicting device structures and their material properties. The various
process steps that have to be modelled are now described.
2.1.1
Oxidation
Oxidation is modelled by solving the diffusion equation for the transport of oxygen
through oxide and silicon. Silicon at the interface is converted to silicon dioxide
after accumulating a sufficient concentration of oxidant. In local oxidation of Si
(LOCOS), a deposited silicon nitride layer acts as a diffusion barrier in regions where
oxidation is not desired. Historically, modelling of thermal oxidation of silicon has
been based upon the well-known linear-parabolic growth model due to Deal and
Grove in 1965 [2]. This model is, however, inaccurate in the ‘very thin’ oxide
regime (∼20 nm). Since this regime has become a very important state-of-the-art
MOS technology, many more complex models [3] have been proposed to account for
the growth of thin oxides.
The problem of modelling oxidation is compounded considerably in 2D, where
one can no longer ignore the mechanical stress of the growing oxide. Specifically,
this is true when oxide is known to exhibit fluid flow at high process temperatures,
but there is no consensus as to whether it is viscous, viscoelastic or even plastic flow.
However, using a comprehensive process simulation program, one can now simulate
a complex structure and analyse stresses that may arise during thermal oxidation.
In general, oxidation simulation tools should include the following:
•
non-linear viscoelastic model;
•
stress-dependent oxidation;
•
initial film stress specification;
•
thermal expansion;
•
glass reflow.
2.1.2
Ion implantation
Ion implantation is the most important technique for introducing dopants into semi-
conductors. Commonly, dopants are implanted into silicon through silicon dioxide.
However, silicon nitride, photoresist, polySi or various silicides are also used as
masking materials. For VLSI technologies, low ‘thermal budgets’ are required to
minimise profile broadening by diffusion, and correct prediction of ion-implanted
profiles has become crucial. As modern annealing methods such as rapid thermal
annealing (RTA) and flash annealing do not alter the implanted profile very much,
the determination of the initial implantation profile has become a very important task.
Thus, the simulation of ion implantation has gained in significance tremendously.
For ion-implantation simulation, three main techniques are used: the analytical
description of the doping profile [4], and the solution of the Boltzmann transport equa-
tion [5] or the Monte Carlo method [6,7]. Simulators contain both analytic and Monte
Carlo ion-implantation models so that a wider range of the required physical situations

34
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
can be realistically simulated. Simpler analytical models based on a Gaussian or other
distribution functions may also be used to define an ion-implanted profile prior to
subsequent processing.
Models based on Gaussian, joined half-Gaussian and Pearson IV distributions
are available for simulation of any impurity element into silicon or into films such
as oxide or nitride on silicon. A Gaussian distribution may be used to account for
scattering effects. Specific models for As, P and B are available. For all cases, angled
implants and irregular surface geometries, including undercuts, are allowed.
When greater accuracy is required in defining the implant profile, Monte Carlo
programs have been developed for accurately simulating the implantation of ions
into semiconductor materials. For example, the TRIM Monte Carlo ion-implantation
program [8] was developed for 1D and 2D implantation studies in multi-layered
structures. Such a capability can greatly aid in the understanding of ion implantation
(especially lateral scattering in 2D) and can be used to generate new and improved
parameters for analytic models, or to extend their range. Another powerful Monte
Carlo program for ion implantation in solids is MARLOWE [9]. An important feature
of MARLOWE is its capability of treating crystalline materials, rather than simply
assuming the semiconductor material to be amorphous. Consequently, this program
can simulate the channelling of dopant atoms in crystalline materials.
In general, an ion-implantation simulation tool should have the following
capabilities:
•
Monte Carlo implantation;
•
dual Pearson, Pearson and Gaussian distribution functions;
•
depth-dependent lateral straggling;
•
dose accumulation;
•
primary ion distribution;
•
range matching and dose matching;
•
calibrated internal tables for B, BF2, As, P, Sb, In and Ge;
•
automated saving and reloading of 1D and 2D implanted profiles.
2.1.3
Diffusion
Accurate modelling of dopant diffusion is one of the key elements in process sim-
ulation. Point defects are responsible for most non-equilibrium effects in diffusion,
and a complete diffusion model must be able to account for defect-dopant interac-
tions. Presently, most process simulators model diffusion by a numerical solution of
the diffusion equation for dopants, and incorporate non-linear effects through use of
a concentration-dependent dopant diffusivity relationship. Non-equilibrium effects,
typically due to thin film/substrate interfacial reactions, are incorporated via boundary
conditions.
For diffusion modelling, the most general form requires the simultaneous solution
of a set of non-linear coupled differential equations for dopants and defects, where
the point defect distributions are explicitly calculated. Diffusion simulators are also
capableofmodellingavarietyofexplicitpoint-defect-mediateddiffusioneffects, such
as oxidation-enhanced diffusion and nitridation-retarded diffusion. The simulation of

IC technology and TCAD tools
35
rapid thermal annealing (RTA) processes are also necessary. As short times and high
temperatures are associated with RTA, a highly non-equilibrium state where impurity
and point defect ‘reactions’ tend to dominate ‘diffusion’ arises.
Hu [10] introduced the dual diffusion mechanism in silicon, involving the lattice
vacancy and silicon self-interstitial for mediating the dopant diffusion. Oxidation
enhanced/retarded diffusion [11] and retarded diffusion during thermal nitridation
[12] and silicidation [13] are compatible with the dual mechanism. Also, the pair-
diffusion advanced in diffusion modelling by hypothesising that dopant diffusion
proceeds by dopant point-defect pairs [14–16]. High concentration effects like clus-
tering and precipitation are inherently connected to the processes of activation and
deactivation of dopants [17].
Commercially available simulators, such as TMA/Avanti’s (now Synopsys)
TSUPREM4 and Silvaco’s ATHENA, have several models and parameters to predict
the dopant diffusion behaviour in two-dimensions. Careful consideration has to be
made to fit the experimental results. In general, diffusion simulation tools should
have the following capabilities:
•
advanced point defect model with full charge states for dopants and defects,
clusters, solubility;
•
advanced calibration parameters;
•
equilibrium model for fast simulations of large structures;
•
polySi model for grain boundary diffusion;
•
epitaxy.
Modelling realistic diffusion processes requires the incorporation of as much
physics as possible to obtain sufficient accuracy. To design a new simulation model,
one has to make a compromise between the number of parameters and the underlying
physical relationships. As an example, a physically based model, in the form of a
two-dimensional simulation is necessary for dopant diffusion study in polySi. PolySi
layers are used in modern IC fabrication processes as diffusion sources, for instance,
for out-diffusion processes in forming an n-polySi gate for MOSFETs, or for emitter
and base formation in high-performance bipolar technology [18].
Any advanced polySi diffusion model must include various phenomena such as
clustering due to the excessively high dopant concentrations and segregation kinetics,
to handle the exchange of dopants in the grain/grain-boundary network. To determine
the impurity profile in the complex lattice polySi-silicon structure, it is also necessary
to include a generation/recombination mechanism and grain growth kinetics.
2.1.4
Lithography
Lithography deals with the basic processes of pattern definition and transfer, which
ultimately decide the performance and packing density in a circuit. Topography deals
with the change in the shape on the wafer surface. As IC fabrication technology
pushes towards finer line-widths, the topographical features of devices are becoming
critical. In IC processing, lithography step involves a multi-step combination of resist

36
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
processing, plasma etching of oxide/nitride and sputter deposition of metals to form
the contact to the substrate.
The important issues are the types of physical features that can be built with
adequate yield and their corresponding electrical performance. If process models can
be established, algorithms can often be used to explore process effects by simulating
the time evolution of the line edge profile (topography). Besides the advantages of
controllability and observability, simulation can be done much more rapidly and
economically. In order to predict the profile evolution with enough accuracy to
represent the very small structures such as trenches, contacts or vias, 3D approaches
to topography modelling have been developed [19,20].
The full spectrum of these topography models covers lithography, etching and
deposition modules. In the lithography area, the quantitative resist modelling is still
the bottleneck and the macroscopic models developed by Dill still dominate [21].
The modelling of image formation has received a lot of attention mostly because
of the optical proximity correction needs. There are numerous software tools for
aerial imaging that result in good engineering approximations [22–24].
However, even these tools are not sufficient to handle the current lithography
systems with large numerical apertures, off-axis illumination and pupil filtering. The
complex nature of material etching and deposition processes has limited the develop-
ment of physically based models for such processes. Consequently, many simulators
include user-defined models for material removal and addition as well as models for
isotropic and anisotropic deposition/etching.
Since the wavelength of visible light is comparable to device dimensions for
submicron device structures, then for conventional photoresist exposure methods,
the image obtained from a lithographic mask will not match the intended masking
design. Moreover, other complicating factors often arise due to topographical varia-
tions in the photoresist and in the structures underneath the photoresist. Developing
the photoresist introduces another factor that typically offsets the final shape from the
intended shape, as well as giving the edge of the photoresist a non-vertical profile.
A good example of topography design occurs in sputter deposition of metal into
small contact holes. In shrinking VLSI layout for high density, the size of the contact
holes is one of the limiting factors. Not only must the lithography be capable of
resolving these two-dimensional features, but the deposition must also be capable
of adequately coating them. The thickness in the bottom of the contact and along
the sides is greatly influenced by the aspect ratio of the opening and edge profile
shape. A tapered process results in much better coverage and reduced sensitivity to
electromigration induced by high current densities.
A variety of etching and deposition models have also been developed. Basic
etching concepts have evolved from crystal growth models and have been applied to
plasma etching reactive-ion etching and ion milling [25–29]. Sputter deposition and
evaporation have also been simulated [30–33]. The conditions necessary for metal
‘lift-off’ and step coverage have been explored [32].
Electron beam lithography simulation has been based on Monte Carlo simulation
of the latent energy deposition profile [34,35] and a solubility-versus-dose model for
PMMA resist. Profile simulation has been useful in characterising effects of machine,

IC technology and TCAD tools
37
wafer and resist parameters on lithographic performance [36–41]. X-ray and ion beam
lithography have also been simulated using energy deposition models with the PMMA
resist model [42–44].
Historically, ithasoftenbeensufficienttosimulateonlythetwo-dimensionalcross
section of an integrated device feature. Programs like SAMPLE [45,46], SPEEDIE
[47] or COMPOSITE [48] use the well-known string algorithm [49] for fast and
accurate computation of two-dimensional topography processes. These programs
are widely available and have been applied with great success. However, the real
problems are in three-dimensional topography simulation.
2.1.5
Etching
An important process in semiconductor manufacturing is the etching of silicon and
polySi for device fabrication. Chlorine-based chemistries are commonly used in
industry owing to the capability of highly anisotropic feature etching allowing the
necessary submicron feature production. Plasma etching using high-density plasma
(HDP) reactors is predominant in semiconductor fabrication due to its capability
to produce highly anisotropic features in line-widths below 0.2 µm. In general,
etching/deposition simulation tools should have the following capabilities:
•
Etching: Isotropic, vertical, anisotropic, crystallographic, and polygon.
•
Deposition: Isotropic and anisotropic.
The etch and deposition simulator SPEEDIE [47] is intended to simulate two-
dimensional profile evolution during etching and deposition in gaseous systems.
SPEEDIE predicts time evolution of etch profiles using physical models and parame-
ters extracted from special test structures. The models in SPEEDIE assume that: etch
and deposition reactor pressure is below several Torr, such that gas-phase collisions
within the topological features can be ignored because the mean free path is very
large in comparison with the characteristic geometrical dimension of IC devices. The
fluxes for three types of species are calculated: ions, chemical radicals and depo-
sition precursors. Multiple transport mechanisms that are modelled include direct
gas-phase fluxes, neutral adsorption/re-emission, ion-induced redeposition, surface
diffusion and ion reflection.
Several other tools [50–52] have been developed for the study of the hybrid
plasma equipment model (HPEM). These include the plasma chemistry Monte Carlo
model (PCMCM) and the Monte Carlo feature profile model (MC-FPM), which
focus on the effect of the plasma on the wafer surface. Using the output from the
main plasma simulation, the PCMCM self-consistently determines the energy and
angular distributions of all plasma species at the wafer. This distribution information
can then be used by the MC-FPM to determine the time evolution of etch features on
the wafer based on an energy- and angular-dependent surface chemistry.
2.1.6
Metallisation
Semiconductor devices require conducting materials to provide gate contacts, metal-
to-silicon contacts, interconnects between devices and bonding pads for final

38
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
assembly. In the microelectronics industry, an increase in device density has generally
been facilitated by the miniaturisation of the device and interconnect features. As a
result of the decrease in feature sizes, however, the fabrication of integrated circuits
has become dependent upon the fundamental properties of the thin film material and
film–substrate interactions.
Specially, the contact metallisation has been greatly affected by miniaturisa-
tion of the features as the semiconductor technologies has moved into ultra large-scale
integration. Processing has evolved from rather simple sputtering into elaborate tech-
niques involving source-geometry adjustments, collimation, feature-shape adjust-
ments, temperature-controlled processing and RF sputtering. Metallisation materials
have also evolved from simple metal such as aluminium to aluminium alloys used in
conjunction with silicides and refractory metal diffusion barrier layers. Alternative
metals such as copper are now being used.
As component miniaturisation continues, new technologies must be developed
and research tools must likewise evolve with the technology. Extensive processing
and materials research is required to develop the reliable fabrication processes of
sub-0.1 µm metallisation. A new feature scale simulator needs to be used, as a pro-
cess design and development tool requires both modelling and process prediction
capability.
GROFILMS [53], a two-dimensional thin film process simulator, simulates the
growth and processing of thin films, while considering the microscopic fundamental
physical phenomena that occur. On the basis of a line segment/nodal description
of thin film microstructure, GROFILMS is capable of modelling diffusion, grain
growth competition, anisotropic energetic and ballistic shadowing. Phenomena such
as substrate wetting, grain boundary grooving and surface faceting are also accu-
rately represented. From a process development stand point, GROFILMS employs
system scale parameters to simulate thin film processing (deposition and anneal) over
topographical features such as trenches and vias.
As feature sizes decrease, the Al/Si metallisation shows several limitations. For
example, owing to the high solubility of Si in Al, interdiffusion at Al-Si contact inter-
faces can occur during processing at moderately high temperatures. The interdiffusion
can cause the Si to dissolve into the Al creating a void. Al atoms move into the void
forming a spike into the device region. Reliability failures due to this phenomenon
can be avoided by the use of barrier layers at the Al/Si junction. Al alloys were first
employed to further extend the viability of Al-based metallisation. The addition of
1 per cent Si saturates the Al, eliminates the driving force for dissolution and sup-
presses junction spiking. Eventually, new barrier layer materials are required as metal
silicide layers do not always form stable contacts. Examples of common barrier layers
include titanium (Ti), titanium nitride (TiN) and stuffed inter-metallic alloys such as
titanium-tungsten with or without nitride formation at the grain boundaries.
The second major drawback of Al/Si technology arising from the increased current
densities and the low melting point of Al is the susceptibility to electromigration
failures. Electromigration is the mass transport of the conductor material under the
influence of high current density. Electromigration results as a momentum trans-
fer occurs during interactions between conductor atoms and conductor electrons.

IC technology and TCAD tools
39
The mass transport leads to a divergence in atom flux causing voids and open circuits
and interconnect failures. Relationships exist between electromigration susceptibility,
the metal film texture and the number and type of grain boundaries.
Electromigration becomes a serious problem as miniaturisation and high-density
integration continue to decrease the metallisation line-widths and increase current
densities. Copper (Cu) is added to Al to form Al-Cu alloys to decrease susceptibility
to electromigration failure. The Cu segregates to the grain boundaries and lowers the
effective rate of grain boundary diffusion within the alloy. There is thus an increase
in resistance to electromigration.
The use of Al-Cu alloys as the interconnect material results in trade-offs with
processing techniques and metallisation properties. As Cu does not easily form a
volatile species, difficulties with dry etch processes exist. Increased corrosion rates
due to the presence of Cu requires encapsulation of the interconnect lines. The line
resistivity of the alloys also increases over that of pure Al. These problems restrict
the amount of Cu in the alloy to less than 2 per cent, however, Al with 0.5 per cent
Cu is generally used to increase the electromigration reliability of integrated circuit
interconnections.
New and innovative circuit layout designs are necessary to reduce delays due
to capacitive coupling of conduction lines and simultaneously increase the packing
density of the devices. To this end, multi-level metallisation (MLM) design schemes
are employed. The MLM design minimises interconnect distances and reduces signal
transmission delays. IC operating speed is thus enhanced by stacking metallisation
layers one on top of the other. MLM structures also utilize the vertical dimension,
permitting increased device density.
The use of MLM, however, tends to leave topographical features with high aspect
ratios. These features are to be filled with the metallisation material. Consequently,
feature miniaturisation and design geometry of MLM schemes significantly affect the
development of the deposition processes required for successful metallisation. For
example, uniformity of the metal fill is a critical issue as feature dimensions decrease.
The sputter deposition of Al is often inadequate for filling vias and forming reliable
contacts. Tungsten (W) chemical vapour deposition is being used as an alternative
contact and via fill metallisation. Tungsten CVD can be selectively deposited. Good
coverage is achieved within high aspect ratio vias. However, increased RC time delays
that result from the higher resistance of W (5.65 µ-cm) can significantly reduce the
device performance.
Challenges in interconnect technology include circuit layouts, substrate geometry
and fabrication. Circuit designs consider the decreasing interconnect separations and
high-frequency operation of the circuits. Increased RC time delays impose limita-
tions on the circuit layouts. Dielectric deposition and planarisation and reliable metal
deposition become more difficult.
The properties of the contact metals are crucial to the development of the inter-
connect technology and fabrication processes. As feature sizes continue to decrease,
the requirements of the interconnect metal become increasingly rigorous. The metal
must be reliably deposited into increasingly complex topographies, remaining electri-
cally and structurally stable. It must handle the higher current densities resulting from

40
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Table 2.1
Requirements for contact metallisation for integrated
circuit interconnect technology
Metallisation property
Issue
Low electrical resistivity
Performance
High electromigration resistance
Reliability
Resistance to stress-induced voiding
Reliability
Oxidisation/corrosion resistance
Processing/reliability
Thermal stability
Processing/reliability
Silicon process compatibility
Processing
Good adhesion to barrier layer or dielectric
Processing
Ease of deposition and patterning
Processing
Low production cost/high yield
Manufacturing
cross-sectional areas that exhibit decreasing conductivity. A list of the requirements
for reliable metallisation as summarised in Table 2.1 and may be a starting point for
the evaluation of a contact material.
2.2
Plasma processing
Inthissection, anoverviewofplasmachemistry, modelsandmodelinputsispresented
as a methodology for the development and application of plasma process simulation
tools in microelectronics. Plasmas have been used in microelectronic processing since
the 1960s. Early applications included ashing and isotropic etching of silicon or sili-
con dioxide with halogen plasmas. In the mid-1970s the phenomenon of directional
(anisotropic) etching of surfaces was recognised, and it is this development that has
allowed the manufacture of integrated circuit chips with very small feature sizes.
The semiconductor industry has, in the past, relied primarily on conventional empir-
ical methods for the design of processes and the equipment used to facilitate them.
Empirical design has worked very well so far as the semiconductor industry has not
generally faced any significant technological barriers that would have necessitated
a thorough theoretical understanding of manufacturing processes and tools. Simula-
tion tools for low temperature plasma modelling and simulation have now reached
a maturity level, allowing them to be used to address real process development on
state-of-the-art technologies.
The plasma sources include electron cyclotron resonance (ECR), helicon wave,
helical resonator and inductively coupled plasma (ICP) designs. Lieberman and
Gottscho [54] have reviewed the design of various plasma sources. The sources have
interesting characteristics that make them attractive from a processing viewpoint. It
is possible to operate these tools at relatively high plasma density (1011–1012 cm−3)
and at low neutral pressures (typical values for etching are 1–50 mTorr, compared
to 100 mTorr to several Torr for capacitively coupled discharges). Low-pressure

IC technology and TCAD tools
41
operation at relatively high plasma density results in nearly collisionless sheaths,
and it is thought that this feature promotes good etch anisotropy. High plasma density
also promotes high ion fluxes to surfaces, and thus high process rates. Non-capacitive
power deposition, through the use of microwave power, helicon waves or inductive
heatingleadstolowplasmapotential(10–30 V)andallows, throughseparateradiofre-
quency (RF) biasing of substrates, control of ion energies and minimisation of device
damage.
The ICP has the additional advantage of simplicity of design. It requires no
external magnetic fields for efficient power coupling, eliminating the need for
design and optimisation of electromagnet or permanent magnet configurations. The
ICP consists, essentially, of a multi-turn RF antenna coil coupled across a dielectric
window to the plasma, which acts as a single-turn lossy conductor. In addition to
inductive coupling, there may be substantial capacitive coupling between coil and
plasma. ICPs are now becoming one of the most important discharge configurations
for applications in semiconductor processing [54–58]. Applications include etching,
plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition and physical vapour deposition.
Plasmas are complex physico-chemical systems,
involving the collective
behaviour of electrons and ions in a reactive neutral background. The past 20 years
have witnessed significant advances in plasma equipment and process modelling.
However, the analytical solution of plasma processes is possible only for simple sys-
tems, with many simplifying assumptions and limited kinetics. During the 1980s the
plasma process and equipment modelling work involved one-dimensional simulation
of capacitively coupled discharges [59]. The emphasis was mainly on the understand-
ing of the basic plasma characteristics and refinement of modelling techniques, rather
than the development of comprehensive plasma equipment models. As the compu-
tational resources evolved, the models were extended to two-dimensions, and more
complex plasma chemistries were explored.
The emergence of inductively coupled plasmas in the early 1990s prompted the
development of the first truly comprehensive plasma models that simultaneously
captured most aspects of the plasma reactor behaviour. Plasma models have also
been extended to three-dimensions, and comprehensive models have been developed
for a variety of new plasma devices. Although most of the above plasma models are
either fluid-based or hybrid (in which electrons are treated kinetically), fully kinetic
particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations have also been developed. With the basic models
in place, other aspects of the reactor physics such as non-local behaviour of electrons
and plasma–circuit interaction have also been investigated.
Most plasmas in the process equipment are excited by RF or microwave sources,
and accurate modelling of plasma process is critical for developing predictive models.
Not only does the circuit help accurately describe power-coupling, but an accurate
representation of harmonics and the like also plays a crucial role in describing how
the species interact with surfaces (energy flux and angular distribution functions).
Since external RF measurements are relatively easy to make, even on commercial
reactors, RF measurements can be used to fine tune plasma chemistries and reactor
models. Although the characteristics of individual sheaths have been investigated
in considerable detail, it is important to understand the interaction of plasmas and

42
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
circuits in multiple electrode systems or on assessing the impact of external RF system
components on plasma characteristics.
Gas-phase deposition is very useful for material synthesis, particularly devoted
to the deposition of thin solid films. In these processes, the film is obtained from a
gaseous phase bya chemicalreactioninvolvinginorganicormetal-organicprecursors.
The versatility of these processes allows the deposition of stable, metastable or kinetic
solid products. A wide variety of gases are used in the semiconductor industry for
plasma processes. Rare gases, such as Ar, He, Ne, Xe and O2 and N2 are commonly
used for both etching and deposition chemistries. Etching often utilizes halogenated
gases such as Cl2, BCl3, CF4, C2F6, C4F8, SF6, HBr and NF3.
Deposition can be chemically more complex, and the gases used include mixtures
of CH4, SiH4, NH3 or N2O. The semiconductor industry uses low-k materials for
interconnects, and complicated deposition gases (e.g., TEOS and SiHx-(CH3)4−x)
are used. It is important to identify what species are generated in these plasmas and
how they interact with each other. Some examples of deposition reactions involved in
CVD processes are summarised in Table 2.2. From the above examples, it is clear that
different precursors or their combinations can be conveniently used for the deposition
of the desired material.
The most important interactions in the plasma are often electron impact processes
such as neutral dissociation, ionisation, dissociative ionisation, attachment and dis-
sociative attachment. Because the electron energy distribution function (EEDF) is
usually non-Maxwellian, it is best to know the cross-sections for these electron impact
processes. Once the cross-sections are known, the reaction rates can be calculated
using EEDF. In addition to the parent gases, the cross-sections are also needed for
the radicals (e.g., CF, CF2, CF3, SF2, SF3, CHF2, BCl2) and secondary molecules
(e.g., C2F4 in C4F8) that are often a major constituent of the plasma. Gas-phase
plasma chemical mechanisms are complex. This is especially true for complex etch-
ing or deposition chemistries where it is difficult to identify all the relevant species
in the plasma.
Table 2.2
Examples of CVD processes
System
Type
Chemical reaction
Temperature (K)
Si-epitaxy
Thermal
SiH4−xClx + H2 →Si + HCl
1050–1350
LPCVD
Thermal
SiH4 →Si + 2H2
850–950
SiH4 + N2O →SiO2 + N2
900–1000
SiH2Cl2 + 4NH3 →Si3N4 + HCl + H2
1000–1100
WF6 + 3H2 →W + HF
500–700
VPE
Thermal
GaCl + AsH3 + As2 + As4 →GaAs + HCl
800–1100
MOCVD
Thermal
Ga(CH3)3 + AsH3 →GaAs + CH4
800–900
In(CH3)3 + PH3 →InP + CH4
600–900
PECVD
Plasma
SiH4 →a-Si:H + H2
300–600

IC technology and TCAD tools
43
Chemical mechanisms that capture the relevant physical/chemical phenomena
are often more relevant than individual atomic and molecular data. In addition to
fundamental atomic/molecular physics data, information on chemical mechanisms
are derived from swarm measurements and empirically inferred from experiments.
It is important to develop and systematically improve chemical mechanisms for
plasma processing relevant gases, and research has resulted in the development of
mechanisms for several gases relevant to etching (e.g., CHF3, C2F6 and C4F8).
In addition to electron collision cross-sections, ion–ion, ion–neutral and neutral–
neutral reaction rates are needed as well. Complete sets of relevant cross-sections are
not known for many of the relevant gases. Heavy metals (e.g., Ta or W) are important
for many semiconductor contact applications and their complicated atomic structure
makes modelling of these plasmas a challenge. Using gaseous lasers, thermochem-
istry, atmospheric chemistry and improvement of atomic and molecular measurement
techniques, substantial amounts of atomic and molecular physics data were generated
before 1980 (e.g., Ar, O2 and Cl2) [60]. Using the data, several mechanisms have
been proposed for some of the simpler processing relevant gases.
The interaction of the plasma with surfaces plays an important role in the dis-
charge dynamics. Sputtering or reactive ion etching introduces new species in the
discharge, and these species (e.g., Cu in IPVD or SiFx during fluorocarbon etching
of SiO2) can greatly alter the discharge behaviour. Surface processes at the plasma–
surface interface are not well characterised compared to gas-phase processes within
the plasma. Although it is difficult to investigate surface processes in situ (in the pres-
ence of the plasma), beam studies have proven useful for investigating fundamental
etching and deposition processes at surfaces. Molecular dynamics simulations have
also been found useful to understand surface processes such as ion sputtering of Cu
and Si. A very small subset of relevant surface processes has been characterised in
this manner and, for most applications, it is fair to state that the pertinent surface data
does not exist.
2.3
Chemical mechanical polishing
Chemical mechanical polishing (CMP) is used for planarisation in ultra large-scale
integrated circuit fabrication. It is used for planarisation of inter-level dielectrics
(ILD), shallow trench isolation (STI) and copper damascene metallisation. In spite of
extensive use of CMP, many aspects of CMP are not well understood. The simulation
of CMP is particularly important within integrated topography process simulation
environments to allow for studying the interplay between etching, deposition and
CMP process steps.
The coupling of the different topography simulation modules allows for parameter
studies covering a number of subsequent process steps and is therefore highly useful
for reducing the amount of experimental work needed for integrated topography
process characterisation and optimisation. The integration of chemical mechani-
cal polishing module and application to damascene processes have been recently
demonstrated [61].

44
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
The most important issues for modelling of CMP include the removal rate (RR),
which consists of a mechanical as well as a chemical contribution, the bending and
the stress of the pad, which strongly influence the quality of the planarisation, and
the transport and flow of the slurry. Whether the primary removal mechanism is
mechanical or chemical depends on the layer being removed. There are generally
four approaches to model wear mechanisms and material removal rates in CMP
processes. The phenomenological approach is useful in practice for predicting dishing
and erosion, but does not provide much insight in the actual CMP process.
The approach based on fluid hydrodynamics assumes slurry erosion to be the
main wear mechanism and neglects mechanical abrasion by particles embedded in
the surface of the polishing pad. Although global planarisation can be achieved by
hydrodynamic effects if a continuous flow of slurry is present, but the removal rate
predicted by fluid modelling is too low in this regime. The third approach is based on
a contact-mechanics analysis of the CMP process. According to these models, elastic
deformation of the polishing pad determines the pressure distribution between wafer
and pad and thus plays an important role in determining the wafer surface profile after
polishing. The fourth approach is based on the theories of contact mechanics and fluid
hydrodynamics. Other models take into account the roughness of the polishing pad
and describe CMP in terms of asperity contacts between wafer and pad. There exist
only a few models to predict surface evolution on feature scale.
The model takes into account both the roughness and elastic deformation of the
polishingpadforcomputingthepressuredistribution. Thephysicalfeature-scaleCMP
model based on contact mechanics has the advantage that the parameters needed for
the simulation input can be experimentally measured. Several CMP models have been
published in the literature [62].
The feature-scale physical model based on contact-mechanics has been imple-
mented in 2D simulator ISE-TCAD [63]. The simulator allows for two-step polishing
of multi-line structures with different pads, slurries and polishing parameters. When
used within an ISE-TCAD software environment, topography simulation can be cou-
pled to various tools, for example, other process simulators such as etching and
deposition simulation modules, and modules for electrical characterisation. The inte-
gration with the 3D simulation of barrier and copper deposition has been demonstrated
for damascene processes [61]. The feature-scale model takes into account both the
roughness and elastic deformation of the polishing pad for computing the pressure
distribution.
2.4
Synopsys TCAD Tools
Recently, Synopsys has announced their TCAD Sentaurus tool suite [64]. Sentaurus
has been created by combining the features from Synopsys and former ISE-TCAD
products, together with a wide range of new features and capabilities, along with other
software tools, such as, TSUPREM4, MEDICI, DAVINCI and Raphael. Sentaurus
addresses most of the simulation challenges arising from semiconductor technologies.
It includes a comprehensive suite of TCAD products for multi-dimensional process,

IC technology and TCAD tools
45
device, and system simulations, embedded into a powerful user interface. Sentaurus
TCAD tools provide the users with the capability of automatically adapting the mesh
toresolve dopantprofilesduringimplantationandannealing. Sentauruscanhandlethe
complete range of semiconductor technologies, from deep-submicron logic, memory
and mixed-signal to smart power, sensors, compound semiconductors optoelectronics
and RF.
Sentaurus Process is an advanced multi-dimensional process simulator for devel-
oping and optimising silicon and compound semiconductor process technologies.
Current trends in the manufacturing of nanoscale devices demand a more fundamental
approach towards modelling. It is important to understand new physical phenomena
in order to optimise process and enhance device performance. For example a model
for anisotropic elasticity allows accurate modelling of the variation of the elastic
behaviour of silicon along the crystal directions. The model accounts for wafer
orientation and slice angle to compute the crystal directions correctly. Recently
semiconductor manufacturers have used strained-Si to enhance transistor perfor-
mance by adding stress in the channel to enhance mobility and therefore drive current.
Three-dimensional simulation is needed to comprehend fully the impact of new
physical phenomena on device performance. Advances in 3D meshing through
the MGOALS library within Sentaurus Process, along with advances in Sentaurus
Structure Editor, have made 3D simulation much easier to perform. Many innovative
features include kinetic Monte Carlo [65], adaptive meshing, laser and flash anneal-
ing, Monte Carlo implantation of silicon carbide and enhancements in 3D oxidation.
Sentaurus Device is a multi-dimensional device simulator capable of simulating
the complete range of semiconductor devices including nanoscale CMOS, FinFETs,
CMOS image sensors, flash memory, SiGe HBTs, power devices, compound semi-
conductors, analog/RF, light-emitting diodes and semiconductor lasers. In addition,
it can be used to analyse electrostatic discharge (ESD) single event upset (SEU) and
soft errors.
Aclearunderstandingofstresseffectsonthetransportpropertiesinsemiconductor
devices is also crucial for developing increasingly smaller and faster transistors.
Sentaurus provides users with two tools to help understand stress effects on device
performance: the continuum simulator Sentaurus Device (SDevice) and the ensemble
Monte Carlo device simulator MOCA. It features both a bulk mode and a 2D mode.
The bulk mode assumes a homogeneous geometry and a constant electric field, and it
is used to study and to calibrate the stress dependencies of kinetic material parameters.
The continuum simulator uses semi-empirical models to calculate the impact of stress
on carrier mobility. These models are fast and robust, but they must be calibrated to
experimental data. Sentaurus Device incorporates an extensive ensemble of physical
models and material parameters to address a broad range of device applications. It
offers a comprehensive set of options, allowing flexibility in configuring application-
specific solutions and interfaces directly with the Synopsys tools Sentaurus Process,
Sentaurus Workbench, Sentaurus Structure Editor and TSUPREM4 to provide a
complete state-of-the-art TCAD simulation environment.
Strain engineering in MOSFETs is very important for 65 nm and 45 nm technology
node development and beyond. At every step in the process development, the

46
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
need to relate carrier mobility to stress in the material has increased significantly.
Current versions of MEDICI and DAVINCI from Synopsys include a stress-induced
hole mobility model reported by Intel [66] for strain-engineered MOSFETs, which
will be introduced in Chapter 4. Although the model is specific to stress-induced
hole mobility, it can be adapted to describe stress-induced electron mobility (the
piezoresistance model or the valley occupancy model) [67]. The latest release of
TSUPREM4 provides users with new models for treating anisotropic elasticity in
silicon, stress-dependent point defect diffusivity, stress-dependent reaction rates and
the segregation of dopant point defect pairs at interfaces.
Interchangability is also an important feature for Synopsys tools. For example,
recent file Input/Output enhancements in MEDICI and DAVINCI support automatic
TIF file compression and decompression. This feature allows the programs to save
and load simulation results in compressed TIF files that can be up to ten times smaller
than the decompressed versions. This feature allows MEDICI and DAVINCI to read
compressed TIF files created by TSUPREM4 directly. Also, DAVINCI can save
device structures in TDR file format that can be read by Sentaurus Device. This
allows devices that were originally simulated with DAVINCI to be read directly into
Sentaurus Device and can now be simulated using the advanced features of Sentaurus
Device.
With semiconductor devices becoming increasingly complex, the simulation of
the topographic steps calls for models that capture the influence of process condition.
Sentaurus topography, an integral part of the Sentaurus TCAD tool suite, allows users
to evaluate and optimise critical topography processing steps in arbitrarily shaped,
multi-layer and multi-material semiconductor structures.
2.5
SILVACO: TCAD simulation suite
In this section, a brief overview on the progress that has been made in simulating semi-
conductor device/process simulation and fabrication processes using TCAD software
from another vendor will be presented. Silvaco TCAD products such as ATHENA for
process simulation and ATLAS for device simulation are widely used to develop and
optimise the semiconductor processes. IC designers may use the SPICE-like simulator
SmartSpice to design and simulate analog circuits. As manufacturing and design
depend on extracted device models and accurate circuit simulation, a well-established
tool UTMOST for data acquisition and parameter extraction is also available.
Physically based simulation is different from empirical modelling. The goal of
empirical modelling is to obtain analytic formulae that approximate existing data
with good accuracy and minimum complexity. Physically based simulation is very
important for two reasons. First, it is almost always much quicker and cheaper than
performing experiments. Second, it provides information that is difficult to measure.
Empirical models provide efficient approximation and interpolation. However, they
do not provide insight and have predictive capabilities. Both ATHENA and ATLAS
are physically based simulators offering predictive capability and insight into the
viability of a device or process. Silvaco also provides integrated simulation software
for specific technologies, for example, silicon on insulator (SOI). Such software

IC technology and TCAD tools
47
includes technology simulation, SPICE model extraction, interconnect parasitic
analysis, SPICE circuit simulation and traditional CAD.
2.5.1
ATHENA
ATHENA is an advanced 2D process simulation tool for silicon and advanced mate-
rials technologies. Arbitrary 2D structures composed of different semiconductor
materials with profiles of different impurities, diffused, implanted or incorporated
into deposited layers can be incorporated. ATHENA combines high-temperature
process modelling such as impurity diffusion and oxidation, topography simulation
and lithography simulation in a single easy-to-use framework. ATHENA consists of
four primary tools and several secondary tools. The primary tools in ATHENA are
•
SSUPREM4: forsimulatingionimplantation, diffusion, oxidationandsilicidation
processes for silicon;
•
Flash: forsimulatingimplantation, activationanddiffusionforadvancedmaterials
technologies;
•
Elite: for 2D topography simulation;
•
Optolith: for lithography simulation.
ATHENA provides additional optional modules for the modelling of silicides,
Monte Carlo modelling of ion implantation, etching and deposition. Hence it offers
a capability for fast and accurate simulation of all critical fabrication steps used in
CMOS, bipolar, SiGe, SOI, III-V, optoelectronic and power device technologies.
2.5.2
ATLAS
ATLAS is a physically based device simulator, providing general capabilities for
2D and 3D simulation of semiconductor devices. ATLAS is often used in conjunc-
tion with ATHENA using the physical structures and doping profiles generated by
ATHENA as input to predict the electrical characteristics associated with specified
bias conditions. The combination of ATHENA and ATLAS makes it possible to
determine the impact of process parameters on d.c., a.c. and transient device
characteristics.
ATLAS can also be used in conjunction with the Virtual Wafer Framework (VWF)
Interactive Tools. These include Deckbuild, Tonyplot, DevEdit, MaskView and
Optimiser. Input to ATLAS specifies the device simulation problems by defining
the physical structure to be simulated, the physical models to be used and the bias
conditions for which electrical characteristics are to be simulated.
ATLAS performs self-consistent solution of Poisson equation, current continuity
equations, with an option to incorporate energy balance equations and lattice heat
equations, handling multiple materials such as Si, Ge, SiGe, GaAs, AlGaAs, SiC,
GaN, InP as well as arbitrary user-defined materials. Electrical characteristics of
devices for steady-state, transient and small-signal a.c. analysis are performed.
Arbitrary doping from analytic functions, tables or process simulation can be
incorporated. Automatic regridding, I–V curve tracing and parameter extraction can
be used for device performance optimisation and model calibration.

48
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Physical models available in ATLAS include recombination and generation,
bandgap narrowing, tunnelling and temperature-dependent impact ionisation. A range
of different mobility models with adjustable parameters are dependent on lattice tem-
perature, impurity concentration, carrier concentration, carrier energy, parallel and
perpendicular electric fields. Transport models incorporate either Fermi–Dirac or
Boltzmann statistics.
All ATLAS simulations require two inputs: (1) a text file that contains commands
for ATLAS to execute and (2) a structure file that defines the structure that will be
simulated. The structure file may be generated internally in ATLAS, coupled through
output from ATHENA or generated using DevEdit, an interactive mesh editor. The
ATLAS input file contains data relevant to mesh generation, physical model selection,
type of contact and the analysis to be carried out. ATLAS produces three types
of output files: a run-time diagnostic, a log file that stores all terminal voltages
and currents from the device analysis and a solution file, which stores 2D and 3D
data relating to the values of solution variables within the device at a given bias
point. Supplementary programs Deckbuild and Tonyplot, respectively, provide an
interactive run time environment and offer scientific visualisation of either terminal
characteristics or profiles of solution variables or other derived quantities such as
electric field, generation rate.
A subsidiary optional module QUANTUM solves the coupled Schrodinger–
Poisson equations for the simulation of various effects of quantum confinement of
carriers in thin layers. The Schrodinger–Poisson solver allows calculation of bound
state energies and associated carrier wave function self-consistently with electrostatic
potential. A quantum moment transport model allows simulation of confinement
effects on carrier transport once the bound state energies are known for each well.
The electrical characteristics predicted by ATLAS can be used as input by the
UTMOST device characterisation and SPICE modelling software. Compact models
based on simulated device characteristics can then be supplied to circuit designers for
circuit design. Combining ATHENA, ATLAS, UTMOST and SmartSpice makes it
possible to predict the impact of process parameters on circuit characteristics. ATLAS
can be used as one of the simulators within the VWF automation tools to perform
highly automated simulation-based experimentation linking simulation very closely
to technology development.
2.6
Process-to-device simulation using SILVACO
TCAD tools present unique opportunities in term of visualisation of processing steps,
description of the physical changes and understanding of the interrelation of the
process variables. Modelling of processes provides a way to interactively explore the
fabrication process and study the effects of process choices.
A full TCAD simulation of a process involves the following steps:
•
virtual fabrication of the device using a process simulator;
•
device simulation that solves the equations describing the device behaviour;
•
post processing that is, generation of figures and plots.

IC technology and TCAD tools
49
In the following, the use of Silvaco TCAD tools for the simulation of
(1) AlGaAs/InGaAs/GaAs HEMT and InGaAs/InP HBT device structures, and
(2) advanced strained-Si MOSFET is demonstrated.
2.6.1
Device generation
A typical process usually involves deposition, etching, planarisation and implan-
tation of different species.
For example,
a pseudomorphic HEMT with an
AlGaAs/InGaAs/GaAs layer structure generated using the graphical structure edi-
tor DevEdit is shown in Figure 2.1. A recessed gate has been included in the design,
as well as several buffer layers and delta doped regions. After a process simulation
the final device is defined in terms of a grid, the different materials and their asso-
ciated properties (AlGaAs, InGaAS, GaAs) and doping profile associated with each
material. In this case, doping distributions are defined using analytical functions.
For creating a non-planar HBT structures, DevEdit performs automatic meshing
(see Figure 2.2) for the illustrated InGaAs/InP HBT structure. Extra refinement of
the grid is needed particularly near interfaces between different materials, at steep
doping gradients or where abrupt discontinuities in either conduction or valence band
is evident. Mesh editing of a device grid can be obtained manually or automatically,
depending on complexity of the structure.
Source
0
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.16
0.2
Gate
Drain
Delta doping
Delta doping
Microns
Microns
0
1
2
3
4
InGaAs channel
Materials
GaAs
AlGaAs
InGaAs
Gold
Figure 2.1
A pseudomorphic AlGaAs/InGaAs/GaAs HEMT device structure gener-
ated with DevEdit [Source: Silvaco International]

50
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Emitter
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Microns
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
Microns
2
2.4
2.8
Base
Collector
Materials
InGaAs
InP
Contact
Figure 2.2
Automatic mesh generation with DevEdit for device simulation [Source:
Silvaco International]
2.6.2
Device simulation
Device simulation has two main purposes: to understand and to depict the physical
processes in the interior of a device, and to make reliable predictions of the behaviour
of the next-generation devices. The quality of physical models is vital for understand-
ing of the physical processes in semiconductor devices and for reliable prediction of
device characteristics.
The fundamental semiconductor equations are Poisson equation and continuity
equations for electrons and holes that may involve additional terms and complex-
ity when using an energy balance model. Basic semiconductor equations must be
discretised at each grid point. The current densities are expressed in terms of the
quasi-Fermi levels φn and φp as
→
Jn = −qµnn∇φn
(2.1)
→
Jp = qµpp∇φp
(2.2)
where µn and µp are the electron and hole mobilities. The quasi-Fermi levels are
then linked to the carrier concentrations and the potential through the two Boltzmann

IC technology and TCAD tools
51
approximations:
n = nie exp
q(ψ −φn)
kTL

(2.3)
p = nie exp
−q(ψ −φp)
kTL

(2.4)
where nie is the effective intrinsic concentration and TL is the lattice temperature.
These two Equations (2.3) and (2.4) may then be rewritten to define the quasi-Fermi
potentials:
φn = ψ −kTL
q ln n
nie
(2.5)
φp = ψ + kTL
q ln p
nie
(2.6)
By substituting Equations (2.5) and (2.6) into the current density expressions, the
following current relationships are obtained:
→
Jn = qDn∇n −qnµn∇ψ −µnn[kTL∇(ln nie)]
(2.7)
→
Jp = −qDp∇p −qpµp∇ψ + µpp[kTL∇(ln nie)]
(2.8)
The final term accounts for the gradient in the effective intrinsic carrier concen-
tration, which takes account of bandgap narrowing effects. Effective electric fields
are normally defined, whereby
→
En = −∇

ψ + kTL
q ln nie

(2.9)
→
Ep = −∇

ψ −kTL
q ln nie

(2.10)
which then allows the more conventional formulation of drift-diffusion equations to
be written [see Equations (2.7) and (2.8)].
→
Jn = qnµn
→
En +qDn∇n
(2.11)
→
Jp = qpµp
→
Ep −qDp∇p
(2.12)
It should be noted that this derivation of the drift-diffusion model has assumed that
the Einstein relationship and in the case of Boltzmann statistics this corresponds to
Dn = kTL
q µn
(2.13)
Dp = kTL
q µp
(2.14)

52
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
1.2
Valence band energy (V)
Conduction band energy (V)
InGaAs
InP
InP
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Depth (microns)
1
1.2
1.4
InGaAs
0.8
0.4
0
−0.4
Potential (eV)
−0.8
−1.2
−1.6
−8
Figure 2.3
Band diagram for the InGaAs/InP HBT structure [Source: Silvaco
International]
HBT devices constructed from different semiconductor layers can be solved self-
consistently, if the above equations are applied. For the InGaAs/InP HBT structure,
the band diagram is shown through the intrinsic region in Figure 2.3. An a.c. analysis
of the HBT provides gain vs. frequency plots, s-parameter extraction and can predict
the gain roll-off with frequency (see Figure 2.4). Impact ionisation models allow
simulation of breakdown voltages and is shown in Figure 2.5. A Gummel plot is
shown in Figure 2.6.
The selection of physical models is very important in order to get realistic results
from the device simulator. This includes mobility models, carrier transport mecha-
nism, velocity saturation, carrier generation and recombination, as well as quantum
mechanical correction. The simplest device simulation is a d.c. simulation to predict
I-V characteristics in a steady-state condition. But if a small sinusoidal signal is super-
imposed on the d.c. solution, the device can be treated as a two-port network where
the complex small-signal admittance matrix can be calculated. By decomposing this
matrix into a real part, conductance matrix and an imaginary part, capacitance matrix,
the inter-electrode conductances and capacitances can be found. If the y-matrix is
known, the other a.c. parameters such as s- and z-parameters can be calculated [68].
ATLAS can generate s-parameter data.
To study the non-quasistatic phenomena based on a steady-state solution a voltage
or current increment can be applied to any of the device terminals. The simulator then
calculatesthetransientresponseatanyoftheotherterminals. Thisapproachisrelevant
for simulation of device when switching state. Other types of simulations are also

IC technology and TCAD tools
53
60
50
40
30
20
a.c. current gain (dB)
10
0
5
6
7
8
Log frequency (Hz)
9
10
11
12
Figure 2.4
Alternating current gain roll-off with frequency for InGaAs/InP HBT
structure [Source: Silvaco International]
−5
−6
−7
−8
Conductor current (mA)
−9
−10
−11
−12
−13
0
2
4
Conductor bias (V)
6
8
10
Collector current
Figure 2.5
Breakdown voltage simulation in InGaAs/InP HBT structures [Source:
Silvaco International]

54
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
−2
−3
−4
−5
−6
−7
−8
−9
−10
−11
−12
−13
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Base voltage (V)
Conductor current (mA)
Base current
Collector current
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
Figure 2.6
Gummel plots for InGaAs/InP HBTs [Source: Silvaco International]
possible for example in mixed-mode simulations, several devices can be connected in
a circuit together with elements that have a compact model description. This approach
is very useful, where a SPICE model of a novel device is not available or when a
series resistance has to be included in an a.c. simulation.
2.7
Simulation example: strained-Si MOSFET
As another example of process-to-device simulation, in the following, the simulation
for strained-Si n-MOSFETs using Silvaco simulation tools is discussed. Advanced
MOSFETs have additional device features to enhance performance like HALO doping
to suppress short channel effects, threshold implants to adjust the threshold voltage,
anti-punch through implantations that locally increase doping concentration under
the channel, source and drain extensions, silicided source and drain, and so forth.
ATHENA was used for the process simulation of strained-Si n-MOSFET with a
standard polysilicon gate down to 45 nm gate length. Typical Si CMOS fabrication
process steps have been used in simulation. Implantation with As+ and BF2+ created
deep and shallow S/D regions and the p-well, respectively. The device structure
obtained from the ATHENA process simulation with these features is illustrated in
Figure 2.7, where both lightly doped and heavily doped regions of source and drain are
shown. The channel region (top 10 nm) is the most critical region for heterostructure
MOSFETs and needs to have a fine grid. Figure 2.8 shows the simulated doping
profile.

IC technology and TCAD tools
55
Leff
= 90nm
Gate
Poly-gate
Drain
Source
Strained - Si
Xc
Relaxed SiGe
Materials
Materials
SiGe
SiGe
Polysilicon
Polysilicon
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Microns
Substrate
0.1
0
Phosphorous
Phosphorous
Materials
SiGe
Polysilicon
Phosphorous
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
Yext
Ycon
0.5
Xe
Microns
20.5
20.5
19.7
19.7
18.8
18.8
18 
18 
17.2
17.2
16.3
16.3
15.5
15.5
14.7
14.7
13.8
13.8
13
13
12.2
12.2
20.5
19.7
18.8
18 
17.2
16.3
15.5
14.7
13.8
13
12.2
SiO
SiO2
SiO2
Silicon
Silicon
Silicon
Aluminium
Aluminium
Aluminium
Figure 2.7
Simulated device structure obtained from process simulation for a
strained-Si n-MOSFET with Leff of 90 nm and oxide thickness
1.8 nm. This device was created using ATHENA process simulator [After
A. R. Saha and C. K. Maiti, unpublished data]
To obtain realistic device simulation, an improved transport model is required.
For relatively long channel devices, it is sufficient to use the basic drift-diffusion
equations, but if the gate length is below 60 nm, an energy balance model is often
recommended, since the standard drift-diffusion approach cannot reproduce velocity
overshoot and often overestimates the impact ionisation rates. The energy balance
model is a very good compromise and gives improved prediction of I-V characteris-
tics, as shown in Figure 2.9. In the preceding device simulation the following physical
effects were modelled:
•
For the bandgap narrowing, the Slotboom model was used. Impact ionisation and
the effects of polySi depletion due to the gate voltage were considered.

56
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
−0.2
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
0
0.2
0.4
Materials
Materials
Silicon
Silicon
SiGe
SiGe
Polysilicon
Polysilicon
Silicon
Silicon
SiGe
SiGe
0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16
Microns
0.2 0.24 0.28
Polysilicon
Polysilicon
18.2
18.2
17.6
17.6
17 
17 
16.4 
16.4 
15.7 
15.7 
15.1
15.1
14.5
14.5
14.5
14.5
13.9 
13.9 
12.6 
12.6 
12
12
0.6
0.8
0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Microns
p-well
(doping profile)
0.4
0.5
Source
Source
Drain
Drain
Materials
Silicon
SiGe
Polysilicon
Silicon
SiGe
Polysilicon
18.2
17.6
17 
16.4 
15.7 
15.1
14.5
14.5
13.9 
12.6 
12
Source
Drain
SiO
SiO2
SiO
SiO2
SiO2
SiO2
Boron
Boron
(/cm
(/cm3)
Boron
(/cm3)
Active phospherus (/cm
Active phospherus (/cm3)
Active phosphorus (/cm3)
Gate
Aluminium
Aluminium
Aluminium
Active boron (/cm
Active boron (/cm3)
Active boron (/cm3)
Figure 2.8
Depthprofileofboroninthesurfaceandburiedchannel[AfterA.R.Saha
and C. K. Maiti, unpublished data]
•
Doping-dependentmobilitymodelwasusedwiththefollowingextensions: mobil-
ity degradation at interfaces, high field saturation (velocity saturation), that is,
carrier drift velocity is no longer proportional to the electric field.
•
Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) model for recombination through deep levels in the
band and model for trap-assisted tunnelling were used.
2.8
Summary
In this chapter, the modelling and simulation of unit processes such as ion implan-
tation, diffusion, oxidation, lithography, etching, plasma processing, chemical
mechanical polishing and contact metallisation have been addressed. With regard to
plasma processing, only a small subset of commercial plasma reactors and processes
can be modelled with reasonable accuracy. Very little fundamental plasma chem-
istry data is available for the new etching and deposition chemistries that are being
explored in the semiconductor industry. It is important to have improved predictive

IC technology and TCAD tools
57
0.00
0
50
100
Drain current (A)
150
200
250
300
Leff = 0.09 m
1.00
1.25
0.8 V
Vg.Vt=1.0
0.6 V
0.4 V
0.2 V
0.25
0.75
0.50
Drain voltage (V)
Figure 2.9
Calibrated Id–Vd characteristics showing the usefulness of NEB model.
Symbols – DD Simulation; solid lines – NEB Simulation; dashed
lines – experimental (RimVLSI01) [After A. R. Saha and C. K. Maiti,
unpublished data]
simulation capability for plasma processes and for establishing the larger need for
simulation and modelling tools that can address process integration.
Some of the capabilities of state-of-the-art simulators used in characterising and
predicting semiconductor process and device-related phenomena have been pre-
sented. An attempt will be made to outline the degree of sophistication of the physics
incorporated in process/device simulation programs. The setup of the TCAD simu-
lator is highly complicated and time-consuming. The main concept that should be
considered is to match the simulation methodology as close as possible to the fabri-
cation technology. A brief outline of some of the advances that have been made and
some concerns that remain in simulator development is presented.
While using a simulation tool, the following points need to be remembered: (1) the
simulator needs to replicate the integral physics, (2) default model parameters are gen-
erally used, unless more accurate values have been identified by the user, (3) validity
of models requires experimental confirmation, (4) generation of appropriate mesh
is important for consistency of output and (5) there is always a trade-off between
accuracy and speed.
Use of TCAD tools to understand various design parameters on device per-
formance has been described. Two different commercial tools from Synopsis and
Silvaco have been introduced. As application examples, AlGaAs/InGaAs/GaAs
HEMT, InGaAs/InP HBT device structures and strained-Si n-MOSFETs with 90-nm
gate length have been simulated using Silvaco tools. It is important to note that the

58
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
accurate TCAD simulations and modelling of physical devices depend significantly
on calibrated physical models and appropriate input data. The interface between
device characterisation and device simulation for the generation of reliable device
models for circuit simulation is still not fully developed. This can limit the predictive
power of the combined process and device simulation approach.
References
1 S. H. Goowin-Johansson, R. Subrahmanyan, C. E. Floyd, and H. Z. Mas-
soud, ‘Two-dimensional impurity profiling with emission computed tomography
techniques’, IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design, vol. 8, pp. 332–335, 1989.
2 B. E. Deal, and A. S. Grove, ‘General relationship for the thermal oxidation of
silicon’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 36, pp. 3770–3778, 1965.
3 M. L. Green, E. P. Gusev, R. Degraeve, and E. L. Garfunkel, ‘Ultrathin (<4 nm)
SiO2 and Si-O-N gate dielectric layers for silicon microelectronics: Understand-
ing the processing, structure, and physical and electrical limits’, J. Appl. Phys.,
vol. 90, pp. 2057–2121, 2001.
4 J. F. Gibbons, ‘Ion implantation in semiconductors – Part I: Range distribution
theory and experiments’, Proc. IEEE, vol. 56, pp. 295–313, 1968.
5 L. A. Christel, J. F. Gibbons, and S. Mylroie, ‘An application of the Boltzmann
transport equation to ion range and damage distribution in multilayered targets’,
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 51, pp. 6176–6182, 1980.
6 M. T. Robinson, and O. S. Oen, ‘Computer studies of the slowing down of
energetic atoms in crystals’, Phys. Rev., vol. 132, pp. 2385–2398, 1963.
7 G. Hobler, and S. Selberherr, ‘Monte Carlo simulation of ion implantation into
two- and three-dimensional structures’, IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design of
Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 8, pp. 450–459, 1989.
8 J. F. Ziegler, J. P. Biersack, and U. Littmark, The Stopping and Range of Ions in
Solids, vol. 1. Pergamon Press, New York, 1984.
9 B. Obradovic, G. Wang, Y. Chen,
D. Li,
C. Snell,
and A. F. Tasch,
‘UT-MARLOWE 5.0 with TOMCAT’, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
Texas, 1999.
10 S. M. Hu, ‘Formation of stacking faults and enhanced diffusion in the oxidation
of silicon’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 45, pp. 1567–1573, 1974.
11 D. A. Antoniadis, and I. Moskowitz, ‘Diffusion of substitutional impurities in
silicon at short oxidation times: An insight into point defect kinetics’, J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 53, pp. 6788–6796, 1982.
12 S. Mizuo, and H. Higuchi, ‘Effect of back-side oxidation on B and P diffusion in
Si directly masked with S3N4 films’, J. Electrochem. Soc.: Solid-State Sci. and
Technol., vol. 129, pp. 2292–2295, 1982.
13 K. Maex, and L. Van Den Hove, ‘The effect of silicides on the induction and
removal of defects in silicon’, Mat. Sci. Engg. B, vol. 4, pp. 321–329, 1989.
14 F. F. Morehead, and R. F. Lever, ‘Enhanced tail diffusion of phosphorus and boron
in silicon’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 48, pp. 151–153, 1986.

IC technology and TCAD tools
59
15 R. B. Fair, ‘Shallow junctions – Modeling the dominance of point defect charge
states during transient diffusion’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 691–694, 1984.
16 S. M. Hu, ‘Vacancies and self-interstitials in silicon: Generation and interac-
tion in diffusion’, J. Electrochem. Soc.: Solid-State Sci. and Technol., vol. 139,
pp. 2066–2075, 1992.
17 E. Guerrero, H. Potzl, R. Tielert, M. Grasserbauer, and G. Stingeder, ‘Generalized
model for the clustering of arsenic dopants in silicon’, J. Electrochem. Soc.:
Solid-State Sci. and Technol., vol. 129, pp. 1826–1831, 1982.
18 Y. Tamaki, T. Shiba, T. Kure, K. Ohyu and T. Nakamura, ‘Advanced process
device technology for 0.3 µm high-performance bipolar LSIs’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 39, pp. 1387–1391, 1992.
19 E.W.SchecklerandA.R.Neureuther, ‘Modelsandalgorithmsfor3-Dtopography
simulation with SAMPLE-3D’, IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design, vol. 13,
pp. 219–230, 1994.
20 M. Fujinaga, and N. Kotani, ‘3-D topography simulator (3-D MULLS) based on
a physical description of material topography’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 44, pp. 226–238, 1997.
21 F. H. Dill, A. R. Neureuther, T. A. Tuttle, and E. J. Walker, ‘Modeling projec-
tion printing of positive photoresist’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-22,
pp. 456–464, 1975.
22 V. K. Malhotra, and F.-C. Chang, ‘Verifying the correctness of your optical
proximity correction designs’, in Proc. SPIE Conf., vol. 3679, pp. 130–137,
1999.
23 W. Maurer, C. Dolainsky, J. Thiele, C. Friedrich, and P. Karakatsanis, ‘Process
proximity correction using an automated software tool’, in Proc. SPIE Conf.,
vol. 3679, pp. 245–253, 1999.
24 K. D. Lucas, M. McCallum, and B. Falch, ‘Design, reticle and wafer OPC
manufacturability for the 0.18 µm lithography generation’, in Proc. SPIE Conf.,
vol. 3679, pp. 118–125, 1999.
25 H. W. Lehmann, L. Krausbauer, and R. Widmer, ‘Redeposition – A serious prob-
lem in RF sputter etching of structures with micrometer dimensions’, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol., vol. 14, pp. 281–284, 1977.
26 N. S. Viswanathan, ‘Simulation of plasma etched lithographic structures’, J. Vac.
Sci. Technol., vol. 16, pp. 388–390, 1979.
27 J. L. Reynolds and A. R. Neureuther, ‘Simulation of dry etched line edge profiles’,
J. Vac. Sci. Technol., vol. 16, pp. 1772–1775, 1979.
28 L. Mei, S. Chen, and R. W. Dutton, ‘A surface kinetics model for plasma etching’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 831–832, 1980.
29 A. R. Neureuther, ‘Simulating VLSI wafer topography’, in IEEE IEDM Tech.
Dig., pp. 214–218, 1980.
30 I. A. Blech, ‘Evaporated film profiles over steps in substrates’, Thin Solid Films,
vol. 6, pp. 113–118, 1970.
31 I. A. Blech, D. B. Fraser, and S. EoHasyko, ‘Optimization of Al step coverage
through computer simulation and scanning electron microscopy’, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol., vol. 15, pp. 13–19, 1978.

60
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
32 A. R. Neureuther, C. H. Ting, and C. Y. Liu, ‘Application of line edge pro-
file simulation to thin-film deposition process’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. ED-27, pp. 1449–1455, 1980.
33 Y. Homma, A. Yajima, and S. Harada, ‘Feature size limit analysis of lift-off
metalization technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 570–573, 1981.
34 R. J. Hawryluk, ‘Exposure and development models used in electron beam
lithography’, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., vol. 19, pp. 1–17, 1981.
35 K. Murata, D. F. Kyser, and C. H. Ting, ‘Monte Carlo simulation of fast sec-
ondary electron production in electron beam resists’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 52,
pp. 4396–4405, 1981.
36 J. S. Greeneich, ‘Impact of electron scattering on linewidth control in electron-
beam lithography’, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., vol. 16, pp. 1749–1753, 1979.
37 K. Murata, E. Nomura, and K. Nogami, ‘Experimental and theoretical study of
cross-sectional profiles of resist patterns in electron-beam lithography’, J. Vac.
Sci. Technol., vol. 16, pp. 1734–1736, 1979.
38 A. R. Neureuther, D. F. Kyser, and C. H. Ting, ‘Electron beam resist edge
profile simulation’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-26, pp. 686–692,
1979.
39 D. F. Kyser, and R. Pyle, ‘Computer simulation of elctron beam resist profiles’,
IBM J. Res. and Develop., vol. 24, pp. 426–437, 1980.
40 M. G. Rosenfield, A. R. Neureuther, and C. H. Ting, ‘The use of bias in electron-
beam lithography for improved linewidth control’, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., vol. 19,
pp. 1242–1247, 1981.
41 F. Jones, and J. Paraszczak, ‘RD3D (Computer simulation of resist development
in three-dimensions)’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-28, pp. 1544–1552,
1981.
42 A. R. Neureuther, ‘Simulation of X-ray resist line edge profiles’, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol., vol. 15, pp. 1004–1008, 1978.
43 K. Heinrich, H. Betz, A. Heuberger, and S. Pongraz, ‘Computer simulations of
resist profiles in x-ray lithography’, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., vol. 19, pp. 1254–1258,
1981.
44 L. Karapiperis, I. Adesida, C. A. Lee, and E. D. Wolf, ‘Ion beam exposure profiles
in PMMA-Computer simulation’, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., vol. 19, pp. 1259–1263,
1981.
45 W. G. Oldham, S. N. Nandgaonkar, A. R. Neureuther, and M. M. O’Toole, ‘A gen-
eral simulator for VLSI lithography and etching processes: Part I - Application to
projection lithography’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-26, pp. 717–722,
1979.
46 W. Oldham, A. Neureuther, C. Sung, J. Reynolds, and S. Nandgaonkar, ‘A general
simulator for VLSI lithography and etching processes: Part II – Applica-
tion to deposition and etching’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-27,
pp. 1455–1459, 1980.
47 J. McVittie, J. Rey, L.Y. Cheng, A. Bariya, S. Ravi and K. Saraswat, ‘SPEEDIE:
A profile simulator for etching and deposition’, in Proc. TECHNOCON,
pp. 16–19, 1990.

IC technology and TCAD tools
61
48 J. Lorenz, J. Pelka, H. Kyssel, A. Sachs, A. Seidel, and M. Svoboda, ‘COM-
POSITE – A complete modeling program of silicon technology’, IEEE Trans.
Computer-Aided Design, vol. 4, pp. 421–430, 1985.
49 R. E. Jewett, P. I. Hagouel, A. R. Neureuther, and T. Van Duzer, ‘Line-profile
resist development simulation techniques’, Polymer Eng. and Sci., vol. 17,
pp. 381–384, 1977.
50 P. L. G. Ventzek, T. J. Sommerer, R. J. Hoekstra, and M. J. Kushner, ‘Two-
dimensional hybrid model of inductively coupled plasma sources for etching’,
Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 63, pp. 605–607, 1993.
51 R. J. Hoekstra, and M. J. Kushner, ‘Predictions of ion energy distributions and rad-
ical fluxes in radio frequency biased inductively coupled plasma etching reactors’,
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 79, pp. 2275–2286, 1996.
52 R. J. Hoekstra, and M. J. Kushner, ‘Integrated plasma equipment model for
polysilicon etch profiles in an inductively coupled plasma reactor with subwafer
and superwafer topography’, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 15, pp. 1913–1921,
1997.
53 L. J. Friedrich, S. K. Dew, M. Brett, and T. Smy, ‘Thin film microstructure mod-
elling through line-segment simulation’, Thin Solid Films, vol. 266, pp. 83–88,
1995.
54 M. A. Leiberman, and A. J. Lichtenberg, Principles of Plasma Discharges and
Materials Processing. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1994.
55 H. F. Winters, and J. W. Cohurn, ‘Surfacc science aspects of etching reactions’,
Surf. Sci. Rep., vol. 14, pp. 161–269, 1992.
56 J. H. Keller, J. C. Forster, and M. S. Barnes, ‘Novel radio-frequency induction
plasma processing technique’, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 11, pp. 2487–2491,
1993.
57 J. B. Carter, J. P. Holland, E. Peltzer, B. Richardson, E. Bogle, H. T. Nguyen,
et al., ‘Transformer coupled plasma etch technology for the fabrication of subhalf
micron structures’, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 11, pp. 1301–1306, 1993.
58 D. B. Graves, ‘Plasma processing in microelectronics manufacturing’, AIChE J.,
vol. 35, pp. 1–29, 1989.
59 D. B. Graves, and K. F. Jensen, ‘A continuum model of d.c. and RF discharges’,
IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., vol. PS-14, pp. 78–91, 1986.
60 E. Aydil, and D. Economou, ‘Theoretical and experimental investigations of
chlorine RF glow discharges. I. Theoretical’, J. Electrochem. Soc., vol. 139,
pp. 1396–1406, 1992.
61 P.-H. Nguyena, E. Bar, J. Lorenz, and H. Ryssel, ‘Modeling of chemical-
mechanical polishing on patterned wafers as part of integrated topography process
simulation’, Microelectr. Eng., vol. 76, pp. 89–94, 2004.
62 E. Bar, J. Lorenz, and H. Ryssel, ‘Simulation of the influence of via sidewall
tapering on step coverage of sputter-deposited barrier layers’, Microelectr. Eng.,
vol. 64, pp. 321–328, 2002.
63 ISE Integrated Systems Engineering AG., Zurich, Switzerland, ISE-TCAD
Manual, 2004.
64 Synopsys, ‘TCAD News’, October 2005.

62
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
65 N. Strecker, V. Moroz, and M. Jaraiz, ‘Introducing Monte Carlo diffusion Sim-
ulation into TCAD tools’, in Proc. Intl. Conf. Modeling and Simulation of
Microsystems, pp. 462–465, 2002.
66 B. Obradovic, P. Matagne, L. Shifren, X. Wang, M. Stettler, J. He, and
M. D. Giles, ‘A physically-based analytic model for stress-induced hole mobility
enhancement’, in IWCE-10 Tech. Dig., pp. 26–27, 2004.
67 Synopsys, ‘TCAD News’, June 2006.
68 S. E. Laux, ‘Techniques for small-signal analysis of semiconductor devices’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 32, pp. 2028–2037, 1985.

Chapter 3
Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
The scaling of silicon-based semiconductor devices continues to drive increased
performance and reduced cost for many applications including wireless communi-
cations. Strained-SiGe/Si heterostructures and superlattices are essential for many
advanced Si-based devices. In many ways, the ability to fabricate smaller devices con-
trols the scaling process. While process modelling of silicon devices is well advanced,
modelling of SiGe technology is still in its formative stage and many issues, specif-
ically associated with this new material that affect passivation, oxidation, dopant
diffusion and thermal stability, still need to be resolved. In particular, the ability to
predict exact amounts of dopant diffusion is critical.
Diffusion of boron in SiGe is of great interest in view of obtaining boron-doped
thin strained-SiGe layers resulting in a very good base layer in SiGe HBTs. One
critical area is that of dopant profiles – in controlling the effect basewidth of HBTs
that is, the ability to place a specific amount of impurity in one region of a device,
and keep it there during the entire fabrication process.
In order to understand how to model dopant diffusion in any semiconductor, it
is first important to understand the physical mechanisms governing dopant motion,
which are dependent upon both the properties of the dopant and of the semiconductor.
Dopants are known to diffuse through single crystal semiconductors via mediation
with point defects. For a substitutional dopant to become mobile and diffuse through
an undamaged silicon crystal, it must interact with a defect, where both defect and
dopant may be charged. The activation energy for Frenkel pair generation in silicon
is quite high; consequently, this is not believed to be a major source of point defects
in silicon. However, for other semiconductors, such as GaAs, Frenkel pair generation
can be a major source of point defects.
3.1
Boron out-diffusion
Low Ge-fraction silicon germanium (SiGe) has shown promise for providing faster,
high gain transistors through bandgap engineering in a Si-based material system.

64
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
In a bipolar junction transistor, a small amount of boron diffusion will have only a
very small effect on the transistor performance. However, for a p-type SiGe base
in a heterojunction bipolar transistor, if the boron diffuses even slightly out of the
SiGe base, the HBT performance is severely degraded [1]. The change of energy
band influences the device current gain and frequency character greatly. When the
base dopant out-diffusion length was 5 nm, current gain and fT of a SiGe HBT
dropped by 78 per cent and 58 per cent, respectively. At the same time, the basewidth
and the height of parasitic conduction band barriers increased, which resulted in a
decrease in the cut-off frequency. Extension of base dopant beyond the SiGe region
occurs during thermal cycling, or improper control of the as-deposited profile [2].
Even small amounts of boron out-diffusion from a heavily-doped SiGe base into the
Si emitter and collector cause parasitic barriers in the conduction band, which can
drastically reduce the collector current enhancement [3–5]. This diffusion problem
is resolved by doping only part of the SiGe layer and leaving the rest undoped, then
assuming that the boron will diffuse during processing.
The roles of the out-diffusion of the boron from the Si1−xGex base and the life-
time in the base have been investigated by Shafi et al. [6] using a two-dimensional
drift-diffusion device simulator. It is shown that the increased base currents in the
HBTs are caused by recombination in the neutral base, and that the lifetime in the
Si1−xGex is an important parameter in determining the base current. The device sim-
ulations were carried out using the HQUPETS simulator, which carries out a full drift
diffusion analysis in two dimensions for both silicon bipolar transistors and Si/SiGe
HBTs [7].
Figure 3.1 shows the effect of boron out-diffusion from the Si1−xGex base on the
collector current of the HBT. Results are shown for Si1−xGex HBTs with two different
base doping concentrations of 7 × 1019 cm−3 and 7 × 1018 cm−3. Both devices show
a decrease in the collector current with out-diffusion but the curve for the heavily
doped base decreases much more rapidly than that for the lightly doped base. This
result indicates that control of the out-diffusion of boron from the base is much more
critical in devices with heavily doped bases.
The boron out-diffusion from the base can also affect the base current, and in
particular how the base current varies with collector/base voltage. This effect is at
maximum when the amount of boron out-diffusion is small, since the potential barrier
at the collector/base junction can be most easily modulated by the collector/base
bias in these circumstances. This is illustrated in Figure 3.2(a), which shows band
diagrams for devices with 12 Å of out-diffusion and different values of collector/base
voltage. The potential barrier at the collector/base junction decreases significantly as
the collector/base reverse bias increases from 0 to 10 V. This leads to a significant
decrease in the excess minority carrier concentration in the base, as illustrated in
Figure 3.2(b). Since the recombination rate is dependent on the excess minority
carrier concentration in the base, reducing the electron concentration also reduces the
recombination, and hence the base current due to neutral base recombination. Since
secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) is unable to resolve very small amounts
of out-diffusion, the best way of obtaining the out-diffusion length is to simulate
the collector current. The value of out-diffusion can then be used, along with the

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
65
10–4
10–5
10–6
10–7
0
12 Å
Measured collector 
current MBE device
NB = 7×1019 cm–3
NB = 7×1018 cm–3
50
100
Out-diffusion (Å)
150
Collector current (A)
Figure 3.1
Simulated collector current vs. boron out-diffusion for Si/Si0.85Ge0.15
HBTs with base doping concentrations of NA = 7 × 1019 cm−3 and
NB = 7 × 1018 cm−3. The bias conditions used were Vbe = 0.55 V
and vcb = 0 V [After Z. A. Shafi et al., J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 78,
1995(2823–2829)]
measured SIMS emitter profile, to model both the magnitude of the base current and
its variation with collector/base bias.
For SiGe device simulation, knowledge of doping and Ge profile in the device
is essential. The incorporation of high boron levels in the base region along with the
Ge-induced effects makes prediction of boron diffusion through the SiGe layer diffi-
cult. Owing to the need to align doping and alloy (Ge) profiles in SiGe structures, it is
important to understand dopant diffusion in SiGe so that the effect of processing can
be properly simulated and final dopant profiles in the device are as desired. Published
experimental data has shown that boron diffusion in SiGe differs from that in bulk sil-
icon. Specifically, experimental evidence indicates that the boron diffusivity in SiGe
is dependent on the concentration of germanium with boron diffusivity decreasing
as the germanium content increases. If the boron diffuses less than expected and a
significant intrinsic region exists in the base, the frequency performance of the device
will be affected. Thus it is a critical need to simulate the amount of dopant diffusion
that will occur during processing, so that an optimised device can be easily fabricated.
3.2
Diffusion: B in strained-SiGe
Simulation of diffusion of boron in SiGe is of great interest in view of obtaining boron-
doped thin strained-SiGe layers resulting in a very good base layer. It has been found
that B diffusivity in SiGe alloy can be reduced by an order of magnitude lower than
that in Si [8]. Boron diffuses via an interstitial mediated mechanism. Moriya et al. [9]
have shown that the degree of B diffusion reduction increases with Ge fraction in the

66
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
–3.4
EV
Ec
–3.6
–3.8
–4.0
–4.2
–4.4
–4.6
–4.8
–5.0
–5.2
1×1014
0 0.30
0.31
Depth (microns)
0.32
Vcb = 0V
Vcb = 0V
Vcb = 5V
Vcb = 10V
Electron concentration (cm–3)
0.25
0.27
2×1014
3 ×1014
4×1014
5×1014
(a)
(b)
0.29
0.31
Depth (microns)
Potential (eV)
0.33
0.35
Vcb = 5V
Vcb = 10V
Figure 3.2
Effect of the collector/base bias on the band structure and carrier
concentration in a Si/Si1−xGex HBT. The out-diffusion was 12Å, the
emitter/base voltage, Vbe = 0.65 V, and the lifetime in the base was
τnb = 0.11ns. (a) Simulated energy band diagram, (b) Simulated elec-
tron concentration in the base [After Z. A. Shafi et al., J. Appl. Phys.,
Vol. 78, 1995(2823–2829)]
strained-SiGe layers and explained that this was due to the change in the charged point
defect concentration caused by bandgap narrowing. This explanation is based on the
assumption that B diffusion is mediated by the positively charged point defects.
Another plausible explanation is the strain-dictated distribution of point defect
population [10]. This explanation gets support from total energy calculation in which
the authors computed the energies of formation for self-interstitials and vacancies
in Si as a function of hydrostatic pressure. A linear increase in interstitial forma-
tion energy and decrease in vacancy formation energy were found with increasing
pressure, corresponding to an outward relaxation of the lattice around the interstitial,
and an inward relaxation of the vacancy [11]. Strain-induced changes in point defect
formation energy has been experimentally investigated [10].

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
67
However, most Boron diffusion studies have been performed with strained-SiGe
layers having uniform Ge content [12–14]. But the grading of the Ge across the quasi-
neutral base induces a built-in electric field in the base, which accelerates electrons
injected from the emitter to the collector, thereby reducing the base transit time.
Rajendran and Schoenmaker [15] have studied the boron diffusion in strained-SiGe
layers in which Ge is linearly graded from the e-b (emitter-base) to the c-b (collector-
base) junction. However, the high doping concentration and the grading of the Ge
composition in the base layer makes it difficult to predict the out-diffusion of B from
the Si1−xGex layer. Several workers [8,10,16–19] have investigated the reasons for
the decrease in the macroscopic boron diffusivity in SiGe by examining changes in the
various parameters that might affect it. It has been shown that boron in SiGe diffuses
primarily via an interstitial mediated mechanism. Consequently, only parameters
directly related to interstitial and mobile boron diffusion and the formation of mobile
boron from substitutional boron are necessary to accurately simulate boron diffusion
in SiGe.
On the basis of the diffusion studies of boron in compressively strained-Si1−xGex
epitaxial layers with graded Ge profiles grown by rapid pressure chemical vapour
deposition during furnace and rapid thermal annealing, Rajendran et al. [17], have
presented a simple and accurate empirical diffusion model that fits for various
Ge concentrations, and thermal budget has been developed and implemented in a
TAURUS-PMEI (physical model and equation interface). The diffusion model simu-
lates the measured profiles over the range of Ge concentrations, and box and graded
Ge profiles were considered.
The diffusion model used is essentially a modified model of Lever et al. [20],
with the inclusion of the strain dependence of the activation energy of the diffusion
coefficient [10]. Also the model for intrinsic carrier concentration of SiGe, drift field
due to band-gap narrowing, modified strain model that includes the strain due to
the fractions of Ge concentration and also the boron concentration are included. The
boron flux, JB, is given by
JB = −DBζ
∂CB
∂x + CB
Q
∂NT
∂x + 2CBn
Q
∂ln ni
∂x

(3.1)
where Q =

(N2
T + 4n2
i ) = n + p, ζ = (1 + β(p/ni))/(1 + β), n and p are electron
and hole concentrations, NT, is the net doping, and ni is the intrinsic carrier con-
centration. CB is the boron concentration, ζ models the concentration dependence
of the effective diffusion coefficient and DB is the Boron diffusivity. The first term
in the brackets is the conventional diffusion term (Fick’s law) for boron diffusion in
silicon; the second term describes the effect of the electric field caused by the dopant
distribution. The third term is the contribution from the electric field created by the
Si1−xGex bandgap variation with the Ge fraction.
In their study, the SiGe layers have been grown in an ASM Epsilon 2000 RPCVD
single wafer reactor. The Si-cap/Si1−xGex-layer/Si-spacer stack was grown epitax-
ially on p-Si (100) substrates for five different Ge fractions as well as graded Ge

68
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
1016
1016
Depth (m)
1017
1018
1019
Boron concentration (cm–3)
Germanium concentration (cm–3)
1017
0
0.08
0.16 0.24 0.32
SIMS: As-grown
Model
SIMS
with TB
0.4
1018
1019
1020
1022
1016
1016
Depth (m)
1017
1018
1019
1020
(a)
(b)
Boron concentration (cm–3)
Germanium concentration (cm–3)
1017
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
1018
1019
1020
1022
1021
SIMS: As-grown
SIMS
Model
with TB
Figure 3.3
Comparison of simulations to the SIMS profile of samples (a) with
10 per cent Ge, 7 × 1018 cm−3 for 850 ◦C at 20min and (b) with
15 per cent Ge, 2 × 1019 cm−3 for 900 ◦C at 4min [After K. Rajendran
et al., IEEE Trans Electron Dev., Vol. 48, 2001(2022–2031). © 2001
IEEE]
profiles. The samples were grown with target box B profiles with doping concen-
trations of 5 × 1018 cm−3. Samples with boron box profiles in the Si-capping layer,
Si1−xGex and Si spacer have also been studied.
Figure 3.3 shows the results of simulation performed in TAURUS [21] through
physical model and equation interface (PMEI), and measured profiles for the box-type
Ge with fractions and thermal budgets of (1) 10 per cent, 850 ◦C, 20 min and (2) 15 per
cent, 900 ◦C, 4 min. It appears that the calculated and SIMS diffused profiles fit very
well and the diffusivity of B decreases with the increase of Ge content. This shows
that the reduction of the B concentration in the underlying Si substrate of Si1−xGex/Si
is caused by the reduction of the effective B diffusivity in the Si1−xGex/Si interface
region. Figure 3.3 also shows a comparative analysis of the present simulation results
with SIMS for various thermal budgets and Ge content. The SIMS of the B initial
profiles are also given in Figure 3.3 and shows the different B peaks studied.
Figure 3.4 shows the B diffusivity as a function of reciprocal temperature for
different Ge contents and also shows a B diffusivity in a depth scale. Graded Ge
profiles show a lower value compared to Box-type Ge profiles. Figure 3.4 shows
the simulated and measured profiles of graded-Ge (15 per cent) for (a) rapid thermal
annealing (RTA) at 1050 ◦C for 10 s and (b) furnace annealing (FA) and RTA at 850 ◦C
for 20 min and 1000 ◦C for 10 s. It is interesting to note that the simulated and SIMS
diffused profiles fit very well and the diffusivity of B increases with the increase of
annealing temperature. In the case of lowering annealing time, the B concentration in
the Si1−xGex layer becomes higher than the B concentration in Si. This phenomena
is due to the decrease of B atoms that have redistributed from Si1−xGex layer to the
Si substrate. For some of the thermal budgets the diffusion of B in strained-Si1−xGex

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
69
0
4
8
12
16
1016
1015
Depth (m)
1017
1018
1019
(a)
(b)
FA + RTA
Boron concentration (cm–3)
Germanium (%)
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
1016
1015
Depth (m)
1017
1018
1019
Boron concentration (cm–3)
Germanium (%)
0
0.02
0.04 0.06
0.08
0.1
SIMS: As-grown
Simulation
SIMS
with TB
Figure 3.4
Comparison of simulation with SIMS diffusion profile with Ge: 15 per
cent (Ge-graded profile), 5 × 1018 cm−3. (a) Rapid thermal annnealing
(RTA): (1050 ◦C, 10s); (b) Furnace annealing (FA) and RTA: (850 ◦C,
20min and 1000 ◦C, 10s) [After K. Rajendran et al., IEEE Trans
Electron Dev., Vol. 48, 2001(2022–2031). © 2001 IEEE]
resulted in diffusion into the relaxed-Si layers on both sides of the diffused profiles
as given in the above figures.
Figure 3.5 shows the B diffusivity as a function of strain, Ge fraction and temper-
ature. B diffusivity decreases rapidly with the increase of strain as well as Ge fraction.
By comparing with experimental values, the extracted (by using experiment and sim-
ulation) B diffusivity predicted a lower value (retardation). Figure 3.5(b) shows the
extracted boron diffusivity as an function of depth. Here, the As-grown SIMS profile
was used as an initial profile, before annealing at Ge fraction of 15 per cent. It appears
that the two tails on both sides of each plot are the results of boron diffusivity in the
Si region and the flat regions are in Si1−xGex epitaxial layers. It is interesting to note
that boron diffusivity has a comparatively lower value in the Si1−xGex layer than in
the adjacent Si regions. In addition, the graded Ge profile has a lower value of boron
diffusivity compared to box-type profile.
Kuo et al. [16] showed that the diffusivity of B in Si1−xGex was almost stress-
independent. The B diffusivity in almost strain-free Si0.80Ge0.20 is approximately
equal to B diffusivity in fully strained-Si0.80Ge0.20, which is about one order of
magnitude lower than that in Si. The result indicates that boron diffusion in SiGe is
predominantly a function of Ge content, rather than biaxial strain. The importance of
Ge chemical content or microscopic strain has been suggested [16].
Following the work from References 17 and 20, a new model for the diffusion
of boron in SiGe has been implemented in Silvaco SUPREM4 [22]. This new dif-
fusion model treats SiGe as highly Ge-doped silicon and accounts for two effects:
(1) boron diffusivity decreases exponentially as the Ge content increases and (2) the
intrinsic carrier concentration increases linearly as the Ge content increases. The most

70
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
10–18
0
5
10
15
20
Ge fraction (%)
Depth (µm)
25
30
T = 860 °C
T = 800 °C
Model-850°C/20 min
Expt-850°C/20 min
Model-850°C/60 min
Expt-850°C/60 min
Model-900°C/4 min
Expt-900°C/4 min
Model-900°C/12 min
Expt-900°C/12 min
Kuo et al. [5,6]
Moriya et al. [27]
T = 900 °C
(850 °C, 20 min)
(850 °C, 20 min and 1100 °C, 10 s)
(900 °C, 4 min)
Ge: 15% 
35
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
10–17
10–16
10–15
Boron diffusivity (cm2s–1)
10–18
10–17
10–16
(a)
(b)
Boron diffusivity (cm2s–1)
Figure 3.5
(a) Extracted (simulation) and measured B diffusivity as a function of
Ge fraction at different thermal budgets. (b) Extracted B diffusivity as a
function of depth for box-type Ge profile for 900 ◦C at 4min and 850 ◦C
at 20min and graded Ge profile with FA: 850 ◦C at 20min and 1100 ◦C
at 10s [After K. Rajendran et al., IEEE Trans Electron Dev., Vol. 48,
2001(2022–2031). © 2001 IEEE]
outstanding feature of the new model is the resulting boron pileup at the Si/SiGe inter-
face. It was also shown that the diffused profiles in layers with uniform and graded Ge
profiles differ significantly. Strain effects are considered negligible in this model. In
this new diffusion model, SiGe layers are introduced by using the DEPOSIT statement
to create a Ge-doped silicon layer.
3.3
Diffusion: P and As in strained-SiGe
While the diffusion of boron in SiGe is relatively well characterised [8,9,23], there
is little information about n-type dopant diffusion in SiGe. The diffusion behaviour
of ion-implanted arsenic and phosphorus in relaxed-Si0.8Ge0.2 has been investigated
by Eguchi et al. [24]. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) was used to obtain
diffusion profiles in Si and SiGe samples. The 20 per cent enhancement for As and
P effective diffusivities in SiGe were extracted by comparing measured SIMS data
with simulated profiles from TSUPREM4 [25].
The effective diffusivity of As and P in SiGe under equilibrium conditions was
found to be enhanced compared to that in Si. Both dopants exhibit enhanced dif-
fusivities in SiGe compared to those in Si under equilibrium conditions. At high
concentrations (n = 5 × 1019 cm−3), the ratio of the effective diffusivity in SiGe
relative to that in Si is found to be approximately 7 for arsenic, and roughly 2 for
phosphorus in the temperature range from 900 to 1050 ◦C. However, under transient
diffusion conditions, arsenic diffusion in SiGe is retarded while arsenic diffusion in Si
is enhanced by the ion implant damage. The transient retarded diffusion of As in SiGe

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
71
suggests that As diffuses primarily by a vacancy-mediated mechanism in SiGe. The
absolute value of effective diffusivity of P in SiGe is roughly three times higher than
that of As in SiGe. Therefore, to form shallow source/drains, As is a better choice for
a n-type dopant in SiGe. The As diffusion model, implemented in TSUPREM4 was
applied for modelling dopant diffusion in SiGe as in Si. As diffusion in Si is assumed
to be based on neutral and single-negatively charged defects.
The effective diffusivity of As in Si under equilibrium conditions can be
described as
DAs
eff (Si) = fi

Do
i + D−
i

n
ni(Si)

+ fv

Do
v + D−
v

n
ni(Si)

(3.2)
where n is the electron concentration and ni(Si) is the intrinsic carrier concentration in
Si. Do
i and D−
i represent the contributions from neutral and single-negatively charged
interstitial defects, respectively. Do
v and D−
v represent the contributions from neutral
and single-negatively charged vacancy defects. And the factors fi and fv represent the
fractions of interstitial and vacancy-mediated diffusion, respectively. The P diffusion
model in Si is assumed to be based on neutral, single- and double-negatively charged
interstitial defects. The effective diffusivity of P under equilibrium conditions can be
described as
DP
eff (Si) = Do
i + D−
i

n
ni(Si)

+ D−
i

n
ni(Si)
2
(3.3)
where D−
i
represents the contribution from double-negatively charged interstitial
defects. These equations were modified to include appropriate intrinsic carrier
concentration in SiGe, ni(SiGe) and is given by
ni(SiGe) = ni(Si) exp
Eg
2kT

(3.4)
where Eg between Si and relaxed-SiGe (Ge 20 per cent) is approximately 0.08 eV
[26]. Hence, the diffusion models for As and P in SiGe under equilibrium conditions
are described below:
DAs
eff (SiGe) = gAs

fi

Do
i + D−
i

n
ni(SiGe)

+ fv

Do
v + D−
v

n
ni(SiGe)

(3.5)
DP
eff (SiGe) = gP

Do
i + D−
i

n
ni(SiGe)

+ D−
i

n
ni(SiGe)
2	
(3.6)
In Equations (3.5) and (3.6), gAs and gP are defined as enhancement factors for the
diffusion coefficients. The values for each individual diffusivity (Do
i , D−
i etc.) used in
(3.5) and (3.6) are the same as the Si values used in (3.2) and (3.3). g is varied in the
simulations to fit the observed SIMS data in SiGe. Using the extracted enhancement
factors g, and the intrinsic carrier concentration ni, the effective diffusivities for As
and P in SiGe under equilibrium conditions can be evaluated at any given value of n

72
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
1017
0
0.2
0.4
Depth (m)
0.6
1018
1019
1020
1021
Si
SiGe
As implanted
Simulation
SIMS
As 30 KeV  = 4 × 14 cm–2 1050 °C 30min
As concentration (atoms/cm3)
Figure 3.6
Arsenic SIMS profiles in Si and SiGe [After S. Eguchi et al., MIT Annual
Report 2003]
using (3.5) and (3.6). Finally, r, ratio of the effective diffusivity of dopants in SiGe
compared to that in Si is given by
r = Deff (SiGe)/Deff (Si)
(3.7)
From the extracted diffusivities, r shows substantial magnification of Deff in SiGe
compared to that in Si. Figure 3.6 shows As profiles in Si and SiGe after 1050 ◦C,
30 min annealing. The As profiles in Si and SiGe are quite similar. However, after
1050 ◦C, 30 min annealing, the As diffusion in SiGe is enhanced compared to that in
Si. In the temperature range from 900 to 1050 ◦C, the enhancement factor r is found
to be roughly constant under equilibrium conditions and is about 7 for an average
doping concentration n = 5 × 1019 cm−3.
Figure 3.7 shows P profiles in Si and SiGe after 1050 ◦C, 30 min annealing.
P diffusion in SiGe is observed to be enhanced compared to that in Si. For P, the
extracted ratio r in the temperature ranges from 900 to 1050 ◦C is found to be
roughly 2, (i.e., r ∼1.7 at 1050 ◦C, r ∼2 at 1000 ◦C and r ∼2.2 at 900 ◦C).
Figure 3.8 shows effective diffusivities of As and P in SiGe and Si under equilibrium,
extrinsic conditions. In the plot, the diffusivities are evaluated at n = 5 × 1019 cm−3.
From the plot in Figure 3.8, in the temperature range from 900 to 1050 ◦C, under
equilibrium, extrinsic conditions, the effective diffusivity of P in SiGe, DP
eff (SiGe) is
approximately three times higher than the diffusivity of As in SiGe.
Figure 3.9 compares As profiles in Si and SiGe for an annealing temperature of
1000 ◦C and times of 1, 20, and 60 s. For annealing times of 20 and 60 s, As diffuses
faster in SiGe compared to Si. However, the profile for As in SiGe after 1000 ◦C,
1 s is very similar to that in Si. These results demonstrate the possibility to form
As ion implanted n+/p junctions in SiGe that are as shallow as those in Si. These

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
73
P  = 8 × 1014 cm–2, 30 KeV, 1000 °C 30min
1018
0
0.2
0.4
Depth (m)
0.6
1019
1020
SiGe
Si
P imp
Simulation
SIMS
P concentration (atoms/cm3)
Figure 3.7
Phosphorus SIMS profiles in Si and SiGe [After S. Eguchi et al., MIT
Annual Report 2003]
SiGe
Si
P
As
n = 5 × 1019 cm–3
~3x
8.6
9
9.4
9.8
1/kT (eV–1)
10–13
10–14
10–15
10–16
Effective equilibrium diffusivity (cm2/s−1)
1050
1000
950
Temperature (°C) 30 min
Figure 3.8
Comparison of effective diffusivity in Si and SiGe under equilibrium
conditions [After S. Eguchi et al., MIT Annual Report 2003]
results also suggest that either As diffusion in Si is enhanced for short anneal times,
or As diffusion in SiGe is dramatically retarded for short anneal times, compared to
diffusion under equilibrium conditions.
Figure 3.10 shows the resulting time dependence of the extracted As effective
diffusivities in Si and SiGe. It is observed that after relatively long time annealing,

74
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
1022
0
0.1
0.2
1021
1020
1019
1018
As concentration (atoms/cm3)
Depth (m)
SiGe
Si
20 s
60 s
1 s
As 15 KeV  = 3 × 1015 cm–2, 1000 °C
Figure 3.9
Comparison of As profiles in Si and SiGe after 1000 ◦C annealing [After
S. Eguchi et al., MIT Annual Report 2003]
40
20
0
60
Annealing time (s)
10–13
10–12
SiGe
n = 5 × 1020 cm–3
Si
As effective diffusivity (cm2/s–1)
As:  = 3 × 1015 cm–2, 1000 °C
Figure 3.10
Time dependence of As effective diffusivity in Si and SiGe for 1000 ◦C
annealing [After S. Eguchi et al., MIT Annual Report 2003]
the As effective diffusivity in SiGe is larger than that in Si. For short anneal times,
where the diffusion is dominated by the effects of ion implant damage, the As effective
diffusivity in Si is observed to be enhanced. However, As effective diffusivities in
SiGe are observed to be retarded for short anneal times, as shown in Figure 3.10.
A possible explanation for the observed retarded transient diffusion of As in SiGe is
that As diffuses primarily by vacancies in SiGe.

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
75
3.4
Dopant diffusion in SiGeC
Adding germanium to silicon allows for the adjustment of both bandgap and strain,
making possible devices such as the heterojunction bipolar transistor and strained-Si
MOSFETs. The out-diffusion of boron in Si1−xGex has been discussed in Section 3.1.
Low carbon concentrations can be used to suppress diffusion of dopants. This unique
property has already found its first device application, the SiGeC heterojunction
bipolar transistors [27, 28]. Introducing small amounts of substitutional carbon can
adjuststrainandbandgap, andhasbeenshowntodramaticallyreducetheout-diffusion
of boron and phosphorus atoms, allowing for increased control over dopant profiles.
Thus, Si1−x−yGexCy alloys are of great interest for scaled Si-based devices.
Research on highly supersaturated, carbon containing alloys on silicon substrates
started only a few years ago [29]. Meanwhile, knowledge has been accumulated on
growth, strain manipulation, thermal stability, carbon effects on band structure and
charge carrier transport [30–36]. Advanced SiGeC HBTs are fabricated in numerous
differentarchitectures[37–47], dependingonwhethertheyuseselectiveordifferential
epitaxy, and self-alignment or quasi self-alignment. The selection of the architecture
is required at the beginning of the development, while the assessment of whether
the choice is optimum for the target applications can only be made after several
technology optimisation cycles. Device performance figures of merit like fT, fmax
and NFmin are not always one-to-one correlated with the performance of basic circuit
blocks. Especially when advanced materials or process steps are introduced, the lack
of specific models or model coefficients might result in marginal impact of TCAD in
the decision process and optimisation cycle.
Work on C-containing alloys has mainly been pursued at IHP in Germany since
1993. First grown with MBE, the process was later transferred to CVD. SiGeC HBTs
from IHP now offer high-performance wireless solutions, with the potential to inte-
grate digital and analog functions on a single chip [48–50]. They combine high
performance with process simplicity, and hence low cost [51]. Both these features
stem directly from the beneficial effects of adding small concentrations of C to SiGe.
Rucker and Heinemann [52] have shown that dopant diffusion coefficients in Si
can be changed by more than one order of magnitude owing to alloying with Ge
and C. The observed suppression of boron diffusion in C-rich layers was explained
on the basis of coupled diffusion of Si point defects and carbon. A model for boron
diffusion and segregation in SiGe heterostructures was also presented. The conse-
quences of the unique diffusion properties of SiGeC alloys for heterojunction bipolar
transistors were investigated by process and device simulation. It has been shown that
by adding small amounts of carbon (∼0.1–1.0 per cent) to either silicon or Si1−xGex,
the diffusivity of boron and phosphorus atoms can be reduced by orders of mag-
nitude below normal levels. This provides a mechanism by which diffusion can be
controlled without altering processing conditions. By adding carbon to regions of a
device where diffusion must be minimised, sharp profiles can be maintained even
during high-temperature processing. This has been crucial in the continued scaling
of high-performance HBTs; other potential applications include MOSFET channels
and source/drains.

76
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Several factors, however, limit the usefulness of carbon. Carbon has a very low
solubility in silicon and Si1−xGex and is therefore unstable. High levels of substitu-
tional carbon, needed for the desired effect of reduced dopant diffusion, can be lost
during thermal annealing to undesirable α-SiC precipitates. Carbon has also been
shown to degrade the electrical properties of silicon and Si1−xGex films in some
cases. In addition, many effects of carbon are still not understood or have not been
investigated. Possible atomic interactions between carbon and other dopants dur-
ing thermal processing are largely unknown, and may have important technological
implications, as it is essential that both the carbon and dopants remain on substitu-
tional lattice sites and do not form defects. The exact mechanism by which carbon
controls dopant diffusion, while a subject of many studies, is still not fully under-
stood; in particular, whether carbon–dopant interactions are playing a role is not
fully known. There has also been very little investigation of carbon in polycrystalline
films.
Carbon controls boron spike diffusion in the base layer, which is critical to achieve
high-speed HBTs [43, 53]. During the fabrication of transistors, attention should be
given to low thermal budgets; however, the rapid thermal annealing (RTA) activa-
tion step used in typical BiCMOS technologies (typically 1000–1100 ◦C) modifies
considerably the boron diffusion in SiGeC HBTs. Several workers [50,54–59] have
attempted to understand the diffusion mechanisms and modelling boron diffusion
in SiGeC; however, major focus was on RTA or thermally annealed films in the
temperature range of 700–900 ◦C.
Boron and carbon diffusion in SiGeC layers under different actual process condi-
tions, typical for BiCMOS processes, has been studied in detail by Sibaja-Hernandez
et al. [60]. Special attention was paid to the RTA temperatures in the range
1020–1100 ◦C. The impact of Si cap thickness, germanium profile, polySi emitter
processes and atmosphere conditions in the RTA step on boron and carbon diffusion
in SiGeC base layer was studied. The authors have derived model parameters for
equilibrium and transient-enhanced diffusion conditions and incorporated in the pro-
cess simulator TSUPREM4 [61] via User-Specified Equation Interface. The model
and model parameters were validated for a 0.13 µm BiCMOS process. Following
Reference 62, the boron diffusion model for SiGeC is implemented as [60]
∂CB
∂t
= −∇·

−DB

∇CB + CB∇NT
Q + CB
2n
Q ∇ln(ni)

(3.8)
where NT and Q are the net doping concentration, NA-ND, and the total carrier
concentration, n + p, respectively. The first term in (3.8) is the simple diffusion
term (Fick’s law), and the second and third terms are electric field contributions due
to the dopant distribution and bandgap varying with Ge content, respectively [20].
The boron diffusivity is given by
DB =

Dx + DP
 p
ni
 
exp

−ϵBsx
kT
 
fI
 I
I∗

+ (1 −f I)
 V
V ∗

(3.9)

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
77
The first factor is the boron diffusivity in Si under extrinsic conditions. The
second factor takes into consideration a linear dependence of the activation energy
of the diffusion coefficient on the Ge content, x [10]. The characteristic strain in the
plane of the SiGe layer (s) is modified with an energy per unit strain factor (ϵB).
The third factor considers the dependency of boron diffusivity on vacancies (V),
and silicon self-interstitials (I), where I∗and V ∗denote the equilibrium interstitial
and vacancy concentrations, respectively. The model also includes boron diffusion
reduction due to trapping of boron atoms [20]. To simulate correctly the diffusion of
impurities in carbon-doped devices, coupled diffusion of carbon and Si point defects
has to be taken into account.
Some experimental Boron and carbon diffusion in SiGeC layers and simulation
results under different process conditions, with RTA temperatures in the temperature
range of 1000–1100 ◦C, are presented below. Good correlation between measured and
simulated boron and carbon profiles (Figure 3.11) was obtained with the modified
pre-factors and activation energies for carbon and Ge diffusivities, for different RTA
temperatures in inert ambience. Figure 3.11 shows the impact of different RTA
temperatures on B and C profiles for 150 nm Si cap. The model also agrees well
with simulations under oxidising ambient conditions, where excess interstitials are
injected, enhancing the boron diffusion. Default model coefficients [61,63] and the
1020
1019
Boron concentration (cm–3)
Carbon concentration (cm–3)
1018
130
140
150
160
170
Depth (nm)
180
190
200
1020
1019
1018
1020 °C
1020 °C
1050 °C
1050 °C
1070 °C
1070 °C
15% Gebox profile
Solid line: TS4 simulations
Dashed line: SIMS measurements
Figure 3.11
Experimental (dashed lines) and simulated (solid lines) boron and car-
bon profiles for different RTA temperatures. Samples with a 150nm
silicon cap were annealed for 10s at temperatures of 1020, 1050 and
1070 ◦C [After A. Sibaja-Hernandez et al., Mat. Sci. Semicond. Proc.,
Vol. 8, 2005(115–120)]

78
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Table 3.1
TSUPREM4 model coefficients
Parameter
TSUPREM4
Reference [60]
Deff
Cs (cm2 s−1)
1.90 exp(−3.1/kT)
0.33 exp(−3.1/kT)
DCi (cm2 s−1)
0.44 exp(−0.88/kT)
0.44 exp(−0.88/kT)
DGe (cm2 s−1)
0.037 exp(−5.46/kT)
1.38 × 105 exp(−5.39/kT)
Source: After A. Sibaja-Hernandez et al., Mat. Sci. Semicond. Proc., Vol. 8, 2005(115–120).
50
60
70
Boron profile lines: 
Black: simulations 
Grey: experiments
80
90
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
Ge (%)
12
14
16
1017
1018
1019
1020
1021
Depth (nm)
8%
B
Ge
4%
0%
B concentration (cm–3)
Figure 3.12
Impact of the Ge profile pedestal (8 per cent, 4 per cent and 0 per cent)
on boron diffusion. Measured (grey – solid lines) and simulated
(black – solid lines) profiles for boron under 1100 ◦C spike anneal
[After A. Sibaja-Hernandez et al., Mat. Sci. Semicond. Proc., Vol. 8,
2005(115–120)]
coefficients extracted from the experimental results are shown in Table 3.1. The ger-
manium diffusivity is in good agreement with the measurements of Dorner et al. [64]
and Hettich et al. [65], although the pre-exponential factor in TSUPREM4 is around
6–7 orders of magnitude lower.
In SiGeC HBTs generally using two-step Ge profiles, the current gain is tuned
by varying the Ge concentration in the pedestal. The different germanium con-
centrations in the low-Ge layer impact the boron diffusion. Boron diffuses more
for lower Ge concentrations resulting in a non-symmetric boron profile after the
spike anneal. Figure 3.12 shows that variation of the Ge fraction in the pedestal is
correctly simulated. The presence of a polyemitter modifies the boundary condition
for the diffusion of interstitials and vacancies. Therefore, the model is found to be in
good agreement for typical profiles of a 0.13-µm high-speed BiCMOS process (see
Figure 3.13), using in situ As-doped polyemitter with 1100 ◦C spike anneal.

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
79
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
200
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Ge (%)
1017
1018
1019
1020
1021
Depth (nm)
Concentration (cm–3)
Ge
As
B
Simulations
Measurement
Figure 3.13
Measured and simulated profiles after 1100 ◦C spike annealing for
a typical 0.13µm SiGeC BiCMOS process. Confirmation of process
modelling accuracy is observed [After A. Sibaja-Hernandez et al., Mat.
Sci. Semicond. Proc., Vol. 8, 2005(115–120)]
3.5
Oxidation: SiGe/SiGeC films
In order to use SiGe alloys in Si-based devices, it is of primary importance to study
the oxidation of these alloys layers since it is a major step in Si technology. The most
frequentlyusedstartingmaterialsfortheoxidationstudiesarestrained-Si1−xGex films
with desired compositions. The films can be deposited with a variety of techniques
such as ultra high vacuum chemical vapour deposition (UHVCVD) or molecular
beam epitaxy (MBE). Moreover, since silicon oxidation has been studied for decades
now, it is of interest to compare the basic physical phenomena involved in both silicon
and SiGe oxidation.
Investigations performed so far using thermal oxidation have shown different
behaviours depending on the oxidation conditions and alloy composition. In the case
of wet oxidation, for Ge concentrations below 50 per cent, a pure SiO2 layer is
formed and a Ge pileup occurs at the SiO2/SiGe interface [66–69]. Oxidation of
polycrystalline Si1−xGex films with different compositions, carried out in pyrogenic
steam at 800 ◦C for various lengths of time, shows that the oxidation is enhanced by
the presence of germanium, and the enhancement becomes more pronounced for the
films with high germanium content. A mixed oxide in the form of either (Si,Ge)O2
or SiO2-GeO2 is found at the sample surface if the initial Si1−xGex contains more
than 50 per cent of germanium. As high-pressure oxidation increases the oxidation
rate at a relatively lower temperature, it has also been employed for the oxidation of
SiGe [70].
In thermal oxidation (wet), an increase by a factor of about 2 of the oxida-
tion rate in the linear regime of SiGe compared to Si is observed. As regards dry

80
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
oxidation, the formation of a SiO2 top layer with a Ge pileup at the interface has
been reported [67,70,71]. However, no increase of the oxidation rate of SiGe alloys
with respect to Si has been noted although a Ge-rich layer is present at the interface.
A first explanation of increase in oxidation rate in wet oxidation has been given by
Fathy et al. [68]. They assumed that during the linear regime of wet oxidation the
oxidation rate is limited by the breaking of Si substrate bonds. Thus, the increase of
the oxidation rate in the SiGe case can be explained by the fact that SiGe bonds are
weaker than Si–Si bonds. LeGoues et al. [66] have explained the difference in oxida-
tion rates in dry and wet conditions. They assumed that the Si interstitials formation
is the limiting factor during the linear regime of wet oxidation but not during the
linear regime of dry oxidation. Thus, the increase of oxidation rate, observed in the
case of wet oxidation, can be explained by the fact that the Ge-rich interfacial layer
would prevent interstitial formation by reducing the stress between the oxide and the
substrate.
To avoid the problem of Ge segregation at the interface, which degrades gate
oxide properties, attempts have been made to form a thin Si-cap layer on strained-
SiGe films [72]. This thin Si-layer is supposed to be converted fully into SiO2 during
oxidation. However, a surface silicon cap layer of about 14 nm is found to have a
significant impact on the oxidation of the Si0.5Ge0.5 films; it leads to the growth of
about 115 nm thick SiO2, which is about four times that of the SiO2 resulting from
the oxidation of the cap layer itself. On the Si1−xGex films with only 30 per cent of
germanium, the SiO2 continues to grow after oxidation for 180 mins, resulting in 233-
nm-thick SiO2, which is about 2.4 times greater than the SiO2 grown on (100) silicon
substrates. Rejection of germanium results in piling up of germanium at the interface
between the growing SiO2 and the remaining Si1−xGex. Substantial inter-diffusion
of silicon and germanium takes place in the remaining Si1−xGex.
Nevertheless,
thermal
oxidation
processes
requiring
high
temperatures
(700–1000 ◦C) are not suitable when applied to strained-SiGe layers since they can
undergo dislocations formation and degradation of electrical characteristics under
such high-temperature treatments. Clearly, low thermal budgets are highly desirable
for processing such strained layers. Low-temperature oxidation has been performed
using electron cyclotron resonance plasma [73–75]. The results of such oxidation dif-
fer from that obtained with thermal oxidation and show that both Si and Ge are fully
oxidised forming SiO2 and GeO2 without any Ge pileup at the oxide/substrate inter-
face. Use of microwave plasma of oxygen [76] or N2O [77], or ultraviolet radiation
[78] can also enhance the oxidation rate. The Si1−xGex alloys used for such oxidation
studies are often thin films. They can be epitaxial (crystalline) [67,70,76,77,79–83],
polycrystalline [80,84] or amorphous [85].
3.5.1
Oxidation kinetics
The basic understanding of the kinetics of thermal oxidation in Si comes from the
model proposed by Deal and Grove [86], which assumes that growth occurs by
diffusion of oxidant through the oxide to the oxide/Si interface where it reacts with
Si to form SiO2. Although this model has been developed for thermal oxidation of

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
81
Si, most researchers use this model to interpret the oxidation kinetics of the oxidation
of SiGe. A mathematical model of thermal oxidation of Si1−xGex alloys has been
reported by Hellberg et al. [87,88]. The growth of SiO2 is simulated in conjunction
with the determination of silicon distribution in Si1−xGex using numerical methods.
The main feature of the model is the assumption of simultaneous oxidation of ger-
manium and silicon when exposing the Si1−xGex to an oxidising atmosphere. The
enhanced oxidation of silicon in the presence of germanium is modelled as a result
of the rapid oxidation of germanium followed by the quick reduction of GeO2 by
silicon. The growth of a mixed oxide in the form of either (Si,Ge)O2 or SiO2-GeO2
only occurs when the supply of silicon to the SiO2/Si1−xGex interface is insuffi-
cient. A comparison is made between simulation and experiment for wet oxidation
(in pyrogenic steam) of polycrystalline Si1−xGex films. It is found that the model
gives a good account of the oxidation process. Kinetic parameters, that is, inter-
facial reaction rate constant for oxidation of germanium and diffusion coefficient
of silicon(germanium) in Si1−xGex, are extracted by fitting the simulation to the
experiment. Thermal oxidation of Si1−xGex proceeds as follows [88]:
1.
When the Si1−xGex surface is exposed to an oxidising atmosphere containing
either O2 or H2O, the silicon atoms are preferentially oxidised forming SiO2
while the germanium atoms pile up at the interface between the growing SiO2
and the remaining Si1−xGex. This condition will prevail till the concentration x is
above the critical value of xe (typically 3.2 × 10−19 of the atomic concentration
of silicon).
2.
As the oxidation process proceeds, and when x is smaller than xe, oxidation of
germanium would take place resulting in simultaneous oxidation of silicon and
germanium.
If one follows the formulation of the Deal–Grove model [86], the above model,
however, does not work as the growth rate of SiO2 should be directly proportional
to the value of x. The value of xe being on the order of 10−19 is a very demanding
concentration criterion. The formation of mixed oxides for substrate concentrations
with nearly 50 per cent silicon at 800–1000 ◦C [79,81,85,87] shows quite clearly that
this model does not apply. Germanium is known to be oxidised with an appreciable
rate temperature below 450 ◦C, which is several hundred degrees lower than that
for the oxidation temperature of silicon. The vast majority of oxidation studies on
Si1−xGex, carried out in the temperature range of 500–1000 ◦C, show that a mixed
oxide forms when the germanium concentration is above 50 per cent. There is not
enough silicon at the interface to reduce all formed GeO2 because of the limited flux
of silicon.
Figure 3.14 shows schematically a one-dimensional model for the SiGe oxidation
process. During the oxidation of Si1−xGex, one may distinguish three fluxes: Jox, J ′
Si,
J ′
Ge. Jox, the flux of O2 molecules through growing oxide, is given by
Jox = Dox
co −ciox
Lox
(3.10)

82
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
SiO2
SiO2
SixGe1−x
ao
co
aiSi
ciox
Lox
JSi
Jox
o
z
L
O2
H2O
or
Si
Figure 3.14
A one-dimensional model schematically showing the various fluxes
occurring during the oxidation of Si1−xGex films on top of an
SiO2/silicon substrate. Note that the concentration gradient in the SiGe
layer is steeper in the silicon-rich region than in the germanium-rich
area near the interface. The constant slope of the oxygen concentra-
tion in the oxide results from the assumptions of (a) constant diffusion
coefficient Dox, and (b) the establishment of a steady state condition
[After P.-E. Hellberg et al., J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 82, 1997(5779–5787)]
where Dox and co are the diffusion coefficient and the solid solubility of O2 in the
oxide, respectively. ciox is the concentration of O2 at the Si1−xGex/oxide interface,
and Lox is the oxide thickness.
The second and third fluxes are those of silicon and germanium, respectively, at
the Si1−xGex/oxide interface towards the oxide:
J ′
Si = kSiaiSiciox
(3.11)
J ′
Ge = kGe(1 −aiSi)ciox
(3.12)
where kSi and kGe are the rate constants for the reaction of silicon and germanium
with O2 to form SiO2 and GeO2, respectively. aiSi is the silicon activity at the
Si1−xGex/oxide interface. As Si1−xGex is assumed to be an ideal solution, the silicon
activity a is equal to the composition x. Under conditions of steady state the sum of
the flux of silicon expressed by (3.11) and the flux of germanium expressed by (3.12)

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
83
should be equal to the flux of O2 expressed by (3.10):
Jox = J ′
Si + J ′
Ge
(3.13)
By eliminating ciox, the following is obtained from (3.10) to (3.13):
Jox =
[kGe + aiSi(kSi −kGe]co
1 + (Lox/Dox)[kGe + aiSi(kSi −kGe)]
(3.14)
In order to find the thickness of the oxide formed one should make use of an
equation by relating the growth of the oxide to the flux of O2 as
dLox
dt
= Jox
(3.15)
in which  is the molecular volume of either SiO2 or GeO2. As a first-order approx-
imation, the molecular volume of GeO2 is approximately equal to that of SiO2. It
should be noted that Dox, co, and Lox are quantities related to the mixed oxide con-
taining both SiO2 and GeO2. During oxidation, the reduction reaction occurs, which
has been studied by Prabkakaran et al. [89,90]. They have shown that the cleavage
of Ge-O bonds and the formation of Si-O bonds already take place around 200 ◦C.
Thus, it can be anticipated that reaction proceeds rapidly at temperatures well above
200 ◦C. Therefore, as long as there is enough silicon to reduce GeO2 at the interface,
(3.11) and (3.12) together can account for the net flux of silicon towards the interface
forming pure SiO2:
JSi = keff ciox
(3.16)
with
keff = kGe + aiSi(kSi −kGe)
(3.17)
which can be regarded as the effective interface reaction rate constant. Thus, Dox,
co, and Dox are now quantities only related to pure SiO2. In order to find the oxide
thickness as a function of time, the silicon activity at the Si1−xGex/oxide interface,
aiSi, has to be determined.
The diffusion process described below will allow the determination of the silicon
activity, a, in the remaining Si1−xGex film during oxidation. The silicon diffusion in
Si1−xGex obeys Fick’s second law:
N ∂a
∂t = ∂φSi
∂z
= N ∂
∂z D(x)∂a
∂z
(3.18)
in which N is the atomic concentration of silicon in Si1−xGex (per cm3), a is the
silicon activity, t is the diffusion time, φSi is the flux of silicon and z is the coordinate
(i.e., the depth in the Si1−xGex). The diffusion coefficient, D(x) is a strong function
of the silicon concentration in the Si1−xGex film [91]. The simultaneous solution
to (3.14), (3.15), and (3.18) is very complex and an analytic solution is difficult to
find. Equation 3.18 is therefore solved with a finite difference method, with the first
boundary condition at the Si1−xGex/SiO2 interface being set by JSi [Equation (3.16)].

84
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
10–5
0
0.2
Composition x In SixGe1−x
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
10–3
10–1
101
103
Diffusion coefficient (nm2/min–1)
Figure 3.15
Diffusion coefficient D(x) of silicon and germanium in Si1−xGex alloys.
The solid points represent the experimental results in the literature and
the solid lines represent the simple exponential functions that are found
when modelling the oxidation of polycrystalline Si1−xGex films [After
P.-E. Hellberg et al., J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 82, 1997(5779–5787)]
It is assumed that no germanium diffuses into the formed SiO2 under the oxidation
conditions used.
McVay and DuCharme [91] have studied the diffusion of germanium in Si1−xGex
at temperatures typically around 1000 ◦C. Their results are extrapolated to 800 ◦C and
are shown in Figure 3.15 together with other results of self-diffusion of germanium
and diffusion of germanium in silicon [92]. Since large uncertainties have been found
in the pre-exponential factors for the diffusion of germanium in Si1−xGex, large errors
can be expected with the extrapolated results so they can only be used as guidelines
for determination of the composition-dependent D(x). Figure 3.16 shows the growth
of SiO2 (pure) on various substrates at 800 ◦C. A comparison is made between the
experimental [87] data (legends) and the simulation results (lines) generated by the
mathematicalmodel. Itisapparentthatthemodelgivesagoodaccountoftheoxidation
process.
3.5.2
Plasma oxidation of SiGe films
The oxide composition depends on the Ge concentration in the SiGe layers and varies
with the oxidation time. In a 500 ◦C oxidation, it has been shown that the oxide
first contains pure SiO2 and the germanium piles up to form a pure Ge layer at the
oxide/alloy interface [93]. Once the Ge interfacial layer reaches a critical thickness
of about 12 Å, Ge starts to be embedded in the SiO2 layer and forms microcrystals.
For longer oxidation times, the Ge atoms start to be oxidised and the results are
summarised in Figure 3.17. This transition between Ge pileup and oxidation has been
observed for both wet thermal oxidation [94] and high-pressure dry oxidation [95].

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
85
250
200
150
100
50
00
50
100
Time (min)
Oxide thickness (nm)
150
200
Figure 3.16
Comparison between the experimental data (legends) and the simula-
tion results (lines) of the growth of SiO2 on various substrates: silicon
(100) (filled circles vs. continuous line), amorphous silicon (open cir-
clesvs. continuousline), Si0.7Ge0.3 with(opendiamondsvs. continuous
line) and without (filled diamonds vs. broken line) the silicon cap layer
of 14 nm thickness, and Si0.5Ge0.5 without the cap layer (open squares
vs. continuous line). The simulation results were generated by using
the mathematical model (see text) [After P.-E. Hellberg et al., J. Appl.
Phys., Vol. 82, 1997(5779–5787)]
SiO2
SiO2 + Ge
SiO2 + GeO2
20% Ge
10% Ge
5% Ge
SiO2
30 min
2 h
Oxidation time
4 h
SiO2
SiO2 + Ge
Figure 3.17
Variation of the oxide composition with oxidation time after plasma-
assisted oxidation of SiGe layers at 500 ◦C [After C. Tetelin et al.,
J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 83, 1998(2842–2846)]
Tetelinetal. [96] haveusedtheDeal–Grove(D-G)modeltointerprettheoxidation
kinetics of the plasma-assisted oxidation of SiGe. In this linear regime, the oxide
growth is limited by the interface kinetics. The interface reaction can be divided in
three steps: (1) breaking of the oxidant molecule, (2) breaking of a Si–Si or SiGe
substrate bond and (3) the relaxation of the interfacial stress between the oxide and
the substrate. For short oxidation times, the variation of the oxide thickness is linear

86
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
250
200
150
100
50
0
0
100
200
Oxide thickness (Å)
300
400
Oxidation time (min)
Si
Si0.8Ge0.2
Si0.9Ge0.1
Si0.95Ge0.05
Figure 3.18
Oxidation kinetics of Si and SiGe layers after plasma-assisted oxi-
dation at 500 ◦C [After C. Tetelin et al., J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 83,
1998(2842–2846)]
with the oxidation time. The relation between the oxidation time (t) and the oxide
thickness (d) can be written:
t = A
B d −τ
(3.19)
where τ is a time constant for an initial ultra fast regime and B/A is the linear rate
constant. For longer oxidation time, the D-G model assumes that the oxide growth is
limited by the diffusion of oxidant through the oxide. Then, the relation between the
oxide thickness (d) and the oxidation time (t) can be written as follows:
t = d2
B
(3.20)
where B is the parabolic rate constant. Figure 3.18 compares the rates of oxidation
of Si and SiGe for different Ge concentrations. These rates have about the same
magnitude of that observed during dry thermal oxidation at 800 ◦C. Nevertheless, the
results strongly differ from the case of dry oxidation because, for the temperature
studied here, the presence of Ge enhances the oxidation rate of Si. Figure 3.19 shows
that the oxidation kinetics of SiGe first follows a linear regime. In this regime, for
all Ge contents and all oxide thickness, the oxide formed is pure SiO2. These results
show that during the linear regime the oxidation rate increases with the Ge content
of the SiGe layer. This can be explained either by interfacial stress relaxation or by
bond strength difference in Si and SiGe.
Figure 3.20 compares oxidation kinetics of Si (100) and Ge/Si (100) structures.
For the three types of Ge layer reported (4 and 9 Å amorphous Ge and 10 Å epitaxial
Ge), no difference in the oxidation rate has been observed. From these measurements,

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
87
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
0
50
Si0.8Ge0.2
Si0.9Ge0.1
Si0.95Ge0.05
100
Oxide thickness (Å)
150
200
Oxidation time (min)
Figure 3.19
First linear regime of the oxidation kinetics of Si and SiGe lay-
ers at 500 ◦C [After C. Tetelin et al., J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 83,
1998(2842–2846)]
10
20
30
40
50
60
Si (100)
9 Å amorphous Ge
4 Å amorphous Ge
10 Å amorphous Ge
0
10
20
30
40
50
Oxide thickness (Å)
60
Oxidation time (min)
Figure 3.20
Comparison of oxidation rates of Si and Ge/Si (100) structures
at 500 ◦C [After C. Tetelin et al.,
J. Appl.
Phys.,
Vol.
83,
1998(2842–2846)]
it was concluded that unlike the case of wet thermal oxidation [66], the presence of
a pure Ge layer at the oxide/alloy interface has no effect on the oxidation kinetics.
Figure 3.21 shows the variation of the square of the oxide thickness with the oxidation
time. It is clear that for longer oxidation time, the plasma-assisted oxidation of SiGe
layers follows the parabolic regime described by Deal and Grove. The measured
oxidation rates for the different SiGe layers and the parabolic constant measured

88
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
50
100
150
200
250
0
0.0
5.0 × 104
1.0 × 105
1.5 × 105
Si0.8Ge0.2
Si0.9Ge0.1
Si0.95Ge0.05
Square of the oxide thickness (Å2)
Oxidation time (min)
Figure 3.21
Parabolic regime of the oxidation kinetics of Si and SiGe layers at
500 ◦C[AfterC.Tetelinetal., J.Appl. Phys., Vol. 83, 1998(2842-2846)]
Table 3.2
Linear rate constant and parabolic rate
constant of the plasma-assisted oxida-
tion of different SiGe layers [After C.
Tetelin et al., J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 83,
1998(2842–2846)].
Sample
B/A (Å/min)
B(Å2/min)
Si
1.27 ± 0.05
153.8 ± 4
Si0.95Ge0.05
1.35 ± 0.06
200 ± 8
Si0.9Ge0.1
1.95 ± 0.06
380 ± 32
Si0.8Ge0.2
2.70 ± 0.05
574 ± 23
from the oxidation kinetics are summarised in Table 3.2. These results show that the
parabolic constant B increases with the Ge concentration in the SiGe layers. Other
material properties of low-temperature plasma-grown oxides and qualitative model
for the mechanism of oxide growth of SiGe that is consistent with published results
for SiGe oxides grown with other oxidation systems have been reviewed by Riley
and Hall [75].
3.6
Summary
In this chapter, a brief discussion on the nature of point defect-mediated diffusion,
boron diffusion in silicon and SiGe, and reasons for strain relaxation in SiGe has been
made. Becauseoftherelationshipbetweendopantdiffusionandpointdefectdiffusion,

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
89
both the movement of point defects and dopants need to be modelled simultaneously.
It has been shown that boron in strained, low Ge-composition SiGe layers diffuses
primarily via an interstitial mediated mechanism. Mobile misfit dislocations can act as
a strong interstitial sink but immobile dislocations appear to have very little effect on
the point defect population. However, experiments should be performed to determine
the segregation coefficient across the Si/SiGe interface as a function of germanium
and dopant concentration. Further studies should also be taken up to find more closely
the relationship between relaxation and interstitial absorption.
A moderate amount of boron pileup is observed at the Si/SiGe interface, and the
diffusivity of boron is noticeably reduced within the SiGe boundary layers. The boron
profile in the graded structure differs significantly. Very little pileup is seen at the
SiGe interface owing to the low Ge content at that boundary. The boron diffusivity at
the inner Si/SiGe interface is close to that in the silicon structure. Since most of the
SiGe layers used in HBTs are metastable in nature, they will relax upon high temper-
ature processing and produce dislocations at the Si/SiGe interface. It is important to
isolate the effect of these parameters upon boron diffusivity.
TCAD models had been used to simulate the effects of boron diffusion in Si and
Si1−xGex. From the models, it was found that boron diffusion is related more to
Ge concentration rather than to strain. Model parameters for boron diffusion imple-
mented both in the ATHENA and TSUPREM4 User-Specified Equation Interface
have been extracted for SiGe/SiGeC layers for RTA temperatures in the 1020–1100 ◦C
range. Good correlation between measured and simulated boron and carbon profiles
under different process conditions were obtained for germanium and carbon diffusion
coefficients.
AmathematicalmodelofoxidationofSi1−xGex alloyshasbeenpresented. Acom-
parison between simulation and experiment was made, showing that the model gives
a good account of the process of oxidation of Si1−xGex. While the diffusion of silicon
and germanium is strongly dependent on the crystalline structure and the composition
of the Si1−xGex alloys, the interfacial reaction rate constants are mainly affected by
the type of oxidant and the crystalline structure of the Si1−xGex.
The kinetics of plasma-assisted oxidation of SiGe layers at 500 ◦C has also been
presented using the Deal and Grove model. In the linear regime, the oxidation rate
increases with the Ge concentration in the layer. The comparison between the oxida-
tion kinetics of different Ge/Si (100) structures and the oxidation kinetics of Si and
SiGe allows one to conclude that unlike in the case of wet thermal oxidation, the
limiting factor of the interface oxidation reaction is the breaking of substrate bonds in
case of dry oxidation. There is still no explanation of the fact that the linear kinetics
of the dry thermal oxidation of Si and SiGe are the same.
References
1 Z. Li, W. Zhang, D. Wang, Y. Chang, and Y. Sun, ‘The base dopant out
diffusion and the optimized setback layers in SiGe HBT’, in Proc. Solid-State
and Integrated-Circuit Tech. Conf., pp. 596–599, 2001.

90
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
2 C. K. Maiti,
and G. A. Armstrong,
Applications of Silicon-Germanium
Heterostructure Devices. Inst. of Physics Pub., UK, 2001.
3 E. J. Prinz, P. M. Garone, P. V. Schwartz, X. Xiao, and J. C. Sturm, ‘The effect
of base-emitter spacers and strain-dependent densities of states in Si/Si1−xGex/Si
heterojunction bipolar transistors’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 639–642, 1989.
4 E. J. Prinz, P. Garone, P. Schwartz, X. Xiao, and J. Sturm, ‘The effect
of base dopant outdiffusion and undoped Si1−xGex junction space layers in
Si/Si1−xGex/Si heterojunction bipolar transistors’, IEEE Electron Device Lett.,
vol. EDL-12, pp. 42–44, 1991.
5 Z. A. Shafi, C. J. Gibbings, P. Ashburn, I. R. C. Post, C. G. Tuppen, and
D. J. Godfrey, ‘The importance of neutral base recombination in compromis-
ing the gain of Si/SiGe heterojunction bipolar transistors’, IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. 38, pp. 1973–1976, 1991.
6 Z. A. Shafi, P. Ashburn, I. R. C. Post, D. J. Robbins, W. Y. Leong, C. J. Gibbings,
and S. Nigrin, ‘Analysis and modeling of base currents of Si/Si1−xGex hetero-
junction bipolar transistors fabricated in high and low oxygen content material’,
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 78, pp. 2823–2829, 1995.
7 G. A. Armstrong, and T. C. Denton, ‘HQUPETS – a two-dimensional simulator
for heterojunction bipolar transistors’, in Proc. IMA Conf. on Semiconductor
Modeling, Loughborough, pp. 16–17, 1991.
8 P. Kuo, J. L. Hoyt, J. F. Gibbons, J. E. Turner, R. D. Jacowitz, and T. I. Kamins,
‘Comparison of boron diffusion in Si and strained Si1−xGex epitaixl layers’, Appl.
Phys. Lett., vol. 62, pp. 612–614, 1993.
9 N. Moriya, L. C. Feldman, H. S. Luftman, C. A. King, J. Berk, and B. Freer,
‘Boron diffusion in Si1−xGex epitaxial layers’, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 71,
pp. 883–886, 1993.
10 N. E. B. Cowern, P. C. Zalm, P. Van der Sluis, D. J. Gravesteijn, and W. B. de Boer,
‘Diffusion in strained Si(Ge)’, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 72, pp. 2585–2588, 1994.
11 A. Antonelli and J. Bernholc, ‘Pressure effects on self-diffusion in silicon’, Phys.
Rev. B, vol. 40, pp. 10643–10646, 1989.
12 K. Rajendran, and W. Schoenmaker, ‘Simulation of boron diffusivity in strained
Si1−xGex epitaxial layers’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 89, pp. 980–988, 2001.
13 D. X. Xu, C. J. Peters, J. P. Noed, S. J. Rolfe, and N. G. Turr, ‘Control of
an anomalous boron diffusion in the base of Si/SiGe/Si hetereojunction bipolar
transistors using PtSi’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 64, pp. 3270–3272, 1994.
14 P. Kuo, J. L. Hoyt, J. F. Gibbons, J. E. Turner and D. Lefforge, ‘Effects of Si
thermal oxidation on B diffusion in Si and strained Si1−xGex layers’, Appl. Phys.
Lett., vol. 67, pp. 706–708, 1995.
15 K. Rajendran, and W. Schoenmaker, ‘Measurement and simulation of boron
diffusion in strained Si1−xGex epitaxial layers with a linearly graded germanium
profile’, Solid State Electron., vol. 45, pp. 1879–1884, 2001.
16 P. Kuo, J. L. Hoyt, and J. F. Gibbons, ‘Effects of strain on boron diffusion in Si
and SiGe’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 66, pp. 580–582, 1995.

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
91
17 K. Rajendran, W. Schoenmaker, S. Decoutere, and M. Caymax, ‘Simulation
of boron diffusion in strained Si1−xGex epitaxial layers’, in Proc. SISPAD,
pp. 206–209, 2000.
18 K. Rajendran, W. Schoenmaker, S. Decoutere, R. Loo, M. Caymax, and
W. Vandervorst, ‘Measurement and simulation of boron diffusion in strained
Si1−xGex epitaxiallayers’, IEEETrans. ElectronDevices, vol.48, pp.2022–2031,
2001.
19 K. Rajendran, and W. Schoenmaker, ‘Measurement and simulation of boron dif-
fusivity in strained Si1−xGex epitaxial layers,’ in Abs. Computational Electronics
Symp., pp. 108–109, 2000.
20 R. F. Lever, J. M. Bonar, and A. F. W. Willoughby, ‘Boron diffusion across
silicon-silicon germanium boundaries’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 83, pp. 1988–1994,
1998.
21 Avant! Corporation, Fremont, CA, Taurus Process/Device, Ver. 98.4, 1998.
22 Silvaco International, Silvaco-ATHENA User’s Manual, 2005.
23 G. H. Loechelt, G. Tam, J. W. Steele, L. K. Knoch, K. M. Klein, J. K. Watanabe,
and J. W. Christiansen, ‘Measurement and simulation of boron diffusion in Si
and strained Si1−xGex epitaxial layers during rapid thermal annealing’, J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 74, pp. 5220–5526, 1993.
24 S. Eguchi, C. W. Leitz, E. A. Fitzgerald, and J. L. Hoyt, ‘Diffusion behavior of
ion-implanted n-type dopants in silicon germanium’, in Proc. Mat. Res. Soc.,
vol. 686, pp. A1.7.1–A1.7.6, 2002.
25 SUPREM-3, One-Dimensional Semiconductor Process Simulation, Technology
Modeling Associates, 1993.
26 R. Braunstein, A. R. Moore, and F. Herman, ‘Intrinsic optical absorption in
germanium-silicon alloys’, Phys. Rev., vol. 109, pp. 695–710, 1958.
27 D. Knoll, B. Heinemann, K.-E. Ehwald, B. Tillack, P. Schley, and H. J. Osten,
‘Comparison of SiGe and SiGe:C heterojunction bipolar transistors’, Thin Solid
Films, vol. 369, pp. 342–346, 2000.
28 G. Lippert, H. J. Osten, K. Blum, R. Sorge, P. Schley, D. Kruger, and G. Fischer,
‘Optimized processing for differentially moleculer beam epitaxy-grown SiGe(C)
devices’, Thin solid film, vol. 321, pp. 21–25, 1998.
29 H. J. Osten, Carbon-Containing Layers on Silicon – Growth, Properties and
Applications. Trans-Tech Publications, Switzerland, 1999.
30 H. J. Osten, M. Kim, G. Lippert, and P. Zaumseil, ‘Ternary SiGeC alloys: growth
and properties of a new semiconducting material’, Thin Solid Films, vol. 294,
pp. 93–97, 1997.
31 H. J. Osten, B. Heinemann, D. Knoll, G. Lippert, and H. Rucker, ‘Effects of
carbon on boron diffusion in SiGe: Principles and impact on bipolar devices’,
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, vol. 16, pp. 1750–1753, 1998.
32 H. J. Osten, D. Knoll, and H. Rucker, ‘Dopant diffusion control by adding carbon
into Si and SiGe: Principles and device application’, Mat. Sci. and Eng. B, vol. 87,
pp. 262–270, 2001.

92
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
33 H. J. Osten, H. Rucker, J. P. Liu, and B. Heinemann, ‘Wider latitude for sophisti-
cated devices by incorporating carbon into crystalline Si or SiGe’, Microelectronic
Eng., vol. 56, pp. 209–212, 2001.
34 H. J. Osten, ‘MBE growth and properties of supersaturated, carbon-containing
silicon/germanium alloys on Si(001)’, Thin Solid Films, vol. 367, pp. 101–111,
2000.
35 H. J. Osten, R. Barth, G. Fischer, B. Heinemann, D. Knoll, G. Lippert, et al.,
‘Carbon-containing group IV heterostructures on Si: Properties and device
applications’, Thin Solid Films, vol. 321, pp. 11–14, 1998.
36 B. Heinemann, D. Knoll, G. G. Fischer, P. Schley, and H. J. Osten, ‘Comparative
analysis of minority carrier transport in npn bipolar transistors with Si, Si1−xGex,
and Si1−yCy base layers’, Thin Solid Films, vol. 369, pp. 347–351, 2000.
37 H. J. Osten, D. Knoll, B. Heinemann, and P. Schley, ‘Increasing process margin in
SiGe heteeterojunction bipolar technology by adding carbon’, IEEE Trans. Elec.
Devices, vol. 46, pp. 1910–1912, 1999.
38 D. Knoll, H. Rucker, B. Heinemann, R. Barth, J. Bauer, D. Bolze, et al., ‘HBT
before CMOS, a new modular SiGe BiCMOS integration scheme’, in IEEE IEDM
Tech. Dig., pp. 499–502, 2001.
39 B. Heinemann, D. Knoll, R. Barth, D. Bolze, K. Blum, J. Drews, et al.,
‘Cost-effective high-performance high-voltage SiGe:C HBTs with 100 GHz fT
and BVCEO×fT products exceeding 220 VGHz’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
pp. 348–351, 2001.
40 H. J. Osten, D. Knoll, B. Heinemann, H. Rucker, and K.-E. Ehwald, ‘Carbon
doped SiGe heterojunction bipolar transistor module suitable for integration in a
deep submicron CMOS process’, in Asia-Pacific Microwave Conf, pp. 757–762,
2000.
41 I. M. Anteney, G. Lippert, P. Ashburn, H. J. Osten, B. Heinemann, G. J. Parker,
et al., ‘Characterization of the effectiveness of carbon incorporation in SiGe for
the elimination of parasitic energy barriers in SiGe HBTs’, IEEE Electron Device
Lett., vol. 20, pp. 116–118, 1998.
42 H. J. Osten, G. Lippert, D. Knoll, R. Barth, B. Heinemann, H. Rucker, and
P. Schley, ‘The effect of carbon incorporation on SiGe heterobipolar transistor
performance and process margin’, IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 803–806, 1997.
43 H. Rucker, B. Heinemann, R. Barth, D. Bolze, J. Drews, U. Haak, et al.,
‘SiGe:C BiCMOS technology with 3.6 ps gate delay’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
pp. 121–124, 2003.
44 B. Heinemann, R. Barth, D. Bolze, J. Drews, P. Formanek, O. Fursenko, et al.,
‘A complementary BiCMOS technology with high speed npn and pnp SiGe:C
HBTs’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 117–120, 2003.
45 D. Knoll, B. Heinemann, K.-E. Ehwald, H. Rucker, B. Tillack, W. Winkler, and
P. Schley, ‘BiCMOS integration of SiGe:C heterojunction bipolar transistors’, in
IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 162–166, 2002.
46 D. Knoll, K. E. Ehwald, B. Heinemann, A. Fox, K. Blum, H. Rucker, et al.,
‘A flexible, low-cost, high performance SiGe:C BiCMOS process with a one-
mask HBT module’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 783–786, 2002.

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
93
47 B. Heinemann, H. Rucker, R. Barth, J. Bauer, D. Bolze, E. Bugiel, et al.,
‘Novel collector design for high-speed SiGe:C HBTs’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
pp. 775–778, 2002.
48 H. J. Osten, D. Knoll, B. Heinemann, and B. Tillack, ‘Carbon doping of
SiGe heterobipolar transistors’, in Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits in
RF Systems, pp. 19–23, 1998.
49 H. J. Osten, D. Knoll, B. Heinemann, H. Rucker, and B. Tillack, ‘Carbon doped
SiGe heterojunction bipolar transistors for high frequency applications’, in IEEE
BCTM Proc., pp. 109–116, 1999.
50 H.Rucker, B.Heinemann, D.Bolze, D.Knoll, D.Kruger, R.Kurps, etal., ‘Dopant
diffusion in C-doped Si and SiGe: Physical model and experimental verification’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 345–348, 1999.
51 D. Knoll, B. Heinemann, H. J. Osten, K. E. Ehwald, B. Tillack, P. Schley,
et al., ‘Si/SiGe:C heterojunction bipolar transistors in an epi-free well, single-
polysilicon technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 703–706, 1998.
52 H. Rucker, and B. Heinemann, ‘Tailoring dopant diffusion for advanced SiGeC
heterojunction bipolar transistors’, Solid State Electron., vol. 44, pp. 783–789,
2000.
53 T. F. Meister, H. Schafer, K. Aufinger, R. Stengl, S. Boguth, R. Schreiter,
et al., ‘SiGe bipolar technology with 3.9 ps gate delay’, in IEEE BCTM Proc.,
pp. 103–106, 2003.
54 R. F. Scholz, P. Werner, U. Gosele, and T. Y. Tan, ‘The contribution of vacan-
cies to carbon out-diffusion in silicon’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 74, pp. 392–394,
1999.
55 J. L. Ngau, P. B. Griffin, and J. D. Plummer, ‘Modeling the suppression of boron
transient enhanced diffusion in silicon by substitutional carbon incorporation’,
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 90, pp. 1768–1778, 2001.
56 R. Pinacho,
P. Castrillo,
M. Jaraiz,
I. Martin-Bragado,
J. Barbolla,
H.-J. Gossmann, et al., ‘Carbon in silicon:modelling the diffusion and clustering
mechanism’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 92, pp. 1582–1587, 2002.
57 M. S. Carroll, and J. C. Sturm, ‘Quantification of substitutional carbon loss from
Si0.998C0.002 due to silicon self-interstitial injection during oxidation’, Appl. Phys.
Lett., vol. 81, pp. 1225–1227, 2002.
58 M. S. Carroll, J. C. Sturm, E. Napolitani, D. De Salvador, M. Berti J. Stangl, et al.,
‘Diffusion enhanced carbon loss from SiGeC layers due to oxidation’, Phys. Rev.
B, vol. 64, pp. 073308–073311, 2001.
59 N. E. B. Cowern, B. Colombeau, F. Roozeboom, M. Hopstaken H. Snijders,
P. Meunier-Beillard, et al., ‘Diffusion suppression in silicon by substitutional C
doping’, in Proc. ESSDERC, pp. 203–206, 2002.
60 A. Sibaja-Hernandez, M. W. Xu, S. Decoutere, and H. Maes, ‘TSUPREM-4
based modelling of boron and carbon diffusion in SiGeC base layers under rapid
thermal annealing conditions’, Mat. Sci. Semicond. Proc., vol. 8, pp. 115–120,
2004.
61 Avant!
Corporation,
Fremont,
CA, Two-Dimensional Process Simulation
Program, Tech. Rep. TSUPREM-4, Ver. 6.6, 1998.

94
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
62 S. Decoutere and A. Sibaja-Hernandez, ‘SiGeC HBTs : The TCAD challenge
reduced to practice’, Mat. Sci. Semicond. Proc., vol. 8, pp. 283–288, 2005.
63 R. C. Newman, and J. Wakefield, ‘Diffusion and precipitation of carbon in
silicon’, in Metallurgy of semiconductor materials, vol. 15, (J. B. Schroeder,
Ed.), pp. 201–208, Interscience, New York, 1962.
64 P. Dorner, W. Gust, B. Predel, and U. Roll, ‘Investigations by SIMS of the bulk
impurity diffusion of Ge in Si’, Philos. Mag. A, vol. 49, pp. 557–571, 1984.
65 G. Hettich, H. Mehrer, and K. Maier, ‘Tracer diffusion of 17Ge and 31Si in
intrinsic and doped silicon’, in Defects and radiation effects in semiconductors,
(J. H. Albany, Ed. Inst. Phys. Conf. Ser. 46), pp. 500–507, Institute of Physics,
London, 1979.
66 F. K. LeGoues, R. Rosenberg, T. Nguyen, F. Himpsel, and B. S. Meyerson,
‘Oxidation studies of SiGe’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 65, pp. 1724–1728, 1989.
67 F. K. Legoues, R. Rosenberg, and B. S. Meyerson, ‘Kinetics and mechanism
of oxidation of SiGe: dry versus wet oxidation’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 54,
pp. 644–646, 1989.
68 D. Fathy, O. W. Holland, and C. W. White, ‘Formation of epitaxial layers of Ge
on Si substrates by Ge implantation and oxidation’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 51,
pp. 1337–1339, 1987.
69 O. W. Holland, C. W. White, and D. Fathy, ‘Novel oxidation process in Ge+-
implanted Si and its effect on oxidation kinetics’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 51,
pp. 520–522, 1987.
70 D. C. Paine, C. Caragianis, and A. F. Schwartzman, ‘Oxidation of Sil−xGex alloys
at atmospheric and elevated pressure’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 70, pp. 5076–5084,
1991.
71 K. K. Liou, P. Mei, U. Gennser, and E. S. Yang, ‘Effects of Ge concentration on
SiGe oxidation behaviour’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 59, pp. 1200–1202, 1991.
72 S. S. Iyer, P. M. Solomon, V. P. Kesan, A. A. Bright, J. L. Freeouf, T. N. Nguyen,
and A. C. Warren, ‘A Gate-quality dielectric system for SiGe Metal-Oxide-
Semiconductor Devices’, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. EDL-12, pp. 246–248,
1991.
73 P. W. Li, and E. S. Yang, ‘SiGe gate oxide prepared at low temperature in an
electron cyclotron resonance plasma’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 63, pp. 2938–2940,
1993.
74 M.Mukhopadhyay, S.K.Ray, C.K.Maiti, D.K.Nayak, andY.Shiraki, ‘Electrical
properties of oxides grown on strained SiGe layer at low temperatures in a
microwave oxygen plasma’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 65, pp. 895–897 (see also
Vol. 66(12), p.1566, March 20, 1995 issue), 1994.
75 L. S. Riley, and S. Hall, ‘X-ray photoelectron spectra of low tempoerature plasma
anodized Si0.84Ge0.16 alloy on Si(100)’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 85, pp. 6828–6837,
1999.
76 M. Mukhopadhyay, S. K. Ray, C. K. Maiti, D. K. Nayak, and Y. Shiraki, ‘Proper-
ties of SiGe oxides grown in a microwave oxygen plasma’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 78,
pp. 6135–6140, 1995.

Diffusion and oxidation of SiGe/SiGeC films
95
77 M. Mukhopadhyay, S. K. Ray, D. K. Nayak, and C. K. Maiti, ‘Ultrathin oxides
using N2O on strained Si1−xGex’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 68, pp. 1262–1264,
1996.
78 V. Craciun, I. W. Boyd, A. H. Reader, W. J. Kersten, F. J. G. Hakkens,
P. H. Oosting, et al., ‘Microstructure of oxidized layers formed by the low tem-
perature UV assisted dry oxidation of strained Si0.8Ge0.2 on Si’, J. Appl. Phys.,
vol. 75, pp. 1972–1975, 1994.
79 J. Eugene, F. K. LeGoues, V. P. Kesan, S. S. Iyer, and F. M. d’Heurle, ‘Diffusion
versus oxidation rates in silicon-germanium alloys’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 59,
pp. 78–80, 1991.
80 S.-G. Park, W. S. Liu, and M.-A. Nicolet, ‘Kinetics and mechanism of wet
oxidation of GexSi1-x alloys’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 75, pp. 1764–1770, 1994.
81 J. P. Zhang, P. L. F. Hemment, S. M. Newstead, A. R. Powell, T. E. Whall, and
E. H. C. Parker, ‘A Comparison of the behavior of Si0.5Ge0.5 alloys during dry
and wet oxidation’, Thin Solid Films, vol. 222, pp. 141–144, 1992.
82 J. Xiang, N. Herbots, H. Jacobsson, P. Ye, S. Hearne, and S. Whaley, ‘Compar-
ative study on dry oxidation of heteroepitaxial Si1−xGex and Si1−x−yGexCy on
Si(100)’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 80, pp. 1857–1866, 1996.
83 D. K. Nayak, K. Kamjoo, J. S. Park, J. C. S. Woo, and K. L. Wang, ‘Wet oxidation
of GeSi strained layers by rapid thermal processing’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 57,
pp. 369–371, 1990.
84 H. Tsutsu, W. J. Edwards, D. G. Ast, and T. I. Kamins, ‘Oxidation of
polycrystalline-SiGe alloys’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 64, pp. 297–299, 1994.
85 A. K. Rai, and S. M. Prokes, ‘Wet oxidation of amorphous Si-Ge layer
deposited on Si(001) at 800 and 900 ◦C’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 72, pp. 4020–4025,
1992.
86 B. E. Deal, and A. S. Grove, ‘General relationship for the thermal oxidation of
silicon’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 36, pp. 3770–3778, 1965.
87 P.-E. Hellberg, S.-L. Zhang, F. M. d’Heurle, and C. S. Petersson, ‘Oxidation
of silicon-germanium alloys. I. An experimental study’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 82,
pp. 5773–5778, 1997.
88 P.-E. Hellberg, S.-L. Zhang, F. M. d’Heurle, and C. S. Petersson, ‘Oxidation of
silicon-germanium alloys. II. A mathematical model’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 82,
pp. 5779–5787, 1997.
89 K. Prabhakaran, T. Ogino, T Scimeca, Y. Watanabe, and M. Oshima, ‘Bonding
partner change reaction in oxidation of Ge on Si(001): Observation of two step
formation of SiO2’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 64, pp. 1839–1841, 1994.
90 K. Prabhakaran, T. Nishoka, K. Sumitomo, Y. Kobayashi, and T. Ogino,
‘Oxidation of Ultrathin SiGe Layer on Si(001): Evidence for Inward Movement
of Ge’, Jap. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 33, pp. 1837–1838, 1994.
91 G. L. McVay, and A. R. DuCharme, ‘Diffusion of Ge in SiGe Alloys’, Phys. Rev.
B, vol. 9, p. 627, 1974.
92 W. Frank, U. Gosele, H. Mehrer, and A. Seeger, Diffusion in Crystalline Solids.
Academic, New York, 1984.

96
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
93 C. Tetelin, X. Wallart, L. Vescan, and J. P. Nys, ‘Plasma assisted oxidation of
SiGe layers at 500 ◦C: interface characterization’, Appl. Surf. Sci., vol. 104/105,
pp. 385–391, 1996.
94 W. S. Liu,
E. W. Lee,
M-A. Nicolet,
V. Arbet-Engels,
K. L. Wang,
N. M. Abuhadba, et al., ‘Wet oxidation of GeSi at 700 ◦C’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 71,
pp. 4015–4018, 1992.
95 E. C. Frey, N. Yu, B. Patnaik, N. R. Parikh, M. L. Swanson, and W. K. Chu,
‘Transition between Ge segregation and trapping during high-pressure oxidation
of GexSi1−x/Si’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 74, pp. 4750–4755, 1993.
96 C. Tetelin, X. Wallart, J. P. Nys, L. Vescan, and D. J. Gravesteijn, ‘Kinetics and
mechanism of low temperature atomic oxygen-assisted oxidation of SiGe layers’,
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 83, pp. 2842–2846, 1998.

Chapter 4
Strain-engineered MOSFETs
In the field of microelectronics, the planar Si metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect
transistor (MOSFET) is perhaps the most important invention. It started in 1928 when
J.E. Lilienfeld proposed the concept of field-effect conductivity modulation and the
MOSFET [1]. With the discovery of silicon dioxide (SiO2) passivation for the Si
semiconductor system by Atalla in 1958, the modern Si MOSFET era started [2].
Since then MOSFET performance has improved at a dramatic rate owing to gate
length scaling and has become the dominant technology for integrated circuits.
During the early years of transistor scaling, Gordon Moore predicted that the
number of transistors in a chip will increase exponentially [3, 4], which is now
known as Moore’s law. However, according to Moore himself, ‘no exponential is
forever’ [5]. Many of the exponential trends are approaching limits that require new
means to circumvent to continue the historic rate of progress. Accordingly, new and
more fundamental barriers must be confronted in the coming decades – the fact that
the technology is approaching atomic dimensions. For example, Figure 4.1 shows
the increase in computer performance benefiting from both faster transistors and an
exponentially increasing transistor budget. Figure 4.2 shows the increasing power dis-
sipation of microprocessor chips, despite all attempts to decrease operating voltage
(see Figure 4.3) and minimise leakage currents.
Key to continuing the historic trends, the transistor itself must evolve from the
planar structure, generally used today. The key challenge for continuing transistor
scaling below a gate length of 30 nm is the growth in off-state leakage current such
as has been observed in an experimental prototype 10 nm planar device [6].
However, future progress can continue with new materials and device structures.
Several ideas have been put forward to decrease leakage and continue speed improve-
ments, including fully depleted silicon-on-insulator [7], as well as double-gate [8]
and triple-gate [9] structures. Figure 4.4 shows directions in which the standard planar
transistor is evolving. Even the crystal structure of the silicon has been modified by
introducing strain into the lattice to increase carrier mobility and, hence, transistor
performance [10].

98
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
100000
10000
1000
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
1970
1975
1980
4004
8008
8080
8086
285
385
485
Pentium
Pentium 2
Pentium 4
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
MIPS
Figure 4.1
Processor performance (MIPS) [After G. E. Moore, Proc. ISSCC,
2003(20–23). © 2003 IEEE]
1000
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
0.001
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Power (W)
Active
Leakage
Figure 4.2
Processor power (W) – active and leakage [After G. E. Moore, Proc.
ISSCC, 2003(20–23). © 2003 IEEE]
In this chapter, the key scaling limits are identified for MOS transistors (see
Table 4.1), and methods for improving device performance are discussed. For
improved short channel effects, creation of shallow source/drain extension (SDE)
profiles, the use of retrograde and halo well profiles to improve leakage characteristics
and the effect of scaling the gate oxide thickness are discussed in detail. Experimental
data and simulations are used to show that although conventional scaling of junction
depths is still possible, increased resistance for junction depths below 30 nm results in

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
99
100
Power supply (V)
10
1
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Figure 4.3
Processor supply voltage [After G. E. Moore,
Proc.
ISSCC,
2003(20–23). © 2003 IEEE]
Changes 
made
Future 
options
New 
transistor 
structure
Transistor
High-k 
gate 
dielectric
Gate: 
silicide 
added
Channel: 
strained
silicon
Figure 4.4
New materials and device structures extending transistor scaling [After
G. E. Moore, Proc. ISSCC, 2003(20–23). © 2003 IEEE]
Table 4.1
The key scaling limits for conventional MOS transistors
[After S. E. Thompson et al., Lecture notes.]
Feature
Limit
Reason
Gate length
0.10 µm
leakage (Ioff )
Channel length
0.06 µm
leakage (Ioff )
Oxide thickness
2.3 nm
leakage (Igate)
Junction depth
30 nm
resistance (Rsde)
Channel doping
Vt = 0.25 V
leakage (Ioff )
SDE under diffusion
15 nm
resistance (Rinv)

100
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
performance degradation. Fundamental trade-offs and scaling trends in engineering
these effects are analysed.
4.1
Scaling issues
Shrinking the conventional MOSFET beyond the 90-nm technology node requires
innovations to circumvent barriers due to the fundamental physics that constrain the
conventional MOSFET. The limits most often cited are
•
quantum-mechanical tunnelling of carriers through the thin gate oxide;
•
tunnelling of carriers from source to drain, and from drain to the body of the
MOSFET;
•
control of the density and location of dopant atoms in the MOSFET channel and
source/drain region to provide a high on-off current ratio;
•
the increase in subthreshold slope.
These fundamental limits have led to pessimistic predictions of the imminent end
of technological progress for the Si semiconductor industry [11–16]. The key scaling
limits for conventional Si MOS transistors are shown in Table 4.1. Because of these
limits, new solutions need to be developed for continued transistor scaling. Possible
device performance improvement opportunities are shown in Table 4.2.
Smallgeometryeffectsbecomemoreseverethanthefundamentallimitsofswitch-
ing owing to quantum fluctuations, energy equipartition or thermal fluctuations. Short
Table 4.2
Device performance improvement opportunities [After H.-S. P. Wong,
Lecture notes.]
Source of
Parameters
Method
improvement
affected
Charge density
S (inverse subthreshold slope)
double-gate FET
Qinv at a fixed off-current
low operating temperature
Carrier transport
mobility (µeff )
strained-Si
carrier velocity
high-mobility substrates
ballistic transport
reduced mobility
degradation factors
shorter channel length
Ensuring device
generalised scale length
via electrostatic control
scalability to a
channel length
sharp doping profiles
shorter channel
halo/pocket implants
length
high gate capacitance
Parasitic resistance
Rext
extended/raised source/drain
low-barrier Schottky contact
Parasitic capacitance
Cjn
SOI
Cgd, Cgs, Cgb
double-gate FET

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
101
channel effect due to the charge sharing along the transistor channel is more severe,
as it is strongly dependent on the gate/channel coupling capacitance, the junction
depth, the channel length and the doping concentration. This effect is the main lim-
itation to minimal design rule and it can be of the order of threshold voltage itself,
if low threshold voltage values are reached. Another CMOS challenge is to achieve
symmetry of threshold voltage for n- and p-channel devices to yield ideal transfer
CMOS inverter characteristics, thereby providing an acceptable trade-off between
performance and standby leakage.
The use of n+-poly gate for n-MOSFETs and p+-poly gate for p-MOSFETs
theoretically allows threshold voltage adjustment by enhancement of the well dopant
concentration. However, this solution suffers essentially from B penetration into SiO2
coming from the p+-doped gate. Nitrided SiO2 is a way to limit, without avoiding,
this effect. However, the creation of trapping centres in the oxide or at the SiO2/Si
interface will decrease carrier mobility. The use of midgap gate material offers an
attractive possibility of a single material for both n- and p-MOSFETs. However, the
flat-band voltage is shifted by approximately 0.55 eV. It could lead to too high an
absolute value of Vt, if one does not reduce or compensate the surface concentration.
The metal gate integration of metal gate technology with conventional processing is
not straightforward. The popularity of silicon gate technology comes from the self-
alignment of source and drain on the gate. The process sequence has to be modified in
order to allow a metal gate integration. Alternative approaches such as the damascene
gate [17] or the replacement gate have been proposed to avoid the source and drain
integration problem. For sub-0.10 µm devices, the following are the main challenging
issues that cannot be avoided:
•
Direct tunnelling through SiO2 when the sub-2.5 nm thickness is reached. This
increases the contribution of the leakage component to power consumption.
Nevertheless, SiO2 operating in the direct tunnelling current regime has been
demonstrated to be usable down to a thickness of 1.4 nm without affecting device
reliability [18–20].
•
High doping levels in the channel reaching more than 5×1018 cm−3 will enhance
reverse tunnelling current in source and drains up to values of 1 A/cm2 under
1 V [21].
•
Reverse short-channel effect due to lateral non-uniform doping resulting in Vth
variation when channel length varies.
•
Drain-induced threshold voltage shift due to change in drain-induced barrier low-
ering (DIBL) for long channel devices when the halo-implant influence on the
channel diminishes.
•
Poly-depletion is getting significant for ultrathin gate oxide, which accounts
for about an 8-nm increase in equivalent oxide thickness (EOT) for most
devices.
•
High field in the drain to gate causes band-to-band tunnelling due to high junction
doping and abrupt junctions.
•
Proximity effect of shallow trench isolation (STI) stress reduces electron mobility
but increases hole mobility, thus affecting Idsat.
•
Statistical dopant fluctuations.

102
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
The dopant fluctuations become very severe for geometries lower than 50 nm.
Moreover, the discrete nature of dopant distribution can also give rise to devices
characteristics asymmetry [22]. Special attention needs to be paid to these issues
because the number of dopants in the channel of a MOSFET tends to decrease with
scaling. The random dopant placement in the volume of the MOSFETs channel by
the ion-implantation technique must be considered.
In the following, possible solutions to overcome the physical limitations that one
could encounter in a classical scaling scenario through the different aspects of MOS
devices optimisation are discussed:
1.
gate, channel and substrate engineering;
2.
source and drain engineering;
3.
gate dielectric engineering.
Recently, a special issue has been brought out by the editors of the IEEE
Transactions on Electron Devices to highlight some of the new innovations in
strain-engineered MOSFETs and to survey their current progress and potential [23].
Interested readers may refer to this issue, which focuses on front-end materials such
as strained-Si, SiGe and processes, as well as advanced transistor structures.
4.2
Mobility-enhanced substrate engineering
An engineered substrate is a material that can be manufactured and introduced into
the conventional silicon processing, resulting in products that are unique and could
not have been created on Si substrates. High carrier mobility MOSFETs and the
integration of photonic materials like GaAs are some examples in which new ICs
can be created using new materials platforms or substrates [24,25]. Uniaxial process-
induced strain is being adopted in all 90-, 65- and 45-nm high-performance logic
technologies. Uniaxial strain offers large performance improvement at low cost and
minimally increased manufacturing complexity and is scalable to future technology
nodes.
In nanoscale MOSFETs, biaxial strain has been the conventional method to strain
the MOSFET channel. Recent studies in the field of uniaxial process-induced strain
have revealed significant advantages over its biaxial counterpart [26,27]. Starting at
the 90-nm technology generation, process-induced strained-Si is one such material
change that has been widely adopted [10,28–30]. At present, strained-Si offers per-
formance gains much larger than any other new material options. Three techniques
are being used to introduce strain:
1.
tensile and/or compressive capping layer post salicide;
2.
local epitaxial films grown in the source and drain regions;
3.
capping layers on top of the polySi gate before source/drain anneal for stress
memorisation of the polySi gate, and the combination of these various techniques
is additive.
Figure 4.5 shows the feature size progress during the last 30 years and high-
lights the new materials needed to continue the scaling trends. A possible method

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
103
10 m
10 m
1970
1980
Source intel 
technology
Technology feature size
Gate length
polySi
Si3N4
CoSi2
Si,
SiO2
TiSi2, W
Ti, TiN
90 nm
Higher strain 
High K? 
Metal gates? 
Double gate? 
Tri-Gate 
SiC s/d?
Ge channel?
Cu
1990
2000
SiGe, 
NiSi 
Low K
2010
2020
# new materials
Nominal feature size
100 m
1 m
Figure 4.5
Technology and gate feature size and new materials needed vs. time
[After S. E. Thomson et al., IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manufacturing,
Vol. 18, 2005(26–36)]
for overcoming the limitations of conventional Si CMOS is the enhancement of
the carrier transport properties in the transistors channel region through the use of
new materials and/or the modification of the channel material properties. As VLSI
technology uses various materials, it is important to understand how the different
materials used and their patterning affects the stress present in nanoscale transis-
tors. A complete understanding of these stress effects and their interaction with the
intentionally or otherwise strained-Si layer is needed to ensure an optimum and sta-
ble process performance. Besides the intentionally added strain (substrate strain),
the device and process-induced strain also have to be carefully controlled to obtain
maximum device performance.
Two basic approaches exist for implementing strain in MOSFETs: a global
approach, where biaxial stress is introduced across the entire substrate (substrate
strain), and a local approach, where uniaxial stress is engineered into the device by
means of epitaxial layers and/or high-stress nitride capping layers (process-induced
stress). Two techniques to introduce stress or strain are shown in Figure 4.6. The
difference between the uniaxial process stress and biaxial substrate strain is that
process strain is present in both the n+-polySi gate and Si channel while biaxial
stress strains only the Si channel. For biaxial stress, a undesirably large n-channel
threshold voltage shift has been reported [31–33] which is due to strain-induced
bandgap narrowing [34], and is larger for biaxial than uniaxial tensile stress.
Currently, the most important area of engineered substrates is strained- or relaxed-
SiGe/Si. The lattice mismatch between Si and Ge is about 4.18 per cent and offers
a host of materials and devices that can be fabricated in the Si CMOS or bipolar
processing, such as low-power or high-frequency CMOS and also the integration of
III-V photonics with Si. Most of the initial work on strained-Si has focused on biaxial

104
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Si1-xCx
Si1-xGex
Si1-xGex
Si
Si
P-channel
N- or P-channel
Fitzgerald 1991,
Welser 1994, 
Rim 1998, 
Hoyt 2002 
⊥
1
Si1-yGey
Si
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6
Two techniques to introduce stress or strain. (a) uniaxial stress and
(b) biaxial strain [After S. E. Thompson, IEEE IDEAS Symp. Proc.,
2005(14–16). © 2005 IEEE]
global strain using a wafer-based approach and using a thin strained-Si layer on a thick
relaxed-SiGe virtual substrate. Uniaxial process-induced stress (as opposed to biaxial)
is being pursued now because larger hole mobility enhancement can be achieved at
low strain and because it results in significantly smaller stress-induced n-channel
MOSFET threshold voltage shift [35]. For first- and second-generation strained-Si
MOSFETs the industry has adopted process-induced uniaxial stress [28,29,36].
Various methods have been proposed to induce the desired stress in the channel,
such as the use of a SiGe virtual substrate [37], tensile films [38] or mechanical
force [39]. The strain in the channel region can be obtained by the optimisation of the
stress introduced by the individual process steps (process-induced stress, PSS) and
can as well be implemented by using strained-Si substrates (substrate-induced, SS).
It is important to make sure that the combined effect of the three stress components
(along x, y and z axes) is still positive and different contributions do not cancel
each other out. Accurate process/stress models need to be developed to incorporate
both the intentional and unintentional stress sources in order to maximise device
performance. Major progress has been made in new engineered substrate materials
and their potential needs to be examined for microelectronic applications with a view
to (1) new materials needing to be incorporated to continue downscaling and (2)
performance advantage. In the following, a brief review on the latest developments
in mobility-enhanced substrate engineering driven by IC industry requirements is
given and examples of silicon heterostructure substrates of interest for applications
in heterostructure CMOS (HCMOS) are shown.
4.2.1
Orientation-dependent mobility engineering
It is well known that hole mobility is more than doubled on (110) silicon sub-
strates with current flow direction along ⟨110⟩[40,41] compared with conventional

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
105
(111)/<112>
(110)/<110>
100
200
300
(a)
(b)
0.0
5.0 × 1012
Ninv (cm–2)
Electron mobility (cm2V–1S–1)
1.0 × 1013
1.5 × 1013
(110)/<100>
(100)/<110>
(111)/<112>
(110)/<110>
50
100
150
0.0
5.0 × 1012
Ninv (cm–2)
Hole mobility (cm2V–1S–1)
1.0 × 1013
1.5 × 1013
(110)/<100>
(100)/<110>
Figure 4.7
Carrier mobility in the inversion layer with various substrate orien-
tations. Electron mobility (a) is highest on (100) substrate while hole
mobility (b) is highest on (110) substrate with current flow along ⟨110⟩
direction. The gate oxides (about 2 nm thick) were grown simultaneously
in N2O ambient at 800 ◦C in convention furnace [After M. Yang et al.,
IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., 2003(453–456). © 2003 IEEE]
(100) substrates. The carrier mobility dependence on surface orientation is shown
in Figure 4.7. The electron mobility is found to be the highest on (100) substrates.
Uniaxial process-induced strain is generally applied either parallel (longitudinal) or
perpendicular (transverse) to the direction of MOSFET current flow.
Although the hole mobility on (110) surface is about two times as high as that
on (100) surface [40, 42–44], the electron mobility of (110) n-MOSFETs is much
lower and about one-half of that of (100) counterpart [40, 42, 45]. This is a serious

106
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
STI
STI
BOX
(100) or (110) Silicon handle wafer
p-FET on (110) SOI 
or n-FET on (100) SOI
n-FET on (100) epi-layer 
or p-FET on (110) epi-layer
Figure 4.8
Schematic cross-section of CMOS on a hybrid-substrate with p-FET on
(110) surface orientation and n-FET on (100) surface orientation [After
M. Yang et al., IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., 2003(453–456). © 2003 IEEE]
problem for the enhancement of CMOS current drive. As a result, it is important to
develop a new device technology with enhanced electron mobility in the (110)-surface
CMOS. Strained-SOI n-MOSFETs, fabricated on (110)-surface, show an electron
mobility enhancement of 23 per cent along the (001) direction, against that of the
(110)-surface unstrained-bulk MOSFETs [45]. An electron mobility ratio of (110)
strained-SOI n-MOSFETs to the universal mobility of (100) bulk MOSFETs increases
up to 81 per cent.
A schematic cross-section of CMOS on hybrid substrate is shown in Figure 4.8,
including two types of structures: (1) p-FET on (110) SOI and n-FET on (100) silicon
epitaxial layer, and (2) n-FET on (100) SOI and p-FET on (110) silicon epitaxial layer.
The hybrid substrate is formed by layer transfer technique through wafer bonding
(Figure 4.9). Interested readers may refer to an excellent review on hybrid-orientation
technology (HOT) by Yang et al. [46]. The authors describe a novel planar silicon
CMOS structure where n-FETs are fabricated on (100) surface orientation Si and
p-FETs on (110) surface orientation on the same die, through wafer bonding and
selective silicon epitaxy.
4.2.2
Mobility enhancement by process-induced stress
The influence of externally applied stress on the electrical performance of integrated
circuits has been an active area of research for almost 30 years. STI can create large
stresses due to thermal mismatch, oxide growth and trench fill, and the sharp corners
at the top and bottom of the trenches are major contributors to the stress behaviour.
A major concern when scaling local oxide isolation (LOCOS) and SIT structures is
the build-up of localised stress near the isolation edge, often leading to dislocation
formation and degrading device characteristics.
In the front-end process, STI is a major source of stress in the MOSFET channel.
The proximity and amount of the stress in the silicon substrate limits the density of

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
107
(100) substrate
(100) substrate
(100) SOI
(110) SOI
(100) Si handle 
wafer
(100) Si handle 
wafer
(110) Si handle 
wafer
(110) Si handle 
wafer
(110) substrate
Step 1: Buried oxide formation and H I/I.
Step 2: Flip-bond implanted wafer to handle wafer 
with different orientation.
Step 3: Wafer split and SOI thinning
(110) substrate
Type A
Type B
Oxide
Oxide
Oxide
Oxide
Oxide
Oxide
Oxide
Oxide
Oxide
Oxide
H
H
Figure 4.9
Process flow to form the hybrid-substrates (type A and type B) [After
M. Yang et al., IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., 2003(453–456). © 2003 IEEE]
ICs, and when too much stress is exerted in the silicon, it will yield by releasing dis-
locations that lead to higher leakage currents and degraded device performance. Thin
films such as silicon nitride, silicon dioxide and polySi are frequently encountered in
device fabrication; these films contain intrinsic stresses as a result of the deposition
process.
The advantage of uniaxial stress in Si process flow is that compressive strain
is introduced into the p-type and tensile strain in the n-MOSFETs to improve both
the electron and hole mobilities on the same wafer. Three state-of-the-art techniques
for introducing uniaxial stress in the Si channel are described below. Transmission
emission micrograph (TEM) micrographs of 45 nm p- and n-MOSFETs are shown in
Figure 4.10. In the first approach [29], reported by Intel, Texas Instruments, Applied
Materials and recently by IBM [47], TSMC, and Freescale [48], a local epitaxial SiGe
film is grown in the source and drain regions and introduces uniaxial stress into the
Si channel. The process flow consists of the following steps: the Si source and drain

108
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
High stress film
n-type MOSFET
p-type MOSFET
45 nm
Si1-xGex
Si1-xGex
Figure 4.10
Transistor cross-section of 45-nm gate length strained-Si transistors
used at 90-nm technology node [After S. E. Thompson, IEEE IDEAS
Symp. Proc., 2005(14–16). © 2005 IEEE]
are etched, creating an Si recess, and then SiGe (for p-channel) or SiC (for n-channel)
is epitaxially grown in the source and drain. This creates primarily a uniaxial com-
pressive or tensile stress, respectively, in the channel of the MOSFET. For 17 per
cent Ge, 500–900 MPa of channel stress is created, depending on the proximity of
the SiGe to the channel. Impressive 60–90 per cent drive current enhancements on
short devices (∼35 nm) have been demonstrated, which offer greater device perfor-
mance than alternative Si device enhancement concepts, such as multigates or high-k
dielectrics.
To fabricate the strained-Si, in post-spacer etch, a Si recess etch is inserted fol-
lowed by selective epitaxial Si1−xGex deposition [see Figure 4.11(a)]. The silicon
etch is blocked from n-channel devices and polySi gates. The Si recess etch removes
100 nm vertically and 70 nm laterally from the p-channel source and drain. Next,
epitaxial Si1−xGex is grown in the source and drain [see Figure 4.11(b)].
The Si1−xGex growth is targeted to reduce the external resistance. The mismatch
in the Si1−xGex to Si lattice causes the smaller lattice constant Si channel to be under
compressive strain. The next process flow is conventional except for the salicide
[see Figure 4.11(c)]. Si1−xGex in the source and drain requires extensive changes
to the salicide since Ge inhibits the CoSi2 transition to the low-resistivity disilicide
phase [33]. To solve this problem, NiSi instead of CoSi2 is used. Nickel silicide
requires extensive changes since all formation and post-formation process steps need
to be less than 500 ◦C.
After salicide formation, longitudinal uniaxial tensile strain is introduced into the
n-MOSFET by engineering the tensile stress and thickness of the Si nitride-capping
layer [see Figure 4.11(d)]. The thickness of the capping layer is approximately 80
nm. The capping layer introduces longitudinal tensile and compressive out-of-plane
(z) stress [38, 49]. Florida object oriented three-dimensional finite element process
simulator (FLOOPS) [50, 51], is a very useful technology computer aided design

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
109
45 nm
SiGe
600 MPa
400 MPa
200 MPa
1000 MPa
MPa
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1000 MPa
0.0
0.1
m
Si
Si0.83Ge0.17
Figure 4.11
Stress contours for 45 nm gate length transistor with Si0.83Ge0.17 in
the source and drain [After S. E. Thompson, IEEE IDEAS Symp. Proc.,
2005(14–16). © 2005 IEEE]
Gate
Gate
SiGe channel 
stressor
P-channel
N-channel
STI
STI
STI
Si recess etch
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
NiSi
Gate
Figure 4.12
(a–d) Process-induced strained-Si formation process flow [After
S. E. Thompson, IEEE IDEAS Symp. Proc., 2005(14–16). © 2005
IEEE]
(TCAD) aid to calculate the channel stress for both n- and p-channel MOSFETs. For
a nominal 45-nm gate length transistor used at the 90-nm technology node, ∼500 MPa
of uniaxial longitudinal compressive stress is introduced into the p-channel MOSFET
in the inversion layer, as demonstrated by stress contours in Figure 4.12.

110
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
The use of Si1−xGex in the p-channel source and drain and a tensile capping film,
and capping film strain relaxation off the p-MOSFET, allows independent targeting
of the n- and p-type MOSFET Si channel strain. The channel stresses are predom-
inantly uniaxial, which is desirable since uniaxial stress offers many advantages in
electrical performance over biaxial stress, as will be discussed later. Stress-induced
tensile capping films are adopted at the 90-nm technology generation and can improve
n-channel device saturated drive current 10–15 per cent [28,30]. However, the tensile
stress from the capping layer needs to be relaxed from the p-channel device since it
causes significant degradation [28,30,38,49]. There are several techniques to almost
completely neutralise the capping layer strain; one is the use of a Ge implant and
masking layer.
A second, less complex technique for introducing strain in the MOSFET is the use
of a tensile and/or compressive capping layer [52, 53]. The capping films are intro-
duced either as a permanent layer post salicide, as discussed here, or as a sacrificial
layer before source and drain anneal, as will be discussed next. A dual capping layer
approach enabled by the creation of very high-compressive and high tensile stress SiN
has been reported [54]. SiN layers with more than 2 GPa of tensile stress and more
than 2.5 GPa of compressive stress have been developed by Applied Materials. IBM,
AMD and Fujitsu [52,53] have reported a CMOS architecture in which high-tensile
and high-compressive Si nitride layers are selectively deposited on n-MOSFET and
p-MOSFET, respectively. This dual-stress liner (DSL) architecture creates longi-
tudinal uniaxial tensile and compressive stress in the Si channel to simultaneously
improve both n- and p-channel transistors.
The process flow consists of a uniform deposition of a highly tensile Si3N4 liner
post silicidation over the entire wafer, followed by patterning and etching the film
off p-channel transistors. Next, a highly compressive SiN layer is deposited, and this
film is patterned and etched from n-channel regions. High-stress compressive films
can induce channel stress comparable in magnitude to the first-generation embedded
SiGe in the source and drain. The advantages of DSL flow over epitaxial SiGe are
reduced process complexity and integration issues.
Higher channel strain is possible by increased strain in the (1) nitride-capping
layer, (2) epitaxial Si1−xGex by higher Ge concentration or (3) fabrication of the
epitaxialSi1−xGex closertotheSichannel. Morecomplexstructurestointegratestrain
are also possible, such as epitaxial SiC in the source and drain of n-channel MOSFETs,
that may offer higher channel strain than the capping-layer approach or strained-
Si1−xGex in the source and drain for uniaxial tensile strain introduction. There are
also numerous other techniques and process steps to introduce strain such as high-
strain capping layers introduced before polySi gate crystallisation [55], high-stress
shallow-trench isolation and silicide [56].
In the near term for future technology generations, combinations of all these tech-
niques will be used. This will place additional restrictions and requirements on new
structures and materials. For example, for alternate device structures and materials
such as FinFET, tri-gate and high-k gate dielectrics to be competitive with strained
planar CMOS, strain or some other mobility-enhancing technique is needed in these
structures as well [57].

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
111
200
150
100
50
0
1998
1999
2000
DC NMOS
DC NMOS
IBM NMOS
IBM NMOS
DC PMOS
DC PMOS
IBM PMOS
IBM PMOS
2001
Year
fD fmax (GHz)
2002
2003
2004
Figure 4.13
Cut-off frequencies fT (filled symbols) and fmax (open symbols) of
strained-Si FETs [After V. Palankovski et al., Asia Pacific Microwave
Conference Abstr. and Proc., 2004]
4.2.3
Mobility enhancement by substrate-induced strain
Through the conventional scaling of MOSFET devices via gate oxide thickness,
SDE, junction depths and gate lengths have enabled MOSFET gate lengths to be
reduced from 10 µm in the 1970s to 0.1 µm or below now. The push to scale the
conventional MOSFET continues to show remarkable progress [58]. Figure 4.13
summarisesreportedvaluesforthecut-offfrequenciesfT andfmax. Inordertomaintain
this rapid rate of improvement, aggressive engineering of the source/drain and channel
regions is required. It is also important to research in the area of materials compatible
with Si technology and device structures for improving the speed of VLSI circuits.
SiGe has emerged as a promising material because of its electrical and material
properties.
Currently, SiGe has the major impact on silicon device technology primarily
becauseofitselectricalpropertiesandalsobecauseofitsothermaterialproperties. The
areas of major impact include bipolar/BiCMOS technology and CMOS technology.
There has been tremendous progress to grow device quality SiGe films. The initial
growth technique used was Si MBE but this technique was replaced by high-quality
chemicalvapourdeposition(CVD)techniquessuchasUHVCVD.Theabilitytoinsitu
dope SiGe films with B and P and incorporate C in the film has greatly extended the
use of the film and the performance levels achieved with it. The most mature and
well-known example application of SiGe is SiGe BiCMOS technology, where it is
employed in manufacturing processes [59, 60]. Because of the application potential
of SiGe BiCMOS in wireless, wired, storage, test and other areas SiGe revenues are
expected to grow at a rate of over 30 per cent per year.

112
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
SiGe applications in hetero-FET technologies has also been demonstrated. SiGe
has been used to advantage for extrinsic as well as intrinsic applications. However,
there are no qualified production technologies using SiGe in FET structures. For the
CMOS technology, although the SiGe channel has been used to enhance the perfor-
mance of p-MOS, a desired improvement of the complimentary n-MOS transistors is
notachievablewithSiGe. OxidesgrownonSiGehavepoorcharacteristicssotherehas
been some concern about the quality of its use as a gate material where it is deposited
on the gate oxide. Some initial reliability studies have revealed an enhanced degra-
dation in polySiGe gate devices compared to polySi gate devices when the polySiGe
was deposited on the gate oxide [61].
SiGe has been used to enhance the intrinsic conduction in FET structures using
bandgap engineering. Several suggested structures for a CMOS type of process may
be grouped into three categories: (1) pseudomorphic compressively strained-SiGe
channels [62], (2) tensile strained surface channel [37, 63, 64] and (3) modulation
doped buried channel MODFETs [65]. For these three classes of devices the primary
aspects of each are summarised in Table 4.3.
There are two major extrinsic application areas of SiGe in hetero-FET struc-
tures: that of replacing the gate polySi with gate polySiGe and using it for raised
source/drains. There are three advantages for using it as a gate material: (1) lower
thermal budget than silicon [66], (2) superior boron dopant activation [67] and
(3) a variable workfunction p-type gate [68]. The second extrinsic application raised
source/drain, which is currently being used in CMOS technology. The fundamen-
tal problem is realising a shallow junction contact to the FET channel with a low
resistance contact typically done by forming a silicide. Advanced scaled devices
Table 4.3
Comparison of various CMOS SiGe FET structures [After
D. L. Harame et al., Appl. Surf. Sci., Vol. 224, 2004(9–17).]
Parameter
Pseudomorphic
Tensile
Modulation-doped
compressive
strained-Si
strained-SiGe
strained-SiGe
surface channel
channel
Substrate
Silicon
SiGe on
SiGe on
relaxed buffer
relaxed buffer
RMS cross-hatch (nm)
none
2–10
2–10
Threading
dislocations (cm−2)
negligible
105–107
105–107
Stable at 1000 ◦C
Yes
Yes
No
Layer structure
simple
moderate
complex
p/n-channel
buried/surface
surface/surface
buried/buried
p/n µ enhancement
(1.5–2.0)/1.0
(1.4–1.8)/2.0
∼5/3
p/n gm enhancement
(1.2–1.6)/1.0
(1.4–1.7)/1.6
∼2.2–1.3
Projected stage delay
improvement (%)
10–20
30–40
100

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
113
require shallow junctions that are problematic in achieving low resistance. A raised
S/D structure prior to S/D implant enables a shallower junction contact to the device.
Using SiGe in the raised source/drain can reduce the thermal budget of the selective
epitaxial growth [69] and reduce the contact resistance of the silicide/semiconductor
interface [70]. Though Co has been shown to be problematic for use with SiGe, it
has been demonstrated that Ni and Pt form good low-resistance silicides on SiGe
layers [71].
It is well known that due to lattice mismatch, an epitaxial ultrathin Si layer grown
pseudomorphically on relaxed-SiGe layer on Si experiences a biaxial compressive
(tensile) strain, provided that the layer thickness is below the critical thickness [59].
This strain leads to a modification of both the conduction and valence bands. It lifts the
degeneracy of the light and heavy hole bands and lowers the spin-orbit band resulting
in reduction of inter-band scattering and improvement of hole mobility. In order
to investigate and design strained-Si device structures, it is necessary to model the
carrier mobilities in these devices. In the following, the theoretical and experimental
mobility reported to describe the doping and material composition dependence for
the strained-Si material are discussed. Reported enhancements with local and global
strain engineering techniques are shown in Table 4.4.
The presence of the Ge atoms is responsible in modifying the band structure of
strained-Si1−xGex layer. In SiGe, Ge composition may change from 0.0 to 1.0, and
this change is non-linear in nature, giving rise to Si like band structure when x < 0.85
and Ge like band structure when x > 0.85. As is well known, the strain in the silicon
layer causes the six-fold degenerate valleys of the silicon conduction band minimum
to split into two groups: two lowered valleys with the longitudinal effective mass
axis perpendicular to the interface, and four raised valleys with the longitudinal mass
Table 4.4
Reported enhancements with local and global strain engineering
techniques
Manufacturer
Strain
Lg (nm)
NMOS Idsat
PMOS Idsat
References
type
enhancement
enhancement
Intel
local
45
10%
25%
[28]
AMD
global
25
25%
n/a
[32]
IBM/Sony/Toshiba/
local
45
11%
20%
[53]
AMD/Chartered
on SOI
AMD
local
40
13%
20%
[72]
on SOI
Freescale/TSMC/
global
150
28%
12%
[73]
SOITEC
on SOI
IBM
global
67
35%
n/a
[74]
Intel
global
140
24%
n/a
[75]
Toshiba
global
40
n/a
19%
[76]
TSMC
global
60
15%
n/a
[77]

114
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
∆4
∆2
∆2
∆4
∆6
~0.67y
~0.75y
~0.47y
~0.57y
~0.47y
~1.12–0.4y
~0.6y
Relaxed 
Si1–yGey
Strained 
Si1–xGex 
Unstrained 
Si 
~1.12
Strained 
Si 
lh
~0.6x
~0.1y
~0.1y
hh
hh
lh, hh
Figure 4.14
Bandgap alignment (in eV) of strained-Si relative to relaxed-Si1−yGey,
strained-Si1−xGex and Si [After V. Palankovski et al., Asia Pacific
Microwave Conference Abstr. and Proc., 2004]
axis parallel to the interface. The combination of a lighter effective mass and reduced
intervalley scattering gives rise to higher electron mobility and originates spectacular
electron velocity overshoot.
For Ge < 0.85, compressively straining SiGe leads to splitting of the six-fold
degenerate 6-valleys in Si into two-fold degenerate 2 valleys higher in energy
and four-fold degenerate 4 valleys lower in energy. Figure 4.14 shows the band
alignment of strained-Si on SiGe relative to relaxed-SiGe and unstrained-Si. The fig-
ure shows the strain-induced splitting of the conduction and valence bands, together
with the band edge discontinuities, as a function of the germanium content y in
the SiGe layer. The higher in-plane effective electron mass of 4 valleys leads
to a reduction of the electron mobility for strained-SiGe. In the case of tensile
strained-Si, the direction of motion of the splitting is reversed with the 4 valley
moving lower in energy and 4 higher. The lower in-plane effective mass of elec-
trons in the 2 valleys and the reduction of inter-valley phonon scattering lead to
an enhanced electron mobility. In the calculations a linear dependence of the dis-
continuities on y has been assumed, which gives a good agreement with reported
data [60].
In Si-heterostructures, the mobility enhancement factor is defined as the ratio
between the extracted mobility from strained-Si MOSFETs and the extracted mobil-
ity in conventional Si MOSFETs processed in same run. Figure 4.15(a) shows the
mobility enhancement ratio for electrons as a function of the Ge content y in the SiGe
buffer layer. The figure compares experimental data reported by various research
groups. As can be seen in the figure, the enhancement of the electron mobility
increases gradually with the Ge content y for y < 0.2 and tends to saturate for
higher values. It is noted that the electron mobility enhancement of more than 50
per cent is observed in a wide range of effective fields (up to 2 MV/cm) and doping
concentrations (up to 6 × 1018 cm−3). Similarly, Figure 4.15(b) shows the mobility
enhancement ratio for holes as a function of the Ge content of the Si1−yGey buffer

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
115
2.6
exp. – Stanford
exp. – MIT
exp. – IBM
exp. – Hitachi
exp. – Toshiba
MC – Rashed
MC – Vogelsang
MC – Takagi
own MC data
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0
5
10
15
Ge content y (%)
20
25
30
35
40
Mobility enhancement
2.6
(b)
(a)
exp. – Stanford
exp. – MIT
exp. – IBM
exp. – Hitachi
exp. – Toshiba
exp. – AMD
MC – Oberhuber
MC – Bufler
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0
5
10
15
Ge content y (%)
20
25
30
35
40
Mobility enhancement
Figure 4.15
Mobility enhancement ratio for (a) electrons and (b) holes as a function
of the Ge content y in the Si1−yGey buffer layer [After V. Palankovski
et al., Asia Pacific Microwave Conference Abstr. and Proc., 2004]
layer. The figure compares experimental data from various research groups. It can
be seen that the enhancement of the hole mobility increases gradually with the Ge
content y for y ≤0.4.
Transport properties of strained-Si and SiGe layers have been theoretically inves-
tigated using Monte Carlo calculations [78–80] or near equilibrium solutions to
the Boltzmann equation [81]. To enable predictive simulations using TCAD tools
a reliable set of models for the Si/SiGe material system is required. A com-
prehensive set of strain-dependent models for parameters such as the low-field,
high-field and the surface mobility, energy relaxation time and carrier life times

116
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
for TCAD purposes is necessary. For this, appropriate models for the band
structure parameters and deformation potentials must be used. Pseudopotential
calculations for the transport properties of strained-Si or SiGe have been reported in
References 81 and 82.
MonteCarlosimulation, whichaccountsforalloyscatteringandthesplittingofthe
anisotropicconductionbandvalleysduetostrain[83], incombinationwithanaccurate
ionised impurity scattering model [84], allows one to obtain results for strained-Si
for the complete range of donor and acceptor concentrations and Ge contents in the
Si1−yGey buffer layer. Strain effects on the device characteristics have been studied
by Monte Carlo device simulation [85]. Use of the same functional form for Si to fit
the doping dependence of the in-plane and the perpendicular mobility component for
y = 0 and y = 1 (Si and strained-Si on Ge) has been reported [86]. Other possible
approaches are to use analytical models [87] or tabulated Monte Carlo data in a device
simulator [88].
Figure 4.16 shows the in-plane (parallel) and the perpendicular minority electron
mobility in strained-Si as a function of y in the Si1−yGey buffer at 300 K for different
acceptor doping concentrations. Figure 4.17 shows the minority electron mobility
in strained-Si1−xGex as a function of acceptor concentration NA in comparison with
Monte Carlo simulation data both for in-plane and perpendicular directions. It is seen
that the electron mobility in perpendicular (vertical) direction is enhanced for typical
base doping concentrations (above 1018 cm−3) and typical Ge content, x ≤0.2 in
SiGe HBTs. The model parameters used for strained-SiGe on Si and for strained-Si
on relaxed-SiGe at 300 K are summarised in Table 4.5.
Ge content y (%)
0.0
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0.2
0.4
MC data NA = le14 cm–3(par)
MC data NA = le14 cm–3(parp)
MC data NA = le18 cm–3(par)
MC data NA = le18 cm–3(parp)
Model NA = le14 cm–3(par)
Model NA = le14 cm–3(parp)
Model NA = le18 cm–3(par)
Model NA = le18 cm–3(parp)
0.6
0.8
1.0
Electron mobility (cm2/ Vs)
Figure 4.16
Minority electron mobility in strained-Si as a function of the Ge content
y in the Si1−yGey buffer layer for different acceptor doping concentra-
tions [After V. Palankovski et al., Asia Pacific Microwave Conference
Abstr. and Proc., 2004]

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
117
Electron mobility (cm2/ Vs)
0
1015
1016
1017
Acceptor concentration NA (cm–3)
1018
1019
1020
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
MC data Si
MC perp. Si0.9Ge0.1
MC par. Si0.9Ge0.1
Model Si
Model par. Si0.9Ge0.1
Model perp. Si0.9Ge0.1
Exp. data Si
Exp. data Si0.9Ge0.1


Figure 4.17
Minority electron mobility in Si1−xGex as a function of NA and x:
comparison with measurements and Monte Carlo simulation data for
in-plane and perpendicular directions [After V. Palankovski et al., Asia
Pacific Microwave Conference Abstr. and Proc., 2004]
Table 4.5
Parameter values for the majority/minority electron mobility in
strained-SiGe and Si at 300 K [After V. Palankovski et al., Asia
Pacific Microwave Conference Abstr. and Proc., 2004.]
Parameter
Si
Ge (on Si)
SSi(µ∥)
Strained-Si(µ⊥)
µLn(cm2/Vs)
1430
560
2420
502
µmid
maj (cm2/Vs)
44
80
95
20
µhi
maj (cm2/Vs)
57
59
123
25
µmid
min (cm2/Vs)
141
124
232
49
µhi
min (cm2/Vs)
218
158
315
62
α
0.65
0.65
0.65
0.65
β
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
4.3
Channel engineering
The simplest SiGe CMOS structure is the pseudomorphic compressively strained-
SiGe channel. Since the band offsets are almost entirely in the valence band, the
holes are confined away from the interface and the mobility is significantly improved.
Threshold voltage implants in the channel may degrade the mobility. At high over-
drive, a parallel surface channel conduction path exists that further degrades the

118
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
2.2 nm 
Tox
Relaxed SiGe
Epitaxial growth of strained Si on 
relaxed SiGe by UHV/CVD
STI isolation and well formation
Gate oxidation
Poly gate deposition and patterning
S/D implant and spacer 
formation
Raised S/D (RSD) formation by 
selective Si epitaxy
Salicidation and metallisation
Strained Si 
channel
Graded SiGE buffer
15 m
Si substrate
Poly 
gate
~10 nm
Figure 4.18
Strained-Si CMOS device cross-section and process flow in a 0.13-µm
process [After K. Rim et al., Proc. VSLI Tech. Symp., 2002(98–99).
© 2002 IEEE]
overall mobility. With the rapid improvement in CMOS performance and the lack of
improvement in the n-FET, these devices have not found widespread use.
The replacement of the channel material by strained-Si, which utilizes an under-
lying relaxed-SiGe layer for its functioning, renders a solution to the problem since it
leads to enhancement of both the electron and hole mobilities. Strained-Si/SiGe FETs
exhibit superior performance for radio frequency (RF) applications. The strained-Si
CMOS and the MODFET CMOS structures require a relaxed-SiGe buffer layer.
The structure and process of a 0.13 µm strained-Si CMOS fabricated on tensile
strained-Si epitaxially grown on a relaxed-SiGe/SiGe buffer layer [89] is shown
in Figure 4.18. The three substrate regions included in the strained-Si hetero-FET
devices are (1) tensile strained-Si device, (2) relaxed-SiGe and (3) SiGe buffer layers.
The SiGe buffer layer gradually increases the Ge content (15–30 per cent Ge)
until the layer relaxes by means of a high density of misfit dislocations. The high-
defect density in the SiGe buffer layers is shown in Figure 4.19. The relaxed-SiGe is
a high-quality layer with low (105–107 cm−2) defect density on which a thin tensile
strained-Si layer is grown. The asymmetric strain in the silicon changes the band
structure and splits both the conduction and valence bands, increasing the mobility
of both electrons and holes [37, 90]. The band alignment is also changed such that
electrons are confined to the strained-Si layer but holes may also be confined to a
parasitic buried channel at the relaxed-SiGe layer interface as shown in Figure 4.20.
Strained-Si CMOS is the most promising SiGe hetero-FET device candidate because
of its similarity with conventional CMOS processing, since it is a material innovation.
The improvement in mobility is a function of the Ge content achieved in the
relaxed layer with electron mobility plateauing after 20 per cent and hole mobility
continuing to improve up to 40 per cent Ge. The electron mobility of strained-Si FETs
is improved by 70 per cent on relaxed Si0.8Ge0.2 buffer layers and hole mobility is
improved by 70 per cent on relaxed-Si0.6Ge0.4 buffer layers [33]. Significantly, these
mobility enhancements of 50 per cent have been shown for Eeff up to 2 MV/cm−1 and

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
119
Region 2 
SiGe = 29%
94% 
relaxed 
(XRD)
Region 1 
SiGe step
graded 
buffer
Region 3 
Tensile strained 
silicon layer
Si(100)
Figure 4.19
TEM micrographs of tensile strained-Si quantum well. Note the three
regions; (1) SiGe step graded buffer, (2) relaxed-SiGe and (3) device
layers [After K. Rim, Application of Silicon-Based Heterostruc-
tures to Enhamced Mobility Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Field-Effect
Transistors, PhD Thesis, Stanford University, 1999]
Strained Si
Unstrained Si
Relaxed Si0.7Ge0.3
~165 meV
~180 meV
HH, LH
> ±30 meV
~140 meV
LH
Ev
Ec
HH
∆Es~140 meV
∆Es~200 meV
∆2
∆4
∆6
Figure 4.20
Band alignment in strained-Si CMOS [After K. Rim, Application
of Silicon-Based Heterostructures to Enhamced Mobility Metal-
Oxide-Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistors, PhD Thesis, Stanford
University, 1999]

120
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
channel doping above 6 × 1018 cm−3 [64], which easily covers the range of channel
doping (up to 6 × 1018 cm−3), and electric fields (up to 1 MV/cm) found in CMOS
down to 50 nm devices.
At moderate Ge content of ∼15 per cent enhancements in ION of 15–20 per cent
have also been experimentally demonstrated. There are several challenges in realising
these benefits in conventional CMOS processes [91], which include:
1.
material quality of the epitaxial layers;
2.
controlling the threading dislocations from the high Ge content (20–30 per cent)
SiGe buffer layers;
3.
thermal conductivity ∼15× lower in 20 per cent SiGe, which reduces the
performance enhancements;
4.
process issues arising from the presence of the SiGe layer (e.g., dopant diffu-
sion (B reduction, as enhancement), isolation, oxidation and silicidation of high
Ge content SiGe layers). In spite of these difficulties, strained-Si CMOS looks
promising, particularly for nodes beyond 90 nm.
The MODFET is the third in class of SiGe hetero-FET devices that have been
proposed for very low-noise high fT devices for RF/analog applications. Very high
mobilities can be achieved with modulation doping and buried undoped channels.
For example, mobilities as high as 2800 cm2/Vs can been achieved in n-type doped
Si/SiGe MODFETs [92], an increase of 3–5 times, compared to unstrained Si
n-MOSFETs. The hole mobility of compressively strained layers on SiGe shows
even greater enhancement compared to unstrained Si. Si0.2Ge0.8-channel quantum
wells grown on relaxed-Si0.7Ge0.3 have produced mobilities over 1000 cm2/Vs, while
Ge quantum wells grown on Si0.4Ge0.6 have yielded room temperature hole mobil-
ities around 1800 cm2/Vs [93]. The later value is about ten times higher than the
hole mobility in Si p-MOSFETs for the same carrier density. Process integration is
more difficult for a true CMOS MODFET implementation, which requires both p-
and n-type modulation doped profiles, which makes the approach less attractive. An
implementation for CMOS in which the n-FET is modulation doped and the p-FET
has a very high Ge content buried channel above the strained-Si channel has been
suggested by Armstrong [94]. Owing to complexity, this approach is not optimal.
4.4
Gate engineering
MOSFET gate engineering has become an increasingly important technology com-
ponent in the overall transistor design. The demand for gate engineering has been
driven by several technical concerns. Gate depletion and boron penetration through
thin gate oxide place directly opposing requirements on the gate engineering for
advanced MOSFETs. The traditional gate material for n- and p-MOSFETs is heavily
doped n-type (n+-polySi). The n+-polySi gate enables the n-MOSFET to operate in
a surface-channel mode while the p-MOSFET operates in a buried-channel mode.
To have more balanced devices and improved short-channel effects, the p-MOSFET
shouldalsooperateinthesurface-channelmodeandthereforeshouldhaveap+-polySi

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
121
gate. However, for scaling in the deep sub-micron and beyond 100 nm, the effects
of gate depletion and boron penetration become the major concern in devices incor-
porating p+-polySi gates. The problem of B penetration in p+-polySi-gated devices
would obviously be aggravated in advanced CMOS technologies with ultrathin SiO2
(<3 nm).
In general, the gate electrode should be doped very heavily in order to decrease
the gate depletion effects. For nanoscale devices, if an insufficient doping level in
the gate is obtained owing to the use of a low-thermal budget and/or low implant
dose to avoid B penetration, the polySi gate depletion effect (PDE) will become
unacceptable. Figure 4.21(a) shows the poly gate depletion due to a relatively low-
doped gate. However, the high amount of dopant density in the poly gate causes a
high-density charge layer at the polysilicon gate–oxide interface when gate depletion
occurs [see Figure 4.21(b)]. These parasitic charges behave as charge centres for
scattering to the carriers in the channel region. This degrades the drain current.
Process simulation results of p- and n-MOSFETs with various gate doping profiles
using TSUPREM4 are shown in Figure 4.22. The goal of the process simulations is
to simulate devices for a fixed threshold voltage (Vt). The simulated p-MOS devices
have a gate doping of 1 × 1020 cm−3 (p+ gate), down to 5 × 1013 cm−3 (p-gate and
n-gate). However, such low doping concentrations are not useful, because of very
Oxide 
Substrate
Oxide 
Substrate
n+ source
n+ drain
n+ source
n+ drain
Gate deletion 
with less charges
High dense 
charge layer
Poly gate
Poly gate
(a)
(b)
Vd
Vg–Vt> 0
Vd
Vg–Vt> 0
VS
VS
Figure 4.21
Schematic diagrams of (a) polySi gate-depletion due to a relatively
low-doped gate and (b) high-density charge layer at polySi-gate oxide
interface [After R. Komaragiri et al., Proc. SAFE, 2004(704–709)]

122
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
–6
–4
–2
0
2
PMOS on state
n poly gate 1017 cm–3 
p poly gate 1018 cm–3 
p+ poly gate 1020 cm–3 
Capacitance (Fcm−2)
–0.0000002
0.0000000
0.0000002
0.0000004
0.0000006
0.0000008
#2
#1
0.0000010
0.0000012
0.0000014
0.0000016
0.0000018
PMOS off state
4
6
VG (volt)
tox = 2 nm
Figure 4.22
C-V characteristics of a n-MOS capacitor illustrating gate depletion
(adjusted for same flat-band voltage) [After R. Komaragiri et al., Proc.
SAFE, 2004(704–709)]
high poly gate resistance. The optimal value of the poly gate doping depends upon
the channel length and lies in the range of 1017–1019 cm−3.
In Figure 4.22, one can observe a severe depletion in the simulated C-V char-
acteristics of a low-doped (1017 cm−3) p-poly gate MOS capacitor. The gate starts
depleting at around Vg = −1 volt (the threshold region of a p-MOS) in the low
doped p-type case. In case of a highly doped p+-poly gate, one can see the gate
depletion at a higher gate voltage. The gate depletion is totally absent in the case
of an n-doped poly gate in negative bias, as shown in Figure 4.22. Only at positive
gate bias, the gate depletion occurs. However, in this region the p-MOSFET is turned
off, so that gate depletion does not degrade drive current. Even at high doping con-
centrations (p+ doped gate, Figure 4.22), gate depletion will occur by introducing
more parasitic gate charges. The effects of reduced capacitance and drain current are
shown in Figure 4.22. Gate depletion also reduces the total gate capacitance. The
replacement of a poly silicon gate with a metal gate even though it removes the poly
depletion and remote Coulomb scattering, is difficult to implement in dual workfunc-
tion gate architectures but a single workfunction may be possible in fully-depleted
SOI technologies.
The previously described limitations have given rise to interest in alternative mate-
rials for both the gate electrode and gate dielectric. The threshold voltage instability is
due to shifts in the flat-band voltage through both the gate workfunction, which would

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
123
be lower than that of a degenerate gate, and the charges induced and/or introduced in
the gate oxide and at the interfaces. This problem would be exacerbated in nanoscale
devices where channel dopant fluctuation further worsens the situation. However,
these problems may be alleviated by introducing nitrogen in the oxide and/or the
gate, as will be shown later. It is worth to note that the tunnelling current increases
exponentially with decreasing oxide thickness, and for 2 nm oxide this current can
be as high as 1–10 A/cm2 [95].
Recently the introduction of a metal gate with a mid-gap workfunction alongside
high-k dielectric for the gate insulator has been proposed. In relation to Si/SiGe/Si
MOSFETs, such high-k dielectrics may be favourable in terms of increasing the
transconductance while still maintaining lower power-delay product compared to
conventional Si devices. Examples of alternative metal gate electrodes are damascene
metals W/TiN or Al/TiN [96], copper [97] and tantalum [98]. Such metal gates can
indeed be used to eliminate gate depletion and avoid the problems generated by
B penetration. This, however, yields a buried-channel device, which suffers from
more short-channel effects than the surface channel device, but with better channel
mobility. However, the thermal budget needed may be incompatible with standard
CMOS processing for some metals.
As discussed above, the B penetration effects in polySi-gated devices that shift
the threshold voltage of the MOSFET is one of the consequences. Poly-Si1−xGex gate
material is compatible with standard Si processing techniques. It is suitable in dual
p+/n+ gate technology and has the potential of not only suppressing the effects of B
penetration and gate depletion but more importantly the ability to adjust the threshold
voltage [99,100]. The diffusivity of B in polySi1−xGex is smaller than in polySi [101]
and as such helps in suppressing B penetration through the oxide because B can be
activated at lower thermal budgets with even better activation levels. Moreover, the
polySi1−xGex material has also been shown to benefit from an improved resistivity,
compared to polySi, owing to the presence of Ge [100]. The tunable workfunction of
the polySi1−xGex gate can be used to adjust the threshold voltage, while engineering
the channel doping profile can be used to control short channel effects [102].
Depending on the Ge content in the gate, the valence band edge can be raised up
because Ge has a smaller energy gap than Si and therefore the polySi1−xGex would
have an energy gap in between that of Si and Ge. For a degenerate p+-polySiGe gate
material, the Fermi level would approximately be at the valence band edge. That
is how Ge can be used to modify the workfunction of the gate that is, adjustment
of the threshold voltage of a MOS device. Gate depletion effect, which is due to
insufficient implant dose and/or insufficient activation, would also be suppressed
in devices incorporating polySi1−xGex gates. As a result, one can obtain a much
lower threshold voltage instability due to effect of B penetration and gate depletion.
Therefore, by employing a p+-polySi1−xGex gate, not only the threshold voltage is
adjusted by changing the Ge content in the gate to match that of a n-MOSFET, but
also the threshold shifts that are caused by B penetration and gate depletion effects
are suppressed.
The advantages of gate engineering may be achieved together with the channel
engineering, as both physical characteristics will affect the nominal threshold voltage

124
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
value given by the well-known expression for n-MOSFETs
Vt = VFB + 2	F + QB
Cox
(4.1)
where
VFB = 	ms −Qox
Cox
(4.2)
and Vt is the threshold voltage, VFB the flat-band voltage, 	F the distance from
Fermi level to the intrinsic Fermi level, QB the depletion charge, 	ms is the metal-
semiconductor work function, Qox is the oxide charge density, and Cox is the unit
area capacitance of the gate insulator. From the above expressions, Vt depends on the
gate material as well as the doping concentration in the channel.
Low threshold voltage values may be achieved by (1) adjusting gate insulator
thickness and (2) tuning surface doping concentration as low as possible. High-quality
gate insulator and subthreshold characteristics optimisation require modifications of
the device vertical structure and low thermal budget. An alternative way to give
low threshold voltage is to use SOI, where a fully depleted architecture can yield
subthreshold slope approaching an ideal 60 mV/decade by using ultra thin films
[103,104]. Practically, ultrathin SOI films are difficult to control and use of partially
depleted SOI has been more prevalent [105]. Lim et al. [106] have reported on
the scaling of complementary threshold voltages for fully depleted SOI n- and p-
channel transistors using polySiGe as gate material. The authors have shown that
a carefully optimised polySiGe gate, in a FDSOI transistor allows better control of
threshold voltage than a conventional design, which requires a very highly doped
layer. Via simulation, it has been shown that a p+-polySi0.4Ge0.6 gate can yield a
similar workfunction to a mid-gap metal, but at the same time offer much greater
compatibility with conventional silicon processing.
As Si1−xGex is one of the few materials that offers the possibility of a mid-gap
gate material that is fairly compatible to the standard Si CMOS processing, it is now
being considered seriously. A comparison of the energy levels of bulk-Si, Si1−xGex
and Ge [107] are shown in Figure 4.23. The electron affinities of Si and Ge are
E0 
Silicon
Germanium
0.66 eV
1.12 eV
4.05 eV
4.00 eV
GexSi1–x
Ec
Ev
Eg (x)
Figure 4.23
Energy levels of Si and Ge. For Si1−xGex the valence band level will
be in between the values for Si and Ge

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
125
similar, but because of the difference in bandgap the valence band edge of Ge lies
more than 0.5 eV closer to the free electron energy than is the case for Si. The
bandgap of Si1−xGex has a value in between those of Ge and Si, but it is not a linear
interpolation and the exact bandgap changes when the layers are strained [108]. For
heavily doped material, as is the case for gate material, the Fermi level lies close to
the conduction band edge for n-type doping and close to the valence band for p-type
doped materials. For heavily p-type doped SiGe the Fermi level will lie in between
that of Si and Ge at an energy that would lie in the forbidden gap for polySi gates –
hence the expression mid-gap gate material. Replacing p+-polySi by p+-polySiGe
gates will in this way give the desired workfunction shift, leading to more negative
threshold voltages. When in future generations single p+ doped gates will be used for
CMOS, the workfunction difference between n+-polySi and p+-polySiGe will cause
Vt to shift towards more positive values.
Workfunction engineering by exploiting the difference in valence band edge can
in principle be applied for all Ge contents. However, a Fermi energy level close
to midgap can only be achieved with very high Ge percentages, where problems
are encountered with process compatibility. For example, the melting point of SiGe
is a more or less linear interpolation between that of pure Si and pure Ge. High-
temperature steps, like rapid thermal annealing (RTA) would not be possible if the Ge
percentage becomes too high. Also alloys with a high Ge content will behave more
Ge-like, which could pose a problem with certain chemical cleaning or etching steps.
Some reports state that the process compatibility will extend to up to 60 per cent Ge,
but for every single step that would have to be carefully investigated.
Figure 4.24 shows how the gate workfunction decreases with the Ge content [109].
Since the gate workfunction can be reduced by approximately 0.45 eV for a Ge content
0.0 0.1
0.2 0.3 0.4
0.5
0.6
Ge mole fraction
Ge
Si
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
5.0
5.1
5.2
This work, in situ doping
Ref. 124, in situ doping
Ref. 123, ion implantation
Ref. 122, ion implantation
Workfunction (eV)
0.7 0.8 0.9
1.0 1.1
Figure 4.24
The workfunction of B-doped p+-polySi1−xGex gate material as a func-
tion of Ge content [After M. Y. A. Yousif et al., Solid-State Electron.,
Vol. 45, 2001(1931–1937)]

126
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
of about 50 per cent, this offers the possibility to engineer the threshold voltage
from the gate material, rather than from the substrate material. As evident from this
figure, the values obtained for the workfunction of in situ B-doped p+-polySi1−xGex
films with x = 0, 0.2 and 0.35 are in excellent agreement with reported results.
For the case of B/BF+2-implanted samples, one may notice some discrepancies in
the workfunction around 35–60 per cent Ge content. A reduction of more than 0.40
eV in the workfunction can be seen in p+-polySiGe films with 56 per cent Ge and
strain is confirmed to take place in such films [108]. At a Ge content of 45 per
cent also a difference of about 150 meV between the workfunction of in situ doped
films [110] and ion-implanted films can be observed. Also note that the effect of
35 per cent Ge is more than that of 45 per cent Ge in the case of ion-implanted
gates.
Gate oxide thickness scaling has been instrumental in controlling short channel
effects as MOS gate dimensions have been reduced. In order to ensure that short
channel effects are not aggravated to an extent where the gate electrode loses control
over the channel, thereby decreasing the threshold voltage, it is absolutely imperative
that the gate oxide be shrunk to 2 nm or below, for a 100-nm MOSFET. This in
turn leads to unacceptable levels of gate leakage due to direct quantum mechanical
tunnelling. Gate oxide thickness is approximately linearly scaled with channel length
to maintain the same amount of gate control over the channel to ensure good short
channel behaviour. Figure 4.25 shows the electrical channel length divided by gate
oxide thickness for Intel’s process technologies over the past 25 years. Each data
point represents a process technology, developed approximately every three years,
which was used to fabricate Intel’s leading-edge microprocessors.
With gate oxide thickness of the order of 2 nm or less for a 90-nm logic tech-
nology in order to achieve better short-channel margin, direct tunnelling of carriers
in between the channel region and the gate electrode becomes unacceptably high.
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0.01
0.1
1
NMOS LE (m)
LE = 45 * Tox
LE/Tox
10
Figure 4.25
Channellengthdividedbygateoxidethicknessvs. channellength[After
S. E. Thompson et al., Lecture notes]

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
127
A comprehensive account of the different tunnelling current modelling techniques
from a historical perspective may be found in Reference 111.
4.5
Strained-engineered CMOS technology
Process-induced strain engineering, along with aggressively scaled devices has
been the key feature for enhancing the leading-edge device performance for high-
speed 90-nm logic technology [29, 112]. Optimised strain-engineered 45-nm gate
length CMOS technology, offering high-performance n-MOSFETs with no impact
on p-MOSFETs devices and with minimum manufacturing complexity, has been
announced [30]. Through aggressive scaling of the gate length and gate oxide thick-
ness (1.2 nm EOT), high-performance 45-nm logic devices have seamlessly been
integrated into an existing 90-nm logic technology [112].
Other front-end process technology features include shallow abrupt SDE, halo
implants, deep source/drain implants and spike activation anneal. The silicon chan-
nel has been strained from both sides by STI and contact etch stop layer. Device
performance has been improved by optimising the stress effects. Spacer and the sub-
sequent thermal cycle were optimised to reduce dopant transient enhanced diffusion
(TED) and improve the junction abruptness. Optimised strain engineering obtained
via both the trench isolation and contact etch stop nitride film has enabled the
high-performance devices, which are amongst the best reported so far.
It has been shown that the silicon channel can be strained from both STI and
contact etch stop layer. Device performance can be improved by optimising the stress
effects. Conventional contact etch stop nitride films have tensile stress in the range of
0 to 7 Gdyne/cm2. When the tensile stress is increased to 14 Gdyne/cm2, the resulting
film in which a more gentle subthreshold slope results in a higher mobility and a lower
intercept indicating lower external parasitic resistance, gives better n-MOSFET drive
current. Optimisation of the nitridation process with ultrathin gate dielectric has led
to achieve high drive current without increasing gate leakage, degrading channel
mobility or causing large Vt shift.
The mobility enhancement in p-MOSFETs with SiGe source/drain has been
studied [113, 114]. The shape of the SiGe source/drain is engineered to vary the
compressive stress in the channel from 200 MPa to 1.5 GPa. The depth of the SiGe
recess varies from 20 to 120 nm. The source/drain elevation above the channel level
varies from 20 to 80 nm. The source/drain recess is obtained by either anisotropic
or isotropic etching. Ten-micrometre wide transistors are fabricated with standard
orientation and polySi gate lengths down to 35 nm. Two diffusion distances from
the polySi gate to STI are used: 0.5 and 10 µm. Experimental p-MOSFETs with
Si0.8Ge0.2 source/drain have been reported [113]. A TEM of a typical transistor is
shown in Figure 4.26.
The channel stress is calculated using 2D process simulation, where all intentional
and unintentional stress sources, as well as the stress evolution during the entire
process flow, are taken into account [115]. The distribution of the longitudinal stress
component σxx in a typical case is shown in Figure 4.27. The stress distribution

128
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Figure 4.26
TEM image of a 35-nm p-MOSFET[After L. Smith et al., IEEE Electron
Dev. Lett., Vol. 26, 2005(652–654). © 2005 IEEE]
–2250
–2000
–1750
–1500
–1250
–1000
–750
–500
–250
0
Stress XX 
linear (MPa)
Z
Y
X
SiGe
NiSi
Figure 4.27
Simulated stress distribution for the device structure shown in
Figure 4.26 [After L. Smith et al., IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., Vol. 26,
2005(652–654). © 2005 IEEE]
was uniform, varying by less than 4 per cent throughout the channel. The following
analysis is based on the simulated longitudinal σxx and transverse σzz stresses that
are averaged along the channel at a depth of 2 nm from the channel surface.
The transverse stress component is always compressive and consistently about
18.5 per cent of the longitudinal stress component. Such relatively high compressive
transverse stress is typical for transistors with wide channels. As the channel gets
narrower, the transverse stress reduces and can even become tensile [116]. Since the
effects of the longitudinal and the transverse stress components on the hole mobility

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
129
are comparable in magnitude [35], it is important to consider both of these in-plane
components when estimating the stress-enhanced mobility.
The mobility enhancements observed in purely uniaxial stress via wafer bending
experiments and more complicated stress patterns have been compared by Smith
et al. [117]. The authors have proposed an effective channel stress as σeff
=
0.8σzz −σxx. This effective stress takes into account the mobility degradation due to
compressive transverse stress. The σzz weight of 0.8 is extracted from wafer bending
data as a ratio of the transverse to longitudinal piezoresistance coefficients. For the
wafer bending experiments, the effective channel stress is identical to σxx because
of zero transverse stress. Figure 4.28 shows the low-field mobility enhancement
extracted along with the enhancement derived from longitudinal wafer bending.
Figures 4.29 and 4.30 show subthreshold characteristics and Ids-Vgs for the high
speed n- and p-MOSFET devices with gate length of 45-nm. n- and p-MOSFET drive
current at |Vds| = |Vgs| = 1.0 V are 1010 and 400 µA/µm at 100 nA/µm off-state
leakage and 45-nm nominal channel length. Good halo and extension implant designs
resulted in subthreshold slope of 85 mV/dec and low drain-induced barrier lowering
of 100 mV/V.
Figures 4.31 and 4.32 show the effect of STI proximity to the gate edge in the
device performance. The stress in p-MOSFETs increases current when the gate to
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
250
500
750
LOD = 0.5 µm
zz
xx
LOD = 10 µm
[11]
[2]
[1]
Effective channel stress (MPa)
Mobility enhancement (%)
Channel stress (MPa)
1000
1250
1500
–2000
–1800
–1600
–1400
–1200
–1000
–800
–600
–400
–200
0
Figure 4.28
Hole mobility enhancement and simulated stress components as a func-
tion of the effective channel stress. For the mobility enhancement,
measured data are shown as symbols, the dotted line shows bulk
piezoresistance, the dashed line shows best-fit piezoresistance and the
solid line shows the mobility model (see text) [After L. Smith et al.,
IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., Vol. 26, 2005(652–654). © 2005 IEEE]

130
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
–1.2
1.E–10
–0.8
1.E–09
–0.4
0.0
Gate voltage (V)
Drain current (A/m)
p-FET
n-FET
Vd = 1 V
Vd = 1 V
Vd = 0.05 V
Vd = 0.05 V
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.E–08
1.E–06
1.E–07
1.E–05
1.E–04
1.E–03
1.E–02
Figure 4.29
Subthreshold behaviour for 45-nm devices [After V. Chan et al., IEEE
IEDM Tech. Dig., 2003(77–80). © 2003 IEEE]
–1.2
–0.8
0.0
1.0
Drain current (mA/m)
–0.4
0.0
Drain voltage (V)
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.2
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
p-FET n-FET
Vg = –1V
Vg = 1V
0.8V
0.6V
0.4V
0.2V
Figure 4.30
Output characteristics for 45-nm devices [After V. Chan et al., IEEE
IEDM Tech. Dig., 2003(77–80). © 2003 IEEE]
STI edge distance becomes shorter, but n-MOSFET current is decreased. When the
channel width is reduced, n-MOSFETs are less sensitive to the stress effect; however,
on the contrary, p-MOSFETs become more sensitive to it. Several devices, namely
high-speed (HS), high-Vt (HVT) and super-high-Vt (SHVT), covering a wide off-state
leakage current range of 1–100 nA/µm at Vdd of 1 V have been realised in the 45-nm

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
131
25
20
15
0.12
0.24
Active size
n–10 × 0.045
n–0.24 × 0.045
n–0.12 × 0.045
p–10 × 0.045
p–0.24 × 0.045
p–0.12 × 0.045
p-FET
n-FET
W (m)
10
10
0.12
0.24
10
5
0
0
0.2
0.4
Active size (symmetric) (µm)
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Drive current change (%)
–5
–10
Figure 4.31
Shallow trench isolation (STI) mechanical stress effect (different active
width) on the n- and p-MOSFET drive current change with different
devicewidth[AfterV.Chanetal., IEEEIEDMTech. Dig., 2003(77–80).
© 2003 IEEE]
0.045
0.045
0.24
0.24
Active size
n–10 × 0.045
n–10 × 0.024
n–10 × 10
p–10 × 0.045
p–10 × 0.024
p–10 × 10
p-FET
n-FET
L (m)
10
10
0
0.2
0.4
Active size (symmetric) (m)
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
25
20
15
10
5
0
Drive current change (%)
–5
–15
–10
Figure 4.32
STI mechanical stress effect on different device length [After V. Chan
et al., IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., 2003(77–80). © 2003 IEEE]

132
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
technology. The nominal unloaded ring oscillator speed of the three devices are 7.0,
9.0 and 10.8 ps/stage at 1 V Vdd and 45 nm Lnom, respectively.
Several interesting observations are as follows:
1.
The stress in different channel length devices will have different effects. The drive
current enhancement in long channel devices with high tensile stress is negligible.
2.
As the gate length is scaled down, the electron mobility enhancement becomes
significant but reduces for shorter gate length, although the current improvement
in linear region remains high.
3.
High halo dose and high parasitic resistance can offset the current enhancement
by the local strain benefits.
4.6
Layout engineering
It has been shown that the induced channel stress and the consequent drive current
increase are dependent on various processing factors, such as recess depth, SiGe
overgrowth and the channel direction [113]. The impact of process-induced strain
on electrical behaviour necessitates increasing complexity in TCAD modelling. STI
is a dominant source of mechanical stress variations in MOSFET channel, and is
dependent on MOSFET geometry variations, such as active area size and shape.
The stress generated by shallow-trench isolation can alter the drive current of n- and
p-MOSFETs by up to 20 per cent depending on the length of diffusion [118]. p-MOS
transistors with epitaxial SiGe in the S/D regions are widely regarded as a viable and
manufacturable way to enhance the performance up to 35 per cent [28].
Also, the drive current is not only related to gate length and width but also to
the exact layout of the individual transistor. As MOSFET dimensions shrink, the
stress becomes dependent also on the width of the STI surrounding the transistor.
The question remains how this technology is applicable for next-generation nodes
with the active area dimensions scaled down to the decananometre range. A similar
problem arises with the intentional application of stress by depositing SiGe layers
beneath the source and drain regions [29,113,119].
Layout dependence of n- and p-MOSFETs have been studied by several work-
ers [120]. Stress simulations and mobility models have been calibrated and verified
for test structures with SiGe source/drain as a stressor. The numerical results show
that variations of 15 per cent in drive currents and of 44 per cent in hole mobility
due to layout-induced stress variations can occur. For 45 nm gate length p-MOS
transistors with large active areas, measurements and simulations show a 65 per cent
increase in drive current, but this improvement may be seriously degraded when tran-
sistor dimensions such as the source-drain length and the device width are further
scaled [121].
In the following, the impact of layout on SiGe stress-enhanced p-MOSFET perfor-
mance, where numerical simulation is compared with measurements on test structures
comprising isolated and nested transistors, are discussed. The isolated transistor is
surrounded by STI, whereas the nested transistor is bounded by multiple polySi gates

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
133
SiGe
SiGe
STI
STI
L s/d
L
Silicon
Figure 4.33
Simulated 2D cross-section of an isolated 35-nm p-MOS. Layout is
shown on the top [After V. Moroz et al., Proc. SISPAD, 2005(143–146).
© 2005 IEEE]
and doped SiGe source and drains. The characteristic dimensions are the channel
length L, width W, source and drain length Ls/d and the STI width.
Simulation results performed using Taurus-Process and Taurus-Device (2D/3D)
TCAD tools that contain an extensive set of stress-related features have been reported
[115]. The authors used a model for the stress-induced enhancement of the low-field
hole mobility that was extracted for compressive uniaxial stress up to a level of
1.5 GPa [117]. Figure 4.33 shows the simulated 2D cross-section of a typical isolated
35 nm p-MOS transistor, and Figure 4.34 shows a typical nested 35 nm p-MOS. The
corresponding layouts are shown in the figures as the top inserts. The white lines
shown in the silicon regions in both figures represent the simulated P/N junctions.
The simulated distribution of the stress component along the channel direction
for the isolated transistors with 0.4 µm Ls/d is shown in Figure 4.35. Figure 4.36
shows measured and simulated stress-induced mobility enhancements as a function
of Ls/d. The mobility enhancement increases with Ls/d owing to the increasing size
of SiGe stressor. At small Ls/d, transistors with nested gates exhibit higher mobility
enhancement than the isolated transistors owing to the absence of STI relaxer. For
large Ls/d cases, (Ls/d >1 µm), the mobility enhancements saturate at the same level
for both isolated and nested transistors. When the Ls/d is scaled down to 200 nm, the
minimum size for the 90-nm technology node, the mobility enhancement is 30× less
than the saturation value. There is a small but noticeable effect of the width of the
transistor. As the width increases the stress increases and reaches the saturation level
as shown in Figure 4.37.

134
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
SiGe
L s/d
W
Figure 4.34
Simulated 2D cross-section of a nested 35-nm p-MOS. Layout is
shown on the top [After V. Moroz et al., Proc. SISPAD, 2005(143–146).
© 2005 IEEE]
SiGe
–500 MPa
Z
Y
X
–1800
–1500
–1000
–500
0
500
800
Stress XX 
linear (MPa)
–1000 MPa
Figure 4.35
Simulated stress distribution of the normal stress component along the
channel direction for an isolated p-MOS transistor with 0.4 µm Ls/d
[After V. Moroz et al., Proc. SISPAD, 2005(143–146). © 2005 IEEE]

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
135
2.6
2.4
2.2
Isolated 
transistors
Nested gates
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0
0.2
Mobility enhancement factor
0.4
0.6
0.8
Ls/d (m)
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Figure 4.36
Mobility enhancement of isolated and transistors with nested gates as
a function of Ls/d. Measured data is shown as symbols, and simula-
tion results are shown as lines [After V. Moroz et al., Proc. SISPAD,
2005(143–146). © 2005 IEEE]
Mobility enhancement factor
2.14
Simulated
Measured
2.12
2.1
2.08
2.06
2.04
2.02
2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Channel width (m)
Figure 4.37
Mobility enhancement of isolated transistors as a function of channel
width. Measured data is shown as symbols, and simulation results are
shown as lines [After V. Moroz et al., Proc. SISPAD, 2005(143–146).
© 2005 IEEE]

136
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
4.7
Strain-engineered MOSFETs: simulation
Although the transition from conventional Si-processing to strained-Si/SiGe MOS-
FETs may appear to be only a substrate change, but due to doping differences between
Si and SiGe and other material parameters, channel re-engineering is necessary
to achieve successful sub-100 nm devices using heterolayers. Figure 4.38 shows
the typical strained-Si and strained-Si-on-insulator (strained-SOI) MOSFETs, using
strained-Si/SiGe heterostructures. The advantage of these device structures using
Si/SiGe heterointerfaces against the devices using process-induced strain like cap-
ping layers, STI, silicides and so on is the capability to introduce much larger and
more uniform strain in the channels, expected for tight distributions in the strain
variation.
In the following, an example of integrated modelling approach, from dopant
implantation and thermal processing to device simulation, is presented following
Thean et al. [122], which allows one to optimise short-channel effects and parasitic
S/D resistance for scaled strained-Si devices as shown in Figure 4.39. The SiGe
Strained Si
Strained Si
n+ polySi
n+
n+
n+
n+
p+
p+
S
S
D
D
<001>
G
Gate oxide
Gate
Tensile strain
G
p-Si substrate
Si substrates
Tensile strain
SiO2
Buried SiO2
p– relaxed 
Si1–xGex
Relaxed 
Si1–xGex
p– SiGe graded buffer 
Ge: 0% → x%
SiGe buffer layer
Figure 4.38
Schematic diagrams of typical device structure of strained-Si MOS-
FETs fabricated on bulk-Si substrates and strained-Si-on-insulator
(Strained-SOI) MOSFETs [After T. Mizuno et al., IEEE Trans. Electron
Dev., Vol. 48, 2001(1612–1618). © 2001 IEEE]

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
137
(a)
(b)
Poly 
Si 
gate
Nitride 
spacer
Y
Strained-Si 
Si1–xGex
Source
Drain
∆Ex
∆EC
EV EF
EC
SiO2 spacer
T1
T2
T3
Figure 4.39
(a) A schematic of gate and channel structures with exaggerated
recessed features that illustrate typical differences in strained-Si thick-
nesses (T1, T2 and T3) under the gate and spacer regions. (b) The
energy band diagram showing the type-II heterostructure in the verti-
cal direction under the gate [After A. V.-Y. Thean et al., Proc. SISPAD,
2003(195–198). © 2003 IEEE]
substrate is modelled by doping Si to alloying concentrations corresponding to the Ge
mole fraction, x, where the mole fraction-dependent strained-Si and SiGe bandgaps
are according to Rieger et al. [82]. A drift-diffusion approach used in DESSIS [123]
has been applied to model the carrier transport, where the drive current enhancement is
calibrated to experiments through detailed matching of mobility and transconductance
behaviour. Coupled dopant diffusion processes during thermal steps as described in
DIOS [124], implementation of the pair-diffusion model where dopant-defect pairs
and unpaired point defects are the mobile species, were used in simulation.
The device simulation included a model of type-II heterostructure at the strained-
Si/SiGe interface (see Figure 4.39). The strained-Si/SiGe conduction and valence
band offsets, Ec and Ev, respectively, were taken from Reference 82. Simulations
based on hydrodynamic models were also performed as comparisons. Band-to-band
tunnelling according to Schenk [125] is included to account for junction leakage, in
addition to diode current increase arising from reduced bandgaps of strained-Si and
SiGe. Dopant implantations were simulated by two-dimensional Monte Carlo method
and analytic implant tables with nuclear and electronic-stopping of SiGe calibrated
to secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) data for the device (see Figure 4.39).
The transient enhanced diffusion was simulated by the addition of point defects from
implant damage. After process simulation, the final structure was checked against
transmission electron microscopy images of the devices [see Figure 4.39(a)].
Figures 4.40 and 4.41 show the SIMS and simulated As profiles after 1025 ◦C
and 900 ◦C anneals, respectively, for SiGe with 25 per cent Ge. It is seen that
high-temperature anneal enhances the diffusion of As in SiGe. The diffusion can
be sensitive to the presence of the heterostructure and Ge distribution, leading to very
different doping profiles when the diffusion occurs in the absence of the strained-Si

138
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0
Ge concentration
As-implanted (As in SiGe)
As in Si
As in SiGe
Without SSi
0.05
1×1018
1×1019
1×1020
1×1021
1×1022
0.1
Depth (m)
Concentration (cm–3)
Figure 4.40
Diffusion of As in Si and strained-Si/SiGe heterostructure after a
10 s anneal at 1025 ◦C (solid: simulated, dashed: SIMS) [After
A. V.-Y. Thean et al., Proc. SISPAD, 2003(195–198). © 2003 IEEE]
As-implanted 
(As in SiGe)
As in Si
As in SiGe
0.02
0.04
Depth (m)
1×1018
1×1019
1×1020
1×1021
Concentration (cm–3)
Figure 4.41
Diffusion of As in Si and strained-Si/SiGe heterostructure after a
900 ◦C 10 s thermal anneal (solid: simulated, dashed: SIMS) [After
A. V.-Y. Thean et al., Proc. SISPAD, 2003(195–198). © 2003 IEEE]
layer (see Figure 4.40). When the anneal temperature is lowered to 900 ◦C, dopant
diffusion in SiGe becomes comparable to that of Si (see Figure 4.41). Figure 4.42
shows the B doping profiles after the same annealing condition. In this case, boron
diffusion in the SiGe substrate is retarded when the anneal temperature is high and
becomes comparable to the Si case when temperature is lowered. Figure 4.42 also

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
139
B in Si
B in Si
B in SiGe
B in SiGe
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.4
Depth (m)
Depth (m)
1×1018
1×1017
1× 1017
1× 1018
1× 1019
1× 1020
1× 1021
1×1019
1×1020
1×1021
Concentration (cm–3)
Concentration (cm–3)
Figure 4.42
Diffusion of B in Si and strained-Si/SiGe heterostructure after a 10 s
high temperature anneal (solid: simulated, dashed: SIMS). Inset:
Dopant diffusion when anneal temperature is lowered to 900 ◦C [After
A. V.-Y. Thean et al., Proc. SISPAD, 2003(195–198). © 2003 IEEE]
(a)
(b)
271.6 nm
637.9 nm
Figure 4.43
(a) Simulated junction profile of a long strained-Si/SiGe device before
S/D optimisation. (b) Scanning electron microscopy of a dopant-
selective etched device showing the junction profile due to the strained-
Si/SiGe heterostructure [After A. V.-Y. Thean et al., Proc. SISPAD,
2003(195–198). © 2003 IEEE]
shows the junction profile of a strained-Si device that received S/D implants meant
for optimised Si devices.
Figure 4.43(a) shows the simulated junction profile of a long strained-Si/SiGe
device before S/D optimisation and Figure 4.43(b) shows the scanning electron
microscopy of a dopant-selective etched device showing the junction profile due

140
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
(a)
(b)
Silicon
Strained-Si/Si/Ge
(c)
Figure 4.44
(a) Net doping concentration delineating the junction profiles of small
NMOS devices, (b) contour plots of As doping and (c) Contour plots
showing the B halos [After A. V.-Y. Thean et al., Proc. SISPAD,
2003(195–198). © 2003 IEEE]
to the strained-Si/SiGe heterostructure. Figure 4.44 compares the As S/D and B halo
profiles for 50-nm Si and strained-Si devices. The strained-Si devices show more
abrupt halo profiles due to retarded B diffusion in SiGe and deeper junctions due
to enhanced As diffusion. The differences in density of states, bandgap and band
offsets contribute to a Vt difference between strained-Si and bulk-Si devices. From
capacitance-voltage measurement of long-channel devices, the Vt difference is deter-
mined to be approximately 150 mV. The long-channel Vt of the strained-Si devices
was found to be very sensitive to the Ec and Ev values.
From simulation, it has been shown that the thickness of the strained-Si layer is an
important factor in determining the S/D profiles and consequently the short-channel
behaviour of the device. It is seen that when the strained-Si thickness is reduced
below 100 Å, the lateral diffusion of the S/D extensions increases for a given implant
and thermal anneal conditions. Figure 4.45 shows the contour plot of the junction
and halo profiles of two strained-Si devices with different strained-Si thickness that
underwent the same implant and anneal processes. The physical channel defined by
the S/D junctions severely limits the gate length scaling by promoting the early onset
of punchthrough and short channel effects.
The enhanced lateral diffusion leads to a reduction in physical channel length,
defined by the separation between the S/D extensions [see Figure 4.45(a)]. As the
strained-Si thickness is decreased, the junctions come closer together. This is due
largelytothefactthatalargerportionoftheS/DAsdopantsislocatedintheSiGewhen
the strained-Si is thin and more dopants undergo enhanced diffusion in the presence of
Ge. In addition, the B halo distributions in the two devices are also markedly different
[see Figures 4.45(b) and (d)] owing to different amount of retardation experienced by

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
141
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)
−0.02
−0.05
0.05
0
−0.01
0.0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
−0.02
−0.05
0.05
0
−0.01
0.0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
−0.02
−0.05
0.05
0
−0.01
0.0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
−0.02
−0.05
0.05
0
−0.01
0.0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
Figure 4.45
(a) Net doping profile of strained-Si device with strained-Si thickness
of 70 Å, (b) the boron halo profile of the strained-Si device with 70
Å thick strained-Si, (c) net doping profile of strained-Si device with
strained-Si thickness of 100 Å and (d) the boron halo profile of the
strained-Si device with 100 Å thick strained-Si [After A. V.-Y. Thean
et al., Proc. SISPAD, 2003(195–198). © 2003 IEEE]
the dopants when the strained-Si thickness changes. Thus, careful implant condition
to avoid excessive lateral diffusion is necessary so that the short channel effect
can be improved in sub-100 nm strained-Si devices, even with high-temperature
anneals.
Figure 4.46 shows a plot of the drain-induced barrier lowering as a function of
strained-Si thickness. As the strained-Si thickness is thinned from 100 Å to 50 Å,
DIBL increases rapidly for the 70-nm device, owing to enhanced lateral diffusion of
the S/D extensions. However, the changes in DIBL is negligible for the slightly longer
device (Lg = 100 nm) for the same reduction in strained-Si thickness. The 70- and
100-nm devices demonstrate the same DIBL when the strained-Si layer thickness is
greaterthan100Å,indicatingthatenhancedlateraldiffusionisminimisedforstrained-
Si thicker than 100 Å. It has been observed that short channel behaviour of the devices
is not only influenced by the location of the strained-Si/SiGe interface but also the
band offset at the heterojunction. When the conduction band offset Ec is reduced to
zero, DIBL increases slightly, especially when the strained-Si is thinned, indicating
that the band structure of the heterointerface can help to reduce short channel effect.
The role of strained-Si layer thickness with respect to dopant and device behaviour
has been investigated for 45–50 nm devices. Figure 4.47 compares the simulated

142
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
40
60
DIBL (V/V)
Lgate = 100 nm
∆EC = 0
Lgate = 70 nm
80
100
SSi thickness (Å)
Figure 4.46
DIBL metric as a function of strained-Si thickness. Black curve is for a
Lg = 100 nm device and the grey curve is for a Lg = 70 nm; the dashed
curve is for 70-nm device when Ec is set to zero [After A. V.-Y. Thean
et al., Proc. SISPAD, 2003(195–198). © 2003 IEEE]
–0.5
0
0.5
VDS = 1.2 V
VDS = 0.1 V
1
VGS (V)
Lgate = 50 nm SSi/SiGe NMOSFET
IDS (A/m)
1 × 10–10
1 × 10–5
Figure 4.47
Drain current vs. gate voltage characteristic of a 50-nm strained-
Si device. (symbols: measurement and solid: simulation) [After
A. V.-Y. Thean et al., Proc. SISPAD, 2003(195–198). © 2003 IEEE]
and measured characteristics of a Lg = 50 nm strained-Si device with good short-
channel control, exhibiting a DIBL of only 52 mV/V. Well-behaved short channel
characteristics are observed from simulation for strained-Si thickness of 60 Å under
the gate.

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
143
4.8
Summary
In this chapter, some of the engineering solutions to boost the performance of the
conventional Si MOSFET by exploiting the favourable electrical properties of the
strained-Si and Si1−xGex materials and their compatibility with standard CMOS tech-
nology are addressed. Both biaxial and uniaxial stress provide significant enhanced
mobility to improve MOSFET performance. As an in-depth understanding of how
stress affects the semiconductor fabrication processes, stress simulations for strained-
Si have been discussed to understand the effects of strain on carrier mobility, drive
current and threshold voltage shift. The importance of an integrated TCAD approach
to design sub-100-nm strained-Si/SiGe devices has been discussed. The impact of
layout characteristic lengths on stress-enhanced transistor performance is discussed.
It may be noted that Si1−xGex may be used in three different regions of the MOSFET
device:
1.
as a quantum well to engineer the channel of the p-MOSFETs;
2.
to engineer the gate work function of the transistor;
3.
as a virtual substrate for tensile strained-Si MOSFETs.
References
1 J. E. Lilienfeld, ‘Method and apparatus for controlling electric currents’, U. S.
Patent 1,745,175, 1925.
2 M. M. Atalla, M. Tannenbaum, and E. J. Scheibner, ‘Stabilization of silicon
surface by thermally grown oxides’, Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 38, pp. 749–783,
1959.
3 G. E. Moore,
‘Cramming more components onto integrated circuits’,
Electronics, vol. 38, pp. 114–117, 1965.
4 G. E. Moore, ‘Progress in Digital Integrated Electronics’, in IEEE IEDM Tech.
Dig., pp. 11–13, 1975.
5 G. E. Moore, ‘No exponential is forever: but “Forever” can be delayed!’, in
Proc. ISSCC, pp. 20–23, 2003.
6 B. Doyle, R. Arghavani, D. Barlage, S. Datta, S. Doczy, J. Kavalieros, et al.,
‘Transistor elements for 30 nm physical gate lengths and beyond’, Intel Technol.
J., vol. 6, pp. 42–54, 2002.
7 R. Chau, J. Kavalieros, B. Doyle, A. Murthy, N. Paulsen, D. Lionberger, et al.,
‘A 50 nm depleted-substrate CMOS transistor (DST)’, in IEEE IEDM Tech.
Dig., pp. 621–624, 2001.
8 X. Huang, W. Lee, C. Kuo, D. Hisamoto, L. Chang, J. Kedzierski, et al., ‘Sub
50-nm FinFET: PMOS’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 67–70, 1999.
9 J.-T. Park and J. P. Colinge, ‘Multiple-gate SOI MOSFETs: device design
guidelines’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 49, pp. 2222–2229, 2002.
10 S. Thompson, N. Anand, M. Armstrong, C. Auth, B. Arcot, M. Alavi, et al.,
‘A 90 nm logic technology featuring 50 nm strained silicon channel transistors,

144
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
7 layers of Cu interconnects, low k ILD and 1 µm2 SRAM cell’, in IEEE IEDM
Tech. Dig., pp. 61–64, 2002.
11 J. Meindl, ‘Low power microelectronics – retrospect and prospect’, Proc. IEEE,
vol. 83, pp. 619–635, 1995.
12 Y. Taur, D. A. Buchanan, W. Chen, D. J. Frank, K. E. Ismail, S. H. Lo, et al.,
‘CMOS scaling into the nanometer regime’, IEEE Proc., vol. 85, pp. 486–504,
1997.
13 H.-S. P. Wong, D. J. Frank, P. M. Solomon, C. H. J. Wann, and J. J. Wesler,
‘Nanoscale CMOS’, Proc. IEEE, vol. 87, pp. 537–570, 1999.
14 R. W. Keyes, ‘Fundamental limits of silicon technology’, Proc. IEEE, vol. 89,
pp. 227–239, 2001.
15 J. D. Plummer and P. B. Griffin, ‘Material and process limits in silicon VLSI
technology’, Proc. IEEE, vol. 89, pp. 240–258, 2001.
16 P. A. Packan, ‘Pushing the limits’, Science, vol. 285, pp. 2079–2080, 1999.
17 A. Yagishita, T. Saito, K. Nakajima, S. Inumiya, Y. Akasaka, Y. Ozawa, et al.,
‘High performance metal gate MOSFETs fabricated by CMP for 0.1 µm regime’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 785–788, 1998.
18 H. Iwai, ‘Future semiconductor manufacturing-challenges and opportunities’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 11–16, 2004.
19 H. Sasaki, M. Ono, T. Yoshitomi, T. Ohguro, S. Nakamura, M. Saito, et al.,
‘1.5 nm direct-tunneling gate oxide Si MOSFET’s’, IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. 43, pp. 1233–1242, 1996.
20 C. Caillat, S. Deleonibus, G. Guegan, S. Tedesco, B. Dal’zotto, M. Heitzmann,
et al., ‘65 nm physical gate length NMOSFETs with heavy ion implanted pockets
and highly reliable 2 nm thick gate oxide for 1.5 V operation’, in IEEE VLSI
Tech. Symp. Dig., pp. 89–90, 1999.
21 Y. Taur, Y. J. Mii, D. J. Frank, H. S. Wong, D. A. Buchanan, S. J. Wind, et al.,
‘CMOS scaling into the 21st century: 0.1 µm and beyond’, IBM J. Res. and
Devices, vol. 39, pp. 245–260, 1995.
22 H.-S. Wong, and Y. Taur, ‘Three-dimensional “atomistic” simulation of discrete
random dopant distribution effects in sub-0.1 µm MOSFET’s’, in IEEE IEDM
Tech. Dig., pp. 705–708, 1993.
23 IEEE, ‘Special issue on nonclassical Si CMOS devices and technologies:
Extending the roadmap’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 53, pp. 941–1095,
2006.
24 P. R. Chidambaram, C. Bowen, S. Chakravarthi, C. Machala, and R. Wise,
‘Fundamentals of silicon material properties for successful exploitation of strain
engineering in modern CMOS manufacturing’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 53, pp. 944–964, 2006.
25 E. A. Fitzgerald, ‘Engineered substrates and their future role in microelectron-
ics’, Mat. Sci. and Eng. B, vol. 124–125, pp. 8–15, 2005.
26 S. E. Thompson, G. Sun, Y. S. Choi, and T. Nishida, ‘Uniaxial-process-induced
strained-Si: Extending the CMOS roadmap’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 53, pp. 1010–1020, 2006.

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
145
27 S. E. Thompson, ‘Strained Si and the future direction of CMOS’, in IEEE IDEAS
Symp. Proc., pp. 14–16, 2005.
28 T. Ghani, M. Armstrong, C. Auth, M. Bost, P. Charvat, G. Glass, et al.,
‘A 90nm high volume manufacturing logic technology featuring novel 45nm
gate length strained silicon CMOS’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 978–980,
2003.
29 S. E. Thompson, M. Armstrong, C. Auth, S. Cea, R. Chau, G. Glass, et al.,
‘A logic nanotechnology featuring strained-silicon’, IEEE Electron Device Lett.,
vol. 25, pp. 191–193, 2004.
30 V. Chan, R. Rengarajan, N. Rovedo, W. Jin, T. Hook, P. Nguyen, et al., ‘High
speed 45 nm gate length CMOSFETs integrated into a 90 nm bulk technology
incorporating strain engineering’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 77–80, 2003.
31 J.-S. Goo, Q. Xiang, Y. Takamura, F. Arasnia, E. N. Paton, P. Besser, et al., ‘Band
offset induced threshold variation in strained-Si nMOSFETs’, IEEE Electron
Device Lett., vol. 24, pp. 568–570, 2003.
32 J. Goo, Q. Xiang, Y. Takamura, H. Wang, J. Pan, F. Arasnia, et al., ‘Scalability
of strained-Si nMOSFETs down to 25 nm gate length’, IEEE Electron Device
Lett., vol. 24, pp. 351–353, 2003.
33 K. Rim, J. Chu, H. Chen, K. A. Jenkins, T. Kanarsky, K. Lee, et al.,
‘Characteristics and device design of sub-100 nm strained si n- and
p-MOSFETS’, in IEEE VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., pp. 98–99, 2002.
34 J. G. Fossum, and W. Zhang, ‘Performance projections of scaled CMOS devices
and circuits with strained Si-on-SiGe channels’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 50, pp. 1042–1049, 2003.
35 S. E. Thompson, G. Sun, K. Wu, J. Kim, and T. Nishida, ‘Key differences
for process-induced uniaxial vs. substrate-induced biaxial stressed Si and Ge
channel MOSFETs’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 221–224, 2004.
36 M. D. Giles, M. Armstrong, C. Auth, S. M. Cea, T. Ghani, T. Hoffmann, et al.,
‘Understanding stress enhanced performance in Intel 90nm CMOS technology’,
in IEEE VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., pp. 118–119, 2004.
37 C. K. Maiti, L. K. Bera, S. S. Dey, D. K. Nayak, and N. B. Chakrabarti, ‘Hole
mobility enhancement in strained-Si p-MOSFETs under high vertical fields’,
Solid State Electron., vol. 41, pp. 1863–1869, 1997.
38 A. Shimizu, K. Hachimine, N. Ohki, H. Ohta, M. Koguchi, Y. Nonaka,
et al., ‘Local mechanical-stress control (LMC): A new technique for CMOS-
performance enhancement’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech.
Dig.,
pp. 433–436,
2001.
39 A. Lochtefeld, and D. A. Antoniadis, ‘Investigating the relationship between
electron mobility and velocity in deeply scaled NMOS via mechanical stress’,
IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 22, pp. 591–593, 2001.
40 H. S. Momose, T. Ohguro, K. Kojima, S. Nakamura, and Y. Toyoshima,
‘110 GHz cut-off frequency of ultra-thin gate oxide p-MOSFETs on (110)
surface-oriented Si substrate’, in IEEE VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., pp. 156–157,
2002.

146
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
41 M. Yang, E. P. Gusev, M. Ieong, O. Gluschenkov, D. C. Boyd, K. K. Chan,
et al., ‘Performance dependence of CMOS on silicon substrate orientation for
ultrathin oxynitride and HfO2 gate dielectrics’, IEEE Electron Device Lett.,
vol. 24, pp. 339–341, 2003.
42 T. Sato, Y. Takeishi, and H. Hara, ‘Mobility anisotropy of electrons in inver-
sion layers on oxidized silicon surface’, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 4, pp. 1951–1960,
1971.
43 M. Kinugawa, M. Kakumu, and J. Matsunaga, ‘Submicron 3D surface-
orientation-optimized CMOS technology’, in IEEE VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig.,
pp. 17–18, 1986.
44 S. Sugawa, I. Ohshima, H. Ishino, Y. Saito, M. Hirayama, and T. Ohmi, ‘Advan-
tage of silicon nitride gate insulator transistor by using microwave-excited
high-density plasma for applying 100 nm technology node’, in IEEE IEDM
Tech. Dig., pp. 817–820, 2001.
45 S. Takagi, A. Toriumi, M. Iwase, and H. Tango, ‘On the universality of the
inversion layer mobility in Si MOSFETs: Part I: Effects of surface orientation’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 41, pp. 2363–2368, 1994.
46 M. Yang, V. W. C. Chan, K. K. Chan, L. Shi, D. M. Fried, J. H. Stathis, et al.,
‘Hybrid-orientation technology (HOT): Opportunities and challenges’, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 53, pp. 965–978, 2006.
47 Q. Ouyang, M. Yang, J. Holt, S. Panda, H. Chen, H. Utomo, et al., ‘Investiga-
tion of CMOS devices with embedded sige source/drain on hybrid orientation
substrates’, in IEEE VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., pp. 28–29, 2005.
48 D. Zhang, B. Y. Nguyen, T. White, B. Goolsby, T. Nguyen, V. Dhandapani,
et al., ‘Embedded SiGe S/D PMOS on thin body SOI substrate with drive current
enhancement’, in IEEE VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., pp. 26–27, 2005.
49 S.Ito, H.Namba, K.Yamaguchi, T.Hirata, K.Ando, S.Koyama, etal., ‘Mechan-
ical stress effect of etch-stop nitride and its impact on deep submicron transistor
design’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 247–250, 2000.
50 M. E. Law, and S. M. Cea, ‘Continuum based modeling of silicon integrated
circuit processing: An object oriented approach’, Comp. Mat. Sci., vol. 12,
pp. 289–308, 1998.
51 S. Cea, and M. Law, ‘Multidimensional nonlinear viscoelastic oxidation
modeling’, Simulat. Semicond. Device Process., vol. 6, pp. 139–142, 1995.
52 S. Pidin, T. Mori, K. Inoue, S. Fukuta, N. Itoh, E. Mutoh, et al., ‘A novel strain
enhanced CMOS architecture using selectively deposited high tensile and high
compressive silicon nitride films’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 213–216, 2004.
53 H. S. Yang, R. Malik, S. Narasimha, Y. Li, R. Divakaruni, P. Agnello, et al.,
‘Dual stress liner for high performance sub-45 nm gate length SOI CMOS
manufacturing’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 1075–1077, 2004.
54 A. A. Bayati, L. Washington, L.-Q. Xia, M. Balseanu, Z. Yuan, M. Kawaguchi,
et al., ‘Production processes for inducing strain in CMOS channels’, Semicon-
ductor Fabtech., vol. 26, pp. 84–88, 2005.
55 C.-H. Chen, T. L. Lee, T. H. Hou, C. L. Chen, C. C. Chen, J. W. Hsu, et al.,
‘Stress memorization Technique (SMT) by selectively strained-nitride capping

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
147
for sub-65nm high-performance strained-Si device application’, in IEEE VLSI
Tech. Symp. Dig., pp. 56–57, 2004.
56 A. Steegen, M. Stucchi, A. Lauwers, and K. Maex, ‘Silicide induced pattern
density and orientation dependent transconductance in MOS transistor’, in IEEE
IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 497–500, 1999.
57 M. Yang, M. Ieong, L. Shi, K. Chan, V. Chan, A. Chou, et al., ‘High performance
CMOSfabricatedonhybridsubstratewithdifferentcrystalorientations’, inIEEE
IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 453–456, 2003.
58 R. Chau, J. Kavalieros, B. Roberds, R. Schenker, D. Lionberger, D. Barlage,
et al., ‘30 nm physical gate length CMOS transistors with 1.0 ps n-MOS and 1.7
ps p-MOS gate delays’, IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 45–48, 2000.
59 C. K. Maiti, and G. A. Armstrong, Applications of Silicon-Germanium
Heterostructure Devices. Inst. of Physics Pub., UK, 2001.
60 C. K. Maiti, N. B. Chakrabarti, and S. K. Ray, Strained Silicon Heterostructures:
Materials and Devices. The IEE, UK, 2001.
61 K. Uejima, T. Yamamoto, and T. Mogami, ‘Highly reliable poly-SiGe/
amorphous-Si gate CMOS’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 445–448, 2000.
62 S. Subbanna, V. P. Kesan, M. J. Tejwani, P. J. Restle, D. J. Mis, and S. S. Iyer,
‘Si/SiGe p-channel MOSFETs’, in Proc. VLSI Technol. Symp., pp. 103–104,
1991.
63 D. K. Nayak, K. Goto, A. Yutani, J. Murota, and Y. Shiraki, ‘High-mobility
strained-Si PMOSFETs’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 43, pp. 1709–1715,
1996.
64 J. L. Hoyt, H. M. Nayfeh, S. Eguchi, I. Aberg, G. Xia, T. Drake, et al., ‘Strained
silicon MOSFET technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 23–26, 2002.
65 S. Verdonckt-Vandebroek, E. F. Crabbe, B. S. Meyerson, D. L. Harame,
P. J. Restle, J. M. C. Stork, et al., ‘High-mobility modulation-doped grades
SiGe-Channel p-MOSFET’s’, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. EDL-12,
pp. 447–449, 1991.
66 T.-J. King, and K. C. Saraswat, ‘Low-temperature (≤550 ◦C) fabrication of
poly-Si thin-film transistors’, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 13, pp. 309–311,
1992.
67 T.-J. King, and K. C. Saraswat, ‘A low-temperature (≤550◦C) silicon-
germanium MOS thin-film transistor technology for large-area electronics’, in
IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 567–570, 1991.
68 T.-J. King, J. R. Pfiester, and K. C. Saraswat, ‘A variable-work-function
polycrystalline-Si1−xGex gate material for submicrometer CMOS technologies’,
IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 13, pp. 533–535, 1991.
69 T. Uchino, T. Shiba, K. Ohnishi, A. Miyauchi, M. Nakata, Y. Inoue, et al.,
‘A raised source/drain technology using in situ P-doped SiGe and B-doped Si
for 0.1-µm CMOS ULSIs’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 479–482, 1997.
70 H. Huang, K. Chen, C. Chang, L. Chen, G. Huang, and T. Huang, ‘Reduc-
tion of source/drain series resistance and its impact on device performance for
PMOS transistors with raised Si1−xGex source/drain’, IEEE Electron Device
Lett., vol. 21, pp. 448–450, 2000.

148
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
71 M. C. Ozturk, J. Liu, H. Mo, and N. Pesovic, ‘Advanced Si1−xGex source/drain
and contact technologies for sub-70 nm CMOS’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
pp. 375–378, 2002.
72 M. Horstmanna, D. Greenlawa, Th. Feudela, A. Weia, K. Frohberga,
G. Burbacha, et al., ‘Sub-50 nm gate length SOI transistor development for high
performance microprocessors’, Mat. Sci. and Eng. B, vol. 114–115, pp. 3–8,
2004.
73 A. V. Y. Thean, T. White, M. Sadaka, L. McCormick, M. Ramon, R. Mora,
et al., ‘Performance of super-critical strained-Si directly on insulator (SC-SSOI)
CMOS based on high-performance PD-SOI technology’, in IEEE VLSI Tech.
Symp. Dig., pp. 134–135, 2005.
74 K. Rim, S. Koester, M. Hargrove, J. Chu, P. M. Mooney, J. Ott, et al., ‘Strained
Si NMOSFETs for high performance CMOS technology’, in IEEE VLSI Tech.
Symp. Dig., pp. 59–60, 2001.
75 S. Datta, G. Dewey, M. Doczy, B. S. Doyle, B. Jin, J. Kavalieros, et al., ‘High
mobility Si/SiGe strained channel MOS transistors with HfO2/TiN gate stack’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 653–656, 2003.
76 T. Sanuki, A. Oishi, Y. Morimasa, S. Aota, T. Kinoshita, R. Hasumi, et al.,
‘Scalability of strained silicon CMOSFET and high drive current enhancement
in the 40nm gate length technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 65–68, 2003.
77 H. C.-H. Wang, Y.-P. Wang, S.-J. Chen, C.-H. Ge, S. M. Ting, J.-Y. Kung,
et al., ‘Substrate-strained silicon technology: Process integration’, in IEEE
IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 61–64, 2003.
78 Th. Vogelsang, and K. R. Hofmann, ‘Electron transport in strained Si layers on
Si1−xGex substrates’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 63, pp. 186–188, 1993.
79 L. E. Kay, and T. W. Tang, ‘Monte Carlo calculation of strained and unstrained
electron mobilities in Si1−xGex using an improved an ionized-impurity model’,
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 70, pp. 1483–1488, 1991.
80 F. M. Bufler, P. Graf, S. Keith, and B. Meinerzhagen, ‘Full band Monte Carlo
investigation of electron transport in strained Si grown on Si1−xGex substrate’,
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 70, pp. 2144–2146, 1997.
81 M. V. Fischetti, and S. E. Laux, ‘Band structure, deformation potentials, and
carrier mobility in strained Si, Ge, and SiGe alloys’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 88,
pp. 2234–2252, 1996.
82 M. M. Rieger, and P. Vogl, ‘Electronic-band parameters in strained Si1−xGex
alloys on Si1−yGey substrates’, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 48, pp. 14276–14287, 1993.
83 S. Smirnov, H. Kosina, and S. Selberherr, ‘Investigation of the electron mobility
in strained Si1−xGex at high Ge composition’, in Proc. SISPAD, pp. 29–32, 2002.
84 H. Kosina, and G. Kaiblinger-Grujin, ‘Ionized-impurity scattering of majority
electrons in silicon’, Solid State Electron., vol. 42, pp. 331–338, 1998.
85 F. M. Bufler, and W. Fichtner, ‘Scaling and strain dependence of nanoscale
strained-Si p-MOSFET performance’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 50,
pp. 2461–2466, 2003.

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
149
86 V. Palankovski, S. Dhar, H. Kosina, and S. Selberherr, ‘Improved carrier trans-
port in strained Si/SiGe devices’, in Asia Pacific Microwave Conference, Abstr.
and Proc., 2004.
87 J. B. Roldan, F. Gamiz, P. Cartujo-Cassinello, P. Cartujo, J. E. Carceller, and
A. Roldan, ‘Strained-Si on Si1−xGex MOSFET mobility model’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 50, pp. 1408–1411, 2003.
88 F. Gamiz, J. B. Roldan, H. Kosina, and T. Grasser, ‘Improving strained-Si on
Si1−xGex deep submicron MOSFETs performance by means of a stepped doping
profile’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 48, pp. 1878–1884, 2001.
89 K. Rim, J. L. Hoyt, and J. F. Gibbons, ‘Transconductance enhancement in
deep submicron strained-Si n-MOSFETs’, IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 707–710,
1998.
90 K. Rim, J. L. Hoyt, and J. F. Gibbons, ‘Fabrication and analysis of deep sub-
micron strained-Si N-MOSFET’s’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 47,
pp. 1406–1415, 2000.
91 K. Rim, ‘Strained Si surface channel MOSFETs for high-performance CMOS
technology’, in IEEE ISSCC Tech. Dig., pp. 116–117, 2001.
92 K. Ismail, ‘Si/SiGe high-speed field-effect transistors’, in IEEE IEDM Tech.
Dig., pp. 509–512, 1995.
93 S. J. Koester, R. Hammond, and J. O. Chu, ‘Extremely high transconductance
Ge/Si0.4Ge0.6 p-MODFET’s grown by UHV-CVD’, IEEE Electron Device Lett.,
vol. 21, pp. 110–112, 2000.
94 M. A. Armstrong, D. A. Antoniadis, A. Sadek, K. Ismail, and F. Stern, ‘Design of
Si/SiGe heterojunction complementary metal-oxide semiconductor transistors’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 761–764, 1995.
95 D. A. Buchanan, ‘Scaling the gate dielectric: materials, integration, and
reliability’, IBM J. Res. Develop., vol. 43, pp. 245–264, 1999.
96 A. Yagishita, T. Saito, K. Nakajima, S. Inumiya, Y. Akasaka, Y. Ozawa, et al.,
‘High performance damascene metal gate MOSFETs for 0.1 µm regime’, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 47, pp. 1028–1034, 2000.
97 Y. Ma, D. R. Evans, T. Nguyen, Y. Ono, and S. T. Hsu, ‘Fabrication and charac-
terization of sub-quarter-micron MOSFET’s with a copper gate electrode’, IEEE
Electron Device Lett., vol. 20, pp. 254–255, 1999.
98 T. Ushiki, M. Yu, Y. Hirano, H. Shimada, M. Morita, and T. Ohmi,
‘Reliable tantalum-gate fully-depleted-SOI MOSFET technology featuring low-
temperature processing’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 44, pp. 1467–1472,
1997.
99 M. Y. A. Yousif, M. Friesel, M. Willander, P. Lundgren, and M. Caymax, ‘On the
performance of in situ B-doped P+-poly-Si1−xGex gate material for nanometer
scale MOS technology’, Solid State Electron., vol. 44, pp. 1425–1429, 2000.
100 T. J. King, J. R. Pfriester, J. D. Scott, J. P. McVittie, and K. C. Saraswat,
‘A polycrystalline SiGe gate CMOS technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
pp. 253–256, 1990.

150
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
101 P.-E. Hellberg, A. Gagnor, S.-L. Zhang, and C. S. Petersson, ‘Boron doped
polycrystalline SixGe1−x films: Dopant activation and solid solubility’, J. Elec-
trochem. Soc., vol. 144, p. 3968, 1997.
102 Y. V. Ponomarev, P. A. Stolk, C. Salm, J. Schmitz, and P. H. Woerlee, ‘High-
performance deep submicron CMOS technologies with polycrystalline-SiGe
gates’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 47, pp. 848–855, 2000.
103 S. Cristoloveanu, ‘Silicon on insulator technologies and devices: from present
to future’, Solid State Electron., vol. 45, pp. 1403–1411, 2001.
104 K. D. Hobart, F. J. Kub, M. E. Twigg, G. G. Jernigan, and P. E. Thompson,
‘Ultra-cut: a simple technique for the fabrication of SOI substrates with ultra-thin
(<5 nm) silicon films’, in IEEE SOI Conf. Proc., pp. 145–146, 1998.
105 E. Leobandung, E. Barth, M. Sherony, S. Lo, R. Schulz, W. Chu, et al., ‘High
performance 0.18 µm SOI CMOS technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
pp. 679–682, 1999.
106 T. C. Lim, N. Jankovic, and G. A. Armstrong, ‘Caling of fully depleted SOI
MOSFETs with p+-poly SiGe gates’, in Proc. ISIC, pp. 231–234, 2004.
107 S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices. John Wiley & Sons, New York,
2nd ed., 1981.
108 T. J. King, J. P. McVittie, K. C. Saraswat, and J. R. Pfiester, ‘Electrical prop-
erties of heavily doped polycrystalline silicon-germanium films’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 41, pp. 228–232, 1994.
109 M. Y. A. Yousif, O. Nur, and M. Willander, ‘Recent critical issues in
Si/Si1−xGex/Si heterostructure FET devices’, Solid State Electron., vol. 45,
pp. 1931–1937, 2001.
110 P. Hellberg, S. Zhang, and C. S. Petersson, ‘Work function of boron-doped poly-
crystalline SixGe1−x films,’ IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 18, pp. 456–458,
1997.
111 A. Chatterjee, R. A. Chapman, K. Joyner, M. Otobe, S. Hattangady, M. Bevan,
et al., ‘CMOS metal replacement gate transistors using tantalum Pentoxide gate
insulator’, IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 777–780, 1998.
112 S.-F. Huang, C. Lin, Y. Huang, T. Schafbauer, M. Eller, Y. Cheng, et al., ‘High
performance 50 nm CMOS devices for microprocessor and embedded processor
core applications’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 237–240, 2001.
113 F. Nouri, P. Verheyen, L. Washington, V. Moroz, I. De Wolf, M. Kawaguchi,
et al., ‘A systematic study of trade-offs in engineering a locally strained
pMOSFET’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 1055–1058, 2004.
114 L. Smith, V. Moroz, G. Eneman, P. Verheyen, F. Nouri, L. Washington, et al.,
‘Exploring the limits of stress-enhanced hole mobility’, IEEE Electron Device
Lett., vol. 26, pp. 652–654, 2005.
115 V. Moroz, N. Strecker, X. Xu, L. Smith, and I. Bork, ‘Modeling the impact of
stress on silicon processes and devices’, Mat. Sci. Semicond. Processing., vol. 6,
pp. 27–36, 2003.
116 V. Moroz, X. Xu, D. Pramanik, F. Nouri, and Z. Krivokapic, ‘Analyzing strained-
silicon options for stress-engineering transistors’, Solid State Technol., vol. July,
pp. 49–52, 2004.

Strain-engineered MOSFETs
151
117 L. Smith, V. Moroz, G. Eneman, P. Verheyen, F. Nouri, L. Washington, et al.,
‘Exploring the limits of stress-enhanced hole mobility’, IEEE Electron Device
Lett., vol. 26, pp. 652–654, 2005.
118 R. A. Bianchi, G. Bouche, and O. Roux-dit-Buisson, ‘Accurate modeling
of trench isolation induced mechanical stress effects on MOSFET electrical
performance’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 117–120, 2002.
119 P. R. Chidambaram, B. A. Smith, L. H. Hall, H. Bu, S. Chakravarthi, Y. Kim,
et al., ‘35% drive current improvement from recessed-SiGe drain extensions on
37 nm gate length PMOS’, in IEEE VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., pp. 48–49, 2004.
120 V. Moroz, G. Eneman, P. Verheyen, F. Nouri, L. Washington, L. Smith, et al.,
‘The impact of layout on stress-enhanced transistor performance’, in Proc.
SISPAD, pp. 143–146, 2005.
121 G. Eneman, P. Verheyen, R. Rooyackers, F. Nouri, L. Washington, R. Degraeve,
et al., ‘Layout impact on the performance of a locally strained PMOSFET’, in
IEEE VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., pp. 22–23, 2005.
122 A. V.-Y. Thean, A. L. Barr, T. R. White, Z.-H. Shi, B.-Y. Nguyen, C.-L. Liu, et al.,
‘Computeraideddesignofsub-100nmstrained-Si/Si1−xGex NMOSFETthrough
integrated process and device simulations’, in Proc. SISPAD, pp. 195–198, 2003.
123 DESSIS-ISE, Release 8.5, ‘Integrated Systems Engineering AG, Zurich,
Switzerland’, 2003.
124 ISE Integrated Systems Engineering AG., Zurich, Switzerland, Tech. Rep.
DIOS-ISE, Release 6.0, 1999.
125 A. Schenk, ‘Rigorous theory and simplified model of the band-to-band tunneling
in silicon’, Solid State Electron., vol. 36, pp. 19–34, 1993.


Chapter 5
SOI MOSFETs
Silicon-on-insulator (SOI) refers to the first engineered semiconductor substrate
where a buried layer of silicon dioxide is created beneath a thin layer of silicon. After
a long development history for around 30 years, SOI technology has now joined the
microelectronics roadmap and has started to be used as the mainstream technology
in CMOS LSIs. The advantages of SOI devices over conventional silicon devices are
manifold and have been summarised in many references [1,2]. Circuits based on SOI
technology are extremely attractive for two basic reasons: (1) enhanced performance
(higher speed, lower power dissipation) and (2) extended scalability.
SOI devices intrinsically have very low junction capacitance, where the buried
oxide (BOX) can yield a three-fold reduction. The phenomenon of CMOS latchup
is eliminated in SOI, as there exists no path for current flow to the substrate. SOI
devices eliminate the body-effect since their body potential is not tied to ground. SOI
devices have a body factor close to unity and hence this reduces their subthreshold
slope, an attractive feature for switching applications. SOI technology is compatible
with conventional silicon technology. In principle, by suitable process modifications,
a circuit can be realised using fewer process steps. Scaling in SOI is easy, as the BOX
thickness need not be scaled, so only the dimensions of the device need to be scaled.
However, SOI devices suffer also from some drawbacks:
1.
Floating body effect in partially depleted SOI MOSFETs are prone to ‘kink’ effect
in d.c. circuits and drain-current overshoot in switching circuits.
2.
There is higher off-current due to a forward biased body-source junction when
the drain voltage is high.
3.
Fully depleted devices require ultra-thin films that are difficult to realise.
4.
High quality of buried oxide-silicon interface is vital.
However, the drawbacks of SOI devices are largely overshadowed by the signif-
icant advantages in performance the SOI technology has to offer, particularly for a
low power.

154
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Initial success has been achieved in using SOI substrate for mainstream
CMOS technology. IBM has built and tested SOI-based chips that have produced
20–25 per cent cycle time and 25–35 per cent improvement over equivalent bulk
CMOS technology. The ability of SOI as a low power source originates from the fact
that SOI circuits can operate at a lower voltage than the equivalent bulk technology.
At present SOI applications are mostly for microprocessors [3], but other possibili-
ties are expanding from high speed/low-power logic LSIs [4, 5] to radio frequency
(RF)/analog LSIs [6, 7], DRAMs [8–10], very low-voltage logic LSIs [11, 12] and
system-on-chip (SoC) [13]. Excellent reviews of SOI materials and technology,
evolution of devices and future trends can be found in References 14–16.
As far as the reliability is concerned, SOI MOSFETs are extremely robust to tran-
sient radiation effects. SOI devices offer a significant improvement in the soft-error
rate, since the presence of the BOX significantly reduces the volume susceptible to
ionisingradiation. Forexample, inacircuitexposedtoradiations, mostoftheelectron-
hole pairs are generated in the thick silicon substrate and do not affect the performance
of SOI devices. This is why SOI technologies have initially been dedicated to the niche
of radiation-hard circuits.
In this chapter, focus is on the SOI MOSFETs and a comparison with conventional
MOSFETs in terms of threshold voltage roll-off, kink effect, parasitic bipolar action,
transconductance and output resistance is presented. The current status and future
direction of SOI technology in terms of materials and devices, present status and
future developments are discussed. After a brief presentation of the two SOI process
families (fully depleted SOI and partially depleted SOI processes), attention will be
drawn on the advantages of SOI devices and also which SOI specific effects must be
accounted for by designers. Main mechanisms involved in the operation of fully and
partially depleted SOI MOSFETs are then discussed.
Consideration is given to the design challenges faced with SOI technologies: the
possibility of scaling scenarios that can replace the conventional scaling under the
condition where gate insulator thickness is no longer scaled. It will be demonstrated
that, on the basis of scalability and flexibility arguments, SOI is capable of further
extending the limits and performance of bulk-Si technology.
5.1
Fabrication of SOI wafers
There are various methods to fabricate the SOI wafers and among them, separation
by implanted oxygen (SIMOX) and UNIBOND (also known as Smart-cut) are con-
sidered most important for 300-mm SOI wafer fabrication. Several other methods
including zone melting recrystallisation (ZMR), ELTRANS (epitaxial layer transfer),
ELO (epitaxial lateral overgrowth) and SOS (silicon on sapphire) are used in research
or specialised applications. Many of these techniques have been tried and tested for
several years and almost all of them are present in a manufacturable technology.
Fabrication of SOI substrates has been reviewed by S. Cristoloveanu [17].
Until the early 1990s, SOS was the most mature substrate technology for fab-
ricating SOI devices. Several fabrication technologies exist for fabricating SOS

SOI MOSFETs
155
devices [2]. SOS is fabricated by epitaxial growth of a Si film on sapphire (Al2O3).
The electron mobility in SOS devices (∼250–350 cm2/Vs) is significantly lower
compared to bulk silicon mobility (∼1300–1400 cm2/Vs). This is largely due to the
high defect density and the compressive stress present in silicon on sapphire, which
leads to a reduction in the hole effective mass. This stress is expected to produce
an increase in the hole mobility. However, owing to the presence of surface defects,
hole mobility shows a value nearly identical to that of the bulk mobility. As a result
of these characteristics, SOS is not the ideal material for fabricating advanced SOI
devices. The benefit of reduced parasitic capacitance is offset by the reduced carrier
mobilities and the added cost of SOS technology.
Withinthe epitaxialgrowthcategory, SOIfabricationisaccomplishedusingoneof
two different methods. The first technique is described as epitaxial lateral overgrowth
(ELO). Here the fabrication process involves epitaxial growth of silicon from seeding
windows in the SiO2 layer. The silicon growth occurs initially in the oxide windows
and then laterally over silicon dioxide islands or devices capped with an insulator.
ELO process requires a post-epitaxy thinning of the Si film, which is achieved by
using a patterned oxide. The silicon film in excess is removed, leaving an isolated
Si island in the buried oxide.
The ELO technique has been used to fabricate three-dimensional and dual-gate
device structures. The other technique to fabricate SOI devices epitaxially is known
as lateral solid phase epitaxy (LSPE) technique. The LSPE technique is based on the
lateral epitaxial growth of crystalline silicon through the controlled crystallisation
of amorphous silicon. This technique is a good choice for fabrication processes in
the low temperature range. In ZMR technique, a polySi layer is deposited on the
BOX and is recrystallised by scanning a source of energy (laser) across the wafer.
As for ELO, ZMR is limited by the lateral extension of defect-free and single crystal
islands.
Full isolation by oxidised porous silicon (FIPOS) involves converting a silicon
crystalline layer to porous silicon, followed by a subsequent oxidation of the porous
silicon layer. The advantage of this approach is that porous silicon oxidises much
more readily without affecting the crystalline silicon on top of it. The original FIPOS
process produced SOI material of extremely high quality and the devices fabricated
using this technique showed excellent characteristics. However, this process technol-
ogy suffers from wafer warpage owing to the formation of porous silicon and then
oxidising it.
In the early development stage, SOI technology was based on SIMOX, which
refers to the deep implantation of oxygen ions into a Si wafer to create a buried
insulator (BOX). The SIMOX technique (see Figure 5.1) involves formation of a
buried layer of SiO2 by implantation at high energy (∼200 keV) oxygen ions beneath
the surface of a silicon wafer. The quality of the active silicon layer is a function of
the process and in particular the temperature of the anneal following implantation,
where annealing at high temperature (1320 ◦C, for 6 h) restores the crystalline quality
of the film. SIMOX wafers have good thickness uniformity, low defect density (except
threading dislocations: 104–106 cm−2), sharp Si–SiO2 interface, robust BOX and
high carrier mobility.

156
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Oxygen implant
Silicon substrate
Anneal
Silicon film
Buried oxide
Silicon substrate
Figure 5.1
SIMOX technique
Top wafer
Top wafer
Oxide
Oxide
Oxide
Polish/etch-back
Bond/anneal
Oxide
Silicon film
Handle wafer
Handle wafer
Handle wafer
Figure 5.2
Wafer bonding
Experiments have shown that oxygen dose of the order of 1018/cm2 must be
used to get a box-like profile. SIMOX comes in several versions: (1) thin and
thick Si films fabricated by adjusting the implant energy, (2) low-dose SIMOX
(≤4 × 1017 O+/cm2) with a 100 nm or thin BOX, (3) standard SIMOX (oxygen
dose 1.8 × 1018 O+/cm2 that typically has a 0.2 µm thick Si film and a 0.4 µm
thick BOX, (4) double SIMOX, where the Si layer sandwiched between the two
oxides serves for buried interconnects, wave guiding, additional gates or electric
shielding and (5) interrupted oxides that can be viewed as SOI regions integrated
into a bulk-Si wafer. Ultra-thin SOI layers in particular require not only epitaxial
layer thickness control but also hydrogen annealing to smooth the SOI surface
without reducing the film thickness. However, in SIMOX technology continuous
improvements to the base fabrication technology are being implemented for device
performance enhancement.
Waferbonding(WB)andetch-backorBESOIhasbecomeanimportantalternative
state-of-the-art SOI technology, in which an oxidised Si wafer is bonded to a second
Si wafer (see Figure 5.2). After bonding, the wafer is thinned down to reach the target
thickness of the silicon film. In principle, BESOI can provide defect-free Si overlayer
andcompetewithSIMOXforthick-filmSOIapplications. Etch-stoplayersareneeded

SOI MOSFETs
157
and they can be achieved by doping steps (p+/p−, P/N), epitaxy of a sacrificial layer
(SiGe) or porous silicon. Presently, BESOI is a strong competitor to SIMOX for
supply of quality production SOI wafers, although control of thickness of very thin
layers remains to be resolved.
As the SOI wafer is a composite substrate with an active top Si layer decoupled
from the support wafer, currently the Smart-Cut technique, which is a combination
of ion implantation and bonding techniques, is being widely used. Smart-Cut-based
manufacturing of Soitec’s SOI wafers (trade name UNIBOND) started in the late
1990s [18,19]. Differing from traditional layer-transfer techniques, which are based
mainly on wafer bonding and etch-back or epitaxial lift-off, the Smart-Cut approach
uses a thermal activation process as an ‘atomic scalpel’. This process offers better
control, and a single donor substrate can be reused many times for further layer
transfers (see Figure 5.3).
The Smart-Cut technique employs the deep implantation of hydrogen to generate
microcavities. In order to solve the control problem of thin film thickness in BESOI,
a starting wafer is implanted with hydrogen ions at a low depth below a previously
Initial silicon
Thermal oxidation
Hydrogen Implantation
1
2
3
Cleaning and bonding
4
Splitting
5
Annealing and CMP
touch polishing
6
Wafer A becomes new A
7
A
A
H+
A
A
A
B
D
D
SOI WAFER
Figure 5.3
Typical
process
steps
involved
in
Smart-Cut
technique
[Source: SOITEC.]

158
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
grown oxide. In the second step, the hydrogen-implanted wafer is bonded to an
oxidised wafer. After bonding and annealing, the assembly can be accurately split
at the level of the hydrogen implant, since hydrogen ions weaken the bonding of
Si atoms. Smart-Cut features many advantages with regard to SIMOX and BESOI.
Smart-Cut is currently deployed commercially for SOI, SOQ (silicon-on-quartz or,
more precisely, single crystalline Si on a fused silica substrate) and strained-Si on
insulator. The advantages of of Smart-Cut technology are as follows:
•
It is well-suited to high-volume manufacturing.
•
The thicknesses of the top Si and BOX layers can be easily controlled.
•
The process is scalable to any wafer diameter.
•
It uses standard IC manufacturing equipment.
Recently, SOITEC has introduced strained-Si on insulator (strained-SOI) sub-
strates for the next generation of 65 nm devices, especially for high-speed circuits,
wireless and broadband communication applications [20,21]. Strained-SOI combines
two high-performance technology solutions: strained-Si and ultra-thin SOI. Strained-
SOI, however, is a generic term describing a wafer that integrates both strained-Si and
SOI technologies, which could be either sSOI, or strained-Si on SiGe-on-insulator
(SSGOI). The production of strained-SOI substrates requires growing epitaxial SiGe
and Si layers, combined with wafer bonding and layer transfer to a handle wafer.
Depending on the process and target application, different combinations of Si and
SiGe layers on insulator can be obtained.
Strained-Si on insulator consists of a thin layer of strained-Si bonded directly onto
an insulated handle wafer. It is better suited for a fully depleted device architecture,
with strained-Si film thicknesses typically below 50 nm. Since sSOI has the same
basic structure as the conventional SOI, it is expected that the actual film thicknesses
for sSOI will follow similar guidelines to those that the industry’s roadmap indicates
for SOI. SSGOI consists of a bulk silicon support, topped by a layer of insulator, and
a relaxed-SiGe layer that generates the strain for the silicon film above it. It can be
tailored for both partially depleted and fully depleted applications, with strained-Si
film thicknesses of 7.5–22.5 nm. The total strained-Si and SiGe bilayer is typically
40–80 nm thick. sSOI is likely to be used for high-performance logic applications for
45 nm and below requiring ultra-thin fully depleted structures.
5.2
SOI devices
The SOI MOSFET (see Figure 5.4) is very similar to a conventional MOSFET with
identical modes of operation, the only difference being that the device is formed
on a silicon layer above an underlying BOX. There are two different types of SOI
MOSFET, based on the thickness of the silicon overlayer on which the devices are
fabricated. These two types of device types are partially depleted (PD) and fully
depleted (FD). A fully depleted SOI MOSFET is, as the name implies, fully depleted
of majority carriers at threshold. This tends to occur in relatively thin lightly doped
silicon layers. On the other hand, partially depleted structure has a thick enough

SOI MOSFETs
159
Gate
Gate
Oxide
Buried oxide
Source
Source
Drain
Drain
Gate oxide
Depletion
P-type substrate
P-type substrate
Channel
n+
n+
n+
P
n+
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4
(a) Cross-sectional view of conventional bulk n-MOSFET and
(b) cross-sectional view of an SOI n-MOSFET
silicon layer to have a neutral region above the buried oxide. This is known as a
‘floating region’, as its electric potential is not fixed.
Full depletion of the silicon film not only depends on silicon thickness but also
on the gate length, the doping level of the silicon film, the gate oxide thickness
and the flat-band voltage. For partially depleted SOI transistor, d.c. operation is
governed by the floating body voltage, which is related to the body charge. The major
parasitic effect in SOI-MOSFETs is related to the build-up of a charge in the silicon
layer originated from impact ionisation at the drain junction. This charge cannot
be removed, primarily because no contact with the Si film is available. There are
variousconsequencesofthischarge, whicharegenericallyreferredtoasfloating-body
effects: kink effect, drain current overshoot, hysteresis and instabilities associated
with parasitic bipolar transistor action and premature breakdown. When the body
potential becomes high enough the barrier at the source junction is lowered and an
injection of carriers due to lateral bipolar action occurs, injecting additional minority
carriers from the source (emitter) into the body (base).

160
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
SOI technology is now utilized in many industrial and consumer products
requiring high-performance logic in sub-90 nm technologies. The design issues
resulting from the floating-body in partially depleted SOI device structure, such
as parasitic bipolar effect and Vt variation, are now well understood and circuit/design
techniques to mitigate these effects have been developed. SOI also provides new
degrees of freedom to create many forms of multiple gate devices and offers advan-
tages in many niche applications. For example, in microsensors the Si/BOX interface
gives a perfect etch-stop mark, making it possible to fabricate very thin membranes.
A device with the best possible electrostatic control, the gate-all-around (GAA) tran-
sistor was first proposed by Colinge et al. [22], which can be fabricated by etching
a cavity into the BOX. A free-standing membrane, which will form the body of the
transistor, is obtained. This membrane is subsequently oxidised and wrapped with a
polySi gate [23].
5.2.1
Partially depleted SOI transistors
The partially depleted floating-body MOSFET was the first SOI transistor adopted
for volume production, owing principally to its processing similarities to bulk CMOS.
The PD–SOI device is largely identical to the bulk device, except for the addition
of a BOX layer, isolating the body of the given device from the bodies of other
devices. Isolated below by BOX, to the left and right by trench isolation or diffused
junctions, the body potential ‘floats’. This voltage bias is influenced by both static
and dynamic effects.
In a partially depleted MOSFET, the gate depletion region does not extend all
the way to the BOX layer, and thus a neutral region exists. As there is no external
contact, the holes stored in the body can modulate the body potential and hence the
threshold voltage. Reduction in the threshold voltage gives rise to an abrupt increase
in the drain current. This is known as the ‘kink’ effect as a kink is observed in the
I–V curves (see Figure 5.5), which is due to majority carriers, generated by impact
ionisation influencing the body potential. In weak inversion and at high drain bias,
a positive feedback is responsible for negative resistance regions, hysteresis in log
Id −Vg curves and eventually transistor latch.
Kink effect
Drain voltage
Drain current
Figure 5.5
Kink effect in an SOI MOSFET

SOI MOSFETs
161
The floating body may also cause undesirable transient effects [24]. Under
conditions of fast gate ramps, the body potential tends to rise with the gate potential,
which reduces the threshold voltage and increases the drain current, giving rise to
a phenomenon called drain current overshoot. Majority carriers are expelled from
the depletion region and collected in the neutral body. The drain current decreases
gradually with time during electron-hole recombination. In addition to the usual kink
seen in the drain current characteristics due to the presence of a floating body, one
can observe an additional kink immediately after the first kink. The occurrence of the
second kink is due to the presence of a parasitic npn bipolar transistor that is inherent
in the floating-body structure. The current overshoot is useful, because an extra drive
current is available, which benefits fast switching logic circuits. A reciprocal under-
shoot occurs when the gate is switched from strong to weak inversion: the current
now increases with time as the majority carrier generation allows the depletion depth
to shrink gradually.
At high drain voltage, impact ionisation generate more electron-hole pairs, and
thus modify the shape of the transient. Speed improvement in SOI can occur not
only from the reduction of drain and source capacitances but also from the static
and dynamic threshold voltage lowering due to the floating-body. In both fully and
partially depleted MOSFETs with submicron gate length, problems with the lateral
bipolar transistor that existed for longer gate length can be alleviated by using reduced
drain voltage. However, care must be taken using TCAD to accurately predict the
onset of breakdown, which is governed by film thickness and doping.
The self-heating effect, induced by the poor thermal conductivity of the BOX,
is responsible for the mobility degradation, threshold voltage lowering and negative
differential conductance. The threshold voltage is reduced by charge sharing effect
and drain-induced barrier lowering (DIBL) in the film. Improved DIBL is due to
the penetration of the electric field, into the BOX and underlying Si substrate. Such
fringing fields are responsible for an increase in the potential at the lower interface,
as if the back gate (substrate) was driven from depletion to weak inversion. In other
words, the drain acts as a virtual back gate. This drain-induced virtual substrate
biasing is critical in sub-0.1 µm fully depleted MOSFETs, where the front-channel
threshold voltage is lowered and the subthreshold swing is degraded.
Unfortunately, thin SOI MOSFETs are prone to another short channel mechanism:
drain-induced virtual substrate biasing (DIVSB) [25]. Increasing the drain bias allows
the fringing fields to penetrate into the buried dielectric and underlying substrate (see
Figure 5.6). A depletion region can form underneath the buried insulator, which
modifies its apparent capacitance. A more serious problem is the modification of the
potential distribution in the BOX with a net increase in the potential at the film-BOX
interface, much as if a virtual positive bias was applied to the back gate (substrate).
The fringing fields into the buried insulator and substrate depletion region stand
as a key limiting factor for SOI MOSFET with channel length scaled beyond 0.1 µm.
The thin, fully depleted SOI transistors are particularly sensitive to DIVSB because
the fringing fields drive the back interface from depletion to weak inversion [26].
Owing to interface coupling, the front-channel threshold voltage is lowered and
the subthreshold swing is degraded, which leads to an overall degradation of the
transistor performance.

162
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Gate
Body
Drain
Source
BOX
Si substrate
Figure 5.6
Schematic representation of fringing fields and hot-spot in an SOI
transistor
5.2.2
Fully depleted SOI transistors
For the fully depleted MOSFET, the depletion regions throughout the silicon reaches
the BOX. This reduces all the capacitances associated with the silicon layer. In order
to maintain balance of electric fields and capacitance within the SOI device and reduce
short channel effects, the active silicon thickness must be reduced with scaling. In
this fully depleted FET, the threshold of the device is now defined by the amount of
charge obtainable within the isolated body.
Fully depleted SOI has been shown to be an attractive candidate for deep sub-
micron CMOS low-power and high-speed applications. The subthreshold slope of a
fully depleted SOI MOSFET is near the ideal value of 60 mV/decade. This is because
the gate depletion width is very large and the associated depletion capacitance in
series with the gate capacitance becomes negligibly small. The steeper subthreshold
slope for the fully depleted SOI MOSFET permits a lower threshold voltage for the
same Ioff current, which in turn allows the devices to be used at lower supply voltages
in low power applications. Appropriate scaling of the ratio of film thickness to gate
length can reduce short-channel effects and enhance output currents due to higher
mobility in lightly doped thin films.
Aggressive CMOS scaling involves reducing the thickness of the thin silicon
film. The superior short-channel behaviour of appropriately scaled fully depleted
SOI devices can ultimately allow for use of undoped silicon layers, even at deep-
submicron gate lengths, yielding higher mobility and current drive. Fully depleted
devices require stringent control on the thickness of the active silicon film and hence
pose tighter controls on the fabrication process. For example, silicidation of ultra-thin
films (<50 nm) may consume the entire silicon film in the S/D areas.
The key parameters in SOI are gate length, film thickness and the nature and
thicknessoftheBOX[27]. Increasingthedopingreducesthethresholdvoltageroll-off
Vt(L) resulting from both CSE and DIBL. There is no influence of the film thickness
when the device is partially depleted. However, Figure 5.7 shows the desirability of

SOI MOSFETs
163
20
0
40
60
Film thickness TSi (nm)
80
100
DIBL
CSE
1018
3 ×1017
NA(cm−3) =
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
∆vT shift (V)
Figure 5.7
Threshold voltage shift in sub-100 nm SOI MOSFETs: influence
of film thickness and doping on the CSE and DIBL effects [After
S. Cristoloveanu, Solid-State Electron., Vol. 45, 2001(1403–1411).]
using ultra-thin, undoped SOI even for very short gate lengths, as long as the film
thickness is scaled to the gate length.
In SOI MOSFETs, inversion channels can be activated at both the front Si–SiO2
interface and the back Si–BOX interface (back-gate biasing). A strong coupling
develops between the gate bias and the inversion charge, leading to enhanced drain
current. The front- and back-surface potentials become coupled too and the electrical
characteristics of one channel vary with the bias applied to the opposite gate [28].
This interface coupling causes the front-gate measurements to depend on the back-
gate bias and quality of the BOX and interface. Hence different Id-Vg equations apply
to fully depleted SOI MOSFETs, compared to bulk MOSFETs.
5.3
Double-gate MOSFET
As MOSFETs scale into the sub-100 nm regime, the gate oxide thickness required for
adequate short channel effect (SCE) suppression reaches below 2.0 nm. The direct
tunnelling current through such a thin gate oxide starts to adversely affect the stand-
by power consumption. In highly doped layers random dopant fluctuations makes
it very difficult to control short channel effects. The improved electrostatic control
offered by an alternative device structure, the double-gate (DG) MOSFET illustrated
in Figure 5.8, will enable MOSFET scaling below 45-nm node on ITRS roadmap.
Distinct features of this novel device include application of a second gate and
use of a thin, fully depleted undoped silicon layer. The dual-gate configuration offers
multiple options about how to bias the two gates. Bias configurations may be cate-
gorised as symmetric, asymmetric or ground-plane (GP). A symmetric DG MOSFET
results when two gates have the same workfunction and a single input voltage is
applied to both gates. An asymmetric DG MOSFET either has synchronised but

164
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Oxide
Oxide
Channel
(NA)
Source
(n*)
Drain
(n*)
Gate
L
Gate
tox
tox
tSi
Figure 5.8
Schematic of the cross-section of a DG MOSFET with fully depleted
channel
different input voltages to two identical gates or has the same input voltage to two
gates that have distinct workfunctions. The names symmetric or asymmetric essen-
tially reflect the presence or absence of symmetry of the vertical electric field inside
the silicon. A ground-plane MOSFET (GP MOSFET) has one of its gates biased to a
constant voltage, while the other gate voltage is variable.
The operation of DG SOI MOSFETs is based on the concept of volume inversion:
the formation of front and back inversion channels causes, by continuity, the spreading
of minority carriers in the volume of a thin SOI film. It was predicted at an early
stage that the DG MOSFET will represent the ultimate MOS transistor [29, 30], as
the scalability is improved by the double-gate electrostatic control [29, 31]. Planar
DG MOSFETs with symmetrical configuration have been fabricated with GAA [2],
Delta [32] and lateral epitaxial growth technologies [33].
When biased in volume inversion, a 3-nm-thick DG MOSFET shows an increase
in transconductance as compared to SG operation [see Figure 5.9(a)] [34]. This
difference is explained using the Poisson and Schrodinger equations, solved self-
consistently. Both the vertical potential profile and spatial distribution of charge are
symmetrical, but carriers are no longer confined to the oxide interfaces [Figure 5.9(b)]
[34,35].
As the film thickness decreases below 20 nm, the behaviour of the electron
mobilitybecomesverycomplex[34–36]. Thereareseveralcompetingmechanisms:
1.
Carrier confinement increases, leading to enhanced phonon scattering.
2.
The size-induced quantisation is beneficial for the mobility.
3.
The surface roughness and Coulomb scattering increase and involve the two
Si–SiO2 interfaces.
Monte Carlo simulations show that the carrier mobility may increase as the film
thickness is reduced below 10 nm [37]. The electric field is negligible in the middle of

SOI MOSFETs
165
36
(a)
(b)
28
200
100
0
0
10
20
Depth in silicon (Å)
30
20
12
4
–4–5
–3
–1
1
Front gate voltage (V )
3
5
Single-gate
Single-gate
Double-gate
Double-gate
8
6
4
2
0
12
8
4
0
Drain current (A)
Transconductance (S)
Transverse electric field (× 104, V/cm)
Electron concentration (×1019, cm−3)
Figure 5.9
(a) Drain current and transconductance measured in a 3-nm SOI
MOSFET operated in SG and DG modes. (b) Quantum distributions of
minority carriers and electric field (Vg −Vt = 2 V); in the grey regions,
the carrier mobility is presumably degraded by surface roughness [After
S. Cristoloveanu, Solid-State Electron., Vol. 45, 2001(1403–1411).]
the DG MOSFET where most of the inversion charge is located. As electron–phonon
scattering strongly depends on the field, the mobility is presumably enhanced in the
centre of the film, but it is also reasonable to assume that surface roughness degrades
the mobility near each interface but where carrier concentration is now much lower
[grey areas in Figure 5.9(b)].
5.4
TCAD simulation of SOI devices
Silvaco provides an integrated simulation software for studying various aspects
of SOI technology. The ATHENA/SUPREM4 and ATLAS/S-PISCES simulators
allow device engineers to study deep sub-micron physical effects. TCAD simulation
includes models for simulation of both fully and partially depleted SOI transistors
basedonaccurateprocessgeometryanddopingprofiles. Inthefollowing, someresults
of ATHENA/ATLAS simulation will be presented that illustrate a few common effects
found in short-channel SOI MOSFETs.
A short-channel SOI MOSFET created using ATHENA is shown in Figure 5.10.
The structure of the device is very similar to that of a standard MOSFET device,
but the presence of a thick layer of insulating material under the depletion region
changes some of the device characteristics. Major requirements for SOI process
simulation are
•
definition of regions;
•
deposition/oxidation of silicon;

166
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
ATHENA
SOI process simulation
Silicon
Buried Oxide
Silicon substrate
Microns
SiO2
Silicon
Polysilicon
Aluminium
Materials
Source
Drain
Gate
20
19
18
17
16
15
Net doping
(/cm3)
– 0.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0
Microns
Figure 5.10
Short-channel SOI MOSFET created using ATHENA. Local oxidation
is used to isolate the active layer [Source: Silvaco International.]
•
local oxidation to form silicon islands;
•
shallow implant and RTA diffusion process steps;
•
CMP module silicon island isolation techniques;
•
LOCOS and Trench;
•
Silicides.
SOI MOSFETs are much more difficult to simulate owing to the presence of
significant floating body effects, carrier heating and non-localised transport. The
presence of a floating potential region in an SOI device results in an ill-conditioned
matrix, and the solution of SOI structures may become a numerically unstable prob-
lem. However, these problems can be resolved as long as small steps in voltage are
used. ATLAS allows the implementation of a hierarchy of basic transport models and
advanced models accounting for non-localised and lattice heating effects. In solving
the semiconductor equations in SOI structures, Drift-Diffusion or Energy Balance for-
mulation may be used. However, Energy Balance is necessary for very short-channel
devices to account for velocity overshoot. A non-localised approach allows accurate
simulation of impact ionisation. Basic models for SOI simulation include a choice of
different mobility models. Inclusion of a model for impact ionisation is essential to
model kink effect, snapback and hysteresis.

SOI MOSFETs
167
As SOI devices exhibit self-heating effects, a substantial elevation of temperature
within the SOI device occurs, which can modify the output I–V characteristics of
the device. SOI transistors exhibit significant heating due to the low thermal con-
ductivity of the buried insulator. Thicker BOX leads to heat dissipation problems,
because the heat is trapped in the upper silicon layer by the insulator. Thermal and
electrical effects can be coupled through self-consistent calculations. Models for this
effect include heat generation, heat flow, and effects of local temperature on physical
constants.
Difference between drain I–V characteristics of long channel and short channel
device is often observed. Also a transition takes place from pronounced kink effect
at low gate voltage, when power dissipation is low but impact ionisation at the drain
is high, to negative resistance at high gate voltage when self-heating predominates,
owing to higher power dissipation. As the drive current is increased the silicon lattice
temperature increases, and significantly degrades the carrier mobility so that, despite
increasing the drain voltage, the drive current decreases.
If the film thickness is reduced so that the film becomes fully depleted, the kink is
eliminated. The increased recombination around the source junction of fully depleted
devices also helps to eliminate drain current overshoot in ultra-thin film transistors,
and a lowering of the drain breakdown voltage occurs. [38,39]. The reduced break-
down voltage at zero gate voltage is attributed to the shape of the drain region, with
the reduced drain depth of ultra-thin SOI devices giving rise to a significant increase
in lateral drain field, and a consequent increase in impact ionisation. Holes generated
by impact ionisation serve as a source of base current for the lateral bipolar tran-
sistor, and in the subthreshold region, bipolar snapback effects have been observed
experimentally [40, 41]. To understand the lateral bipolar effect fully in thin SOI
MOSFETs and to establish design criteria for submicrometer n-channel transistors,
a two-dimensional finite difference simulation has been employed that incorporates
the following important features: (1) two carrier modelling of current flow, (2) par-
asitic bipolar effects including snapback, (3) breakdown voltage, (4) punchthrough
due to back-channel conduction and (5) negative differential output resistance caused
by thermal effects.
For accurate SOI device modelling with ultra-thin films quantum simulations
are often indispensable. Quantum confinement of carriers in semiconductor devices
can be incorporated in ATLAS through a self-consistent Schrodinger–Poisson solver
that allows calculation of bound state energies and associated carrier wave func-
tion. A density gradient model allows simulation of confinement effects on carrier
transport. The spatial distribution of the electron concentration in the semiconduc-
tor thin film is calculated classically and quantum mechanically (Figure 5.11) for a
double-gate transistor. The fundamental difference between the classical and quantum
calculation is that the classical electron concentration is maximum at the semi-
conductor interfaces, while the quantum electron concentration is maximum away
from the semiconductor interfaces. If the film is thin enough the maximum elec-
tron concentration is located in the middle of the film giving volume inversion (see
Figure 5.12).

168
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
0.004
0.006
0.012
0.016
Distance along line (m)
0.02
0.024
0.028
0.032
Silicon
20 nm – Classical simulation
20 nm –Quantum mechanical simulation
Oxide
Oxide
Electron concentration (/cm3)
Electron concentration (/cm3)
Figure 5.11
Special distribution of electron concentration using ‘classical’ or
‘Schrodinger’calculation [Source: Silvaco International.]
5.5
Simulation using MASTAR
MASTAR [42] is a computing tool developed for the analytical calculation of the
electrical characteristics of advanced CMOS devices such as planar bulk transistors,
DG or SOI devices. The calculation is based on analytical drift diffusion equations,
which depend directly on the major technological parameters, such as gate length,
channel doping, oxide thickness, and so forth. This application that has been used
to generate data for the ITRS roadmap allows rapid evaluation of key parameter
such as threshold voltage, ‘on’ current, ‘off’ current and gate delay. Moreover, the
influence of ‘physical’ secondary parameters such as mobility, poly depletion and
quantum effect can be visualised. Owing to a possible limited validity of the drift
diffusion models with respect to very short devices, the MASTAR predictions should
be considered as ‘worst case’.
Fenouillet-Beranger et al. [43] have used MASTAR to compare various devices
architectures (bulk, SOI and SON) and process modules (metal gate and strained-Si
channel) in a consistent way. This program makes some empirical projections as to
likely enhancement in performance of CMOS bulk devices, through use of SOI or
strained-Si material. It is shown that the use of MASTAR helps projection of a device

SOI MOSFETs
169
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
Electron concentration (/cm3)
Vg = 0.5 V
10 nm
2 nm
1.5 nm
5 nm
0.004 0.006 0.008 0.01 0.012 0.014 0.016 0.018
0.02 0.022 0.024
Distance along line (nm)
Electron concentration (/cm3)
Figure 5.12
Influence of silicon film thickness on electron concentration distribu-
tion [Source: Silvaco International.]
architecture roadmap and shows precisely which architectures, modules and materials
will be needed at a given CMOS node. Specifically MASTAR is capable of predicting
the degradation in DIBL, subthreshold slope and Ioff vs. Ion. Figure 5.13 illustrates
the impact of the SOI BOX thickness on electrical parameters such as DIBL [see
Figure 5.13(a)] and subthreshold slope [see Figure 5.13(b)] for various TSi (5, 7.5,
10 nm) and a gate oxide of 1 nm, for a gate length of 40 nm and low channel doping.
This study reveals alternative ways in which acceptable levels of short-channel effect
and DIBL (<100 mV/V) can be achieved. The first is to reduce silicon film thickness
to values down to 7.5 and 5 nm. The second is the use of a thin BOX with a thickness
lower than 40 nm. For higher thicknesses no SCE effect improvement is observed.
Another important aspect that is observed in Figure 5.13(a) and (b) is that the thicker
the silicon film is, the more efficient the thin BOX. In summary, ultra-thin Si-film
and BOX permit both subthreshold slope and DIBL below 100 mV/V in the shortest
devices (see Figure 5.13), especially for metal gate (MG) with non-doped channel,
where SCEcannotbereduced byincreaseinfilm doping. ThinBOXisthusconsidered
a beneficial feature, in spite of the fact that, in long-channel devices, it leads to a slight
degradation in the subthreshold slope, owing to higher coupling between the device
body and the bulk. The latter is, however, considered a low price to pay for gaining
a much better electrostatic integrity of very short devices.

170
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0.22
0.2
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0
20
40
60
80
Tbox (nm)
Tbox (nm)
100
120
140
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
TSi 5 nm
TSi 5 nm
TSi 7.5 nm
TSi 7.5 nm
TSi 10 nm
TSi 10 nm
Lg 40 nm metal gate
Lg 40 nm metal gate
Tox 10 Å
Tox 10 Å
Nch: 1e 16 cm−3
Nch: 1e 16 cm−3
GP 1e 20 cm−3
GP 1e 20 cm−3
S (Vd 0.8 V) (V/dec)
DIBL (Vd 0.8V) (V)
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.13
Simulated FD-SOI device with TSi = 5, 7.5, and 10nm, Lg-40nm,
Toxeq = 10 Å, metal gate, non-doped channel, with ground plane (GP).
Curves (a) DIBL and (b) vs. BOX thickness. The ultra-thin Si-film
(between 7.5 and 5nm) and relaxed BOX permit to maintain the sub-
threshold slope below 100 mV/dec and DIBL ∼100 mV. The relaxed-Si
film thickness (10nm) requires a thin BOX to achieve the same target.
Thin BOX thickness is efficient for BOX thickness under 40nm [After
T. Skotnicki et al. Simulation results using MASTAR.]
The use of a metal gate is a very interesting way to reduce DIBL. However,
the metal gate workfunction has to be correctly chosen to maintain a low threshold
voltage on long- and short-channel MOSFET. Figure 5.14 presents the threshold
voltage behaviour of a midgap gate (TiN) with undoped channel at Vdd = 0.1 V
and Vdd = 1 V for simulated devices with TSi 5 nm, thin and thick BOX and a low
channel doping. In the case of a thin BOX the threshold voltage of the long-channel
gate length (Lg = 0.1 µm) is around 0.55 and 0.45 V for the thick BOX. At high
Vdd the threshold voltage of the device with the thick BOX decreases owing to larger
short-channel effects down to 0.1 V, which is the target value. For 10 nm BOX, owing

SOI MOSFETs
171
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
Vth (Vd 0.1 V and 0.8 V) (V)
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0
0.02
0.04
Lg (m)
0.06
0.08
0.1
Vd 0.1 V
Vd 1 V
TSi 5 nm
Midgap gate
Nch 1e 16 cm−3
BOX 145 nm
BOX 10 nm
Figure 5.14
Threshold voltage evolution of simulated devices with midgap gate vs.
Lg at Vd = 0.1 and 0.8Vfor two BOX thicknesses 10 and 145nm, TSi =
5 nm and the channel is undoped [After T. Skotnicki et al. Simulation
results using MASTAR.]
to reduced short-channel effects the threshold voltage is maintained to a higher value
around 0.4 V. These results indicate that with a midgap gate it is very difficult to keep
a low threshold voltage value. Two solutions can be envisaged for decreasing this
value of 0.4 V; one is to reduce the workfunction of the gate by around 200 mV for
NMOS transistors and the other is to counter dope the channel.
A comparison of metal gate and polySi gate is shown in Figures 5.15, 5.16
and 5.17. The simulated transistor has the following features: Lg = 22 nm, gate oxide
thickness: 13 Å, BOX TBOX 10 nm, and a silicon thickness of 5 nm. In Figure 5.15, the
counter doping has to be relatively high (5×1018 cm−3) to bring down threshold volt-
age to the same value obtained with polySi gate and doped channel. In Figures 5.16
and 5.17, an increase of DIBL and subthreshold slope is observed for devices with
counter doped channel. Thus, a transistor with a midgap gate and a counter doped
channel compared with polySi gate degrades SCE. The gain in Ion performance
induced by the suppression of polySi depletion for metal gate is compensated by the
loss of mobility, owing to the high counter doping necessary to reduce the threshold
voltage.
5.6
Strained-Si MOSFETs on SOI
Compared to bulk-Si, enhancement of electron mobilities and hole mobilities on
SOI are found to be >50 per cent and 15–20 per cent, respectively [44]. However
although theoretical studies have predicted higher carrier mobility in ultra-thin
single-gate SOI samples compared to standard Si devices, this mobility increase
(estimated in the best case at 10 per cent) is obtained only for very low silicon
layer thicknesses (<5 nm) and for a high inversion charge concentration. In other

172
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1.00E + 16
1.00E + 17
Channel doping (at/cm3)
1.00E + 18
1.00E + 19
Poly gate +
doped channel
Metal gate + 
counter doped channel
Lg 22 nm
Tox 1 nm
Tbox 10 nm
TSi 5 nm
Vt (V)
Figure 5.15
Threshold voltage evolution of simulated devices with midgap gate
vs. channel counter doping, compared with polySi gate vs. channel
doping, at Vd = 0.1V [After T. Skotnicki et al. Simulation results using
MASTAR.]
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
1.00E + 16
1.00E + 17
1.00E + 18
1.00E + 19
Channel doping (at/cm3)
Lg 22 nm
Tox 1 nm
Tbox 10 nm
TSi 5 nm
Metal gate + 
counter doped
channel
Poly gate +
doped channel
DIBL (Vd 0.8 V) (V)
Figure 5.16
DIBL evolution of simulated devices with midgap gate vs. channel
counter doping, compared with polySi gate vs. channel doping, at
Vd = 0.1V[After T. Skotnicki et al. Simulation results using MASTAR.]
cases, that is, for thicker silicon thicknesses, a mobility degradation is experimen-
tally observed [45]. One may wonder whether it would be possible to combine the
two structures (strained-Si inversion layer and SOI inversion layers) to enjoy the
advantages of each and at the same time overcome the deficiencies they present
separately.

SOI MOSFETs
173
1.00E + 16
1.00E + 17
1.00E + 18
1.00E + 19
Channel doping (at/cm3)
Lg 22 nm
Tox 1 nm
Tbox 10 nm
TSi 5 nm
Metal gate + 
counter doped
channel
Poly gate +
doped channel
0.12
0.11
0.1
0.09
0.08
S (Vd 0.8 V) (mV/dec)
Figure 5.17
Subthreshold slope evolution of simulated devices with midgap gate
vs. channel counter doping, compared with polySi gate vs. channel
doping, at Vd = 0.1V. BOX thickness is 10nm, Tox = 1nm, TSi =
5 nm for Lg = 22nm [After T. Skotnicki et al. Simulation results using
MASTAR.]
5.6.1
Simulation of SSGOI MOSFETs
SOI MOSFETs with strained-Si channel on SiGe-on-insulator (SSGOI) substrates
have been fabricated by combining the SIMOX technology with regrowth of strained-
Si films [46]. It has been demonstrated that strained-SOI n- and p-channel MOSFETs
have mobilities typically 1.6 and 1.3 times higher than conventional Si MOSFETs,
respectively. SSGOI structures provide a good control of short channel effects, have
a lower parasitic capacitance and higher radiation tolerance and, moreover, present
mobility values that are much higher than those found in conventional SOI MOSFETs.
However, an accurate knowledge of high- and low-field transport in strained-Si for
evaluating its true potential for submicron CMOS devices under the impact of non-
equilibrium transport is still lacking.
In this section, design and simulation of p-channel strained-Si MOSFETs on
SOI using ATLAS is discussed. The design considerations are illustrated by com-
paring with the experimental data obtained from n-polySi gate strained-Si channel
SOI MOSFETs. The dependence of the carrier mobility in strained-Si/SiGe-OI inver-
sion layers on the germanium mole fraction and the strained-Si thickness, TSi, is
presented.
Both theoretical and experimental studies have shown both the electron and
hole mobility enhancements when silicon is grown pseudomorphically on relaxed
Si1−xGex [47]. In the conduction band, tensile strain splits the six-fold degener-
acy and lowers the two-fold degenerate perpendicular -valleys with respect to the
four-fold in-plane -valleys in energy space. The strain causes the six-fold degen-
erate valleys of the silicon conduction band minimum to split into two groups: two

174
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
lowered valleys with the longitudinal effective mass axis perpendicular to the inter-
face and four raised valleys with the longitudinal mass axis parallel to the interface.
Such energy splitting suppresses inter-valley carrier scattering between the two-fold
and four-fold degenerate valleys and causes preferential occupation of the two-fold
valleys where the in-plane conduction mass is lower. Similarly, the effect of ten-
sile strain on the valence band needs to be considered. The combination of a lower
effective mass and reduced inter-valley scattering gives rise to higher electron/hole
mobility. Moreover, the lower inter-valley scattering rates make energy-relaxation
times higher, which results in a significant electron velocity overshoot [48]. There-
fore, several material parameters for strained-Si and strained/relaxed SiGe are needed
for the device modelling, namely, the band offsets encountered in strained layers,
bandgap narrowing due to strain, doping-induced bandgap narrowing and the carrier
mobility.
Silicon strained in biaxial tension results in a type II band offset and this allows
tailoring of the band structure to confine both holes and electrons. To obtain accurate
results for p-MOSFET simulations, it is necessary to account for effects associated
with inversion layers. This is done by modelling mobility as having a dependence
on both transverse and longitudinal fields. It has been shown that the value of vsat =
1.1 × 107 cm/s (T = 300 K) is the same regardless of the germanium mole fraction
of the relaxed-SiGe alloy underneath the strained-Si layer. To take into account the
enhanced mobility in strained-Si with increasing strain (i.e., with Ge mole fraction, x,
in the substrate) and the effects associated with inversion layers, a modified CVT
mobility model has been used in the simulation [49].
If the trap density at the interfaces with the SiO2 is kept low, Coulomb scattering
is very weak, and its effects could be ignored. Therefore, only phonon scattering and
surface-roughness scattering are taken into account in the simulation. However, alloy
scattering was ignored. Electrons/holes are also scattered by the random nature of
the SiGe alloy. This is a fundamental limitation that cannot be removed (unless the
alloy can be grown in an ordered form), but it is expected to have a weak effect in
Si/SiGe system because only the tail of the electron distribution penetrates the SiGe
layer [50].
The schematic structure of simulated p-MOSFETs is shown in Figure 5.18. This
device structure is chosen to compare quantitatively the simulation with the experi-
mental results, as there is reliable experimental data available in Reference 51. This
device has an n+-polySi gate, channel length (Lg) of 0.85 µm, channel width (W)
of 5 µm, 8.5 nm oxide thickness and a 20-nm thick strained-Si layer, 290-nm-thick
germanium in Si1−xGex (x = 0.1) layer and 85-nm BOX thickness. A uniform n-type
doping level of 5×1014 and 5×1015 cm−3 is assumed in strained-Si and control-SOI
MOSFETs. The source and drain regions are doped to an impurity concentration of
1020 cm−3 and have a junction depth of 0.3 µm. The fixed oxide charge density is
assumed to be 1 × 1010 cm−2 and the interface between the strained-Si and SiGe is
assumed to be defect free.
The simulated Id–Vds characteristics and, for comparison, reported exper-
imental results (data reproduced from Figure 10 in Reference 51) have been
shown in Figure 5.19(a) and (b), respectively. Qualitative comparison from

SOI MOSFETs
175
Gate
Source
Drain
p+
p+
n + poly gate
20 nm n-strained-Si
8.5 nm SiO2
85 nm buried-SiO2
SiGe buffer
Si substrate
290 nm
Relxed Si1−x Gex
x = 0.10
Figure 5.18
Schematic diagram of an SSGOI p-MOSFET [After S. K. Samanta,
‘Ultrathin oxide and oxynitride gate dielectric films for silicon hetero-
FETs’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 2003.]
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
–2.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
–2.5
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
–0.5 V
–1.5 V
Drain bias (V)
(b)
(a)
–0.5 V
–1.5 V
VGS=–2 V
VGS=–2 V
  W = 5 m 
(Measured)
  W= 5 m 
(Simulated)
 SSGOI (Leff = 0.85 m)
 SOI (Leff = 0.80 m)
SSGOI (Leff = 0.85 m)
SOI (Leff = 0.80 m)
 Drain bias (V)
ID (A)
Figure 5.19
Drain characteristics comparing sSOI and SSGOI: (a) measured and
(b) simulated [After S. K. Samanta, ‘Ultrathin oxide and oxynitride gate
dielectric films for silicon hetero-FETs’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute
of Technology, Kharagpur, 2003.]
Figure 5.19(a) and (b) shows a close similarity between the experimental and simu-
lation results at room temperature. The drain current at saturation region is enhanced
by about 18 per cent, compared to control-SOI p-MOSFETs in both cases (measured
and simulated).
The simulated subthreshold characteristics of strained-SOI devices with
10 per cent Ge concentration at the same channel is shown in Figure 5.20(a). The
simulated subthreshold slope (S) of SSGOI MOSFETs is found to be 115 mV/decade.

176
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
–2.5
10–12
10–11
10–10
10–9
10–8
10–7
10–6
10–5
10–4
10–3
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
–2.5
10–8
10–7
10–6
10–5
10–4
10–3
ID (A)
W/L = 5 m/0.85 m
W/L = 5 m/0.85 m
Simulated
Vd = 0.05 V
Vd = 0.05 V
–2 V
 
Gate bias (V)
Measured
(a)
(b)
–2 V
Gate bias (V)
Figure 5.20
(a) Simulated and (b) measured subthreshold characteristics [After
S. K. Samanta, ‘Ultrathin oxide and oxynitride gate dielectric films
for silicon hetero-FETs’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, 2003.]
However, large amount (10−7) of drain leakage currents at low gate bias is observed
from reported experimental results [51], which is shown in Figure 5.20(b). This high
drain leakage current is due to the misfit dislocation in the SiGe layer and the back-
side leakage current of BOX layer is due to its poor quality. Leakage current can
be reduced by optimising the SIMOX process. Defect-free SiGe layer has, however,
been considered in the simulation. The punchthrough effect is also observed at high
drain bias for both measured and simulated data, because of thicker strained-Si/SiGe
layers upon the BOX layer.
The simulated output characteristics of SSGOI MOSFETs at room tempera-
ture are plotted for different germanium mole fractions and gate-source voltages in
Figure 5.21. As the drain-source voltage is increased the transverse field at the drain
edge decreases. This reduction and increasing carrier confinement with increasing
valence band offset produces a separation of the output curves with increasing mole
fraction of Ge at high drain-source voltages.
Figure 5.22(a) shows the significant enhancement of drain current of SSGOI
MOSFETs compared to SOI MOSFETs for all the drain-source voltages at room
temperature. A plot of the ratio of the drain current values for (x = 0.3) and (x = 0)
[Figure 5.22(b)] shows the largest enhancement in drain current arising from the
increase in mobility. The channel conductance is plotted in Figure 5.23 vs. drain-
source voltage for different x. Greatest enhancement in current in comparison with
standard SOI MOSFETs is obtained at low Vds, in the linear operation region, and it
is associated with increased mobility. The saturation region conductance is similar in
all cases since the saturation velocity is not dependent on Ge factor x.

SOI MOSFETs
177
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
0
100
200
300
400
500
VDS = – 2.0 V
SOI 
0.1
 0.2
 SSGOI (x = 0.3)
W/L = 5 mm/0.85 m 
Drain current (A)
Drain bias (V)
Figure 5.21
Output characteristics with different Ge mole fraction [After
S. K. Samanta, ‘Ultrathin oxide and oxynitride gate dielectric films
for silicon hetero-FETs’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, 2003.]
0.0 –0.5 –1.0 –1.5 –2.0 –2.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.0 –0.5 –1.0 –1.5 –2.0 –2.5
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
 SSGOI (x = 0.3)
 SOI 
W = 5 m
 L = 0.85 m
–2.5 V
–2 V
–2 V
VGS = –2.5 V
VGS = 2 V
VGS = 2.5 V
Drain current (mA)
Drain bias (V)
(b)
(a)
Drain bias (V)
ID(SSGOI (x=0.3))/ID(SOI)
Figure 5.22
Ratio between the drain current corresponding to (x = 0) and (x = 0.3)
vs. Vgs [After S. K. Samanta, ‘Ultrathin oxide and oxynitride gate
dielectric films for silicon hetero-FETs’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute
of Technology, Kharagpur, 2003.]

178
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
SOI
0.1
0.2
SSGOI (x = 0.3)
VGS = 2.0 V 
T = 300 K
Channel conductance (mA/V)
VDS (V)
Figure 5.23
Channel conductance vs. drain-source voltage [After S. K. Samanta,
‘Ultrathin oxide and oxynitride gate dielectric films for silicon hetero-
FETs’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 2003]
The effect of Ge content x on the linear transconductance of SSGOI p-MOSFETs
is shown in Figure 5.24 where the transconductance has been plotted as a function of
gate voltage for different Ge-content (in the relaxed-Si1−xGex: x = 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3)
devices. The germanium mole fraction leads to a greater confinement of the holes
in strained-Si/SiGe layers and increases the phonon scattering rate. However, the
increase in the germanium mole fraction produces an increase in the strain in the Si
layer and, as a consequence, a decrease in the effective mass and a reduction in the
inter-valley scattering rate and the enhancement mobility behaviour.
As seen from Figure 5.24, when compared to a device with x = 0.1, the devices
with x = 0.2 and x = 0.3 exhibit a hole mobility (and hence the transconductance)
enhancement factor of 1.2 and 1.4, respectively. Therefore, the decrease in effective
mass of holes and inter-valley scattering rate are the important factors to enhance
mobility. At low Vgs, the output current is small and remains nearly constant up to
about −0.5 V. The gate voltage at which peak transconductance occurs depends on
the value of Vds. Two peaks are seen at about −1.0 and −1.5 V. The peak at −1.0 V
corresponds to hole confinement at the strained-Si/SiGe-buffer interface. However,
at high gate voltage, the holes at the SiO2/strained-Si interface dominate the channel
conduction and the device becomes a surface channel device.
The transconductance and mobility of these devices is shown in Figure 5.25(a)
and (b), respectively, for different values of strained-Si thickness (TSi). It is observed
that for TSi = 10 nm, only one prominent peak of gm is present in Figure 5.25(a)
at gate voltage of −1.0 V. The relative position and size of the peak decreases with

SOI MOSFETs
179
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
–2.5
–3.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0.1
0.2
SSGOI (x = 0.3)
VDS = –50 mV 
W/L = 5 m/8.5 m 
Transconductance (S)
Gate bias (V)
Figure 5.24
Simulated linear transconductance characteristics: Vds for an n+-gate
SSGOI p-MOSFET with Ge content (x = 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3) [After
S. K. Samanta, ‘Ultrathin oxide and oxynitride gate dielectric films
for silicon hetero-FETs’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, 2003.]
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
–2.5
–3.0
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0.0 –0.5 –1.0 –1.5 –2.0 –2.5 –3.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
(a)
(b)
Field effect hole mobility (cm2/ Vs)
 TSi = 10 nm
 TSi = 20 nm
 TSi
30 nm
20 nm
10 nm
TSi =
VGS (V)
VGS (V)
Transconductance (S)
Figure 5.25
(a) Transconductance and (b) effective mobility vs. gate voltage for
different values of TSi [After S. K. Samanta, ‘Ultrathin oxide and oxyni-
tride gate dielectric films for silicon hetero-FETs’, PhD Thesis, Indian
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 2003.]

180
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
increasing thickness of strained-Si layer. The holes at the strained-Si/SiGe-buffer
interface dominate the channel conduction for TSi < 2 nm while the device becomes
a surface channel device for TSi > 2 nm. If the germanium mole fraction is main-
tained at x = 0.3, below the critical thickness, the strain remains unchanged, and
fundamentally the same splitting occurs between the heavy hole (HH) and light
hole (LH) bands of the silicon valence band minimum. Therefore, the hole effec-
tive mass is essentially independent of TSi. However, the greater confinement of
holes in the strained-Si/SiGe inversion layers, with a thinner silicon layer, leads to a
greater phonon scattering rate. As the thickness of the strained-Si layer is reduced,
phonon scattering rate increases, while the effective mass remains essentially the
same, and therefore a degradation in hole mobility is expected, which is shown in
Figure 5.25(b).
5.6.2
MC simulation of sSOI MOSFETs
In this section, the capability of the Monte Carlo device simulator SPARTA [52–55]
to simulate devices under biaxial tensile strain will be discussed. The example con-
sidered here is an advanced 25-nm strained-Si directly on SOI (sSOI) n-MOSFET,
which corresponds approximately to a scaled version of the realisation of the sSOI
MOSFETs [56]. Quasi-ballistic transport has been observed from extracted channel
velocity, which is far above the saturation velocity, and also from strong anisotropy
between the crystallographic ⟨100⟩and ⟨110⟩directions.
Quasi-ballistic transport occurs when electrons near equilibrium are suddenly
exposed to a high field and is strongly enhanced by strain, as can be seen from the
overshoot peaks inFigure5.26. Withtheirinitiallylowenergy, theydonotsuffermuch
scattering over a short distance (in time or space), so that the gain in velocity during
the free-flight leads to overshoot effects that are very sensitive to the band curvature.
The anisotropy of the full band structure in the quasi-ballistic transport regime is
analogously present in nanoscale devices, which is the reason for high strain-induced
performance enhancement as demonstrated by measurements [57] and Monte Carlo
simulation [53]. This increased contribution of quasi-ballistic transport, which is
not captured by classical device simulation (discussed above), makes Monte Carlo
simulation necessary for simulation of nanoscale devices.
In the DESSIS and SPARTA [55] command files, the level of the pseudomorphic
strain in the strained regions is specified by the germanium mole fraction in the virtual
SiGe substrate. In addition, the Ge content needs to be specified in the Monte Carlo
section of the SPARTA command file, so that the corresponding band structure table
is used. In the SPARTA simulation, it is also possible to switch between the crys-
tallographic ⟨110⟩and ⟨100⟩channel orientations. The resulting comparison of the
characteristics of the sSOI n-MOSFET output is shown in Figure 5.27.
From strain dependence of the Monte Carlo simulations alone, Figure 5.28 shows
the velocity profiles 0.13 nm below the gate oxide, corresponding to the on-state of
the output characteristics in Figure 5.27. It can be seen that along almost the whole
25-nm channel the electrons travel with a velocity much higher than the saturation
value of 107 cm/s.

SOI MOSFETs
181
Strained Si, E II <100>
Strained Si, E II <110>
Unstrained Si, E II <110>
Strained Si, E II <100>
Strained Si, E II <110>
Unstrained Si, E II <110>
1
10
Electric field (kV/cm)
100
Electrons
T = 300 K
Electrons
T = 300 K
E = 100 kV/cm
1
(a)
(b)
0
Drift velocity (107 cm/s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
Time (ps)
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Drift velocity (107 cm/s)
Figure 5.26
(a) In-plane velocity vs. field characteristics of electrons in unstrained
silicon along ⟨100⟩and ⟨110⟩directions in strained-Si; (b) transient
in-plane velocity overshoot of electrons after a sudden application of
a field of 100kV/cm [Source: Application Notes, Integrated Systems
Engineering AG, Switzerland.]
The anisotropy of the on-current (Figure 5.27) stemming from the anisotropic
velocities (Figure 5.28) demonstrates that the on-state is governed by quasi-ballistic
transport, which is analogous to the anisotropic velocity overshoots in bulk strained-Si
in Figure 5.26. Figure 5.29 shows Id–Vd characteristics as simulated with SPARTA,
the drift-diffusion (DD) model and the hydrodynamic (HD) model. The DD
simulations have been performed without considering avalanche generation. It is seen
that while DD underestimates the drain current, HD overestimates it. Consequently,
the results of SPARTA could be used as a reference for fine-tuning the energy relax-
ation time. Nevertheless, the relaxation time so calibrated is valid only for the given

182
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
0.2
0.4
Drain-source voltage VDS (V)
0.6
0.8
Monte Carlo, <100>
Monte Carlo, <110>
Drift-diffusion
SSDOI NMOSFET
VGS = 0.9 V
LG = 25 nm
tox = 1.3 nm
tSI = 7 nm
Drain current ID (A/cm)
Figure 5.27
Monte Carlo output characteristics of the 25-nm n-type sSOI MOSFET
for strained-Si with ⟨100⟩and ⟨110⟩channel orientations in compari-
son to the drift-diffusion result [Source: Application Notes, Integrated
Systems Engineering AG, Switzerland.]
3e+07
2e+07
1e+07
0.01
Position (m)
0.02
0.03
Monte Carlo, <100>
Monte Carlo, <110>
Drift diffussion
Velocity (cm/s)
Figure 5.28
Velocity profiles along the channel, 0.13nm below the gate oxide,
in unstrained-Si and strained-Si n-type sSOI MOSFETs [Source:
Application Notes, Integrated Systems Engineering AG, Switzerland.]
gate length and channel orientation, that is, ⟨110⟩. The results of such a calibration
are shown in Figure 5.30 where the energy relaxation time in strained-Si was reduced
from 0.35 to 0.11 ps. A detailed discussion on comparisons of DD, HD and Monte
Carlo is available in Reference 58.

SOI MOSFETs
183
1.0e−03
5.0e−04
0.0e+00
Id (A/m)
0
0.2
0.4
Vd (V)
0.6
0.8
Drift-diffusion
Hydro,tau = 0.35 ps (default)
Monte Carlo: SPARTA
Figure 5.29
Id–Vd characteristics as obtained from drift-diffusion, hydrodynamic
and Monte Carlo for the channel oriented along ⟨110⟩; the energy
relaxation time for hydrodynamic uses the default value [Source:
Application Notes, Integrated Systems Engineering AG, Switzerland.]
1.0e−03
5.0e−04
0.0e+00
Id (A/m)
0
0.2
0.4
Vd (V)
0.6
0.8
Drift-diffusion
Hydro, tau = 0.11 ps
Monte Carlo : SPARTA
Figure 5.30
Id–Vd characteristics as obtained from drift-diffusion, hydrodynamic
and Monte Carlo simulations; the hydrodynamic simulation uses a
calibrated energy relaxation time, which is valid only for a given gate
length (0.25µm) and channel orientation (⟨110⟩) [Source: Application
Notes, Integrated Systems Engineering AG, Switzerland.]

184
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
5.7
Modelling of multi-gate SOI devices
In implementation of multiple gate SOI devices, device designers have sought
alternate design concepts to achieve the desired current drive capability and electro-
static control. Recent investigations have resulted in several novel device structures
including the FinFET [59–61], the tri-gate, the quantum wire MOSFET, the -Gate
or the 	-Gate MOSFET and the Quadruple-Gate or the GAA MOSFET [62]. These
multi-gate devices are 3D variants of the conventional, planar MOSFET offering
improved current drive, transconductance and subthreshold characteristics. In addi-
tion, they have the added feature that their fabrication technology is compatible with
the already well-understood, low-cost and reliable silicon IC technology.
The primary problem in the mass fabrication of these novel devices is the difficulty
in accurate patterning of thin, narrow device dimensions for the channel body or
fin. As device dimensions continue to shrink, fabrication processes tend to become
more complex. As a result, modelling of multi-gate devices using state-of-the-art
commercial device simulators now requires 3D as opposed to 2D simulation.
TCAD has an important role in the introduction of FinFETs, and must address
new complexities in the range of device parameters that must be defined. There is also
a need for simulation studies that compare the behaviour of multi-gate devices [63].
On the basis of 3D device simulations, Kranti and Armstrong [64] have reported
the possible device performance enhancements for triple-gate (TG) and double-gate
(DG) FinFETs for high performance (HP), low operating power (LOP) and low
standby power (LSTP) logic technologies according to ITRS 65-nm node specifi-
cations. The authors have studied in detail the impact of spacer width (s), lateral
source/drain doping gradient (d), aspect ratio (AR), fin thickness (Tfin) and height
(Hfin)alongwithgateworkfunction(φm)onthedeviceperformance. Theauthorshave
presented a design guideline on SCEs, intrinsic delay (τ = CggVdd/Ion), off-current
(Ioff ) and Ion/Ioff to meet ITRS requirements for TG and DG FinFETs.
3D device simulations using ATLAS [49] have been carried out to explore
the design space for triple-gate (Figure 5.31a and b) and double-gate FinFETs
(Figure 5.31c). A BOX (tBOX) of 100 nm, doping (Na) of the p-type SOI layer of
1015 cm−3 and gate workfunction of 4.52–4.72 eV were chosen for the devices. Hfin
was varied from Lg/2 to 2Lg, whereas Tfin was varied from Lg/2 to Lg, where Lg is
the physical gate length of the devices. The spacer width (s) was varied from (0.25)Lg
to (1.0)Lg for all the devices and S/D doping profile defined by its gradient at the gate
edges [65–67] was varied from 2 to 8 nm/decade, as shown in Figure 5.31(d). The
equivalent oxide thickness (EOT) in inversion, including finite inversion layer capac-
itance, gate depletion and physical oxide thickness to account for quantum effects was
defined by ITRS guidelines. The sidewall spacer of SiO2 and gate electrode thickness
of 25 nm was assumed in all the simulations. The double-gate FinFET was simulated
by electrically isolating the top gate electrode using a thicker top gate oxide thickness
of 50 nm, as shown in Figure 5.31(c).
Simulations were performed with DD models using a modified expression of
saturation velocity (vsat) and the empirical parameter beta (β = 1) proposed by
Granzner et al. [68, 69] to account for electron transport for nanoscale gate length

SOI MOSFETs
185
Drain electrode
Gate electrode
Gate electrode
Source electrode
Z
Y
X
Gate oxide
Gate oxide
Gate oxide
1E+26
1E+25
1E+24
1E+23
1E+22
1E+21
1E+20
0
10
20
30
Distance along the channel (nm)
40
50
1E+28
(a)
(b)
(c)
(b)
1E+27
Hfin
Hfin
Tfin
Tfin
Hfin
Tfin
Tfin
Buried oxide
Buried oxide
Buried oxide
Gate electrode
Na = 1021 m−3
Gate length (Lg)
Spacer
Spacer
Doping in sillicon film (m−3)
d = 8 nm/dec
d = 2 nm/dec
Figure 5.31
(a) Schematic diagram of a triple-gate (TG) FinFET. (b) 2D cut-plane
(y-z plane) at x = Lg/2 of a triple-gate FinFET. (c) 2D cut-plane
(y-z plane) at x = Lg/2 of a double-gate FinFET. (d) Variation of
source/drain doping gradient along the channel at a fixed spacer of
(0.5)Lg [After A. Kranti and G. A. Armstrong, Semicond. Sci. Technol.,
Vol. 21, 2006 (409–421).]
devices. The gate-length-dependent saturation velocity (in units of 107 cm/s) [69]
was defined by the expression vsat(Lg) = 2.0 + (19.2/L1.43
g
). Simple modification
in the saturation velocity of carriers provides a reasonable estimation of on current
when compared with Monte Carlo simulation for DG MOSFETs over a wide range
of gate lengths (10–100 nm) [69].

186
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
TG FinFET
0.10
0.05
0.00
1
3
5
d (nm/dec)
7
9
Φm=4.52 eV, Vds = 50 mV, Tox= 1.3 nm
s = (0.25)Lg
s = (0.50)Lg
s = (1.00)Lg
Hfin = 12.5 nm
Hfin = 25 nm
Lg = 25 nm
Tfin = 12.5 nm
Hfin = 50 nm
Vth (V)
Figure 5.32
Variation of threshold voltage of the TG FinFET with doping gradi-
ent for various values of spacer and fin height [After A. Kranti and
G. A. Armstrong, Semicond. Sci. Technol., Vol. 21, 2006(409–421).]
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
1
3
5
d (nm/dec)
7
9
Hfin = 12.5 nm
Hfin = 25 nm
Hfin = 50 nm
S-slope (mV/dec)
Figure 5.33
Variation of S-slope of the TG FinFET as a function of doping gra-
dient for various values of spacer and fin height [After A. Kranti and
G. A. Armstrong, Semicond. Sci. Technol., Vol. 21, 2006 (409–421).]
Figures 5.32–5.34 show the dependence of threshold voltage (Vth), DIBL and
subthreshold slope (S) on Hfin, s and d. Vth is defined as the gate bias when the
drain current reaches 500 nA × (Wg/Lg) and DIBL as Vth (at Vds = 1.1 V)-Vth
(at Vds = 0.05 V). With an increase in Hfin, the top gate loses control over the

SOI MOSFETs
187
1
3
5
d (nm/dec)
7
9
Hfin = 12.5 nm
Hfin = 25 nm
Hfin = 50 nm
200
160
120
80
40
0
DIBL (mV/V)
Figure 5.34
Variation of DIBL of the TG FinFET with doping gradient for various
values of spacer and fin height [After A. Kranti and G. A. Armstrong,
Semicond. Sci. Technol., Vol. 21, 2006(409–421).]
channel and the two side gates mainly govern current conduction. This results in a
degradation of SCEs – lowering of Vth and increase in DIBL and S-slope. Therefore,
from the viewpoint of controlling SCEs, TG devices should be designed with lower
aspect ratios. Also, as shown in the figure, lateral source/drain doping gradient along
with spacer width offers another degree of freedom apart from the important device
parameters such as Hfin, Tfin, AR and Tox to minimise SCEs. Larger s values along
with lower AR result in Vth, S-slope and DIBL values that are nearly independent of d.
It is, however, better to design TG devices with smaller values of d along with larger
s values as this combination results in a shorter effective channel length ((Leff )WI)
in the weak inversion region, as shown in Figure 5.35. (Leff )WI was extracted by
comparing Ioff (Ids at Vgs = 0 V, Vds = 1.1 V) for a device having finite d and s with
an ideal device with s = d →0 [67].
Clearly, adjusting s and d is a more viable option for controlling SCEs and thus
achieving lower Ioff in the ultra-short gate length regime than to vary the gate length
and/or fin height. It should be noted that many possible combinations of s and d
can be obtained to achieve nearly the same (Leff )WI that is, s = (0.25)Lg with
d = 3 nm/decade, s = (0.50)Lg with d = 4.5, s = (0.75)Lg with d = 6 and
s = (1.0)Lg with d = 8 all achieve (Leff )WI of ∼30 nm. Therefore, optimisation
of s and d for short-channel immunity must be considered together with the on–off
current values as a high doping gradient that is, higher values of d as the gate edge not
only reduces (Leff )WI, (that is, increases SCEs), but also draws more carriers into the
spacer region near the gate edges, thus increasing Ion (Ids at Vgs = Vds = 1.1 V). Thus,
lateral S/D doping gradient along with the spacer width defines a design trade-off
between acceptable SCEs and parasitic series resistance and thus requires careful
optimisation of the overall performance (Ion, Ioff and Ion/Ioff ) of the device.

188
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
1
3
5
d (nm/dec)
7
9
60
50
40
30
20
10
TG FinFET
Lg = 25 nm, Tfin = 12.5 nm, Hfin = 25 nm
Φm = 4.52 eV, Vds = 1.1 V, Tox = 1.3 nm
s = (0.25)Lg
s = (0.50)Lg
s = (0.75)Lg
s = (1.00)Lg
(Leff)WI (nm)
Figure 5.35
Dependence of extracted effective channel length (LeffWI) in the sub-
threshold region with spacer width and doping gradient with AR = 2
[After A. Kranti and G. A. Armstrong, Semicond. Sci. Technol., Vol. 21,
2006(409–421).]
Modelling of tri-gate SOI device has been carried out by INTEL using DESSIS
[70]. Thegoalofthisstudywastounderstandthedeviceperformanceunderaggressive
scaling conditions. The baseline structure for this study has a gate length, body
height and width of 30 nm. The simulations show that the device shows a near-
ideal, fully depleted performance with good DIBL and steep subthreshold gradient.
The simulations also help understand the role of the corner transistors in influencing
device operation. Their results suggest that the tri-gate device could eventually replace
conventional planar MOS transistors in the near future.
G.Peietal. [71] havereportedthesubthresholdcharacteristicsformultipledimen-
sion FinFET transistors using a 3D numerical device simulator, FIELDAY. In this
report, design considerations for FinFET devices have been explored using 3D numer-
ical simulations and analytical modelling. Analytical expressions have been derived
using solutions of the 3D Laplace equation for the subthreshold behaviour in these
nanoscale devices. Simulation results reported here compare well with experimental
measurements on fabricated device structures.
5.8
Summary
The use of TCAD to investigate design and applications of devices based on
SOI technology has been reviewed. SOI technology allows integration of high-
performance innovative devices that can push forward the present frontiers of the
CMOS downscaling. As one moves from 0.1 µm generation and below, SOI offers

SOI MOSFETs
189
a number of advantages in low power, communication circuits and system-on-chip
and may ultimately replace bulk CMOS technology. SOI technology improves per-
formance over bulk CMOS technology by 25–35 per cent, equivalent to two years of
bulk CMOS advances and offers the low power advantages. Indeed some perceived
SOI disadvantages (self-heating, hot carriers and early breakdown) are no longer
such a significant problem for operation at low voltage. The importance of using
strained-Si alongside SOI technology to yield significant improvements in mobility
has been highlighted.
As devices such as the FinFET are essential to a 3D structure, the importance of
adapting the TCAD tools to investigate various design issues has been described. On
the basis of 3D device simulations, predictions for device performance enhancements
for TG and DG FinFETs for high performance (HP), low operating power (LOP)
and low standby power (LSTP) logic technologies according to ITRS 65-nm node
specifications have been made.
References
1 T. Yaur, and T. H. Ning, Fundamentals of Modern VLSI Devices. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1998.
2 J.-P. Colinge, SOI Technology: Materials to VLSI, 2nd Ed. Kluwer, Boston, 1997.
3 G. G. Shahidi, A. Ajmera, F. Assaderaghi, R. J. Bolam, E. Leobandung,
W. Rausch, et al., ‘Partially-depleted SOI technology for digital logic’, in IEEE
ISSCC Tech. Dig., pp. 426–427, 1999.
4 K. Ueda, K. Nii, Y. Wada, I. Takimoto, S. Maeda, T. Iwamatsu, et al.,
‘A CAD-compatible SOI/CMOS gate array having body-fixed partially-depleted
transistors’, in IEEE ISSCC Tech. Dig., pp. 288–289, 1997.
5 Y. Ohtomo, S. Yasuda, M. Nogawa, J. Inoue, K. Yamakoshi, H. Sawada, et al.,
‘A 40Gb/s 8×8 ATM switch LSI using 0.25 µm CMOS/SIMOX’, in IEEE ISSCC
Tech. Dig., pp. 154–155, 1997.
6 M. Harada, T. Tsukahara, and J. Yamada, ‘0.5–1V 2GHz RF front-end circuits in
CMOS/SIMOX’, in IEEE ISSCC Tech. Dig., pp. 378–379, 2000.
7 M. Kumar, Y. Tan, J. Sin, L. Shi, and J. Lau, ‘A 900MHz SOI fully-integrated
RF power amplifier for wireless transceivers’, in IEEE ISSCC Tech. Dig.,
pp. 382–383, 2000.
8 T. Eimori, T. Oashi, H. Kimura, Y. Yamaguchi, T. Iwamatsu, T. Tsuruda, et al.,
‘ULSI DRAM/SIMOX with stacked capacitor cells for low-voltage operation’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 45–48, 1993.
9 Y. Koh, M. Oh, J. Lee, J. Yang, W. Lee, C. Park, et al., ‘1 Giga bit SOI DRAM
with fully bulk compatible process and body-contacted SOI MOSFET structure’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 579–582, 1997.
10 J.-W. Park, Y.-G. Kim, I.-K. Kim, K.-C. Park, H. Yoon, and K.-C. Lee,
‘Performance characteristics of SOI DRAM for low-power application’, in IEEE
ISSCC Tech. Dig., pp. 434–435, 1999.

190
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
11 T. Fuse, Y. Oowaki, T. Yamada, M. Kamoshida, M. Ohta, and T. Shino, ‘A 0.5 V
200 MHz 1-Stage 32b ALU using a body bias controlled SOI pass-gate logic’, in
IEEE ISSCC Tech. Dig., pp. 286–287, 1997.
12 A. Ebina, T. Kadowaki, Y. Sato, and M. Yamaguchi, ‘Ultra low-power
CMOS IC using partially-depleted SOI technology’, in IEEE CICC Tech. Dig.,
pp. 57–60, 2000.
13 Y. Hirano, T. Matsumoto, S. Maeda, T. Iwamatsu, T. Kunikiyo, K. Nii, et al.,
‘Impact of 0.10 µm SOI CMOS with body-tied hybrid trench isolation structure
to break through the scaling crisis of silicon technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech.
Dig., pp. 467–470, 2000.
14 G. K. Celler, and S. Cristoloveanu, ‘Frontiers of silicon-on-insulator’, J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 93, pp. 4955–4978, 2003.
15 S. Cristoloveanu, and G. Reichert, ‘Recent advances in SOI materials and device
technologies for high temperature’, in Proc. Devices and Sensors Conference,
High-Temperature Electronic Materials, pp. 86–93, 1998.
16 S. Cristoloveanu, and V. Ferlet-Cavrois, ‘Introduction to SOI MOSFETs: context,
radiation effects, and future trends’, Int’l. J. High Speed Electron. Syst., vol. 14,
pp. 465–487, 2004.
17 S. Cristoloveanu, ‘Silicon on insulator technologies and devices: from present to
future’, Solid State Electron., vol. 45, pp. 1403–1411, 2001.
18 M. Bruel, B. Aspar, B. Charlet, C. Maleville, T. Poumeyrol, A. Souble, et al.,
‘Smart Cut: A promising new SOI material technology’, in IEEE Intl SOI Conf.
Proc., pp. 178–179, 1995.
19 M. Bruel, ‘Silicon on insulator material technology’, Electron. Lett., vol. 31,
pp. 1201–1202, 1995.
20 B. Ghyselen,
J.-M. Hartmann,
T. Ernst,
C. Aulnette,
B. Osternaud,
Y. Bongumilowicz, et al., ‘Engineering strained silicon on insulator wafers with
the SmartCutTM technology’, Solid State Electron., vol. 48, pp. 1285–1296, 2004.
21 G. Celler, and M. Wolf, ‘Strained silicon on insulator: A quick guide to the
technology, the processes, and the products, SOITEC’, July 2003.
22 J. P. Colinge, M. H. Gao, A. Romano-Rodriguez, H. Maes, and C. Claeys,
‘Silicon-on-insulator “gate-all-around device”’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
pp. 595–598, 1990.
23 R. A. Johnson, P. R. de la Houssey, C. E. Chang, P.-.F. Chen, M. E. Wood,
G. A. Garcia, et al., ‘Advanced thin-film silicon-on-sapphire technology:
microwave circuit applications’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 45,
pp. 1047–1054, 1998.
24 D. Munteanu, D. Weiser, S. Cristoloveanu, O. Faynot, J.-.L. Pelloie, and
J. G. Fossum, ‘Generation-recombination transient effects in SOI transis-
tors: experiments and simulations’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 45,
pp. 1678–1683, 1998.
25 T. Ernst, C. Tinella, C. Raynaud, and S. Cristoloveanu, ‘Fringing fields in sub-
0.1 µm fully depleted SOI MOSFETs: Optimization of the device architecture’,
Solid State Electron., vol. 46, pp. 373–378, 2002.

SOI MOSFETs
191
26 K. Oshima, S. Cristoloveanu, B. Guillaumot, S. Deleonibus, and H. Iwai, ‘SOI
MOSFETs with buried alumina: Thermal and electrical aspects’, J. Electrochem.
Soc., vol. 151, pp. G257–G261, 2004.
27 Y. Ohmura, S. Nakashima, K. Izumi, and T. Ishii, ‘0.1-µm-gate, ultra-thin film
CMOS device using SIMOX substrate with 80-nm-thick buried oxide layer’, in
IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 675–678, 1991.
28 H.-K. Lim, and J. G. Fossum, ‘Threshold voltage of thin-film silicon on insu-
lator (SOI) MOSFETs’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 30, pp. 1244–1251,
1983.
29 D. Franck, S. Laux, and M. Fischetti, ‘Monte Carlo simulations of a 30 nm
dual gate MOSFET: How short can Si go?’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
pp. 553–556, 1992.
30 E. Rauly, O. Potavin, F. Balestra, and C. Raynaud, ‘On the subthreshold swing and
short channel effects in single and double gate deep submicron SOI MOSFET’s’,
Solid State Electron., vol. 43, pp. 2033–2037, 1999.
31 R. H. Yan, A. Ourmazd, and K. F. Lee, ‘Scaling the Si MOSFET – from bulk to
SOI to bulk’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 39, pp. 1704–1710, 1992.
32 D. Hisamoto, T. Kaga, and E. Takeda, ‘Impact of the vertical SOI “DELTA”
structure on planar device technology’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 38,
pp. 1419–1424, 1991.
33 H. P. Wong, K. K. Chan, and Y. Taur, ‘Self-aligned (top and bottom) double-
gate MOSFET with a 25nm thick silicon channel’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
pp. 427–430, 1997.
34 T. Ernst, D. Munteanu, S. Cristoloveanu, T. Ouisse, S. Horiguchi, Y. Ono,
et al., ‘Investigation of SOI MOSFETs with ultimate thickness’, Microelectronics
Engineering, vol. 48, pp. 339–342, 1999.
35 B. Majkusiak, T. Janik, and J. Walczak, ‘Semiconductor thickness effects
in the double-gate SOI MOSFET’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 45,
pp. 1127–1134, 1998.
36 F. Gamiz, J. B. Roldan, P. Cartujo-Cassinello, J. A. Lopez-Villanueva, and
S.Rodriguez, ‘Electronmobilityinextremelythinsingle-gatesilicon-on-insulator
inversion layers’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 86, pp. 62–69, 1999.
37 C.Fiegna, A.Abramo, andE.Sangiorgi, ‘Single-anddouble-gateSOIMOSstruc-
tures for future ULSI: a simulation study’, in Future Trends in Microelectronics,
Wiley, New York, 1999.
38 G. A. Armstrong, J. R. Davis, and A. Doyle, ‘Characterization of bipolar snap-
back and breakdown voltage in thin film SOI transistors by two-dimensional
simulation’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 38, pp. 328–336, 1991.
39 G. A. Armstrong, and W. D. French, ‘Simulation of ultra thin film SOI transistors
using a non-local model for impact ionisation’, Solid State Electron., vol. 35,
pp. 1761–1770, 1992.
40 G. A. Armstrong, and W. D. French, ‘Improved physical modelling of bipolar
effects in SOI transistors’, in Proc. 5th Int. Symposium on silicon-on-insulator
technology, pp. 104–112, 1992.

192
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
41 G. A. Armstrong, and W. D. French, ‘Suppression of parasitic bipolar effects in
thin film SOI transistors’, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. EDL-13, pp. 198–200,
1992.
42 T. Skotnicki, ‘MASTAR Manual, ver. 4’, 2005.
43 C. Fenouillet-Beranger, T. Skotnicki, S. Monfray, N. Carriere, and F. Boeuf,
‘Requirements for ultra-thin-film devices and new materials for the CMOS
roadmap’, Solid State Electron., vol. 48, pp. 961–967, 2004.
44 D. Adams, M. Austin, R. Rai-Choudhury, and J. Hwang, ‘A performance com-
parison of advanced SOI technologies’, SOS/SOI Technology Workshop, p. 79,
1988.
45 J. H. Choi, Y. J. Park, and H. S. Min, ‘Electron mobility behavior in extremely
thin SOI MOSFET’s’, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 16, pp. 527–529, 1995.
46 S. Takagi, N. Sugiyama, T. Mizuno, T. Tezuka, and A. Kurobe, ‘Device
structure and electrical characteristics of strained-Si-on-insulator (strained-SOI)
MOSFETs’, Mat. Sci. Eng. B, vol. 89, pp. 426–434, 2002.
47 M. V. Fischetti, and S. E. Laux, ‘Band structure, deformation potentials, and
carrier mobility in strained Si, Ge, and SiGe alloys’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 88,
pp. 2234–2252, 1996.
48 J. B. Roldan, F. Gamiz, J. A. Lopez-Villanueva, and J. E. Carceller, ‘A Monte
Carlo study on the electron-transport properties of highperformance strained-Si
on relaxed Si1−xGex channel MOSFETs’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 80, pp. 5121–5128,
1996.
49 Silvaco International, Silvaco-ATLAS User’s Manual, 2004.
50 J. H. Davies, The Physics of Low-Dimensional Semiconductors: An Introduction,
Cambridge University Press, New York, 1998.
51 T. Mizuno, N. Sugiyama, A. Kurobe, and S. Takagi, ‘Advanced SOI p-MOSFETs
with strained-Si channel on SiGe-on-insulator substrate fabricated by SIMOX
technology’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 48, pp. 1612–1618, 2001.
52 F. M. Bufler, Y. Asahi, H. Yoshimura, C. Zechner, A. Schenk, and W. Fichtner,
‘Monte Carlo simulation and measurement of nanoscale n-MOSFETs’, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 50, pp. 418–424, 2003.
53 F.M.Bufler, andW.Fichtner, ‘Scalingofstrained-Sin-MOSFETsintotheballistic
regime and associated anisotropic effects’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 50,
pp. 278–284, 2003.
54 F. M. Bufler, and W. Fichtner, ‘Scaling and strain dependence of nanoscale
strained-Si p-MOSFET performance’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 50,
pp. 2461–2466, 2003.
55 ISE Integrated Systems Engineering AG., Zurich, Switzerland, ISE-TCAD
Manual, 2004.
56 K. Rim, K. Chan, L. Shi, D. Boyd, J. Ott, N. Klymko, et al., ‘Fabrication and
mobility characteristics of ultrathin strained-Si directly on insulator (SSDOI)
MOSFETs’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 49–52, 2003.
57 K. Rim, S. Koester, M. Hargrove, J. Chu, P. M. Mooney, J. Ott, et al., ‘Strained
Si NMOSFETs for high performance CMOS technology’, in IEEE VLSI Tech.
Symp. Dig., pp. 59–60, 2001.

SOI MOSFETs
193
58 F. M. Bufler, A. Schenk, and W. Fichtner, ‘Monte Carlo, hydrodynamic and drift-
diffusion simulation of scaled double-gate MOSFETs’, J. Comput. Electron.,
vol. 2, pp. 81–84, 2003.
59 X. Huang, W. Lee, C. Kuo, D. Hisamoto, L. Chang, J. Kedzierski, et al., ‘Sub
50-nm FinFET: PMOS’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 67–70, 1999.
60 E. Liu, C. Lin, and X. Liu, ‘Simulation of 100 nm SOI MOSFET with
FinFET structure’, in Proc. Conf. Solid-state and Integrated-Circuit Technology,
pp. 883–886, 2001.
61 J. G. Fossum, M. M. Chowdhury, V. P. Trivedi, T.-J. King, Y.-K. Choi, J. An,
et al., ‘Physical insights on design and modeling of nanoscale FinFETs’, in IEEE
IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 679–682, 2003.
62 J.-P. Colinge, ‘The evolution of the silicon-on-insulator MOS transistor’, in Proc.
ISDRS, pp. 354–355, 2003.
63 J.-T. Park, and J. P. Colinge, ‘Multiple-gate SOI MOSFETs: Device design
guidelines’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 49, pp. 2222–2229, 2002.
64 A. Kranti, and G. A. Armstrong, ‘Performance assessment of nanoscale double-
and triple-gate FinFETs’, Semicond. Sci. Technol., vol. 21, pp. 409–421, 2006.
65 R. J. Luyken, T. Schultz, J. Hartwich, L. Dreeskornfeld, M. Stadele, and L. Risch,
et al., ‘Design considerations for fully depleted SOI transistors in the 25–50 nm
gate length regime’, Solid State Electron., vol. 47, pp. 1199–1203, 2003.
66 R. J. Luyken, M. Stadele, W. Rosner, T. Schultz, J. Hartwich, L. Dreeskornfeld,
et al., ‘Perspectives of fully-depleted SOI transistors down to 20 nm gate length’,
in IEEE Int. SOI Conf., pp. 137–139, 2002.
67 T. C. Lim and G. A. Armstrong, ‘Parameter sensitivity for optimal design of 65 nm
node double gate SOI transistors’, Solid State Electron., vol. 49, pp. 1034–1043,
2005.
68 R. Granzner, V. M. Polyakov, F. Schwierz, M. Kittler, and T. Doll, ‘On the
suitability of DD and HD models for the simulation of nanometer double-gate
MOSFETs’, Physica E, vol. 19, pp. 33–38, 2003.
69 R. Granzner, V. M. Polyakov, F. Schwierz, M. Kittler, R. J. Luyken, W. Rosner,
et al., ‘Simulation of nanoscale MOSFETs using modified drift-diffusion and
hydrodynamic models and comparison with Monte Carlo results’, Microelec-
tronics Engineering, vol. 83, pp. 241–246, 2006.
70 B. S. Doyle, S. Datta, M. Doczy, S. Hareland, B. Jin, J. Kavalieros, et al., ‘High
performance fully-depleted Tri-Gate CMOS transistors’, IEEE Electron Devices
Lett., vol. 24, pp. 263–265, 2003.
71 G. Pei, J. Kedzierski, P. Oldiges, M. Ieong, and E. C.-C. Kan, ‘FinFET design
considerations based on 3-D simulation and analytical modeling’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 49, pp. 1411–1419, 2002.


Chapter 6
Heterostructure bipolar transistors
Early bipolar junction transistors were too slow for practical applications in telecom-
munications. One approach to speed up the flow of the minority carriers from the
emitter to the collector by incorporating an ‘electric field’ into the base region, the
so-called ‘drift transistor,’ was proposed by Herbert Kroemer in 1953 [1]. The drift
transistor used the concept of a doping-engineered electric field in the base to reduce
the electron base transit time. An eight-fold increase in the theoretical frequency was
predicted as compared to Shockley’s ‘diffusion’ bipolar transistors. This could be
achieved by using not a uniform doping in the base but one that decreased exponen-
tially from the emitter end to the collector end. While working out the detail, Herbert
Kroemer realised that
a drift field may also be generated through a variation of the energy gap itself,
by making the base region from a nonstoichiometric mixed crystal of different semi-
conductors with different energy gaps (for example, SiGe), with a composition that
varies continuously through the base (translation from Reference 2.)
This was not yet the full general design principle, but it constituted the origi-
nal conception (see Figure 6.1) of what has become known as the heterostructure
bipolar transistor, and ultimately of the heterostructure device field in general [2].
Heterostructures, as it is known today, may be defined as heterogeneous semicon-
ductor structures built from two or more different semiconductors, in such a way that
the transition region or interface between the different materials plays an essential
role in any device action [3]. Kroemer has pioneered the understanding of hetero-
junctions and heterointerfaces. His research on the theoretical prediction of band
line-upsandtheproblemsassociatedwithconnectingelectronicwavefunctionsacross
heterointerfaces provide many valuable insights into heterostructures [4].
Commonly used elements in present heterostructure technology are the elements
from the central portion of the periodic table belonging to columns II through VI. They
are Zn, Cd, Hg (from column II); Al, Ga, In (from column III); Si, Ge, C (from column
IV); N, P, As, Sb (from column V); and S, Se, Te (from column VI). Interestingly,

196
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Figure 6.1
The start of heterostructures: portion of a page from Reference 2
[Source: C. K. Maiti]

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
197
silicon, the backbone of modern electronics is at the centre. Below Si is germanium,
which is, however, rarely used, but Ge-Si alloys with composition-dependent position
play an increasingly important role in today’s heterostructure technology. In fact,
historically Ge-Si was the first heterostructure device system proposed, although it
was also the system that took longest to bring to practical maturity, largely because
of the 4 per cent mismatch between the lattice constants of Si and Ge.
In principle, every element in column III may be combined with every element
in column V to form a so-called III–V compound. Two or more discrete compounds
may be used to form alloys. A common example is aluminium-gallium arsenide,
AlxGa1−xAs, where x is the fraction of column III sites in the crystal occupied by Al
atoms and 1−x is occupied by Ga atoms. Hence, one may have a continuous range of
materials and it becomes possible to make compositionally graded heterostructures,
in which the composition varies continuously rather than abruptly throughout the
device structure. Similar to the III–V compounds, every element from column VI
may be used together with every element in column II to create II–VI compounds.
The fundamental design principle of heterostructures is that their variable energy
gaps can be used to control the distribution and flow of electrons and holes sepa-
rately and independently of each other as shown in Figure 6.2. In a heterostructure,
where the energy gap becomes position dependent, and the two band-edge slopes
are no longer equal, the two forces are no longer equal in magnitude. It would,
for example, be possible to have a force acting only upon one kind of the carriers
[see Figure 6.2(b)] or to have forces that act in the same direction for both types of
carriers [see Figure 6.2(c)]. Only electrical forces in homogeneous crystals can never
do this. This is why Kroemer called these forces ‘quasi-electric’ and commented as
they present a new degree of freedom for the device designer to enable him to obtain
effects that are very difficult to obtain using only ‘real’electric fields [3].
The underlying design principle of heterostructure devices was reported for the
first time in a 1957 paper by Kroemer [5], although the wide-gap emitter idea, which
appears to have been presented principally to cover alternative design possibilities,
a procedure typical in patents, was offered by W. Shockley in his patent application
in 1948 [6]. On the basis of the concept of graded energy gap, the band diagram
for a pnp transistor having a base region with a graded gap, to speed up minority
carrier flow from emitter to collector, is shown in Figure 6.3. Note that Figure 6.3
shows a flat conduction band, as would be the case for a heavy uniform doping;
the band diagram of Figure 6.2(b) represents essentially the base region of graded
energy gap concept while the Figure 6.2(c) illustrates the generality of the design
principle.
Fortheproposedgraded-gapbasestructure, however, notechnologywasavailable
in the 1950s. The other possibility envisaged was a design in which the emitter was
made from a wider-gap semiconductor than the base, with a quasi-abrupt transition
at the interface between the two, leading to a band diagram as shown in Figure 6.4.
It was also realised that a wide-gap emitter has advantages of its own [7,8]. Kroemer
pointed out that the advantage of the wide bandgap emitter over a conventional bipo-
lar transistor in current gain was due to an exponential factor proportional to the
difference in the base and emitter energy gaps. For example, one of the problems

198
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
(a)
−qF
+qF
qFh
+qFh
Fe = O
(b)
(c)
−qFe
Figure 6.2
Quasi-electric fields. Energy band diagrams showing how Kroemer used
quasi-electric fields to engineer the force experienced by electrons and
holes: (a) shows the tilted energy bands expected in the presence of a
true electric field; (b) shows the bands with a quasi-electric field with no
force on electrons but a force on the holes; and (c)‘shows quasi-electric
fields forcing electrons and holes in the same direction. Nobel Lecture
[After H. Kroemer, Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 73, 2001(783–793)]
eVe
eVc
Figure 6.3
pnp transistor with a base region with a graded gap, to speed up minority
carrier flow from emitter to collector. pnp transistors were the preferred
design for the Ge-based transistors of the mid-1950s. Nobel Lecture
[After H. Kroemer, Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 73, 2001(783–793)]

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
199
eVe
eVc
Figure 6.4
Wide-gap emitter. The energy-gap variation has been compressed into a
quasi-abrupt transition at the emitter-to-base interface. The base region
still has a uniform energy gap without the transport-aiding quasi-field,
but there is now a potential barrier for the escape of electrons from the
base into the emitter that is larger than the barrier for holes entering
the base from the emitter. Nobel Lecture [After H. Kroemer, Rev. Mod.
Phys., Vol. 73, 2001(783–793)]
with bipolar transistors is minimising the back-injection of majority carriers from the
base (electrons in a pnp transistor) into the emitter. In a homojunction transistor, this
requirement limits the base doping, which has other undesirable consequences, like a
large base resistance. A wide-gap emitter greatly suppresses this back-injection cur-
rent, roughly by a factor exp(−Eg/kT), where Eg is the difference in energy gaps.
In his classic 1982 paper on HBTs and ICs [8], Kroemer advanced the concept of the
‘inverted’ transistor, more commonly referred to now as the collector-up structure.
The basic advantage of the ‘inverted’ transistor is a lower collector-base capacitance
and consequently increased RF gain and higher speed.
6.1
The first SiGe transistor
While at RCA in 1957, Kroemer made an unsuccessful attempt to build a Ge
transistor with a Ge-Si alloy emitter [9]. The idea was to utilize the fact that the
Au-Si phase diagram exhibits a low-melting (370 ◦C) eutectic. Small grains of
the eutectic powder was put onto a Ge chip and alloyed at a temperature some-
where around 500–600 ◦C. The Au-Si alloy would melt and penetrate into the Ge
chip, dissolving some Ge. Upon cooling, a Ge-Si alloy emitter would recrystallise
(see Figure 6.5). Although one or two working transistors were obtained, the large
thermal strains generated during the solidification of the eutectic caused the Ge chip
to crack. The work was followed up by Diedrich and Jotten [10], but the technol-
ogy was unpromising and SiGe HBTs had to wait several decades for their practical
realisation.

200
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Au-Si eutectic
Cracks
Cracks
Re-grown Si-Ge alloy
Ge substrate
Figure 6.5
Attempt to realise a Ge transistor with a Ge-Si alloy emitter. A piece of
Au-Si eutectic was alloyed into a Ge base, forming a SiGe alloy emitter
uponcooling. NobelLecture[AfterH.Kroemer, Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol.73,
2001(783–793)]
6.2
Issues related to heterostructure
When two semiconductor materials with significantly different lattice constants are
grown upon each other, whether graded or not, huge strains rapidly build up with
increasing thickness, and eventually misfit dislocations form, making the film use-
less. As a result, the need for lattice matching is obvious. Historically, the importance
of lattice matching was recognised almost from the beginning, especially for bipolar
applications, and a lattice mismatch below 0.1 nm (0.2 per cent) was suggested as the
most promising one, indicating a recognition of the stringency of the lattice-matching
needs. With the emergence of quantum wells, superlattices and other heterostructures
calling for very thin layers, the issue of strain induced by lattice mismatch has lost
some of its relevance [3]. In sufficiently thin structures, a large strain can be accom-
modated without dislocation formation, to the point that the modification of the energy
band structure of a heterostructure by deliberate introduction of strain has become an
important device design principle. The evolution of successful SiGe HBTs is perhaps
the most striking example [11,12].
The main reason for the continued dominance of the (Al,Ga)As alloy system in
heterostructure studies is due to the fact that AlAs and GaAs have essentially the
same lattice parameter. A display of the energy gaps of III–V semiconductors vs.
their lattice constants is shown in Figure 6.6, with interconnect lines representing
binary alloys. Bulk GaAs is obtained as high-quality single crystals with low dis-
location densities, especially in semi-insulating form, making it an ideal substrate
readily available for the growth of different heterostructures. The only bad aspect
to the (Al,Ga)As system is the chemical affinity of aluminium to oxygen leading to
many residual defects in (Al,Ga)As. A second natural substrate is InP, widely used
for both optoelectronic and high-speed device applications that call for energy gaps
less than that of GaAs. There is no binary III–V compound lattice matched to InP,
but InP is widely used in devices, combined with a wide variety of alloys ranging
from (Ga,In)As to Al(As,Sb). In 1983, Kroemer proposed the use of (Ga,In)P, which
is lattice matched to GaAs. (Ga,In)P has drawn some attention as an alternative to

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
201
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9 6.0
6.1
6.2
6.3 6.4
6.5
InSb
InSb
InAs
InAs
GaSb
GaSb
GaP
GaP
GaAs
GaAs
InP
InP
AISb
AISb
AIAs
AIAs
(Ga.In)As
(Ga.In)As
InSb
InAs
GaSb
GaP
GaAs
InP
AISb
AIAs
(Ga, In)As
Lattice constant (Å)
Energy gap (eV)
III–V Semiconductor materials
Figure 6.6
Energy gap of various III–V compounds vs. lattice constant. Nobel
Lecture [After H. Kroemer, Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 73, 2001(783–793)]
(Al,Ga)As, especially in HBTs, for which the band alignment at the (Ga,In)p-GaAs
interface is more favourable.
In the early 1960s, the most successful heterojunctions demonstrated were based
on the Ge-on-GaAs system [13]. If lattice matching were the only constraint, then the
Ge-GaAs system would be the ideal heterosystem, which, however, has been found
to be otherwise. This has been explained in the literature due to ‘valence mismatch-
ing,’ meaning that the number of electrons provided by the atoms is not equal to the
canonical number of exactly two electrons per covalent bond [3]. Covalent bonds
between Ge on the one hand and Ga or As on the other are readily formed, but they
are not electrically neutral, as was first pointed out by Harrison et al. [14]. Although
the authors discuss only the GaAs-Ge interface, their argument applies to other inter-
faces combining semiconductors from different columns of the periodic table. In
the specific case of compound semiconductor growth on a column IV elemental
semiconductor, the additional problem of antiphase domains on the compound side
arises [15].
The above discussion pertains to the most widely used (001)-oriented interface.
The interface charge at a valence-mismatched interface actually depends on the crys-
tallographic orientation. It has been shown by Wright et al. [16] that an ideal (112)
interface exhibits neither an interface charge nor antiphase domains, and it was in
fact possible to demonstrate GaP-on-Si interfaces that had a sufficiently low defect
density that they operated as emitters in a GaP-on-Si HBT [16,17].

202
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Performance improvements in Si bipolar have so far been achieved through the
vertical scaling of the transistor, such as an increase in the collector doping concentra-
tion to reduce the base-collector junction depletion width and to increase the current
level. As a result, speed improvement is generally accompanied by an increase in
the operating current density. In high-speed digital as well as in analog/mixed-signal
applications, high speed, high transconductance, low noise and low power perfor-
mance are of crucial importance. Also, for the implementation of broadband systems
extensive efforts have been made to improve the speed performance of modern Si
bipolar transistors, and the bipolar transistor has re-established itself as the leading
contender for these applications.
The concept of combining silicon and germanium into an alloy for use in high-
speed transistor engineering is an old one, and was envisioned by Kroemer in his
early research on drift transistors discussed above [2, 5, 18]. However, because of
non-availability of appropriate technique for growing lattice-matched SiGe alloy on
Si, this concept could be made to practical reality only in the past 20 years. The
incorporation of silicon-germanium (SiGe) in the mainstream Si technology dur-
ing the past ten years has changed the scenario completely. Graded epitaxial-base
SiGe heterojunction bipolar transistors have several advantages over conventional
implanted-base silicon bipolar junction transistors (BJTs) and are competing the III–V
technologies [19].
The silicon-germanium heterojunction bipolar transistor is the first practical
bandgap-engineered device to be realised in silicon. As a result of the bandgap engi-
neering made possible by including a small amount of germanium in the base, one
achieves
1.
improved emitter injection efficiency;
2.
reduced emitter charger storage;
3.
reduced base transit time;
4.
reduced output conductance;
5.
improved current gain at low temperature.
In addition to directly improving the intrinsic device performances via bandgap
engineering, the inclusion of an epitaxial SiGe-base in a HBT enhances the device
design window in the following ways:
1.
reduced basewidth;
2.
improved profile control;
3.
lower electric field at the emitter-base junction.
Many of the advantages of the SiGe HBTs have opened up several new device
design windows, which is usually quite rigid for high-performance BJTs. Compared
to III–V technologies, SiGe-technology offers the following advantages:
1.
low cost through compatibility with silicon CMOS;
2.
uniformity and high yield across large wafers;
3.
high thermal conductivity;
4.
lower operating voltage.

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
203
The SiGe HBT offers several advantages over a Si BJT [19]:
1.
Owing to the reduced base bandgap, a much higher base doping concentration
can be used, decreasing the base resistance.
2.
A reduction in the base transit time results in higher fT and fmax.
3.
An increase in collector current density will allow high current gain with low
base resistance.
4.
Early voltage is higher at a given cut-off frequency.
The presence of Ge in the base of a bipolar transistor enhances the collector current
at fixed base-emitter voltage over a comparably constructed Si BJT. The Jc enhance-
ment depends exponentially on the emitter-base boundary value of Ge-induced band
offset, and linearly on the Ge grading across the base. This dependence offers a
trade-off for the Ge profile optimisation. A box Ge profile is better for current
gain enhancement than a triangular Ge profile. The Ge-induced Jc enhancement is
exponentially dependent on reciprocal temperature, and thus cooling will produce a
strong magnification of the enhancement in gain. Thus, SiGe HBTs exhibit superior
cryogenic performance, without the heavy doping and freeze-out effects generally
seen in Si BJTs at reduced temperatures [20]. This is because most of the key param-
eters of SiGe HBTs are thermally activated functions of the amount of bandgap
reduction in the base region [21,22]. The bandgap reduction is proportional to the Ge
content, and hence small amounts of Ge are sufficient to attain the desired cryogenic
performance in SiGe HBTs. For an extensive discussion of the SiGe HBT design
issues, the reader may refer to several texts [19,23,24].
The silicon-germanium heterojunction bipolar transistor is the first practical
bandgap-engineered device to be realised in silicon. SiGe HBT technology combines
transistor performance competitive with III–V technologies with the processing
maturity, integration levels, yield, and hence, cost commonly associated with con-
ventional Si fabrication. Progress in SiGe HBTs has been very rapid, from the
first laboratory demonstration to the installation of a complete IC technology in a
200-mm CMOS/DRAM manufacturing for commercial RF and microwave applica-
tions [25,26]. Several companies have put first-generation SiGe HBTs into production
with values of fT and fmax around 50 GHz. Third-generation technology produced
transistors with values of both and fmax around 120 GHz, while a 2003 state-of-the-art
device has fT of 375 GHz [27]. SiGe HBTs are well suited for wireless and optical
telecommunications market in the l–20 GHz range. Technical progress in bringing
SiGe HBT to reality has been exceptionally rapid and IBM has been the major player.
The first functional SiGe HBT was announced in 1987 [25]. Worldwide attention
was directed toward the technology in 1990 with the demonstration of a non-self-
aligned SiGe HBT with a cut-off frequency (fT) of 75 GHz [28]. Later in 1990,
the first emitter-coupled logic (ECL) ring oscillators using self-aligned SiGe HBTs
were produced [29]. The first SiGe BiCMOS technology was reported in 1992 [30],
and the first large-scale integrated (LSI) circuit (a l.2 GSample/s digital-to-analog
converter) in 1993 [31]. SiGe HBTs with frequency response greater than 100 GHz
were demonstrated in 1994 [32–34]. Since 1995 to present, many circuits, too
numerous to list individually, targeting digital, RF and microwave applications have

204
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
been demonstrated. In 2001, a 40 Gb/s communication subsystem SiGe BiCMOS
technology exhibited fT = 120 GHz [35,36].
6.3
SiGe materials
In this section, a review on the materials used in SiGe HBTs and their principle of
operation are given. The key to the evolution of SiGe heterojunction bipolar tech-
nology has been developments in epitaxy systems that have allowed the growth of
pseudomorphic (strained) Si1−xGex to be achieved at temperatures low enough for
integration in CMOS technology. When bandgap engineering is used to construct a
transistor, a perfect crystalline structure is essential, since any defects created can
degrade circuit yields. Si and Ge are completely miscible over the entire compo-
sitional range, giving rise to alloys with a diamond crystal structure. There is a
4.17 per cent mismatch in the lattice constant of Si and Ge at room temperature,
and the mismatch increases slightly with temperature. Hence, when a SiGe layer is
deposited on a Si substrate, the lattice mismatch can lead to the growth of either
a strained or a relaxed layer. The lattice constant at room temperature is given by
Vegard’s rule as
aSi1−xGex = aSi + x(aGe −aSi)
(6.1)
for low atomic concentrations, x, of Ge [37]. When growth conditions favour pseudo-
morphic (or strained) growth, the deposited SiGe films are under biaxial compressive
stress and the SiGe film adopts the lattice constant of the underlying Si. Relaxed
or unstrained growth occurs when misfit dislocations are generated at the interface.
As germanium is not lattice-matched to silicon, growth of SiGe on silicon intro-
duces compressive strain. For a given Ge concentration, there is a limit as to how
thick the SiGe layer can be and remain stable; thicker layers will tend to incor-
porate dislocations. The theoretical stability criterion developed by Matthews and
Blakeslee [38] is equivalent to a certain maximum integrated Ge content across
the film.
SiGe epitaxial growth studies conducted by Bean [39] show that the optimal
temperature for a good-quality epitaxial growth is around 550 ◦C for moderate Ge
concentrations (up to 15 per cent). At lower Ge concentrations (<l0 per cent),
however, optimal growth temperatures can be somewhat higher, increasing with
decreasing Ge content. SiGe alloys, because of their larger lattice constant, show
a smaller fundamental bandgap compared to Si. Strain in the film further reduces
the bandgap and also results in a further modification of the band structure. For
example, the splitting of degenerate valence and conduction bands can result from
strain. The band alignment for strained-SiGe films on Si substrate is type-I in nature
(i.e., the entire bandgap of SiGe layer is contained within the Si bandgap), with most
of the difference occurring in the valence band. On the other hand, a strained-Si
film grown on an unstrained SiGe substrate acquires a type-II band alignment, with
the conduction and valence bands of Si shifted upwards in energy compared to the
substrate.

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
205
The thickness of the deposited SiGe layer is an important device design consid-
eration. Van der Merwe [40] introduced the concept of ‘critical thickness’ based on
equilibrium theory, defining ‘critical thickness’ as the film thickness below which,
it was energetically favourable to contain the misfit by elastic energy stored in the
distorted crystal and above which it was favourable to store part of the energy in misfit
dislocations at the heteroepitaxial interface. Another definition for the critical thick-
ness was introduced by Matthews and Blakeslee [38]. They defined critical thickness
in terms of the mechanical equilibrium of a pre-existing threading dislocation, as the
thickness at which the force of the threading dislocation residing at the heteroepitaxial
interface is equal to that component of force per unit length acting on the threading
component of the dislocation in the plane of the epitaxial layer. Figure 6.7 shows the
stability curve for strained-SiGe epitaxial films.
The Matthews and Blakeslee curve, shown on the left in the solid line, represents
the theoretically expected critical thickness, whereas Stiffler’s curve [41], shown on
the right in the dashed line, represents the empirical critical thickness for ultra-high
vacuum/chemical vapour deposition grown SiGe films on a blanket Si wafer. The
difference in the two curves is not unexpected because the critical thickness depends
on the material system, substrate type, the amount of surface defects, temperature,
growth process and various other parameters. Deposited SiGe films that lie below the
stability curve are thermodynamically stable and can be processed using conventional
furnaceorrapidthermalannealing, ionimplantationwithoutgeneratingdefects. Films
105
104
103
102
101
100
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
Ge fraction, x
0.40
0.50
0.60
Equilibrium (stable)
900 °C
900 °C
750 °C
750 °C
550 °C
550 °C
500 °C
625 °C
500 °C
Relaxed
Metastable
Thickness (nm)
Figure 6.7
The critical thickness as a function of effective strain for SiGe films
grown on Si

206
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
lying above the stability curve are thermodynamically ‘metastable’ and will relax to
their natural lattice constant if exposed to temperatures above the original growth
temperature, or if stressed by fabrication steps such as ion implantation or rapid
thermal annealing.
6.3.1
UHVCVD growth of SiGe films
The first successful growth of SiGe epitaxial films was demonstrated using molec-
ular beam epitaxy (MBE) in 1987 [42]. Later, a number of other techniques such
as rapid-thermal chemical vapour deposition (RTCVD) [43], reduced-pressure (or
atmospheric-pressure) chemical vapour deposition (RPCVD/APCVD) [44], and
ultra-high vacuum chemical vapour deposition [45] have also been used to success-
fully grow the SiGe films. Of all the above methods, UHVCVD has shown the ability
for high volume production through large-scale integration and batch processing. This
section gives a brief description of IBM’s UHVCVD SiGe technology.
Figure 6.8 shows the cross-section of a UHVCVD reactor [45]. UHVCVD relies
on hydrogen passivation for preparing the silicon surface for epitaxy rather than the
conventional high-temperature oxide desorption. When Si is etched in hydrofluoric
acid (HF), an adlayer of hydrogen is formed, which reduces the reactivity of the sili-
con surface with respect to oxidants such as water and oxygen by about 13 orders of
magnitude. The HF passivated wafers are loaded into the load-lock of the UHVCVD
apparatus. After pump down below 10−6 Torr, wafers are transferred under flow-
ing hydrogen into the UHVCVD section of the apparatus, and growth commences
immediately. The gaseous sources employed for alloying or doping are silane, ger-
mane, diborane and phosphine. Films are deposited at temperatures in the range of
400–500 ◦C. Film growth rates may be varied from 0.01 to 10 nm/min as a function
of temperature and film germanium content, and typical rates employed are between
0.4 and 4.0 nm/min. These limits are used to ensure precise dimensional control, of
the order of l–2 atomic layers. This level of precision is required if one is to compete
Transfer
Gate valves
Load lock
System
Turbomolecular and
mechanical pumps
Gas inlet
Exhaust
Mechanical pump
Turbomolecular pump
Quartz wafer boat
Gate
valve
Seals
Wafers
Furnace
Figure 6.8
Schematic cross-section of a UHVCVD reactor

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
207
Base
Emitter
Metal
Collector
n+
Oxide
n+
n+
n
p-SiGe
p+
p+
p−
polySi
Shallow trench
Deep trench
Figure 6.9
Typical cross-section of a SiGe HBT [After J. Tang et al., IEEE Trans.
Microwave Th. and Tech., Vol. 50, 2002(2467–2473). ©2002 IEEE]
1021
1020
1019
1018
1017
1016
0
200
400
Depth (nm)
600
800
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
0
Germanium (%)
SiGe HBT (Trapezoidal profile)
Xj(EB) = 35 nm
WB(met) = 90 nm
Ge
As
As
poly
P
B
Dopant concentration (cm−3)
Figure 6.10
Typical secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) doping profile of a
SiGe HBT [After S. Zhang et al., IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 49,
2002(429–435). ©2002 IEEE]
effectively with the control of ion implantation. The deposition of compositionally
graded germanium profiles within the base of the SiGe heterojunction bipolar transis-
tors is routinely practised because it enhances the device performance for relatively
low-average Ge content. The typical cross-section of the UHVCVD SiGe HBT is
shown in Figure 6.9.
Figure6.10showsatypicalsecondaryionmassspectroscopy(SIMS)depthprofile
of an advanced SiGe HBT, which has been optimised for room temperature operation.
The in situ boron-doped graded SiGe base is deposited across the entire wafer using
the UHVCVD technique. The Ge profile is graded across the neutral base and has a
trapezoidal shape with 2 per cent Ge at the e-b depletion edge and a 5 per cent grading
across the base. The metallurgical basewidth is about 90 nm.

208
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
6.4
Physics of SiGe HBTs
Pseudomorphic Si1−xGex has a bandgap smaller than Si and hence makes possible
bandgap engineering concepts that were previously only achievable in III/V or II/VI
technologies. When incorporated into the base of a bipolar transistor Si1−xGex gives
a reduction in the potential barrier to electrons in the emitter. The essential differences
between an Si BJT and an SiGe HBT are best illustrated using the schematic energy
band diagram shown in Figure 6.11. Also the SiGe HBT and Si BJT are taken to be
of identical geometry, and it is assumed that the emitter, base and collector-doping
profiles of the two devices are identical, apart from the Ge in the base of the SiGe
HBT. In this case, an ideal graded-base SiGe HBT with constant doping in the emitter,
base and collector regions is considered. In such a device construction, the Ge content
is linearly graded from 0 per cent near the metallurgical emitter-base (e-b) junction
to some maximum value of Ge content near the metallurgical collector-base (c-b)
junction and then rapidly ramped back down to 0 per cent Ge. However, a wide
variety of practical SiGe profile designs, ranging from constant (box) Ge profiles to
triangular (linearly graded) Ge profiles, and including the intermediate case of the
Ge trapezoid (a combination of box and linearly graded profiles) are possible and the
analyses have been made [19,23,24].
TheadditionofGeinthebaseoftheSiGeHBTcausesaloweringoftheconduction
band, thus resulting in a bandgap reduction. The band offset at the emitter-base
junction is Eg,Ge(x = 0) and that at the collector-base junction is Eg,Ge(x =
Wb). The compositional grading of Ge across the base region results in a position
dependence of the band offset, which can be conveniently expressed as a bandgap
grading term [Eg,Ge(grade) = Eg,Ge(Wb) −Eg,Ge(0)]. This position-dependent
band offset induces a quasi-drift field in the neutral base, which aids the transport of
∆Eg,Ge(x =0)
∆Eg,Ge(x = Wb)
∆Eg,Ge(grade) = ∆Eg,Ge(WB)– ∆Eg,Ge(0)
Si
Ec
Ev
SiGe
Emitter
n+Si
%Ge
p −Si
SiGe
base
Collector
n −Si
Figure 6.11
Energy band diagram of a graded-base SiGe HBT compared to an
identically constructed Si BJT

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
209
minority carriers from emitter to collector, thus improving the frequency response.
This also results in an enhanced collector current and hence enhanced gain. This
enhanced gain can be traded for increased base doping and decreased basewidth, and
hence improved high frequency performance.
To understand the operation of a SiGe HBT, one generally models enhancement
in current gain, β, which is given by
β = δIc
δIb
(6.2)
where Ic is the collector current and Ib is the base current. Assuming a narrow base
region and negligible base recombination, β is related to the physical parameters of
the device by the well-known equation
β = Dnbn2
iBWENE
Dnen2
iEWBNB
(6.3)
where Dnb is the diffusion constant for electrons (in the case of an npn device) in the
base, Dne is that for holes in the emitter, WB is the width of the base, WE is that of
the emitter, NB is the doping concentration in the base, NE is that in the emitter, niB
is the intrinsic carrier concentration in the base and niE, that in the emitter.
In order to achieve a high β, a large NE, a small value of NB, and a small WB
are desirable. However, the doping and the width of the base must be large enough
to withstand the depletion occurring in the junctions, so that a punchthrough of the
base does not take place. The theoretical consequences of these bandgap changes
on the collector current density can be expressed using the generalised Mall–Ross
relation as
J =
q(eqVbe/kT −1)
 Wb
0
Nb(x)dx
Dnb(x)n2
ib(x)
(6.4)
where Wb is the quasi-neutral basewidth at bias Vbe, and Dnb is the minority electron
diffusivity in the base. The position-dependent effective intrinsic carrier density in
the base is given by:
n2
ib(x) = γ n2
ioeEapp
gb /kTeEg,Ge(grade)(x/WbkT)eEg,Ge(0)/kT
(6.5)
where Eapp
g
/kT is the heavy doping-induced apparent bandgap narrowing of
the base.
γ is the ratio of density-of-states product between Si and SiGe
(NcNv(SiGe)/NcNv(Si)) and accounts for the reduction in the effective density-of-
states with increasing Ge content. In the present analysis, the SiGe HBT and the
Si BJT are assumed to be of identical geometry, and the emitter, base and collector
profiles of the two devices are assumed to be the same, apart from the Ge in the base
of the SiGe HBT. For simplicity, a Ge profile, which is linearly graded from the e-b
to the c-b junctions, is considered. The same procedure can be employed in deriving
the solutions for more general Ge profiles. The analysis also assumes low-injection
conditions and Boltzmann statistics.

210
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
10−2
10−4
10−6
10−8
10−10
0.2
0.4
0.6
Base–emitter voltage (V)
0.8
1.0
Collector and base currents (A)
Silicon
SiGe
AE = 0.5×2.5 m2
VCB = 0
Figure 6.12
Typical Gummel characteristics of an SiGe HBT as compared to an Si
BIT of comparable construction
In ideal Si BJTs and SiGe HBTs, the emitter profiles are identical and thus base
current will be the same. Hence the β-ratio is equal to the Jc ratio. Using (6.4) and
(6.5), the ratio of the collector current density and hence current gain ratio can be
expressed as
Jc,SiGe
Jc,Si
= βSiGe
βSi
= γ η

Eg,Ge (grade)/kT)eg,Ge(0)/kT
1 −e−Eg,Ge (grade)/kT

(6.6)
where η = Dnb(SiGe)/Dnb(Si) accounts for the differences in the electron mobilities
in the base. The measured Gummel characteristic of a SiGe HBT and an identically
constructed Si BJT with identical base current can be seen in Figure 6.12. This
plot confirms the enhancement in collector current in an SiGe transistor, predicted
in (6.6). With reference to the band diagram in Figure 6.11, Jc in a SiGe HBT is
exponentially dependent on the e-b boundary value of the Ge-induced band offset
and linearly proportional to the Ge bandgap grading factor. The use of a graded Ge
profile also leads to an exponential increase in Early voltage VA and hence increased
output conductance, as given in (6.7). The Early voltage is a measure of how much
the neutral base profile can be depleted with reverse bias on the c-b junction.
VA,SiGe
VA,Si
= eEg,Ge (grade)/kT)
1 −e−Eg,Ge (grade)/kT
g,Ge (grade)/kT

(6.7)
An important figure of merit for analog applications such as high-speed data
converters and precision current sources is the ‘current gain–Early voltage product’
(βVA product). The βVA product of a SiGe HBT as compared to that of an identically
constructed Si BJT is given by the simple ratio
βVA,SiGe
βVA,Si
= γ ηeEg,Ge(0)/kTeEg,Ge (grade)/kT
(6.8)
Equation (6.8) shows that the βVA product of a SiGe HBT depends exponentially
on both the emitter-base band offset and the germanium grading in the base, and
hence can be well controlled in applications that require it. For example, a triangular

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
211
Ge profile is better for Early voltage enhancement than a box Ge profile. As the
Ge-induced VA enhancement is exponentially dependent on reciprocal temperature,
cooling will produce a strong magnification of the enhancement. In a well-designed
SiGe HBT, the Ge profile design that balances the optimisation of β, VA and βVA
would be a Ge trapezoid, with a small (e.g., 5 per cent) Ge content at the e-b junction,
and a larger (e.g., 15 per cent to 20 per cent) Ge content.
The unity gain cut-off frequency fT is an important figure of merit in RF and
microwave circuit applications. Base transit time τb typically limits the maximum fT
in conventional Si BJTs. The built-in electric field induced by the Ge grading across
the neutral-base effectively decreases τb since the carriers are now more rapidly
accelerated across the base. The ratio of base transit time is given by:
τb,SiGe
τb,Si
= 2
η

kT
Eg,Ge (grade)

1 −1 −e−Eg,Ge (grade)/kT
Eg,Ge (grade)/kT

(6.9)
Emitter transit time τe is typically not a limiting parameter in state-of-the-art polySi
emitter devices. However, it may become more important as the vertical profile is
scaled to thinner dimensions with further technology evolution. τe is inversely pro-
portional to the a.c. current gain, and hence is lower in SiGe HBTs. This combination
of lower τe and τb in SiGe HBTs results in a significant improvement of frequency
response compared to similarly constructed Si BJTs.
6.5
Figures of merit of SiGe HBTs
To assess the capabilities and the performance of electronic devices, several figures
of merit (FOM) are often used. RF figure of merit of a transistor are Unity gain
frequency, fT, maximum oscillation frequency, fmax, base resistance rb, and the min-
imum noise figure NFmin. RF transistors are unconditionally stable at any operating
frequency above a critical frequency fk. At operating frequencies below fk, however,
the transistor is conditionally stable and certain termination conditions can cause
oscillations. The stability behaviour of a transistor can be described by the stability
factor k as introduced by Rollett [46]:
k = 2Real(y11)Real(y22) −Real(y12y21)
|y12y21|
(6.10)
where y11, y12, y21 and y22 are the frequency-dependent y-parameters of the transistor.
If k > 1, the transistor is unconditionally stable. Usually, fmax is more significant
than fT and is a good measure of transistor performance not only for power gain in
small-signal and large-signal amplifiers, but also for wideband analogue amplifiers
and even for non-saturating logic gates [47].
Cut-offfrequency, fT, canbedeterminedbyconvertingthemeasureds-parameters
to h-parameters and plotting |h21| in decibels vs. log frequency. In general, for a well-
behaved device, |h21| will decrease at 20 dB/dec of frequency, and therefore, fT (the
frequency value at 0 dB) can be extrapolated from the measured data [48]. Physically,

212
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
fT can be related to the device profile via the total emitter to the collector delay. From
the small-signal equivalent circuit, the equations for fT can be derived as
fT = 1
2π
 kT
qIc
(Ceb + Ccb) + τe + τeb + τb + τc + τbc
−1
(6.11)
where Ceb and Ccb are the emitter-base and the collector-base depletion capacitances;
τe, τb and τc are the base, emitter and collector transit times, respectively. τeb and τbc
are the emitter-base and collector-base space charge region delay time, respectively.
Thus, one can observe that for fixed bias current, improvements in τb and τe due to
the presence of SiGe will directly translate into an enhanced fT. In terms of transistor
power gain, one can approximate the maximum oscillation frequency (fmax) figure
of merit by
fmax =

fT
8πCbcRb
(6.12)
where Rb is the small-signal base resistance, and Cbc is the total collector-base capaci-
tance. A derivation of fT and fmax, together with relevant assumptions and discussion,
can be found in References 23 and 19.
Thus, on the basis of the above discussions, several conclusions regarding the
effects of Ge on the frequency response of a SiGe HBT can be made [19]:
1.
For a fixed bias current, the presence of Ge in the base region affects the
transistor’s frequency response through the base and emitter transit times.
2.
The fT enhancement for a SiGe HBT over a Si BJT depends on Ge grading across
the base.
3.
A triangular Ge profile is better for cut-off frequency enhancement than a box
Ge profile is.
4.
The Ge-induced fT enhancement depends strongly on temperature in contrast to
a Si BJT.
5.
Improved fT in the entire useful range of Ic offers important opportunities for
various communication applications.
For precision analog and RF circuits, parameter stability over both temperature
and bias must be ensured. Thus, the specific impact on actual SiGe HBT devices
and circuits is both profile design and application dependent, and thus they need
careful design considerations. Various second order effects, neglected in this section
have to be taken into account through TCAD. For example, high injection effects at
high current density often results in barrier effects associated with the collector-base
heterojunction can strongly degrade both d.c. and a.c. performance. Other examples
include the impact of neutral base recombination (NBR) on SiGe HBT operation.
Discussion on the implications of these and other second-order effects have been
covered in several texts [19, 23, 24]. Use of TCAD to resolve some of these issues is
covered in the following section.

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
213
6.6
Simulation of SiGe HBTs
TCAD device simulation involves an optimisation relating to the trade-offs involved
in output parameters such as speed, leakage, noise, breakdown voltage and power
consumption as a function of input design parameters such as transistor geometry,
doping profiles, materials and material compositions. While d.c. simulation is suffi-
cient for optimisation of breakdown voltages, turn-on voltages or leakage currents,
a.c. simulation is required for speed, noise and power issues.
In the following, as an example of TCAD optimisation of a SiGe bipolar transistor,
we have chosen the work of Palankovski and Selberherr [49], who have investigated
polySi emitter SiGe HBTs epitaxially grown by chemical vapour deposition process
for both the 0.8 µm and 0.35 µm technology nodes with an implanted CMOS n-well.
The SiGe base has a triangular Ge profile. The base–emitter junction was formed by
rapid thermal processing, which causes out-diffusion of As from the polySi emitter
layer into the crystalline Si.
The process simulation was performed with DIOS [50] from the blank wafer to the
final device with implant profiles and annealing steps calibrated to one-dimensional
SIMS profiles. To study the influence of the selectively implanted collector (SIC) dop-
ingondeviceperformance, fourSiGeHBTstructureswithemitterareasof6×0.8 µm2
have been investigated both experimentally and by means of process simulations,
followed by two-dimensional device simulation. The only process step in which the
four HBTs (referred to as Dev.1, Dev.2, Dev.3 and Dev.4) differ is the combination
of energy and dose used for the SIC implants, as summarised in Table 6.1. Both
DESSIS [51] and MINIMOS-NT [52] were used for two-dimensional device sim-
ulation. The only fitting parameters used in the simulation were the contribution of
bandgap narrowing to the conduction band (here about 80 per cent and 20 per cent
for donor and acceptor doping, respectively), and the concentration of traps in the
Shockley–Read–Hall recombination model (1013 cm−3).
The only fitting parameters used in the simulation were the contribution of
bandgap narrowing to the conduction band (here about 80 per cent and 20 per cent
Table 6.1
Summary of key process and device parameters [After
V. Palankovski and S. Selberherr, Proc. Symp. on Diagnos-
tics and Yield: Advanced Silicon Devices and Technologies
for ULSI Era, 2003(1–11)]
Device
Energy
Dose
fT
BVceo
fT · BVceo
(keV)
(cm−2)
(GHz)
(V)
(GHz · V)
Dev.1
480
7×1012
32
4.0
128
Dev.2
480
3×1013
40
3.7
148
Dev.3
300
7×1012
33
3.1
102
Dev.4
300
3×1013
42
2.3
97

214
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
10–3
10–4
10–5
10–6
10–7
10–8
10–9
10–10
10–11
10–12
10–13
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Vbe (V)
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Exp.data
Dev.4
Dev.3
Dev.2
Dev.1
Ic,Ib(A/m)
Figure 6.13
Forward Gummel plots at Vcb = 0 V. Comparison between measure-
ment and simulation [After V. Palankovski and S. Selberherr, Proc.
Symp. on Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon Devices and
Technologies for ULSI Era, 2003(1–11)]
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
10–6
10–5
10–4
10–3
Ic (A/m)
Dev.1 exp.data
Dev.2 exp.data
Dev.3 exp.data
Dev.4 exp.data
Dev.1
Dev.2
Dev.3
Dev.4
fT (GHz)
Figure 6.14
fT vs. Ic at Vce = 1.5 V. Comparison between measurement and
drift-diffusion simulation with DESSIS [After V. Palankovski and S. Sel-
berherr, Proc. Symp. on Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon
Devices and Technologies for ULSI Era, 2003(1–11)]
for donor and acceptor doping, respectively) and the concentration of traps in the
Shockley–Read–Hall recombination model (1013 cm−3). Some simulation results
with measured device data are presented below. Both device simulators correctly
reproduce the measured forward Gummel plot at 300 K (see Figure 6.13) with default
models. The slight increase of collector current Ic with dose and energy at high bias
is due to the differences in the base push-out effect.
It is observed from Figures 6.14 and 6.15 that both DESSIS and MINIMOS-NT
failed to explain the experimentally observed similarity in peak fT for some devices

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
215
fT (GHz)
0
10–6
10–5
10–4
10–3
Ic (A/m)
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
Dev.1 exp.data
Dev.2 exp.data
Dev.3 exp.data
Dev.4 exp.data
Dev.1
Dev.2
Dev.3
Dev.4
Figure 6.15
fT vs. Ic at Vce = 1.5 V. Comparison between measurement and drift-
diffusion simulation with MINIMOS-NT [After V. Palankovski and
S. Selberherr, Proc. Symp. on Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon
Devices and Technologies for ULSI Era, 2003(1–11)]
fT (GHz)
0
10–6
10–5
10–4
10–3
Ic (A/m)
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
Dev.1 exp.data
Dev.2 exp.data
Dev.3 exp.data
Dev.4 exp.data
Dev.1
Dev.2
Dev.3
Dev.4
Figure 6.16
fT vs. Ic at Vce = 1.5 V. Comparison between measurement and hydro-
dynamic simulation with MINIMOS-NT [After V. Palankovski and
S. Selberherr, Proc. Symp. on Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon
Devices and Technologies for ULSI Era, 2003(1–11)]
(Dev.3 and Dev.4) while the presence of about 50 per cent more phosphorus in the
collector of the two low-dose devices (Dev.1 and Dev.3) provided an acceptable quali-
tative agreement. It is known that with shrinking device dimensions non-local effects,
such as velocity overshoot, become more pronounced. Neglecting these effects can
be reason for underestimating fT [53].
Simulations with the hydrodynamic transport model improved the results quanti-
tatively (see Figure 6.16). Figure 6.17 shows the velocity overshoot over the greater
part of the base region, which is about twice the saturation velocity limit in the
drift-diffusion case (107 cm/s). This correlates to the higher electron energy in the

216
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Dev.1
Dev.2
Dev.3
Dev.4
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0–1.0
–0.8
–0.6
Depth y (m)
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
Electron velocity (107 cm/s)
Figure 6.17
Electron velocity overshoot in the base–collector space charge region
at Vce = Vbe = 0.88 V [After V. Palankovski and S. Selberherr,
Proc. Symp. on Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon Devices and
Technologies for ULSI Era, 2003(1–11)]
collector and explains the increase of fT in comparison to drift-diffusion simulations
(see Figures 6.14 and 6.15). The good agreement at low currents is very important
since HBTs typically operate at much lower frequencies than at the maximum fT.
Simulations prove that in this range optimisation of the SIC implant do not have
an influence on fT, that is, the base–emitter capacitance and not the base–collector
capacitance is dominating. The maximum fT was found to have stronger dependence
on the dose than on the energy of the implants.
Furthermore, an important figure of merit, the product of open circuit base break-
down voltage times unity gain frequency BVceo·fT (see Table 6.1) reaches a maximum
for high SIC implant energies (deep implant) and high SIC doses. The higher fT for
high-dose/low-energy SIC implants is due to smaller basewidth and delayed onset of
the base push-out effect due to the higher collector doping.
In the simulation, for SiGe HBTs from the 0.35 µm technology node, several
important physical effects, such as surface recombination, impact ionisation (II) gen-
eration and self-heating (SH), were modelled and included in the simulation in order to
get a good agreement with measured forward (see Figure 6.18) and output characteris-
tics (see Figure 6.19). It is noted that the simulation results without SH effects cannot
match the experimental data, especially at high power levels. The only fitting param-
eters used in the simulation were the contribution of BGN to the conduction band, the
trap charge density in the Shockley–Read–Hall recombination model (1014 cm−3),
the velocity recombination for holes in the polySi contact model [54] used at the
emitter contact and the substrate thermal resistance. Both Ic and Ib increase owing
to self-heating at a given bias condition. As the change is relatively higher for Ib in
order to maintain it at the same level, Vbe and, therefore, Ic, decreases. A closer look

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
217
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
10–6
10–7
10–8
10–9
10–10
10–11
0.4 0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Vas (V)
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
Ic–Exp. data
IB–Exp. data
IB– Exp. data
Ic–Exp. data
IcIb (A)
Figure 6.18
Forward Gummel plots at Vcb = 0 V. Comparison between measure-
ment data and simulation at room temperature [After V. Palankovski
and S. Selberherr, Proc. Symp. on Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced
Silicon Devices and Technologies for ULSI Era, 2003(1–11)]
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
0.0
Vce (V)
Ic (mA)
Measured
Simulation w/o SH and II
Simulation with SH and II
Figure 6.19
Output characteristics: simulation with and without self-heating (SH)
and impact ionisation compared to measurement data. Ib is stepped
by 0.4 µA from 0.1 to 1.7 µA [After V. Palankovski and S. Selberherr,
Proc. Symp. on Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon Devices and
Technologies for ULSI Era, 2003(1–11)]
at the increasing collector current Ic at high collector-to-emitter voltages Vce and con-
stant base current reveals the interplay between self-heating and impact ionisation
(see Figure 6.20). While impact ionisation leads to strong increase of Ic, self-
heating decreases it. Figure 6.21 shows excellent agreement between simulated and
measured fT.

218
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
1.5
1.3
1.1
0.9
0.7
0.5
0.3
0.1
Ic (mA)
1.5
2.0
2.5
Vce (V)
Measured
No II, no SH
II and SH
Only II included
Only SH (Rth = 1×104 K/W)
Figure 6.20
Output characteristics for Ib = 0.9 µ A: Ic at high Vce reveals the inter-
play between self-heating (SH) effect and impact ionisation generation
[After V. Palankovski and S. Selberherr, Proc. Symp. on Diagnostics
and Yield: Advanced Silicon Devices and Technologies for ULSI Era,
2003(1–11)]
100
80
60
40
20
0
0.1
1
fT (GHz)
10
|h21| 2– Exp.data
|h21|2– Simulation
gm– Simulation
gm– Exp.data
|h21|2, gm (dB)
Figure 6.21
Short-circuit current gain h21 and matched gain gm vs. frequency at
Vce = 1 V and current density JC = 76 kA/cm2 (measurements with
circles) [After V. Palankovski and S. Selberherr, Proc. Symp. on Diag-
nostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon Devices and Technologies for ULSI
Era, 2003(1–11)]

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
219
6.7
Transit time in SiGe HBTs
The drift-diffusion approximation can lead to inaccuracy in the prediction of device
characteristics, particularly when the width of the base is reduced below 30 nm. In
this instance it is necessary to perform a simulation involving energy balance (EB)
[19]. Owing to the small basewidths of less than 30 nm in SiGe HBTs, the electron
transport becomes more and more ballistic. This calls into question the validity of
the standard simulation tools like the drift-diffusion (DD) or hydrodynamic (HD)
model used to design high-frequency HBTs. As discussed earlier, the base transit
time no longer dominates the cut-off frequency of high-speed HBTs, and the DD
model overestimates the base transit time, bearing the possibility of wrong guidelines
for transistor design optimisation. Also, DD model leads to an underestimation of
the peak cut-off frequency by 10 per cent. Close to high injection, differences in
the emitter transit times of the HD and MC model are observed that are mainly
related to small differences in the Gummel plot. Transit times of SiGe HBTs have
been investigated in the quasi-stationary limit by consistent drift-diffusion (DD),
hydrodynamic (HD) and full-band Monte Carlo simulations [53]. The quasi-ballistic
transport in the base and collector leading to a strong velocity overshoot is modelled
using HD model, and corresponding transit times were found to be in good agreement
with the MC results.
The authors calculated the band structure with the non-local empirical pseu-
dopotential method [55]. The conduction and valence band edge were modelled
following Reference 56 and are the same for all three models. Apparent bandgap
narrowing due to heavy doping, as described in Reference 57, was also included
in simulation. All transport parameters of the DD and HD models were generated
by MC bulk simulations to ensure consistency of the simulation models [58]. The
heat flux of the HD model was reduced to 25 per cent. Using the three simula-
tion models, transit times were evaluated and some simulation results are presented
below.
Base and collector transit times are shown in Figure 6.22. A good agreement is
obtained between the HD and MC models for the base transit time resulting from
classical and particle simulations. Since the DD model yields a velocity that is con-
siderably smaller than the one of the other two models, the base transit time of the
DD model is the largest one. Consequently, the DD model indicates that base tran-
sit time is dominant for the collector current levels where the HBT shows its peak
performance, whereas this is not the case for the HD and MC models.
In the case of the emitter transit time (see Figure 6.23) the DD and MC models
agree well, whereas the HD model yields a transit time being lower than the DD
result for a collector current larger than 0.7 mA/µm2. Close to high injection, the
HD emitter transit time deviates from MC results, which is mainly due to the small
differences in the Gummel characteristics of both models. In contrast to the base and
collectorregionsforwhichthequalitativebehaviourofthetransittimesofthedifferent
simulation models is generally valid, no generally valid conclusions can be drawn
for the emitter region.

220
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
DD
10
5∗10–1
5∗10–1
5∗10–1
5∗10–1
10°
10°
100
Collector current (mA/m2)
Collector transist time (ps)
Base transit time (ps)
HD
MC
DD
HD
MC
Figure 6.22
Base and collector transit times for Vce = 0.8 V [After C. Jungemann
et al., IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 48, 2001(2216–2220).
©2001 IEEE]
The cut-off frequency is shown in Figure 6.24. As expected, the DD model yields
the smallest cut-off frequency of about 95 GHz owing to the higher transit times in
the base and in the Ge overlap region of the collector. Since the other transit times
are of a similar magnitude, the impact of this error on the cut-off frequency is only
about 10 per cent. However, all other models show the peak at the same collector
current of about 2.0 mA/µm2. The MC model peaks at 106 GHz and the HD model
at 113 GHz. The larger cut-off frequency of the HD model is mainly due to its lower
emitter transit time (see Figure 6.23).
6.8
SiGe HBTs at low temperature
While SiGe HBT technology is being primarily exploited for room temperature
applications, it has long been recognised that bandgap engineering using SiGe

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
221
Total transit time (ps)
Emitter transit time (ps)
DD
HD
MC
DD
MHD
HD
MC
5∗10–1
100
5∗10–1
5∗10–1
100
Collector current (mA/m2)
2.20
2.00
1.80
1.60
1.40
100
Figure 6.23
Total and emitter transit times for Vce = 0.8 V [After C. Jungemann
et al., IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 48, 2001(2216–2220).
©2001 IEEE]
can provide superior cryogenic performance [20]. Examples of existing cryogenic
electronicsapplicationsincludesatellitesystems, deep-spaceandplanetaryspacemis-
sions, very high precision instrumentation and detector electronics, superconductor-
semiconductor hybrid electronic systems and very-low-noise receivers for astronomy.
The transit time components of SiGe HBTs have been calculated in the low-
temperature regime through simulation. The effect of low temperature on each
transit time component has been investigated and an increase in fT by more than
1.8 times has been obtained when the simulation temperature is lowered from 300 K to
120 K [59].
Low-temperature investigations provide not only the potential behaviour of
the devices for specific applications but also are a powerful tool for a better

222
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
120.0
100.0
80.00
60.00
40.00
20.00
0.000
10−1
100
Collector current (mA/m2)
DD
HD
HD-CPI
MC
Cut-off frequency (GHz)
Figure 6.24
Cut-off frequency for Vce = 0.8 V [After C. Jungemann et al., IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 48, 2001(2216–2220). ©2001 IEEE]
understanding of the physics governing device performance at room temperature.
Performance enhancements in HBTs, when operated at low temperature, have been
reported in the literature. In contrast to BJTs, the Si/SiGe emitter/base heterojunc-
tion bandgap counter balances the doping level difference, resulting in enhancement
of current gain by a factor of 10 or more from 300 to 77 K, and at the same
time, to an increase of fT by 30–60 per cent [20,60,61]. In the following, results
of simulation of high-frequency figures of merit vs. temperature carried out on
SiGe bipolar transistors with several base doping and activation annealing con-
ditions are discussed. Cryogenic performance of a SiGe HBT technology is also
presented.
The Gummel characteristics at 300 and 85 K are shown in Figure 6.25 for
Vcb = 0 V. The base–emitter turn-on voltage increases with cooling, as expected,
owing to the exponential decrease of the intrinsic carrier concentration with cooling.
The base and emitter regions in this device are both doped above the Mott-transition
and ensure that carrier freeze-out does not negatively impact the base or emitter resis-
tance below 100 K. As can be seen in Figure 6.25, at 85 K this device is capable of very
high current density operation (>25 mA/µm2), and thus the high collector doping
leveleffectivelylimitstheimpactofheterojunctionbarriereffectsatlowtemperatures,
which can be a key design issue for the cryogenic operation of SiGe HBTs [20]. The
current gain increases monotonically with cooling, from 600 at 300 K, to 3800 at 85 K,
as shown in Figure 6.26. Two mechanisms are responsible for this improvement with
cooling: (1) the Ge-induced band offset in this device (exponentially) increases the
current gain with cooling, and (2) the heavily doped base region partially offsets the

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
223
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Emitter base voltage (V)
0.6
1
1.1
1.2
85 K
300 K
10–9
10–8
10–7
10–6
10–5
0.0001
0.001
0.01
0.1
Collector and base currents (A)
AE = 0.12 m × 10 m
Vce = 0 V
Figure 6.25
Gummel characteristics at 300 and 85K for a 0.12 × 10.0 µm SiGe
HBT [After Banerjee et al., IEEE BCTM Proc., 2003(171–173). ©2003
IEEE]
3500
3000
4000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
10–1
10–2
0.0001
Collector current (A)
0.001
0.01
0.1
AE = 0.12 m × 10 m
Vce = 0 V
85 K 
150 K 
200 K 
300 K 
Current gain
n
a
a
Figure 6.26
Current gain as a function of bias current and temperature for a
0.12 × 10.0 µm SiGe HBT [After Banerjee et al., IEEE BCTM Proc.,
2003(171–173). ©2003 IEEE]
doping-induced bandgap narrowing associated with the emitter region. The strong
decrease in the current gain above its peak value at 85 K is associated with the
‘Ge-grading’ effect, but the current gain remains above 2000 at 85 K at the current
density at which peak fT is reached, effectively minimising any emitter charge storage

224
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
60
40
20
0
0.01
0.1
1
Collector current (mA/m2)
Si BJT
Data at 300K
T = 150 K
T = 150 K
T = 300 K
T = 300 K
T = 120 K
T = 120 K
SiGe HBT
Cut-off frequency (GHz)
Figure 6.27
Comparison of simulated and experimental (dashed line) cut-off fre-
quency vs. collector current at room temperature and performance
enhancement at low temperature [After S. Mandal et al., Proc. MIEL,
2004(315–318). ©2004 IEEE]
at low temperatures. SiGeC HBTs developed by ST Microelectronics have also been
evaluated for cryogenic applications [62,63].
Understanding of the transit time behaviour with decreasing temperature is essen-
tial to get the performance advantage of heterostructure devices at low temperature
for analog applications. Mandal et al. [59] have shown using simulation, the possi-
ble high-frequency performance enhancement of a SiGe HBTs at low temperature.
The behaviour of the transit time components has also been investigated in detail.
As shown in Figure 6.27, the fT of the Si-BJT increases from 21 to 38 GHz with
reducing temperature from 300 to 150 K and then decreases as temperature is further
decreased owing to minority carrier trapping that occurs in the neutral base region
at low temperature. On the other hand, for a SiGe HBT, the fT increases from 40
GHz at 300 K to 66 GHz at 120 K, owing to in-built field inside the base resulting
from the grading of Ge in the base region of the transistor. Maximum oscillation
frequency, fmax, can be calculated from fT, Rb and Cb for a given device geometry.
The various components of the τec are shown in Figures 6.28 through 6.31. Transit
time components distribution for Si-BJT and SiGe HBT at different temperatures is
shown in Figures 6.32 and 6.33. It is observed that τb is the main component of the
total delay time in both Si and SiGe HBTs even at low temperature.
6.9
Summary
In this chapter, the design principle of heterostructure devices has been discussed.
Critical issues for numerical modelling of heterostructure devices have been

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
225
120 K
150 K
300 K
10−12
10−13
e (S)
0.01
0.1
1
Collector current (mA/m2)
Figure 6.28
Simulated emitter transit time vs. collector current as a function of tem-
perature [After S. Mandal et al., Proc. MIEL, 2004(315–318). ©2004
IEEE]
120 K
150 K
300 K
0.01
0.1
1
Collector current (mA/m2)
10−11 
10−12 
b (S)
Figure 6.29
Simulated base transit time vs. collector current as a function of tem-
perature [After S. Mandal et al., Proc. MIEL, 2004(315–318). ©2004
IEEE]
discussed. Several examples of simulation of devices employing SiGe HBTs have
been considered. Attention has been given to simulation of various advanced tech-
nologies leading to high cut-off frequency and/or low transit time. Good agreement
between simulation and measurement provides confidence in the use of device sim-
ulation for future device development. Transit time analysis of a SiGe HBT using
drift-diffusion (DD), hydrodynamic (HD) and full-band Monte Carlo simulations has

226
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
120 K
150 K
300 K
0.1
1
Collector current (mA/m2)
10−13 
10−12
eb (S)
Figure 6.30
Simulated emitter–base transit time vs. collector current as a function
of temperature [After S. Mandal et al., Proc. MIEL, 2004(315–318).
©2004 IEEE]
120 K
150 K
300 K
0.1
0.01
1
Collector current (mA/m2)
10−12 
8×10−13
6×10−13
4×10−13
2×10−13
bc (S)
Figure 6.31
Simulated base–collector transit time vs. collector current as a function
of temperature [After S. Mandal et al., Proc. MIEL, 2004(315–318).
©2004 IEEE]
τbc
τbc
τeb
τeb
τb
τb
τe
τe
5%
9%
(a)
(b)
69%
17%
14%
16%
6%
64%
Figure 6.32
Transit time component distribution of (a) Si-BJT and (b) SiGe HBT
at 150 K [After S. Mandal et al., Proc. MIEL, 2004(315–318). ©2004
IEEE]

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
227
τbc
τbc
τeb
τeb
τb
τe
τe 5%
7%
(a)
(b)
9%
71%
17%
τb 65%
13%
13%
Figure 6.33
Transit time component distribution of an SiGe HBT at tempera-
ture (a) 300 K and (b) 120 K [After S. Mandal et al., Proc. MIEL,
2004(315–318). ©2004 IEEE]
been discussed in detail. Detail transit time analysis at low temperature for a SiGe
HBT has also been performed, which shows its applicability in low-temperature
electronics.
References
1 H. Kroemer, ‘Der Drifttransistor’, Naturwissensch., vol. 40, p. 5789, 1953.
2 H. Kroemer, ‘Zur Theorie des Diffusions und des Drifttransistors: III Dimension-
ierungsfragen’, Arch. Elektr. Ubertragung, vol. 8, pp. 499–504, 1954.
3 H. Kroemer, ‘Nobel Lecture: Quasielectric fields and band offsets: teaching
electrons new tricks’, Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 73, pp. 783–793, 2001.
4 W. R. Frensley, and H. Kroemer, ‘Theory of energy-band lineups at an abrupt
semiconductor heterojunction’, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 16, pp. 2642–2652, 1977.
5 H. Kroemer, ‘Quasielectric and quasimagnetic fields in nonuniform semicon-
ductors. Republished from symposium on the role of solid state phenomena in
electric circuits, Polytechnic Institute Brooklyn, NY, 1957, pp. 143–153’, RCA
Rev., vol. 18, pp. 332–342, 1957.
6 W. Shockley. US Patent No. 2,569,347, 1951.
7 H. Kroemer, ‘Theory of a wide-gap emitter for transistors’, Proc. IRE, vol. 45,
pp. 1535–1537, 1957.
8 H.Kroemer, ‘HeterojunctionBipolarTransistorsandIntegratedCircuits’, inProc.
IEEE, vol. 70, pp. 13–25, 1982.
9 H. Kroemer, ‘Unpublished’.
10 H. Diedrich, and K. Jotten, in Proc. of the Colloque International sur les
Dispositifs a’Semiconducteurs, Paris (Editions Chiron, Paris), p. 330, 1961.
11 G. Abstreiter, ‘Electronic properties of Si/SiGe/Ge heterostructures’, Physica
Scripta, vol. T-68, pp. 68–71, 1996.
12 U. Konig, ‘Future applications of heterostructures’, Physica Scripta, vol. T-68,
pp. 90–101, 1996.
13 R. L. Anderson, ‘Germanium-Gallium-Arsenide Heterojunctions’, IBM J. Res.
Devices, vol. 4, pp. 283–287, 1960.

228
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
14 W. A. Harrison, E. A. Kraut, J. R. Waldrop, and R. W. Grant, ‘Polar heterojunction
interfaces’, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 18, pp. 4402–4410, 1978.
15 H. Kroemer, ‘Polar-on-nonpolar epitaxy’, J. Cryst. Growth, vol. 81, pp. 193–204,
1987.
16 S. L. Wright, M. Inada, and H. Kroemer, ‘Polar-on-nonpolar epitaxy: sublattice
ordering in the nucleation and growth of GaP on Si (211) surfaces’, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol., vol. 21, pp. 534–539, 1982.
17 S. L. Wright, H. Kroemer, and M. Inada, ‘Molecular-Beam epitaxial growth of
GaP on Si’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 55, pp. 2916–2927, 1984.
18 H. Kroemer, ‘Heterostructure bipolar transistors: What should we build?’, J. Vac.
Sci. Technol. B, vol. 1, pp. 126–130, 1983.
19 C. K. Maiti, and G. A. Armstrong, Applications of Silicon-Germanium Het-
erostructure Devices. Inst. of Physics Pub., UK, 2001.
20 J. D. Cressler, J. H. Comfort, E. F. Crabbe, G. L. Patton, J. M. C. Strok,
J. Y. C. Sun, et al., ‘On the profile design and optimization of epitaxial Si- and
SiGe-base bipolar technology for 77 K applications-part I: Transistor d.c. design
considerations’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 40, pp. 525–541, 1993.
21 J. D. Cressler, E. F. Crabbe, J. H. Comfort, J. M. C. Strok, and J. Y. C. Sun, ‘On the
profile design and optimization of epitaxial Si- and SiGe-base bipolar technology
for 77 K Applications-Part II: Circuit performance issues’, IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. 40, pp. 542–555, 1993.
22 J. D. Cressler, ‘Silicon bipolar transistor: a viable candidate for high speed appli-
cations at liquid nitrogen temperature’, Cryogenics, vol. 30, pp. 1036–1047,
1990.
23 J. D. Cressler, and G. Niu, Silicon-Germanium Heterojunction Bipolar Transis-
tors. Artech House, London, 2003.
24 P. Ashburn, SiGe Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.,
Chichester, 2003.
25 S. S. Iyer, G. L. Patton, S. S. Delage, S. Tiwari, and J. M. C. Stork, ‘Silicon-
germanium base heterojunction bipolar transistors by molecular beam epitaxy’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 874–876, 1987.
26 D. J. Harame, J. H. Comfort, J. D. Cressler, E. F. Crabbe, J. Y. C. Sun,
B. S. Meyerson, et al., ‘Si/SiGe epitaxial-base transistors-part I: Materials,
physics, and circuits’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 42, pp. 455–467, 1995.
27 J.-S. Rieh, B. Jagannathan, H. Chen, K. Schonenberg, S.-J. Jeng, M. Khater,
et al., ‘Performance and design considerations for high speed SiGe HBTs of
fT/fmax = 375 GHz/210 GHz’, in Int. Conf. Indium Phosphide and Related
Materials, pp. 374–377, 2003.
28 G. L. Patton, J. H. Comfort, B. S. Meyerson, E. F. Crabbe, G. J. Scilla,
E. D. Fresart, et al., ‘75-GHz fT SiGe-base heterojunction transistors’, IEEE
Electron. Device Lett., vol. 11, pp. 171–173, 1990.
29 J. H. Comfort, G. L. Patton, J. D. Cressler, W. Lee, E. F. Crabbe, B. S. Meyerson,
et al., ‘Profile leverage in self-aligned epitaxial Si or SiGe base bipolar
technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 21–24, 1990.

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
229
30 D. L. Harame, E. F. Crabbe, J. D. Cressler, J. H. Comfort, J. Y.-C. Sun,
S. R. Stiffler, et al., ‘A high-performance epitaxial SiGe-base ECL BiCMOS
technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 19–22, 1992.
31 D. L. Harame, J. M. C. Stork, B. S. Meyerson, K. Y.-J. Hsu, J. Cotte,
K. A. Jenkins, et al., ‘Optimization of SiGe HBT technology for high speed
analog and mixed-signal applications’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 71–74,
1993.
32 E. Kasper, A. Gruhle, and H. Kibbel, ‘High speed SiGe-HBT with very low sheet
resistivity’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 79–82, 1993.
33 E. F. Crabbe, B. Meyerson, J. Stork, and D. Harame, ‘Vertical profile optimization
of very high frequency epitaxial Si- and SiGe-base bipolar transistors’, in IEEE
IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 83–86, 1993.
34 A. Schuppen, A. Gruhle, U. Erben, H. Kibbel, and U. Konig, ‘Multi emitter finger
SiGe-HBTs with Fmax upto 120 GHz’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 377–380,
1994.
35 A. Joseph, D. Coolbaugh, M. Zierak, R. Wuthrich, P. Geiss, Z. He, X. Liu,
et al., ‘A 0.18 µm BiCMOS technology featuring 120/100 GHz (fT/fMAX) HBT
and ASIC-compatible CMOS using copper interconnect’, in IEEE BCTM Proc.,
pp. 143–146, 2001.
36 G. Freeman, Y. Kwark, M. Meghelli, S. Zier, A. Rylyakov, M. Sorna, et al.,
‘40 Gbit/sec circuits built from a 120 GHz fT SiGe technology’, in IEEE 23rd
GaAs IC Symp. Dig., pp. 89–92, 2001.
37 S. S. Iyer, G. L. Patton, J. M. C. Stork, B. S. Meyerson, and D. L. Harame, ‘Het-
erojunction bipolar transistor using Si-Ge alloys’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 36, pp. 2043–2063, 1989.
38 J. W. Matthews, and A. E. Blakeslee, ‘Defects in epitaxial multilayers - I. Misfit
dislocations’, J. Cryst. Growth, vol. 27, pp. 118–125, 1974.
39 J. C. Bean, L. C. Feldman, A. T. Fiory, S. Nakahara, and I. K. Robinson,
‘GexSi1−x/Si strained layer superlattice growth by molecular beam epitaxy’,
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 2, pp. 436–440, 1984.
40 J. H. van der Merwe, ‘Crystal interfaces. Part I. Semi-infinite crystals (see also
erratum p. 3420 (1963)’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 34, pp. 117–122, 1963.
41 S. R. Stiffler, J. H. Comfort, C. L. Stanis, D. L. Harame, E. de Fresart, and B. S.
Meyerson, ‘The thermal stability of SiGe films deposited by ultrahigh-vacuum
chemical vapor deposition’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 70, pp. 1416–1420, 1991.
42 G. L. Patton, S. S. Iyer, S. L. Delage, S. Tiwari, and J. M. C. Stork, ‘Silicon-
germanium base heterojunction bipolar transistors by molecular beam epitaxy’,
IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 9, pp. 165–167, 1988.
43 C. A. King, J. L. Hoyt, C. M. Gronet, J. F. Gibbons, M. P. Scott, and
J. Turner, ‘Si/Si1−xGex heterojunction bipolar transistors produced by limited
reaction processing’, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. EDL-10, pp. 52–54,
1989.
44 M. Hong, E. de Fresart, J. Steele, A. Zlotnicka, C. Stein, G. Tam, et al.,
‘High-performance SiGe epitaxial base bipolar transistors produced by a

230
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
reduced-pressureCVDreactor’, IEEEElectronDeviceLett., vol.14, pp.450–452,
1993.
45 B. S. Meyerson, ‘UHV/CVD growth of Si and Si-Ge alloys: Chemistry, physics
and device applications’, Proc. IEEE, vol. 80, pp. 1592–1608, 1992.
46 J. M. Rollett, ‘Stability and power-gain invariants of linear twoports’, IRE Trans.
Circ. Th., vol. CT-9, pp. 29–32, 1962.
47 D. J. Roulston, Bipolar Semiconductor Devices. McGraw Hill, Singapore, 1990.
48 G. Niu, S. Zhang, J. D. Cressler, A. J. Joseph, J. S. Fairbanks, L. E. Larson, et al.,
‘Noise modeling and SiGe profile design tradeoffs for RF applications [HBTs]’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 47, pp. 2037–2044, 2000.
49 V. Palankovski, and S. Selberherr, ‘Critical modeling issues of SiGe semiconduc-
tor devices’, in Proc. Symp. on Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon Devices
and Technologies for ULSI Era, pp. 1–11, 2003.
50 ISE Integrated Systems Engineering AG., Zurich, Switzerland, Tech. Rep. DIOS-
ISE, Release 6.0, 1999.
51 DESSIS-ISE, Release 8.5,
‘Integrated Systems Engineering AG, Zurich,
Switzerland’, 2003.
52 T. Binder, K. Dragosits, T. Grasser, R. Klima, M. Knaipp, H. Kosina, et al.,
‘MINIMOS-NT User’s Guide’, in Institut fur Mikroelektronik, Technische
Universitat, Wien, 1998.
53 C. Jungemann, B. Neinhus, and B. Meinerzhagen, ‘Comparative study of electron
transit times evaluated by DD, HD, and MC device simulation for SiGe HBT’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 48, pp. 2216–2220, 2001.
54 Z. Yu, Ricco, and R. Dutton, ‘A comprehensive analytical and numerical model of
polysilicon emitter contacts in bipolar transistors’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. ED-31, pp. 773–784, 1984.
55 M. M. Rieger, and P. Vogl, ‘Electronic-band parameters in strained Si1−xGex
alloys on Si1−yGey substrates’, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 48, pp. 14276–14287, 1993.
56 F. Schaffler, ‘High-mobility Si and Ge structures’, Semicond. Sci. Technol.,
vol. 12, pp. 1515–1549, 1997.
57 R. J. E. Hueting, J. W. Slotboom, A. Pruijmboom, W. B. de Boer, E. C. Timmering,
and N. E. B. Cowern, ‘On the optimization of SiGe-base bipolar transistors’, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 43, pp. 1518–1524, 1996.
58 R. Thoma, A. Emunds, B. Meinerzhagen, H. J. Peifer, and W. L. Engl, ‘Hydro-
dynamic equations for semiconductors with nonparabolic bandstructures’, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 38, pp. 1343–1352, 1991.
59 S. K. Mandal, G. K. Marskole, K. S. Chari, and C. K. Maiti, ‘Transit time
components of a SiGe-HBT at low temperature’, in Proc. MIEL, pp. 315–318,
2004.
60 N. Zerounian, F. Aniel, R. Adde, and A. Gruhle, ‘SiGe heterojunction bipolar
transistor with 213 GHz fT at 77 K’, Electron. Lett., vol. 36, pp. 1076–1078,
2000.
61 B. Banerjee, S. Venkataraman, Y. Lu, S. Nuttinck, H. Deukhyoun, Y.-J. E. Chen,
et al., ‘Cryogenic performance of a 200 GHz SiGe HBT technology’, in IEEE
BCTM Proc., pp. 171–173, 2003.

Heterostructure bipolar transistors
231
62 H. Baudry, B. Martinet, C. Fellous, O. Kermarrec, Y. Campidelli, M. Laurens,
et al., ‘High performance 0.25 µm SiGe and SiGe:C HBTs using non selective
epitaxy’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 52–55, 2001.
63 N. Zerounian, M. Rodriguez, M. Enciso, F. Aniel, P. Chevalier, B. Martinet,
et al., ‘Transit times of SiGe:C HBTs using nonselective base epitaxy’, Solid
State Electron., vol. 48, pp. 1993–1999, 2004.


Chapter 7
SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
Before 1990, heterojunction bipolar transistors were available only in III–V
compound semiconductor technologies. The addition of Ge in Si to form strained-
SiGe and the incorporation of SiGe in conventional Si BiCMOS technology has
created a revolution in the semiconductor industry [1,2]. The Ge added to form high-
performance heterojunction bipolar transistors can operate at speed much higher than
standard silicon bipolar transistors. State-of-the-art SiGe HBTs have values of fT
beyond 350 GHz and fmax 270 GHz [3] and operate at speed previously attainable
only with GaAs technology. The performance improvement of SiGe HBTs is due to
energy bandgap lowering resulting from adding Ge to the base of the device, and
the principle of operation has been described earlier. SiGe HBTs differ from III–V
technologies in that the breakdown voltage may be set by collector implants and not
predetermined by layer growth. Therefore, the SiGe HBTs with multiple breakdown
voltages can be fabricated in the same process by varying the collector implants.
In the high-speed arena, SiGe HBTs today are surpassing even the fastest III–V
production devices. The key to this achievement is the superior parasitic control
technology available to SiGe device designers, compared to what is available to
III–V device designers. SiGe HBTs have the advantage of being built in the existing
silicon fabrication using standard silicon production equipment. Research is under
way on SiGe heterojunction MOSFETs, which in turn is expected to revolutionise
the future of CMOS technology as well.
SiGe HBTs have also been integrated into standard CMOS logic technologies,
resulting in the integration of high-performance analog and RF circuits with CMOS
logic leading to SiGe-BiCMOS technology, although there is conflicting CMOS/HBT
thermal budget requirements. The CMOS devices are used primarily for integrating
digital logic functions with high-speed bipolar analog circuits. This allows fully
integrated system-on-a-chip products, with the CMOS performing the low-frequency
baseband signal processing.
Semiconductor chips used in wireless applications such as cellular phones,
wireless networks and global positioning systems (GPS) must be inexpensive.

234
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
The performance and integration capability of SiGe technology has enabled the
production of a wide range of new products for wireless and wired communica-
tions. Early SiGe products include chip sets for wireless cellular handsets and base
stations [4,5], wireless local area network (WLAN), high-speed, high-capacity wired
network applications and many other applications.
SiGe BiCMOS technology has become a popular choice for broadband appli-
cations because of the availability of the high-speed SiGe HBTs and the potential
for highly integrated transceivers in robust silicon-based processes. However, the
power consumption of SiGe high-speed building blocks [6] raises concerns about
heat removal in a packaged environment, which may ultimately limit the achievable
integration level for single-chip transceivers. Thus it is necessary to have a BiCMOS
topology that allows operation from lower supply voltages without speed degradation.
Despite high cut-off frequencies in modern SiGe HBTs, the bandwidth of high-
speedbipolardigitalcircuitsishinderedbydeviceparasiticssuchasthebaseresistance
and the collector–base capacitance. For a given technology, the RC product cannot be
reduced, since any increase in total emitter length to minimise base resistance results
in a commensurate rise in base–collector capacitance.
BiCMOS technology development started in the early 1980s as a way of signif-
icantly enhancing digital performance. Analog BiCMOS processes were limited in
applications, because of the high supply voltages prevalent in analog circuit design
and the abundance of bipolar processes [7]. From a system point of view, analog
BiCMOS implies a different focus than digital BiCMOS. Wireless applications are
typically high-volume products and require simpler processes. Optimisation requires
less emphasis on peak transistor speed and more emphasis on speed at low power,
linearity, noise and passive elements. Current BiCMOS technology must satisfy the
bipolarperformancerequirementsaswellasdemonstratefullcompatibilitywithexist-
ing libraries and methodologies [2]. For recent research activities in developing new
silicon-based RF integrated circuit (RFIC) technologies including processes, active
and passive devices, modelling and simulation, circuit applications and ESD pro-
tection, which are critical to realising true RF system-on-a-chip (SoCs), the reader
may refer to the special issue on integrated circuits technologies for RF circuit
applications [8].
SimilartoMoore’slawthatpredictsatwo-foldincreaseindensityevery18months
inCMOSlogicandmicroprocessortechnologies, therehasbeenasimilarperformance
trend in SiGe technologies where the SiGe HBT performance has approximately dou-
bled every 2–3 years. As shown in Figure 7.1, cut-off frequency has increased from
50 GHz in 1997 to 350 GHz in 2003 [3, 9–13]. Figure 7.1 also shows the trend
for SiGe BiCMOS technologies focused on applications requiring fT in the range
of 50–100 GHz [14–16]. These applications include wireless handsets, WLAN, GPS
andstorage. Today’s state-of-the-artSiGeBiCMOStechnologycombineshigh-speed,
low-noise SiGe HBTs, with aggressively scaled Si-CMOS, and offers on-chip passive
components, to produce low-cost, high-yield, Si-based SoC solutions for applications
in the 1–40 GHz range. Enhancements in passives enable system cost reductions by
reducing the number of off-chip components and reducing chip size through passives
scaling. Enhancements in passives that are more fully described in Chapter 11 include

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
235
1000
0.1
1
10
Application frequency (GHz)
SiGe  BiCMOS HP
RF CMOS
InP HBT
0.25 m
MMDS
WLAN
UWB
GPS
PCS
WCDMA
PDC
CDMA
GSM
0.5 m
WLAN
Sat TV
Auto Radar
LMDS
WLAN
Auto Radar
0.13 m
0.09 m
0.13 m
0.6 
0.6 m [5]
m [5]
0.5 m [4]
0.5 
0.5 m [3]/
m [3]/
1.2 m [2]
fT = 10X fapp
fT = 3X fapp
100
100
10
Device peak cut-off frequency (GHz)
1
0.6 m [5]
0.6 m [3]
0.18 m
0.18 m
Figure 7.1
SiGe HBTfT performance trends. RF application spectrum overlaid with
technology performance. An acceptable range of fT for each application
is chosen as 3–10X [After A. J. Joseph et al., Proc. IEEE, Vol. 93,
2005(1539–1558). ©2005 IEEE]
increased MIM capacitance per area, improved inductor Q, improved varactors and
tighter resistor tolerance. For a comprehensive review on SiGe BiCMOS technol-
ogy for RF circuit applications, the reader may refer to the paper by Racanelli and
Kempf [17], in which the authors have reviewed the state-of-the-art SiGe BiCMOS
technologyandfuturedevelopmenttrendsforhighlyintegratedRFplatformsolutions.
In this chapter, the challenges that were needed to overcome both to enable the
growth of a SiGe epitaxial layer and to integrate the process with standard bipolar
and CMOS processes are mentioned. This will lead to a discussion of the current
state-of-the-art in SiGe processing technology along with a prediction of challenges
anticipated with future, more advanced, SiGe technologies. The discussion will be
based mostly on the information from IBM’s 0.5, 0.24 and 0.18 µm SiGe BiCMOS
technologies [18–20].
In the following, SiGe heterojunction bipolar technology, with particular empha-
sis on the influence of materials issues on the technology performance, is described.
The discussion will be limited to only self-aligned, fully integrated, Si-technology-
compatible SiGe HBT technologies that have been reported in the literature (see
References 21 and 22 for a review on early SiGe technology). The history of devel-
opment of SiGe HBTs at IBM has been reviewed by Harame and Meyerson [23],
while the latest status of SiGe BiCMOS technology, modelling and design have been
addressed in a special issue of the proceedings of the IEEE [24].
The first SiGe HBTs were mesa-type transistors fabricated using molecular beam
epitaxy (MBE) and used a low-temperature processing. The collector, base and emit-
ter layers were epitaxially grown by MBE without breaking vacuum. Mesa-defined

236
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
transistor structures are fabricated using dry-etching techniques. A six-fold increase
in the collector current was measured for a device with 12 per cent uniform germa-
nium across a 100-nm basewidth, which corresponded to a total bandgap shrinkage
of 45 meV [25]. Although the thermal cycle was kept relatively low (780 ◦C), the
I–V characteristics (Gummel plot) were very non-ideal and essentially unusable
owing to poor material quality and possible relaxation. However, eventual develop-
ment of a manufacturable SiGe epitaxial (EPI) growth process was the fundamental
breakthrough that underpinned SiGe technology evolution [26].
Conventional blanket epitaxial techniques use high temperature for surface clean-
ing and growth. A low-temperature epitaxial process is needed for integration of base
epitaxial growth with SiGe processing. The first SiGe HBTs were fabricated using
the conventional bipolar structures on patterned substrates and used an in situ doped
graded SiGe base profile, readily accomplished with the CVD technique. The process-
ing and structures employed the same isolation and polySi emitter processes found in
conventional bipolar technology, setting a new and important direction for all SiGe
epitaxial base work and fully compatible with the silicon technology.
A non-self-aligned transistor structure, in which the emitter opening was spaced
away from extrinsic base or linkup regions, was used to simplify extracting vertical
profile information from the resultant devices. Many process steps were borrowed
from the conventional double-polySi self-aligned transistor technology. However, as
the SiGe technology cannot satisfy all the requirements for specific applications, a
series of derivative technologies that are based on the parent IBM’s high-performance
(HP) technology have been developed. These roughly fall into three groups,
1.
updating the older technology with improved passives and additional devices;
2.
low complexity, lower-cost (and lower performance) technologies for consumer
markets such as wireless;
3.
high breakdown technologies for specialised applications. Process simplification
can be achieved by trading performance for cost. This performance degradation,
however, can be minimised through device scaling.
IBM’s technology for SiGe is very mature since they were the first to commer-
cialise SiGe technology, have published widely and offer several distinct versions of
SiGe. IBM has also reported the strategy of having an SiGe BiCMOS roadmap with
their mainstream HP and derivative components for specialised market segments.
The demanding performance and integration requirements for both the digital and
the interface optoelectronic components define the requirements for the HP SiGe
BiCMOS roadmap.
Early IBM products demonstrated the performance and integration capability of
SiGe BiCMOS leading to acceptance and large increase in the number of networking
chips mostly at the 0.18 µm node. Advanced SiGe HBTs require a combination of
vertical and lateral scaling [12,27].
An advanced CMOS roadmap has been realised by incorporating base CMOS
technology into the BiCMOS, which is facilitated by a base-after-gate process flow
in IBM’s 200 GHz fT and 285 GHz fmax 0.13 µm SiGe BiCMOS technology, which

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
237
is ideal for 40 Gb/s SOC implementation [12, 14]. SiGe technology from several
manufacturers can be found in References 28–32. BiCMOS technologies combining
the high RF performance of SiGe-based HBTs with the high level of CMOS inte-
gration are increasingly recognised as key enablers for single chip solutions for
broadband and wireless communication systems. Status and future trends of ‘C-free’
SiGe BiCMOS technology have been reviewed in Reference 33. BiCMOS integration
of C-doped SiGe (SiGeC) HBTs, which were initiated in the middle of the 1990s, is
also addressed [34].
During the 1990s, two main approaches were used for the fabrication of SiGe
HBTs [21, 22]. The first used the differential epitaxy that was put together to make
the first epitaxial base transistor by modifying an existing bipolar structure and the
second selective epitaxy [35, 36]. For the differential epitaxy process, the p+SiGe
base layer is grown after oxide isolation formation so that single-crystal material is
formed where the silicon collector is exposed and polycrystalline material is formed
over the oxide isolation. Several companies including IBM [37,38] have pioneered
the use of differential epitaxy in SiGe HBTs.
The differential epitaxy is carried out after the creation of shallow trench or
LOCOS oxide isolation regions. Single crystal SiGe is produced where the n-Si
collector is exposed and polycrystalline SiGe is grown over the field oxide. To achieve
differential epitaxy, it is necessary to have good nucleation of polycrystalline SiGe
on the isolation oxide around the perimeter of the base window. This is generally
achieved by using silane as the silicon source gas during the SiGe growth. The Ge
profile is often graded across the base to give a bandgap that decreases from emitter
to collector. This gives a quasi-drift field, which aids carrier transport across the base,
reduces the base transit time and enhances the value of fT.
As an alternative to differential epitaxy, several companies have pioneered selec-
tive epitaxy [35,36,39]. In this approach, an overhanging p+-polySi extrinsic base is
created in an emitter window, prior to base epitaxy.
The hydrogen passivation preclean and UHVCVD deposition process, developed
by IBM, meets most requirements of low-temperature defect-free SiGe epitaxial lay-
ers [40]. The low-temperature epitaxial (LTE) process produces very low defect
epitaxial layer that is necessary for achieving high device yield. It also provides the
capability for precise doping profile control that is necessary for HBT device per-
formance [41–43]. However, the device yield has always been an issue with silicon
bipolar and BiCMOS technologies. The yield is usually limited by dislocations in the
silicon crystal that cause emitter to base, collector to base and/or collector to emitter
shorts. The possibility of creating these dislocations is increased with SiGe HBTs,
due to the potential for defect formation during EPI growth and defect formation due
to the strain in the Ge layer.
As described above, the LTE process produces a relatively defect-free epitax-
ial layer and does not contribute to yield loss. Minimising the thermal cycles post
epitaxial growth helps reduce the possibility of forming defects due to the strained
layer. The primary cause for defect generation has been found to be related to stress
from the edge of the shallow trench isolation (STI). The STI effect on HBT yield
has been studied extensively with 0.5 µm generation technology. TEM analysis of

238
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
low yielding samples showed dislocation defects propagating from either the top or
bottom corners of the STI adjacent to the HBT. These results suggested that the HBT
was not in stress equilibrium with the surrounding STI. It was found that the shape of
the STI adjacent to the HBT affected how the transition from EPI silicon to polySi in
the SiGe epitaxial film formed. The shape of this transition region has a big influence
on the stress in the HBT. Optimisation of the STI shape reduced the stress, leading to
fewer dislocations and significantly higher HBT yield.
7.1
SiGe-BiCMOS technology
BiCMOS technologies have the ability to integrate analog bipolar functions with
CMOS logic on the same die. Coupled with the manufacturability of passive ele-
ments, BiCMOS silicon or SiGe technologies have potentials for designs that require
a high level of RF and logic integration. From a system point of view, analog BiCMOS
implies a different focus than digital BiCMOS. Logic gates are not constructed from
Bipolar and CMOS devices, but rather the system is divided into separate analog Bipo-
lar and CMOS digital logic sections. This has important methodology implications.
The high-frequency sections require RF design skills and tools and tend to be rela-
tively small in terms of area and total transistor count. The lower-frequency CMOS
logic sections tend to be large in area and transistor count and require high-level
design tools using hardware description language.
Early BiCMOS integration emphasised processes with only 3–4 additional
masking steps to the CMOS processes and low-performance non-self-aligned npn
transistors. Modern BiCMOS has high-performance self-aligned bipolar transistors
that are incorporated in a modular fashion because modular process design is the only
practical way to satisfy the CMOS, Bipolar and Interconnect requirements as well as
the increased integration levels. The cost of modular design is significantly higher
mask counts.
Another key issue for BiCMOS is lateral and vertical scaling of the bipolar
transistor to meet the requirements of future applications. At low currents, device
performance is parasitic capacitance limited, at moderate currents it is base transit
time limited, and at high currents it is base pushout and resistance limited. Analog cir-
cuits have similar dependencies, and therefore it is crucial to reduce parasitics for low
power operation. Vertical profile scaling for conventional ion-implanted base bipolar
is much more problematic, because it largely consists of reducing the basewidth by
decreasing the base implant energy. Because of dopant channelling during implan-
tation, the implanted profile is difficult to control and very sensitive to implant
energy. Therefore, it is important to use low-energy implantation to reduce basewidth.
However, decreasing the energy of the implant results in higher surface concentra-
tions, which results in heavily doped emitter–base junctions with high electric fields.
These high electric fields are a reliability concern that is usually characterised by
current gain degradation during reverse emitter–base bias stress [44]. Epitaxial base
technology provides a way out of bipolar’s vertical scaling dilemma by depositing
the base dopant setback from the surface with a silicon spacer [43,45].

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
239
Many BiCMOS technology applications require additional active devices beyond
the npn transistors, p- and n-MOSFETs that are naturally part of the process. Circuit
designers often require a pnp transistor for compatibility with circuits and circuit
design techniques previously implemented in older bipolar technologies. Substrate
pnp transistors are usually available but these are not useful for current mirrors. A bulk
lateral pnp using the existing p-MOSFET wells and S/D implants is also available, but
the transistor may have insufficient (low) current gain. It is difficult to simultaneously
optimise a lateral pnp, p-MOSFET and npn bipolar with the same process. Lateral pnp
optimisation requires deep junctions, thick epitaxy – which would degrade the npn
bipolar and high surface well concentrations to prevent depletion of the neutral base.
pFET optimisation requires shallow junctions, reduced well doping at the surface and
moderate doping in the bulk to reduce short channel effects.
For smart power applications high-voltage LDMOS transistors have been added
to existing BiCMOS processes [46, 47]. These devices are constructed by bring-
ing the gate polySi over the LOCOS field oxide and dropping the voltage across a
lightly doped drift region under the field oxide. The bipolar n+ subcollector may
be placed under the n-well in high-side driver LDMOS devices to prevent vertical
punch-through and the heavily doped n+ reach through is used for guarding to limit
hole injection into the substrate [48].
In the conventional design methodology, communication systems applications
involve a combination of GaAs, BiCMOS and CMOS chips. The requirements for
monolithic wireless chips emphasise technology with high-Q passives (inductors,
varactors and capacitors) in addition to the active devices, compact models with
accurate noise figure and distortion analyses, signal integrity analysis and RLC par-
asitic extraction. Designers perform multiple design passes on each of the chips
separately. For active discrete components, GaAs has so far been preferred over SiGe
because it was a higher performance. However, SiGe BiCMOS technology allow
now an entire multi-technology chip set [49–54]. Resistors are often fabricated by
using existing implants in the process, for example, n-well, p-well, n+ subcollector,
n+ reach through, p+ extrinsic base polySi, n+ emitter polySi, and so on. Circuit
designers often prefer resistance values outside the range of existing layers in the
process. A challenge for designers is to use the existing values in a BiCMOS process
for circuit designs.
Approaches to generate high-Q inductors are as follows:
1.
Reduce resistance of the coil.
2.
Make the dielectric layer underneath the coil as thick as possible.
3.
Reduce substrate loss.
4.
If possible, connect the inductor differentially to reduce capacitance to ground.
Fabricating the inductor coils in a higher level of metallisation improves Q but it
requires an additional metal layer and is not cost effective. Using a higher resistivity
substrate can reduce substrate loss but excessively resistive substrate makes CMOS
devices more prone to latch-up. Alternatively, deep trenches underneath the inductor
can be used to reduce substrate losses. Another interesting technique to improve
inductor Q is to connect the inductor differentially.

240
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
While there is a great diversity of HP BiCMOS process integration approaches,
they all have similar objectives and problems and have used similar solutions. For
a BiCMOS process flow design, one needs to consider the following: substrate
selection, buried layers and epitaxial growth, collector isolation, wells, field oxide
isolation, reach through, Vt and bipolar base implants, gate oxidation and polySi
deposition as process modules common to all BiCMOS processes. After gate oxi-
dation the decision about the sequence and bipolar structure used in the process is
made. The process flows and approaches, however, may diverge. The structure,
sequence, and thermal cycle must all be selected to satisfy the requirements for a
particular application. A general process flow will be presented and used to highlight
the most common approaches and process flows as well as significant issues for these
approaches.
7.2
IBM SiGe-BiCMOS technology
The development of RF/analog mixed-signal methodology at IBM dates back to the
support for the early bipolar technology used in bipolar-based mainframes and as an
outgrowth of the analog BiCMOS processes. An excellent review on the evolution
of IBM’s SiGe performance and minimum lithographic feature size together with
some derivative technologies may be found in references [55,56]. The HBT cut-off
frequency fT has improved from 47 GHz in the 0.5 µm generation to 210 GHz in the
0.13 µm generation. The pace of development continues unabated, and there are no
apparent barriers to scaling the SiGe HBTs beyond 350 GHz [57,58].
IBM has four SiGe BiCMOS technologies and one CMOS RF technology quali-
fied for high volume production [59–63]. The key technology characteristics for four
generations of SiGe Bipolar/BiCMOS technology from IBM is shown in Table 7.1.
The main purpose of the CMOS devices in a BiCMOS technology is to provide
integrated logic functionality. SiGe HBT characteristics across four generations of
BiCMOS technology is shown in Table 7.2. Incorporation of SiGe bipolar technol-
ogy leads to many process differences, thus leading to significant device differences.
However, the CMOS device characteristics in the BiCMOS technology closely match
those of the base CMOS technology. Table 7.3 compares some of the key parameters
of SiGe BiCMOS and RF CMOS technologies.
7.2.1
Base-during-gate process
The key issue when defining a SiGe BiCMOS process involves choosing an integra-
tion method that minimises the interaction of the HBT and CMOS processing steps.
IBM’s 0.5 µm SiGe BiCMOS technologies [20,33,55] utilized a ‘base-during-gate’
integration method. This was also referred to as base=gate because the extrinsic base
of the bipolar was the same as the gate stack of the CMOS. With this approach, the
growth and patterning of the npn SiGe epi-base also forms the FET polySi gates.
Figure 7.2 shows the main process flow for the base CMOS process (known as the
CMOS backbone) with bipolar and analog element steps that feed into the CMOS

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
241
Table 7.1
Key technology characteristics for four generations of SiGe Bipolar/
BiCMOS technology from IBM [After D. Harame et al., Proc. 4th IEEE
Intl. Caracas Conf. on Devices, Circuits and Systems, 2002(D052-1-
D052-17).]
BiCMOS5HP
BiCMOS7HP
BiCMOS8HP
Lithography (µm)
0.5
0.18
0.18/0.13
Emitter width (µm)
0.42
0.2
0.12
npn(HP/HB) fT
47/27
120/30
210/—
(GHz)
npn(HP/HB) fmax
65/55
100/—
∼160/—
(MAG, GHz)
npn density
1.0X
2.0X
2.0X
CMOS supply (V)
3.3
1.8/2.5/3.3
NA
CMOS power
0.3
0.03
NA
(µW/MHz/gate)
CMOS gate delay (ps)
180
33
NA
Rel. CMOS density
1X
7.5X/2X
NA
(High-perf/I/O)
BEOL metal
Al
Cu
Cu
BEOL current – M1
1X
1.5X
1.5X
HBT structure
ETX
ETX
REB
Integration scheme
Gate during
Base after
Base after
base
gate
gate
Table 7.2
HBT characteristics across generations of BiCMOS technology
[After D. Harame, Lecture notes.]
Units
5HP
5HPE
6HP
7HP
8HP
npn isolation
Deep
Shallow
Deep
Deep
Deep
trench
trench
trench
trench
trench
Peak fT
GHz
50
45
50
120
210
Peak fmax
GHz
65
50
65
100
185
fT 30 µA
GHz
15
19
19
25
50
Ic at peak fT
mA
0.6
0.5
0.5
1.0
1.0
BVceo
V
3.3
3.3
3.3
2.0
1.9
BVcbo
V
10.5
10.5
10.5
6.5
6
backbone. In the 0.5 µm generation the base CMOS was used only for digital appli-
cations and lacked analog modules. Therefore, additional processing modules for
resistors and capacitors were added in the BiCMOS circuits. The integration method
is key in ensuring that the addition of the SiGe HBT to the CMOS process has

242
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Table 7.3
Comparison of thin-oxide CMOS parameters for SiGe BiCMOS and
RF CMOS technologies [After D. Harame, Lecture notes.]
CMOS
CMOS
SiGe
SiGe
6SFRF
6SFRF
7HP
7HP
Parameter
Units
n-FET
p-FET
n-FET
p-FET
Tox (thin)
nm
5.0
—
3.5
—
Tox (thick)
nm
7.0/14.0
—
6.8
—
Vsupply
V
2.5/3.3/6.5
—
1.8/3.3
—
Lmin
µm
0.25
—
0.18
—
Leff
µm
0.18
0.18
0.12
0.14
Vt,lin
mV
500
−500
355
−420
Idsat
µA/µm
595
280
600
260
Ioff
nA/µm
0.005
0.003
0.1
0.05
Body effect
—
0.23
0.27
0.19
0.25
gm,sat
µS/µm
300
200
500
275
fT
GHz
35
20
75
45
fmax
GHz
22
22
70
45
Ion implanted resistor
Precision capacitor
Resistor salicide 
block mask
Metal insulator metal 
capacitor (MIM)
Interconnect technology
Salicide and contacts
Spacer etch, FET S/D/G 
ion implant, final anneal
Polysilicon gate and extrinsic 
base etch, gate REOX, FET 
extension, spacer deposit
FET well /VT implants
Shallow trench isolation
Subcoll., n-epi, deep trench
Reach through to N+ 
Subcollector
Bipolar window, SiGe base 
deposition, self-aligned 
extrinsic base I/I emitter 
definition and opening, 
collector implant, n+ 
polysilicon emitter formation
CMOS backbone
Bipolar
Analog element
Gate oxide, poly deposition
Figure 7.2
Schematic process flow diagram for the 0.5 µm Base-During-Gate
(BDGate) production technology. The CMOS backbone represents the
base CMOS process. Insertion points are shown for analog and bipolar
process modules [After D. L. Harame et al., IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, Vol. 48, 2001(2575–2594). ©2001 IEEE]

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
243
no effect on the FET device characteristics. Similarly, it is important for bipolar
device performance. The primary considerations are to minimise the impact of the
CMOS processing steps on the thermal cycle interactions and the trade-off of overall
process modularity vs. process sharing.
By integrating the various components of the bipolar transistor properly into the
processflow(seeFigure7.2), theperformanceofboththeCMOSandnpntransistorsis
not degraded. The key is that the CMOS heat cycles occur before the bipolar device
epitaxial base growth, so that the base dopant diffusion is kept to a minimum. To
maintain CMOS ASIC compatibility, IBM qualified its commercial SiGe process at a
low temperature for production in 1996, based on a method of depositing an epitaxial
layer of SiGe alloy [19]. The alloy was co-deposited with the boron-doped intrinsic
base using a novel form of LTE growth. The addition of the LTE process/tooling
is the only requirement to convert an existing silicon BiCMOS fabrication to one
that can also produce SiGe BiCMOS products. Sharing of layers and thermal cycles
worked well by reducing the number of overall steps. However, changes in thermal
cycles with subsequent generations of CMOS technologies created difficulties with
this approach.
7.2.2
Base-after-gate process
To overcome thermal cycle incompatibility with IBM’s 0.24 µm generation SiGe
BiCMOS technology a ‘base-after-gate’ integration scheme was developed. In the
base-during-gate SiGe BiCMOS technologies [9, 18, 19, 22], the npn base polySi is
patterned at the same time as the FET gates; therefore, the npn base and emitter
are subjected to the FET spacer and source/drain-activation thermal cycles. This
approach could not be used for BiCMOS 6HP because the parent CMOS technology
has large source/drain activation thermal cycles that would be detrimental to the HBT.
In the 0.24 µm generation, the CMOS technology had high thermal cycles for the
REOX (900 ◦C furnace oxidation) and arsenic-doped n-FET extension anneals, which
prohibited the BDGate process from being used. Therefore, the BAGate integration
approach for the 0.24 µm generation was developed to decouple the CMOS thermal
cycle from the bipolar (see Figure 7.3).
In the ‘base-after-gate’ integration flow, major thermal cycles are performed prior
to base deposition and a low thermal budget HBT module is used. BAGate technology
has several advantages over BDGate technology. The CMOS is largely fabricated in
one complete block before the SiGe base is deposited; therefore, the base CMOS
technology steps can be completely copied without modification. Also, derivative
technologies composed of high-voltage FETs in a similar or identical design-rule set
can be easily developed from an existing production BiCMOS technology because
the FET steps do not need to be modified. The bipolar is fabricated in a complete
block after the CMOS without sharing any CMOS thermal cycles except for a final
emitter drive-in RTA, making the BAGate an ideal process for the HBT. The concern
with the BAGate process is that it is structurally a more complex process because
the bipolar layers that are deposited over the CMOS topography must be completely
removed.

244
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
N+ subcollector, n-epi, 
deep trench isolation
Bipolar
CMOS backbone
Analog element
Reach through to N+ 
Subcollector, bipolar 
protect layer
Bipolar Window (BW), SiGe 
base deposition, self-aligned 
extrinsic base I/I, emitter 
definition and opening, 
collector implant, n+ 
polysilicon emitter, extrinsic 
base pattern and etch
Shallow trench
FET well and VT implants, 
gate oxidation, polysilicon 
gate deposition, pattern and 
etch, poly REOX, FET 
extensions, sidewall 
formation, n-FET S/D/G I/I, 
FET protect deposition
p-FET S/D/G I/I, final RTA, 
resistor salicide block 
mask, salicide and contacts
Standard interconnect 
technology including metal 
insulator metal capacitor
Figure 7.3
Schematic process flow diagram for the 0.25 µm and 0.18 µm Base-
After-Gate (BAGate) production technology. The CMOS backbone
represents the base CMOS process. Insertion points are shown for ana-
log and bipolar process modules. Note the reduced number of analog
and bipolar blocks compared to the BDGate process [After D. L. Harame
et al., IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 48, 2001(2575–2594). ©2001
IEEE]
This base-after-gate approach is not without its own challenges. All films
deposited during the HBT module must be completely removed from over the FET
gates without forming extraneous spacers. Advances in reactive ion etch (RIE) tech-
nology has made removal of these films possible. The RF and analog circuits that are
built with SiGe BiCMOS technologies typically require additional components above
and beyond the standard HBT and logic CMOS devices. These include analog FETs,
precision resistors and capacitors, and high-Q inductors. The modularity of BAGate
process supports rapidly developing derivatives and low-cost alternative BiCMOS
technologies.
ExamplesofSiGeHBTtechnologiesavailablefromIBMwithapplicationspecific
focus are IBM’s SiGe BiCMOS 5HPE, SiGe BiCMOS 7WL, and SiGe BiCMOS 8WL
[15, 16]. These technologies are compared to their high performance counterparts
SiGe 5HP, 7HP, and 8HP in Table 7.4 [9, 11, 13]. As seen in the Table 7.4 these
technologies have lower npn fT than their parent technologies.

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
245
Table 7.4
SiGe BiCMOS parameters by technology
5HPE
7HP
7WL
8HP
8WL
Lithography (µm)
0.35
0.18
0.18
0.13
0.13
npn fT/fmax (GHz)
44/80
120/100
60/110
200/280
100/200
npn BVceo (V)
3.3
2.0
3.3
1.77
2.5
CMOS Lg Drawn (µm)
0.36
0.18
0.18
0.13
0.13
CMOS Vdd (V)
3.3, 5.0
1.8, 2.5, 3.3
1.8, 2.5, 3.3
1.2, 2.5
1.2, 2.5, 3.3
Poly resistor Rs (/sq.)
220
270
260
340
340
MIM cap. (fF/µm2)
2.0
1.0
2.0
1.0
4.2
Peak inductor Q freq.
18
18
28
18
28
(2nH inductor)
(5 GHz)
(5 GHz)
(3 GHz)
(5 GHz)
(3 GHz)
7.3
SiGe HBTs on SOI
As described in Chapter 5, SOI technology improves performance over bulk CMOS
technology by 25–35 per cent. SOI technology also brings power use advantages of
1.7 to 3 times – a key requirement for extending the battery life of small, hand-held
devices. In the context of BiCMOS, the CMOS circuitry gains much advantage from
SOI; namely simplified process flow and latch-up immunity together with enhanced
MOSFET device performance. Bipolar transistors fabricated on SOI substrates offer
the possibility of lower parasitic capacitances, but have a greater susceptibility to
self-heating [64].
Silicon-on-insulator (SOI) technology also brings advantages of reduced collec-
tor capacitance and reduced cross-talk for mixed-signal circuits. In particular, the
lower threshold voltage and low junction capacitance associated with SOI CMOS is
particularly suited to low-voltage, low-power applications. BESOI (bond and etch
back SOI) is preferred for HBT application due to the better Si and SiO2 quality.
A HBT on bonded wafer SOI has been reported by NEC for possible application in
low-power, radio frequency electronics [65].
An SiGe technology for combining 0.2 µm self-aligned selective-epitaxial-
growth (SEG) SiGe heterojunction bipolar transistors with CMOS transistors and
high-quality passive elements has been developed for use in microwave wireless and
optical communication systems [66]. The process sequence is shown in Figure 7.4.
A standard bipolar process was carried out from the formation of the n+ buried col-
lector layer by ion implantation and diffusion of Sb to the trench isolations. Then, a
0.3-µm CMOS process module was inserted.
The technology has been applied to fabricate SiGe HBTs on SOI wafer based on
a high-resistivity substrate. The fabrication process is almost completely compatible
with the existing 0.2 µm BiCMOS process because of the essential similarity of
the two processes. SiGe HBTs with STI and deep-trench isolations and Ti-salicide

246
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
n+ buried collector (Sb+) 
n− epitaxial growth (0.3 m) 
Shallow (0.3 m) trench isolation 
Collector plug 
Deep (1m) trench isolation 
MR and HR polySi (w/Ge I/I) 
Base polySi (0.2 m) 
Emitter window and SIC1 
SiGE SEG and SIC2 
Emitter polySi (in situ P-doped)
Ti-salicide 
Contact and W plug 
1st metal and via 
MIM capacitor 
2nd to 4th metal
n and p well I/I 
Gate poly-Si (LR)
PTS I/I and LDD 
n and p S/D I/I
CMOS
SiGe HBT
Figure 7.4
Process sequence for 0.2 µm SOI/HRS SEG SiGe HBT/CMOS. A 0.3 µm
CMOS process module was inserted after formation of the trench iso-
lations [After K. Washio et al., IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 49,
2002(271–278). ©2002 IEEE]
electrodes exhibited high frequency and high-speed capabilities with fmax = 180 GHz
and an ECL-gate delay of 6.7 ps, along with good controllability, reliability and
high yield.
Hall et al. [67] have reported SiGe heterojunction transistors fabricated on bonded
wafer SOI substrates. The bonded wafer substrates incorporate polySi filled, deep
trenches for isolation. A novel selective and non-selective low-pressure chemical
vapour deposition growth process was used for the epitaxial layers. Experimental tran-
sistors exhibited good uniformity across the wafers and collector currents were found
to be ideal, showing the expected enhancement for the SiGe devices compared to Si.
SiGe on thick SOI is an attractive technological option for its low collector-to-
substrate capacitance, high-quality passive elements, and high immunity to substrate
noise [68]. However, these advantages come with the drawbacks of self-heating due to
the low thermal conductance of the buried oxide, and high wafer cost. Investigations
on the impact of self-heating in SiGe-on-SOI devices on transistor performance and
effect of introduction of thermal vias to reduce temperature rise have been performed
by Armstrong and Gamble [69].
A vertical bipolar transistor on SOI has been proposed and demonstrated by Cai
et al. [70, 71]. The transistor operates on the principle that the collector region is
fully depleted so that the charge carriers travel laterally towards the collector reach
through and contact after traversing the intrinsic base layer. The SOI silicon layer
thickness is comparable to that used in SOI CMOS, and no subcollector layer or deep
trench isolation are required. The transistor has been demonstrated in a polySi emitter
SiGe-base npn implementation on SOI with a 140 nm silicon layer. The fabricated
npn bipolar transistors exhibit a BVceo of 4.2 V and a peak fT of over 60 GHz.

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
247
E
n (depleted)
Buried oxide
Substrate of SOI
C
B
n+
n+
n+
p+
p+
Figure 7.5
Schematic of a vertical bipolar transistor on thin SOI substrate [After
J. Cai et al., VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., 2002(172–173). ©2002 IEEE]
The challenge for SOI BiCMOS integration arises from a fundamental device
architectural difference between bipolar and CMOS. Unlike CMOS transistors where
current flows in the silicon layer from source to drain, in high-speed vertical bipolar
transistors including all SiGe HBTs, electrons flow vertically from the emitter on
the top to the collector on the bottom. In order to have low resistance access to the
collector from a contact electrode on the top, a subcollector layer on the order of
1–2 µm thick with heavy doping is needed underneath the collector, which makes it
too thick to build on thin silicon film SOI.
The proposed SiGe HBT on SOI structure is shown schematically in Figure 7.5 for
an npn transistor. The collector region directly underneath the base is fully depleted
during operation. Collector terminal current is carried by the n and n+ regions sur-
rounding the fully depleted collector. The emitter and base regions can be built in the
same way as in a regular vertical bipolar transistor process. Figure 7.6 shows the elec-
tron flow path from emitter to collector in forward active mode, and the energy band
diagram along the electron path. An electron injected from the emitter flows vertically
through the base layer and, instead of continuing vertically down to a subcollector
layer as in a bulk transistor, travel laterally towards the collector reach through and
contact after traversing the intrinsic base layer.
7.4
Complementary SiGe HBT technology
Currently, SiGe technology development is exclusively based on npn SiGe HBTs due
to the larger minority electron mobility in the base and the valence band offset in SiGe
strained layers is generally more conducive to npn SiGe HBT designs. Although a
complementary (npn-pnp) bipolar technology generally gives much greater design
flexibility and higher performance than the npn-only technology, the design of high-
performance pnp SiGe HBTs remains a big challenge [72, 73]. The valence band
offset in SiGe translate into a conduction that greatly enhances minority electron
transport in the device, thereby significantly boosting transistor performance over a
similar npn Si BJT. It has been shown that the electric field effects associated with the

248
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
B
E
C
A
n+
n+
n
C Collector 
reachthrough
B
E
EC
EV
EC
Space-charge 
region of B-C
diode
n
p
A0
A9
A9
A
A0
A-
A-
Buried oxide
Figure 7.6
Schematic illustrating the electron path from emitter to collector (top)
and the energy band diagram along the electron path (bottom) [After
J. Cai et al., VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., 2002(172–173). ©2002 IEEE]
Ge profile in SiGe HBTs can be tailored to alter the local electric field distribution in
the base-collector space-charge region. For a pnp SiGe HBT, on the other hand, the
valence band offset directly results in a valence band barrier, even at low injection,
which strongly degrades minority hole transport and thus limits frequency response.
Careful optimisation to minimise these hole barriers in pnp SiGe HBTs can yield
impressive device performance compared to Si pnp BJTs [74,75]. The inherent design
differences between npn and pnp SiGe HBTs may be outlined as follows: (1) npn and
pnp profile design optimisation, (2) single Ge profile design for both npn and pnp
transistors, (3) if graded base design preferable to a box-like profile design for pnp
HBTs and (4) if Ge retrograding is required to obtain acceptable SiGe pnp HBT
performance.
The first SiGe HBT pnp transistors were grown with a n-type MBE deposited
epitaxial base and a single crystalline boron-doped emitter deposited by UHVCVD.
pnp SiGe base transistors were also fabricated in the same time frame as the first

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
249
npn SiGe base transistors. Epitaxial-base pnp transistors were particularly difficult to
fabricate because it required achieving abrupt N type dopant profiles reaching peak
concentrations. The MBE n-type base films, as the MBE boron doped layer before,
had very high defect densities, which caused considerable leakage and poor Gummel
characteristics. However, higher fT was measured on the SiGe-base pnp transistors
than the control homojunction Si-base pnp transistors.
The valence band offset in strained SiGe directly results in a valence band barrier
in a pnp SiGe HBT, even at low injection, which strongly degrades minority hole
transport, and thus limits frequency response [74, 75]. Careful optimisation to min-
imise these hole barriers in pnp SiGe HBTs is thus required. It has been shown that the
backside Ge profile shape strongly influences high-injection heterojunction barrier
effect in SiGe HBTs, which produces premature roll-off of β and fT at high current
density [72, 73]. The backside Ge retrograde has been shown to alter the electric
field distribution in the base-collector space-charge region and therefore affects both
impact ionization and apparent neutral base recombination (NBR) in SiGe HBT [72].
Impact ionization and apparent NBR are critical to the breakdown voltage and output
conductance of SiGe HBTs and are thus key design parameters.
7.5
SiGeC HBT technology
As discussed above, the SiGe alloy-based HBTs have already extended the perfor-
mance of Si-based devices and the Si1−xGex heterojunction bipolar transistors have
reached the level of maturity needed for volume production. However, the Si1−xGex
on Si (001) system has some severe limitations. Examples include, the existence of
a critical layer thickness for perfect pseudomorphic growth, which depend on the
amount of Ge in the SiGe layer. In addition, the major band offset between Si and
strained-SiGe is located in the valence band, that is, this system is better suited for
hole channel than for electron channel devices.
A major problem in fabricating SiGe devices is the ability to retain the narrow
as-grown profile of the boron doping within the base layer during post-epitaxial
processing. Heat treatment and transient enhanced diffusion (TED) due to annealing
implantation damage can result in the boron profile diffusing into the adjacent silicon
regions. This may result in undesirable conduction band barriers and thereby degrade
the device performance. TED can be strongly reduced by incorporating carbon into
the SiGe base layer. This use of carbon also allows significantly greater flexibility in
process design, with a wider latitude in process margins over standard SiGe.
The out-diffusion of boron from the SiGe base as a result of transient enhanced
diffusion following extrinsic base implant is the main factor that limits the achievable
fT of SiGe HBTs. When boron diffuses out of the SiGe base, the emitter/base and
collector/base junctions are created in silicon instead of SiGe. This leads to the for-
mation of parasitic energy barriers in the conduction band [76], which degrade both
gain and fT.
Research on highly supersaturated, carbon containing alloys on Si substrates
started only a few years ago. These new materials alleviate some of the limitations of

250
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
SiGe on Si (001). Si1−yCy and Si1−x−yGexCy layers can be grown pseudomorphically
on Si (001), using MBE, or different chemical vapour deposition techniques. Low
carbon concentrations can also be used to suppress diffusion of dopants, such as boron,
strain manipulation, thermal stability, and also carbon effects the band structure and
charge carrier transport. These unique properties have already found its first device
application, the SiGeC heterojunction bipolar transistors [77]. Although the process
started with MBE, the process was later transferred to CVD. SiGeC HBTs now offer
high-performance wireless solutions, with the potential to integrate digital and analog
functions on a single chip.
Research on SiGeC has shown that carbon is very effective in suppressing tran-
sient enhanced boron diffusion [78] when present in the base at a concentration of
∼1 × 1020cm−3 [79,80]. This is illustrated in Figure 7.7, which shows SIMS boron
profiles for SiGe and SiGeC wafers implanted with 2 × 1012 cm−2 P at 190 keV,
8 × 1011 cm−2 P at 110 keV for a pedestal collector and 6 × 1012 cm−2 at 100 keV
for a low-doped emitter. The wafers were given an anneal of 15 min at 800 ◦C
and 30 s at 1000 ◦C. It can be seen that there is considerable broadening of the
boron profile in the SiGe wafer, whereas in the SiGeC wafer the profile is very
sharp.
Figure 7.8 shows the historical trend in peak fT in both SiGe and SiGeC tech-
nologies, from the first self-aligned device demonstration in 1994 until 2003. IHP
has demonstrated the advantages of implementing C-doped SiGe HBTs in a BiCMOS
technology with respect to manufacturability, RF performance, modular process inte-
gration, and low process complexity. It has been shown that C doping allows the
fabrication of the HBT layers before the essential CMOS steps start, paving the way
250
Depth (nm)
Boron concentration (cm–3)
300
200
1.E+17
1.E+16
1.E+18
1.E+19
1.E+20
350
150
Figure 7.7
AtypicalBoronSIMSprofilesforanSiGeCwafer(solidline)andanSiGe
wafer (dotted line) illustrating the suppression of transient enhanced
boron diffusion

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
251
225
200
Only generated 
self-aligned HBTs
SiGe HBTs
SiGeC HBTs
175
150
125
100
75
50
25
0
1990
1992
1994
1996
Year
300 K
1998
2000
2002
Peak fT (GHz)
Figure 7.8
Reported cut-off frequency for SiGe and SiGeC HBTs
for a truly modular HBT integration in different CMOS platforms. Integration of
high-performance RF LDMOS transistors and other BiCMOS components have also
been accomplished.
This IHP process offers f T( fmax) values of up to 300 (350) GHz, and gate delays
down to 3.26 ps [58]. The HBTs use a SiGeC base layer of thickness of less than
30 nm, highly doped with B to attain an internal base sheet resistance of less than
2 k. This layer and a Si low-doped emitter layer are deposited in an integrated
epitaxy process using a single wafer RPCVD system (ASM Epsilon 2000). C doping
is performed in situ during epitaxy using methylsilane. The C-doped SiGe layers
forming the base of the HBTs are grown by LPCVD epitaxy, with low defect density
and excellent profile control. Incorporation of C in SiGe allows higher B doping
levels in very thin SiGe layers without out-diffusion from the SiGe, even after post-
epitaxial implants. Such implants were applied to dope the external base regions of
the transistors, and for selective doping of the low-doped emitters (LDE) and collec-
tors (LDC). Substantial flexibility is available in IHP technology to trade-off gain,
BVceo, fT and fmax simply by varying the base B dose and the conditions for the LDC
implantation. Besides comparable 1/f noise, the Si/SiGeC HBTs show Early voltage-
current gain products of more than 20000 V. The excellent quality of the SiGeC base
layers is demonstrated by wafer yields of more than 80 per cent for 16 k transistor
arrays.
IHP has produced SiGeC HBTs with an fmax of 95 GHz and an fT of 80 GHz
for 40 Gbit/s fibre optics applications. Delays per stage of only 16 ps have been
demonstrated for ring oscillators containing SiGeC HBTs. IHP has demonstrated the
first modular integration of SiGeC HBTs into a 250 nm epi-free, dual-gate CMOS-
compatible platform. This module fully uses the advantages of carbon, including

252
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
suppressed boron diffusion and increased thermal and processing stability. In the
following, the focus will be on SiGeC technology from IHP.
The modular integration of high-performance bipolar transistors in a standard
CMOS with no changes to the CMOS process is a promising way to realise highly inte-
grated low-power systems in a cost effective fashion [31]. The researchers from IHP,
Germany have shown that a strong C-induced suppression of thermal and transient
enhanced diffusion of boron enables the modular integration of high-performance
SiGeC HBTs into a state-of-the-art CMOS platform. The physical mechanism behind
the suppression of B diffusion in C-rich Si and SiGe has been described in several
references ([77] and references therein), and explain why the high stability of base
B profiles in SiGeC HBTs is important for a modular BiCMOS process. Success-
ful integration of high-performance SiGeC HBTs with a 0.25 µm CMOS platform
using only four additional mask layers beyond the core CMOS flow (see Figure 7.9).
This BiCMOS process exhibited excellent d.c. parameters and a high yield of
SiGeC HBTs.
The availability of both npn- and pnp-type bipolar transistors with matched per-
formance in a complementary BiCMOS process (CBiCMOS) is a promising route
to applications simultaneously requiring low voltage, low power, and high speed.
IHP has developed a high-speed CBiCMOS process. CBiCMOS process flow and
transistor cross sections from IHP are shown in Figures 7.10 and 7.11, respectively.
A total of ten mask steps are used for the complementary bipolar module, five for the
pnp and four for the npn, and one common mask step for structuring npn emitter poly
and pnp base poly. This process offers pnp SiGeC HBTs with peak fT/fmax values of
80 GHz/120 GHz at 2.6 V BVceo.
Basic RF CMOS flow
HBT processing steps
HBT mask (0) → Implants for high fT HBTs
Optional mask → Removing ARC and gate 
poly from HBTs
SiO2/Si3N4, layers for protecting the MOS regions 
HBT mask (1) → Defining HBT regions 
                         → Collector implant + RTA 
SiGeC base epitaxy + Si LDE epitaxy
HBT mask (2) → Defining emitter windows 
     → SIC implants
As doped Si deposition (highly doped emitter) 
HBT mask (3) → Defining poly-emitter
                       → Self-aligned implant
Si3N4, spacers and Si3N4/SiO2, protect layers 
HBT mask (4) → Defining HBT base poly 
Wet etching protection layers from MOS regions
Shallow trench isolation + Sac oxide 
High energy P impl. (NMOS isol./ HBT subcoll.)
NMOS and PMOS well production + RTA 
Wet etch sac oxide + Pre gate clean 
2.8 nm gate oxide + Gate poly + ARC layer
Gate structuring + Gate poly oxidation 
Wet etch ARC and Si3N4 layers 
NMOS and PMOS extension and halo implants 
Salicide protection layer for resistors 
Forming gate spacers 
NMOS and PMOS gate and S/D implants 
Final RTA + Co salicidation 
4 level Al metall, (including MIM fabrication)
Figure 7.9
HBT-before-CMOS BiCMOS process flow from IHP for fabricating
several types of SiGeC HBTs [After D. Knoll et al., IEEE IEDM Tech.
Dig., 2001(499–502). ©2001 IEEE]

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
253
(M7): Opening npn regions + 
High dose npn collector implant + RTA 
Oxide depostion 
(M8): Opening active npn coll. regions 
npn base epitaxy
(M9): Opening pnp regions + 
High dose pnp collector implant 
+ n-isolation implant + RTA 
Oxide depostion 
(M10): Opening active pnp coll. regions 
pnp base epitaxy 
(M11): Structuring pnp emitter window 
etch stop layer + base link implant
CBiCMOS process flow
Gate etch (M6), Spacer formation
Deposition of CMOS protection layers
PNP
(M12): Opening npn em. window + SIC 
As doped npn emitter deposition
(M13): Opening npn em. window + SIC 
B doped npn emitter deposition 
(M14): Structuring pnp poly emitters
(M15): Structuring npn emitter + pnp base poly 
(M16): Implantation of npn base and pnp collector contacts 
Removing CMOS protection layers by wet etch
S/D implantations (M17, M18) ... Passivation (M30)
NPN
BIPOLAR (NPN+PNP) MODULE (M7)–(M16)
Figure 7.10
Flow of the complementary BiCMOS process [After B. Heinemann
et al., IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., 2003(117–120). ©2003 IEEE]
Table 7.5 compares transistor parameters obtained with the IHP standard SiGe
HBT technology and those for C containing HBTs. Device parameters available for
IBM’s SiGe HBT BiCMOS are also included [19,81,82]. The essential difference in
comparison with the SiGe-only transistors is the higher base boron doping that can
be used without out-diffusion from the SiGe layer. As a result, the SiGeC HBTs reach
higher fmax, lower noise figures, and higher Early voltages than the C-free devices.
Note that the SiGeC devices, like the C-free HBTs, use a much simpler collector
construction than applied by the best-in-class, but surpass its performance. Knoll
et al. [83] have demonstrated that the presence of C has no deleterious effects on d.c.
parameters, low frequency noise, or junction leakage.

254
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Base
Emitter
Collector
npn
pnp
Base
Emitter
Collector
High doped collector
High doped collector
n-isolation
n-well
pnp base poly
npn emitter poly
n+ S/D
n+ S/D
SIC
SIC
p+
Figure 7.11
Schematic cross-section of the npn HBT structure (left) and the pnp
HBT structure (right) of the complementary BiCMOS process [After
B. Heinemann et al., IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., 2003(117–120). ©2003
IEEE]
Table 7.5
ComparisonofIHPSiGeandSiGeCHBTparameterswithpublished
data from IBM’s SiGe HBT BiCMOS. The SiGeC HBTs show higher
fmax, lower noise figures, and higher Early voltages than the SiGe-
only devices principally as a result of a higher base boron doping
that can be used without out-diffusion from the SiGe layer
SiGe HBTs
SiGeC HBTs
SiGe HBTs
IHP standard
IHP
IBM
technology
technology
BiCMOS
Collector well
Implanted,
Implanted,
Epitaxially,
construction
epi-free
epi-free
buried subcoll
Peak fT (GHz)
45
50
47
Peak fmax (GHz)
45
90
65
Current gain
90
200–250
100
Early volt. (V)
15
>100
65
BVceo(V)
3.1
2.7
3.4
NFmin(dB)
<3
<2
2
Gain(dB)
>4
>8
–
Ring osc.
16
19
FI/FO = 1
Delay(ps)
(CML-RO)
(CLM-RO)
(ECL-RO)
7.6
TCAD: SiGe/SiGeC BiCMOS process
In the fabrication of SiGe-based transistors, a low-temperature budget is needed. This
limitation is due to diffusion of dopants to the adjacent layers and also strain relaxation
after thermal annealing. Both these undesired effects degrade the high-frequency
performance of SiGe HBTs. A self-aligned transistor design is the preferable way

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
255
to decrease the junction capacitances and an industrial approach is the integration of
selective implanted collector (SIC) layers.
Silvaco and SimuCad provide well-integrated simulation software for tech-
nology development essential for SiGe/SiGeC. In the following, an example of
TCAD application towards SiGe/SiGeC technology development is presented. One
can use ATHENA/SUPREM4 to model the full SiGe/SiGeC process flow with a
range of sophisticated and experimentally verified models that include the following
effects:
•
retardation of boron diffusivity in germanium and carbon containing films;
•
effects of carbon on interstitial diffusivity and recombination behaviour;
•
interstitial injection during epitaxial processes resulting in enhanced dopant
diffusion;
•
fully coupled diffusion models;
•
smart epitaxial simulation automatically depositing polycrystalline films on non-
crystalline regions of the device;
•
polySi grain boundary diffusion models.
A trench isolated double polySiGe HBT has been simulated using the process
simulator ATHENA. The device structure after oxide growth, deposition, etch, epi-
taxy, implantation and diffusion, as shown in Figure 7.12, is then passed to ATLAS
−2
−1
0
1
2
−12
−8
−4
0
4
Microns
8
12
Microns
3
4
5
6
20.4
19.6
18.8
17.9
17.1
16.2
15.4
14.5
13.7
12.8
12.0
Melt doping
Figure 7.12
A 0.5 µm deep-trench isolated double polySiGe HBT with an emitter
area of 40 µm2 simulated using the 2D process simulator ATHENA
[Source: Silvaco International]

256
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
for the device’s electrical analysis at various bias points. In a SiGe HBT, the presence
of a narrow bandgap SiGe layer in the base region where most of the bandgap offset
occurs in the valence band, creates an energy well for holes. The base is generally
highly doped to increase high-frequency performance whilst still retaining a reason-
able gain. For this reason, the diffusion of boron in SiGe is of great interest and has
been discussed in Chapter 3.
The incorporation of high boron levels in the base region along with the Ge-
induced effects makes prediction of boron diffusion through the SiGe layer difficult.
Most practical devices do not use uniform Ge content in the base, as this results in
very thin base region before strain related defects occur. To reduce strain and increase
basewidth, most devices have base regions with ‘graded’ germanium profiles. The
effect of carbon incorporation to reduce the Boron out-diffusion has been discussed
(see Figure 7.7).
ATLAS/BLAZE seamlessly takes devices created in ATHENA/SUPREM4 and
provides the following outputs for the virtual analysis of SiGe HBTs:
•
d.c. I–V, Gummel and breakdown curves;
•
a.c. analysis for accurate extraction of fT/fmax and capacitance data;
•
s-parameter, y-parameter, and z-parameter calculations;
•
Transient analysis for large-signal inputs;
•
Analysis of critical parameters that impact device reliability;
•
1/f, trap and diffusion-induced noise calculations;
•
User-definable models and parameters.
The device structure, generated after process simulation using ATHENA (shown
in Figure 7.12), is passed on to the device simulator ATLAS. Figure 7.13 shows the
simulated Gummel plot and it is seen that almost ideal base current characteristics
are observed. For wireless applications gain verses collector current plot at different
frequencies is of interest. Figure 7.14 obtained from ATLAS simulation shows the
gain verses collector current for the polySiGe HBT at 2, 5 and 10 GHz.
The design of the collector in a SiGe HBT is dictated by conflicting requirements
to simultaneously achieve high breakdown voltage BVceo, low base-collector capaci-
tance, low base-collector signal delay τbc, and a high value of the knee current density
at which fT decreases. Impact ionization models available in ATLAS allow simulation
of breakdown voltages and recombination in the base of a SiGe HBT. Figures 7.15
and 7.16 show the breakdown characteristics and recombination in the base of a SiGe
HBT, respectively.
For RF applications, understanding of the noise in SiGe HBTs is very important as
it provides the ability to investigate and optimise the noise behaviour at the operating
point. Of prime concern to RF designers is the trade-off between achieving a low noise
figure, a high operating current and a sufficiently high current gain. ATLAS simulated
minimum noise figure vs. collector current for a polySiGe HBT at 2, 5 and 10 GHz
is shown in Figure 7.17. In Silvaco simulation, noise combined with S-PISCES or
BLAZE allows analysis of the small-signal noise generated within SiGe HBTs and
may be used to extract figures of merit that are essential for optimising the circuit
design.

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
257
1e−1
Base current (A)
Collector current (A)
1e−2
1e−3
1e−4
1e−5
1e−6
1e−7
1e−8
1e−9
1e−10
1e−11
1e−12
1e−13
1e−14
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Base voltage (V)
0.8
1
1.2
Figure 7.13
d.c. characteristics showing Gummel plot of SiGe HBT [Source:
Silvaco International]
70
Gms (dB)
2 GHz
5 GHz
10 GHz
60
50
40
30
20
0
0.01
0.02
Collector current (A)
0.03
0.04
Figure 7.14
Gain vs. collector current for the polySiGe HBT at 2, 5 and 10 GHz
[Source: Silvaco International]

258
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0.009
0.008
Collector current (A)
0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
0
0.5
1
1.5
Collector voltage (V)
2
2.5
3
0
Figure 7.15
Simulation of breakdown voltage using impact ionization model in a
SiGeHBT.I–VcharacteristicsoptimisedforhighfT showsaconsequent
low breakdown voltage [Source: Silvaco International]
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
Microns
0.1
0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Emitter
Base
pn junction
Silicon emitter layer
Silicon substrate
Microns
SiGe base region
Recombination rate
4.69e + 27
4.23e + 27
3.77e + 27
3.32e + 27
2.06e + 27
  2.4e + 27
1.94e + 27
1.48e + 27
1.02e + 27
5.59e + 27
     1e + 26
Figure 7.16
Recombination in the base of an SiGe HBT [Source:
Silvaco
International]

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
259
4
F Min (dB)
10 GHz
5 GHz
2 GHz
3
2
1
0
0.01
0.02
Collector current (A)
0.03
0.04
Figure 7.17
Minimum noise figure vs. collector current for the polySiGe HBT at 2, 5
and 10 GHz at a collector voltage of 1 V[Source: Silvaco International]
7.7
Summary
A retrospective look at the development and production of SiGe HBTs reveals that
significant challenges have been overcome to make SiGe now a mature technology. In
this chapter, key developments including the SiGe epitaxial growth process, overall
integration methods, and elimination of yield-limiting defects to enable production
of highly integrated products have been presented. Optimising the interaction of
the EPI layer with its surroundings has enabled the achievement of high bipolar
device yield. Integration of HP SiGe HBT with CMOS logic and a host of passive
devices has created technologies that are well suited for a broad range of HP com-
munication products. Modular integration approaches, such as the base-after-gate
approach, has simplified the development of SiGe HBT technologies. It is observed
that use of a modular integration approach enables a quick migration to next genera-
tion and derivative technologies easily. Enhancements have been achieved primarily
in cost reduction, increased integration, and application specific voltage/power
requirements.
Vertical SiGe HBTs compatible with SOI CMOS have been discussed. The
unique feature of collector voltage pinning in thin Si film was discussed in depth,
which gives rise to high breakdown voltage, high Early voltage, and low collector
capacitance. The SOI device is promising for a better fT-BVceo trade-off than that

260
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
from conventional collector scaling in bulk devices. The fabricated devices show the
anticipated strong dependence of d.c. and RF characteristics on SOI substrate bias.
IBM’s and IHP’s SiGe and SiGeC BiCMOS technologies that have driven the
requirements for the most advanced communication applications have been discussed.
As a TCAD example, process and device simulation results for a trench isolated
double polySiGe HBT using the process simulator ATHENA and device simulator
ATLAS towards SiGe/SiGeC technology development have been presented. Use of
TCAD tools for the SiGe/SiGeC technology development is expected to offer the
process and device designers significant advantages in time-to-market, cost, power
and performance prediction.
In contrast to the nearly exponential trend in npn SiGe HBT performance over
time, towards complementary bipolar technology, careful analysis of the inherent
profile design and differences between npn and pnp SiGe HBTs design is necessary
for Ge profile design of high-performance pnp SiGe HBTs. Research areas that need
more emphasis for passive elements are modelling at RF frequencies, accurate SPICE
models and characterisation as a function of temperature.
References
1 C. K. Maiti,
and G. A. Armstrong,
Applications of Silicon-Germanium
Heterostructure Devices. Inst. of Physics Pub., UK, 2001.
2 A. J. Joseph, D. L. Harame, B. Jagannathan, D. Coolbaugh, D. Ahlgren,
J. Magerlein, et al., ‘Status and direction of communication technologies – SiGe
BiCMOS and RFCMOS’, Proc. IEEE, vol. 93, pp. 1539–1558, 2005.
3 J.-S. Rieh,
B. Jagannathan,
H. Chen,
K. T. Schonenberg,
D. Angell,
A. Chinthakindi, et al., ‘SiGe HBTs with cut-off frequency of 350 GHz’, in
IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 771–774, 2002.
4 R. Lodge, ‘Advantages of SiGe for GSM RF front ends’, Electron. Eng., vol. 71,
pp. 18–19, 1999.
5 R. Gotzfried, F. Beisswanger, S. Gerlach, A. Schuppen, H. Dietrich, U. Seiler,
etal., ‘RFIC’sformobilecommunicationsystemsusingSiGebipolartechnology’,
IEEE Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 46, pp. 661–668, 1998.
6 A. Rylyakov, and T. Zwick, ‘96 GHz static frequency divider in SiGe bipolar
technology’, in IEEE GaAs IC Symp. Tech. Dig., pp. 288–290, 2003.
7 A. R. Alvarez, BiCMOS Technology and Applications. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Boston, 1989.
8 IEEE, ‘Special issue on integrated circuits technologies for RF circuit applica-
tions’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 52, pp. 1231–1488, 2005.
9 D. C. Ahlgren,
G. Freeman,
S. Subbanna,
R. Groves,
D. Greenberg,
J. Malinowski, et al., ‘A SiGe HBT BiCMOS technology for mixed signal RF
applications’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 195–197, 1997.
10 G. Freeman, D. Ahlgren, D. R. Greenberg, R. Groves, F. Huang, G. Hugo,
et al., ‘A 0.18 µm 90 GHz fT SiGe HBT BiCMOS, ASIC-compatible, copper

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
261
interconnect technology for RF and microwave applications’, in IEEE IEDM
Tech. Dig., pp. 569–572, 1999.
11 A. Joseph, D. Coolbaugh, M. Zierak, R. Wuthrich, P. Geiss, Z. He, et al.,
‘A 0.18 µm BiCMOS technology featuring 120/100 GHz (fT/fMAX) HBT and
ASIC-compatible CMOS using copper interconnect’, in IEEE BCTM Proc.,
pp. 143–146, 2001.
12 D. C. Ahlgren, B. Jagannathan, S.-J. Jeng, P. Smith, D. Angell, H. Chen, et al.,
‘Process variability analysis of a Si/SiGe HBT technology with greater than
200 GHz performance’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 80–83, 2002.
13 B. A. Orner, Q. Z. Liu, B. Rainey, A. Stricker, P. Geiss, P. Gray, et al., ‘A 0.13 µm
BiCMOS technology featuring a 200/280 GHz (fT/fmax) SiGe HBT’, in IEEE
BCTM Proc., pp. 203–206, 2003.
14 S.A.St. Onge, D.L.Harame, J.S.Dunn, S.Subbanna, D.C.Ahlgren, G.Freeman,
et al., ‘A 0.24 µm SiGe BiCMOS mixed-signal RF production technology
featuring a 47 GHz ft HBT and 0.18 µm Leff CMOS’, in IEEE BCTM Proc.,
pp. 117–120, 1999.
15 N. Feilchenfeld, L. Lanzerotti, D. Sheridan, R. Wuthrich, P. Geiss, D. Coolbaugh,
et al., ‘High performance, low complexity 0.18 µm SiGe BiCMOS technology
for wireless circuit applications’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 197–202, 2002.
16 L. Lanzerotti, N. Feilchenfeld, D. Coolbaugh, J. Slinkman, P. Gray, D. Sheridan,
et al., ‘A low complexity 0.13 µm SiGe BiCMOS technology for wireless and
mixed signal applications’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 237–240, 2004.
17 M. Racanelli, and P. Kempf, ‘SiGe BiCMOS technology for RF circuit
applications’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 52, pp. 1259–1270, 2005.
18 D. N. Ngoc, D. L. Harame, J. C. Malinowski, S. J. Jeng, K. T. Schonenberg,
M. M. Gilbert, et al., ‘A 200 mm SiGe-HBT BiCMOS technology for mixed
signal applications’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 89–92, 1995.
19 D.
Ahlgren,
M.
Gilbert,
D.
Greenberg,
S.-J.
Jeng,
J.
Malinowski,
D. Nguyen-Ngoc, et al., ‘Manufacturability demonstration of an integrated SiGe
HBT technology for the analog and wireless marketplace’, in IEEE IEDM Tech.
Dig., pp. 859–862, 1996.
20 D. L. Harame, K. M. Newton, R. Singh, S. L. Sweeney, S. E. Strang,
J. B. Johnson, et al., ‘Design automation methodology and rf/analog modeling
for rf CMOS and SiGe BiCMOS technologies’, IBM J. Res. and Dev., vol. 47,
pp. 139–175, 2003.
21 D. J. Harame, J. H. Comfort, J. D. Cressler, E. F. Crabbe, J. Y. C. Sun,
B. S. Meyerson, et al., ‘Si/SiGe epitaxial-base transistors-part I: Materials,
physics, and circuits’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 42, pp. 455–467,
1995.
22 D. J. Harame, J. H. Comfort, J. D. Cressler, E. F. Crabbe, J. Y. C. Sun,
B. S. Meyerson, et al., ‘Si/SiGe epitaxial-base transistors-part II: Process integra-
tionandanalogapplications’, IEEETrans. ElectronDevices, vol.42, pp.469–482,
1995.
23 D. L. Harame, and B. S. Meyerson, ‘The early history of IBM’s SiGe mixed signal
technology’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 48, pp. 2555–2567, 2001.

262
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
24 IEEE, ‘Special issue on silicon germanium – advanced technology, modeling and
design’, Proc. IEEE, vol. 93, p. 1519, 2005.
25 S. S. Iyer, G. L. Patton, S. S. Delage, S. Tiwari, and J. M. C. Stork, ‘Silicon-
germanium base heterojunction bipolar transistors by molecular beam epitaxy’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 874–876, 1987.
26 B. S. Meyerson, ‘UHV/CVD growth of Si and Si-Ge alloys: Chemistry, Physics
and Device Applications’, Proc. IEEE, vol. 80, pp. 1592–1608, 1992.
27 G. Freeman, J.-S. Rieh, B. Jagannathan, Y. Zhijian, F. Guarin, and A. Joseph,
‘Device scaling and application trends for over 200 GHz sige HBTs’, in Proc.
IEEE RFIC Symp., pp. 6–9, 2003.
28 C. P. Moreira, E. Kerherve, P. Jarry, A. A. Shirakawa, and D. Belot, ‘Dual-
mode RF receiver front-end using a 0.25-µm 60-GHz fT SiGe:C BiCMOS7RF
technology’, in SBCCI. Symp. Dig., pp. 88–93, 2004.
29 P. Deixler, A. Rodriguez, W. De Boer, H. Sun, R. Colclaser, D. Bower,
et al., ‘QUBiC4X: An fT/fmax = 130/140 GHz SiGe:C-BiCMOS manufactur-
ing technology with elite passives for emerging microwave applications’, in IEEE
BCTM Proc., pp. 233–236, 2004.
30 S. Van Huylenbroeck, A. Sibaja-Hernandez, A. Piontek, L. J. Choi, M. W. Xu,
N. Ouassif, et al., ‘Lateral and vertical scaling of a QSA HBT for a 0.13 µm
200 GHz SiGe:C BiCMOS technology’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 229–232,
2004.
31 D. Knoll, B. Heinemann, R. Barth, K. Blum, J. Borngraber, J. Drews,
et al., ‘A modular, low-cost SiGe:C BiCMOS process featuring high-FT and
high-BVCEO transistors’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 241–244, 2004.
32 B. Heinemann, R. Barth, D. Bolze, J. Drews, P. Formanek, O. Fursenko, et al.,
‘A complementary BiCMOS technology with high speed npn and pnp SiGe:C
HBTs’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 117–120, 2003.
33 D. L. Harame, D. Ahlgren, D. Coolbaugh, J. Dunn, G. Freeman, J. Gillis, et al.,
‘Current status and future trends of SiGe BiCMOS technology’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 48, pp. 2575–2594, 2001.
34 L. D. Lanzerotti, A. St. Amour, C. W. Liu, and J. C. Sturm, ‘Si1−x−yGexCy/Si
heterojunction bipolar transistors’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 930–932,
1994.
35 F. Sato, T. Hashimoto, T. Tatsumi, and T. Tashiro, ‘Sub-20 ps ECL circuits with
high-performance super self-aligned selectively grown SiGe base (SSSB) bipolar
transistors’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 42, pp. 483–488, 1995.
36 T. F. Meister, H. Schafer, M. Franosch, W. Molzer, K. Aufinger, U. Scheler, et al.,
‘SiGe base bipolar technology with 74 GHz fmax and 11 ps gate delay’, in IEEE
IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 739–742, 1995.
37 B. Jagannathan, M. Khater, F. Pagette, J.-S. Rieh, D. Angell, H. Chen, et al.,
‘Self-aligned SiGe NPN transistor with 285 GHz fmax and 207 GHz ft in a
manufacturable technology’, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 23, pp. 258–260,
2002.
38 P. Deixler, A. Rodriguez, W. De Boer, H. Sun, R. Colclaser, D. Bower,
et al., ‘QUBiC4X: A fT/fmax = 130/140 GHz SiGe:C-BiCMOS manufacturing

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
263
technology with elite passives for emerging microwave applications’, in IEEE
BCTM Proc., pp. 236–239, 2004.
39 K. Washio, E. Ohue, K. Oda, M. Tanabe, H. Shimamoto, T. Onai, et al.,
‘A selective-epitaxial-growth SiGe-base HBT with SMI electrodes featuring
9.3-ps ECL-gate delay’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 46, pp. 1411–1416,
1999.
40 B. S. Meyerson, ‘Low-temperature silicon epitaxy by ultrahigh vacuum chemical
vapor deposition’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 48, pp. 797–799, 1986.
41 R. A. Johnson, M. J. Zierak, K. B. Outama, T. C. Bahn, A. J. Joseph,
C. N. Cordero, et al., ‘A 1.8 million transistor CMOS ASIC fabricated
in a SiGe BiCMOS technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 217–220,
1998.
42 D. L. Harame, E. F. Crabbe, J. D. Cressler, J. H. Comfort, J. Y.-C. Sun,
S. R. Stiffler, et al., ‘A high-performance epitaxial SiGe-base ECL BiCMOS
technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 19–22, 1992.
43 D. L. Harame,
J. M. C. Stork,
B. S. Meyerson,
T. N. Nguyen,
and
G. J. Scilla,
‘Epitaxial-base transistors with ultra-high vacuum chemical
vapor deposition (UHV/CVD) epitaxy/enhanced profile control for greater
flexibility in device design’, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 10, pp. 156–158,
1989.
44 A. Neugroschel, C.-T. Sah, and M. S. Carroll, ‘Degradation of bipolar transistor
current gain by hot holes during reverse emitter-base bias stress’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 43, pp. 1286–1290, 1996.
45 J. H. Comfort, G. L. Patton, J. D. Cressler, W. Lee, E. F. Crabbe, B. S. Meyerson,
et al., ‘Profile leverage in self-aligned epitaxial Si or SiGe base bipolar
technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 21–24, 1990.
46 M. Smayling, J. Reynolds, D. Redwine, S. Keller, and G. Falessi, ‘A modu-
lar merged technology process including submicron CMOS logic, nonvolatile
memories, linear functions, and power components’, in IEEE CICC Proc.,
pp. 24.5.1–24.5.4, 1993.
47 P. G. Y. Tsui, P. V. Gilbert, and S.-W. Sun, ‘A versatile half-micron complementary
BiCMOS technology for microprocessor-based smart power applications’, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 42, pp. 564–570, 1995.
48 E. Bayer, W. Bucksch, K. Scoones, K. Wagensohner, J. Erdeljac, and L. Hutter,
‘A 1.0 µm linear BiCMOS technology with power DMOS capability’, in IEEE
BCTM Proc., pp. 137–1414, 1995.
49 S. Subbanna, J. Johnson, G. Freeman, R. Volant, R. Groves, D. Herman, et al.,
‘Prospects of silicon-germanium-based technology for very high-speed circuits’,
in IEEE MTT-S Dig., pp. 361–364, 2000.
50 J. Dunn, D. Harame, S. St. Onge, A. Joseph, N. Feilchenfeld, K. Watson, et al.,
‘Trends in silicon germanium BiCMOS integration and reliability’, in Proc. Int.
Reliability Phys. Symp., pp. 237–242, 2000.
51 G. Freeman, J. Kierstead, and W. Schweiger, ‘Electrical parameter data analysis
and object-oriented techniques in semiconductor process development’, in IEEE
BCTM Proc., pp. 81–88, 1996.

264
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
52 M. Racanelli, P. Ma, and P. Kempf, ‘SiGe BiCMOS technology for highly inte-
grated wireless transceivers’, in IEEE 25th GaAs IC Symp. Dig., pp. 183–186,
2003.
53 K. Washio, ‘SiGe HBT and BiCMOS technologies for optical transmission
and wireless communication systems’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 50,
pp. 656–668, 2003.
54 M. Racanelli, and P. Kempf, ‘SiGe BiCMOS technology for communication
products’, in IEEE CICC Proc., pp. 331–334, 2003.
55 J. S. Dunn, D. C. Ahlgren, D. D. Coolbaugh, N. B. Feilchenfeld, G. Freeman,
D. R. Greenberg,
et al.,
‘Foundation of rf CMOS and SiGe BiCMOS
technologies’, IBM J. Res. and Dev., vol. 47, pp. 101–138, 2003.
56 D.Harame, A.Joseph, D.Coolbaugh, G.Freeman, K.Newton, S.M.Parker, etal.,
‘The emerging role of SiGe BiCMOS technology in wired and wireless commu-
nications’, in Proc. IEEE Int. Caracas Conf. Devices, Circuits and Systems,
pp. D052–1–D052–17, 2002.
57 J.-S. Rieh, B. Jagannathan, H. Chen, K. Schonenberg, S.-J. Jeng, M. Khater,
et al., ‘Performance and design considerations for high speed SiGe HBTs of
fT/fmax = 375 GHz/210 GHz’, in Int. Conf. Indium Phosphide and Related
Materials, pp. 374–377, 2003.
58 M. Khater, J.-S. Rieh, T. Adam, A. Chinthakindi, J. Johnson, R. Krishnasamy,
et al., ‘SiGe HBT technology with fmax/fT = 350/300 GHz and gate delay below
3.3 ps’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 247–250, 2004.
59 S. Subbanna, R. Groves, B. Jagannathan, D. Greenberg, G. Freeman, R. Volant,
et al., ‘Using silicon-germanium mainstream BiCMOS technology for X-band
and LMDS (25–30 GHz) microwave applications’, in IEEE MTT-S Symp. Dig.,
pp. 401–404, 2002.
60 B.-U. Klepser, and W. Klein, ‘Ramp-up of first SiGe circuits for mobile communi-
cations: positioning of SiGe vs. GaAs and silicon’, in GaAs IC Symp., pp. 37–40,
1999.
61 U. Konig, ‘SiGe and GaAs as competitive technologies for RF-applications’, in
IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 87–92, 1998.
62 M. Mouis, and A. Chantre, ‘VLSI integration of SiGe epitaxial base bipolar
transistors’, in Proc. URSI ISSSE Symp., pp. 50–55, 1998.
63 C. Kermarrec, T. Tewksbury, G. Dawe, R. Baines, B. Meyerson, D. Harame,
et al., ‘SiGe HBT’s reach the microwave and millimeter-wave frontier’, in IEEE
BCTM Proc., pp. 155–162, 1994.
64 M. Mastrapasqua, P. Palestri, A. Pacelli, G. K. Celler, M. R. Frei, P. R. Smith,
et al., ‘Minimizing thermal resistance and collector-to-substrate capacitance in
SiGe BiCMOS on SOI’, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 23, pp. 145–147,
2002.
65 F. Sato, T. Hashimoto, H. Tezuka, M. Soda, T. Suzaki, T. Tatsumi, et al.,
‘A 60-GHz fT super self-aligned selectively grown SiGe-base (SSSB) bipolar
transistor with trench isolation fabricated on SOI substrate and its application
to 20-Gb/s optical transmitter IC’s’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 46,
pp. 1332–1338, 1999.

SiGe/SiGeC HBT technology
265
66 K. Washio,
E. Ohue,
H. Shimamoto,
K. Oda,
R. Hayami,
Y. Kiyota,
et al., ‘A 0.2-µm 180-GHz-fmax 6.7-ps-ECL SOI/HRS self-aligned SEG SiGe
HBT/CMOS technology for microwave and high-speed digital applications’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 49, pp. 271–278, 2002.
67 S. Hall, A. C. Lamb, M. Bain, B. M. Armstrong, H. Gamble, H. A. W. El Mubarek,
et al., ‘SiGe HBTs on bonded wafer substrates’, Microelectronic Eng., vol. 59,
pp. 449–454, 2001.
68 S. Ueno, M. Watanabe, T. Kato, T. Shinohara, K. Mikami, T. Hashimoto, et al.,
‘A single-chip 10 Gb/s transceiver LSI using SiGe SOI/BiCMOS’, in IEEE ISSCC
Tech. Dig., pp. 82–83, 2001.
69 G. A. Armstrong, and H. S. Gamble, ‘Simulation of self heating effects in
heterojunction bipolar transistors fabricated in wafer bonded SOI substrates’,
in Silicon-on-Insulator Technology and Devices IX Editor P. L. Hemment, The
Electrochemical Society Proc. Series, Pennington, NJ, vol. 99-3, pp. 249–254,
1999.
70 J. Cai, A. Ajmera, C. Ouyang, P. Oldiges, M. Steigerwalt, K. Stein, et al.,
‘Fully-depleted-collector polysilicon-emitter SiGe-base vertical bipolar transistor
on SOI’, in VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., pp. 172–173, 2002.
71 J. Cai, M. Kumar, M. Steigerwalt, H. Ho, K. Schonenberg, K. Stein, et al.,
‘Vertical SiGe-base bipolar transistors on CMOS-compatible SOI substrate’, in
IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 215–218, 2003.
72 G. Zhang, J. D. Cressler, L. Lanzerotti, R. Johnson, Z. Jin, S. Zhang, et al.,
‘Electric field effects associated with the backside Ge profile in SiGe HBTs’,
Solid State Electron., vol. 46, pp. 655–659, 2002.
73 G. Zhang, J. D. Cressler, G. Niu, and A. Pinto, ‘A comparison of npn and pnp
profile design tradeoffs for complementary SiGe HBT technology’, Solid State
Electron., vol. 44, pp. 1949–1954, 2000.
74 D. L. Harame, J. M. C. Stork, B. S. Meyerson, E. F. Crabbe, G. L. Patton,
G. J. Scilla, et al., ‘SiGe-base PNP transistors fabricated with n-type UHV/CVD
LTE in a “No Dt” process’, in Dig. Symp. on VLSI Technol., pp. 47–48, 1990.
75 D. L. Harame, B. S. Meyerson, E. F. Crabbe, C. L. Stains, J. M. Cotte,
J. M. C. Strok et al., ‘55 GHz polysilicon-emitter graded SiGe-base PNP tran-
sistor’, in Proc. Symp. VLSI Technology, pp. 71–75, 1991.
76 Md. R. Hashim, R. F. Lever, and P. Ashburn, ‘2D simulation of the effects of
transient enhanced boron out-diffusion from base of SiGe HBT due to an extrinsic
base implant’, Solid State Electron., vol. 43, pp. 131–140, 1999.
77 H. J. Osten, Carbon-Containing Layers on Silicon – Growth, Properties and
Applications. Trans-Tech Publications, Switzerland, 1999.
78 L. D. Lanzerotti, J. C. Sturm, E. Stach, R. Hullullull, T. Buyuklimanli, and
C. Magee, ‘Suppression of boron transient enhanced diffusion in SiGe hetero-
junction bipolar transistors by carbon incorporation’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 70,
pp. 3125–3127, 1997.
79 H. J. Osten, G. Lippert, D. Knoll, R. Barth, B. Heinemann, H. Rucker, et al., ‘The
effect of carbon incorporation on SiGe heterobipolar transistor performance and
process margin’, IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 803–806, 1997.

266
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
80 I. M. Anteney, G. Lippert, P. Ashburn, H. J. Osten, B. Heinemann, G. J. Parker,
et al., ‘Characterization of the effectiveness of carbon incorporation in SiGe for
the elimination of parasitic energy barriers in SiGe HBTs’, IEEE Electron Device
Lett., vol. 20, pp. 116–118, 1998.
81 S. Subbanna, G. Freeman, D. Ahlgren, D. Greenberg, D. Harame, J. Dunn, et al.,
‘Integration and design issues in combining very-high-speed silicon-germanium
bipolar transistors and ULSI CMOS for system-on-a-chip applications’, in IEEE
IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 845–848, 1999.
82 G. Niu, J. D. Cressler, U. Gogineni, and D. L. Harame, ‘Collector-base junc-
tion avalanche multiplication effects in advanced UHV/CVD SiGe HBTs’, IEEE
Electron Device Lett., vol. 19, pp. 288–290, 1998.
83 D. Knoll, B. Heinemann, H. J. Osten, K. E. Ehwald, B. Tillack, P. Schley,
et al., ‘Si/SiGe:C heterojunction bipolar transistors in an Epi-free well, single-
polysilicon technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 703–706, 1998.

Chapter 8
MOSFET: compact models
The primary goal of compact model development for circuit simulation is to provide
physics-based, scalable models that are fully integrated into a design kit environment.
Progress in MOS device physics, model development and model implementation
process has qualitatively changed the capabilities of compact models precisely at a
time when the rapid expansion of RF MOSFET applications is imposing the most
stringent demands on the new generation of MOSFET models. A MOSFET compact
model predicts the output current (Ids) and its derivatives (gm and gds) as a function
of temperature, bias voltage, channel length and device width.
Si MOSFETs have so far been primarily used in digital circuits and at frequencies
below 1 GHz. By optimisation of the technology and device geometry n-channel
Si MOSFETs with cut-off frequencies beyond 150 GHz have been realised. The
feasibility of using CMOS for implementing RF circuits for wireless communica-
tions has been demonstrated [1–3]. One of the major obstacles for use of CMOS in
RF circuits is the lack of good MOS models that are valid up to RF. The rapid growth
of RF CMOS and mixed-signal integrated circuit (IC) design has increased the need
for accurate, robust models for simulating analog circuit designs.
There are two major problems faced in simulating MOS circuits, particularly
MOS-based analog circuits. The first is the development of models which are suitable
for the new fabrication technologies for short-channel devices. The second problem is
thespecificationofmodelparameters. AlthoughmostMOSmodelsarephysics-based,
some parameters do not have well-defined values and there are other parameters for
which the physical values do not produce the best fit to actual device characteristics.
So, it is generally necessary to extract model parameters from measured transis-
tor data obtained for a given fabrication process. MOSFET analytical models are
based on either a regional approach, surface potential formulation, or semi-empirical
equations. Models based on the regional approach use a different set of equations
to describe the device behaviour in different regions. Where weak and strong inver-
sion regions are generally bridged by using a non-physical curve fitting. Two different

268
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
types of compact MOSFET models can be distinguished on the basis of different mod-
elling approach: threshold-voltage based models [4–6] and surface-potential-based
models [7, 8]. For a comprehensive review on high-frequency modelling technique
of MOSFETs for radio frequency integrated circuit (RFIC) design, covering intrin-
sic and extrinsic components, equivalent circuits, parameter extraction, noises and
distortion behaviours for RF circuit applications, the reader may refer to a paper by
Cheng et al. [9].
The demands for advanced models, which can describe nanoscale silicon
MOSFET devices for analog and mixed-signal applications and account for the physi-
cal effects on small geometry devices, have led to enormous efforts in the development
of advanced physics-based compact models. For recent research activities in devel-
oping new models for MOSFETs, active and passive devices for circuit applications
and ESD protection, which are critical to realising the RF systems-on-a-chip (SoCs),
the reader may refer to the special issue on advanced compact models and 45-nm
modelling challenges by the IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices editors [10].
In this chapter, currently available MOSFET models and the impact of the new
modelling paradigm on MOSFET circuit simulation with particular attention to RF
issues, non-quasistatic effects and symmetric surface-potential based models are
discussed. New models from Philips, MOS Model 11, EKV, HiSIM and PSP will
be introduced, and a comparison with the well-established BSIM model will be
carried out.
8.1
Charge-based MOSFET models
The MOSFET models that are currently available can be divided into three gener-
ations. The first generation of MOSFET models treats the device as almost ideal
describing the MOSFET from very simple physically based parameters. The solution
adopted was the threshold voltage (Vt) based formulation that assumes the surface
potential is a very simple function of the input voltage; constant for Vg above Vt
and a linear function of gate voltage below Vt. This results in separate solutions for
different regions of MOSFET operation requiring smoothing functions to connect the
regions.
Originally, most of the model development was done to achieve a good fit for
d.c. characteristics while the main requirement for the capacitance model was good
continuityratherthangoodfit. ForMOSFETs, thelevel1, 2and3modelsaregenerally
referred to as the first generation models. The Shichman–Hodges model (also known
as Level 1) is the original MOSFET model developed and is applicable mainly to long
channel devices. Attention was given to physically accurate representation without
equal consideration to mathematical representation, which often creates numerical
problems during circuit simulation. The C–V portion of the model is the Meyer model,
which is not based on charge conservation model. Level 2 model addresses several
short channel effects such as the velocity saturation. However, the mathematical
implementation of the model is complicated, leading to convergence problems. For
C–V calculation, either the Meyer model of Level 1 or the Ward–Dutton model can

MOSFET: compact models
269
be used. The Ward–Dutton model [11] is a charge-based model, which forms the
backbone of all present models. Semi-empirical Level 3 is regarded as a simplified
version of Level 2. This model has proven to be robust and is popular for digital
circuit design. However, the model is not scalable.
In the second generation of models, the parameters in the model are empirical
in their character. The BSIM model places less emphasis on the exact physical for-
mulation of the device, but instead relies on empirical parameters and polynomial
equations to handle various physical effects. This generally leads to improved circuit
simulation behaviour compared to previous models, although its accuracy degrades
in submicron FETs. Several empirical parameters without clear physical meanings
are incorporated in the model. This approach gains the advantage of improved con-
vergence properties, but at the cost of complicating the parameter extraction process,
as well as weakening the link between model parameters and fabrication process.
BSIM2 is an extension to BSIM, with comprehensive modifications which make
it suitable for analog circuit design. Although BSIM2 is an improvement upon BSIM,
in terms of model accuracy as well as convergence behaviour in circuit simulation,
it still breaks the transistor operation into several regions. This leads to discontinuity
in the first derivative in I–V and C–V characteristics, a result that can cause numeri-
cal problems in simulation. With the help of smoothing functions, BSIM3 adopts
a single equation to describe device characteristics in various operating regions.
This eliminates the discontinuity in the I–V and C–V characteristics. BSIM3 has
evolved through several versions. BSIM3vl and BSIM3v2 contain many mathe-
matical problems that have largely been solved by the third version, BSIM3v3.
Although BSIM3v3 is a de facto public-domain industry standard MOS model,
it has limitations when approaching for high frequency analog circuits exceeding
several GHz. An enhanced version specifically for analog circuits, BSIM4, offers
several improvements over BSIM3, through improved noise modelling, and in the
incorporation of extrinsic parasitics. Interested readers may refer to an excellent
review on compact noise models for MOSFETs by Jindal [12]. MOSFET models
included in circuit simulators can be classified into three categories: analytical
models, table lookup models and empirical models. Most of the models in current
use are analytical. Further details of a range of different models can be found in
Reference 13.
Until recently threshold-voltage-based MOSFET compact models were consid-
ered standard and attempted to accommodate the increasing demands of the design
community by a rapid increase in the number of model parameters without changing
the regional nature of the model. Interests in analog and mixed-signal IC designs
require different operation regions of compact models for the circuit designs and
simulations [14].
For example BSIM3v3 includes the following physical phenomena [15]:
•
short and narrow channel effects on threshold voltage;
•
non-uniform doping effect (in both lateral and vertical directions);
•
mobility reduction due to vertical field;
•
bulk charge effect;

270
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
•
velocity saturation;
•
drain-induced barrier lowering;
•
channel length modulation (CLM);
•
substrate current-induced body effect (SCBE);
•
subthreshold conduction;
•
source/drain parasitic resistances;
•
poly-gate depletion and quantum mechanical effects.
A new variant on the BSIM family, BSIM5 uses a single set of equations to
calculate charges throughout all the bias regions. It incorporates short-channel, non-
uniform doping and other effects to accurately model subtle details of the device
behaviour. Special attention is paid to higher-order physics such as accurate current
saturation and quantum mechanical effect. It is fully symmetric and smooth. Velocity
saturation, velocity overshoot and source-velocity limit are modelled in a unified way.
BSIM5showsthattheclassicalvelocitysaturationunderestimatesthedraincurrentfor
45 nm technology, while the hydrodynamic model overestimates the current because
source-velocity limit starts to take effect. The BSIM5 core model is being extended
to model non-classical devices such as ultra-thin-body SOI and multi-gate devices
including FinFET.
A summary of various MOSFET models developed during the last four decades
is shown in Figure 8.1. It can be seen from the figure that the number of parameters
requiredtofit a modelisbecomingverylarge. Forexample, BSIM3v3requiresseveral
hundred parameters for a complete model [16]. Automated extraction program of
model parameter through a dedicated program such as ICCAP requires significant
experience and specialist knowledge. Perhaps the ultimate, but yet unrealised goal
Core parameters only
With geometry parameters (with L, W parameters)
With geometry parameters (with L, W, P parameters)
Level 2
Level 3
Level 1
1970
1
2
4
6
8
2
4
6
8
2
4
6
8
10
100
1000
1980
1990
2000
2010
Year model introduced
Number of model parameters
1st Generation
2nd Generation
3rd Generation
BSIM3v3
BSIM2
BSIM2
BSIM3v3
MM9
MM9
BSIM3v2
PCIM
HSPL28
HSPL28
BSIM
BSIM
HSPL28
BSIM4v2
BSIM3v1
BSIM2
BSIM4v2
EKV v2.6
EKV v3
Figure 8.1
Different MOS models and the number of d.c. model parameters vs. the
year of the model introduction

MOSFET: compact models
271
in TCAD compact modelling is a versatile model with as few parameters as possible
(e.g., <30), and good accuracy in all regions of operation. Saijets et al. [17] have
evaluated several mainstream MOS models.
A fundamental requirement of accurate MOSFET models is symmetry with
respect to source–drain interchange or ‘Gummel symmetry’ [7]. Some of the
fundamental problems of Vt-based models such as BSIM3, include the use of
source-referenced threshold voltage, producing a singularity in the I–V characteristic.
Unphysical description of the moderate inversion region leads to erroneous results for
the gm/Id ratio (critical for analog design) and inconsistent modelling of charges and
currents, producing negative transcapacitances [16]. The use of source-referenced
threshold voltage and asymmetric bulk charge linearisation in standard Vt-based
models not only violates the Gummel symmetry but also prevents the modelling
of common current division circuits.
In most Vt-based MOSFET models reported in the literature a trade-off between
accuracy and complexity has resulted in a regional approach, where different sets of
equations are used for different regions of device operation. Continuity of the current
and its derivatives with respect to bias at the transition points is ensured by using
so-called smoothing functions. The above continuity is beneficial for the conver-
gence properties of the circuit simulation program, which uses the Newton–Raphson
method to solve circuit equations. The main drawback of regional models is the impre-
cise description of drain current Id and transconductance gm in the transition region
between subthreshold and superthreshold, the so-called moderate inversion region.
The above-mentioned region becomes particularly important with the continuous
down-scaling of MOS transistors toward submicron dimensions and the subsequent
decrease in supply voltage.
There is now a consensus that threshold-voltage-based models of bulk MOSFETs
need to be replaced by more physical surface-potential-based models [18, 19] or
inversion-charge based models [20]. One approach is to find the density of the inver-
sion charge at the two ends of the channel and formulate the model outputs in terms
of these charge densities. These are ‘charge based models’ meaning that both con-
ductance and capacitance calculations are based on charge. This approach has been
used in EKV, ACM and BSIM5 models.
In another approach, one solves for the input equation surface potential at the
two ends of the channel. The terminal charges, currents and derivatives are then
calculated from the surface potential and hence are called surface potential models.
SP, MOS Model 11 and HiSIM are based on this approach. Progress in development
of these models has brought about qualitative improvement in ability to simulate
CMOS circuits and is reviewed below.
8.2
Surface-potential based MOSFET models
Continued scaling of MOS transistors has lead to much competition in the quest for
the best TCAD compact model for MOSFETs [4–8, 21]. The continuing shrinking
of CMOS transistors to the 100 nm and below has led to the need to incorporate

272
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
small-geometry electrical effects, which were previously considered to be second-
order, into increasingly sophisticated SPICE models for these devices. Rapid growth
in low-power, low-voltage CMOS imposes tighter requirements on model accuracy.
The aggressive reduction of the power supply voltage implies that threshold-voltage-
based approach to compact modelling is close to its limits and the next generation
advanced compact MOSFET models should be surface-potential based. Since the
source–drain overlap regions are critical in modern scaled MOSFETs the surface-
potential-based approach is essential as it allows the physical modelling of these
regions. For most low-voltage analog applications, a MOSFET is typically biased
within approximately 300 mV of its threshold, and hence the use of regional models
is no longer appropriate.
Modelling of short-channel MOSFETs requires a precise description of physi-
cal effects such as mobility reduction, series resistance, velocity saturation, channel
length modulation, static feedback, self-heating and drain-induced barrier lowering.
With the aggressive scaling of oxide thickness, modelling of tunnelling currents
is essential. A surface-potential-based formulation enables a particularly simple
implementation of this effect.
As a result, considerable attention has been drawn to charge sheet MOSFET
models based on surface potential formulations. These so-called surface-potential
basedmodelsareinherentlysingle-piece, andgiveanaccurateandcontinuousdescrip-
tion of current and its derivatives in all operation regions. The charge sheet MOSFET
model is based on surface potential formulations and describes the drain current in
the whole range of applied voltages using one single equation. Models based on
surface potential formulation are inherently continuous and require the solution of
an implicit equation. Surface potentials at drain and source are given by an implicit
relation based on the terminal voltages, and as a consequence this can only be solved
iteratively, resulting in long computation times, which is undesirable for VLSI circuit
simulation. In order to reduce computation time, an explicit, yet accurate relation
between surface potential and terminal voltages is preferable.
A big advantage of a complete surface-potential-based model is that the overall
model consistency is automatically preserved through the surface potential. There-
fore, the number of model parameters can be drastically reduced in comparison
with conventional models. This parameter reduction comes without any loss in
reproduction accuracy of measurement data.
The above effects have been incorporated in the surface-potential-based MOSFET
model [21], and it has been found to give an accurate description of the drain current
in all practical operation regions, even in the moderate inversion region. An explicit
approximate relation for surface potential as a function of terminal voltages has been
developed [21], which results in an accurate description of all operation regions. The
use of the explicit relation for φs does not result in a noticeable decrease in accuracy
when compared to implicit φs-based models or in an increase in simulation time when
compared to Vt-based models. In other words the new model combines the advantages
of both regional and single-piece models.
Traditionally, the development of surface-potential-based models has been inhib-
ited by the inherent complexity of this approach. However, reformulation of the

MOSFET: compact models
273
charge sheet model using a symmetric linearisation method [22] resulted in a model
formulation which is no more complex than less accurate Vt-based or inversion charge
based models while producing results that are numerically equivalent to the original
form of the surface-potential-based model. Furthermore, the difficult problem of com-
puting the surface potentials as functions of the terminal voltages has been solved
by improving the convergence of the numerical algorithms and more recently using
analytical approximations accurate to within 10 nV. The reported results were limited
to the range adequate in bulk MOSFET models but a simple extension of the work
in [23, 24] produces analytical approximations valid for extreme forward biases of
the source/drain junction occasionally encountered in SOI devices. Typical results
shown in Figures 8.2 and 8.3 are accurate not only for surface potential but also for
a much more demanding task of evaluating the transcapacitances. While not using
the threshold voltage as a key variable, surface-potential-based models are capable
of a very detailed modelling of Vt as a function of geometry. Also, surface-potential-
based modelling of Vt(L) dependence has been shown to be superior to the traditional
description.
8.2.1
SP model
The surface-potential-based compact MOSFET model (SP ‘core’ model) has been
developed at the Pennsylvania State University. This model solves several long-
standing problems of surface-potential based modelling and provides a basis for a
comprehensive compact MOSFET model [18]. In the SP model, accurate analytical
2.5
2
1.5
0.5
Surface potential s (V)
0
–0.5
–1
0
1
2
–0.8
–0.6
Analytical approximation
Iterative solution
0
Vgs – Vfb (V)
Vsb = 1 V
3
1
Figure 8.2
Surface potential computed using new analytical approximation and
numerical iteration for different back bias; tox = 3 nm and Nsub =
1017 cm−3 [After G. Gildenblat et al., Proc. 11th Intl. Conf. Electronics,
Circuits, and Systems, 2004 (638–641). ©2004 IEEE]

274
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Vgs – Vfb (V)
–1
0
Normalized gate capacitance
1
2
0
Analytical approximation
Iterative solution
3
0.2
0
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
–0.8
–0.6
Vsb = 1 V
Figure 8.3
Normalized C–V curves computed using new analytical approximation
and numerical iteration for different back bias; tox = 3 nm and Nsub =
1017 cm−3 [After G. Gildenblat et al., Proc. 11th Intl. Conf. Electronics,
Circuits, and Systems, 2004(638–641). ©2004 IEEE]
approximation has been reported for the surface potential of MOS transistors. These
include
accurate and generic algorithm for surface potential evaluations [23];
model development based on symmetric linearisation [23];
self-consistent inclusion of velocity saturation in current and charges in a manner
consistent with Gummel symmetry, without a need for iterative numerical
computations, [25];
simplified quasistatic terminal charge consistent with d.c. current, analytical
inclusions of polySi depletion and quantum corrections, offering a model
flexibility for various advanced CMOS technologies [26].
SP formulation goes beyond the gradual channel approximation by using the bias-
and geometry-dependent lateral-field gradient factor, which can accurately model the
charge-sharing and DIBL effects. The symmetric linearisation method developed in
SP preserves the Gummel symmetry and produces expressions for both the drain
current and the terminal charges that are as simple as those in Vt-based or charge-
based models, and are numerically indistinguishable from the original charge-sheet
model equations. As a result SP is at least as fast as the latest Vt-based models.
Analytical inclusions of polySi depletion and quantum corrections are accom-
plished through developing the non-iterative approximations for surface potentials
by perturbation method and the simplified model formulations by the symmetrically
linearised surface-potential-based approach. The physical content and computational

MOSFET: compact models
275
efficiency of the model is significantly increased while the number of model parame-
ters is reduced without sacrificing the quality of the fit of experimental data. Surface
potential models use a single expression for drain current and give a physics-based
and accurate description in all operation regions including the moderate inversion
and the accumulation region. As discussed above the charge-based model and the
Vt-based model are special simplified cases of the surface-potential-based model.
For a comprehensive review on PSP model, the reader may refer to a recent paper by
Gildenblat et al. [27].
8.2.2
HiSIM
In the surface-potential-based modelling, the surface potential is the measure of
all device characteristics, which are very much dependent on technology. HiSIM
(Hiroshima-university STARC IGFET Model) is another MOSFET model for circuit
simulation, based on the complete drift-diffusion approximation with channel-surface
potentials [28]. As the simulation is based on the drift-diffusion approximation and
a channel-surface-potential description, the modelling allows the MOSFET charac-
teristics to be closely based on their physical origins. HiSIM obtains the potentials
by solving the Poisson equation iteratively both at the source side and drain side.
An accuracy of 10 pV has been achieved with faster simulation time than some
threshold-voltage-based models [29].
In HiSIM major phenomena that appear in advanced MOSFETs are demonstrated
to be modelled closely based on their physical origins, and thus resulting in a small
number of model parameters. HiSIM implements charge and capacitance equations
that maintain the gradual-channel approximation and provide a solution in the satura-
tion condition by extending the surface potential beyond the pinch-off point. The most
important practical advantage of HiSIM is the reduced number of model parameters
(about 70 model parameters), and one parameter set is enough for all gate lengths.
All model parameters have a clear, direct relation to the MOSFET physics result-
ing in easily extractable parameters with a clearly defined physical meaning [29].
For a comprehensive recent review on HiSIM, the reader may refer to a paper by
Miura-Mattausch et al. [30].
Simulated surface potential values by HiSIM are shown in Figure 8.4. Once the
surface-potential values at source and drain side are known, all device characteristics
are calculated without any additional parameter. Since this is the core approach of
the surface-potential-based modelling and at the same time the core of the device
physics, a one-to-one correspondence between circuit simulation model and device
physics is readily obtainable. Also higher-order phenomena observed such as noise
have been shown to be determined by the potential gradient along the channel, which
again highlights the strength of the concept of surface-potential-based modelling.
8.2.3
MOS model 11
MOS Model 11 (MM11) is a compact MOSFET model intended for digital, ana-
log and RF circuit simulation in modern CMOS technologies from Philips and

276
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0.2
0
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
1
SL (V)
S0 (V)
2
3
4
5
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Vds
Vgs (V)
Vds (V)
SL = S0 + Vds
Vgs /V=5
Vgs /V=5
=4
=3
=2
=1
0.4
0.6
0.8
3V
1V
1.0
1.2
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.4
Simulated surface potential values with HiSIM at (a) source side as a
function of Vgs and (b) drain side as a function of Vds. The short-channel
effect is incorporated in the values [After H. J. Mattausch et al., Proc.
Solid-State and Integrated-Circuit Technology, 2001(861–866). ©2004
IEEE]
is a successor to the original widely used Philips MOS Model 9 (MM9). MM9
employs smoothing functions to achieve continuity in device characteristics. The
model is accurate for circuit simulation of sub-quarter micron technologies. MM11 is
a symmetrical, surface-potential based model, which accurately describes distortion
behaviour, making it highly suitable for digital and analog as well as RF circuit design.
Being surface-potential based, it includes accurate descriptions of the currents and
charges, especially the first-order derivatives (transconductance, conductance, capac-
itances) and the equations are valid in all regions (accumulation, depletion and weak,
moderate and strong inversion). In MM11, a linearisation is performed around the
average of source and drain surface potentials, which results in simpler expressions
without a loss of accuracy.
In MM11, special emphasis has been given to distortion modelling. For an accu-
rate description of distortion, the model should accurately describe the drain current
and its higher-order derivatives. Parameter extraction in MM11 is relatively straight-
forward. And the public domain model is available in commercial circuit simulators
such as SPECTRE, HSPICE and ADS. MOS Model 11 incorporates bias-dependent
source/drain partitioning of gate leakage current, quantum mechanical effects and
poly-depletion.

MOSFET: compact models
277
MM11 contains improved expressions for mobility reduction. velocity saturation
and various conductance effects. In addition, the MM11 approach also ensures that
the model symmetry with respect to source–drain interchange is maintained. Note
that this approach is very similar to the symmetric linearisation method used in SP,
which made it easy to merge the best features of MM11 and SP into one model
called PSP.
The PSP model [31], from Pennsylvania State University has been jointly devel-
oped by Philips and Pennsylvania State University. This surface potential model has
evolved from the MOS Model 11 and SP [32]. It includes ‘universal’ dependence
on vertical effective field and the deviations from the universality associated with
Coulomb scattering. The PSP model was recently selected to be the industry standard
for future nanometer chip design by the Compact Model Council, USA.
The main features of PSP are as follows:
•
physical surface-potential-based formulation in both intrinsic and extrinsic model
modules;
•
physical and accurate description of the accumulation region;
•
inclusion of all relevant small-geometry effects;
•
modelling of the halo implant effects, including the output conductance degrada-
tion in long devices;
•
Coulomb scattering and non-universality in the mobility model;
•
non-singular velocity-field relation enabling the modelling of RF distortions
including intermodulation effects;
•
complete Gummel symmetry;
•
quantum-mechanical corrections;
•
correction for the polySi depletion effects;
•
GIDL/GISL model;
•
surface-potential-based noise model including channel thermal noise, flicker
noise and channel induced gate noise;
•
advanced junction model including trap-assisted tunnelling, band-to-band tun-
nelling and avalanche breakdown;
•
stress model.
8.2.4
EKV model
On the basis of a new approach to analytical MOSFET modelling, the Enz-
Krummenacher-Vittoz EKV model was first published in 1995 [33]. EKV model
is unique in its use of substrate-referencing, as opposed to source-referencing of the
preceding models. This fundamental philosophical change allows the EKV model
a greater scope of fundamentally eliminating the asymmetry problems unavoidable
in the source-referencing models. Referencing the voltages to the substrate not only
preserves and exploits the symmetry of the device in the model, but also clearly dis-
tinguishes between effects that do not affect this symmetry property, such as all the
effects related to the transverse field (mobility reduction due to the transverse field,
poly depletion, quantum effect and non-uniform doping in the transverse direction)

278
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
and the effects related to the longitudinal direction, such as velocity saturation and
non-uniform doping in the longitudinal direction.
In the following, the main features of the public domain EKV 3.0 MOSFET
model are discussed. The EKV model was initially developed for the design of very
low-power analog ICs, with the objective of having a simple analytical model valid
in all modes of inversion. It was important to correctly handle the weak inversion
part since many micropower circuits were designed based on the MOS transistor
operating in this region. Since its introduction, the model has become popular owing
to its simplicity and the relatively few parameters.
The EKV model is a physics-based and design-oriented MOSFET model. On the
basis of the surface-potential approach, a linearisation technique is at the heart of the
analytical framework. Even though early EKV model used the linearisation of the
inversion charge with respect to the channel voltage to derive the drain current, it was
actually not a charge-based model.
EKV also redefined the forward and reverse currents extending it to all modes
of inversion. The basic concept of normalized forward current (also called inversion
factor) and reverse current were also defined and used for circuit design optimisa-
tion. The moderate inversion region is covered by an empirical interpolation function
after proper normalization. Designing circuits operating in the ever more impor-
tant moderate and weak inversion regions of operation of the MOS transistor is a
challenge, even for RF circuits. A proper normalization of drain current leads to
a level-of-inversion-centred analysis of MOS physics, providing many guidelines
to the designer for the trade-offs in circuit design. The EKV model approach is
therefore not only a circuit simulation model, but it also provides a whole frame-
work for advanced analog IC design. A rigorous derivation of the charge-based
EKV model and a detailed modelling of the inversion charge linearisation can
be found in Reference 34. A comparison of various MOS models is shown in
Table 8.1.
Table 8.1
Comparison of various MOS models
BSIM4
MOS9
MOS11
EKV
HiSIM
Modelling
Analytical
Analytical
Analytical
Analytical
Iterative
method
Inversion
Vt-based
Vt-based
ψ-based
hybrid
ψ-based
d.c. current
drift
drift
drift-diff.
drift
drift-diff.
Referencing
Dynamic
Source
Source
Bulk
Source
Symmetry
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Induced
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ignored
Yes
gate noise
Tunnelling
Yes
Ignore
Yes
Ignored
Yes

MOSFET: compact models
279
8.3
Model evaluation
A judgment on the quality of each MOSFET model described above is sometimes
necessary. It should be noted that the quality of fit is not the only criterion for choosing
a compact model. Ease of parameter extraction, correlation of parameters, number
of parameters, redundancy of parameters and the model behaviour should also be
considered. A comparison of models is necessary to show weaknesses and strengths
of each particular model so that the user community can decide which model is appro-
priate for their use. However, it may be noted that the quality requirements might
be different for digital and analog applications and/or specific operating conditions.
Test conditions are given for some parameters. For some parameters, the test condi-
tions/algorithms will vary among the foundries. In those cases, the foundry-specific
test conditions and algorithm should be used. The following list provides a guideline
in the evaluation of the quality of a compact model:
•
short channel effects;
•
narrow width effects;
•
number of regional models and scalability;
•
lateral and vertical non-uniform doping effects;
•
mobility reduction with gate and substrate bias;
•
output conductance;
•
velocity saturation;
•
subthreshold conduction;
•
linear region fit accuracy;
•
saturation region fit accuracy;
•
transition from linear to saturation region;
•
continuous derivatives;
•
substrate current modelling;
•
junction area, field and gate sidewall, overlap capacitances;
•
charge conservation and high frequency characteristics;
•
physical values for physical model parameters;
•
source/drain parasitic effects;
•
temperature parameters;
•
leakage currents;
•
noise parameters.
Saijetsetal. [17] haveevaluatedtheexistingmainstreamMOSmodelsatradiofre-
quencies. The strengths and weaknesses of the models were also compared. The four
mainstream RF CMOS models chosen for comparison are EKV [34], BSIM3v3 [16],
Philips MOS Model 9 [35] and the old classic Berkeley Spice Level 3 MOSFET
model [36]. In this evaluation study, identical equivalent circuits, including the par-
asitic series resistances and zero-bias capacitances were assumed for the extrinsic
a.c. models and the models were compared by comparing their s-parameter fits. The
authors first extracted a complete scalable d.c. model and also the a.c. parameters

280
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
were extracted using both capacitance measurements and s-parameter fitting. Both
d.c. and a.c. extractions were made by using the APLAC circuit simulator and
by programs written in APLAC description language. In a.c. measurements the
n-MOSFET devices were considered as two-port having the gate as the input and
the drain as the output.
It was found that the real differences of the a.c. model behaviour results from
differences in their d.c. and active charge models. It also became evident that a more
complex MOSFET model is necessary and more development of parameter extraction
techniques is required. Both d.c. and a.c. extraction may very easily fall into local
numerical minima that can represent non-physical values, complicating the model
optimisation.
8.4
Modelling of SOI MOSFETs
In general an SOI model can be classified into three categories: partially depleted
(PD), ideal fully depleted (FD) and dynamic depleted (DD). Partially depleted has
been the most popular form of SOI technology because of its ease in manufacturability
and compatibility with bulk CMOS processing. Ultra-thin film PD-SOI technology
offers better short-channel control over bulk technology [37]. A fully depleted model
is similar to a partially depleted model, but without a node for the floating body.
It has to handle transition from FD to PD because all SOI devices can operate in
accumulation by applying appropriate gate bias [38].
An SOI CMOS SPICE model is similar to a traditional CMOS SPICE model with
a fifth node to model the floating body potential, an optional sixth node to model
the resistance of a body tied transistor and a seventh node (for self-heating effects).
Existing SPICE models currently offered in commercial electrical simulators are
BSIM3SOI/BSIMPD (University of Berkeley), SOISPICE (University of Florida)
and STAG (University of Southampton).
BSIMProPlus [39] is considered to be the most efficient and accurate SPICE
model parameter extraction tool on the market for digital, analog, mix-signal and
RF modelling application especially in advanced process technologies. BSIMProPlus
provides accurate and fast extraction routines for I–V, C–V, temperature-model and
RF small equivalent circuit model parameter extractions.
A recent enhancement variant of the BSIMSOI model is BSIMPD [40], which
includes all major physics in SOI MOSFETs, and has been tested extensively within
IBM on its state-of-the-art high-speed SOI technology. The following features are
significant:
•
Floating body simulation in both I–V and C–V. The body potential is determined
by the balance of all the body current components.
•
An improved parasitic bipolar current model. This includes enhancements in the
various diode leakage components, second order effects (high-level injection and
Early effect), diffusion charge equation and temperature dependence of the diode
junction capacitance.

MOSFET: compact models
281
•
An improved impact-ionization current model. The contribution from BJT current
is also modelled.
•
A gate-to-body tunnelling current model, which is important to thin-oxide SOI
technologies.
•
Enhancements in the threshold voltage and bulk charge formulation of the high
positive body bias regime.
•
An external body node (the 6th node) facilitates the modeling of distributed body-
resistance.
•
Self-heating. An external temperature node (the 7th node) facilitates the simula-
tion of thermal coupling.
•
A unique SOI low-frequency noise model, including a new excess noise resulting
from the floating body effect.
Since the issues discussed in Section 1 also apply to SOI MOSFETs, surface-
potential-based approach has been extended to modelling of SOI devices. A variant
of SP model, SP–SOI has been formulated within the framework of the bulk SP
model [18]. This assures that all small geometry effects are physically modelled and
standard benchmark tests are automatically satisfied. SP–SOI also has the following
additional features:
•
internal floating body;
•
improvedanalyticalapproximationofsurfacepotentialwhichallowshighforward
body bias;
•
self-heating model;
•
backgate charge.
A simplified circuit representation of SP–SOI is shown in Figure 8.5. The internal
body potential is determined by the junction current, impact ionization, GIDL/GISL
currents, and capacitive coupling under transient operation. Unlike the standard
bulk and SOI models, SP models are automatically symmetric, provided one uses
symmetric rather than the source based linearisation and the drift velocity model is
non-singular.
Typical device characteristics are shown in Figure 8.6 for three device sizes, using
the same set of parameters. A careful reproduction of the drain conductance in bulk
SP model has been retained in SP–SOI, including impact ionization effects. For
negative gate biases the drain current is caused primarily by the tunnelling currents
in the source-drain overlap regions and is accurately reproduced by the model.
8.5
Modelling of heterostructure MOSFETs
Strain engineering in MOSFETs is receiving serious attention due to many advantages
of strain on carrier mobility and therefore drive current of MOSFETs and has been
discussed in Chapter 4. Due to the introduction of strain in the MOSFET channel,
the effective mass of carriers decreases and results in an increase in carrier mobility.
Strained-Si1−xGex- and strain-compensated Si1−x−yGexCy-channel MOSFETs are
the most investigated heterostructure MOSFETs [41].

282
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
dQgb /dt
dQd /dt
IBJT
IGISL
IGIDL
Ibd
Ibs
Iii
Ids
dQg /dt
dQs /dt
Gb
B
G
S
S
D
D
Figure 8.5
Simplified circuit representation of SP–SOI model [After W. Wu et al.,
IEEE CICC Proc., 2005(819–822). ©2005 IEEE]
For compact modelling of strained-Si heterostructure MOSFETs, a single-piece
charge model in the entire accumulation, depletion, and strong inversion regions
for strained-Si MOSFETs that is scalable in terminal biases and strained-Si param-
eters with physically derived flat-band voltages has been developed and validated
with numerical simulation [42]. The capacitance–voltage characteristics of strained-
Si n-MOSFETs shows a ‘plateau’ in the accumulation region [43], which is unique
to heterojunction devices. The physical understanding can be easily investigated
by numerical simulations. However, there are so far no complete analytical equa-
tions to physically model these effects in the entire region of MOSFET operations.
Chandrasekaran et al. [42] have presented a physics-based strained-Si n-MOSFET
charge model that is scalable for terminal biases and strained-Si parameters, such
as Ge mole fraction x, strained-Si layer thickness, and doping. The authors have
derived physical equations of the flat-band voltages for the strained-Si/SiGe device
and applied them to the regional surface-potential and charge solutions that could be
added to form a unified solution. The authors have used the unified regional charge-
based approach, where regional solutions are physically derived and the transitions
across regions are controlled by the smoothing parameters. Being physics-based,
the model can be used to extract physical parameters from measured strained-Si
devices.
For the case of a strained-Si channel (under biaxial tensile strain realised using the
lattice mismatch of an underlying relaxed-SiGe layer [41]), the energy band structure
is modified and the inversion carrier transport properties are enhanced, depending on
the Ge content. The enhancement follows from improved velocity saturation and over-
shoot effects, as well as increased mobility. The improved overshoot has been shown
to result from a strain-induced increase in the carrier energy relaxation time. Further,

MOSFET: compact models
283
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
W/L = 2 m/2 m
W/L = 2 m/0.1 m
W/L = 0.12 m/0.1 m
Id, a.u.
Id, a.u.
Id, a.u.
Vds (V)
Vds (V)
Vds (V)
Vgs = 0, 0.3, 0.7, 1.0, 1.2 V
Vgs = 0, 0.3, 0.7, 1.0, 1.2 V
Vgs = 0, 0.3, 0.7, 1.0, 1.2 V
0.8
1
1.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Figure 8.6
Comparison of SP–SOI (solid lines) with measured data (symbols) for
three different geometries using the same model parameter set [After
W. Wu et al., IEEE CICC Proc., 2005(819–822). ©2005 IEEE]

284
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
the band structure modification results in a narrowed energy bandgap, dependent on
Ge mole fraction, which yields a reduced threshold voltage for the heterostructure
MOSFET relative to the Si counterpart.
Strained-Si on SOI (sSOI) MOSFETs are susceptible to the local thermal heating
generated in the channel because of the low thermal conductivity of buried oxide
(BOX). Even with a 100-nm-thin BOX, SOI MOSFETs d.c. I–V characteristics,
from which the SPICE simulation model parameters are extracted, suffer current loss
due to self-heating effect (SHE). However, for most logic circuits, SHE is insignif-
icant since the average power consumption per device is low and the switching
time is much shorter than the thermal time constant. Thus, using the conventional
methods of extracting the parameters from d.c. I–V data, SPICE simulation under-
estimates the device current due to SHE, which is present in the d.c. data but absent
in logic circuits. Therefore, for accurate logic circuit simulation, one needs to obtain
SHE-free I–V data and then extract SHE-free model parameters to close the gap
between the d.c. I–V data and circuit speed. The pulse I–V measurement tech-
nique is a good way to directly obtain I–V data free from self-heating, but it is
difficult, requiring the fast time resolution setup and careful consideration of the
coupling.
Process/physics-based compact model, UFPDB [44], which is unified for bulk-Si
and PD-SOI MOSFETs, has been employed to model strained-Si MOSFETs [45].
UFPDB has been implemented in SPICE3, to project the performance advantage of
PD-SOI CMOS with floating bodies over the bulk-Si counterpart as the technologies
are scaled to 100 nm or below [46]. The small set of UFPDB parameters relate
directly to the MOSFET structure and the pertinent device physics, and hence can
be well estimated without requiring numerous data sets of measured electrical device
characteristics.
UFPDB (Ver. 2.0) was upgraded to allow a strained-Si/SiGe option. A new param-
eter, based on the relation between the bandgap narrowing and the Ge content in the
underlying relaxed-SiGe buffer layer, was added to define the narrowed bandgap in
the strained-Si channel and depletion region. The reduced bandgap necessitates an
increase in threshold voltage for Ioff control. Simulations were based on this control
being implemented via increased channel doping in both n- and p-channel devices.
Unloaded CMOS ring oscillator simulations revealed speed enhancement in the range
14–16 per cent for optimal Ge content of x between 0.2 and 0.3.
The simulation prediction suggests that strained-Si channel technology is worth
pursuing as the scaling limits of bulk-Si and PD-SOI CMOS are approached. The
simulations also quantified the significant speed loss for strained-Si/SiGe CMOS due
to the increased areal components of source/drain junction capacitance, especially
when the control was effected via increased channel doping. This loss would be
avoided in strained-Si/SiGe CMOS on thin SOI, and hence an additional speed advan-
tage (∼8 per cent) of PD-SOI CMOS over the bulk-Si counterpart is intimated.
Further, SOI would enable the simpler control via channel doping in both devices,
while retaining a significant speed enhancement (13 per cent for x = 0.20) due to the
strained-Si/SiGe channels.

MOSFET: compact models
285
8.6
RF MOS modelling
The RF properties of deep-sub-micron silicon MOSFETs are very promising in terms
of performance, scalability, and system-on-chip perspective. Till the mid 1990s, most
RF circuits and systems have been implemented with either compound semiconduc-
tor transistors, such as GaAs MESFETs, HEMTs, HBTs, or silicon BJTs and SiGe
HBTs. Until recently, the achievable microwave properties of silicon MOSFETs have
been inferior to those of other high-frequency transistors. However, during the last
decade, the continuous downscaling of CMOS has made it a candidate for RF appli-
cations [47,48]. An 0.18 µm CMOS technology exhibits excellent potential for RF
applications with fT and fmax of almost 50 GHz, and 0.35 dB of NFmin at 2 GHz [3].
As the gate length shrinks below 100 nm, fT will exceed 100 GHz. The improved RF
performance of silicon-based technologies over the years and their potential use in
telecommunication applications increased the research in RF modelling of MOS tran-
sistors. Chang et al. [49] have reported the state-of-the-art 90-nm foundry RF CMOS
technology with discussion on various integrated passive elements and user-friendly
design kit for RF IC design.
RF circuitry consists primarily of four RF building blocks, amplifiers, filters,
mixers, and oscillators. The design of these building blocks requires accurate small-
signal as well as large-signal RF MOSFET models. Much attention has been paid
to model the small-signal RF behaviour of MOS transistors, using compact models,
for example BSIM3v3 [50], MM9 [51], as well as equivalent circuit-based models
[52, 53]. However, large-signal RF MOSFET models are equally important in the
design of mixers and power amplifiers.
All of the requirements for a MOSFET model in low-frequency application, such
as continuity, accuracy, and scalability of the d.c. and capacitance models should be
maintained in an RF model that has additional requirements:
(a)
predict bias dependence of small-signal parameters at high-frequency operation;
(b)
simulate intermodulation distortion;
(c)
predict HF noise in low noise amplifiers (LNA);
(d)
include the non-quasistatic (NQS) effect.
A modified model based on s-parameter measurements to enhance the RF perfor-
mance of EKV model has been reported [53] by adding new capacitance equations
using subcircuits, as shown in Figure 8.7. The combination of the d.c. and RF parts
of the model predicts the non-linear high frequency performance up to 10 GHz over
various bias points. Once the equivalent circuit element values of the linear model
are known, the next step is to find equations that fit the extracted capacitances over
all bias points. This modelling procedure is shown in Figure 8.8.
The MOSFET equivalent circuit elements are extracted from s-parameters at all
gate voltages and drain voltages that occur in large-signal operation. The accuracy
of the equivalent circuit-based model is validated by large-signal RF measurements
using a non-linear network measurement system. Both the equivalent circuit-based

286
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Extrinsic gate structure
Extrinsic drain structure
Cpadd1
Cpadd1
Rd
Rg
Lg
Ris
Rds
Zdsout
gm
Rds1
Cgd
Cgs
Cds1
Cds2
Rs
Rid
Ls
Ld
Rpadd1
Cpadg1
Rpadg1
Rpadd2
Cpadg2
Rpadg2
Intrinsic transistor model
Figure 8.7
Small-signal equivalent circuit of a MOSFET for the extraction of the
linear intrinsic elements [After C. E. Biber et al., IEEE MTT-S Symp.
Dig., 1997(865–868). ©1997 IEEE]
S-parameters of 
de-embedding 
structures
S-parameters of 
test transistors 
at various bias points
Existing non-linear 
SPICE model without 
capacitances
De-embedding of the 
extrinsic elements
Y-parameters of the 
intrinsic transistor
Small signal elements 
at every bias point
Linear parameter 
extraction
Cgs, Cgd, Zdsout
Non-linear model
gm, gds
Equations for Cgs, 
Cgd and Zdsout as 
f(Vgs, Vds)
NON-linear RF 
SPICE model
Optimising drain 
current for RF 
gm and gds
Figure 8.8
Flow chart of the modelling process used to obtain a non-linear RF
SPICE model [After C. E. Biber et al., IEEE MTT-S Symp. Dig.,
1997(865–868). ©1997 IEEE]

MOSFET: compact models
287
model and the BSIM3v3 model meet the requirements to describe accurately the RF
large-signal behaviour of MOS transistors [4,54].
In RF MOSFETs, the influence of the distributed substrate resistance becomes
significant as the operation frequency increases [50,55–58]. At low frequencies, the
impedance of the junction capacitance is so large that the substrate resistance may not
be seen from the drain terminal. However, with increasing frequency, the impedance
of the junction capacitance reduces and the effects of the substrate resistance start to be
seen. At high frequencies, combined with the fact that the MOSFET is a four-terminal
device, the signals in RF MOSFETs are coupled through the substrate R–C network
in a complex way. In strong inversion the substrate signal coupling mainly affects the
small-signal output characteristics, which are important for RF design.
RF CMOS models with the substrate components, including the substrate resis-
tance and drain/source junction capacitance, have been published [50,52,56,58–60].
HF characteristics of substrate resistance in MOSFETs has been studied by Cheng
and Matloubian [61] at different bias conditions for a 0.35 µm BiCMOS tech-
nology in the frequency range up to 10 GHz. A strong bias dependence of the
real part of admittance, y22, mainly contributed by the channel conductance, was
observed and a very weak bias dependence of substrate resistance was found after
de-embedding the measured admittance to remove the influence of channel resis-
tance and gate-to-drain capacitance. The measured y22 vs. frequency (after two-step
de-embedding) for a single-finger device is given in Figure 8.9, in which both real
and imaginary parts of the measured y22 are functions of applied biases, especially
at higher gate bias. Figure 8.10 gives the equivalent circuit for the device at the
given measurement conditions. It is known that the measured y22 includes at least
the contributions from the gate resistance, drain series resistance, source series resis-
tance, channel resistance, gate-to-source capacitance, gate-to-drain capacitance, and
gate-to-bulk capacitance besides the substrate components (SCs). To understand the
HF behaviour of the SCs, the contributions of other components such as gate resis-
tance and gate capacitance should be de-embedded from the measured y22 shown in
Figure 8.9.
8.7
Large-signal MOSFET models
A large-signal FET model generally consists of charge sources and current sources.
These sources are referred to as the device’s state functions. The device state functions
can be represented either by functional descriptions or by look-up tables. Different
methods exist to determine their electrical properties. At present, RF large-signal
models are mostly generated from d.c., C–V, and/or s-parameter measurements.
Schreurs et al. [62, 63] extracted RF large-signal model parameters directly from
large-signal RF measurements, using the nonlinear network measurement system
(NNMS). However, the NNMS is not a widespread measurement system [64]. Func-
tional descriptions in large-signal models can be subdivided into three categories:
(a) compact models (e.g. BSIM3, MM9, and EKV), (b) empirical models, and (c)
neural network models [63].

288
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
2.5×10–3
(a)
(b)
2.0×10–3
1.5×10–3
1.0×10–3
5.0×10–4
2.0×10–3
1.5×10–3
1.0×10–3
5.0×10–4
0.0
0.0
0
2
4
6
Frequency (GHz)
8
10
12
0
2
4
6
Frequency (GHz)
8
10
12
Vgs=0.6V
Vgs=0.4V
Vgs=0.2 V
Vgs=0.0 V
Vgs=0.6 V
Vds=2.0V
Vds=2.0V
Vds=1.5V
Vds=1.0V
Vds=0.5V
Vds=0.0V
=1.5V
=1.0V
=0.5V
=0.0V
Real (y22)
Imaginary (y22)
Imaginary (y22)
Real (y22) and imaginary (y22) (A/V)
Real (y22) and imaginary (y22) (A/V)
Wdawn=1×15 m
Ldawn=0.35 m
Vds=0V
Vds=0V
Wdawn=1×15 m
Ldawn=0.35 m
Vds=0 V
Vds=0V
Vgs=0.4V
Vgs=0.2V
Vgs=0.0 V
Real (y22)
Figure 8.9
(a) Measured y22 data at different gate biases show strong gate-bias
dependence and (b) measured y22 data at different drain biases show
drain-bias dependence [After Y. Cheng and M. Matloubian, IEEE
Electron Device Lett., Vol. 21, 2000(604–606). ©2000 IEEE]

MOSFET: compact models
289
(b)
(a)
B
B
Rsb
Bi
Rdb
Cdb
Csb
Csb
Cdb
Cgd
Cgb
Cgs
Si
G
Rg
Rs
Rd
Di
GmbVbs
GmVgs
D
Rds
Ysub
Di
Si
Rdsb
B
B
B
S
Rsb
Bi
Rdb
Rdsb
Figure 8.10
(a) HF equivalent circuit of a MOSFET and (b) the substrate network
[After Y. Cheng and M. Matloubian, IEEE Electron Device Lett.,
Vol. 21, 2000(604–606). ©2000 IEEE]
Gate
Qgs(Vgsi, Vdsi)
Qds(Vgsi, Vdsi)
Ids(Vgsi, Vdsi)
Ri(Vgsi, Vdsi)
Vgsi
Vdsi
Drain
Source
Figure 8.11
Large-signal MOSFET model. The magnitude of the current source and
the charge sources depends on the bias conditions and on the element
values of the modified equivalent circuit [After E. P. Vandamme et al.,
Solid State Electron., Vol. 46, 2002(353–360)]
The large-signal equivalent circuit-based, RF MOSFET model developed by
Vandamme et al. [54] is shown in Figure 8.11, which contains a current source
at the drain terminal Ids(Vgsi, Vdsi), two charge sources, one at the gate terminal
Qds(Vgsi, Vdsi) and one at the drain terminal Qds(Vgsi, Vdsi) and a resistance
Ri(Vgsi, Vdsi), stemming from non-quasistatic effects. Contrary to MESFETs, the
current source at the gate can be omitted for a MOSFET, because no d.c. current flows
through the gate (gate tunnelling currents only start playing a role for a gate-oxide
thickness below 2 nm, i.e. for 0.1 µm technologies and below). The magnitude of

290
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Drain
Gate
Source
Cpd
Cpg
Cgs
gds
Cds
Intrinsic
Rgs
Rgd
gm Vg
Cgd 
Cpgd
Ld
Rd
Lg
Rg
Rs
Figure 8.12
Cross-section of a MOSFET with main network elements determin-
ing its electrical behaviour (Vg is the voltage across Cgs) [After
E. P. Vandamme et al., Solid State Electron., Vol. 46, 2002(353–360)]
the charge source and the current source depends on the intrinsic gate and drain
voltages, Vgsi and Vdsi, respectively, as well as on the electrical properties and
geometry of the MOSFET.
The MOS transistor, shown schematically in Figure 8.12 can be divided into
an intrinsic part and an extrinsic part. The extrinsic elements are bias-independent
and consist of the series inductors and series resistors in the gate, source- and drain
leads, denoted by Lg, Ls, Ld and Rg, Rs, Rd, respectively, and the parallel coupling
capacitors between the pads of gate and source Cpg, gate and drain Cpgd and drain and
source Cpd.
The extrinsic elements are extracted from the s-parameters, biased at various
Vgs while keeping Vds = 0 V. However, before the extrinsic element values can
be extracted, the measured s-parameters need to be de-embedded; that is, the influ-
ence of pad parasitics and interconnections in the RF test structure must be taken
into account. Therefore an improved three-step de-embedding procedure [65], based
on Reference 66 is required. Next, the de-embedded s-parameters are converted to

MOSFET: compact models
291
Cgs
Cgd
Rgd
Cgi
Cds
gds
ggsVg
Rgs
Vg
Vgsi
Cdsi
jωCdmVdsi
(gmi+jωCm)Vgsi
gdsi
Ri
Vdsi
Gate
Gate
Source
Source
Drain
Drain
Figure 8.13
Equivalent circuit (top) and modified equivalent circuit (bottom) of the
intrinsic part of a MOSFET. The modified equivalent circuit is used
for large-signal modelling [After E. P. Vandamme et al., Solid State
Electron., Vol. 46, 2002(353–360)]
y- or z-parameters, using a conversion table [67], from which the extrinsic element
values are extracted. At Vds = 0 V, it can be assumed that Rgs = Rgd, Cgs = Cgd and
gm = 0 S [68], which simplifies the equivalent circuit.
The intrinsic partoftheMOS transistor, showninFigure8.13, consistsofthegate–
source and gate–drain capacitors and resistors, Cgs, Cgd and Rgs, Rgd, respectively;
the transconductance, gm, the output conductance, gds and the drain–source junction
capacitance, Cds (source and bulk are grounded). For large-signal modelling it is
desirable to eliminate the coupling between gate and drain through Cgd and Rgd [64]
This eliminates consistency problems with gate–source and gate–drain charges and
leads to a simpler large-signal model with only two internal terminal voltages, Vgsi and
Vdsi. A modified equivalent circuit for the intrinsic part of the MOSFET, is shown in
Figure 8.13, with an additional current source and two additional transcapacitances
Cm and Cdm to model the coupling between gate and drain. It can be shown that,
at least up to 50 GHz, this circuit behaves electrically in the same manner as the
conventional intrinsic equivalent circuit.
Excellent RF characteristics of CMOS in an integrated BiCMOS process and
highly scaled MOS devices with a thin gate oxide have been reported in an advanced

292
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
industrial 0.25 µm BiCMOS process, offering four levels of Al and a full menu of
active and passive devices [69]. The process uses an essential industrial-standard,
qualified CMOS platform, and offers SiGeC HBTs with different speed/breakdown
voltage and 2.5 V CMOS transistors for digital applications, and isolated NMOS
devices for RF applications. Accurate modelling and parameter extraction for
RF CMOS have become essential for the development of RF Si CMOS-based
circuits. A sub-circuit extension of BSIM3v3 model of a sub-micron MOSFETs for
small-signal RF circuit simulation have been reported [70].
For RF applications, models for CMOS transistors have been developed on
the basis of BSIM3v3. The improvements of high-frequency behaviour have been
modelled using a sub-circuit, which contains an intrinsic MOSFET, and lumped
elements for substrate, gate, source, and drain. The substrate and gate resistances
significantly affect the model accuracy in the high-frequency range. In the following,
thetechniquesofextractionandoptimisationofmodelparametersforthen-MOSFETs
in the frequency range from 0.1 GHz to 40 GHz are discussed.
The equivalent sub-circuit for a RF MOSFET is shown in Figure 8.14. The
sub-circuit contains an intrinsic MOSFET (BSIM3v3) and lumped elements for sub-
strate, gate, source, and drain. The BSIM3v3 model consists of a non-quasistatic
model and a capacitance model, which makes it the ideal for RF simulations.
Drain
LDD
DJDBP
Source
RBDB
RBPD
RBPB
RBPS
RBSB
DJSBA
DJSBP
LSS
RSS
CGSX
RGG
LGG
CGDX
Gate
Bulk
BSIM3v3
DJDBA
RDD
Figure 8.14
RF MOS equivalent circuit using BSIM3v3 [After B. Senapati et al.,
Proc. IWPSD 2003(818–820)]

MOSFET: compact models
293
Inthe RFBSIM3v3macromodel, thereisaresistancenetworkforthesubstrate, which
is described by the following resistances, namely, RBPD, RBPS, RBDB, RBSB, and
RBPB. Together with the resistance network, the internal drain-bulk junction diode
and source-bulk junction diodes of the BSIM3v3.2 model are replaced by the exter-
nal elements, namely, DJDBA, DJDBP, DJSBA, and DJSBP for area and perimeter,
respectively. RSS and RDD are resistances of the source and drain, respectively. In
order to model high-frequency response, extra lumped elements must be considered
for the accurate prediction of the high-frequency characteristics. Thus the inductors
LGG, LSS, and LDD and capacitors CGDX and CGSX that are parasitic elements
existing between gate, source, or drain are included.
The RF MOSFET sub-circuit model was implemented in the SPICE3 simulator.
The model parameter extraction and optimisation were performed from the measured
experimental data of the MOSFET using ICCAP [71]. Two-port s-parameters for the
frequency range from 0.1 to 40 GHz are measured for different bias conditions using
a HP 8510 network analyser and GSG probes. Different control biases are applied
from an HP-4142B source measure unit. Model parameters are extracted after open
and short de-embedding the probe-pad parasitic.
Figure 8.15 shows the drain currents (Id) vs. drain voltage (Vd) for different gate
biases. The drain currents are in good agreement with the experimental results for low,
medium, and high gate biases. Figure 8.16 shows the current gain (|h21 |) and power
gain (Gmax) of the MOSFET for frequency ranges 0.1 to 40 GHz at a Vd = 2.5 V
and Vg = 1.25 V. Figure 8.17 shows the s-parameters of the MOSFET for frequency
40
35
30
25
20
15
Measured
Simulated
10
5
0
0.0
0.5
1.0
Vd (V)
1.5
2.0
2.5
Id (mA)
Figure 8.15
Measured and simulated drain current vs. drain voltage for a gate
voltage sweep from 0.75 to 2.5 V [After B. Senapati et al., Proc. IWPSD
2003(818–820)]

294
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Measured
Simulated
Gmax
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0.1
1
10
Frequency (GHz)
100
|H21|
|H21| or Gmax (dB)
Figure 8.16
Measured and simulated | h21 | vs. frequency at a Vg = 1.25 V and
Vd = 2.5 V [After B. Senapati et al., Proc. IWPSD 2003(818–820)]
–2.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.5
1.0
2.0
5.0
S22
S11
–1.0
–1.0
–0.5
1.0
2.0
–2.0
–5.0
0.0
S21
S12*10
0.2
Measured
Simulated
Simulated
(modified BSIM3)
(BSIM3)
Figure 8.17
Measured and simulated s-parameters at a Vg = 1.25 V and Vd =
2.5 V for a frequency sweep from 0.1 GHz to 21 GHz [After B. Senapati
et al., Proc. IWPSD 2003(818–820)]

MOSFET: compact models
295
ranges 0.1 to 21 GHz at a Vd = 2.5 V and Vg = 1.25 V. Measured data are presented
by open circle, the modified BSIM3 model by a solid line and BSIM3 model by
a dotted line indicating the relative improvement achieved in the modified BSIM3
model.
8.8
Summary
As the mainstream MOS technology is scaled into the deep sub-micron regime, devel-
opment of a truly physical and predictive compact model for circuit simulation that
covers geometry, bias, temperature, d.c., a.c., RF, and noise characteristics becomes a
major challenge. Well-constructed models, however, without accurate model param-
eters for the used process, may lead to wrong prediction in circuit simulation. Model
parameter extraction, in particular from the device characterisation is crucial and
remains as an important practical issue that needs serious attention.
The surface-potential is based approach is being developed using solutions of
several long-standing problems of compact modelling. These include symmetric
linearisation method enabling extremely simple yet accurate expressions for the
drain current and terminal charges, non-iterative computation of the surface potential
and extension of the model formulation beyond the gradual channel approximation.
Approaches to MOSFET compact models have been described. A big advantage of a
complete surface-potential-based model is that the overall model consistency is auto-
matically preserved through the surface potential. Therefore, the number of model
parameters can be drastically reduced in comparison with conventional models.
The modelling of partially-depleted SOI MOSFETs using the third-generation
surface-potential-based models has been discussed. An SP-based model has been
showntobeanalternativetothemoretraditionalthreshold-voltage-basedSOImodels.
ModellingissuesforheterostructureMOSFETsareoutlined, whichneedfurtheratten-
tion. A subcircuit model for RF CMOS valid under different bias conditions and
RF frequency range up to 20 GHz has been described. The usefulness and accu-
racy of the n-MOSFET model are discussed. A method to extract the important
parameters and fine tuning of the parameters from d.c. and RF measurements is also
discussed.
References
1 Q. Huang, F. Piazza, P. Orsatti, and T. Ohguro, ‘The impact of scaling down to
deep submicron on CMOS RF circuits’, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 33,
pp. 1023–1036, 1998.
2 B. Razavi, ‘CMOS technology characterization for analog and RF design’, IEEE
J. Solid-State Circuit, vol. 34, pp. 268–276, 1999.
3 E. Morifuji, H. S. Momose, T. Ohguro, T. Yoshitomi, and H. Kimijima, ‘Future
perspective and scaling down roadmap for RF CMOS’, in IEEE VLSI Tech. Symp.
Dig., pp. 163–164, 1999.

296
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
4 Y. Cheng, M.-C. Jeng, Z. Liu, J. Huang, M. Chan, K. Chen, et al., ‘A physical
and scalable I-V model in BSIM 3v3 Analog/Figital Circuit Simulation’, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 44, pp. 277–287, 1997.
5 M. Shur, T. A. Fjeldly, T. Ytterdal, and K. Lee, ‘Unified MOSFET Model’,
Solid State Electron., vol. 35, pp. 1795–1802, 1992.
6 T. Skotnicki, C. Denat, P. Senn, G. Merckel, and B. Hennion, ‘A New
analog/digital CAD model for sub-halfmicron MOSFETs’, in IEEE IEDM Tech.
Dig., pp. 165–168, 1994.
7 K. Joardar, S. K. Gullapalli, C. McAndrew, M. E. Bumham, and A. Wild,
‘ImprovedMOSFETmodelforcircuitsimulation’, IEEETrans. ElectronDevices,
vol. 45, pp. 134–148, 1998.
8 M. Miura-Mattausch, U. Feldmann, A. Rahm, M. Bollu, and D. Savignac,
‘Unified Complete MOSFET Model for analysis of digital and analog circuits’,
IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design, vol. CAD-15, pp. 1–7, 1996.
9 Y. Cheng, M. J. Deen, and C.-H. Chen, ‘MOSFET modeling for RF IC Design’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 52, pp. 1286–1303, 2005.
10 IEEE, ‘Special issue on advanced compact models and 45-nm modeling chal-
lenges,’ IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 53, pp. 1957–2202, 2006.
11 D. E. Ward and R. W. Dutton, ‘A charge-oriented model for MOS transis-
tor capacitances’, IEEE J. Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-13, pp. 703–707,
1978.
12 R. P. Jindal, ‘Compact noise models for MOSFETs’, IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. 53, pp. 2051–2061, 2006.
13 D. P. Foty, MOSFET Modeling with SPICE—Principles and Practice. Prentice-
Hall, 1997.
14 Y. P. Tsividis and G. Masetti, ‘Problems in precision modeling of the MOS transis-
tor for analog applications’, IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design, vol. CAD-3,
pp. 72–79, 1984.
15 Y. Cheng, M. Chan, K. Hui, M. Jeng, Z. Liu, J. Huang, et al., ‘BSIM3v3 manual.’
University of California/Berkeley, 1996.
16 W. Liu, MOSFET Models for Spice Simulation, Including BSIM3v3 and BSIM4.
John Wiley & Sons, NY, 2001.
17 J. Saijets, M. Andersson, and M. A. Berg, ‘A comparative study of various
MOSFET models at radio frequencies’, Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal
Processing, vol. 33, pp. 5–17, 2002.
18 G. Gildenblat, H. Wang, T.-L. Chen, X. Gu, and X. Cai, ‘SP: An advanced surface-
potential-based compact MOSFET model’, IEEE J. Solid State Circuits, vol. 39,
pp. 1394–1406, 2004.
19 G. Gildenblat, X. Cai, T. Chen, X. Gu, and H. Wang, ‘Reemergence of the
surface-potential-based compact MOSFET models’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
pp. 863–866, 2003.
20 M. Bucher, C. Lallement, C. Enz, and F. Krummenacher, ‘Accurate MOS mod-
elling for analog circuit simulation using the EKV model’, in IEEE Intl. Symp.
Circuits and Systems, pp. 703–706, 1996.

MOSFET: compact models
297
21 R. van Langevelde and F. M. Klassen, ‘An explicit surface-potential-based
MOSFET model for circuit simulation’,
Solid State Electron.,
vol. 44,
pp. 409–418, 2000.
22 H. Wang, T.-L. Chen, and G. Gildenblat, ‘Quasi-static and non-quasi-static
compact MOSFET models based on symmetrically linearization of the bulk
and inversion charges’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 50, pp. 2262–2272,
2003.
23 T.-L. Chen and G. Gildenblat, ‘Analytical approximation for the MOSFET surface
potential’, Solid State. Electron., vol. 45, pp. 335–339, 2001.
24 W. Wu, T. Chen, G. Gildenblat, and C. C. McAndrew, ‘Physics-Based Mathe-
matical Conditioning of the MOSFET Surface Potential Equation’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Device, vol. 51, pp. 1196–1200, 2004.
25 G. Gildenblat, T.-L. Chen, and P. Bendix, ‘Analytical approximation for pertur-
bation of MOSFET surface potential by polysilicon depletion layer’, Electron.
Lett., vol. 35, pp. 1974–1976, 1999.
26 G. Gildenblat, T.-L. Chen, and P. Bendix, ‘Closed form approximation for
the perturbation of MOSFET surface potential by quantum-mechanical effects’,
Electron. Lett., vol. 36, pp. 1072–1074, 2000.
27 G. Gildenblat, X. Li, W. Wu, H. Wang, A. Jha, R. van Langevelde, et al., ‘PSP: An
advanced surface-potential-based MOSFET model for circuit simulation’, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 53, pp. 1979–1993, 2006.
28 H. J. Mattausch, M. Miura-Mattausch, H. Ueno, S. Kumashiro, T. Yamaguchi,
K. Yamashita, et al., ‘HiSIM: The first complete drift-diffusion MOSFET model
for circuit simulation’, in Proc. Solid-State and Integrated-Circuit Technology,
pp. 861–866, 2001.
29 M. Miura-Mattausch, H. J. Mattausch, T. Ohguro, T. Lizuka, M. Taguchi,
S. Kumashiro, et al., ‘MOSFET model HiSIM based on surface-potential descrip-
tion for enabling accurate RF-CMOS design’, J. Semicond. Technol. Sci., vol. 4,
pp. 133–139, 2004.
30 M. Miura-Mattausch, N. Sadachika, D. Navarro, G. Suzuki, Y. Takeda,
M. Miyake, et al., ‘HiSIM2: Advanced MOSFET model valid for RF circuit
simulation’, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 53, pp. 1994–2007, 2006.
31 G. Gildenblat, C. McAndrew, H. Wang, W. Wu, D. Foty, L. Lemaitre, et al.,
‘Advanced compact models: gateway to modern CMOS design’, in Proc. 11th
Intl. Conf. Electronics, Circuits and Systems, pp. 638–641, 2004.
32 G. Gildenblat and T. L. Chen, ‘Overview of an advanced surface-potential based
mosfet model (SP)’, in Proc. Nanotech, pp. 657–661, 2002.
33 C. C. Enz, F. Krummenacher, and E. A. Vittoz, ‘An analytical MOS transistor
model valid in all regions of operation and dedicated to low-voltage and low-
current applications’, Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Processing, vol. 8,
pp. 83–114, 1995.
34 J.-M. Sallese, M. Bucher, F. Krummenacher, and P. Fazan, ‘Inversion charge
linearization in MOSFET modeling and rigorous derivation of the EKV compact
model’, Solid State Electron., vol. 47, pp. 677–683, 2003.

298
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
35 R. M. D. A. Velghe, D. B. M. Klaassen, and F. M. Klaassen, ‘MOS model 9.’
Unclassified report NL-UR 003/94, Philips Electronics N.V., 1994.
36 P. Antognetti and G. Massobrio, Semiconductor Device Modeling with SPICE.
McGraw Hill Book Co., NY, 1987.
37 S. K. H. Fung, M. Khare, D. Schepis, W. Lee, S. H. Ku, H. Park, et al., ‘Gate length
scaling accelerated to 30 nm regime using ultra-thin film PD-SOI technology’, in
IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 629–632, 2001.
38 D. Sinitsky, S. Tang, A. Jangity, F. Assaderaghi, G. Shahidi, and C. Hu, ‘Simula-
tion of SOI devices and circuits using BSIM3SOI’, IEEE Electron Devices Lett.,
vol. 19, pp. 323–325, 1998.
39 Cadence Design Systems, ‘BSIMProPlus Datasheet’, 2003.
40 P. Su, S. K. H. Fung, S. Tang, F. Assaderaghi, and C. Hu, ‘BSIMPD: A partial-
depletion SOI MOSFET model for deep-submicron CMOS designs’, in IEEE
CICC Proc., pp. 197–200, 2000.
41 C. K. Maiti,
and G. A. Armstrong,
Applications of Silicon-Germanium
Heterostructure Devices. Inst. of Physics Pub., UK, 2001.
42 K. Chandrasekaran, X. Zhou, S. B. Chiah, W. Shangguan, and G. H. See, ‘Physics-
based single-piece charge model for strained-Si MOSFETs’, IEEE Electron
Devices Lett., vol. 52, pp. 1555–1562, 2005.
43 C. K. Maiti, L. K. Bera, and S. Chattopadhyay, ‘Strained-Si Heterostruc-
ture field effect transistors’, Semicond. Sci. Technol., vol. 13, pp. 1225–1246,
1998.
44 J. G. Fossum, ‘UFSOI MOSFET models (ver. 7.0) user’s guide, Univ. of Florida,
Gainesville’, 2002.
45 J. G. Fossum and W. Zhang, ‘Performance Projections of Scaled CMOS Devices
and Circuits with Strained Si-on-SiGe Channels’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 50, pp. 1042–1049, 2003.
46 M. M. Pelella and J. G. Fossum, ‘On the performance advantage of PD/SOI
CMOS with floating bodies’, IEEE Electron Devices Lett., vol. 49, pp. 96–104,
2002.
47 J. N. Burghartz, M. Hargrove, C. S. Webster, R. A. Groves, M. Keene,
K. A. Jenkins, et al., ‘RF potential of a 0.18-µm CMOS logic device technology’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 47, pp. 864–870, 2000.
48 T. Manku, ‘Microwave CMOS—device physics and design’, IEEE J. Solid State
Circuits, vol. 34, pp. 277–285, 1999.
49 C.-S. Chang, C.-P. Chao, J. G. J. Chern, and J. Y.-C. Sun, ‘Advanced CMOS
technology portfolio for RF IC applications’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 52, pp. 1271–1285, 2005.
50 W. Liu, R. Gharpurey, M. C. Chang, U. Erdogan, R. Aggarwal, and J. P. Mattia,
‘RF MOSFET modeling accounting for distributed substrate and channel resis-
tances with emphasis on the BSIM3v3 SPICE model’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
pp. 309–312, 1997.
51 R. R. J. Vanoppen, J.A.M.Geelen, and D. B. M. Klassen, ‘The high-frequency
analogue performance of MOSFETs’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 173–176,
1994.

MOSFET: compact models
299
52 S. H.-M. Jen, C. C. Enz, D. R. Pehlke, M. Schroter, and B. J. Sheu, ‘Accurate
modeling and parameter extraction for MOS transistors valid up to 10 GHz’, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 46, pp. 2217–2227, 1999.
53 C. E. Biber, M. L. Schmatz, and T. Morf, ‘Improvements on a MOSFET model
for non-linear RF simulations’, in IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig.,
pp. 865–868, 1997.
54 E. P. Vandamme, D. Schreurs, C. van Dinther, G. Badenes, and L. Deferm,
‘Development of a RF large signal MOSFET model, based on an equivalent
circuit, and comparison with the BSIM3v3 compact model’, Solid State Electron.,
vol. 46, pp. 353–360, 2002.
55 M. B. Das, ‘High-Frequency Network Properties of MOS Transistors Including
the Substrate Resistivity Effects’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-16,
pp. 1049–1069, 1969.
56 J.-J. Ou, X. Jin, I. Ma, C. Hu, and P. R. Gray, ‘CMOS RF modeling for GHz
communication IC’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 94–95, 1998.
57 S. F. Tin, A. A. Osman, K. Mayaram, and C. Hu, ‘A simple subcircuit extension of
the BSIM3v3 model for CMOS RF design’, IEEE J. Solid State Circuits, vol. 35,
pp. 612–624, 2000.
58 D. R. Pehlke, M. Schroter, A. Burstein, M. Matloubian, and M. F. Chang, ‘High-
frequency application of MOS compact models and their development for scalable
RF model libraries’, in IEEE CICC Conf. Dig., pp. 219–222, 1998.
59 Y. Cheng, M. Schroter, C. Enz, M. Matloubian, and D. Pehlke, ‘RF modeling
issues of deep-submicron MOSFETs for circuit design’, in Proc. Solid-State and
Integrated Circuit Technology, pp. 416–419, 1998.
60 S. F. Tin and K. Mayaram, ‘Substrate network modeling for CMOS RF circuit
simulation’, in IEEE CICC Proc., pp. 583–586, 1999.
61 Y. Cheng and M. Matloubian, ‘On the high-frequency characteristics of substrate
resistance in RF MOSFETs’, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 21, pp. 604–606,
2000.
62 D. M. M.-P. Schreurs, J. Verspecht, S. Vandenberghe, and E. Vandamme,
‘Straightforward and accurate nonlinear device model parameter-estimation
method based on vectorial large-signal measurements’, IEEE Trans. Microwave
Th. and Tech., vol. 50, pp. 2315–2319, 2002.
63 D. Schreurs, S. Vandenberghe, G. Carchon, B. Nauwelaers, E. Vandamme,
G. Badenes, et al., ‘Evaluation of non-linear modelling techniques for MOSFETs
based on vectorial large-signal measurements’, in IEEE ISCAS Symp. Proc.,
pp. 429–432, 2000.
64 P. Jansen, D. Schreurs, W. De Raedt, B. Nauwelaers, and M. Van Rossum,
‘Consistent small-signal and large-signal extraction techniques for heterojunc-
tion FET’s’, IEEE Trans. Microwave Th. and Tech., vol. 43, pp. 87–93,
1995.
65 E.P.Vandamme, D.M.M.-P.Schreurs, andG.VanDinther, ‘ImprovedThree-Step
De-embedding Method to Accurately Account for the Influence of Pad Parasitics
in Silicon On-Wafer RF Test-Structures’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 48,
pp. 737–742, 2001.

300
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
66 H. Cho and D. Burk, ‘A Three Step Method for the De-embedding of High
Frequency S-parameter Measurements’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 38,
pp. 1371–1375, 1991.
67 G. Gonzalez, Microwave transistor amplifiers: Analysis and design. Prentice-
Hall, 1997.
68 Y. P. Tsividis, Operation and Modeling of the MOS Transistor. McGraw-Hill,
1999.
69 K.-E. Ehwald , D. Knoll, B. Heinemann, K. Chang, J. Kirchgessner, R. Mauntel,
et al., ‘Modular integration of high-performance SiGe:C HBTs in a deep sub-
micron, epi-free CMOS process’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 561–564,
1999.
70 B. Senapati, K.-E. Ehwald, D. Knoll, and F. Furnhammer, ‘An extended BSIM3v3
model for RF MOSFETs’, in Proc. IWPSD, pp. 818–820, 2003.
71 Hewlett-Packard Company, San Francisco, CA, IC-CAP User’s Manual — High
Frequency Model Tutorials, 1997.

Chapter 9
HBT: compact models
The demand for high-speed wireless and communication applications has pushed the
development of SiGe and SiGeC epitaxial base HBT processes [1]. The corresponding
circuit design activities essentially depend on accurate compact models of SiGe HBTs
in all relevant modes of the transistor operation. Unlike the high-performance digital
CMOS that can afford a few years between products, the analog and mixed-signal
applications involving SiGe demands significantly reduced product cycle time. Thus,
there is an intimate relationship between the TCAD, process development and circuit
designers.
For many advanced high-speed and RF circuits, the impact of substrate parasitic
elements on bipolar transistor electrical performances cannot be neglected. These
parasitic elements influence strongly the output characteristics. A compact model
consists of lumped elements such as resistors, diodes, capacitors and dependent cur-
rent sources connected together with minimum number of nodes to form an equivalent
circuit to represent a semiconductor device. All lumped elements can be calculated
directly from layout and technological data. Development of reliable device models
is an essential part in the circuit design for analog and mixed-signal applications.
Accurate device characterisation also plays an important and critical role in model
development and circuit benchmarking.
The combination of narrow basewidth, due to epitaxial growth techniques, has
resulted in a tremendous performance boost of SiGe-based bipolar transistors. In
order to capture the resulting new electrical and physical effects occurring in such
technologies, improved compact models are needed for predicting accurately the
circuit performance. A compact model should incorporate all physics relevant to
future technology generations with a small number of model parameters compared
to models used in industry today [2–7].
In general, two strategies for developing compact models are possible: (1) con-
structing numerical tables with interpolation formulae that have little physical basis
to a physical model and (2) deriving physics-based compact mathematical expres-
sions. Table models are easier to construct but are very much limited in use. The term

302
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Circuit design
Accurate, valid over wide range
Smooth geometry scaling (for optim.)
Computationally fast and reliable
Easy to understand
Include all physical effects
Model parameters without wafers
Rapid et al. of process variations
Debugging  of process issues
EC topology, equations to
fit in different interfaces
I, Q contin. differentiable
Modular, easily extendable
Well-defined, fast, reliable
Using standard equipment
Min. parameter interaction
Simulator
Process development
Param. extraction
Compact
model
Figure 9.1
Requirements for compact model development [After M. Schroter, CMC
Meeting presentation]
physics-based refers to the relation of the model equations to the underlying physics
describing the operation of a device. It should be mentioned that a successful com-
pact model and its development have to satisfy many requirements from different
directions (see Figure 9.1). Such a model development requires the background in
respective transistor theory, process information and device simulation. Preceding
all these requirements is the necessity to create carefully controlled device measure-
ment test structures that allow for accurate extraction of the desired device and circuit
parameters.
Robust measurement and modelling of high-speed semiconductor devices, par-
ticularly at the extreme levels of performance found in modern SiGe devices, require
extreme care in getting reliable data, and importantly, a model to fit the data. The
characterisation of high-performance SiGe HBTs, and associated passives, requires
care owing to the demanding requirements associated with these devices. Circuit
measurement is particularly demanding for applications utilizing SiGe devices owing
to the high-frequency and low-noise characteristics of these designs [8,9]. Frequently,
off-the-shelf measurement solutions do not exist to satisfy the needs.
Compact models should be fully symmetric, model all intrinsic capacitances and,
as such, be capable of using a small number of extraction parameters to model analog
and RF performance of the devices representing the most advanced technology nodes.
Further, it is highly desirable that this model can be used for the extrapolation of future
technologies and device parameter variation based on technology fluctuations. The
development of sophisticated compact models takes 10–20 years before they actually
become suitable for production circuit design.
Compact models are judged on their success in predicting large-signal behaviour
and this is where the real difference is found between the various models. The small-
signal behaviour may be found by the linearisation of the large-signal circuit for

HBT: compact models
303
a given bias point. A sound compact transistor model should have the following
attributes:
•
physics-based formulation for the prediction of electrical behaviour;
•
accurate and valid over a wide operational range;
•
scalability for various transistor configurations;
•
fast and numerically stable;
•
provide model parameters even if wafers are not available (predictive);
•
suitable to assist process development;
•
capable for the rapid evaluation of impact of process variations.
As the field of compact modelling is enormous, ranging from bipolar (vertical and
lateral, homo- and heterojunctions) to MOSFET (lateral and vertical, MESFET and
HEMT) models, the scope of this chapter will be limited to treating only the vertical
bipolar models (as lateral bipolar device are less frequently used), with emphasis
on their applicability for RF circuit design. Although the available models were
developed mainly for the homojunction devices, extensions to heterojunction devices
(viz., SiGe-base) are possible and are considered in this chapter. Compact circuit
models usually consist of a set of model equations that are either empirical or derived
from device physics, or a combination of both. Historically, one can distinguish the
models as follows:
•
Physical models (generally computed from doping profile etc.) that express all
the compact-model elements in physical parameters. The advantages are that they
are accurate and suitable for yield calculations but take long calculation time.
•
Compact models (extracted) are defined by topology and element val-
ues/equations (analytical equation for every circuit component). The advantages
are that they are fast, accurate if parameters are correct and to some extent suitable
for yield calculations. The disadvantages are that they are inaccurate, if model
does not fit the device or parameters are inaccurate.
•
Database models are obtained from bulk measurements. Although they are accu-
rateandfast, theyrequirealargenumberofmeasurements, arenotaccurateoutside
the measured regions and are also not scalable. Model complexity is defined by
number of nodes and elements in the equivalent circuit along with the element
equations and number of parameters. Currently the following transistor models
are available and are listed below according to their complexity:
•
Ebers-Moll (EM);
•
Gummel-Poon (GP);
•
Extended Gummel-Poon;
•
VBIC;
•
MEXTRAM;
•
HICUM.
The goal of this chapter is to provide an overview on vertical bipolar inter-
company (VBIC), high current model (HICUM) and most exquisite transistor model
(MEXTRAM) and their associated internal circuits necessary to deploy the model for
design purposes. These include (1) the basic operating principle, (2) how the physical

304
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
effects in advanced transistors are covered, (3) the geometry scaling methods used,
(4) the parameter determination methodology, (5) how a hierarchy of models can be
generated in an efficient way and (6) future research directions.
9.1
Advanced models
The first compact bipolar model was published in 1954 by Ebers and Moll [10]. It was
originally only a static (d.c.) model. Extension of the basic EM model has resulted
in a simple but fast compact model and is suitable for the simulation of large digital
circuits. Since a number of physical effects occur in integrated circuits that are not
included in the EM model, it was replaced by the GP model in 1970 [11, 12] and
is based on the integral charge control relation (ICCR), an extension of the Moll-
Ross relation [13], which includes the integral charge control concept. The charge
control formulation of the GP model accounts for the key physical parameters and
mechanisms that control bipolar junction transistor (BJT) behaviour in an intuitive
and consistent manner, so that a number of second-order effects such as the forward
and reverse Early effect, and high injection are naturally included [14].
Several variants of the GP model have been proposed, and one of the well-known
variants found in most circuit simulators today is the SPICE Gummel-Poon (SGP)
model [15–17]. The equivalent circuit for an integrated vertical npn transistor in the
SGP model found in most commercial simulators is shown in Figure 9.2. Modified
versions of this model can also be found in many commercial simulators such as
H-SPICE (Meta-software), SmartSPICE (Silvaco), PSPICE (Microsim), MSPICE
(Mentor Graphics) and SPECTRE. Additional elements such as capacitors and resis-
tors are added to the existing equivalent circuit to account for parasitics. Because
the depletion and diffusion charge components are not used in the definition of
b
Qtx
Re
Rc
Qbe = Qde + Qte
Qbc = Qdc + Qtc
Qts
lbb1
lbci
lbei
ln
b1
s
e
c
e1
c1
Figure 9.2
Topology of the equivalent circuit diagram for SGP model [After
H. C. de Graaff, Proc. ESSDERC, 1997]

HBT: compact models
305
the main current. In, the d.c. and a.c. characteristics in the GP model are more
or less decoupled. This gives a greater freedom in the parameter extraction, but
results in a non-physical parameter set that is not suitable for proper scaling of the
transistor [16].
Continued scaling of bipolar devices has resulted in a high performance but, at
the same time, has caused increased concern for problems such as quasi-saturation,
avalanche multiplication and self-heating effects, so SGP is not sufficiently accurate
for state-of-the-art scaled bipolar devices [18, 19]. With the complicated transistor
models used in the circuit simulators today, device characterisation with respect to
circuit models becomes a non-trivial task. To meet the needs for accurate modelling
of advanced devices, several compact bipolar models such as Most EXquisite TRAn-
sistor Model (MEXTRAM) largely depending on the modelling of the total stored
charge from Philips [20] and HIgh CUrrent Model (HICUM) from the Ruhr Uni-
versity at Bochum [21, 22] are being developed independently and consistently by
dedicated developers in conjunction with bipolar process development.
In the United States, efforts have been made to formulate new standard models
for MOS and bipolar. The Compact Model Council (CMC), mostly consisting of
US semiconductor companies and CAD suppliers, has been founded to ‘promote
the international, non-exclusive standardization of compact model formulations, the
model interfaces and their availability in circuit simulators’. The VBIC model for
silicon bipolar junction transistors has been developed as an industry standard and
public domain replacement for the SGP model [23]. Presently there are two compact
models recommended by CMC: MEXTRAM and HICUM.
In the following, the focus will be on the state-of-the-art compact models for
vertical bipolar transistors. The four most widely known models (SGP, MEXTRAM,
HICUM and VBIC) will be reviewed and compared with each other with respect to
the modelled physical effects and to their performance. Comparison will be made in
terms of physical effects such as main current and charges, quasi-saturation, collector-
base depletion charge, emitter-base current crowding, influence of extrinsic regions,
non-quasistatic effects, avalanche and thermal modelling. A performance comparison
will also be made with an emphasis on the applicability to RF circuit design. SiGe
HBTs non-linear distortion, geometrical scaling, statistical modelling and thermal
modelling for self-heating will receive explicit attention.
9.2
VBIC model
In 1994, efforts were taken to develop a new industry-standard model for vertical
bipolar transistors. The outcome has been the development of a new compact VBIC
model [23,24], which is an extension of the model developed by Kull et al. [25].
The VBIC model has been designed to be a more complex, improved version of
SGP model with the following additional features:
•
current-dependent base resistance modelling;
•
modelling of the collector epilayer resistance;

306
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
S
Rs
Si
Qbc
Qbe
Ibe
Ith
Ibc–Igc
Qbcx
Qbcp
Qbep
Qbex
ICC
Bx
Bp
Iccp
Ibcp
Ibep
CBCO
RBX
Rbip/Qbp
Rci
Rbi/Qb
Rcx
Ci
Bi
n
n
p
p– (substrate)
n+ (buried collector)
Cx
C
Thermal network
Excess phase network
Rth
Cth
Qcxf
t
xf1
xf2
Flxf
Itzf
P+
n+ (emitter)
Ibex
Re
Ei
E
CBEO
B
R = 1Ω
Figure 9.3
Equivalent network of a npn transistor in the VBIC model. Thermal
network is also shown [After B. Senapati and C. K. Maiti, IEE Proc.
Circuits, Devices and Systems, Vol. 149, 2002(129–135). ©2002 IEEE]
•
self-heating of a bipolar transistor;
•
forward and reverse Early effect based on the junction charges;
•
high-injection effects in the base;
•
excess phase modelled as a separate subcircuit;
•
parasitic substrate pnp transistor;
•
weak avalanche injection.
Figure 9.3 shows the VBIC equivalent network for a npn transistor. The dotted
lines separate the different active and passive regions of the transistor. The parasitic
substrate pnp is modelled by a simplified GP transistor. Quasi-saturation is modelled
after Reference 25 with the elements RCI, Qbcx and a modified Qbc and by including
the elements Ibex and Qbex, along with RBI, Ibe and Qbe. In contrast to the GP model,
the base current is not connected to the collector current. In the VBIC model, both
ideal and non-ideal base currents are calculated from separate saturation currents and
ideality factors. Consequently, the temperature dependence of each current mecha-
nism is modelled separately. Excess phase is modelled with a second-order network
that implements the Weil–McNamee approximation [26]. A weak avalanche current
Igc is also included for the b–c junction [27].
The VBIC model includes two depletion charge models, the standard SGP model
and a single-piece model, in which the capacitance is adjusted to a constant value
for a forward-bias junction. The base-emitter depletion charge is partitioned between

HBT: compact models
307
Qbe and Qbex. The base-collector charge element (Qbc) includes a depletion charge
and a diffusion charge term and is modelled together with Qbcx, the charge asso-
ciated with the base push-out into the collector. Finally, to model capacitances
associated with extrinsic parasitics, the constant capacitances CBEO and CBCO are
included. Note that in Figure 9.3 the intrinsic base resistances, RBI and RBIP, are
modulated by the normalized base charges, Qb and Qbp, respectively, and the intrinsic
collector resistance, RCI, is modulated by Vbci.
The Early effect approximation in the SGP model is known to cause inaccuracies
in output conductance modelling for modern BJTs [28], so an Early effect model
based on the junction depletion charges significantly improves output conductance
modelling. However, this means that existing SGP model parameter sets need to
have the Early voltages adjusted to work reasonably with VBIC [29]. VBIC includes
noisemodelssimilartothoseoftheSGPmodel, withshot, thermalandl/fcomponents.
BJT electrical behaviour varies with temperature, and so VBIC has temperature map-
pings defined for its model parameters. The mappings are similar to, but improved
on, the temperature mappings for the SGP model. The resistances have a temperature
variation [29]
R(T2) = R(T1)(T2/T1)XR
(9.1)
where the temperatures are in degrees K, and there is a separate XR parameter for
each doping type region. This follows from an empirical model of the temperature
dependence of mobility [30]. The transport saturation current varies as
Is(T2) = Is(T1)(rXIS
T
exp(−EA(1 −rT)/Vtβ))l/NF
(9.2)
where rT = T2/T1 and XIS and EA are parameters. This is similar to the SGP model
and is based on the variation of n2
ie with temperature. The other saturation currents
have similar temperature mappings. This allows fitting of βF and βR over bias and
temperature. The forward transport current (Icc) of the intrinsic transistor is modelled
with the forward (Itfi) and reverse (Itri) current components as
Icc = 1
Qb
(Itfi −Itri)
Itfi = IS

exp
 qVbei
NF · kT

−1

;
Itri = IS

exp
 qVbci
NR · kT

−1

(9.3)
where Vbei = Vbi −Vei and Vbci = Vbi −Vci are the branch voltages. The normal-
ized base charge, Qb, is modelled using depletion and diffusion charge components,
forward and reverse Early voltages (VEF,VER) and knee currents (IKF, IKR) as
q1 = 1 +
qje
VER + qjc
VEF
q2 = Itfi
IKF + Itri
IKR
(9.4)
qb = 0.5

q1 +

q2
1 + 4q2


308
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
where qje(Vbei,PE,ME) and qjc(Vbci,PC,MC) are the base-emitter and base-collector
charges, respectively.
The base current (Ib) is divided into base-emitter current (Ibe) and base-collector
current (Ibc). The total base-emitter current (Ibt) is further partitioned between (Ibe)
and (Ibex) to model the distributed nature of the base and are given by
Ibt = IBEI

exp

qVbei
NEI · kT

−1

+ IBEN

exp

Vbei
NEN · kT

−1

Ibe = WBE · Ibt;
Ibex = (1 −WBE) · Ibt
(9.5)
where WBE is a model parameter that varies from 1 to 0. The base-collector current
(Ibc) includes both the ideal and non-ideal components and is given by
Ibc = IBCI

exp

qVbci
NCI · kT

−1

+ IBCN

exp

qVbci
NCN · kT

−1

(9.6)
and also a weak avalanche current component (Igc) is given by Reference 31
Igc = (Icc −Ibc)AVC1(PC −Vbci) exp[−AVC2(PC −Vbci)ME−1]
(9.7)
where AVC1 and AVC2 are model parameters. The intrinsic collector current (Iepi)
is modelled with the enhanced Kull’s quasi-saturation model [25] with the elements:
intrinsic collector resistance (RCI), epitaxial charge (QCO) and epi-doping factor
(GAMM). The transport current (Iccp) of the parasitic transistor can be divided into
two components: forward and reverse. Owing to the distributed nature of the parasitic
components, the forward component of Iccp can further be split into Vbep(= Vbx−Vbp)
and Vbci(= Vbi −Vci) with model parameters WSP and (1−WSP) as
Itfp = ISP

WSP exp

qVbep
NFP · kT

+ (1 −WSP) exp

qVbci
NFP · kT

−1

Itrp = ISP

exp

qVbcp
NFP · kT

−1

Iccp =
1
Qbp
(Itfp −Itrp)
(9.8)
The normalized base charge, Qbp, of the parasitic transistor includes only high-
level forward injection and is given by
Qbp = 0.5

1 +

1 + 4 Itfp
IKP

(9.9)
The base-emitter current (Ibep) and the base-collector current (Ibcp) of the parasitic
pnp transistor are modelled similarly as in case of the intrinsic npn transistor described
above. The parasitic base current (Irbp) is further controlled by the parasitic base
resistance (RBIP). The intrinsic base resistances (RBI) and parasitic resistance (RBIP)
are modulated by the normalized base charges Qb and Qbp, respectively.
Excess phase is modelled with a second-order network in the VBIC model as
a separate option. A self-heating model (released as a separate option for VBIC)

HBT: compact models
309
Table 9.1
VBIC model parameter list for a transistor at room temperature [After
B. Senapati, ‘Modelling and Characterization of SiGe-HBTs for RF
Applications’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur,
2001.]
Basic-effects
Parameter
Measurements
Basic d.c.
IS, NF, NR, IBEI, NEI, IBCI, NCI
GP (IC,B–Vbe, IE,B–Vbc)
β-degradation
IBEN, NEN, IBCN, NCN, IKF, IKR
GP (IC,B–Vbe, IE,B–Vbc)
Junction capacitor
CJE, PE, ME, AJE
Capacitance–Voltage (C–V)
CJC, PC, MC, FC, AJC
Early effects
VEF, VER
IC,E–VCE,EC, C–V
Parasitic transistor
ISP, NFP, IBEIP, IBENP, IBCIP
GP(IS,B–Vbc)
NCIP, IBCNP, NCNP, IKP
(Parasitic pnp)
Parasitic capacitance
CJEP, CJCP, MS, PS, AJS
C–V (Parasitic pnp)
Extrinsic capacitance
CBEO, CBCO
C–V
Resistors
RCX, RBX, RBI, RBP, RE, RS
GP (IC,B–Vbe), (Vce–Ib)
Partitioning
WSP, WBE
Optimisation
Quasi-saturation
RCI, HRCF, QCO, GAMM, VO
High current (Ic–Vce)
Avalanche
AVC1, AVC2
High bias (Ic–Vce)
Self-heating
RTH, CTH
High current (Ic–Vce)
Transit time
TF, QTF, XTF, VTF
High frequency (fT–Ic)
ITF, TR, TD
includes the thermal resistance RTH and capacitance CTH, along with the thermal
power source Ith, which couples, the power generated in the BJT to the thermal net-
work. The local temperature rise at node t is linked to the electrical model through the
temperature mappings of the model parameters. A complete VBIC model parameter
list, grouped according to basic effects, is given in Table 9.1. The terminal currents
of the transistor are given by
Ic = Icc −Ibc + Igc + Irbp
Ib = Ibe + Ibex + Ibc −Igc + Ibep + Iccp
Ie = −Icc −Ibe −Ibex
Is = −Ic −Ib −Ie
(9.10)
In comparison to the GP model, the base currents are no longer directly related
to the collector current, and an alternate formulation of the normalized base charge
Qb has been used in order to obtain dynamic Early voltages. The shortcomings of the
VBIC model are the following:
•
circuit structure that involves many (7) internal nodes and circuit elements;
•
a clear and unified parameter extraction being difficult for the full model;
•
incorrect epilayer model;
•
limitations in the modelling of lightly doped epilayers;

310
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
•
modelling of fT(Ic) at the onset of quasi-saturation;
•
incorrect modelling of the Early effect in the presence of high injection;
•
no a.c. current crowding;
•
incorrect modelling of distortion at high frequency and current levels.
By not using the advanced features the VBIC can be made to be similar to the
SGP model, and the existing extraction techniques can be applied for some of the
VBIC parameters. Cao et al. [32] have developed such a methodology to extract
the parameters of Si-BJTs for the VBIC model.
9.3
MEXTRAM model
MEXTRAMwasintroducedbyDeGraaffandKloostermanatPhilipsin1985asLevel
501 [20]. This was followed by Level 502 in 1987 [33], Level 503 in 1994 and Level
504 in 2000 [34]. MEXTRAM bipolar transistor model has been placed in the public
domainsince1994[35,36]. MEXTRAMisemployedforintensivephysicalmodelling
of the quasi-saturation phenomena including the base widening, Kirk effect [14], hot-
carrier behaviour in the epilayer, and advance modelling of distortion effects [37,38].
In the Level 504 model, special attention is paid to SiGe transistors, and self-
heating effects are included in the description using a one-pole thermal equivalent
circuit similarly to the approach implemented in VBIC. Significantly for advanced
technology devices MEXTRAM can model effects of a graded Ge profile in SiGe
HBTs [39].
Several physical phenomena such as current gain, output conductance, base push-
out, cut-off frequency, noise behaviour and temperature scaling have been included in
MEXTRAM. It is suitable for digital and analog circuit design and has demonstrated
accuracy in a wide variety of applications [40–44]. MEXTRAM is also based on a
reliable, robust and unambiguous transistor parameter extraction method [45–47].
Most parameters of the MEXTRAM model can be extracted directly from depletion
capacitance or terminal currents measurements at different temperatures. The evo-
lution of the equivalent circuit for MEXTRAM is shown in Figures 9.4, 9.5, 9.6,
and 9.7.
A new version (Level 504) of the MEXTRAM compact modelling procedure for
bipolar transistors has been released by the Philips Research Laboratories. Besides
other improvements, the new MEXTRAM version is now capable of modelling
of SiGe transistors. The formulations for a graded base SiGe HBT and neutral
base recombination have been incorporated in the MEXTRAM 504 [44], which
have been implemented in a number of commercial simulators. MEXTRAM pro-
vides a sophisticated model for modelling avalanche effects in the b-c junction.
MEXTRAM uses base–charge partitioning to describe the non-quasistatic effects.
A full parameter extraction using the compact MEXTRAM model has also been
reported [42,48].
Thermal phenomena of bipolar transistors are addressed in MEXTRAM
by a simple thermal impedance and a power dissipation source.
A set of

HBT: compact models
311
Collector
Base
Emitter
Substrate
n–
n–
p–
n–
Figure 9.4
Equivalent circuit without any optional element [Source: Mextram
Manual]
Substrate
Collector
Base
Emitter
Rsub
n–
n–
n–
p–
Figure 9.5
Equivalent circuit with the substrate resistance [Source: Mextram
Manual]
temperature-scaling parameters is extracted along with the corresponding electrical
model parameters in the straight forward procedure. The physics-based modelling of
the MEXTRAM parameters also provides the opportunity for the geometrical scal-
ing [41,49]. MEXTRAM has been used in various SiGe HBTs applications including
high-performance SiGe HBT integration [42], low-noise amplifiers [50–52] and SiGe
HBTs phototransistors [43]. MEXTRAM uses an additional collector node to model
the epilayer in terms of a separate network element, but without making use of the
possibilities of partitioning the epilayer charge similarly to Kull’s epilayer model.
Sheridan et al. [53] have employed MEXTRAM (Level 504) parameter extraction
for the IBM self-aligned high-breakdown 0.32 µm BiCMOS SiGe graded-base test
technology.

312
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Substrate
Collector
Base
Emitter
Rplug
Csub
Rsub
n–
p–
n–
n–
Figure 9.6
Equivalent circuit with the substrate resistance including capacitances
[Source: Mextram Manual]
RBC
b
b1
b2
C1
C2
RBV
lbei
lbci
Qts
Qtes
Qb1b2
Ib1b2
Qbe=Qde+Qte+Qn
Qbc=Qdc+Qtc+Qepi+
lbes
Qtex+Qex
Qtex+Qxex
Ixex+Ixsub
Ixex+Isub+Ib3
Isub+Ixsub–lsf
S
Re
ln
lc1v2
Rc
e1
C
e
Figure 9.7
Topology of the equivalent circuit diagram for MEXTRAM model [After
H. C. de Graaff, Proc. ESSDERC, 1997]
9.4
The HICUM model
HIgh CUrrent bipolar compact transistor Model (HICUM) is the result of bipolar
modelling research conducted at the Ruhr University-Bochum, Germany by Schroter
and Rein [21, 54–56]. HICUM development resulted from the experience that the
SGP model is not accurate enough for high-speed large-signal transient applications
and the required high collector current densities. HICUM was originally designed
to improve on the standard GP model in forward operation or weak saturation. The

HBT: compact models
313
Cox+CTcp
Qde+QTe
Rb0
Rbi
Re
Rc0
QTci
CTc0
CTs
Rs
QTep
Qb1b2
Ibep
C
C1
C2
b2
b1
b
s
lbei
e1
e
ln
Figure 9.8
Topology of the equivalent circuit diagram for HICUM model [After
H. C. de Graaff, Proc. ESSDERC, 1997]
model was subsequently extended to take account of the parasitic substrate transistor,
saturation and quasi-saturation, avalanche and tunnelling currents, and self-heating
effects resulting in the equivalent circuit shown in Figure 9.8 HICUM now employs
an advanced transistor model for the bipolar transistors with main emphasis on circuit
design for high frequency ECL-type circuits for fibre-optic applications.
Since its first appearance, the model has always been updated to accommodate
the changes brought to bipolar fabrication techniques. The model has been extended
to high-speed small-signal applications since 1989 as well as to SiGe HBTs since
1993. Extensions for graded-base SiGe HBTs have been derived using the gener-
alized integral charge control relation (GICCR), which permits modelling of HBTs
with (graded) bandgap differences within the junctions. HICUM uses an implementa-
tion of the Winkel’s delayed charge control model to describe non-quasistatic effects.
HICUM allows one to model reverse-bias tunnelling currents in the e-b diode, a
feature that could be of interest if the e-b diode is used as a varactor diode. Base-
emitter tunnelling model is also available (e.g., for simulation of varactor leakage).
Simple parasitic substrate transistor is included in the equivalent circuit and parallel
RC network takes into account the frequency-dependent coupling between the buried
layer and the substrate terminal. An equivalent circuit for HICUM is presented in
Figure 9.8. HICUM is based on an extended and generalized integral charge control
relation (GICCR) [7, 57]. However, in contrast to the (original) GP model as well
as the SGP model and its variants, in HICUM the GICCR concept is applied con-
sistently without inadequate simplification and additional fitting parameters (such
as the Early voltage). However, the equations governing the HICUM model are
much more complicated and numerous than available in the SGP model. Understand-
ing them requires a more in-depth look at the physical properties of the BJT. The

314
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
HICUM model has been extended to simulate high-frequency small-signal operation
of BJTs [22] and advanced SiGe heterojunction bipolar transistors [7, 58–60], and
further developments are still ongoing following the advancements in bipolar transis-
tor technology and design [61,62]. Details of HICUM model equations can be found
in Reference 63. The current dependence of the internal b-c depletion capacitance is
neglected in HICUM for simplicity, which is justified to a large extent because of
small current levels. In its present form, HICUM employs as many as 87 transistor-
specific model parameters and is designed for geometric scalability, and a separate
program called TRADICA is available to generate HICUM model parameters from
layout data. For a comprehensive review on HICUM for RF bipolar modelling and
circuit applications, the reader may refer to a paper by Schroter [64].
The presently available version of HICUM (named HICUM/Level 2) includes
many physical effects that are relevant for today’s silicon-based processes (including
SiGe technologies). As a consequence, its equivalent circuit is fairly complicated and
not well suited for rough analytical calculations often performed by circuit designers
in the preliminary design phase. Therefore, a simplified version of the model (called
HICUM/Level 0) [65] is intended to be offered. The combination of these different
levels of complexity during circuit design is also expected to save computational
effort and time. The four most widely known models (SGP, MEXTRAM, HICUM
and VBIC) are compared below with respect to the modelled physical effects and to
their performance in Table 9.2.
Both MEXTRAM and HICUM models have matured for more than a decade now
and provide an accuracy that meets most application needs specially for SiGe HBTs.
Despite their different appearances, as MEXTRAM introduces an extra collector
node, the two models are equivalent to a large extent (see Table 9.2) as is apparent
from the following:
•
Both models describe the e-b depletion capacitance in essentially the same way.
•
Modelling of the Early effect is mostly done in the same way.
•
Both models take account of ohmic resistances in series with the base, collector
and emitter terminals.
•
Both models describe the parasitic pnp transistor in terms of a simple transistor
model.
•
a.c. emitter current crowding is described in both models in essentially the
same way.
•
Both models describe self-heating effects.
9.5
Parameter extraction
The accuracy of compact models in circuit simulation depends not only on the
correct physical description of various physical phenomena in the device but also
on a reliable, robust and unambiguous extraction methodology for model parameters.
In order to minimise the correlation between electrical and temperature-dependent
parameters, the electrical parameters may be split into parameters extracted at low-
injection (not affected by the self-heating) and high-injection condition parameters.

HBT: compact models
315
Table 9.2
Physical effects included in various transistor models [After H. C. de
Graaff, Proc. ESSDERC, 1997.]
SGP
MEXTRAM
HICUM
VBIC
High base
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
injection
Early effect
Early
Depletion
Depletion
Depletion
voltage
charges
charges
charges
Quasi-saturation
No
Kirk effect
Kirk effect
Yes
Non-quasistatic
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
effects
Stored base
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
charges
Internal Rb
Conductivity
Conductivity
Conductivity
Conductivity
modulation
modulation
modulation
modulation
Noise
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Weak
Without
With
Yes
Without
avalanche
Kirk effect
Kirk effect
Kirk effect
Parasitic pnp
No
Yes
No
Yes
Current-
No
Yes
Yes
No
dependent CTc
Self-heating
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Internal nodes
3
5
4
7
Number of
parameters
35
39
36
70/63
Moreover, in order to further reduce the parameter correlation, the electrical and
temperature-dependent parameters could be further split into small groups that are
extracted sequentially.
An automated measurement system capable of accurately measuring the various
characteristics of a device and extracting parameters is very important. During devel-
opment of a new device design, data from device simulators or measurements on
prototypes can be used as input to the extraction algorithm and a prototype compact
model can be extracted. Requirements for parameter extraction methodologies are
•
well-defined, simple, fast and reliable procedures;
•
standard measurement equipment;
•
modular – implementation enabling quick adaption to process and model
evolution;
•
model implementation in CAD systems;
•
modular formulation with minimised interactions of parameters with simple
equations and equivalent circuit topology.

316
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
In the following, VBIC parameter extraction techniques will be illustrated. Specif-
ically, extraction of the Early voltages [66, 67] and the transistor series resistances
and other compact model parameters are also covered. A brief overview on the
procedures to determine model parameters is discussed, followed by a discussion
on a measurement setup that can be used to perform d.c. and a.c. (scattering or
s-parameter) measurements, and also the issue of de-embedding in s-parameter
measurements. Finally, some comparisons are shown between simulated results
obtained from both SGP model and VBIC to measured data for various device
characteristics.
The Early voltages are determined by the method described in reference [28]
and knee currents from analysis of forward, reverse and substrate d.c. current gains
(e.g. the knee current is where this gain drops to half its low-current value). These
parameters can further be refined by optimisation. The saturation currents, emission
coefficients and temperature parameters for all transport and diode-like currents are
estimated from low bias data and then refined using optimisation. Fitting the low
bias parameters is straight forward. Resistances can be determined using existing
methods. However, there is a degree of indeterminacy in extracting resistances from
d.c. data only. Initial extracted resistances are thus refined by simultaneous optimi-
sation of a.c. and d.c. data (including high bias data) [68]. Transit time parameters
and excess phase are likewise extracted using existing techniques and then refined
as part of the simultaneous d.c. and a.c. optimisation. In the following, some exam-
ples to demonstrate VBIC’s capabilities for modelling bias, frequency, geometry and
temperature-dependent transistor behaviour, as may be applied to SiGe HBTs, are
presented.
9.6
Extraction algorithm
A typical algorithm for parameter extraction methods for VBIC is given below [69].
In this algorithm, when a parameter has been extracted, its value is used in all the
subsequent steps:
Step 1.
From the low current region of the forward Gummel plot, Ibei, Nei, Iben,
Nen, Is, and Nf are extracted.
Step 2.
From the low current region of the reverse Gummel plot, Ibci, Nci, Ibcn,
and Ncn are extracted.
Step 3.
From the self-heating part of the d.c. measurement, Rth and Cth are
extracted.
Step 4.
From the high current region of the forward Gummel plot, Re is extracted.
Step 5.
From the high current region of the reverse Gummel plot, the Rb + Rc (if
needed, Ikr) are extracted.
Step 6.
From the collector resistance part of the d.c. measurement, Rc and, if
necessary, Xrc(= Xrb = Xre) are extracted.
Step 7.
From the temperature-dependent parameters part of the d.c. measurement,
Xis, Xii and Tnf are extracted.
Step 8.
Steps 4–7 are repeated until the best fits are obtained.

HBT: compact models
317
Step 9.
From the bias independent parameters of the cold-capacitor measurements,
Cje, Cjc, Cbeo and Cbco (and, if included, Lb, Lc, Le) are extracted.
Step 10.
From the bias-dependent parameters of the cold-capacitor measurements,
Me, Mc, Pe, Pc and Fc (and if needed Wbe and the distribution of Rb
between Rbi and Rbx) are extracted.
Step 11.
From the active s-parameter measurement, Tf and the distribution of
Rc between Rci and Rcx are extracted. If necessary, the s-parameter
measurement can be used to fine-tune the resistances Re, Rb and Rc.
Step 12.
If parameters for distributed base are used in Step 10, or some of the resis-
tors have been fine-tuned in Step 11, then Steps 4–11 should be repeated for
the best possible fit. Steps 4–6 do not extract new values for the resistors
that have been fine-tuned in Step 11.
An automated measurement setup that may be used for the extraction of SiGe HBT
device parameters is shown in Figure 9.9. An HP-4145B-based or equivalent system
is chosen as it has the capability to measure d.c. characteristics of semiconductor
devices down to the 100 µV and 1 pA range, and its high sensitivity. For capacitance–
voltage measurements, HP-4061A semiconductor measurement system consists of an
HP-4275A multi-frequency LCR meter and a HP-4140B pA meter. The measurement
system has the capability to measure capacitance down to 1 fF for frequencies ranging
from d.c. to 10 MHz. As device characteristics evaluation is the prime objective, the
controller is commonly used to collect the measured data and transmit the data to
the host computer for post-processing. High-frequency measurements are performed
using HP-8510B network analyser for extraction of transit time.
•  High freq. C–V
•  d.c. C–V
•  Leakage current
    measurement
4061A Semiconductor/component
test system
Switching
module
4145B
Semiconductor
parmeter
analyser
I–V
Measurement
8510B
Vector network
analyser
HP computer
Plotter
Wafer prober
HP–IB
4140B
pA meter/d.c.
voltage source
4275A
multi frequency
LCR meter
Figure 9.9
Electrical measurement system for device characterisation [After
B. Senapati, ‘Modelling and Characterization of SiGe-HBTs for RF
Applications’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur,
2001]

318
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Table 9.3
The different measurement setups. The substrate voltage is normally set
to −1 V with respect to the common in the different measurement setups
[After B. Senapati, ‘Modelling and Characterization of SiGe-HBTs for
RFApplications’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur,
2001.]
Measurement name
Bias setting
Measured data
Forward-Early
Vbe, Vcb, Vcb,max
Ic, Ib
Reverse-Early
Vbc, Vbe, Vbe,max
Ie, Ib
Forward-Gummel
Vbc, Vbe
Ic, Ib, Isub
Reverse-Gummel
Vbe, Vbc
Ie, Ib, Isub
RE-flyback
Ic, Vbe
Ie, Vce
RCC-active
Vbc, Vbe
Ic, Ib, Isub
Output characteristic
Ib 1/4 Ib,set, 1/2 Ib,set
Ic, Ib, Isub
Vce, Vcb,max
Ic, Isub, Vbe
Base-emitter
depletion capacitance
Vbe–Vbe,max
Cbe
Base-collector
depletion capacitance
Vbc–Vcb,max
Cbc
Substrate-collector
depletion capacitance
Vsc–Vcb,max
Csc
s-parameters
Vcb1, Vcb2, Vcb3,
Ic, Ib, s-par
In order to extract the model parameters, several measurements are performed
at different biasing conditions at room temperature (see Table 9.3). The d.c. charac-
terisation is done using the experimental setup described above. The purpose is to
extract as many transistor parameters as possible from d.c. measurements [15,16] and
minimise the number of unknown parameters requiring numerical optimisation [68]
for fitting them in the VBIC model.
As a first step, the forward and reverse Gummel plots are measured. In order to
measure the forward Gummel characteristics of the transistor, a HP-4145B or equiva-
lent that can be programmed as a voltage or current source is used. For measuring the
Gummel characteristics, the instrument is programmed to sweep emitter-base voltage
(Vbe) from 0 to 1 V. Ie, Ib and Ic are measured. The reverse junction voltage used
should be set at 0 V to avoid the generation of avalanche/tunnelling currents and
self-heating. For the reverse Gummel characteristics, the same technique is used but
in reverse operation, when the emitter and collector leads are interchanged. From the
forward Gummel data (linear part of ln(Ic) vs. Vbe curve) estimates for IS and NF
are made while NR is determined from the slope of ln(Ie) vs. Vbc curve of reverse
Gummel data. The base-emitter ideal (IBEI/NEI) and non-ideal (IBEN/NEN) param-
eters are estimated from the ideal and non-ideal portions in ln(Ib) vs. Vbe curve of
the forward Gummel plot, respectively. Similarly, base-collector ideal (IBCI/NCI)
and non-ideal (IBCN/NCN) parameters are extracted from the ln(Ib) vs. Vbc curve of
reverse Gummel plot.

HBT: compact models
319
The forward current gain (βF) is plotted as the ratio of the measured collector
current (Ic) to the base current (Ib) and reverse current gain (βR) as the ratio of the
measured emitter current (Ie) to the base current (Ib). The knee currents are the high
injection currents at which the current gain, β, starts to decrease from its peak value.
From the forward β vs. Ic and reverse β vs. Ie curves estimates are made for IKF and
IKR, respectively. IK refers to a collector current where β drops to half of its peak
value. The parasitic pnp transistor parameters are determined from substrate current
in the reverse Gummel plot, because the base-collector junction is forward biased
and the parasitic transistor is conducting. If there is no substrate terminal available
for a device, a p-n diode is generally used to model the parasitic substrate effects
associated with the extrinsic base instead of a pnp transistor [25].
The output characteristics of the SiGe HBTs are measured using either forced-
voltage (Vbe = constant) or a forced-current (Ib = constant). In the measurement
(Vce) is swept and Ic is measured. For analog design, the Early voltage (VE) is
very important. Physically, VE accounts for the amount of basewidth modulation
due to change in the collector-base reverse voltage. Experimentally, forward VEF
and reverse VER Early voltages are obtained from the low-bias forward and reverse
output characteristics and the junction capacitances; base-emitter CJE (Vbe,PE,ME)
and collector-base CJC (Vbc,PE,MC), respectively [28].
As device dimensions shrink, the self-heating effect becomes more important.
Although negligible at a very low injection (Ic < 1 µA) level, it becomes extremely
important at high injection (Ic > 1 mA) level. Therefore, VE estimation using forced-
Vbe, at high injection levels, is expected to rapidly degrade due to the self-heating
effect, as Ic increases sharply even with a small increase in Vcb. On the other hand,
forced-Ib output characteristics at high injection will show a negative slope in the Ic
vs. Vce characteristics due to an increase in Is with Vcb. Extraction of VE becomes
difficult under such conditions. Fortunately, owing to higher thermal conductivity
of Si, although self-heating being present at all temperatures, the variation in Ic at
low temperatures is small. It has been reported that self-heating has a much stronger
degrading effect on VE as opposed to the degradation in VE due to base pushout or
barrier effect at high injection [70].
The output characteristics of a bipolar transistor normally exhibit a quasi-
saturation and/or high injection effects that are used to extract the epilayer parameters
[31, 45–47]. The output characteristics are measured at three different values of the
base currents and epilayer parameters (VO, RCI, HRCF and GAMM) are extracted
[25]. During the weak avalanche breakdown parameters extraction, the Vbe voltage
is kept constant and Vcb is increased until the avalanche breakdown occurred [31]. To
avoid the high current effects and internal heating, the base-emitter voltage is set to
a low value. Forward weak avalanche breakdown parameters AVC1 and AVC2 have
been extracted and optimised [31].
The next step is the inclusion of the finite base, collector and emitter resistances
in the VBIC model [71]. The emitter resistance (RE) is determined by stimulating the
base with a current in strong saturation and measuring the collector-emitter voltage
(Vce). The collector current is kept small (typically < 1 µA) and the applied base
current is swept up to 10 mA. The inverse of the gradient of characteristics can then
be used to obtain RE. The measurement of the collector resistance (RC) is similar

320
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
to the emitter resistance. Here, current is applied to the base and collector, and
the collector-emitter voltage (Vce) is measured. The Ib −Vce characteristics for two
collector current values are measured and the collector resistance is determined from
the ratio of Vce voltage difference to collector current difference.
The distributed nature of the base resistance makes it difficult to model. Non-
linear effects of the base resistance with the base current have been incorporated in
the SGP model in a rather simple manner. In VBIC model, the base resistances of the
intrinsic and parasitic transistors are bias-dependent and the resistances are modulated
by the normalized base charges. The base resistances RBI and RBX are obtained from
the Gummel plot [71] and further refined by optimising a fit to the experimental data
as described later.
The thermal network shown in Figure 9.3 is used to model self-heating. Self-
heating is a process causing an increase in temperature due to thermal dissipation of
current flowing through a resistive element. A transistor’s electrical response is deeply
coupled to its internal (and surrounding) temperatures. A change in temperature will
affect currents, which in turn affects the temperature. It is important to model this
relation between temperature and electrical behaviour of a transistor, especially when
dealing with high currents such as in power amplifier circuits. At a high power level,
the heat generated in the device raises the internal junction temperature, which in turn
alters current gain (β) or Vbe. The decrease of β with increasing dissipated power
results in a negative differential output resistance (NDR) due to the self-heating in the
device. Iftheambienttemperatureisincreased, β decreasesandIc−Vce characteristics
drop to a low collector current level.
To determine the thermal resistance, Dawson et al. [72] and Bovolon et al. [73]
have suggested a fitting of a linear relationship between β or Vbe and the junction
temperature. However, fitting to such a linear relation has been questioned [74]. As
forward current gain of SiGe HBTs (see Figure 9.10) at different temperatures is found
to be non-linear, we adopted the extraction technique developed by Marsh et al. [74]
in which any nonlinearity in β or Vbe and the junction temperature becomes irrelevant.
In order to extract the thermal resistance parameters measurements are performed
at various biasing conditions and different temperatures. The d.c. characterisation of
the devices, in common-emitter configuration using a probe station with a thermal
chuck having a temperature control of ±0.5 ◦C, is carried out using a HP-4145B
semiconductor parameter analyser. To avoid breakdown of the transistor, the base-
collector voltage is kept below the breakdown voltage of the transistor.
The mean device junction temperature (Tj) can be expressed as
Tj = Tsubs + RthPdiss = Tsubs + Rth(VCEIc + VbeIb)
(9.11)
where Rth is the thermal resistance, Pdiss is the power dissipation and Tsubs is the
substrate temperature. If three substrate temperatures (T1 < T2 < T3) are chosen
to be equally spaced (T), the mean device junction temperature can be solved
using Equation (9.11) for three dissipated power levels, at fixed Ib and Ic and

HBT: compact models
321
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
10–6
10–5
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
Collector current (A)
28 °C
38 °C
48 °C
58 °C
Gain (Ic/IB)
Figure 9.10
Forward current gain of a SiGe HBT at different temperature [After
B. Senapati, ‘Modelling and Characterisation of SiGe-HBTs for RF
Applications’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur,
2001]
is given by Reference 74
Tj = T2 + T
P2
P3
−P2
P1

/
P2
P3
+ P2
P1
−2

(9.12)
whereP1, P2 andP3 arethedissipatedpowerscorrespondingtosubstratetemperatures
T1, T2 and T3, respectively.
The mean device junction temperature is calculated using Equation (9.12) at a
fixed base current (Ib = 300 µA) for T1 = 28 ◦C, T2 = 43 ◦C, and T3 = 58 ◦C from
the output characteristics as shown in Figure 9.11. The thermal resistance (Rth) is
computed at three dissipated powers P1, P2 and P3 using Equations (9.11) and (9.12).
To find the effect of Rth on Pdiss, Rth is computed at different dissipated power levels
in a similar manner. Thermal resistance is found to increase linearly with power
dissipation (see Figure 9.12) and is due to the decreasing thermal conductivity of
Si/SiGe with the temperature.
It may be noted that the accuracy of the extracted Rth values is influenced by the
substratetemperatureandthetemperaturedifference(T)usedduringmeasurements.
It should also be emphasised that the thermal resistance should be extracted under
a high self-heating biasing condition such that the three points are obtained in the
saturation region of the transistor output characteristics (see Figure 9.11). The thermal
resistance of double-mesa SiGe HBTs has been calculated and a dependence on
temperature and on dissipated power similar to GaAs has been found [75].

322
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
28 °C
43 °C
58 °C
50
40
30
20
10
0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Collector-emitter voltage, Vce (V)
Collector current, Ic (mA)
P3
P2
P1
200 A
100 A
300 A
Figure 9.11
Temperature dependence of forward output characteristics of a SiGe
HBT. Self-heating occurs at a high injection level [After B. Senapati,
‘Modelling and Characterization of SiGe-HBTs for RF Applications’,
PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 2001]
Dissipated power (W)
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
800
750
700
650
600
550
500
450
400
Thermal resistance (°C/W)
Rth (Expt.)
Rth = 424.8 + 3059.2xPdiss
Figure 9.12
Extracted thermal resistance as a function of dissipated power at Ib =
300 µA [After B. Senapati, ‘Modelling and Characterization of SiGe-
HBTs for RF Applications’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, 2001]

HBT: compact models
323
The junction capacitances are extracted from capacitance-voltage (C–V)
measurements at 1 MHz using the setup shown in Figure 9.9. The depletion capaci-
tance data should be taken in a forward bias condition up to a point until the diffusion
capacitance kicks in. A rule of thumb is to use a voltage up to a value when the
capacitance becomes two to three times the zero-bias capacitance. From Cbe(Vbe)
data, CJE, PE and ME are determined while CJC, PC and MC are determined from
Cbc(Vbc) data using a non-linear least-square optimisation [16].
Transit time (τF) is commonly determined from cut-off frequency. The cut-off
frequency is obtained from s-parameter measurements (up to 10 GHz) in the com-
mon emitter configuration by extrapolating |h21|. The s-parameter measurements are
carried out using an HP-8510B vector network analyser at room temperature. All par-
asitic components associated with resistance, inductance and capacitance of probes,
pads and interconnects have been successfully de-embedded [76,77]. The input and
output RF connections of transistor fixture are made through SMA connectors (50 
).
Regulated d.c. power supplies are connected through bias-T network for biasing the
transistor. As a small increase in Vbe can cause a large base-emitter current swing that
could destroy the transistor, precaution must be taken. After all the connections are
made, Vbe is set to +0.75 V and Vce is then slowly increased. This would help protect-
ingthetransistorbase-emitterjunctionbylimitingbase-emittercurrentflow. fT ismea-
sured at two Vce values as a function of collector current. The forward transit time (τF)
is obtained from the intercept of the 1/(2πfT) vs. 1/Ic curve. The voltage and current-
dependent parameters (VTF, ITF) of the transit time are estimated by optimisation.
Several precautions necessary during the measurements are listed below:
•
All measurements should be taken from the same location (die) of a chip.
•
To generate scalable model parameters, the dimensions of the measured devices
have to be known. In most cases, design rules and mask geometries are
sufficient. For the emitter-base and base-collector region, however, SEM photos
are preferred to obtain as accurate as possible structural data.
•
s-parameters are preferred to be provided as raw data, that is, not de-embedded.
As a consequence, data of the corresponding OPEN (and SHORT) structures are
also required not only for de-embedding but also for checking the quality of the
measurements. This way, effort for extracting model parameters on inconsistent
or incorrect data can be avoided.
9.7
VBIC model implementation in SPICE
The use of scalable models allows designers to pick the right device for their appli-
cation without being constrained to a finite library of pre-approved devices. The
statistical model also allows the designers to explore the actual design space with
a tighter design tolerance. For their own technology development, researchers from
IBM have developed a fully scalable, statistical GP model for the SiGe HBTs without
sacrificing model accuracy, flexibility or usability [78,79]. Proper scaling of the emit-
ter area and perimeter with drawn dimensions is crucial to developing a scalable model
for an npn transistor. Tight process control significantly simplifies the development
of an accurate statistical model.

324
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Base-emitter voltage, Vbe (V)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
10–1
10–3
10–5
10–7
10–9
10–11
Measured IB and IC
VBIC Model
IC and IB (A)
Figure 9.13
Forward Gummel plot of a SiGe HBT: measured and simulated using
VBIC model [After B. Senapati, ‘Modelling and Characterization
of SiGe-HBTs for RF Applications’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kharagpur, 2001]
Extracted d.c. and a.c. parameters of the SiGe HBTs are implemented in the VBIC
model using Fortran pseudo-code program [23,80,81]. Figures 9.13 and 9.14 show
the forward and reverse Gummel plots of a SiGe HBT, respectively. Measured data is
presented by open circle and the VBIC model by a solid line. The extracted ideality
factor from the Gummel plot is found to be approximately 1.0, indicating that the
device has not suffered from boron out-diffusion into the emitter. Forward and reverse
current gain is shown in Figure 9.15. The maximum forward and reverse current gain
at room temperature are found to be 170 and 12, respectively.
The forward output characteristics with self-heating is shown in Figure 9.16. Mea-
sured data is represented using open circle, the SGP model by a dashed line, and the
VBIC model by a solid line. The negative slope in the forward output characteris-
tics at a high level injection shows the importance of self-heating in the transistor,
which is dependent on the quiescent operating point. As the device begins to operate
at a high power level, the heat generated raises the internal junction temperature,
which in turn alters the Vbe. The GP model fails to predict this important effect,
while VBIC captures the shift with an accurate electrothermal model. It is also
noted that owing to a very high base doping concentration (∼3 × 1019/cm−3) the
basewidth modulation by the base-collector voltage is less pronounced, leading to a
highEarlyvoltageof40V.ThereverseoutputcharacteristicsofSiGeHBTsisshownin
Figure 9.17.

HBT: compact models
325
Base-collector voltage, Vbc (V)
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
10–6
10–7
Measured IE and IB
VBIC model
IE and IB (A)
Figure 9.14
Reverse Gummel plot of a SiGe HBT: measured and simulated using
VBIC model [After B. Senapati, ‘Modelling and Characterization
of SiGe-HBTs for RF Applications’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kharagpur, 2001]
100
10–10
10–8
10–6
10–4
10–2
100
101
102
IC or IE (A)
Reverse gain, (IE/IB)
Forward Gain, (IC/IB)
Measured gain
VBIC model
101
102
103
Figure 9.15
Forward and reverse d.c. current gain of a SiGe HBT: measured and
simulated using VBIC model [After B. Senapati, ‘Modelling and Char-
acterization of SiGe-HBTs for RF Applications’, PhD Thesis, Indian
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 2001]

326
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Collector-emitter voltage, Vce (V)
Measured Ic
VBIC Model
SGP Model
Collector current, IC (mA)
Sweep IB: 25 to 175 A
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
1
2
3
Figure 9.16
Measured and simulated forward output characteristics with self-
heating effect for a SiGe HBT. Note that the VBIC model prediction
is superior to that of by SGP [After B. Senapati, ‘Modelling and Char-
acterization of SiGe-HBTs for RF Applications’, PhD Thesis, Indian
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 2001]
Emitter-collector voltage, Vec (V)
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.0
Measured IE
VBIC model
 Emitter current, IE (mA)
Sweep IB: 9mA to 45 A
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Figure 9.17
Reverse output characteristics: measured and simulated using VBIC
model [After B. Senapati, ‘Modelling and Characterization of SiGe-
HBTs for RF Applications’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, 2001]

HBT: compact models
327
20
15
10
5
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
Collector-emitter voltage, VCE (V)
Sweep IB: 25 to 125 A
Collector current, IC (mA)
Measured IC
VBIC model
SGP model
Figure 9.18
Measured and simulated forward output characteristics including
avalanche multiplication and self-heating effects for a SiGe HBT. The
VBIC model predicts more accurately the avalanche multiplication and
the self-heating effect [After B. Senapati, ‘Modelling and Characteri-
zation of SiGe-HBTs for RF Applications’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute
of Technology, Kharagpur, 2001]
The forward output characteristics with an avalanche breakdown and self-heating
effect is shown in Figure 9.18. It can be seen that the VBIC model predicts more accu-
rately the transition between the saturation and linear region, which makes possible a
better prediction of current gain in the linear region. The difference becomes larger as
the bias is increased and the device goes into breakdown via avalanche multiplication
effect. It is also noted that the quasi-saturation effect is negligible, which reduces the
d.c. current gain due to high injection, as does the unity gain cut-off frequency.
Figure 9.19 shows a typical cut-off frequency characteristics for two collector bias
condition. Measured data is represented by solid dots and the VBIC by a solid line.
It is observed that the VBIC model predicts fT reasonably well when the device is
operated in the linear region and also when the device is pushed into near breakdown.
Accurate modelling of these effects is critical for high frequency design where an
accurate description of the device bandwidth is required over a broad bias range.
Several important VBIC model parameters (extracted and optimised) are listed in
Table 9.4.
Parameter extraction is closely related to the process and parameter extrac-
tion procedures and list of test structures needed for various parameters extraction
are generally made available by the model developer. For example, for HICUM,
the parameter determination methodology has been described in more detail in
References 82 and 83. Mostly, the parameters can be determined using standard

328
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Measured fT
VBIC model
Collector current (A)
10–5
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
10–0
50
40
30
20
10
0
Cut-off frequency (GHz)
Vce = 1 V
Vce = 3 V
Figure 9.19
Measured and simulated cut-off frequency vs. collector current for
a SiGe HBT [After B. Senapati, ‘Modelling and Characterization
of SiGe-HBTs for RF Applications’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kharagpur, 2001]
Table 9.4
Extracted and optimised VBIC model parameters of a SiGe HBT at room
temperature[AfterB.Senapati, ‘ModellingandCharacterizationofSiGe-
HBTs for RF Applications’, PhD Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, 2001.]
Extracted value
Optimised value
IS = 2.5621e-15A, NF = 1.01, NR = 1.03
IS = 4.6221e-15A, NF = 1.0, NR = 1.02
IBEI = 5.5433e-17A, NEI = 1.049
IBEI = 5.5433e-17A, NEI = 1.023
IBEN = 7.4573e-13A, NEN = 2.0
IBEN = 1.4573e-13A, NEN = 2.0
IBCI = 1.543e-16A, NCI = 1.057
IBCI = 2.548e-16A, NCI = 1.035
IBCN = 1.4127e-12A, NCN = 1.55
IBCN = 3.68e-12A, NCN = 1.64
IKF = 5.5e-2A, IKR = 1e-2A
IKF = 2.5e-2A, IKR = 1e-2A
VEF = 40V, VER = 32.5V
VEF = 45V, VER = 39V
RBX = 5.26
, RBI = 30.01
RBX = 2.03
, RBI = 25
RE = 2.81
, RCI = 11.8
RE = 1.51
, RCI = 5.2
GAMM = 2e-11, VO = 1, HRCF = 2
GAMM = 2.5e-11, VO = 1, HRCF = 2
AVC1 = 2, AVC2 = 15, RTH = 424 ◦C/W
AVC1 = 2.5, AVC2 = 20, RTH = 400 ◦C/W
CJE = 105fF, PE = 0.75, ME = 0.35
CJE = 95fF, PE = 0.76, ME = 0.36
CJC = 79fF, PC = 0.71, MC = 0.38
CJC = 38fF, PC = 0.72, MC = 0.42
TF = 4ps, XTF = 5, ITF = 1.2e-1
TF = 3.7ps, XTF = 5, ITF = 3.7e-1

HBT: compact models
329
measurement equipment. A detailed description of the parameter extraction method-
ology for all advanced models such as VBIC, HICUM and MEXTRAM for a variety
of bipolar processes is available in the respective user manuals.
VBIC and HICUM models have been applied for d.c. modelling of state-of-the-
art SiGe and SiGeC HBTs. A comparison is made also with the SGP model [84–89].
The compared effects in SiGe HBTs include Early effect, quasi-saturation, substrate
parasitic, avalanche multiplication and self-heating. Extracted d.c. parameters of
the SiGe HBTs were implemented in the VBIC and HICUM models using APLAC
simulation tool [90].
Figures 9.20 and 9.21 show the forward and reverse Gummel plots of a SiGe
HBT, and Figures 9.22 and 9.23 show the corresponding current gains, respectively.
Measured data is presented by a solid line, SGP model by open upward triangle,
VBIC model by open square and HICUM model by open circle with line. In general,
the fitting is good. The decrease of β with increasing dissipated power in the device
results in a negative differential output resistance (NDR) owing to the self-heating in
the device (see Figure 9.24). The GP model fails to predict this important self-heating
effect [91], while VBIC and HICUM capture the shift with an accurate electrother-
mal model. It is clear that quasi-saturation [25] and weak avalanche [27,92] effects
are satisfactorily modelled in both HICUM and VBIC. This avalanche modelling is
important in view of application in power amplifier circuits in complex modulation
Measured Ib, Ic
VBIC model
HICUM model
GP model
Base-emitter voltage, Vbe (V)
Ic, I b (A)
10–1
10–3
10–5
10–7
10–9
10–11
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ic
Ib
Figure 9.20
Forward Gummel plot of a SiGe HBT [After A. Chakravorty, Compact
Modelling of Si-Heterostructure Bipolar Transistors and Active Induc-
tor Design for RF Applications,
PhD Thesis,
IIT Kharagpur,
2005]

330
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Measured
VBIC model
GP model
Base-collector voltage, Vbc (V)
Ie, Ib (A)
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
10–6
10–7
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1.0
0.9
Ie
Ib
Figure 9.21
Reverse Gummel plot [After A. Chakravorty, Compact Modelling of
Si-Heterostructure Bipolar Transistors and Active Inductor Design for
RF Applications, PhD Thesis, IIT Kharagpur, 2005]
Measured Ib, Ic
VBIC model
HICUM model
GP model
Collector current, Ic (A)
102
104
106
10–13
10–11
10–9
10–7
10–5
10–3
10–1
101
103
Forward gain (Ic/Ib)
Figure 9.22
Forward d.c. current gain [After A. Chakravorty, Compact Modelling
of Si-Heterostructure Bipolar Transistors and Active Inductor Design
for RF Applications, PhD Thesis, IIT Kharagpur, 2005]

HBT: compact models
331
Measured Ib, Ic
VBIC model
GP model
Emitter current, Ie (A)
100
101
102
10–2
10–4
10–6
10–8
100
Reverse gain, (Ie/Ib)
Figure 9.23
Reverse d.c. current gain [After A. Chakravorty, Compact Modelling
of Si-Heterostructure Bipolar Transistors and Active Inductor Design
for RF Applications, PhD Thesis, IIT Kharagpur, 2005]
Measured
VBIC model
HICUM model
GP Model
Colector-emitter voltage, Vce (V)
Collector current, Ic (A)
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
lb Sweep : 25 to 125 A
0
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 9.24
Forward output characteristics [After A. Chakravorty, Compact Mod-
elling of Si-Heterostructure Bipolar Transistors and Active Inductor
Design for RF Applications, PhD Thesis, IIT Kharagpur, 2005]

332
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Measured
VBIC model
HICUM model
GP model
Emitter-collector voltage, Vec (V)
Emitter current, Ie (A)
0.0007
0.0006
0.0005
0.0004
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001
0.0000
–0.0001
Ib Sweep : 9 to 45 A
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
Figure 9.25
Reverse output characteristics of a SiGe HBT [After A. Chakravorty,
Compact Modelling of Si-Heterostructure Bipolar Transistors and
Active Inductor Design for RF Applications,
PhD Thesis,
IIT
Kharagpur, 2005]
systems [93]. The reverse output characteristics of a SiGe HBT shown in Figure 9.25
shows that the predictions using the VBIC model with the extracted parameters
compare favourably with the experimental data for advanced SiGe HBTs. A closer
look reveals that in the forward high current region HICUM model performs better,
whereas the VBIC model is more suitable for both the forward and reverse regions of
SiGe HBTs.
9.8
TRADICA
TRADICA (TRAnsistor DImensioning and CAlculation program) work started in
1986 at Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany [94]. Although it was initially developed
as a transistor dimensioning tool, TRADICA can also be used as a model generation
and prediction tool. TRADICA contains the geometry dependent formulations that
are required to generate model parameters for bipolar transistor models for various
processes (such as double-poly self-aligned transistor structures). TRADICA takes
process-specific and model-specific parameters as well as geometry description to
generate model parameters for transistors of various configurations, which are defined
by emitter width and length, number of emitter, base and collector contacts (stripes),
and their spatial arrangement. Presently, the program generates a hierarchy of SGP
and HICUM models in SPICE format, which can be included in the usual transistor

HBT: compact models
333
library. Input data for TRADICA are as follows:
1.
electrical data, such as sheet resistances, capacitances per unit area and periphery
length, including transistor model specific data such as currents per area, transit
time and so on;
2.
geometry data defined by cross-sections and top-views (design rules, emitter
dimensions);
3.
physical data such as mobilities, temperature coefficients and electromigration
limit;
4.
process-related data such as doping concentrations (optional), certain vertical
dimensions and process tolerances;
5.
operating point information (only for calculating the critical emitter area).
Model parameter determination is based on test structures, mostly transistors, but also
process monitors. The program, which connects process and circuit design, offers the
following advantages over conventional bipolar transistor modelling approaches:
•
The flexibility of the method facilitates quick generation of a large number of
transistor configurations once the parameter extraction is finished, making the
approach significantly more efficient in terms of parameter extraction and more
flexible from a design point of view with respect to circuit optimisation.
•
Since the approach is physical and based on process monitors, it facilitates pre-
diction of the influence of process tolerances on device and circuit performance,
and eventually statistical design.
•
Parameters for transistors not existing on the test chip can also be generated for
circuit design at any time, before and during process development, supporting
concurrent design. As a result, the number of design cycles and time to market
can be significantly reduced.
•
Given specific parameters extracted from an arbitrary wafer, TRADICA can
shift model parameters for wafers subject to various process variations based
on respective process control monitor (PCM) data and analytical prediction
equations.
9.9
Scalable modelling: SiGe/SiGeC HBTs
As the complexity of the circuit increases, scalable device models are crucial for
the circuit design. An accurate modelling of key parameters is essential for accurate
circuit behaviour prediction and circuit design optimisation. From the design point
of view, it is desirable to be able to vary the transistor dimension, defined by the
emitter width and length together with the number of contacts for base, emitter and
collector. Circuit designers need a large range of transistor dimensions for various
applications. For example, when designing a low-noise amplifier, the specifications
for bandwidth and noise have to be satisfied simultaneously. As the maximum speed
and minimum noise in a transistor do generally not occur at the same bias point, one
has to properly select the transistor sizes that give the best overall circuit performance.

334
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
A geometry scalable compact model requires that all of its equivalent circuit elements
are described as a function of layout dimensions [82,95–97].
To serve the design engineers reliably and effectively through design kits, fast
generation of the model parameters for a wide range of transistor sizes is very impor-
tant in a new technology. It is important to note that geometry effects are not only
dependent on the device dimensions but also, for given dimensions, on bias and
frequency, which make transistor geometry scaling a difficult task.
Scaling becomes even more complicated for the elements of the substrate and the
thermal network due to the large variety of layouts and device designs, for example,
junctionisolation, deeptrench, SOIandmetallisation[98,99]. Differentsetsofscaling
equations are needed for these cases. Since a complete description of the scaling
equations for bipolar transistors is beyond the scope of this book, the reader is referred
to References 2,63 and 94, and the references therein.
As SiGe technology has become the key technology for the wireless commu-
nications market, it is important to understand the scalability of this technology.
Standard CMOS models, such as MOS model 11 [100] and BSIM4 [101] give
quite reliable scaling results since they describe only lateral current flow in MOS
devices. On the other hand, scaling of bipolar transistor model parameters is sig-
nificantly more involving due to current flow in both vertical and lateral directions.
Moreover, the scaling rules depend on the layout configuration, device cross-section
and processing data. As a consequence, the geometry scalable bipolar transistor
models and procedures are not generally available. Advanced compact models like
VBIC, HICUM and MEXTRAM came to play with their intuitive mathematical
formulation to model the physical effects such as quasi-saturation, basewidth mod-
ulation, weak avalanche, self-heating and so forth, which were not considered in
SGP [61,83,102,103].
Work on bipolar transistor scaling so far has generally considered the SGP model,
which is inadequate to handle device scaling across a wide range of device sizes, and
more sophisticated substitutes are necessary [23]. A scalable, statistical model has
been developed by IBM for SiGe HBTs [53,104], which are components of a com-
mercially available BiCMOS technology for high frequency applications. IBM has
implemented a model for their SiGe HBT process [105], in which SGP parameters are
scaled from input layout dimensions using simple equations. The SGP model param-
eters were scaled, and statistics added, using language features built into HSPICE.
The resulting fit, for both d.c. and a.c. test conditions have been found to be adequate
for most applications [78]. The device scaling and model statistics have also been
implemented in the SiGe technology. Extraction of scaled MEXTRAM parameters
for high-speed SiGe HBTs based on device physics and general scaling has been
reported by Wu et al. [49].
Correct scaling of the emitter area and perimeter with drawn dimensions is crucial
to developing a scalable model for an npn transistor. The calculations are complicated
by photolithographic diffraction effects that result in rounded corners in the image
developed on the wafer. In very narrow devices, the rounding of the corners can lead to
actual fore-shortening of the emitter length and possibly the width. Figure 9.26 shows
an example of a rectangular emitter with corner-rounding and a narrower emitter with

HBT: compact models
335
Ymax
W/2
Rc
XATAN
Body
Ldrawn
Left
Body
(a)
(b)
(c)
Arc
Edge
Arc
Ymin
Figure 9.26
Schematic illustration of corner-rounding and length fore-shortening:
(a) corner-rounding only, (b) length fore-shortening, and (c) arc detail.
(Note: Width, W, and corner-rounding radius, RC, are in arbitrary
units) [After K. M. Walter et al., IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 33,
1998(1439–1444). ©1998 IEEE]
length fore-shortening as a result of the photo diffraction. A detail of a rounded corner
is also shown.
For analysis, the emitter is divided into three distinct regions: the body, the
edge and the arc. The emitter area is calculated as shown in the equations below.
These equations use the following parameters: Ncr is the corner-rounding radius
L is the statistical emitter length = (LDRAWN −L) W is the statistical emitter
width = (WDRAWN −L) For detail, the reader may refer to the reference [78].
Figure 9.27 shows the ratio of the calculated area to the area of a rectangle with the
same starting dimensions. It is clearly seen that the corner-rounding always reduces
the area, but as the width becomes less than twice the corner-rounding radius, the
actual area decreases rapidly. Normally, the reduction is minor for a nominal emitter,
but statistically the width can easily become less than the critical value.
The statistical change of emitter dimensions from drawn dimensions (prior to
corner-rounding) is calculated by scaling the base current density. The base current
density is limited by the finite recombination velocity at the single crystal-to-polySi
interface. Therefore, with the proper adjustment for photolithographic biases on the

336
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
1
0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Width (m)
% of rectangular area
L = 1.0m
L = w
Figure 9.27
Area reduction due to corner-rounding [After K. M. Walter et al., IEEE
J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 33, 1998(1439–1444). ©1998 IEEE]
image size, the base current density at a given bias will be constant with calculated
perimeter-to-area ratio. This assumes that perimeter effects are minimal because of the
severe limitation imposed by the small recombination velocity at the oxide, making
the current proportional to oxide area only.
Most of the SGP model parameters are then derived from the adjusted areas and
perimeters of the emitter, base and collector areas. Devices with multiple emitter
fingers are handled by modelling a single finger and associated portion of the para-
sitic capacitances, and then multiplying the result by the number of fingers. Once the
emitter area and perimeter are accurately calculated, the major roadblock to a scal-
able model is obtaining an analytical expression for base resistance based on device
geometry. The base resistance was calculated following References 4 and 56.
Measured transistor Gummel plots, which show the collector and base current
response to applied base emitter bias, have been compared with the same model
characteristics over a range of emitter widths from 0.3 to 4.0 µm and lengths from
0.5 to 20.0 µm. Figure 9.28 shows the fit for collector current over the linear portion of
theGummelplotforsub-minimum(0.3×2.5), standard(0.5×2.5)andlarge(4×5)µm
npn transistors.

HBT: compact models
337
0.0001
1E-5
1E-6
1E-7
1E-8
1E-9
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Vbe (V)
Ic (A)
Model 0.3 × 2.5
Model 0.5 × 2.5
Data 0.3 × 2.5
Data 4 × 5
Data 0.5 × 2.5
Model 4 × 5
Figure 9.28
Ic vs. Vbe showing results of emitter scaling [After K. M. Walter et al.,
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 33, 1998(1439–1444). ©1998 IEEE]
Junction capacitances have been determined from low frequency measurements
on structures with large area or perimeter and from scattering parameter (s-parameter)
measurements on a large set of transistors with varying emitter dimension. Parasitic
capacitances associated with various overlaps of electrical junctions have been
extracted from the s-parameter measurements, providing very sensitive extraction
results. Forward transit time has been fit from analysis of s-parameter data (based on
area and perimeter components without parasitics) vs. bias, and fits the model within
±15 per cent. Figure 9.29 illustrates the fit to the fT vs. Ic curve for three transistors,
down to 0.5 × 1.0 µm emitters. Known limitations of the SGP model are evident in
the poorer fit at high current density.
Statistical analysis of in-line manufacturing test data shows that the major compo-
nents of statistical variation in the devices come from (1) emitter size, (2) base pinch
resistance (Rbi) and (3) vertical profile (for instance, in the case where the emitter
doping intersects the germanium profile). As a result of the self-aligned and silicided
extrinsic base, total base resistance is small and insensitive to varying layout. Also,
tight process control significantly simplifies the development of an accurate statistical
model.
Geometry scalable SPICE models for SiGeC HBTs have been proposed by several
researchers, and electrical simulation results are compared with physical simulation
results [106–108]. Also a simple but accurate scalable modelling strategy for SiGeC
HBTs fabricated in a low-cost BiCMOS technology has been reported [109] in VBIC
and HICUM, which offers the designer community a wide range of transistor sizes. In
this approach, only one full extraction on a basic transistor is performed. To simplify
the parameter extraction, emitter length is changed only from a minimum length
(0.84 µm) to a maximum by a factor of four (3.36 µm). To get a large emitter area,

338
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
10–1
100
101
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 9
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 9
Ic (mA)
FI (Ghz)
Model Ft
Data Ft Ae = 0.5 × 1
Data Ft Ae = 0.5 × 2.5
Data Ft Ae = 0.5 × 5
Figure 9.29
Results of scaling on fT [After K. M. Walter et al., IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, Vol. 33, 1998(1439–1444). ©1998 IEEE]
several base-emitter structures in parallel on the top of a single collector is used. With
this procedure one can change the collector current from minimum to biggest device
by a factor of 50. The main advantage of this approach is its simplicity.
Fregonese et al. [108] have developed a geometry scalable substrate network for
HBTs isolated by deep trench in a BiCMOS technology. The doping and dimensions
of the simulated structures are very similar to the 0.25 µm BiCMOS technology from
ST Microelectronics [110]. This technology is characterised by a transit frequency
of 70 GHz. The physical structure is scalable according to all dimensions and resis-
tivities. The length L, the width W of the N well, the resistivity of the substrate, the
substrate contact configuration with respect to its distance d from the deep trench and
its contact width WC were considered in simulation.
The authors have reported a detailed investigation of the substrate impedance as a
function of the device dimensions, of the substrate doping and of the substrate contact
configuration using a commercial physical 3D simulation tool. The deep trenches are
built up with SiO2 walls filled in with polySi. The substrate thickness is about 300 µm.
Owing to its symmetry, only a quarter of the structure was simulated.
The p-n junction and its resistive access RS represent the internal part. This
p-n junction can be modelled with capacitor, which is bias dependent. A capac-
itance, CSUB associated with the material cut-off frequency has been added in
parallel to RS. For a high resistivity substrate, however, this capacitance can-
not be neglected. The implementation of the scalable substrate network has been
added to the HICUM Level 0. The substrate network is connected to the internal

HBT: compact models
339
collector node. This modified HICUM L0 model is scalable and has been imple-
mented in VERILOG-A. A scalable extraction has been performed on the BiCMOS
0.25 µm technology from ST Microelectronics. In order to evaluate the impact of the
substrate network on the electrical characteristics, simulations have been done and
compared with real device measurements.
9.10
Role of TCAD
As discussed above, generating the compact model can be difficult and time-
consuming because of the amount of required data and number of modelling
parameters. Traditionally, TCAD involves process and device experiments only and
has direct impact on the process and device development cycle time. With accurate
process and device simulation early in the development cycle, TCAD may be used
to produce the entire suite of a.c. and d.c. device characteristics and also the pre-
dictive compact model. As the technology development progresses, updates to the
compact models can be provided to ensure the designers will have minimal design
impact from the initial models to final. Thus it is important to understand this new
methodology of combining the TCAD process, device and compact modelling strat-
egy in developing state-of-the-art SiGe technologies. Sheridan et al. [111] have used
the genetic algorithm optimisation techniques for bipolar compact modelling. The
technique uses only a minimal set of extracted parameters together with the use of a
physically bounded genetic algorithm to efficiently optimise a model parameter set.
This significantly reduces the extraction and optimisation effort as well as eliminates
inaccuracies resulting from commonly used fitting methods to approximate model
equations, allowing designers early access to technology models.
Chakravorty et al. [112] have also modelled a low-cost BiCMOS SiGeC HBT
using adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS). Accuracy of the model is
checked for all the d.c. and s-parameters in a wide range of bias and frequencies
and the average error is found to be less than 4 per cent. Especially in high current
and high frequency regions, the ANFIS model is proved to be excellent unlike most
of the physics-based equivalent circuit models that fail to track the actual device
behaviour. The HBT module used for investigation offers fT/fmax/BVceo values of
75 GHz/90 GHz/2.4 V. A schematic for this HBT type is shown in Figure 9.30. The
measurements are performed on a semi-automatic probe shield system from Suss
MicroTec, where d.c. and RF probes are installed simultaneously. Direct current
measurements are carried out using a HP4142 d.c. source from Agilent Technologies
along with Kelvin probes to avoid the influence of contact resistances. The RF mea-
surements are performed using 50 GHz Infinity Probes from Cascade and PNA3568
from Agilent Technologies. OPEN-SHORT de-embedding procedures are preceded
to exclude the pad parasitics. All measurements were done on RF pads. In this way,
the substrate current had to be measured from the wafer backside. Measurements are
guided with ICCAP from Agilent.
Instead of y-parameters, the s-parameters of the device were used to train and
validate the model. Experimental (scattered) as well as the corresponding ANFIS
model simulation (line) data are plotted in Figures 9.31–9.34. From Figure 9.31, it is

340
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Collector
S/C
Emitter
Base
Figure 9.30
Schematic diagram of a low-cost SiGeC HBT. SIC selectively
implanted collector [After A. Chakravorty, Compact Modelling of Si-
Heterostructure Bipolar Transistors and Active Inductor Design for RF
Applications, PhD Thesis, IIT Kharagpur, 2005]
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Base-emitter voltage, Vbe (V)
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
10–6
10–7
10–8
10–9
Ic and Ib (A)
Vbe sweep: 0.61 to 1.03 V
Vce sweep: 0.4 to 2.4 V
Measurement
ANFIS simulation
Figure 9.31
Measured andANFIS-simulated Gummel plots (collector and base cur-
rent data) of SiGeC HBT [After A. Chakravorty, Compact Modelling
of Si-Heterostructure Bipolar Transistors and Active Inductor Design
for RF Applications, PhD Thesis, IIT Kharagpur, 2005]

HBT: compact models
341
1.5
1.2
0.9
0.6
0.3
0.0
–0.6
–0.3
S11 real
0
1 × 1010
2 × 1010
3 × 1010
4 × 1010
Frequency, f (Hz)
Measurement
ANFIS simulation
Vce = 1.2 V
Vbe = 0.8 V, 0.9 V, 1 V
Figure 9.32
Measured and ANFIS-simulated real (s11) data [After A. Chakravorty,
Compact Modelling of Si-Heterostructure Bipolar Transistors and
Active Inductor Design for RF Applications,
PhD Thesis,
IIT
Kharagpur, 2005]
seen that the Ic prediction is accurate, especially in the high current region, where
modern RF circuits operate. Figures 9.32 and 9.33 show the real and imaginary part
of s11 data validation for a range of Vbe (0.8, 0.9 and 1.0 V) with the proposed model.
The mismatch between the measurement and simulation in high frequency region is
due to the fact that lesser amount of training data was available in this area. A good
agreement of model simulation with the measured s21 magnitude data plotted against
the frequency, as seen from Figure 9.34, proves the utility of ANFIS model.
9.11
Summary
The aim of this chapter has been to provide a background for bipolar compact mod-
elling. The main improvements of the VBIC model over the SGP model is the addition
of Early voltage effect, quasi-saturation, substrate parasitic, avalanche multiplication,
self-heating and modelling of the parasitic pnp transistor. A methodology to extract
and optimise d.c. and a.c. parameters for the VBIC model is developed and applied to
SiGe HBTs. The model has been verified and optimized using a VBIC pseudo-code
and an excellent agreement has been found. A comparison of the VBIC and SGP

342
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
S11 imaginary
0
1 ×1010
2×1010
3 ×1010
4 ×1010
Frequency, f (Hz)
Measurement
ANFIS simulation
Vce = 1.2 V
Vbe = 0.8V, 0.9 V, 1V
Figure 9.33
Measured
and
ANFIS-simulated
imaginary
(s11)
data
[After
A. Chakravorty, Compact Modelling of Si-Heterostructure Bipolar
Transistors and Active Inductor Design for RF Applications, PhD
Thesis, IIT Kharagpur, 2005]
25
20
15
10
5
S21 magnitude
0
1×1010
2×1010
3 ×1010
4× 1010
Frequency, f (Hz)
Measurement
ANFIS simulation
Vce = 1.2 V
Vbe = 0.8 V, 0.9 V, 1 V
Figure 9.34
Measured
and
ANFIS-simulated
magnitude
(s21)
data
[After
A. Chakravorty, Compact Modelling of Si-Heterostructure Bipolar
Transistors and Active Inductor Design for RF Applications, PhD
Thesis, IIT Kharagpur, 2005]

HBT: compact models
343
model clearly illustrates the weakness of the conventional SPICE Gummel-Poon
model when applied to advanced SiGe HBTs.
The MEXTRAM model includes a direct coupling between current and charge,
thus leading to coupled d.c. and a.c. behaviour. This has the advantage of a physical
representation of the device, which facilitates accurate scaling. The MEXTRAM
and VBIC bipolar transistor models are comparable for low and medium collector
current densities and frequencies. Parameter conversion from MEXTRAM to VBIC
can easily be done for the depletion capacitances and d.c. parameters related to low
and medium current levels.
HICUMs major advantages over other bipolar models are its scalability, sim-
ple and process-based/related parameter extraction, predictive capability of process
and layout variations, and simple numerical formulation. TCAD tool TRADICA
has also been discussed. ANFIS automates RF modelling as it is technology indepen-
dent, neuro-computing based, intelligent and capable of achieving any predetermined
accuracy limit required.
References
1 C. K. Maiti, and G. A. Armstrong, Applications of Silicon-Germanium
Heterostructure Devices. Inst. of Physics Pub., UK, 2001.
2 M. Schroter, H.-M. Rein, W. Rabe, R. Reimann, H.-J. Wassener, and
A. Koldehoff, ‘Physics and process-based bipolar transistor modelling for inte-
grated circuit design’, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 34, pp. 1136–1149,
1999.
3 H.-M. Rein, and M. Schroter, ‘Experimental determination of the internal base
sheet resistance of bipolar transistors under forward-bias conditions’, Solid State
Electron., vol. 34, pp. 301–308, 1991.
4 M. Schroter, ‘Modelling of the low-frequency base resistance of single
base contact bipolar transistors’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 39,
pp. 1966–1968, 1992.
5 H.-M.Rein, ‘Improvingthelarge-signalmodelsofbipolartransistorsbydividing
the intrinsic base into two lateral sections’, Electron. Lett., vol. 13, pp. 40–41,
1977.
6 M. Pfost, H.-M. Rein, and T. Holzwarth, ‘Modelling substrate effects in the
design of high-speed Si-bipolar ICs’, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31,
pp. 1493–1497, 1996.
7 M. Schroter, M. Friedrich, and H.-M. Rein, ‘A generalized Integral Charge-
Control Relation and its application to compact models for silicon based HBTs’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 40, pp. 2036–2046, 1993.
8 J. Kim, J.-O. Plouchart, N. Zamdmer, N. Fong, M. Sheronv, Y. Tan, et al.,
‘Highly manufacturable 40-50 GHz VCOs in a 120 nm system-on-chip SOI
technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 367–370, 2003.
9 G. Freeman, M. Meghelli, Y. Kwark, S. Zier, A. Rylyakov, M. A. Sorna, et al.,
‘40-Gb/s Circuit Built from a 120-GHz fT SiGe Technology’, IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 1106–1114, 2002.

344
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
10 J. Ebers, and J. Moll, ‘Large-signal behavior of junction transistor’, Proc. IRE,
vol. 42, pp. 1761–1772, 1954.
11 H. K. Gummel, and H. C. Poon, ‘An integrated charge control model of bipolar
transistors’, Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 49, pp. 827–852, 1970.
12 H. K. Gummel, ‘A charge control relation for bipolar transistors’, Bell Syst.
Tech. J., vol. 49, pp. 115–120, 1970.
13 J. L. Moll, and I. M. Ross, ‘The dependence of transistor parameters on
the distribution of base layer resistivity’, Proc. IRE, vol. 44, pp. 72–78,
1956.
14 C. T. Kirk, ‘A theory of transistor cut-off frequency FT falloff at high current
densities’, IRE Trans. Electron Dev., vol. ED-9, pp. 164–174, 1962.
15 I. E. Getreu, Modelling of Bipolar Transistors. Elsevier, NY, 1978.
16 P. Antognetti, and G. Massobrio, Semiconductor Device Modelling with SPICE.
McGraw Hill Book Co., NY, 1987.
17 M. Reisch, High-Frequency Bipolar Transistors. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003.
18 B. Senapati, and C. K. Maiti, ‘Modelling of self-heating effects in SiGe-HBTs’,
in Proc. of 11th Intl. Workshop on Physics of Semiconductor Devices, New Delhi,
2001.
19 X. Cao, J. McMacken, K. Stiles, P. Layman, J. J. Liou, A. Ortiz-Conde,
et al., ‘Comparison of the new VBIC and conventional Gummel-Poon bipo-
lar transistor models’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices., vol. 47, pp. 427–433,
2000.
20 H. C. D. Graaff and W. J. Kloosterman, ‘New formulation of the current and
charge relations in bipolar transistor modelling for CACD Purposes’, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 32, pp. 4215–2419, 1985.
21 H.-M. Rein, and M. Schroter, ‘A compact physical large-signal model for high-
speed bipolar transistors at high current densities - Part II: Two-dimensional
model and experimental results’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 34,
pp. 1752–1761, 1987.
22 A. Koldehoff, M. Schroter, and H.-M. Rein, ‘A compact bipolar transistor
modelforvery-high-frequencyapplicationswithspecialregardtonarrowemitter
stripes and high current densities’, Solid State Electron., vol. 36, pp. 1035–1048,
1993.
23 C. C. McAndrew, J. A. Seitchik, D. F. Bowers, M. Dunn, M. Foisy, I. Getreu,
et al., ‘VBIC95, The vertical bipolar inter-company model’, IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, vol. 31, pp. 1476–1483, 1996.
24 C. C. McAndrew, J. A. Seitchik, D. F. Bowers, M. Dunn, M. Foisy, I. Getreu,
et al., ‘VBIC95: An improved vertical IC bipolar transistor model’, in IEEE
BCTM Proc., pp. 170–177, 1995.
25 G. M. Kull, L. W. Nagel, S.-W. Lee, P. Lloyd, E. J. Prendergast, and
H. K. Dirks, ‘A unified circuit model for bipolar transistors including
quasi-saturation effects’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 32, pp. 1103–1113,
1985.
26 P. B. Weil, and L. P. McNamee, ‘Simulation of excess phase in bipolar
transistors’, IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems, vol. 25, pp. 114–116, 1978.

HBT: compact models
345
27 W. J. Kloosterman, and H. C. de Graaff, ‘Avalanche multiplication in a com-
pact bipolar transistor model for circuit simulation’, in IEEE BCTM Proc.,
pp. 103–106, 1988.
28 C. C. McAndrew, and L. W. Nagel, ‘SPICE early modelling’, in IEEE BCTM
Proc., pp. 144–147, 1994.
29 F. Najm, ‘VBIC95: An improved bipolar transistor model’, IEEE Circuits and
Devices Mag., pp. 11–15, 1996.
30 C. Jacoboni, C. Canali, G. Ottaviani, and A. A. Quaranta, ‘A review of some
charge transport properties of silicon’, Solid State Electron., vol. 20, pp. 77–89,
1977.
31 W. J. Kloosterman, and H. C. de Graaff, ‘Avalanche multiplication in a compact
bipolar transistor model for circuit simulation’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
pp. 1376–1380, 1989.
32 X. Cao, J. McMacken, K. Stiles, P. Layman, J. J. Liou, A. Sun, et al.,
‘Parameter extraction and optimization for new industry standard VBIC
model’, in Intl. Conf. on Advanced Semiconductor Devices and Microsystems,
pp. 107–115, 1998.
33 H. C. De Graaff, and F. M. Klassen, Compact Transistor Modelling for Circuit
Design. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1990.
34 J. C. J. Paasschens, and W. J. Kloosterman, ‘Parameter Extraction for the Bipolar
Transistor Model Mextram - Level 504, Nat Lab Unclassified Report, NL-UR
2001/801, Koninklijke Philips Electronics’, 2001.
35 J. C. J. Paasschens, and W. J. Kloosterman, ‘The Mextram Bipolar Transistor
Model – Level 504, Nat Lab Unclassified Report, NL-UR 2000/811, Koninklijke
Philips Electronics’, 2001.
36 J. C. J. Paasschens, W. J. Kloosterman, and R. vd Toon, ‘Model Derivation
of Mextram 504, Nat Lab Unclassified Report, NL-UR 2002/806, Koninklijke
Philips Electronics’, 2002.
37 L. C. N. de Vreede, H. C. de Graaff, K. Mouthaan, M. de Kok, J. L. Tauritz, and
R. G. F. Baets, ‘Advanced modelling of distorsion effects in bipolar transistors
using the Mextram model’, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31, pp. 114–121,
1996.
38 G. Niu, J. D. Cressler, and A. J. Joseph, ‘Quantifying neutral base recombination
and the effects of collector-base junction traps in UHV/CVD SiGe HBTs’, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 45, pp. 2499–2504, 1998.
39 S. L. Salmon, J. D. Cressler, R. C. Jaeger, and D. L. Harame, ‘The influence
of Ge grading on the bias and temperature characteristics of SiGe HBTs for
precision analog circuits’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 47, pp. 292–298,
2000.
40 W. J. Kloosterman, J. A. M. Geelen, and D. B. M. Klaassen, ‘Efficient parameter
extraction for the Mextram model’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 70–73, 1995.
41 E. Sonmez, A. Trasser, P. Abele, K. B. Schad, and H. Schumacher, ‘Integrated
receiver components for low-cost 26 GHz LMDS applications using an 0.8 µm
SiGe HBT technology’, in 33rd European Microwave Conf., pp. 399–402,
2003.

346
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
42 P. Deixler, H. G. A. Hulzing, J. J. T. M. Donkers, J. H. Klootwijk, D. Hartskeerl,
W. B. de Boer, et al., ‘Explorations for high performance SiGe-heterojunction
bipolar transistor integration’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 30–33, 2001.
43 F. Yuan, Z. Pei, J. W. Shi, S. T. Chang, and C. W. Liu, ‘Mextram modelling of
Si/SiGe heterojunction phototransistors’, in IEEE ISDRS Symp. Dig., pp. 92–93,
2003.
44 J. C. J. Paasschens, W. J. Kloostennan, and R. J. Havens, ‘Modelling two SiGe
HBT specific features for circuit simulation’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 38–41,
2001.
45 J. C. J. Paasschens, W. J. Kloosterman, R. J. Havens, and H. C. de Graaff,
‘Improved compact modelling of output conductance and cut-off frequency of
bipolar transistors’, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 36, pp. 1390–1398, 2001.
46 H. C. de Graaff, and W. J. Kloosterman, ‘Modelling of the collector epilayer
of a bipolar transistor in the Mextram model’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 42, pp. 274–282, 1995.
47 W. J. Kloosterman, J. C. J. Paasschens, and R. J. Havens, ‘A comprehensive
bipolar avalanche multiplication compact model for circuit simulation’, in IEEE
BCTM Proc., pp. 172–175, 2000.
48 S. Mijalkovic, and H. C. de Graaff, ‘Mextram 504 for SiGe HBT applications’,
in Workshop on Semiconductor Advances for Future Electronics, pp. 115–122,
2001.
49 H. C. Wu, S. Mijalkovic, and J. N. Burghartz, ‘Parameter extraction of scalable
Mextram model for high-speed SiGe HBTs’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 140–143,
2004.
50 E. Sonmez, W. Durr, P. Abele, K.-B. Schad, and H. Schumacher, ‘Parameter
extraction of SiGe HBTs for a scalable MEXTRAM model and performance
verification by a SiGe HBT MMIC active receive mixer design for 11 GHz’,
in Topical Meeting on Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits in RF Systems,
pp. 159–162, 2000.
51 U. Erben, and E. Sonmez, ‘Fully differential 5 to 6 GHz low noise amplifier
using SiGe HBT technnology’, Electron. Lett., vol. 40, pp. 39–40, 2004.
52 W. C. Hua, T. Y. Yang, and C. W. Liu, ‘The comparison of isolation technolo-
gies and device models on SiGe bipolar low noise amplifier’, Appl. Surf. Sci.,
vol. 224, pp. 425–428, 2004.
53 D. Sheridan, M. R. Murty, W. Ansley, and D. Harame, ‘IBM Bipolar Model
Standardization: VBIC-MEXTRAM-HICUM, Compact Model Counsil (CMC)
Meeting’, 2002.
54 H. Stubing,
and H.-M. Rein,
‘A compact physical large signal model
for high speed bipolar transistors at high current densities Part I: One-
dimensional model’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-34, pp. 1741–1751,
1987. see also correspondence in IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 35,
pp. 1995–1997, 1988.
55 M. Schroter, and H.-M. Rein, ‘Transit time of high-speed bipolar transistors in
dependence on operating point, technological parameters, and temperature’, in
IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 85–88, 1991.

HBT: compact models
347
56 M. Schroter and H.-M. Rein, ‘Simulation and modelling of the low-frequency
base resistance of bipolar transistors in dependence on current and geometry’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 38, pp. 538–544, 1991.
57 H.-M. Rein, H. Stubing, and M. Schroter, ‘Verification of the integral charge-
control relation for high-speed bipolar transistors at high current densities’, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 32, pp. 1070–1076, 1985.
58 M. Schroter, and H.-M. Rein, ‘Investigation of very fast and high-current tran-
sients in digital bipolar circuits by using a new compact model and a device
simulator’, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 30, pp. 551–562, 1995.
59 M. Schroter, Z. Yan, T.-Y Lee, and W. Shi, ‘A compact tunnelling current and
collector breakdown model’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 203–206, 1998.
60 M. Schroter, and T.-Y. Lee, ‘A physics-based minority charge and transit
time model for bipolar transistors’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 46,
pp. 288–300, 1999.
61 M. Schroter, and H. Tran, ‘Modelling of base-collector junction related effects in
heterojunction bipolar transistors’, in Intl NanoTech Meeting Dig., pp. 102–107,
2004.
62 S. Wilms, and H.-M. Rein, ‘Analytical high-current model for the transit time
of SiGe HBTs’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 199–202, 1998.
63 M. Schroter, HICUM – A scalable physics-based compact bipolar transistor
model, ver. 2.1, 2000.
64 M. Schroter, ‘Staying current with HICUM’, IEEE Circuits and Devices
Magazine, vol. 18, pp. 16–25, 2002.
65 M. Schroter, H. Jiang, S. Lehmann, and S. Komarow, ‘HICUM/Level0 –
A simplified compact bipolar transistor model’,
in IEEE BCTM Proc.,
pp. 112–115, 2002.
66 C. C. McAndrew, and L. W. Nagel, ‘Early effect modelling in SPICE’, IEEE J.
Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31, pp. 136–138, 1996.
67 S. Mijalkovic, ‘Generalized Early factor for compact modelling of bipolar
transistors with non-uniform base’, Electron. Lett., vol. 39, pp. 1757–1758,
2003.
68 J. A. Seitchik, C. F. Machala, and P. Yang, ‘The determination of SPICE
Gummel-Poon parameters by a merged optimization-extraction techniques’, in
IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 275–278, 1989.
69 B. Senapati, Modelling and Characterization of SiGe-HBTs for RF Applications.
PhD thesis, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 2001.
70 J. S. Yuan, ‘Base pushout effect on collector signal delay and Early voltage for
Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors’, Solid State Electron., vol. 36, pp. 657–660,
1993.
71 Application Note 315, Practical Applications of the 4145B Semiconductor
Parameter Analyzer, 1987.
72 D. E. Dawson, A. K. Gupta, and M. L. Salib, ‘CW measurement of HBT thermal
resistance’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 39, pp. 2235–2239, 1992.
73 N. Bovolon, P. Baureis J. E. Muller, P. Zwicknagl, R. Schultheis, and E. Zanoni,
‘A simple method for the thermal resistance measurement of AlGaAs/GaAs

348
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
heterojunction bipolar transistors’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 45,
pp. 1846–1848, 1998.
74 S. P. Marsh, ‘Direct extraction technique to derive the junction temperature of
HBT’s under high self-heating bias conditions’, IEEE Electron Devices, vol. 47,
pp. 288–291, 2000.
75 F. X. Sinnesbichler, and G. R. Olbrich, ‘Electro-thermal large-signal mod-
elling of SiGe HBTs’, in 29th European Microwave Conf., pp. 125–128,
1999.
76 J. M. M. Rios, L. M. Lunardi, S. Chandrasekhar, and Y. Miyamoto, ‘A self-
consistent method for complete small-signal parameter extraction of InP-based
heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBT’s)’, IEEE Trans. Microwave Th. and
Tech., vol. 45, pp. 39–45, 1997.
77 D. Costa, W. U. Liu, and J. S. Harris, ‘Direct extraction of the AlGaAs/GaAs
heterojunction bipolar transistor small-signal equivalent circuit’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 38, p. 2018, 1991.
78 K. M. Walter, B. Ebersman, D. A. Sunderland, G. D. Berg, G. G. Freeman,
R. A. Groves, D. K. Jadus, and D. L. Harame, ‘A scaleable, statistical SPICE
Gummel-Poon model for SiGe HBTs’, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 33,
pp. 1439–1444, 1998.
79 A. DiVergilio, P. Zampardi, and K. Newton, ‘VBIC: A New standard in advanced
bipolar modelling’, IBM MicroNews, vol. 5, pp. 14–17, 1999.
80 B. Senapati, and C. K. Maiti, ‘Advanced SPICE modelling of SiGe HBTs using
VBIC model’, IEE Proc. Circuits, Devices and Systems, vol. 149, pp. 129–135,
2002.
81 B. Senapati, and C. K. Maiti, ‘Advanced SPICE Modelling of SiGe-HBTs’, in
National Seminar on Adv. Transistor Modelling (Invited Paper), 2001.
82 T.-Y. Lee, M. Schroter, and M. Racanelli, ‘A scalable model generation
methodology for bipolar transistors for RF IC design’, in IEEE BCTM Proc.,
pp. 171–174, 2001.
83 D. Berger, D. Celi, M. Schroter, M. Malorny, T. Zimmer, and B. Ardouin,
‘HICUM parameter extraction flow for a single transistor geometry’, in IEEE
BCTM Proc., pp. 116–119, 2002.
84 A. Chakravorty, R. Garg, and C. K. Maiti, ‘VBIC-HICUM models applied to
advanced BJTs developed in high performance mixed analog/digital 0.5 µm
BiCMOS BC050 process’, in Tech. Dig. HOT, p. 12, 2003.
85 A. Chakravorty, R. Garg, and C. K. Maiti, ‘VBIC modelling of high speed
bipolar transistors fabricated in a high performance mixed analog/digital 0.5 µm
BiCMOS technology’, in Proc. NCIIT, pp. 94–96, 2003.
86 A. Chakravorty, B. Senapati, G. Dalapati, R. Garg, C. K. Maiti, G. A. Armstrong,
et al., ‘HICUM modelling of SiGe-HBTs fabricated in wafer bonded SOI
substrates’, in Proc. CODEC, 2004.
87 A. Chakravorty, B. Senapati, G. Dalapati, R. Garg, C. K. Maiti, G. A. Armstrong,
et al., ‘VBIC Modelling of SiGe-HBTs Fabricated in Wafer Bonded SOI
Substrates’, in Proc. IWPSD, pp. 591–593, 2003.

HBT: compact models
349
88 B. Senapati, R. F. Scholz, D. Knoll, B. Heinemann, and A. Chakravorty, ‘Appli-
cation of the VBIC model for SiGe:C heterojuction transistors’, in Proc. Mixed
Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, pp. 94–96, 2004.
89 A. Chakravorty, R. Garg, and C. K. Maiti, ‘Comparison of state-of-the-art bipo-
lar compact models for SiGe-HBTs’, Appl. Surf. Sci., vol. 224, pp. 354–360,
2004.
90 APLAC Solutions Corporation, ‘APLAC Manual, ver. 7.91’, 2003.
91 M. Reisch, ‘Self-heating in BJT circuit parameter extraction’, Solid State
Electron., vol. 35, pp. 677–679, 1992.
92 G. Niu, J. D. Cressler, U. Gogineni, and D. L. Harame, ‘Collector-base junction
avalanche multiplication effects in advanced UHV/CVD SiGe HBTs’, IEEE
Electron Devices Lett., vol. 19, pp. 288–290, 1998.
93 U. Erben, M. Wahl, A. Schuppen, and H. Schumacher, ‘Class-A SiGe HBT
Power Amplifiers at C-Band Frequencies’, IEEE Microwave and Guided Lett.,
vol. 5, pp. 435–436, 1995.
94 M. Schroter, ‘TRADICA User Manual’, 2002.
95 S. P. Voinigescu, M. C. Maliepaard, J. L. Showell, G. E. Babcock, D. Marchesan,
M.Schroter, etal., ‘Ascalablehigh-frequencynoisemodelforbipolartransistors
with application to optimal transistor sizing for low-noise amplifier design’,
IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 32, pp. 1430–1439, 1997.
96 H.-M. Rein, ‘A simple method for separation of the internal and external (periph-
eral) currents of bipolar transistors’, Solid State Electron., vol. 27, pp. 625–632,
1984.
97 M. Schroter and D. J. Walkey, ‘Physical modelling of lateral scaling in bipolar
transistor’, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31, pp. 1484–1492, 1996.
98 D. J. Walkey, T. J. Smy, D. Marchesan, H. Tran, C. Reimer, T. C. Kleckner,
et al., ‘Extraction and modelling of thermal behaviour in trench isolated bipolar
structures’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 97–100, 1999.
99 D. J. Walkey, T. J. Smy, R. G. Dickson, J. S. Brodsky, D. T. Zweidinger, and
R. M. Fox, ‘Equivalent circuit modelling of static substrate thermal cou-
pling using VCVS representation’, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37,
pp. 1198–1206, 2002.
100 R. M. D. A. Velghe, D. B. M. Klaassen, and F. M. Klaassen, ‘MOS Model 9’.
Unclassified report NL-UR 003/94, Philips Electronics N.V., 1994.
101 Y. Cheng, M. Chan, K. Hui, M. Jeng, Z. Liu, J. Huang, J. Chen, R. Tu, P.K. Ko,
and C. Hu, ‘BSIM3v3 Manual’. University of California/Berkeley, 1996.
102 M. Schroter, ‘Compact bipolar transistor modelling – Issues and possible
solutions’, in Intl NanoTech Meeting Dig., pp. 282–285, 2003.
103 M. Schroter, H. Tran, and W. Kraus, ‘Germanium profile design options for
LEC-SiGe HBTs’, Solid State Electron., vol. 48, pp. 1133–1146, 2004.
104 M. Ramana Murty, K. M. Newton, S. L. Sweeney, D. C. Sheridan, and
D. L. Harame, ‘Implementation of a scalable statistical VBIC model for large
signal and intermodulation distortion analysis of SiGe HBTs’, in IEEE MTT-S
Digest, pp. 2165–2168, 2002.

350
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
105 D. J. Harame, J. H. Comfort, J. D. Cressler, E. F. Crabbe, J. Y. C. Sun,
B. S. Meyerson, and T. Tice, ‘Si/SiGe epitaxial-base transistors-part I: materi-
als, physics, and circuits’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 42, pp. 455–467,
1995.
106 R. F. Scholz, A. Chakravorty, D. Knoll, C. K. Maiti, ‘Simple Emitter and Col-
lector Scaling Approach with VBIC for Low-cost SiGe:C HBT’s’, in Tech. Dig.
Workshop on Compact Modelling for RF/Microwave Applications, 2003.
107 R. F. Scholz, B. Senapati, A. Chakravorty, D. Knoll, and C. K. Maiti, ‘Simple
emitter and collector scaling approach with VBIC for low-cost SiGe:C HBTs’,
in IC-CAP European User Meeting, 2003.
108 S. Fregonese, D. Celi, T. Zimmer, C. Maneux, and P. Y. Sulima, ‘A scalable
substrate network for compact modelling of deep trench insulated HBT’, Soild
State Electron., vol. 49, pp. 1623–1631, 2005.
109 D. Knoll, K. E. Ehwald, B. Heinemann, A. Fox, K. Blum, H. Rucker, et al.,
‘A flexible, low-cost, high performance SiGe:C BiCMOS process with a one-
mask HBT module’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 783–786, 2002.
110 H. Baudry, B. Szelag, F. Deleglise, M. Laurens, J. Mourier, F. Saguin, et al.,
‘BiCMOS7RF: a highly-manufacturable 0.25-µm BiCMOS RF-applications-
dedicated technology using non selective SiGe:C epitaxy’, in IEEE BCTM Proc.,
pp. 207–210, 2003.
111 D. C. Sheridan, J. B. Johnson, and J. Watts, ’Use of genetic algorithm optimisa-
tion techniques for bipolar compact modelling, Workshop on Compact Modelling
for RF/Microwave Applications’, 2003.
112 A. Chakravorty, R. F. Scholz, B. Senapati, D. Knoll, A. Fox, R. Garg, et al.,
‘Accurate Modelling of SiGe:C-HBTs using Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference
System’, Mat. Sci. Semicond. Processing, vol. 8, pp. 307–311, 2005.

Chapter 10
Design and simulation of high-speed devices
One of the main differences between Si VLSI and RF electronics is the choice
of semiconductor materials and transistor types. Until recently, CMOS has been
the standard device and Si is the only semiconductor used in VLSI. In RF elec-
tronics, on the other hand, a wide variety of different semiconductor materials
(i.e., Si, SiGe, GaAs, InP and wide bandgap materials) and various transis-
tor types, such as bipolar junction transistor, heterojunction bipolar transistor,
metal–semiconductor field-effect transistor (MESFET), high electron mobility tran-
sistor (HEMT) and metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET)
have found their applications.
Bipolar junction transistors (BJTs) have the benefits of the silicon technology,
for example, very high integration and low-cost production, but are limited to lower
frequencies. Important steps forward to faster silicon-based devices were the inven-
tion of the polySi emitter transistor and now the SiGe HBTs, which are competitive in
terms of speed to the III–V devices. HBTs and HEMTs are among the most advanced
semiconductor devices. They both benefit from the use of heterojunctions formed by
different materials. The HBTs make use of wide bandgap emitter and narrow bandgap
base. In an npn transistor this favours the electron injection from the emitter to the
base, and restricts hole injection from the base the emitter. This advantage can be
maintained even if the base is highly doped to get a low base resistance and the emit-
ter is lightly doped. Microwave, millimetre-wave and high-speed digital HBT ICs
are used for microwave power and low power wireless communications applications
between 0.9 and 100 GHz.
HBTs based on AlGaAs/GaAs, InGaAs/InP and Si/SiGe have shown superior
electrical properties compared to Si BJTs. Much of this improvement is due to the
high-base doping achievable through the use of wide band-gap emitters as well as
superior material properties of the state-of-the-art HBTs due to bandgap engineering
techniques and epitaxial growth developments. For example, by varying Al content
in AlGaAs/GaAs HBT a graded bandgap can be obtained. The resulting accelerating
field decreases the time that the electrons needed to transport across the base and thus

352
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
1000
100
10
1
1980
1985
1990
1995
Year
fT (GHz)
2000
I/I Si BJT
Epi Si BJT
SiGe HBT
SiGeC HBT
2005
Figure 10.1
The trend of cut-off frequency fT over the past two decades, categorised
by conventional implanted-base Si BJTs (I/I Si BJT), epitaxial-base Si
BJTs (Epi Si BJT), SiGe HBTs (SiGe HBT), and SiGe HBTs with carbon-
doped base (SiGeC HBT) [After J.-S. Rieh et al., Proc. IEEE, Vol. 93,
2005(1522–1538). © 2005 IEEE]
increases fT. Furthermore, using MBE, it is possible to grow extremely thin layers
with a thickness of only a few nanometres and sharp interfaces between adjacent
layers.
SiGe HBTs with fT > 300 GHz are becoming more promising each day and
threatening the GaAs market due to competitive material properties, yield, cost
and integration potentials [1, 2]. SiGe HBTs have started replacing III–V devices
for several applications, such as low noise amplifiers and frequency dividers up to
100 GHz [3], and are being considered essential for 40 Gb/s optical communication
systems. Transit frequencies, fT of 350 GHz [2], maximum oscillation frequen-
cies, fmax of 285 GHz, and ring oscillator delays of 4.2 ps [4] have been reported.
Figure 10.1 shows the current status of peak-fT of SiGe HBTs over the last couple
of years. The devices are fully compatible with the existing state-of-the-art 0.13 µm
CMOS technology [4,5].
AlGaAs/GaAs HBTs are commercially available today and commonly used in
RF power amplifiers due to higher power densities and higher fT and fmax without the
limitation of photolithography. This means better device matchings when compared
to III–V FETs. Although brittle and expensive, InP based HBTs show even higher
speed performance due to superior material properties of the InP material. InP HBTs
with 370 GHz fT and 459 GHz fmax have been fabricated [6]. Rodwell et al. [7] have
demonstrated an InP-based HBT with fmax of 1.08 THz fabricated with a transferred
substrate method. Also, UIUC group has reported a single HBT with 506 GHz fT. All
these devices especially the InP-based HBT show aggressive characteristic frequen-
cies when compared to traditional homojunction Si BJTs, where 100 GHz fmax and
84 GHz fT are available from experimental devices [8]. Cut-off frequencies fT of about

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
353
150 GHz and maximum oscillation frequencies fmax of more than 250 GHz [9, 10]
have been reported for HBTs on GaAs. Transfer substrate InAlAs/InGaAs HBTs on
GaAs with 250 GHz [11] and record InP-based HBTs with 800 GHz were demon-
strated [12] but they are still lacking level of integration (∼1000 transistors per chip)
compared to the GaAs-based HBTs.
It is important to find the potentials and limitations of these devices and anal-
yse them under common figure of merit (FOM) definitions such as current–voltage
characteristics, stability, power gain analysis, cut-off and maximum oscillation fre-
quencies and noise figure as well as to make a meaningful comparison which is
necessary for a technology choice especially in RF circuit and system level applica-
tions such as power amplifier, low noise amplifier circuits and transceiver/receiver
systems. A common definition of FOMs is necessary to be able to choose the right
device or material type. Schwierz and Liou have reported a comprehensive study
for the definition of FOMs for RF heterojunction bipolar transistors [13]. The most
relevant figures of merit of transistors for RF/microwave applications are [14]:
•
peak fT and fmax values which determine the ultimate circuit speed;
•
peak fT current density Jc,FT which determines the power dissipation of a
high-speed circuit at a given data rate;
•
Ic,FT/Cbc(Cgd), also known as the intrinsic slew-rate of the transistor, is defined
as the ratio of the peak fT current and the output capacitance;
•
BVcbo/BVdg is the breakdown voltage of the transistor which limits the maximum
output swing achievable in the technology;
•
turn-on/threshold voltage: Vbe/Vt limits the minimum value of the power supply
voltageand, usually, powerdissipationofacircuitandfavoursCMOSoverbipolar
devices and InP HBTs over SiGe HBTs;
•
minimum feature size affects power dissipation and integration levels and favours
Si CMOS and SiGe BiCMOS over III–V technologies owing to the more mature
processing techniques;
•
thermal resistance is closely related to the semiconductor material and to the
minimum feature size and affects indirectly the integration levels and the transistor
speed that can be achieved under reliable operating conditions.
In the following, a comparison of three state-of-the-art heterojunction bipolar
transistors, the AlGaAs/GaAs HBT, the Si/SiGe HBT and the InGaAs/InP HBT, is
presented. The trade-offs between the devices are examined, focusing on their intrin-
sic properties and electrical parameters, and on how these properties and parameters
relate to the reported and potential device performance. Heterostructures, which are
key elements for some advanced RF transistors, are described, and an overview of
the different transistor types and their figures of merit is given. A comprehensive
overview of the complex relationship between IC technologies, devices and RF cir-
cuit performance in terms of key RF figures of merits may be found in Reference 15.
It covers CMOS, BiCMOS and bipolar technologies and also the trends in RF
technologies.

354
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
10.1
SiGe vs. GaAs HBTs
The SiGe HBTs are double heterojunction bipolar transistors (DHBTs) as the SiGe
material is used as a narrow bandgap material in the p-type base. The emitter and the
collector are silicon and have larger bandgap. The AlGaAs/GaAs and InGaP/GaAs
HBTs benefit from a single heterojunction formed between the AlGaAs wide bandgap
emitter and the GaAs p-type base. InP/InGaAs and InAlAs/InGaAs grown on InP
substrate give double heterojunction devices as both emitter and collector regions
include wide bandgap materials. HBTs based on III–V semiconductors are currently
the fastest devices.
During the last decade, there have been a lot of debates and discussions on the
competition between SiGe and GaAs HBTs for high-frequency RF applications. An
early review by Cressler [16] gives an excellent description of the advantages of SiGe
HBT over Si bipolar for high-frequency analog applications. It is clear that reported
data show a large overlap in the performance of GaAs and SiGe HBTs [17].
Some of the key physical properties of Si and GaAs relevant to the electrical
design of SiGe and GaAs HBTs are listed in Table 10.1 [18]. It shows that the dielectric
constant, ϵ, for Si and for GaAs are about the same. Therefore, the depletion layer
capacitance of a p-n junction in Si or in GaAs is a function of the junction depletion
layer width only. The electron diffusion coefficient D, which is related to mobility, is
much larger in GaAs than in Si. For fields less than about 3×104 V/cm the velocity
in GaAs is larger than that in Si. However, for fields larger than about 3×104 V/cm,
the opposite is true. Compared with field-effect devices bipolar transistors employ
vertical current transport, which offer better utilization of wafer area and thus lead
to higher power density. The bipolar approach also offers higher linearity at higher
power levels, superior power-added-efficiency and low frequency noise as necessary
for RF circuits and systems.
Just like Si bipolar transistor, SiGe HBTs use polySi emitter. The emitter poly is
usually doped with As to a concentration of >10×1021 cm−3. There is no additional
Table 10.1
Some properties of Si and GaAs at 300K
Material parameter
Si
GaAs
Dielectric constant
11.9
13.1
Energy gap (eV)
1.12
1.424
Electron drift mobility (cm2/Vs)
1500
8500
∼200
700
at 2 × 1018 doping
at 2 × 1019 doping
Intrinsic carrier concentration (cm3)
1.45 × 1010
∼1.79 × 106
Minority carrier lifetime (s)
2.5 × 10−3
∼10−3
Thermal conductivity (W/cm-K)
1.5
0.46
Semi-insulating substrate
SOI
Ion bombardment

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
355
emitter bandgap engineering. The base region usually has an average doping con-
centration of >10 × 1018 cm−3. In some designs, a very thin i-layer is sandwiched
between the emitter poly and the base layer to increase e-b junction breakdown volt-
age and to reduce e-b junction capacitance. However, due to out-diffusion from the
emitter and base layers, the effect of this i-layer, while not negligible, is not very
large. The net is that the e-b junction capacitance is about that of a n+p-junction
with the p-region doped at >10 × 1018 cm−3. In GaAs HBT, the emitter is engi-
neered using AlGaAs to have an energy gap much larger than that of the GaAs base
layer. It allows a much more lightly doped emitter, typically about >5 × 1017 cm−3
than the base, which is typically doped to about 4 × 1019 cm−3. Thus, for the same
emitter size, the e-b junction capacitance of GaAs HBT is much smaller than that of
SiGe HBT.
In Chapter 6, the working principle of HBTs has been discussed. It should be noted
that bandgap grading is available to both SiGe and GaAs HBTs, although it is applied
much more widely to SiGe than to GaAs. For a linearly graded base bandgap the
current gain, (β), Early voltage, (VA) and the base transit time, (τb), when compared
to Si counterpart are given by Equations (6.6), (6.7) and (6.9), respectively. The
collector doping concentration, Nc must be large enough to avoid base-pushout or
Kirk effect. As a general rule, to avoid Kirk effect, the collector current density
should be less than qvNc, where v is the electron velocity. Under normal operation,
the electric field in the collector is in the range 3–10 × 104 V/cm. At these fields, v is
approximately the same for Si and GaAs. Therefore, for well designed SiGe and GaAs
HBTs operating at the same collector current density, the b-c junction capacitances
are about the same. However, the collector-substrate capacitance of a SiGe HBT is
larger than that of GaAs HBT unless an SOI substrate is used.
Since the bandgap of silicon is smaller than that of GaAs, the diode turn-on
voltage of a p-n diode in Si is smaller than that in GaAs. This voltage difference
can be estimated from the forward current density of a diode. From the material
properties shown in Table 10.1, one can therefore deduce that at 300 K, the diode
turn-on voltage for a GaAs diode is about 0.28 V larger than that of a Si diode. The
larger diode turn-on voltage implies that a circuit built with GaAs HBTs must use a
larger power supply voltage than one built with SiGe HBTs. For an ECL circuit, this
difference is about 20 per cent. Thus, GaAs HBT circuits inherently dissipate more
power than SiGe HBT circuits.
At low current densities where Kirk effect is negligible, the cut-off frequency of
a bipolar transistor is given by Equation (6.11), where the first term represents the
delay time due to charging of the emitter capacitance, the collector capacitance and
the parasitic capacitances, connected to the base lead. As discussed before, for the
same size emitter, emitter capacitance is smaller for GaAs HBT than for SiGe HBT,
and collector capacitance is about the same for the two devices if SOI is used for
SiGe HBT. If SOI is not used, then collector capacitance is much larger for SiGe
HBT. Therefore, for the same design rules and collector current densities, the first
term in Equation (6.11) is smaller for GaAs HBT than for SiGe HBT.
For devices without base bandgap grading, τb is inversely proportional to carrier
mobility. Using the mobility values in Table 10.1, τb is a factor of three lower for a

356
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
GaAs base layer than for a Si base layer of the same width. From Equation (6.9), a
SiGe HBT will need a base bandgap grading of 	Eg ∼l50 meV to achieve the same
τb as a GaAs HBT with no base bandgap grading. With base bandgap grading in both
devices, τb will be lower for GaAs HBT than for a SiGe HBT. On the other hand, τc
should be about the same for SiGe HBT and GaAs HBT if both devices are optimised
for the same collector current densities. It has been shown that at low collector current
density fT is larger for GaAs HBT (and larger yet for GaInAs), consistent with the
discussion above [19–22]. At higher collector current, fT is limited by base and
collector transit times as indicated in Equation (6.9) and by the Kirk effect, which
dominates at very large current densities, so that fT falls off rapidly with increasing
collector current. GaAs HBTs are usually designed to operate at collector current
density of less than 0.5 mA/µm2, where Kirk effect is minimal, to avoid local over-
heating. SiGe HBTs without SOI do not have local over-heating problems, and hence
are usually designed to operate at much larger collector current density, where Kirk
effect is important but is minimised by collector profile engineering. However, if an
SOI substrate is used, then SiGe HBTs will be limited to even lower current densities
than GaAs HBTs because of the very small thermal conductivity of SiO2.
The maximum oscillation frequency, fmax, is related to fT by Equation (6.12),
where Rb is the base resistance and Cbc, is the collector-base capacitance. For compa-
rable advanced device structures, emitter sizes and layouts, Rb should be somewhat
smaller for GaAs HBT than for SiGe HBT, and Cbc should be about the same for
both devices. Therefore, fmax is potentially larger for GaAs HBT than for SiGe HBT.
However, SiGe HBTs without SOI can be designed to operate at much larger current
densities, with smaller emitters and accompanying parasitics, and hence could have
larger fmax than GaAs HBTs.
10.2
Device simulation
Heterostructure bipolar transistors and high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs) are
among the most advanced semiconductor devices. In this section, the simulation of
SiGe, III–V GaAs and InP based heterostructure semiconductor devices is considered.
A common feature is the lack of a rigorous approach to III–V and IV–IV group
semiconductor materials modelling. As an example, modelling of AlGaAs, InGaAs,
or even InAlAs and InGaP is restricted to slight modifications of the GaAs material
properties. Critical issues concerning simulation of heterostructures, such as interface
modelling at heterojunctions and insulator surfaces as well as hydrodynamic and
high field effects modelling, carrier energy relaxation, impact ionisation, gate current
modelling and self-heating effects are mostly not considered. In addition, quantum
mechanical effects are often neglected or accounted for only by simple models for
quantum corrections [23, 24], as solving the Schrodinger or the Wigner equation is
extremely expensive in terms of computational resources.
To enable predictive simulation of semiconductor devices better carrier transport
models are required. The drift-diffusion (DD) transport model is the simplest and
most popular model used for device simulation [25]. However, with downscaling the

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
357
feature sizes, non-local effects become more pronounced and may be accounted for
by using an energy-transport (ET) or hydrodynamic (HD) transport model.
During the past two decades Monte Carlo (MC) methods for solving the
time-dependent Boltzmann equation have been developed [26, 27] and applied for
device simulation [28–30]. Reduction of the demand on computational resources
is still an issue for MC simulation. Also, the MC algorithms encounter serious
difficulties when applied to advanced semiconductor devices.
The critical modelling issues essential for heterostructure device simulation are
addressed in this chapter and special attention is focused on the description of the
anisotropicmajority/minorityelectronmobilityinstrained-SiGegrownonSi. Adirect
approach to obtain scattering parameters (s-parameters) and other derived figures of
merit of SiGe HBTs by means of small-signal a.c. analysis is also discussed. Results
from two-dimensional hydrodynamic simulations of SiGe HBTs are presented and
compared with experimental data. Several examples are chosen from the work of
Palankovski et al. [31–35] to demonstrate technologically important issues which
can be addressed and solved by device simulation. In the following, a review on the
available state-of-the-art device simulators and a discussion on the choice of current
transport models to be used are presented. Critical modelling issues, such as bandgap
narrowing, anisotropic electron minority mobility in strained-SiGe, carrier transport
through heterointerfaces, carrier generation/recombination and lattice self-heating are
also addressed. For more details on device simulation and simulators, and material
parameters the reader may refer to Reference 36.
10.2.1
Device simulators
With the downscaling of device dimensions, device and circuit simulations need to be
carried out by state-of-the-art tools, accounting for physical effects on a microscopic
scale. To enable predictive simulation of semiconductor devices, proper models
describing carrier transport are also required. The continuously increasing computa-
tional power of computer systems now allows the use of technology computer aided
design (TCAD) tools on a very large scale.
Currently, for the silicon industry, where process, device and interconnect simula-
tion tools form a virtual workbench from material analysis to chip design are available,
III–V simulation is mainly focused on device and circuit aspects. A common feature is
the lack of a rigorous approach to III–V group semiconductor materials modelling. As
an example, modelling of AlGaAs, InGaAs, or even InAlAs and InGaP is restricted
to slight modifications of the GaAs material properties. For heterojunction devices,
for example, SiGe HBTs, owing to the extensive number of process steps involved,
device simulation is focused on process control and inverse modelling, for example,
of geometry. Several commercial device simulators, company-developed simulators
and university-developed simulators claim the capability to handle heterostructure
devices. These simulators differ considerably in scope (one-, quasi-two, two-, quasi-
three, or three-dimensional), in the choice of carrier transport model (drift-diffusion,
energy-transport or MC statistical solution of the Boltzmann equation) and in the
capability of including electrothermal effects.

358
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
The quality of the physical models can be questioned as the model parameters for
SiGe are often simply inherited from parameters for silicon. Critical issues concerning
simulation of heterostructures, such as interface modelling at heterojunctions and at
silicon/polySi interfaces are frequently not considered. Hydrodynamic and high-field
effects, such as carrier energy relaxation, impact ionisation and self-heating effects
are often ignored.
The two-dimensional device simulator PISCES and its various derivatives in
TCAD products from commercial vendors incorporates modelling capabilities for
SiGe based devices. PISCES also incorporates more limited modelling capabilities
for GaAs and InP-based devices. One of its many modifications G-PISCES from
Gateway Modelling [37] has been extended by the inclusion of a full set of III–V
models. Examples of MESFETs, HEMTs and HBTs for several material systems, for
example, InAlAs/InGaAs, AlGaAs/InGaAs, AlGaAs/GaAs and InGaP/GaAs HBTs
are demonstrated. A disadvantage of this simulator is the lack of appropriate ET or
HD transport models, necessary to model high-field effects, which are available in
the original version of PISCES.
The device simulator MEDICI from Synopsys which is also based on PISCES,
offers simulation features for SiGe/Si HBTs and AlGaAs/InGaAs/GaAs HEMTs.
Advantages of this simulator are hydrodynamic simulation capabilities and rigor-
ous approach to generation/recombination processes. In addition, it includes module
treating anisotropic material properties. However, it has been successfully used for
the simulation of AlGaAs/GaAs HBTs [38].
At the quantum level, among others, one-dimensional Schrodinger-Poisson solver
NEMO [39] based on non-equilibrium Green’s functions, is offered for sub-0.1 µm
SiGe structure simulation. Gateway Modelling offers a one-dimensional Schrodinger-
Poisson solver POSES [40] for charge analysis in HEMT devices for process control.
In the program SIMBA [41] a link between a one-dimensional Schrodinger solver
and a two-dimensional Poisson solver provides drift-diffusion transport simulation
of GaN HEMTs [42]. The three-dimensional version of SIMBA has been used for
thermal optimisation of GaN HEMT layouts [43].
The two- and three-dimensional device simulator DESSIS from ISE has demon-
strated a rigorous approach to semiconductor physics modelling and includes
extensive interface trap modelling to and III–V materials [44]. Interface tunnelling is
included in a thermionic field emission model. The density-gradient method is used
to model quantum effects in heterostructure devices [44,45]. Quasi-two-dimensional
approaches using simplified one-dimensional current equation are demonstrated by
BIPOLE3 from BIPSIM which additionally features good models for polySi. A full
hydrodynamic transport model has been coupled with a Schrodinger solver at the
University of Leeds [46, 47]. These simulations have been verified against MC
simulations for devices with gate lengths down to 50 nm [46].
The quasi-two-dimensional Silvaco simulator FastBlaze has capabilities of simu-
lation of heterostructure devices. The two- and three-dimensional simulator ATLAS
[48] from Silvaco can also be adapted for the simulation of AlGaAs/GaAs and
AlGaAs/InGaAs/GaAs heterostructures and PHEMTs. Some optimisation results for
SiGe HBTs were reported with another university-developed simulator, SCORPIO

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
359
Table 10.2
Comparison of device simulators. DD: drift-diffusion, ET: energy-
transport, HD: hydrodynamic, TFE: thermionic field emission, TE:
thermionic emission [After V. Palankovski and S. Selberherr, Proc.
Symp. on Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon Devices and
Technologies for ULSI Era, 2003(1–11)]
Simulator
Dimension
Model
Features
SCORPIO
1D
DD
SiGe HBT
POSES
1D
Schrodinger-Poisson
NEMO
1D
Schrodinger-Poisson
BIPOLE3
quasi-2D
DD
polySi
ATLAS
2D
DD, ET
TE, heterojunction model
FastBlaze
quasi-2D
HD
APSYS
2D
HD
Optical, interfaces
G-PISCES
2D
DD
III–V models
PISCES
2D
DD,ET
polySi, harmonic balance
MEDICI
2D
DD,HD
Anisotropic properties, TFE
FIELDAY
2D, 3D
DD
Electrothermal
MINIMOS-NT
2D, 3D
DD,HD
DESSIS
2D, 3D
DD,HD
Trap modelling, TFE model
[49]. Some important features of several heterostructure device simulators currently
available are summarised in Table 10.2.
A software interface between the device model and the compact large-signal
model within the Microwave Design System (MDS and ADS) has been offered by
Agilent. FastBlaze can be combined with the Advanced Design System (ADS) and
has an interface with the microwave circuit simulator. An extraction with subsequent
multi-tone excitation calculations has been presented in Reference 50.
10.3
Material parameters
Understanding the performance of SiGe HBTs is to a great extent determined by
ones knowledge of the strained-Si1−xGex layer properties. The incorporation of Ge
significantly changes the properties of the base region and the base-emitter and base-
collector junctions in a Si/Si1−xGex/Si heterostructure. Various material properties
essential for device simulation and their dependence on the composition for coher-
ently strained-Si1−xGex alloy on Si (100) substrate must be known. Commercially
available simulation software such as Silvaco-ATLAS, MEDICI and university soft-
ware such as PISCES-2ET [48, 51, 52] have been used for the simulation of SiGe
HBTs [25].
Most of the available simulators handle strained-SiGe materials with a very con-
servative approach, especially in the carrier mobility models. Also, the reported
models for SiGe material parameters are scattered over a vast body of literature.

360
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
It has been reported that for adequate modelling, a proper selection of model options
are also needed [53,54]. More accurate strained layer mobility models for majority
and minority carrier are required to take into account the different mobilities along
parallel (in plane) and perpendicular (out-of-plane) to the growth plane of the strained-
SiGe layer. A MC model for mobility in SiGe has been developed and validated with
the available transport data [55].
In this section, focus is placed on developing accurate SiGe material parame-
ter models for robust numerical simulation for SiGe HBTs that fit into the TCAD
software framework currently used for the design of heterostructure technologies.
The dependence of various material parameters on Ge mole fraction (x) is identified.
The models developed are based on the computed and experimental data available
in the literature. The models are based on those incorporated in Silvaco ATLAS two-
dimensional DD device simulator [48]. The models developed should account for
the effect of the heterojunctions and non-uniform Ge and doping densities. Important
material parameters which are needed for device simulation include:
•
energy bandgap and bandgap narrowing;
•
valence and conduction band edge offset due to the composition change and
electron affinity;
•
effective mass for electron and hole for the determination of effective densities
of states for the conduction and valence bands;
•
dielectric constant;
•
electron and hole mobilities and their dependence on composition, doping density,
electric field and temperature;
•
saturation velocity;
•
minority carrier lifetime and corresponding coefficients for various recombination
mechanisms including Auger and radiative;
•
coefficients for impact ionisation.
Heterointerface modelling is a key issue for devices which include abrupt junc-
tions. Thermionic emission and field emission effects critically determine the current
transport parallel and perpendicular to the heterointerfaces. All important physical
effects, suchasbandgapnarrowing, anisotropicelectronminoritymobilityinstrained-
SiGe, Shockley–Read–Hall recombination, surface and Auger recombination, and
impact ionisation are taken into account. III–V materials and SiGe are known to have
reduced heat conductivity in comparison to silicon [56].
Self-heating effects are accounted for by solving the lattice heat flow equation
self-consistently with the energy transport equations. Advanced device simulation
allows precise physics-based extraction of small-signal parameters [57,58]. A model
for carrier-temperature-dependent energy relaxation times [59] has been developed
as well as model for lattice-temperature-dependent saturation velocities [60].
The model parameters are checked against several independent technologies to
obtain concise set used for all simulations. Reviewing simulation of HBTs and submi-
cron heterojunction field-effect transistors with gate-lengths below 100 nm, solutions
of energy transport equations are necessary to account for non-local effects, such

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
361
as velocity overshoot. Advanced device simulation allows precise physics-based
extraction of small-signal parameters [57,58].
10.3.1
Bandgap and bandgap narrowing
The band edge offsets caused by the composition change are critical in determining
the heterostructure device characteristics. In order to determine the band alignment
for a given Si1−xGex/Si heterointerface, the bandgap of the constituent layer as well
as the band edge discontinuity, 	Ec or 	Ev, must be known. The first estimate of the
	Ev was reported by van de Walle and Martin [61]. People and Bean [62] have shown
the band alignment of coherently strained-Si1−xGex/Si heterostructure on Si1−yGey
substrate. Both type-I and type-II band alignments are possible depending on the type
of strain. In SiGe the strain-dependent change of the bandgap due to Ge content has
been reported [63]. The temperature-dependent bandgaps of the constituents, EgSi
and EgSi are calculated by the commonly used model of Varshni [64]
Eg = Eg,0 −α · T 2
L
β + TL
(10.1)
where Eg,0 is the bandgap at TL = 0 K. The parameter values are summarised in
Table 10.3. The dependence on the material composition x is then introduced by
ESiGe
g
= ESi
g · (1 −x) + EGe
g
· x + Cg · (1 −x)x
(10.2)
where x is the Ge mole fraction and Cg = −0.4 eV. This one-valley bandgap fit can
be applied to the case of the strained-Si1−xGex grown on Si as shown in Figure 10.2.
Depending on the strain, the bandgap can become smaller than that of pure Ge [25]. In
the unstrained case, however, an X-to-L gap transition is observed at about x = 0.85
which has to be accounted by the model as well. The stress-dependent change of
the bandgap is an effect which must be separated from dopant-dependent bandgap
narrowing (BGN) which depends on the semiconductor material composition, the
doping concentration and the lattice temperature [65].
The importance of BGN in heavily-doped semiconductors is well known. In the
last 20 years, BGN in silicon has been studied by various research groups [66, 67].
Table 10.3
Parameter values for modelling the bandgap
energy [After V. Palankovski and S. Selberherr,
Proc. Symp. on Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced
Silicon Devices and Technologies for ULSI Era,
2003(1–11)]
Material
Eg,0 (eV)
α (eV/K)
β (K)
Si
1.1695
4.73 × 10−4
636
Ge
0.7437
4.774 × 10−4
235

362
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
1.2
1.1
X
X (strained on Si)
Eg (eV)
L
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Ge mole fraction, x
0.8
1.0
Figure 10.2
Material composition dependence of the Land X-bandgaps in Si1−xGex
at 300K [After V. Palankovski and S. Selberherr, Proc. Symp. on Diag-
nostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon Devices and Technologies for ULSI
Era, 2003(1–11)]
However, there is a lack of experimental information on the band structure of many
technologically significant materials including SiGe and on the heavy doping effects
inthem. Inthesedevices, withbasedopinglevelscloseto1020 cm−3, BGNisexpected
to have a significant influence on the electrical characteristics.
The first empirical expression for the apparent BGN in Si derived from the mea-
surement of collector current of an npn transistor (for p-type Si), was reported by
Slotboom and de Graaff [66]. Lanyon and Tuft [68] theoretically predicted BGN in
Si using the concept of stored electrostatic energy of majority–minority carrier pairs.
del Alamo et al. [69] presented an empirical expression for the apparent BGN in
n-type Si. The expression yielded a value of about 35 mV less than that obtained
from the expression of Slotboom and de Graaff. Swirhun et al. [70] reported that the
apparent BGN is smaller in n-type than in p-type Si which is in agreement with the
Slotboom-de Graaff expression.
Klaassen [67] modified the Slotboom and de Graaff model [71] to accurately
describe the apparent BGN for both n- and p-type Si as a function of impurity
concentration and is given by
	Ebgn
g
(N) = V1

ln
 N
Nref

+

ln
 N
Nref
2
+ C

(10.3)
Equation (10.3) is frequently used in device simulators and the parameters used by
different authors are given in Table 10.4. Temperature dependence of the apparent
BGN has been studied by Swirhun et al. [72] and it was shown that apparent BGN is

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
363
Table 10.4
Parameter values used in simulation for apparent bandgap
narrowing
Parameter
Ref. [66]
Ref. [69]
Ref. [70]
Ref. [67]
(p-type)
(n-type)
(p-type)
(n- and p-type)
V1(mV)
9.0
9.35
9.0
6.92
Nref (cm−3)
1.0 × 1017
7.0 × 1017
1.0 × 1017
1.3 × 1017
C
0.5
0
0.5
0.5
independent of temperature. This is in agreement with the results of Slotboom [73]
and Wagner and del Alamo [74].
In strained-Si1−xGex, the BGN as a function of Ge mole fraction (for <0.3) of the
p-type Si1−xGex has been calculated by Jain et al. [75]. However, the predicted values
are not consistent with the experimental results reported using optical techniques
[76–78], which suggest that the BGN and Fermi level Ef (measured from the valence
band edge) in p-type Si1−xGex layer should be significantly greater than those in
p-type Si. Several authors [79, 80] have shown that the strain changes the effective
density of states mass (m∗
DOS) of the hole. Poortmans et al. [81] have recalculated the
BGN for strained layers taking into account the change in effective mass.
The apparent BGN in bipolar transistors with epitaxial-Si, epitaxial-SiGe and ion
implanted bases has been measured from the temperature dependence of the collector
current density [82–84]. An analytical expression for the apparent BGN for strained-
Si1−xGex layers, based on the reported experimental data and consistent with the
Klaassen model [67] is as follows:
	Ebgn
g
(N) = 0.00692

ln

N
1.3 × 1017

+

ln

N
1.3 × 1017
2
+ 0.5

(10.4)
In Figure 10.3, BGN vs. material composition in boron-doped Si1−xGex is compared
to the model developed by Jain et al. [75]. The decrease of the BGN with increase of
the Ge fraction has been experimentally observed [85,86]. Their approach explains
this effect by the decreased density of states in the valence band and increase of the
relative permittivity in the strained-SiGe alloy.
In general,
the valence band discontinuity for Si1−xGex/Si grown on
(001)-Si1−yGey can be calculated from [87]
	Ev(x) = (0.74 −0.53y)x
(10.5)
where y is the Ge concentration in the substrate. Valence band discontinuity of
Si/Si1−xGex/Si heterostructures has been evaluated experimentally by several work-
ers using X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) [88], admittance spectroscopy
(AS) [89, 90], capacitance-voltage [91], current–voltage (I–V) [92] and from HBT

364
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
60
SiGe: B at 300 K
Jain and Roulston
Exp. data
58
56
54
52
50
0.05
0.10
Bandgap narrowing (meV)
0.15
Ge content, x
0.20
Figure 10.3
Doping-dependent bandgap narrowing vs. Ge content in p-SiGe com-
pared to experimental data [After V. Palankovski and S. Selberherr,
Proc. Symp. on Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon Devices and
Technologies for ULSI Era, 2003(1–11)]
devices [93, 94]. It is observed that the experimental results are in good agreement
with the theoretical predictions.
The band edge offsets are determined from the change of the electron affinity and
the bandgap. By designating of the shift of the conduction band edge relative to the
relaxed-Si [95], the electron affinity as function of the mole fraction is given by
χ(x) = χSi + 0.196x −0.396x2
(10.6)
where χSi = 4.05 is the electron affinity of silicon. However, this formula is valid
for a Ge mole fraction less than 0.3.
The total bandgap difference of the strained-Si1−xGex layer grown on Si(001)
substrate has been computed and compared with the experimental data by many
research groups. The best fit of the curve can be expressed as [96]
	Eg(x) = 0.96x −0.43x2 + 0.17x3
(10.7)
The temperature dependence of the bandgap with Ge mole fraction (x) for a
strained-Si1−xGex layer grown on a (001) Si substrate is given by
Eg(x, T) = Eg(0) −α(x)T 2
T + β(x) −	Eg(x)
(10.8)
where Eg(0) = 1.17 eV stands for Si bandgap at T
= 0 K. The composi-
tion dependence of temperature parameters, α(x) and β(x) can be expressed as
α(x) = 4.73 × 10−4(1 −x) + 4.77 × 10−4x and β(x) = 636(1 −x) + 235x.

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
365
[010]
∆4, four-fold 
      in-plane 
      valleys
∆2, two-fold 
perpendicular 
valleys
[100]
[001]
Strained 
SiGe
Unstrained 
Si
Substrate
Figure 10.4
The constant energy surface of strained-SiGe grown on (001) Si sub-
strate. Note that the size change of each valley in a constant energy
surface indicates a shift up (smaller) or down (larger) in energy
10.3.2
Conduction band density of states
The calculation of the effective density of states is based on the density of state
effective mass, which in turn depends on the Ge mole fraction. Moreover, one needs
to consider for electron the effective masses at different valleys in the conduction
band in order to construct the overall effective masses for use in computing the
densities of states. The conduction band edge of Si consist of a set of six ellipsoidal
energy shells located at equivalent positions in k-space ⟨001⟩direction as shown in
Figure 10.4.
In strained-Si1−xGex alloys, with increasing Ge content, the energies of the X and
L conduction band minima approach each other. Furthermore, the six-fold degeneracy
of the conduction band in the X valley will be split into an energy-lowered four-fold
quadruplet and the energy raised two-fold pair [87,97]. Herring and Vogt [98] have
reported that due to strain, although there is no apparent change in the shape of the
energy surface, the strain causes a shift in energy as shown in Figure 10.4.
The effective mass of electrons in the X and L valley of strained-Si1−xGex for Ge
mole fraction < 0.3 is similar to that of Si. The temperature dependence of transverse
and longitudinal effective mass in the X valley are generally assumed to be the same
as Si [99]. The conduction band density of states for strained-Si1−xGex as a function
of Ge fraction is shown in Figure 10.5. The density of states decreases slowly as
the Ge mole fraction increases, due to the reduction in the population at the band
minima.

366
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0.00
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0.05
0.10
0.15
Ge fraction (x)
Effective DOS (1019 cm–3)
Effective DOS (1018 cm–3)
MC (Bufler 1997)
Analytical model
77 K
300 K
0.20
0.25
0.30
0
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 10.5
The conduction band density of states for strained-Si1−xGex as a func-
tion of Ge fraction for 300 and 77K. Monte Carlo result at 300K is
also shown
10.3.3
Valence band density of states
The presence of strain alters the valence band structure as well. The most obvious
change is that it lifts the degeneracy of the four-fold states so that an energy gap
separates the heavy and light hole bands. The change in the valence band effective
mass due to the presence of a biaxial stress is expected to be same as for the uniaxial
stress case. This is due to the fact that the biaxial stress can be decomposed into a
hydrostatic term and an uniaxial term [87]. The hydrostatic stress term simply shifts
all of the energy levels of the valence bands equally, not affecting the effective mass.
On the other hand, the uniaxial stress splits the heavy and light hole bands and changes
the valence band structure [100], as shown in Figure 10.6.
Depending on the direction of the strain, the light hole band will either move down
(compressive strain) or up in energy (tensile strain) relative to the heavy hole band.
The addition of strain causes a drastic change in mass for the heavy holes, especially at
low k values where it becomes comparable to the light hole mass. Hasegawa [101] has
shown that the highest energy state among the valence bands can be either ⟨3/2, 3/2⟩
or the ⟨3/2, 1/2⟩state, and thus the usual meaning of the ‘heavy’ and ‘light’ hole
bands is lost. Hasegawa has also shown that the transverse and longitudinal effective
masses are not equal. The strain or stress effects on the valence band structure have
been explained on the basis of the coupling interactions between the heavy and light
hole bands [100], and the lift of the degeneracy in bulk-Si heavy and light hole bands
and the changes of the effective masses in the presence of the uniaxial stress have been
experimentally confirmed [102]. The coupling interactions of the spin-orbit band with

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
367
EV (h.h.)
EV (l.h.)
EV (s.o.)
Strained 
SiGe
k
E
(Compressive strain)
Unstrained 
Si
Substrate
Figure 10.6
Shift of the top of each valley in the valence band as a function of strain
energy
the heavy and light hole bands can be significant under large stress or strain and thus
cannot be neglected. A strong reduction of the effective mass has been reported by
many authors [79,80,103,104]. The valence band density of states effective mass as
a function of temperature is shown in Figure 10.7.
In contrast to the conduction band effective mass, that for the valence band is
expectedtobemoretemperaturesensitive. TheoreticalcalculationsofMadarasz[105]
for Si show that the earlier work of Barber [106] underestimated the temperature
dependence. The temperature dependence of density of state (DOS) effective mass
of holes for Si shows a good fit to the expression
m∗
dv(T)
mo
= 0.545 + 3.41 × 10−3T −5.66 × 0−6T 2 + 3.53 × 10−9T 3
(10.9)
where T is the absolute temperature and mo is the electron rest mass. Valence band
density of state effective mass of strained-Si1−xGex depends both on temperature and
Ge mole fraction as
m∗
dv(x, T) = m∗
dv(T)
m∗
dv(0) m∗
dv(x)
(10.10)
where m∗
dv(0) is the DOS effective mass of Si. Finally, the temperature and Ge
mole-fraction-dependent valence band density of states of strained-Si1−xGex can be
expressed as
Nv(x, T) = 2.54 × 1019[m∗
dv(x, T)]3/2
 T
300
3/2
(10.11)

368
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
x=0.0
x=0.1
x=0.2
x=0.3
4.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
100
200
m ∗dv/mo
300
Temperature (K)
Analytical model
Lang 1983
Green 1990
400
500
600
Figure 10.7
The valence band density of states effective mass as a function of
temperature. Models for Si are also shown
The valence band density of states for strained-Si1−xGex as a function of Ge
fraction is shown in Figure 10.8. It is seen that the density of states slowly decrease
as the Ge composition is increased due to reduction in the effective mass.
10.3.4
Si1−xGex mobility
The hole and electron transport for strained and unstrained SiGe have been modelled
by many workers [79,107–110]. The enhanced low temperature mobilities have been
observed for both holes and electrons [111]. MC simulations of electron mobility in
heavily doped SiGe at room temperature indicate µn will be almost 50 per cent higher
than for Si due to the smaller effective mass in SiGe [55,112,113].
In addition to phonon, impurity and alloy scattering mechanisms, strain plays a
major role in determining carrier mobility. The drift hole mobility for unstrained and
coherently strained-Si1−xGex (x < 0.3) alloy with doping levels 1015–1019 cm−3
were analytically obtained by Manku et al. [114]. These mobilities were calculated
by taking into account the acoustic, optical, alloy and ionised-impurity scattering
and were compared with experimental result for boron doping concentration of 2 ×
1019 cm−3. The results showed an increase in the mobility relative to that of Si.
However, in the above, the majority and minority carrier mobilities were assumed
to be equal. Bufler et al. [115] have reported that minority carrier mobilities in
unstrained and strained-Si1−xGex are different as in the case of Si. The electron
and hole mobilities for strained-Si1−xGex were calculated by taking into account the
minority and majority carrier transport parameters.

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
369
Effective DOS (1019 cm–3)
Effective DOS (1018 cm–3)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Ge fraction (x)
0.20
0.25
0.30
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
300 K
77 K
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Figure 10.8
The valence band density of states for strained-Si1−xGex as a function
of Ge fraction for 300 and 77 K
Table 10.5
Hole mobility parameters for strained-SiGe
Nref (cm−3)
α
β
γ
δ
2.35 × 1017
−0.57
−2.23
−2.546
0.90
MC schemes generally require a huge computing resource for obtaining the mobil-
ity parameter as the free flight of the electron under an accelerated electric field,
subject to the scattering events is repeated until a stable value is reached. For device
simulation purpose, however, a simple and less involved method for calculating the
hole mobility in SiGe is desirable and is given by
µs−SiGe
p
= µminT α
n +
µoT β
n
1 + (N/Nref )δT γ
n
(10.12)
where Tn = T/300, and µmin and µo are given as [116]
µmin = 44 −20x + 850x2;
µo = 400 + 29x + 4737x2
(10.13)
The temperature dependence of parameters α, β and γ are assumed to be the same
as those of Si, and are shown in Table 10.5. The doping dependence of hole mobility

370
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
1015
0
200
Experimental
Lu, 5%
Bufler, 8–17%
Carns, 5–22%
Krstelj, 8–27%
Joelsson, 3–36%
400
600
800
1000
1016
1017
1018
1019
1020
Doping concentration (cm–3)
Hole mobility (cm2/Vs)
Analytical model
Ge = 10%
Ge = 20%
Ge = 30%
Figure 10.9
The hole mobility for strained-Si1−xGex as function of Ge compo-
sition for different doping level. The experimental electron mobility
data points are taken from Lu et al. [117], Bufler et al. [118], Carns
et al. [116], Krstelj et al. [119], and Joelsson et al. [120]
of strained-SiGe is shown in Figure 10.9. The experimental hole mobility data from
several reports are included for comparison purposes.
As the minority carrier mobility is of considerable importance for bipolar tran-
sistors, an analytical low field mobility model which distinguishes between majority
and minority electron mobilities has also been developed [65] using MC simulation
data for electrons in Si. MC simulation which accounts for alloy scattering and the
splitting of the anisotropic conduction band valleys due to strain [121] in combina-
tion with an accurate ionised impurity scattering model [122] allows one to obtain
results for SiGe for the complete range of donor and acceptor concentrations and Ge
contents. Commonly the same functional form is used to fit the doping dependence
of the in-plane mobility component for x = 0 and x = 1 (Si and strained-Ge on Si).
The material composition dependence is modelled by [31]
1
µ(x) = 1 −x
µSi
+
x
µGe + (1 −x) · x
Cµ
(10.14)
where Cµ equals to 140 cm2/Vs and 110 cm2/Vs for doping levels below and above
Cmid, respectively. Figure 10.10 shows the in-plane minority electron mobility in
Si1−xGex as function of x at 300 K for different acceptor doping concentrations.
The model parameters used for SiGe at 300 K are summarised in Table 10.6. The
component of the mobility perpendicular to the surface is then obtained by multipli-
cation factor given by the ratio of the two mobility components. The good agreement

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
371
Electron mobility (cm2/Vs)
MC data NA = le14 cm–3
MC data NA = le16 cm–3
MC data NA = le18 cm–3
MC data NA = le20 cm–3
Model NA = le14 cm–3
Model NA = le16 cm–3
Model NA = le18 cm–3
Model NA = le20 cm–3
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Ge composition, x
0.8
1.0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Figure 10.10
Minority electron mobility in Si1−xGex as function of x for in-plane
direction: the model gives good agreement with Monte Carlo simu-
lation data [After V. Palankovski and S. Selberherr, Proc. Symp. on
Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon Devices and Technologies
for ULSI Era, 2003(1–11)]
Table 10.6
Parameter values for the majority/minority elec-
tron mobility at 300K [After V. Palankovski and S.
Selberherr, Proc. Symp. on Diagnostics and Yield:
Advanced Silicon Devices and Technologies for
ULSI Era, 2003(1–11)]
Parameter
Si
Ge (on Si)
Unit
µLn
1430
560
cm2/Vs
µmaj
mid
44
80
cm2/Vs
µmaj
hi
58
59
cm2/Vs
µmin
mid
141
124
cm2/Vs
µmaj
hi
218
158
cm2/Vs
α
0.65
0.65
—
β
2.0
2.0
—
Cmid
1.12 × 1017
4.0 × 1017
cm−3
Cmaj
hi
1.18 × 1020
4.9 × 1018
cm−3
Cmin
hi
4.35 × 1019
5.4 × 1019
cm−3

372
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
1200
1400
MC data Si
MC perp. Si0.9Ge0.1
MC par. Si0.7Ge0.3
Model Si
Model par Si0.7Ge0.3
Model par Si0.9Ge0.1
Model perp. Si0.9Ge0.1
exp. data Si
exp. data Si0.8Ge0.2
1000
800
600
400
200
0
1015
1016
1017
Acceptor concentration NA (cm–3)
1018
1019
1020
Electron minority mobility (cm2/Vs)
Figure 10.11
Minority electron mobility in Si1−xGex as function of NA and x: the
model gives good agreement with measurements and Monte Carlo
simulation data both for in-plane and perpendicular to the surface
directions [After V. Palankovski and S. Selberherr, Proc. Symp. on
Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon Devices and Technologies
for ULSI Era, 2003(1–11)]
of the model with the measured and the MC simulation data, both for in-plane and
perpendicular to the surface directions, is illustrated in Figure 10.11.
10.3.5
Saturation velocity
In Si, the saturation velocity, vsat, depends strongly on temperature [123, 124]. The
expressions for temperature-dependent saturation velocity for electrons and holes
respectively, are given by [125]
vsatn(T) = 1.45 × 107

tan h
155
T

vsatp(T) = 9.05 × 106

tan h
312
T

(10.15)
and represent fits to the experimental data [123,125].
In strained-Si1−xGex, the saturation velocity depends on the Ge mole fraction.
Since the alloy scattering is an important parameter in SiGe alloys, it affects the
velocity-field characteristics for carrier transport. Several workers [115, 126, 127]
have shown that the saturation velocity decreases as the Ge mole fraction is increased.
Bufler et al. [115] have investigated the Ge mole fraction dependence of electron and
hole saturation velocity, vsatn,satp(x), using MC simulation. The best fit of these results

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
373
Analytical model
Ge composition (x)
Saturation velocity (107 cm/s)
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
Hole
Electron
T = 300 K
T = 77 K
Bufler 1997
Mau 1997
0.3
Figure 10.12
The electron and hole saturation velocity for strained-Si1−xGex as a
function of Ge composition at 300 and 77K. The MC electron sat-
uration velocity results are taken from Bufler et al. [115] and hole
saturation velocity from H. Mau [128]
to an analytical expression is given as
Vsatn,satp(x, T) = vsatn,satp(T)

α
α + x(1 −x)

(10.16)
where Vsatn,satp(T) is saturation velocity for Si as in Equation (10.15) and constant
α = 0.255. The composition and temperature-dependent electron and hole saturation
velocities for strained-Si1−xGex are shown in Figure 10.12.
10.3.6
Generation and recombination
The dominant recombination processes in bulk-Si are Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH)
and Auger recombination. Radiative recombination is negligible since Si is an indirect
bandgap semiconductor, and recombination involving excitons and shallow-level
traps is only important at a low temperature. Misfit dislocations in SiGe layers are
undesirable since the formation of efficient generation recombination (GR) centre
degrades device performance and introduces noise. Misfit dislocation generation
can be caused by improper growth condition or strained layer thickness exceeding
the critical thickness [129–132]. Pseudomorphic or commensurate growth lowers
the energy of the interfacial atoms at the expense of stored strain energy within the
coherently strained layer and the Si1−xGex epilayer undergoes a biaxial in-plane
compressive strain due to the large lattice constant of Si1−xGex compared to that of
Si. This biaxial strain is composed of a uniaxial extension in the growth direction and
a hydrostatic strain in all directions [133].

374
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
SRH recombination is dominant for low doping concentrations and is determined
from the following equation [18]:
RSRH =
np −n2
ie
τp[n −nie exp(Et −Ei/kT)] + τn[p −nie exp(Et −Ei/kT)]
(10.17)
where Et is the energy level for the recombination centres, Ei is the intrinsic Fermi
energy and nie is the effective intrinsic carrier concentration including bandgap
narrowing effects. The default trap energy level is the intrinsic level, Ei.
The minority-carrier lifetimes resulting from SRH recombination is inversely
proportional to the dopant concentration and depends strongly on temperature
[134–136]. For doping concentrations up to 1019 cm−3 an empirical fit to experi-
mental data gives the following temperature dependence minority-carrier lifetime
[134,137] as
τn,p =
τo(T/300)γ
1 + (N/NSRH)
(10.18)
for both electrons and holes respectively, and N is the local (total) impurity concen-
tration, τo is the minority carrier lifetime in lightly doped Si and NSRH is the reference
doping. A good fit to experimental data [134,138] is achieved by setting the param-
eters as given in Table 10.7. However, as τo is very much process dependent, values
shown may not be accurate in all cases.
King et al. [94] have investigated the dependence of the minority carrier recom-
bination lifetime on oxygen concentration in CVD grown strained-SiGe layer. Ghani
et al. [139] have investigated the effect of oxygen concentration on the recombination
lifetime of minority electrons. The lifetime value was found to reduce from 0.1 µs
for an oxygen concentration of <1018 cm−3 down to a few ps for oxygen concentra-
tions in excess of <1020 cm−3. Minority carrier lifetime, obtained from a contactless
photocarrier lifetime measurements in MBE-grown Si/SiGe heterostructures by
Higashi et al. [140], was found to degrade from 50 to 100 µs for SiGe layer to
≈100 ns for a fully processed SiGe HBT devices. Generation lifetimes in the strained
layers have also been measured in a strained layer MOS capacitor by a modified
Zerbst technique [141]. Studies on the determination of minority carrier lifetime in
SiGe-based HBTs have been reported and it has been shown that the base recombi-
nation lifetime increases in SiGe HBTs [142]. Since strained-SiGe is very similar to
Table 10.7
Recombination parameters for
electron and hole in Si
Parameter
Electron
Hole
τo(s)
1 × 10−7
1 × 10−7
NSRH (cm−3)
5 × 1016
5 × 1016
γ
−1.5
−1.5

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
375
Si in band structure for low Ge mole fraction (below x = 0.20), Si recombination
model is generally assumed for SiGe [133] although the minority carrier lifetime in
SiGe are believed to be somewhat shorter than Si minority carrier lifetime.
Auger recombination become dominant for total dopant concentration beyond
1018 cm−3 [143]. The model of the Auger recombination process is given by
RAu = (Ccnn + Ccpp)(np −n2
ie)
(10.19)
The Auger coefficients Ccn and Ccp are very weakly temperature dependent and are
represented using simple power laws. Selberherr [144] has reported a fit to the data
of Dziewor and Schmidt [143] for Si as
Ccn = 1.26 × 10−31T 0.14
Ccp = 3.55 × 10−32T 0.18
(10.20)
10.3.7
Impact ionisation
Impact ionisation is the third generation–recombination mechanism that should be
considered if the carrier energies are high enough (>100 kV/cm) to cause interband
transition. The generation rate of electron-hole pairs due to impact ionisation for Si
has been modelled as [145]
G = αn
Jn
q + αp
Jp
q
(10.21)
where αn and αp are the electron and hole ionisation rates that are functions of electric
field (E) and is given by
αn,p = α∞
n,p exp

−

Ecrit
n,p
E
βn,p
(10.22)
In both electronic and optoelectronic devices, the impact ionisation-induced
breakdown is of great importance. Electron-initiated impact ionisation rate (αn) and
hole-initiated impact ionisation rate (αp) limit the high power performance of elec-
tronicdevices. Theratioofelectronandholeimpactionisationcoefficientisespecially
important in low noise applications. The impact ionisation process depends largely
on the band-structure and bandgap. In strained-SiGe, as Ge content is increased the
bandgap decreases, and it is expected that the impact ionisation will play a major role
at high electric field.
However, as the Ge composition is increased, as discussed before, the alloy scat-
tering increases up to a Ge mole fraction of 50 per cent. The increase in alloy scattering
randomises the carrier distribution and suppresses the energy that the carriers can gain
from the field. This, in turn, tends to suppress the impact ionization. Thus, there is
a competition between the effect of decreasing bandgap and increasing alloy scatter-
ing. However, once the Ge content exceeds 50 per cent, the effect of alloy scattering
weakens.

376
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
The experimental impact ionisation coefficient ratio (αn/αp) has been determined
using Si1−xGex photodiodes for the entire composition range 0.08 < x < 1. The
measured value of the ratio varies from 3.3 at x = 0.08 to 0.3 at x = 1 [146]. Yeom
et al. [147] have calculated the impact ionisation coefficient ratio (αn/αp) for SiGe
alloys and reported similar results.
10.4
Simulation of III–V devices
Modelling of advanced III–V semiconductor devices appears to be a less rigorous
approach than for silicon devices as the material properties for modelling of AlGaAs,
InGaAs or even InAlAs, and InGaP are restricted to slight modifications of GaAs
material properties. Also, the database for novel materials, such as GaN or GaSb,
which have entered the III–V material systems with impressive device results, is still
relatively limited. Modelling of stress-induced changes of the physical properties
of strained material layers and consideration of piezoelectric effects is a subject of
ongoing research [36].
The two-dimensional device simulator MINIMOS-NT has been extended to deal
with different complex materials and structures, such as binary and ternary semicon-
ductor III–V alloys with arbitrary material composition profiles. It is well known that
GaAs-HBTs with InGaP emitter material can be improved with respect to reliability
if the emitter material covers the complete p-doped base layer forming outside the
active emitter, the so-called InGaP ledge. Palankovski et al. [148] have reported the
influence of the ledge thickness and of the surface charges on the device performance
and its impact on reliability.
Palankovski et al. [149] have addressed these critical modelling issues for III–V
devices based on GaAs, AlAs, InAs, InP and GaP, their ternary alloys and non-
ideal dielectrics in the 2D device simulator MINIMOS-NT [150]. Various important
physical effects, such as BGN [151], surface recombination and self-heating, are
taken into account. A new universal low field mobility model based on MC simula-
tions, distinguishing between majority and minority electron mobilities has also been
implemented in MINIMOS-NT [65]. This model is significant as underestimation of
electron mobility in the GaAs base of HBTs can result in significant overestimation of
the extracted base resistance. The model parameters have been verified against sev-
eral independent HEMT, HBT technologies and submicron HFETs with gate-lengths
down to 100 nm used for millimetre-wave devices. In simulation, solutions of energy
transport equations were used to account for non-local effects, such as velocity over-
shoot. A new model for carrier temperature-dependent energy relaxation times [59]
was developed as well as a model for lattice temperature-dependent saturation veloc-
ities [60]. Interested readers may refer to an excellent review on modelling of current
transport in ultra-scaled field-effect transistors by Sverdlov et al. [152].
For HFET devices the Schottky contact model determines the possibility to cal-
culate realistic gate currents, based on thermionic effects. Thermionic emission (TE)
and field emission effects critically determine the current transport parallel and per-
pendicular to the heterointerfaces. Carrier tunnelling must be included to describe the

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
377
current transport from the channel to the contacts in HEMT devices depending on the
alloying of the ohmic contacts.
Another critical issue for recessed HFETs and for HBTs is the description of
the semiconductor/insulator interface. Fermi-level pinning prevails especially for
typical barrier materials such as AlGaAs or InAlAs, for ledge materials such as
InGaP and insulators such as SiN. Sophisticated thermionic-field emission interface
models [153] in conjunction with the hydrodynamic transport model are needed in
simulation. When assessing a complete device description, the inclusion of holes and
hot hole effects is necessary.
Trap modelling, for example, the inclusion of DX centres and especially dynamic
trap modelling are the most challenging issues for III–V devices, since the carrier
lifetimes cannot be generalised without deep insight into process technology, for
example, from 1/f noise measurements. Yang et al. [154] have stressed the importance
of Auger recombination for InGaAs-base HBTs relative to SRH recombination.
III–V materials are known to have a reduced heat conductivity in comparison to
Si [56]. To account for self-heating effects the lattice heat flow equation is solved
self-consistently with the energy transport equations (system of six partial differential
equations). The thermal conductivity and the specific heat are expressed as functions
of the lattice temperature and in the case of semiconductor alloys of the material
composition[33]. Figures10.13and10.14presentcomparisonsbetweenexperimental
data [155–158] and simulations for the thermal conductivity in the temperature range
300–800 K. The parameter values used are summarised in Tables 10.8 and 10.9. In
Figures 10.15 and 10.16, comparisons between experimental data from [156–161]
and the results obtained with the model are shown for the thermal conductivity at
300 K.
1.5
exp. data Si
exp. data GaP
exp. data Ge
model Si
model GaP
model Ge
1.0
0.5
0.0
300
400
500
600
Lattice temperature (K)
κ (W/cmK)
700
800
Figure 10.13
Temperature dependence of the thermal conductivity. Comparison
between experimental data and the model for Si, Ge, and GaP
[After V. Palankovski et al., IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 48,
2001(1264–1269). © 2001 IEEE]

378
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.0
300
400
500
600
Lattice temperature (K)
κ (W/cmK)
700
800
exp. data InP
exp. data GaAs
exp. data InAs
model InP
model GaAs
model InAs
Figure 10.14
Temperature dependence of the thermal conductivity. Comparison
between experimental data and the model for InP, GaAs, and InAs
[After V. Palankovski et al., IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 48,
2001(1264–1269). © 2001 IEEE]
Table 10.8
Parameter values for mass density, thermal conductivity, and specific
heat of several important semiconductors
Material
ρ
κ300
α
C300
CL
β
(g/cm3)
(W/K m)
(J/K kg)
(J/K kg)
Si
2.33
148
−1.65
711
255
1.85
Ge
5.327
60
−1.25
360
130
1.3
GaAs
5.32
46
−1.25
322
50
1.6
AlAs
3.76
80
−1.37
441
50
1.2
InAs
5.667
27.3
−1.1
394
50
1.95
InP
4.81
68
−1.4
410
50
2.05
GaP
4.138
77
−1.4
519
50
12.6
The specific heat capacity of the considered material is modelled with
CL(TL) = C300 + CL ·
(TL/300 K)β −1
(TL/300 K)β + (CL/C300)
(10.23)
where C300 is the value for the specific heat at 300 K [162]. The model is used for
the basic semiconductor materials. In Figures 10.17 and 10.18, comparisons between
experimental data and the results obtained with the model for the specific heat are
shown. Note the excellent agreement it gives in a wide temperature range (0–800 K).
The parameter values used are summarised in Table 10.8.

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
379
Table 10.9
Parameter
values
for
thermal conductivity
Material
C (W/K m)
SiGe
2.8
AlGaAs
3.3
InGaAs
1.4
InAlAs
3.3
InAsP
3.3
GaAsP
1.4
InGaP
1.4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Material composition, x
Si1–xGex exp. data
InxGa1–xAs exp. data
Si1–xGex model
InxGa1–x As model
κ (W/cmK)
Figure 10.15
Material composition dependence of the thermal conductivity.
Comparison between experimental data and the model for SiGe and
InGaAs [After V. Palankovski et al., IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
Vol. 48, 2001(1264–1269). © 2001 IEEE]
The advance of device simulation further allows a precise physics-based small-
signal extraction [57,163]. Measured bias dependent s-parameters serve as a valuable
source of information when compared to bias dependent s-parameters simulated from
a device simulator, for example, from MINIMOS-NT. By simulating in the frequency
domain, important small-signal figures of merit, such as the cut-off frequency and
the maximum oscillation frequency can be efficiently extracted [164]. On the other
hand, non-linear periodic steady-state analysis can be performed in the time domain
to obtain large-signal figure of merit parameters, such as distortion, power, frequency
and noise as well in the context of coupled device and circuit simulation [165].
Figure 10.19 shows the simulated and measured output characteristics of a pseu-
domorphic Al0.2Ga0.8As/In0.2Ga0.8As/GaAs high-power HEMT with gate-length

380
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Material composition, x
InxAs1–xP exp. data
AlxGa1–x As exp. data
InxAs1–xP model
AlxGa1–xAs model
κ (W/cmK)
Figure 10.16
Material composition dependence of the thermal conductivity.
Comparison between experimental data and the model for InAsP and
AlGaAs [After V. Palankovski et al., IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
Vol. 48, 2001(1264–1269). © 2001 IEEE]
0
0
200
400
600
800
exp. data Si
exp. data Ge
Model Si
Model Ge
200
400
600
800
1000
cL (J/Kkg)
Lattice temperature (K)
Figure 10.17
Temperature dependence of the specific heat. Comparison between
experimental data and the model for Si and Ge [After V. Palankovski et
al., IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 48, 2001(1264–1269). © 2001
IEEE]
210 nm at substrate temperature of 300 K. The device is designed for Ka-band appli-
cations. Self-heating effects are accounted for as well as impact ionisation. Special
care was put to match the output conductance for Vds > 5 to characterise the device
in the region, which defines the clipping of a voltage swing on an applied load-line
and thus linearity.

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
381
cL (J/K/kg)
0
200
400
600
800
Lattice temperature (K)
0
100
200
300
400
500
exp. data AlAs
exp. data GaAs
Model AlAs
Model GaAs
Figure 10.18
Temperature dependence of the specific heat. Comparison between
experimental data and the model for GaAs and AlAs [After
V. Palankovski et al., IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, Vol. 48, 2001
(1264–1269). © 2001 IEEE]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Measurement
Simulation
ID (mA/mm)
VDs (V)
VGs = 1.2 V, step 0.2 V
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Figure 10.19
Output characteristics of a pseudomorphic Al0.2Ga0.8 As/In0.2Ga0.8
As/GaAs high-power HEMT with gate-length 210 nm at substrate
temperature of 300K [After V. Palankovski et al., IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, Vol. 36, 2001(1365–1370). © 2001 IEEE]
Figure 10.20 demonstrates a comparison of the simulated and measured
s-parameters of a gate length of 140 nm pseudomorphic Al0.2Ga0.8As/In0.2Ga0.8As/
GaAs HEMT at 373 K from 0.5 to 50 GHz using 0.5 GHz steps. No fitting is applied,
just the parasitic elements extracted from the measurements are used. The overall
agreement is considered good. The discrepancies found for s12 between simulation
and measurement are due to both a systematic error in the determination of s12 and
the simulation itself.

382
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
180
0
+250
+100
+50
+25
+10
10
10
25
25
50
50
100
100
250
250
10
25
50
100
250
fstart = 0.5 GHz
S21 radius = 10
S12 radius = 0.4
fstop = 50 GHz
135
90
45
Figure 10.20
Simulated (−) and measured (+) s-parameters of a Lg = 140 nm
HEMT at TL = 373 K from 0.5 to 50 GHz using 0.5 GHz steps
[After V. Palankovski et al., IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 36,
2001(1365–1370). © 2001 IEEE]
For high speed InAlAs/InGaAs HEMTs, the precise evaluation of low volt-
age or low power capabilities is useful for the development for high speed optical
data transmission beyond 40 Gbit/s. The comparison of several lattice matched
and metamorphic technologies further allowed to obtain consistent simulation
parameters also for this material system. Figure 10.21 shows simulation and
measurements for two different substrate temperatures for a composite channel
In0.52Al0.48As/In0.66Ga0.34As/In0.53Ga0.47As/InP HEMT for gate length of 150 nm.
The III–V HBTs are considered essential for high-power amplifiers at 3 V
power supply, as they offer high current amplification and power-added efficiency
(PAE). Figure 10.22 shows the simulated forward Gummel plot of such 3 × 30 µm2
AlGaAs/GaAs HBT with an InGaP ledge compared to experimental data. A good
agreement at room temperature and the simulated Gummel plot at 373 K demon-
strates the suitability of MINIMOS-NT to reproduce the thermal device behaviour
correctly. It is often problematic to achieve realistic results in simulation of out-
put HBT characteristics, especially for high-power devices as the power dissipation
increases with collector-to-emitter voltage, gradually elevating the junction tempera-
ture above the ambient temperature [166]. This leads to gradually decreasing collector
currents at constant applied base current or, respectively, gradually increasing at
constant base-to-emitter voltage.
Figure 10.23 shows the simulated output device characteristics compared to mea-
surements for constant base voltage in the range 1.4–1.45 V using a 0.01 V step.

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
383
ID (mA/mm)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
VDS = 0.75 V
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
VGS (V)
Measurement Tsub = 300 K
Measurement Tsub = 348 K
Simulation Tsub = 300 K
Simulation Tsub = 348 K
Figure 10.21
Transfer characteristics of a composite channel InAlAs/InGaAs/InP
HEMT with gate length of 150 nm for two different temperatures
[After V. Palankovski et al., IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 36,
2001(1365–1370). © 2001 IEEE]
IC IB (A)
10–8
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
10–7
10–6
10–5
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
100
VBE (V)
IB–exp. data
IC–exp. data
IB–293 K
IC–293 K
IB–373 K
IC–373 K
Figure 10.22
Forward Gummel plots at Vbc = 0 V for AlGaAs/GaAs HBT:
Comparison with measurement data at TL = 293K and TL = 373K
[After V. Palankovski et al., IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 36,
2001(1365–1370). © 2001 IEEE]
Note the significant disagreement between simulation without self-heating (SH) and
the measured data and the good agreement when self-heating is included in the sim-
ulation. The lattice temperature can reach a temperature as much as 400 K. Such a
lattice temperature rise significantly changes the material properties of the device and
hence its electrical characteristics [167].

384
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
1.0
0.0
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Measured
Simulated without SH
Simulated with SH
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
VCE (V)
IC (A)
Figure 10.23
HBT output characteristics: simulation of with and without self-
heating compared to measurement data at constant Vbe stepped from
1.4 to 1.45 V [After V. Palankovski et al., IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits,
Vol. 36, 2001(1365–1370). © 2001 IEEE]
10.5
Comparison of HBTs
Esame et al. [168] have made a comprehensive comparison of three state-of-the-art
heterojunction bipolar transistors; AlGaAs/GaAs, Si/SiGe and InGaAs/InP HBTs.
Direct current and bias point simulations of the devices were performed using
Agilent’s ADS design tool and a comparison is given for a wide range of FOM spec-
ifications. It has been concluded that GaAs based HBTs are suitable for high-power
applications due to their high-breakdown voltages, SiGe-based HBTs are promising
for low noise applications due to their low noise figures and InP will be the choice, if
very high-data rates are of primary importance since InP-based HBT transistors have
superior material properties leading to Terahertz frequency operation.
For device I–V curve families Vce is swept from 0 to 5 V and Ib from 10 to 100
mA. As seen from Figure 10.24, for 70 µA base current the AlGaAs/GaAs device’s
collector current is 6 mA, while it is 11 mA for the Si/SiGe device and 4 mA for
the InGaAs/InP HBT at their optimal Vce for class A operation. Since the breakdown
voltagephenomenawerenotmodelledfortheAlGaAs/GaAsandInGaAs/InPdevices,
no collector-base breakdown can be seen in Figure 10.24(a) and (c). However, for
the Si/SiGe device, this breakdown can be seen at around 5 V of collector-emitter
voltage (Figure 10.24b). This low BVcbo is the main problem for the SiGe-based
heterojunction transistors and limits their use in some application areas such as base
stations of cellular networks, where supply voltages exceed 10 V. A solution may be
to design a double heterojunction bipolar transistor, which provides high-breakdown
voltages owing to the use of a wide-gap material in the collectors.

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
385
9
m
m3
m3
m3
VCE = 2.900
m3 = 0.006
IBB = 0.000070
m3
m3
m3
VCE = 2.600
m3 = 0.011
IBB = 0.000070
m3
m3
m3
VCE = 2.650
m3 = 0.004
IBB = 0.000070
IBB = 1.000E-4
IBB = 9.000E-5
IBB = 8.000E-5
IBB = 7.000E-5
IBB = 6.000E-5
IBB = 5.000E-5
IBB = 4.000E-5
IBB = 3.000E-5
IBB = 2.000E-5
IBB = 1.000E-5
IBB = 1.000E-4
IBB = 9.000E-5
IBB = 8.000E-5 
IBB = 7.000E-5
IBB = 6.000E-5
IBB = 5.000E-5
IBB = 4.000E-5
IBB = 3.000E-5
IBB = 2.000E-5
IBB = 1.000E-5
IBB = 1.000E-4
IBB = 9.000E-5
IBB = 8.000E-5
IBB = 7.000E-5
IBB = 6.000E-5
IBB = 5.000E-5
IBB = 4.000E-5
IBB = 3.000E-5
IBB = 2.000E-5
IBB = 1.000E-5
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
VCE
0
1
2
3
4
5
VCE
DC.IC.i. mA
DC.IC.i. mA
–1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
VCE
DC.IC.i. mA
–1
40
(a)
(c)
(b)
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
–5
Figure 10.24
Ic vs. Vce curves of (a) AlGaAs/GaAs HBT, (b) Si/SiGe HBT, and
(c) InGaAs/InP HBT [After O. Esame et al., Microelectronics J.,
Vol. 35, 2004(901–908)]

386
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
RF transistors, like other active devices are unconditionally stable at any operat-
ing frequency above a critical frequency, fk. At operating frequencies below fk, the
transistor is conditionally stable and certain termination conditions can cause oscil-
lations. As discussed in Reference 169, stability measure ‘B > 0’ and stability factor
‘k > 1’ are the necessary and sufficient conditions for stability. k and B are defined as
k = 1 −|s11|2 −|s22|2 + |	|2
2(s12s21)
(10.24)
B = 1 + |s11|2 −|s22|2 −|	|2
(10.25)
where
|	| = |s11s22 −s12s21|
(10.26)
If k > 1, the transistor is unconditionally stable, and for k < 1, it works in the
region of conditional stability where unintended oscillations may occur. These sets
of expressions reduce to ‘k > 1’ since in this case B is positive for all the devices.
In Figure 10.25, stability factor k vs. frequency curves for 70 µA base current is
given and ‘k = 1’ points are marked. The AlGaAs/GaAs device is unconditionally
stable over 12.3 GHz while fk is 31.7 GHz for the Si/SiGe HBT and 56.5 GHz for
InGaAs/InP HBT. Collector voltages are set to optimum values for class A operation
in the stability analysis.
For fT calculation, Vce is set to optimal value for class A operation for each device,
and select different base current values over a wide range of frequency spectrum. For
all devices, Ib is swept from 10 to 100 µA with 10 µA steps. The fT values and also the
short current gain can be read from Figure 10.26. For Ib = 100 µA, the AlGaAs/GaAs
HBT shows an fT of 95.7 GHz while SiGe HBT shows 278 GHz and the InGaAs/InP
HBT 302.6 GHz. However, β at Ib = 100 µA for the above devices are 25, 51 and
40, respectively.
There are several power gain definitions commonly used to characterise RF tran-
sistors. If a transistor is to achieve maximum power gain, then power matching is
required. For operating frequencies above fk, power matching is obtained when both
the input and output of the transistor are conjugately impedance-matched to the signal
source and load respectively. The power gain obtained under these matching condi-
tions is the maximum available gain (MAG). However, when the transistor is operated
at frequencies below fk, auxiliary external admittances at the input and output have
to be connected to the transistor to suppress its tendency to oscillate. The maximum
oscillation frequency is defined as the frequency at which the transistor still provides
a power gain MAG if the stability factor k > 1. It is equal to the maximum stable gain,
|s21|/|s12|, if k < 1 and the maximum unilateral gain if s12 = 0. For Ib = 100 µA, the
AlGaAs/GaAs HBT shows an fmax of 151.7 GHz while SiGe HBT shows 134.6 GHz
and the InGaAs/InP HBT 416.6 GHz. However, the current gains at Ib = 100 µA
are 25, 51 and 40, respectively. The corresponding graphs for MAG are illustrated in
Figure 10.27.

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
387
3.0
2.5
2.0
m2
m2
m2
m2
freq = 12.3 GHz
m2 = 1.01
IBB = 0.000070
m2
freq = 31.7 GHz
m2 = 1.01
IBB = 0.000070
m2
freq = 56.5 GHz
m2 = 997 m
IBB = 0.000070
Frequency (GHz)
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0
20
40
60
80
100 120 140 160 180 200
Frequency (GHz)
0
20
40
60
80
100 120 140 160 180 200
Frequency (GHz)
0
20
40
60
80 100 120 140 160 180 200
K
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
K
2.5
(a)
(b)
(c)
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
K
Figure 10.25
Stability factor k vs. frequency curves for (a) AlGaAs/GaAs HBT,
(b) Si/SiGe HBT, and (c) InGaAs/InP HBT [After O. Esame et al.,
Microelectronics J., Vol. 35, 2004(901–908)]
Si/SiGe HBTs show better noise performance than their AlGaAs/GaAs and
InGaAs/InP counterparts. NFmin is 5 dB for the GaAs based device at its optimum bias
for class A operation. It is 1.5 dB for the SiGe HBT and 2.735 dB for the InP HBT for a
wide range of Vce values. This advantage makes SiGe attractive for applications such
as low noise amplifiers (LNAs), where minimum noise figure is the critical FOM.

388
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
4E1
1E1
1E-1
1E8
1E9
1E10
m2
m2
m2
Frequency (GHz)
1E8
1E9
1E10
1E11
1E12
Frequency (GHz)
1E9
1E10
1E11
5E11
Frequency (GHz)
1E11 2E11
1
1E2
Current gain
4E1
(a)
(b)
(c)
1E1
1E-1
1
Current gain
Current gain
1E1
1E-1
1E-2
1
m2
freq = 95.70 GHz
m2 = 0.995
IBB = 0.000100
m2
freq = 278.0 GHz
m2 = 0.997
IBB = 0.000100
m2
freq = 302.6 GHz
m2 = 1.000
IBB = 0.000100
m2
m2
m2
m2
m2
m2
Figure 10.26
Short-circuit current gain vs. frequency curves for (a) AlGaAs/GaAs
HBT, (b) Si/SiGe HBT, and (c) InGaAs/InP HBT [After O. Esame
et al., Microelectronics J., Vol. 35, 2004(901–908)]

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
389
(a)
(b)
(c)
6E1
1E1
1E-1
1E8
1E9
1E10
1E11 2E11
1
MAG (dB)
Frequency (GHz)
6E1
1E1
1E-1
1E8
1E9
1E10
1E11
5E11
1
1E1
4E1
1E-1
1
MAG (dB)
MAG (dB)
1E9
1E10
1E11
1E12
m2
freq = 151.7 GHz
m2 = 1.000
IBB = 0.000100
m2
freq = 134.6 GHz
m2 = 0.984
IBB = 0.000100
m2
freq = 416.6 GHz
m2 = 0.999
IBB = 0.000100
m2
m2
m2
m2
m2
m2
m2
m2
m2
Frequency (GHz)
Frequency (GHz)
Figure 10.27
MAG vs. frequency curves for (a) AlGaAs/GaAs HBT, (b) Si/SiGe
HBT,
and
(c)
InGaAs/InP
HBT
[After
O.
Esame
et
al.,
Microelectronics J., Vol. 35, 2004(901–908)]

390
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
10.6
RFMOS vs. HBTs
There has been tremendous progress in consumer RF products with the availability
of SiGe BiCMOS and CMOS technologies with good passive elements. Therefore,
there is an increasing trend to migrate applications from SiGe BiCMOS to a pure
CMOS technology, especially in the sub-10 GHz range. Exploring the design space
to create acceptable circuits with MOSFETs will need device models and design kits
that are accurate over a wide range of frequency and bias conditions. Since HBTs
have been used extensively in RF applications, accurate high-frequency models and
design tools are already available.
Most high volume consumer wireless applications still operate below 10 GHz
in carrier frequency, and therefore high fT can be potentially traded for significant
savings in power. A similar argument can also hold for SiGe HBTs, where fT can
exceed 350 GHz [170]. As CMOS technology scales into the sub-100 nm nodes,
RF performance can approach that of SiGe, for example, a fT = 243 GHz and
fmax = 208 GHz for n-MOSFET [171].
A comparison of speed and power performance of the state-of-the-art CMOS and
SiGe RF transistors has also been reported by Jagannathan et al. [172]. Figure 10.28
shows the Gummel (Vc = Vb = 0 V) and subthreshold I–V (Vds = 1 V) of the HBT
and n-FET respectively. Current in the FET at high gate bias is limited by velocity
saturation and mobility reduction, while a combination of emitter resistance and
IC or ID (mA/m)
VGS or VBE (V)
10–7
VT
Vbe at turn-on
SiGe HBT width = 0.12 m drawn
CMOS n-FET length = 0.08 m drawn
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
10–6
10–5
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
100
101
Figure 10.28
Direct current I–V of n-MOSFET and SiGe HBT. Device turn-
on voltages are indicated [After B. Jagannathan et al., Proc.
Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits in RF Systems Meeting,
2004(115–118). © 2004 IEEE]

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
391
IC or IC (mA/m)
Vbe = 0.9 V
Vgs = 0.8 V
0.0
0.01
0.1
1
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.2
0.4
gm = 78
gm = 16
S/m
S/m
0.6
FET gm (mS/m)
HBT gm (mS/m)
0.8
1.0
FET gm. Vds=1 V
HBT gm. Vcb=0 V
(based on Gummel)
Figure 10.29
gm comparison of n-MOSFET and HBT. gm at device ‘turn-on’ and
gate (base) bias at peak gm is indicated [After B. Jagannathan et al.,
Proc. Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits in RF Systems Meeting,
2004(115–118). © 2004 IEEE]
base-widening mechanisms limit it in the HBT. Figure 10.29 shows the corresponding
comparison of gm as a function of current. gm at Vt (turn-on Vbe) for the two devices
and Vgs (Vbe) at peak gm are marked on the figure as well. gm for the FET is superior
to that of the HBT at low bias current.
Figure 10.30 compares fT of the two devices for two supply voltages. Under
maximum supply conditions, peak fT of the FET is ∼150 GHz compared to ∼225 GHz
in the bipolar device. Note that bias points for peak fT corresponds to that for peak
gm in the device. At similar fT, the current in the FET is lower compared to the
bipolar. In spite of the large gm difference, current at peak fT for the FET is ∼4x
lower compared to the HBT, an indication of the much smaller input capacitance in
the FET. Figure 10.31 shows fT as the function of power consumed. The lower current
operation of the FET leads to the lower power consumption for similar values of fT.
A substantial advantage in power for the FETs, however, results because the supply
voltage can be lowered much more aggressively. Figure 10.32 compares Mason’s
gain (U) of HBT and CMOS at 15 GHz as a function of both Vgs (Vbe) and Vds (Vce).
For Vgs (Vbe) variation, the drain (collector) is held at a constant 1 V, and for Vds (Vce)
variation the gate (base) bias corresponds to peak fT. Despite the fT differences, U of
similar magnitude can be obtained in both devices.
CMOS technology (90 nm node) has been introduced in communications [173],
suggesting that the advanced CMOS process technologies can deliver necessary
analog/RF performance which may replace SiGe HBTs for the majority of com-
munications applications below 5 GHz range. Kuhn et al. [174] have compared RF
CMOS performance from a 90 nm derivative communications process technology to

392
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
ID or IC (mA/m)
fT (GHz)
0.01
IE-3
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
SiGe HBT Vce=1.2 V
SiGe Vce=0.8 V
n-FET Vds=1.2 V
n-FET Vds =0.5 V
0.1
1
10
Vgs = 0.75 V
Vbe = 0.88 V
Figure 10.30
fT vs. current comparison of n-MOSFET and SiGe HBT for various
supply voltages [After B. Jagannathan et al., Proc. Silicon Monolithic
Integrated Circuits in RF Systems Meeting, 2004(115–118). © 2004
IEEE]
Power (mW/m)
fT (GHz)
0.01
IE-3
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
SiGe HBT Vce=1.2 V
SiGe Vce=0.8 V
n-FET Vce=1.2 V
n-FET Vds =0.5 V
0.1
1
10
Vds reduction
Vce reduction
Figure 10.31
fT vs. power comparison of n-MOSFET and SiGe HBT for various
supply voltages [After B. Jagannathan et al., Proc. Silicon Monolithic
Integrated Circuits in RF Systems Meeting, 2004(115–118). © 2004
IEEE]

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
393
0.2
20
Unilateral gain @ 15 GHz (dB)
22
24
26
28
n-FET Vgs variation
HBT Vbe variation
HBT Vce variation
n-FET Vds variation
0.4
0.6
0.8
Voltage (V)
1.0
1.2
Figure 10.32
U gain vs. Vgs(Vbe) and Vds(Vce) comparison of n-MOSFETs and SiGe
HBT [After B. Jagannathan et al., Proc. Silicon Monolithic Integrated
Circuits in RF Systems Meeting, 2004(115–118). © 2004 IEEE]
SiGe HBT performance. NMOS performances at fT/fmax = 209/248 GHz (70 nm)
and fT/fmax = 166/277 GHz (80 nm) with Fmin at 0.3 dB (2 GHz) and 0.6 dB
(10 GHz) have also been reported.
Small-signal RF performance is strongly influenced both by output conduc-
tance and gate resistance. Both parameters increase significantly as the gate length
approaches the minimum length for a technology, and thus devices slightly greater in
length than the minimum will frequently deliver higher fmax as shown in Figure 10.33.
A peak fT of 166 GHz and the 277 GHz peak fmax have been reported from an NMOS
with dimensions 80 nm × 2.5 µm × 6 device. At the end of 2004, a combination
fT/fmax = 209 GHz/248 GHz and a peak fmax = 277 GHz corresponds to the highest
reported in the literature for an NMOS device, and comparable to the best published
HBT data (see Figure 10.34).
Broadband noise performance has been considered to be a significant limitation
of CMOS in comparison to SiGe HBTs. Figure 10.35 compares Fmin vs. frequency
to CMOS and HBT devices from the literature. For operating point comparison,
Figure 10.36 compares Fmin versus bias current for different technologies, where val-
ues of Fmin are among the lowest reported in CMOS and are comparable to published
SiGe HBT data.
Thus in future RF CMOS could be a preferred technology for a majority of
communication products that combine analog/mixed-signal/RF circuits with digital
logic. The NMOS transistors use a high volume digital CMOS process and thus can
be produced more cheaply than SiGe HBTs.

394
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
300
.0005
.0001
40
50
.001
.01
.003 .006
ID (A)
fT
fmax
fT, fmax (GHz)
Vds = 1.2 V
.02 .03
60
80
100
200
Figure 10.33
fT and fmax for an 80 nm × 2.5 µm × 6 device. The measurement is
made by biasing the device at Vds = 1.2 V and then stepping Vgs
through a series of values. Peak fT is 166 GHz and peak fmax is 277
GHz at Vgs = 0.8 V and Vds = 1.2 V [After K. Kuhn et al., IEEE
VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., 2004(224–225). © 2004 IEEE]
350
300
90 nm CMOS
SiGe BJT
250
200
150
100
50
0
0
fmax (GHz)
max. osc. frequency
100
fT (GHz) cut-off frequency
200
300
400
Figure 10.34
fT and fmax are compared with the reported values for CMOS devices
[After K. Kuhn et al., IEEE VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., 2004(224–225).
© 2004 IEEE]
10.7
Summary
The main purpose of this chapter was to discuss the physical models necessary for
simulation of advanced heterostructure devices, such as HBTs or HEMTs. Important
material parameters of strained-SiGe have been considered. Comprehensive ana-
lytical models for material parameter of strained-SiGe films have been presented.
The model equations account for valence band discontinuity, heavy doping effects,

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
395
fmin. (dB)
min. noise figure 
Frequency (GHz)
4
3
2
1
0
0
5
10
15
180 nm node
CMOS
130 nm node
CMOS
0.12 SiGe BJT
0.18 SiGe BJT
90 nm node
CMOS
Figure 10.35
Fmin comparison vs. frequency of RF CMOS against a variety of
reported RF CMOS and HBT devices [After K. Kuhn et al., IEEE
VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., 2004(224–225). © 2004 IEEE]
fmin (dB)
min. noise figure
IDS or IC (mA)
1.4
SiGe BJT 
3 GHz
SiGe BJT 
10 GHz
This work 
NMOS 5 GHz
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
10
20
30
Figure 10.36
Fmin comparison vs. bias of RF CMOS against a variety of reported
RF CMOS and HBT devices [After K. Kuhn et al., IEEE VLSI Tech.
Symp. Dig., 2004(224–225). © 2004 IEEE]
valence and conduction band effective densities of states and ionised doping concen-
tration. Minority and majority electron and hole mobilities in the whole range from
low to very high electric field have also been discussed in detail. The models are
based on computed and experimental data available in the literature. SiGe material
parameter models developed can be incorporated in commercially available simula-
tors for simulation of SiGe HBTs. New models for physical properties with respect
to material composition and strain conditions owing to lattice mismatch have to be
developed.
For advanced heterostructure simulations, anisotropic effective carrier masses,
density of states and carrier mobilities should be considered. A built-in feature

396
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
for automatic estimation of the strain condition based on empirical relation for the
growth-condition-dependent critical layer thickness may also be developed. Possible
simulation applications in the future could be the simulation of leakage currents at
low bias in GaAs-based HBTs, breakdown simulation in III–V devices and thermal
investigations not only in the device but also in the interconnects. The accuracy of
the device simulation for all devices has to be verified not only against d.c. but also
against RF measurements.
The big challenge remaining for III–V device simulation is improved under-
standing of processed semiconductors after different manufacturing steps, for
example, before and after etching. Although a variety of simulators have success-
fully demonstrated some level of agreement with measurements, the understanding
of changes of transport and interface parameters remains the ultimate goal of process
control.
A comprehensive study has been made towards the definition of FOMs for RF
heterojunction bipolar transistors. From a power perspective, SiGe-, GaAs- and InP-
baseddevicesshowslightlydifferentd.c. powerconsumptionandoutputpowervalues
at 10 GHz. InGaAs/InP HBT has the least power consumption since its output current
is smaller, while SiGe HBT maintains output power nearly twice its counterparts and
it is relatively more power efficient. Nevertheless, GaAs is the strongest candidate for
power applications due to large collector-base breakdown voltage. GaAs HBTs are
inherently faster than SiGe HBTs when compared at low current densities. SiGe HBTs
without SOI can be designed to operate at much larger current densities than GaAs
HBTs. Comparing a GaAs HBT circuit operating at say 0.5 mA/µm2 with a SiGe
HBT circuit operating at say 2.0 mA/µm2, the SiGe HBT circuit could have better
performance and much lower power dissipation, but larger substrate-coupling noise
than the GaAs HBT circuit. Thus, the real advantage of SiGe HBTs, without SOI, lies
in their compatibility with silicon VLSI processes and scalability to higher current
densities. SiGe-based HBTs exhibit lower breakdown voltage since the bandgap of
silicon is less than that of GaAs. This makes it more difficult to use SiGe for high-
power applications. However, this problem can be reduced by use of a double HBT,
since a collector-base heterojunction with wide band-gap collector gives rise to higher
breakdown voltage.
The characteristic frequencies fT and fmax depend on material properties, device
modelparameters, devicegeometryandbias. OptimisedSiGebasedHBTsshowbetter
(>200 GHz) characteristic frequency values when compared with traditional GaAs-
based HBTs. Nevertheless, speed-related FOMs are comparable for the two material
systems. InP-based HBT is the most promising due to superior properties of InP
material system. It is well known that fT is more important for digital circuits, while
for analog applications, fmax is more significant. Manufacturers of RF transistors often
strive for fT ∼fmax so that the devices are useful for different applications. Another
significant difference between AlGaAs/GaAs HBT, Si/SiGe HBT and InGaAs/InP
HBT is their noise performance. The noise figure of SiGe-based HBTs is lower
than III–V HBTs at high frequencies, making SiGe a better choice for low-noise
applications.

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
397
References
1 B. Jagannathan, M. Khater, F. Pagette, J.-S. Rieh, D. Angell, H. Chen, et al.,
‘Self-aligned SiGe NPN transistor with 285 GHz fmax and 207 GHz ft in a
manufacturable technology’, IEEE Electron Devices Lett., vol. 23, pp. 258–260,
2002.
2 J.-S. Rieh,
B. Jagannathan,
H. Chen,
K. T. Schonenberg,
D. Angell,
A. Chinthakindi, et al., ‘SiGe HBTs with cut-off frequency of 350 GHz’, in
IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 771–774, 2002.
3 J. Bock, H. Schafer, H. Knapp, D. Zoschg, K. Aufinger, M. Wurzer, et al., ‘Sub
5 ps SiGe bipolar technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 763–766, 2002.
4 B. Jagannathan, M. Meghelli, A. V. Rylyakov, R. A. Groves, A. K. Chinthakindi,
C. M. Schnabel, et al., ‘A 4.2-ps ECL ring-oscillator in 285-GHz fmax SiGe
technology’, IEEE Electron Devices Lett., vol. 23, pp. 541–543, 2002.
5 T. Hashimoto, Y. Nonaka, T. Saito, K. Sasahara, T. Tominari, K. Sakai,
et al., ‘Integration of 0.13-µm CMOS and high performance self-aligned SiGe
HBT featuring low base resistance’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 779–782,
2002.
6 Z. Griffith, Y. Kim, M. Dahlstrom, A. C. Gossard, and M. J. W. Rodwell,
‘InGaAs-InP metamorphic DHBTs grown on GaAs with lattice-matched device
performance and fτ, fmax > 268 GHz’, IEEE Electron Devices Lett., vol. 25,
pp. 675–677, 2004.
7 M. J. W. Rodwell, M. Urteaga, T. Mathew, D. Scott, D. Mensa, Q. Lee,
et al., ‘Submicron scaling of HBTs’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 48,
pp. 2606–2624, 2001.
8 E. Ohue, Y. Kiyota, T. Onai, M. Tanabe, and K. Washio, ‘100-GHz fT Si homo-
junction bipolar technology’, in IEEE VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig., pp. 106–107,
1996.
9 T. Niwa,
Y. Amamiya,
M. Mamada,
and H. Shimawaki,
‘High-β
AlGaAs/lnGaAs HBTs with reduced emitter resistance for low-power-
consumption high-speed ICs’, in Proc. Intl. Symp. on Compound Semiconduc-
tors, pp. 309–312, 1999.
10 T. Oka, K. Hirata, K. Ouchi, H. Uchiyama, T. Taniguchi, K. Mochizuki, et al.,
‘Advanced performance of small-scaled InGaP/GaAs HBTs with over 150 GHz
and over 250 GHz’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 653–656, 1998.
11 D. Mensa, Q. Lee, J. Guthrie, S. Jaganathan, and M. Rodwell, ‘Transferred-
substrate HBTs with 250 GHz current-gain cut-off frequency’, in IEEE IEDM
Tech. Dig., pp. 657–660, 1998.
12 Q. Lee, S. Martin, D. Mensa, R. Smith, J. Guthrie, and M. Rodwell, ‘Submicron
transferred-substrate heterojunction bipolar transistors’, IEEE Electron Devices
Lett., vol. 20, pp. 396–398, 1999.
13 F. Schwierz, and J. J. Liou, ‘Semiconductor devices for RF applications:
evolution and current status’, Microelectron. Reliab., vol. 41, pp. 145–168,
2001.

398
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
14 S. P. Voinigescu, D. S. McPherson, F. Pera, S. Szilagyi, M. Tazlauanu, and
H. Tran, ‘A comparison of silicon and III–V technology performance and build-
ing block implementations for 10 and 40 Gb/s optical networking ICs’, Int. J.
High Speed Electron. Syst., vol. 13, pp. 27–58, 2003.
15 H. S. Bennett, R. Brederlow, J. C. Costa, P. E. Cottrell, W. M. Huang,
A. A. Immorlica, Jr., et al., ‘Device and technology evolution for Si-based
RF integrated circuits’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 52, pp. 1235–1258,
2005.
16 J. D. Cressler,
‘Re-engineering silicon:
Si-Ge heterojunction bipolar
technology’, IEEE Spectrum, vol. 32, pp. 49–55, 1995.
17 T. H. Ning, ‘Trade-offs between SiGe and GaAs bipolar ICs’, in Proc. Int. Conf.
Solid-State and Integrated Circuit Technology, pp. 434–438, 1995.
18 S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices. John Wiley & Sons, New York,
2nd ed., 1981.
19 D. L. Harame, J. M. C. Stork, B. S. Meyerson, K. Y.-J. Hsu, J. Cotte,
K. A. Jenkins, et al., ‘Optimization of SiGe HBT technology for high speed
analog and mixed-signal applications’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 71–74,
1993.
20 E. F. Crabbe, B. Meyerson, J. Stork, and D. Harame, ‘Vertical profile optimiza-
tion of very high frequency epitaxial Si- and SiGe-base bipolar transistors’, in
IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 83–86, 1993.
21 T. Uchino, T. Shiba, T. Kikuchi, Y. Tamaki, A. Watanabe, Y. Kiyota, et al., ‘15-
ps ECL/74-GHz fT Si bipolar technology’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 67–70,
1993.
22 J. F. Jensen, M. Hafizi, W. E. Stanchina, R. A. Metzger, and D. B. Rensch,
‘39.5-GHz static frequency divider implemented in AlInAs/GaInAs HBT
technology’, in GaAs IC Symp. Tech. Dig., pp. 101–104, 1992.
23 W. Hansch, T. Vogelsang, R. Kircher, and M. Orlowski, ‘Carrier transport near
the Si SiO2 interface of MOSFET’, Solid State Electron., vol. 32, pp. 839–849,
1989.
24 K.
Dragosits,
V.
Palankovski,
and
S.
Selberherr,
‘Two-dimensional
modeling of quantum mechanical effects in ultra-short CMOS devices’,
in Advances in Simulation,
Systems Theory and Systems Engineering,
(N. Mastorakis, V. Kluev, and D. Koruga, Eds.), pp. 113–116, WSEAS Press,
2002.
25 C. K. Maiti, and G. A. Armstrong, Applications of Silicon-Germanium
Heterostructure Devices. Inst. of Physics Pub., UK, 2001.
26 C. Jacoboni, and P. Lugli, The Monte Carlo Method for Semiconductor Device
Simulation. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1989.
27 K. Hess, Ed., Monte Carlo Device Simulation: Full Band and Beyond. Kluwer,
Boston, MA, 1991.
28 S. Laux, and M. Fischetti, ‘The DAMOCLES Monte Carlo device simulation
program’, in Computational Electronics, (K. Hess, J. Leburton, and U. Ravaioli,
Eds.), pp. 87–92, Kluwer, Boston, 1991.

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
399
29 H. Kosina, and S. Selberherr, ‘A hybrid device simulator that combines
Monte Carlo and drift-diffusion analysis’, IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design,
vol. 13, pp. 201–210, 1994.
30 W. Engl, A. Emunds, B. Meinerzhagen, H. Peifer, and T. Thoma, ‘Bridging the
gap between the hydrodynamic and the Monte Carlo model- An attempt’, in
Proc. VLSI Process/Device Modeling Workshop, pp. 32–33, 1989.
31 V. Palankovski, and S. Selberherr, ‘Critical modeling issues of SiGe semicon-
ductor devices’, in Proc. Symp. on Diagnostics and Yield: Advanced Silicon
Devices and Technologies for ULSI Era, pp. 1–11, 2003.
32 V. Palankovski, and S. Selberherr, ‘Challenges in modeling of high-speed
electron devices’, in Proc. IWPSD-2003, pp. 45–50, 2003.
33 V. Palankovski, R. Schultheis, and S. Selberherr, ‘Simulation of power hetero-
junction bipolar transistors on gallium arsenide’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 48, pp. 1264–1269, 2001.
34 V. Palankovski, S. Wagner, and S. Selberherr, ‘Numerical analysis of compound
semiconductor RF devices’, in GaAs IC Symp., pp. 107–110, 2003.
35 V. Palankovski, and S. Selberherr, ‘Analysis of high speed heterostructure
devices’, in Proc. MIEL, pp. 115–122, 2004.
36 V. Palankovski, and R. Quay, Analysis and Simulation of Heterostructure
Devices. Springer, New York, 2004.
37 R. Anholt, ‘GATES’, in Electrical and Thermal Characterization of MESFET’s,
HEMT’s, and HBTs. Artech House, Boston, 1995.
38 J. J. Liou, Principles and Analysis of AlGaAs/GaAs Heterojunction Bipolar
Transistors. Artech House, Boston, 1996.
39 NEMO, ‘http://www.cfdrc.com/nemo/’, 1999.
40 R. Anholt, ‘POSES’, in Electrical and Thermal Characterization of MESFET’s,
HEMT’s, and HBTs. Artech House, Boston, 1995.
41 W. Klix, and R. Stenzel, ‘Dreidimensionale Numerische Simulation Elek-
tronischer Bauelemente,’ http://www.htwdresden.de/klix/simba/welcome.html,
2005.
42 R. Stenzel, C. Pigorsch, W. Klix, A. Vescan, and H Leier, ‘Simulation
of AlGaN/GaN-HFETs includme spontaneous and piezoelectric polarization
charges’, in Proc. Intl. Symp. on Compound Semiconductors, pp. 511–514,
1999.
43 R. Dietrich, A. Wieszt, A. Vescan, H. Leier, R. Stenzel, and W. Klix, ‘Power
handling limits and degradation of large area AlGaN/GaN RF-HEMTs’, Solid
State Electron., vol. 47, pp. 123–125, 2003.
44 E. Lyumkis, R. Mickevicius, O. Penzin, B. Polsky, and K. E. Sayed,
‘Numerical analysis of electron tunneling through hetero-interfaces and
Schottky barriers in heterostructure devices’, in GaAs IC Symp., pp. 129–132,
2000.
45 E. Lyumkis, R. Mickevicius, O. Penzin, B. Polsky, K. E. Sayed, A. Wettstein,
et al., ‘Simulations of quautum transport in HEMT using density gradient
model’, in GaAs IC Symp. Tech. Dig., pp. 233–236, 2002.

400
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
46 C. Morton,
and C. Snowden,
‘Comparison of Quasi-2D and ensemble
Monte Carlo simulations for deep submicton HEMTs’, in IEEE MTT-S Proc.,
pp. 153–156, 1998.
47 C. Morton, C. Snowden, and M. Howes, ‘HEMT physical model for MMIC
CAD’, in Proc. European Microwave Conf., pp. 199–204, 1995.
48 Silvaco International, Silvaco-ATLAS User’s Manual, 2004.
49 D. M. Richey, J. D. Cressler, and A. J. Joseph, ‘Scaling issues and Ge pro-
file optimization in advanced UHV/CVD SiGe HBT’s’, IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. 44, pp. 431–440, 1997.
50 R. Johnson, Z. Kachwalla, and C. Snowden, ‘Multi-tone microwave simula-
tion of HEMTs using a physics-based electro-thermal CAD model’, in Proc.
European Microwave Conf., pp. 107–110, 1999.
51 Avant Corporation, Medici - Semiconductor Simulation in 2D, 1997.
52 Stanford University, PISCES-2ET 2-D Device Simulator, 1994.
53 S. Amon, B. Ferk, D. Vrtacnik, D. Resnik, D. Krizaj, and S. Sokolic, ‘2D numer-
ical modeling of SiGe structures’, in Mediterranean Electrotechnical Conf.,
vol. 1, pp. 326–329, 1998.
54 C. K. Maiti, and G. A. Armstrong, ‘Simulation of silicon germanium HBTs using
ATLAS’, Simulation Standard, pp. 6–8, 1997.
55 B. Pejcinovic, L. E. Kay, T. W. Tang, and D. H. Navon, ‘Numerical simula-
tion and comparison of Si BJT’s and Si1−xGex HBT’s’, IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. 36, pp. 2129–2137, 1989.
56 V. Palankovski, and S. Selberherr, ‘Thermal models for semiconductor device
simulation’, in Proc. European Conf. on High Temperature Electronics,
pp. 25–28, 1999.
57 R. Quay, R. Reuter, V. Palankovski, and S. Selberherr, ‘S-parameter simulation
of RF-HEMTs’, in Proc. EDMO, pp. 13–18, 1998.
58 S. Wagner, V. Palankovski, T. Grasser, R. Schultheis, and S. Selberherr, ‘Small-
signal analysis and direct S-parameter extraction’, in Proc. EDMO, pp. 50–55,
2002.
59 B. Gonzalez, V. Palankovski, H. Kosina, A. Hernandez, and S. Selberherr,
‘An energy relaxation time model for device simulation’, Solid State Electron.,
vol. 43, pp. 1791–1795, 1999.
60 R.Quay, C.Moglestue, V.Palankovski, andS. Selberherr, ‘Atemperaturedepen-
dent model for the saturation velocity in semiconductor materials’, Materials Sci.
in Semicond. Processing, vol. 3, pp. 149–155, 2000.
61 C. G. van de Walle, and R. M. Martin, ‘Theoretical study of Si/Ge interfaces’,
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, vol. 3, pp. 1256–1259, 1985.
62 R. People, and J. C. Bean, ‘Band alignments of coherently strained GexSi1−x/Si
heterostructures on ⟨001⟩> GeySi1−y substrates’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 48,
pp. 538–540, 1986.
63 J. Eberhardt, and E. Kasper, ‘Bandgap narrowing in strained SiGe on the basis
of electrical measurements on Si/SiGe/Si hetero bipolar transistors’, Materials
Sci. and Eng., vol. B89, pp. 93–96, 2002.

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
401
64 Y. Varshni, ‘Temperature dependence of the energy gap in semiconductors’,
Physica, vol. 34, pp. 149–154, 1967.
65 V. Palankovski, G. Kaiblinger-Grujin, and S. Selberherr, ‘Implications of
dopant-dependent low-field mobility and band gap narrowing on the bipolar
device performance’, J. Phys. IV, vol. 8, pp. 91–94, 1998.
66 J. W. Slotboom, and H. C. de Graff, ‘Measurement of bandgap narrow-
ing in Si bipolar transistor’, Solid State Electron., vol. 19, pp. 857–862,
1976.
67 D. B. M. Klaassen, J. M. Slotboom, and H. C. De Graaff, ‘Unified apparent
bandgap narrowing in n- and p-type silicon’, Solid State Electron., vol. 35,
pp. 125–129, 1992.
68 H. P. D. Lanyon, and R. A. Tuft, ‘Bandgap narrowing in moderately to heavily
doped silicon’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 26, pp. 1014–1018, 1979.
69 J. A. del Alamo, and R. M. Swanson, ‘Measurement of steady-state minority-
carrier transport parameters in heavily doped n-type silicon’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 34, pp. 1580–1589, 1987.
70 S. E. Swirhun, Y. H. Kwark, and R. M. Swanson, ‘Measurement of electron life-
time, electron mobility and bandgap narrowing in heavily doped p-type silicon’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 24–27, 1986.
71 J. W. Slotboom, and H. C. deGraff, ‘Bandgap narrowing in silicon bipolar
transistor’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 24, pp. 1123–1125, 1977.
72 S. E. Swirhun, D. E. Kane, and R. M. Swanson, ‘Temperature dependence of
minority electron mobility and band-gap narrowing in p+-Si’, in IEEE IEDM
Tech. Dig., pp. 298–301, 1988.
73 J. W. Slotboom, ‘The pn-product in silicon’, Solid State Electron., vol. 20,
pp. 279–283, 1977.
74 J. Wagner, and J. A. del Alamo, ‘Band gap narrowing in heavily doped silicon:
a comparison of optical and electrical data’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 63, pp. 425–429,
1988.
75 S. C. Jain, and D. J. Roulston, ‘A simple expression for band gap narrowing
(BGN) in heavily doped Si, Ge, GaAs and GexSi1−x strained layers’, Solid State
Electron., vol. 34, pp. 453–465, 1991.
76 B. Y. Tsaur, C. K. Chen, and S. A. Manno, ‘Long-wavelength GexSi1−x/Si
heterojunction infrared detector and 400 X 400- element imager arrays’, IEEE
Electron Device Lett., vol. 12, pp. 293–296, 1991.
77 T. L. Lin, A. Ksendzov, S. M. Dejewsky, E. W. Jones, R. W. Fathaure,
T. N. Krabach, et al., ‘SiGe/Si heterojunction internal photoemission long-
wavelength infrared detectors fabricated by molecular beam epitaxy’, IEEE
Electron Devices Lett., vol. 38, pp. 1141–1144, 1991.
78 P. M. Garone, V. Venkataraman, and J. C. Strum, ‘Hole mobility enhancement
in MOS-gated GexSi1−x/Si heterostructure inversion layers’, IEEE Electron
Device Lett., vol. 13, pp. 56–58, 1992.
79 T. Manku, and A. Nathan, ‘Effective mass for strained p-type Si1−xGex’, J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 69, pp. 8414–8416, 1991.

402
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
80 M. V. Fischetti, and S. E. Laux, ‘Band structure, deformation potentials, and
carrier mobility in strained Si, Ge, and SiGe alloys’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 88,
pp. 2234–2252, 1996.
81 J. Poortmans, S. C. Jain, D. H. J. Totterdell, M. Caymax, J. F. Nus, R. P. Mertens,
etal., ‘Theoreticalcalculationandexperimentalevidenceoftherealandapparent
bandgap narrowing due to heavy doping in p-type Si and strained Si1−xGex
layers’, Solid State Electron., vol. 36, pp. 1763–1771, 1993.
82 B. L. Tron, M. D. R. Hashim, P. Ashburn, M. Mouis, A. Chantre, and G. Vincint,
‘Determination of bandgap narrowing and parasitic energy barriers in SiGe
HBT’s integrated in a bipolar technology’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 44, pp. 715–722, 1997.
83 P. Ashburn, H. Boussetta, M. D. R. Hashim, A. Chantre, M. Mouis, G. J. Parker,
et al., ‘Electrical determination bandgap narrowing in bipolar transistors with
epitaxial Si, epitaxial Si1−xGex, and ion implanted bases’, IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. 43, pp. 774–782, 1996.
84 I. M. Anteney, G. Lippert, P. Ashburn, H. J. Osten, B. Heinemann, G. J. Parker,
et al., ‘Characterization of the effectiveness of carbon incorporation in SiGe
for the elimination of parasitic energy barriers in SiGe HBTs’, IEEE Electron
Device Lett., vol. 20, pp. 116–118, 1998.
85 Z. Matutinovic-Krstelj, V. Venkataraman, E. Prinz, J. Sturm, and C. W. Magee,
‘A
comprehensive
study
of
lateral
and
vertical
current
transport
in
Si/Si1−xGex/Si HBT’s’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 87–90, 1993.
86 M. Libezny, S. Jain, J. Poortmans, M. Caymax, J. Nijs, R. Mertens, et al.,
‘Photoluminescence determination of the Fermi energy in heavily doped strained
Si1−xGex layers’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 64, pp. 1953–1955, 1994.
87 R. People, ‘Indirect band gap of coherently strained GexSi1−x bulk alloys on
⟨100⟩silicon substrates’, Phys. Rev., vol. 32, pp. 1405–1408, 1985.
88 W.-X. Ni, J. Knall, and G. V. Hansoon, ‘New method to study band offsets
applied to strained Si/Si1−xGex (100) heterojunction interfaces’, Phys. Rev. B,
vol. 36, pp. 7744–7747, 1987.
89 S. Takagi, J. L. Hoyt, K. Rim, J. J. Welser, J. F. Gibbons, G. van de Wall, et al.,
‘Evaluation of the valence band discontinuity of Si/Si1−xGex/Si heterostruc-
tures by application of admittance spectroscopy to MOS capacitors theoretical
study of Si/Ge interfaces’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 45, pp. 494–501,
1998.
90 K. Nauka, T. I. Kamins, J. E. Turner, C. A. King, J. L. Hoyt, and J. F. Gibbons,
‘Admittance spectroscopy measurements of band offsets in Si/Si1−xGex/Si
heterostructures’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 60, pp. 195–197, 1992.
91 K. Rim, S. Takagi, J. J. Welser, J. L. Hoyt, and F. Gibbons, ‘Capacitance-
voltage characteristics of p-Si/SiGeC MOS capacitors’, Mat. Res. Soc. Symp.
Proc., vol. 379, pp. 327–332, 1995.
92 C. H. Gan, J. A. del Alamo, B. R. Bennett, B. S. Meyerson, E. F. Crabbe,
C.G.Sodini, etal., ‘Si/Si1−xGex valencebanddiscontinuitymeasurementsusing
a semiconductor-insulator-semiconductor (SIS) heterostructure’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 41, pp. 2430–2439, 1994.

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
403
93 S. C. Jain, J. Poortmans, S. S. Iyer, J. J. Loferski, J. Nijs, R. Mertens, et al.,
‘Electrical and optical bandgaps of GexSi1−x strained layers’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 40, pp. 2338–2343, 1993.
94 C. A. King, J. L. Hoyt, and J. F. Gibbons, ‘Bandgap and transport properties
of Si1−xGex by analysis of nearly ideal Si/Si1−xGex/Si heterojunction bipolar
transistor’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 36, pp. 2093–2104, 1989.
95 C. Jungemann, S. Keith, and B. Meinerzhagen, ‘Full-band Monte Carlo device
simulation of a Si/SiGe-HBT with a realistic Ge profile’, IEICE Trans. Electron.,
vol. E83, pp. 1228–1234, 2000.
96 J. C. Bean, ‘Silicon-based semiconductor heterostructures: Column IV bandgap
engineering’, Proc. IEEE, vol. 80, pp. 571–587, 1992.
97 M. M. Rieger, and P. Vogl, ‘Electronic-band parameters in strained Si1−xGex
Alloys on Si1−yGey substrates’, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 48, pp. 14276–14287, 1993.
98 C. Herring, and E. Vogt, ‘Transport and deformation-potential theory for
many-valley semiconductor with anisotropic scattering’, Phys. Rev., vol. 101,
pp. 944–961, 1956.
99 M. A. Green, ‘Intrinsic concentration, effective densities of states, and effective
mass in Si’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 67, pp. 2944–2954, 1990.
100 G. E. Pikus, and G. L. Bir, ‘Effect of determination on the hole energy spectrum
of germanium and silicon’, Soviet Phys. Solid state, vol. 1, p. 1502, 1960.
101 H. Hasegawa, ‘Theory of cyclotron resonance in strained silicon crystals’, Phys.
Rev., vol. 129, pp. 1029–1040, 1963.
102 J. C. Hensel, and G. Feher, ‘Cyclotron resonance experiments in uniaxially stress
silicon’, Phys. Rev., vol. 129, pp. 1041–1062, 1963.
103 Y. Fu, Q. Chen, and M. Willander, ‘Resonant tunneling of holes in Si/GexSi1−x’,
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 70, pp. 7468–7473, 1991.
104 S. K. Chun, and K. L. Wang, ‘Effective mass and mobility of holes in strained
Si1−xGex layers on (001) Si1−yGey substrate’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 39, pp. 2153–2164, 1992.
105 F. L. Madarasz, J. E. Lang, and P. M. Hemeger, ‘Effective masses for non-
parabolic bands in p-type silicon’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 52, pp. 4646–4648,
1981.
106 H. D. Barber, ‘Effective mass and intrinsic concentration in silicon’, Solid State
Electron., vol. 10, pp. 1039–1051, 1967.
107 J. M. Hinckley, and J. Singh, ‘Hole transport theory in pseudomorphic Si1−xGex
alloys grown on Si(001) substrates’, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 41, pp. 2912–2926, 1990.
108 K. Takeda, A. Taguchi, and M. Sakata, ‘Valence-band parameters and hole
mobility of Ge-Si alloys - theory’, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., vol. 16, p. 2237,
1983.
109 S. Krishnamurthy, A. Sher, and A. B. Chen, ‘Generalized brooks formula, and
the electron mobility in Si1−xGex alloys’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 47, pp. 160–162,
1985.
110 T. Manku, and A. Nathan, ‘Electron drift mobility model for devices based on
unstrained and coherently strained Si1−xGex grown on ⟨001⟩silicon substrate’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 39, pp. 2082–2089, 1992.

404
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
111 H. Jorke, and H. J. Herzog, ‘Mobility enhancement in modulation doped
Si-Si1−xGex superlattice grown by molecular beam epitaxy’, in Proc. Silicon
Molecular Beam Epitaxy, Electrochem. Soc., p. 352, 1985.
112 C. Smith, and A. D. Welbourn, ‘Prospects for a hetero-structure bipolar transistor
using a silicon-germanium alloy’, in IEEE BCTM Proc., pp. 57–64, 1987.
113 L. E. Key, and T. W. Tang, ‘Monte Carlo calculation of strained and unstrained
electron mobilities in Si1−xGex using an improved ionized-impurity model’,
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 70, pp. 1483–1488, 1991.
114 T. Manku, J. M. McGregor, A. Nathan, D. J. Roulston, J. P. Noel, and
D. C. Houghton, ‘Drift hole mobility in strained and unstrained doped Si1−xGex
alloys’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 40, pp. 1990–1996, 1990.
115 F. M. Bufler, P. Graf, B. Meinerzhagen, D. Adeline, M. M. Rieger, H. Kabbel,
et al., ‘Low- and high-field electron-transport parameters for untrained and
strained Si1−xGex’, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 18, pp. 264–266, 1997.
116 T. K. Carns, S. K. Chun, M. O. Tanner, K. L. Wang, T. I. Kamins, J. E. Turner,
et al., ‘Hole mobility measurements in heavily doped Si1−xGex strained layers’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 51, pp. 1273–1281, 1994.
117 Q. Lu, M. R. Sardela, Jr., T. R. Bramblett, and J. E. Greene, ‘B-doped fully
strained Si1−xGex layers grown on Si(001) by gas-source molecular beam epi-
taxy from Si2H6, Ge2H6, and B2H6: charge transport properties’, J. Appl. Phys.,
vol. 80, pp. 4458–4466, 1996.
118 F. M. Bufler, P. Graf, and B. Meinerzhagen, ‘Hole transport investigation in
unstrained and strained SiGe’, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, vol. 16, pp. 1667–1669,
1998.
119 Z. Matutinovic-Krstelj, V. Venkataraman, E. J. Prinz, J. C. Sturm, and
C. W. Magee, ‘Base resistance and effective bandgap reduction in n-p-n
Si/Si1−xGex/Si HBTs with heavy base doping’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 43, pp. 457–466, 1996.
120 K. B. Joelsson, Y. Fu, W. X. Ni, and G. V. Hansson, ‘Hall factor and drift
mobility for hole transport in strained Si1−xGex alloys’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 81,
pp. 1264–1269, 1997.
121 S. Smirnov, H. Kosina, and S. Selberherr, ‘Investigation of the electron mobility
in strained Si1−xGex at high Ge composition’, in Proc. SISPAD, pp. 29–32,
2002.
122 H. Kosina, and G. Kaiblinger-Grujin, ‘Ionized-impurity scattering of majority
electrons in silicon’, Solid State Electron., vol. 42, pp. 331–338, 1998.
123 C. Canali, G. Majni, R. Minder, and G. Ottaviani, ‘Electron and hole drift
velocity measurements in silicon and their empirical relation to electric field
and temperature’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 22, pp. 1045–1047,
1975.
124 C. Jacoboni, C. Canali, G. Ottaviani, and A. A. Quaranta, ‘A review of some
charge transport properties of silicon’, Solid State Electron., vol. 20, pp. 77–89,
1977.
125 N. Ahmad, and V. K. Arora, ‘Velocity-field profile on n-silicon: A theoretical
analysis’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 33, pp. 1075–1077, 1986.

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
405
126 S. H. Li, J. M. Hinckley, J. Singh, and P. K. Bhattacharya, ‘Carrier velocity-field
characteristics and alloy scattering potential in Si1−xGex/Si’, Appl. Phys. Lett.,
vol. 63, pp. 1393–1395, 1993.
127 M. Ershov, and V. Ryzhii, ‘High -field electron transport in SiGe alloy’, J. Appl.
Phys., vol. 33, pp. 1365–1371, 1994.
128 H. Mau, Anpassung und Implementation des Energietransportmodells zur
vergleichenden Simulation mit dem Drift-Diffusions-Modell an SiGe Hetero-
bipolartransistoren. PhD thesis, Technische Universit"at Ilmenau, Institut f"ur
Festk"orperelektronik, 1997.
129 J. C. Bean, L. C. Feldman, A. T. Fiory, S. Nakahara, and I. K. Robinson,
‘GexSi1−x/Si strained layer superlattice growth by molecular beam epitaxy’,
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 2, pp. 436–440, 1984.
130 J. W. Matthews, and A. E. Blakeslee, ‘Defects in epitaxial multilayers – I. Misfit
dislocations’, J. Crystal Growth, vol. 27, pp. 118–125, 1974.
131 D. C. Houghton, D. D. Perovie, J.-M. Baribeau, and G. C. Weatherly, ‘Misfit
strain relaxations in GexSi1−x/Si heterostructures: The structural stability of
buried strained layers and strained-layer superlattices’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 67,
pp. 1850–1862, 1990.
132 E. Kasper, ‘Growth and properties of Si/SiGe superlattices’, Surface Sci.,
vol. 174, pp. 630–639, 1986.
133 S. C. Jain, Germanium-Silicon Strained Layers and Heterostructures. Academic
Press Inc., New York, 1994.
134 J. G. Fossum, and D. S. Lee, ‘A physical model for the dependence of car-
rier lifetime on doping density in nondegenerate silicon’, Solid State Electron.,
vol. 25, pp. 741–747, 1982.
135 J. G. Fossum, R. P. Mertens. D. S. Lee, and J. F. Nijs, ‘Carrier recombination
and lifetime in highly doped silicon’, Solid State Electron., vol. 26, pp. 569–576,
1983.
136 B. Zetterlund, and A. J. Steckl, ‘Low temperature recombination life time in Si
MOSFET’s’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 284–288, 1980.
137 M. S. Tyagi, and R. V. Overstraeten, ‘Minority carrier recombination in heavily-
doped silicon’, Solid State Electron., vol. 26, pp. 577–597, 1983.
138 A. Schenk, ‘A model for the field and temperature dependence of Shockley-
Read-Hall lifetimes in silicon’, Solid State Electron., vol. 35, pp. 1585–1596,
1992.
139 T. Ghani, J. L. Hoyt, D. B. Nobel, J. F. Gibbons, J. E. Turner, and T. I. Kamins,
‘Effect of oxygen on minority carrier lifetime and recombination currents in
Si1−xGex heterostructure devices’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 58, pp. 1371–1374,
1991.
140 G. S. Higashi, J. C. Bean, C. Buescher, R. Yadvish, and H. Temkin, ‘Improved
minority-carrier lifetimes in Si/SiGe heterojunction bipolar transistors grown by
molecularbeam epitaxy’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 56, pp. 2560–2568, 1990.
141 P.V.Schwartz, andJ.C.Strum, ‘Microsecondcarrierlifetimesinstrainedsilicon-
germanium alloys grown by rapid thermal chemical vapor deposition’, Appl.
Phys. Lett., vol. 57, pp. 2004–2006, 1990.

406
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
142 C. A. King, J. L. Hoyt, C. M. Gronet, J. F. Gibbons, M. P. Scott, and
J. Turner, ‘Band gap and transport properties of Si1−xGex by analysis of nearly
ideal Si/Si1−xGex heterojunction bipolar transistor produced by limited reaction
processing’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 10, pp. 52–54, 1989.
143 J. Dziewor, and W. Schmid, ‘Auger coefficient for highly doped and highly
excited silicon’, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 31, pp. 346–348, 1977.
144 S. Selberherr, ‘Low temperature MOS device modeling’, in Low Tempera-
ture Electronics and High Temperature Superconductors, Electrochem. Soc.,
vol. 88-9, pp. 70–86, 1987.
145 S. Selberherr, Analysis and Simulation of Semiconductor Devices. Springer
Verlag, Vienna, 1984.
146 J. Lee, A. L. Gutierrez-Aitken, S. H. Li, and P. K. Bhattacharya, ‘Responsiv-
ity and impact ionization coefficients of Si1−xGex photodiodes’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 43, pp. 977–981, 1996.
147 K. Yeom, J. M. Hinckley, and J. Singh, ‘Calculation of electron and hole impact
ionization coefficients in SiGe alloys’, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 80, pp. 6773–6782,
1996.
148 V. Palankovski, S. Selberherr, R. Quay, and R. Schultheis, ‘Analysis of HBT
behavior after strong electrothermal stress’, in Proc. SISPAD, pp. 245–248,
2000.
149 V. Palankovski,
R. Quay,
and S. Selberherr,
‘Industrial application of
heterostructure device simulation’, IEEE J. Solid State Circuits, vol. 36,
pp. 1365–1370, 2001.
150 T. Binder, K. Dragosits, T. Grasser, R. Klima, M. Knaipp, H. Kosina, et al.,
‘MINIMOS-NT User’s Guide’, in Institut fur Mikroelektronik, Technische
Universitat, Wien, 1998.
151 V. Palankovski,
G. Kaiblinger-Grujin,
H. Kosina,
and S. Selberherr,
‘A Dopant-Dependent Band Gap Narrowing Model Application for Bipolar
Device Simulation’, in Simulation of Semiconductor Processes and Devices,
(K. D. Meyer and S. Biesemans Eds.), pp. 105–108, Springer, New York, 1998.
152 V. Sverdlov, H. Kosina, and S. Selberherr, ‘Modeling current transport in ultra-
scaled field-effect transistors’, Microelectron. Reliab., vol. 47, pp. 11–19, 2007.
153 D. Schroeder, Modelling of Interface Carrier Transport for Device Simulation.
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1994.
154 K. Yang, J. C. Cowles, J. R. East, and G. I. Haddad, ‘Theoretical and experi-
mental d.c. characterization of InGaAs-based abrupt emitter HBTs’, IEEE Trans.
Electron Devices, vol. 42, pp. 1047–1058, 1995.
155 J. A. King, Material Handbook for Hybrid Microelectronics. Artech House,
Norwood, MA, 1988.
156 A. Katz, Indium Phosphide and Related Materials. Artech House, Norwood,
MA, 1992.
157 P. D. Maycock, ‘Thermal conductivity of silicon, germanium, III–V compounds
and III–V alloys’, Solid State Electron., vol. 10, pp. 161–168, 1967.
158 M. Landolt, and J. Bornstein, Numerical Data, and Functional Relationships in
Science and Technology. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987.

Design and simulation of high-speed devices
407
159 S. Adachi, Physical Properties of III–V Semiconductor Compounds. Wiley,
New York, 1992.
160 S. Adachi, Properties of Aluminum Gallium Arsenide. IEE-INSPEC, UK, 1993.
161 P. Bhattacharya, Properties of Lattice-Matched and Strained Indium Gallium
Arsenide. IEE-INSPEC, UK, 1993.
162 S. Tiwari, Compound Semiconductor Device Physics. Academic, New York,
1992.
163 R. Quay, H. Massler, W. Kellner, T. Grasser, V. Palankovski, and S. Selberherr,
‘Simulation of gallium-arsenide based high electron mobility transistors’, in
Proc. SISPAD, pp. 74–77, 2000.
164 S. Wagner, V. Palankovski, T. Grasser, G. Rohrer, and S. Selberherr, ‘A direct
extraction feature for scattering parameters of SiGe-HBTs’, in Intl. SiGe
Technology and Device Meeting, pp. 83–84, 2003.
165 Y. Hu, and K. Mayaram, ‘Periodic steady-state analysis for coupled device and
circuit simulation’, in Proc. SISPAD, pp. 90–94, 2000.
166 W. Liu, Fundamentals of III–V Devices: HBT’s, MESFET’s, and HFETs/HEMTs.
Wiley, New York, 1999.
167 V. Palankovski, S. Selberherr, and R. Schultheis, ‘Simulation of heterojunction
bipolar transistors on gallium-arsenide’, in Proc. SISPAD, pp. 227–230, 1999.
168 O. Esame, Y. Gurbuz, I. Tekin, and A. Bozkurt, ‘Performance comparison of
state-of-the-art heterojunction bipolar devices (HBT) based on AlGaAs/GaAs,
Si/SiGe and InGaAs/InP’, Microelectronics J., vol. 35, pp. 901–908, 2004.
169 G. Gonzales, Microwave Transistor Amplifiers. Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, 1984.
170 J.-S. Rieh, B. Jagannathan, H. Chen, K. Schonenberg, S.-J. Jeng, M. Khater,
et al., ‘Performance and design considerations for high speed SiGe HBTs of
fT/fmax = 375 GHz/210 GHz’, in Int. Conf. Indium Phosphide and Related
Materials, pp. 374–377, 2003.
171 N. Zamdmer, J. Kim, R. Trzeinski, J.-O. Plouchart, S. Narasimha, M. Khare,
et al., ‘A 243-GHz Ft and 208-GHz Fmax 90-nm SOI CMOS SoC technology
with low-power millimeter-wave digital and RF circuit capability’, in IEEE VLSI
Tech. Symp. Dig., pp. 98–99, 2004.
172 B. Jagannathan, D. Greenberg, D. I. Sanderson, J-S. Rieh, J. Pekarik,
J. O. Plouchart, et al., ‘Speed and power performance comparison of state-of-
the-art CMOS and SiGe RF transistors’, in Proc. Silicon Monolithic Integrated
Circuits in RF Systems Meeting, pp. 115–118, 2004.
173 K. Kuhn, M. Agostinelli, S. Ahmed, S. Chambers, S. Cea, S. Christensen,
et al., ‘A 90 nm communication technology featuring SiGe HBT transistors, RF
CMOS, precision R-L-C RF elements and 1 µm2 6-T SRAM Cell’, in IEEE
IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 73–76, 2002.
174 K. Kuhn,
R. Basco,
D. Becher,
M. Hattendorf,
P. Packan,
I. Post,
et al., ‘A comparison of state-of-the-art NMOS and SiGe HBT devices for
analog/mixed-signal/RF circuit applications’, in IEEE VLSI Tech. Symp. Dig.,
pp. 224–225, 2004.


Chapter 11
Passive components
Passive components are indispensable in the design and development of microchips
for high-frequency applications. Inductors in particular are used frequently in radio
frequency integrated circuits (RFICs) such as low noise amplifiers (LNAs) and oscil-
lators. Currently analog/mixed-signal/RF product designs incorporating both CMOS
and bipolar active elements have emerged as a potential technology for commu-
nication applications. Radio frequency (RF) system-on-chip (SoC) designs require
high-performance passive components – particularly on – chip inductors and capac-
itors. As chip geometries get smaller and operating speeds increase, the physical
effects of parasitic capacitance, resistance and inductance become increasingly signif-
icant. For RF and wireless applications, the key requirements include high Q passive
elements, superior active devices, robust frequency domain tools and accurate par-
asitic extraction. The technology and tool set must support building monolithic RF
building blocks with an eye towards integrating the entire radio on a chip. Important
requirements can be more easily understood by examining the features and technology
requirements of some key wireless building blocks (see in Table 11.1).
While all of these components can be realised in Si CMOS technology, their
specific designs necessitate special consideration owing to the requirement of high
quality factor Q at relatively high frequencies. Inductance, in particular, can affect the
timing as much as 30 per cent for designs operating above 500 MHz. For SoC design,
an integrated approach to inductance analysis enables designers to accurately model
all the parasitic effects – resistance, capacitance and inductance. The main problem
that designers of multi-million gate designs face during full chip analysis is the large
amount of data as detailed modelling of every capacitive and inductive interaction
in a design, which in an average one million-gate design results in more than a
billion capacitors and inductors. In order to perform accurate inductance analysis,
high-performance extraction and circuit simulation tools are required.
Unlike older BiCMOS designs, modern designs are adopting approaches where
CMOS digital cells from well-characterised libraries are being mixed with specialized
analog BiCMOS (or bipolar) modules to deliver simultaneously optimised digital and

410
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Table 11.1
Features and requirements of basic RF wireless building blocks.
(After D. Harame et al., Proc. 4th IEEE Intl. Caracas Conf.
Devices, Circuits and Systems, 2002 (D052-1–D052-17).)
Circuit
Main feature
Technology requirements
LNA
Low noise figure
Low nFmin, low HBT Rb
Gain per stage
High Early voltage
High linearity
High fT/fmax
Mixer
High linearity
High Early voltage
High port isolation
High fT/fmax
Carrier leakage
Isolation technologies
Small mismatch
VCO
Low phase noise
Farther from carrier
≤high-Q passives
Closer to carrier
≤low 1/f noise HBT
Tuning range (freq/V)
Varactor tuning range(C/V)
Low gain variation
Synthesizer
Low phase noise
Same as VCO
Low reference spurs
Small FET asymmetry
Power consumption
Small gate length for low
Chip area
Supply operation, reduced area
PA
Power added efficiency
Low loss matching
Gain per stage
Interconnect circuits (high-Q
Robustness
inductor, thick metal)
Max available gain HBT
High breakdown HBT
analog elements [1]. A key difference between digital and mixed-signal processes is
the presence of passive elements. The optimisation for analog/mixed-signal/RF is
more difficult, owing to conflicting digital and analog needs. The first problem
is lack of commonality between digital and analog optimisation strategies. The second
problem is that the desired analog process optimisation strategies may run counter
to traditional CMOS scaling. State-of-the-art 90-nm foundry RF CMOS technology
with various integrated passive elements and user-friendly design kit for RFIC design
have been reported by Chang et al. [2].
Current SiGe technology provides easy access to different integrated active and
passive components and for high-frequency applications, most important being the
SiGeHBTitselfandthepassiveinductor, capacitorandtransmissionlineelementsthat
are key to RF design [3]. Integrated inductors find application in many facets of radio
frequency integrated circuits design including impedance matching, filtering, biasing
and in oscillator circuits. Inductors are important, performance limiting components
in monolithic RF circuits, such as voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs), LNAs and

Passive components
411
passive-element filters. High-Q tank circuits in voltage-controlled oscillators reduce
the phase noise. High-Q inductors in low noise amplifiers and power amplifiers (PAs)
not only reduce noise but also improve gain, efficiency and input/output match-
ing. Bandpass filters are crucial to many multi-function communication systems that
are presently made of off-chip components based on SAW or ceramic technology,
which are expensive, bulky, complex in assembly and problematic in reliability. In
analog/mixed-signal design, performance is ultimately limited by the accuracy of the
passive components in the technology [4–7].
Previously developed on-chip active inductors, such as gyrators, were imple-
mented via impedance transformation. However, owing to difficult issues in power,
noise, linearity and reproducibility, gyrators have not been popular in RF circuit
design. To alleviate these problems, on-chip high-Q inductors using active magnetic
coupling have also been investigated. The quality factor of the inductors is limited
by the resistive losses in the spiral coil and by the substrate losses. With the emer-
gence of RF and microwave applications for silicon integrated circuits, integration
of spiral inductors with reasonable characteristics has become an urgent need. In par-
ticular, quality factors of integrated inductors in silicon ICs are typically low, and the
understanding and optimisation of them have received intense attention.
This chapter gives a broad overview of on-chip spiral inductors. The design
concept and modelling approach of the typical square-shaped spiral inductor are
first addressed. This is followed by the discussions of advanced structures for the
enhancement of inductor performance. Research results reported in the literature are
reviewed to explain the recent development of passive components. The design of
one- and two-port bipolar active inductors using SiGe/SiGeC BiCMOS technologies
has been reported [8]. The prime motivation of this design is not to generate very
high-Q values (in thousands), which involves very critical tuning of some sensitive
design parameters; instead, the goal is to have a design that will provide moderately
high-Q values (of the order of 100) that satisfy most of the requirements in Si-based
RF applications. Various types of varactors, MIM capacitors and resistor structures
currently in use are then introduced and the key characteristics of each type of these
devices are discussed.
11.1
Inductor
InductorsarefundamentalelementsfortheimplementationofRFcircuitsandacritical
component in analog/mixed-signal design. Small-valued, precise, high-Q inductors
are employed in circuits such as RF transceivers. The most critical factor in inductor
design is the optimisation of the inductor Q at the design frequency. Inductors are typ-
ically implemented by using circular or rectangular spirals. The conventional layouts
of an on-chip passive inductor are shown in Figure 11.1. The shape could be square,
hexagon, octagon or circular. The choice of layouts is always a trade-off between
performance and simulation/optimisation efforts. Even though most electromagnetic
(EM) simulators can handle a planar structure, the circular inductor requires much
more mesh cells on the peripherals, which is extremely time consuming.

412
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
w
din
dout
s
w
s
s
w
din
dout
din
din
dout
dout
w
s
Figure 11.1
Layouts of conventional on-chip passive inductors.
(a) square,
(b) hexagonal, (c) octagon, and (d) circular
From a performance point of view, however, the most optimum pattern is a circular
spiral, because it suffers less resistive and capacitive losses. But the circular inductor
is not widely used because only a few commercial layout tools support such a pattern.
Hexagonal and octagonal structures are good alternatives, as they resemble closely
to the circular structure, are easier to construct and are supported by most computer-
aided design tools. It has been reported that the series resistance of the octagonal- and
circular-shaped inductors is 10 per cent smaller than that of a square-shaped spiral
inductor with the same inductance value.
Spiral inductors can be fabricated within a conventional MOS process with little
modifications to the design rules. A minimum of two metal layers is required, one
to form the spiral and one to form the underpass. To minimise parasitic capaci-
tance to the substrate, the top metal layer is the usual choice for the main spiral.
Structural parameters such as the outer dimension, number of turns, the distance
between the centres of lines (or pitch) and substrate property are all important factors.
On-chip inductors consume large silicon area, are sensitive to temperature vari-
ations, have limited Q-factor, and their inductance value is not precise, even if
the technology is well characterised. In fact, determining the geometry and area
required to deliver an optimised Q at a design frequency is not a straightforward
process [9,10].
Apart from the spiral inductor, two other kinds of on-chip inductors are in use.
A gyrator, or active inductor, utilizes active components (i.e., transistors) to transform

Passive components
413
the impedance of a capacitor to inductance. Active inductors have been extensively
used for low-frequency applications and in the design of mixers. For high-frequency
applications, an active inductor with a high quality factor is necessary. In addition,
other important specifications, such as noise figure and harmonic distortion compo-
nents, can be maintained at low levels. On the basis of an active inductor, low-noise
preamplifiers have also been developed. Larger, lower-Q devices have functions
such as impedance matching and gain control. Significant research has been done on
monolithic integration of inductors and there has been increasing use of inductors in
state-of-the-art CMOS processes [11–14].
The active devices and capacitor required in the gyrator can be easily fabricated
and occupy minimum space, but they consume a relatively large amount of power
and introduce additional noise. The third on-chip inductor type is constructed with a
bond wire [15]. It can offer a very high quality factor (30–60), but such an approach
is likely to cause unwanted coupling to other devices on the substrate and may not be
sufficiently robust for some RF applications.
However, the most difficult factor in inductor design is the minimisation of the
impact of parasitic elements. Real inductors have parasitic resistance and capacitance.
The parasitic resistance dissipates energy through ohmic loss, while the parasitic
capacitance stores the unwanted energy. At high frequencies, the skin effect causes
a non-uniform current distribution in the metal segments, which introduces (among
other things) a frequency-dependent contribution to the parasitic resistance. Finally,
electromagneticeffectscausedbytheFaradayeffectintroduceparasiticcurrents(eddy
currents) in the silicon as well, adding an additional frequency-dependent term in the
resistance [12,16].
In addition to the layout, the substrate material affects the inductor performances.
Minimising the substrate loss is a more complex task. As the frequency increases,
to where the skin depth is of the order of the substrate thickness, eddy currents in
the substrate become a major loss mechanism. To reduce this loss, one possibility
is to build the inductors on a less lossy substrate. GaAs, silicon-on-insulator (SOI),
silicon-on-sapphire (SOS), high-resistive silicon (HRS) or glass have all been used to
reduce the substrate loss. Another approach to reduce the substrate effect is to remove
it totally. This requires additional process to etch away the material beneath the induc-
tor (suspended) and is fabricated by micro mechanical system (MEMS) technology.
Suspended inductors have a higher Q factor and higher self-resonance. The crosstalk
between the inductor and the other circuit elements can also be minimised. However,
since the inductor is floating over a cavity, and only partially supported, the durability
and robustness are questionable.
A patterned ground plane can be placed under the inductor. This approach par-
tially isolates the eddy current loop degradation formed in the substrate and reduces
crosstalk [17, 18]. However, the Q factor is only slightly increased, but the self-
resonance is much lower owing to the higher capacitance to the ground, which
makes the approach suitable only for the lower frequencies. Mitigating eddy cur-
rent loss can be quite difficult. Electromagnetic simulation of a 1.5 (left) and a 4.5
(right) turn spiral inductors at 2 GHz demonstrates non-uniform current distribution in
Figure 11.2. There are a number of potential techniques available for the optimisation

414
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
More even distribution
Edge current
Edge current
1000
Amps/Metre
889
778
667
505
444
333
222
111
0.0
Figure 11.2
Current crowding is more pronounced in multi-turn coils. Electromag-
netic simulation of a 1.5 (left) and 4.5 (right) turn spiral inductors
at 2GHz. Simulations demonstrate non-uniform current distribution
[After D. Harame et al., Proc. 4th IEEE Intl. Caracas Conf. Devices,
Circuits and Systems, 2002 (D052-1–D052-17). ©2002 IEEE]
of inductor design, including solid [12], patterned ground shields [4] and multi-level
metallisations to build vertical solenoids [19], as well as minimising doping levels
under the inductor.
11.1.1
Inductor model description
Quality factor characterises inductor loss at low frequency. The effective induc-
tance shows the magnitude of the reactive part of the one-port input impedance with
frequency. The self-resonant frequency is the transition frequency where the input
impedance changes from inductive to capacitive.
Nguyen and Meyer [20] developed a simple π-model to describe the inductor’s
behaviour, which can be considered as a section of the ladder model for interconnects.
An improved model, shown in Figure 11.3, was later developed by Ashby et al. [11].
This compact SPICE model accounts for more physical mechanisms. In this circuit,
Rs and Ls represent the respective series resistance and inductance of the metal line.
Ls comprises self inductance and mutual inductance. Cs is the capacitance between
metal lines. However, a practical inductor includes other components associated with
Si substrate, such as, RSi and CSi, the coupling resistance and capacitance. Cox is the
capacitance of oxide layer underneath the spiral.
Except for the series inductance, all components in the model are parasitics
of the inductor and need to be minimised. Deficiencies of this simple model
include assumption of frequency-independence; parameters need to be extracted
from s-parameters at the operating frequency and parasitics associated with the over-
laps and underpasses are not considered. Yue and Wong [21] reported an inductor
model similar to that in Figure 11.3(a), but with models parameters more relevant
to inductor geometry and processing. However, the model parameters need to be

Passive components
415
Ls
Rs
Rs
Ls
Cs
(a)
(b)
Csi
Csi
Rsi
Rsi
Cox
Cox
Csi
Rsi
Vcos t
Cs
Cox
Figure 11.3
Lumped model equivalent circuit of a spiral inductor. For details,
(see text)
extracted from empirical curve fitting rather than by association with underlying
physics.
The inductance represents the magnetic energy stored in the device, although
parasitic components may store energy as well. Numerical simulators computing
the electromagnetic field distribution can therefore be used to calculate inductance
by solving Maxwell’s equations using a more computationally intensive three-
dimensional finite element simulator. Another technique due to Greenhouse [22]
divides the inductor into straight-line segments and sums the self-inductance of indi-
vidual segments and mutual inductance between any two parallel segments. While
the Greenhouse technique offers sufficient accuracy and adequate speed, it cannot
provide an inductor design directly from specifications and is cumbersome for ini-
tial design. However, the analytical technique is less complicated and provides more
physical insights.
Mohan et al. [23] have presented several new simple expressions for the d.c.
inductance of square, hexagonal, octagonal and circular spirals (see Figure 11.1).
The authors have also evaluated the accuracy of the expressions, by comparison with
both three-dimensional field solver predictions and also with measurements. The

416
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
first expression, called the modified Wheeler expression, is obtained by modifying a
relevant expression for discrete inductors:
Lmw = K1µo
n2davg
1 + K2γ
(11.1)
where γ is the fill ratio and davg is the average diameter of the inductor. K1 and K2 are
layout-dependent coefficients. The fill ratio γ represents how hollow the inductor is;
for small γ , one gets a hollow inductor (dout ≈din) and for a large γ , a full inductor
(dout ≫din). This expression is simple but gives very good accuracy.
The second expression is derived from electromagnetic principles by approximat-
ing the sides of the spiral by current sheets with uniform current distribution. This
expression is intuitive and similar in form to inductance expressions for more con-
ventional elements such as coaxial transmission lines and parallel wire transmission
lines. The third expression is obtained by data-fitting techniques. Although it lacks
the physically intuitive derivation of the other two approximations, it is very well
suited for optimisation of circuits using geometric programming.
All three expressions match field solver simulations well, with typical errors of
1–2 per cent, and most errors smaller than around 3 per cent. These expressions are
also good candidates for circuit design and optimisation applications [23]. They can
be included in a physical, scalable lumped circuit model for spiral inductors, where,
in addition to providing design insight, they allow efficient optimisation schemes to
be employed.
Series resistance Rs, a key issue for inductor modelling (see Figure 11.3(a)), arises
from the metal resistivity in the inductor and is closely related to the quality factor.
When the inductor operates at high frequencies, the metal line suffers from the skin
and proximity effects, and Rs becomes a function of frequency [24]. The series feed-
forwardcapacitance, Cs, isapproximatedastheparallel-platecapacitancebetweenthe
spiral and the centre-tap underpass. Cox represents the capacitance between the spiral
and the substrate. The silicon substrate is modelled by CSi and RSi. Cox, CSi and RSi are
proportional to the area covered by the spiral. Csub and Gsub are the properties of the
siliconsubstrateandareextractedfrommeasureddata. Asafirst-orderapproximation,
the current density decays exponentially away from the metal-SiO2 interface, and Rs
can be expressed as [21]
Rs = ρ · lT
w · teff
(11.2)
where ρ is the resistivity of the wire, lT is total length and teff is given by
teff = δ · (1 −et/δ)
(11.3)
where t is the physical thickness of the wire, and δ is the skin depth that is a function
of the frequency
δ =
 ρ
πµf
(11.4)

Passive components
417
where µ is the permeability in H/m and f is the frequency in Hz. Rs being a frequency-
dependent component, it cannot be directly implemented in a time domain simulator,
such as Cadence SPECTRE.
Yue et al. [10] have presented a physical model for planar spiral inductors on
silicon with inductor geometry, allowing designers to predict and optimise the quality
factor (see Figure 11.3(b)). Physical model parameters for an inductor on silicon are
expressed as
Cs = n · w2 ·
ϵox
toxM1−M2
(11.5)
Cox = 1
2 · l · w · ϵox
tox
(11.6)
CSi = 1
2 · l · w · Csub
(11.7)
RSi =
2
l · w · Gsub
(11.8)
where ρ is d.c. metal resistivity, l is overall length of spiral, w is line width, δ is
metal skin depth, t is metal thickness, N is number of turns, n is number of crossovers
between spiral and centre-tap (= N −1), toxM1−M2 is oxide thickness between spiral
and centre-tap, tox is oxide thickness between spiral and substrate, Csub is substrate
capacitance per unit area and Gsub is substrate conductance per unit area.
11.1.2
Quality factor
For determining Q there are three possible approaches. The first approach calculates
the ratio of the power stored to the power dissipated in the inductor. The second
approach is equivalent to deriving the ratio of the imaginary part to the real part of
the one-port input impedance, when the other port is grounded. The third approach
arranges the inductor with a capacitor to find the ratio of the 3dB bandwidth to its
centre resonant frequency. The energy storage and loss mechanisms in an inductor
on silicon can be described by an equivalent energy model, where Ls, Rs, Rp and Co
represent the overall inductance, conductor loss, substrate loss and overall capaci-
tance, respectively. Note that Rp and Cp represent the combined effects of Cox, CSi
and RSi, and hence are frequency dependent. Combining the energy terms according
to the fundamental definition of Q yields
Q = ωLs
Rs
·
Rp
Rp + [(ωLs/Rs)2 + 1]Rs
·

1 −R2
sCo
Ls
−ω2LsCo

(11.9)
where ωLs/Rs accounts for the magnetic energy stored and the ohmic loss in the
spiral conductor. The second term is the substrate loss factor representing the energy
dissipated in the semiconducting silicon substrate. The last term is the self-resonance
factor describing the reduction in Q due to the increase in the peak electric energy
with frequency and the vanishing of Q at the self-resonant frequency.

418
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
At relatively low frequency, Q is low because the substrate capacitance behaves
like an open circuit. As the frequency goes higher, Q increases, and after peaking
it decreases until the frequency reaches the self-resonant frequency. The effective
inductance is close to the d.c. inductance value Ls, at low frequency, but increases
with frequency owing to the parasitic capacitance to the ground. After reaching a
maximum, it reduces and eventually becomes negative, as the component changes
from inductive to capacitive. This frequency-dependent inductance applies in such a
way that at low frequency, the ohmic loss of the coil dominates the real part of the
equivalent input impedance. As the frequency goes higher, substrate effects start to
take over. At the self-resonance frequency, the substrate resistor mainly determines
the real part of the equivalent circuit. In order to maximise Q, a few observations can
be made:
1.
Using thicker metal or using a metal with greater conductivity (e.g., copper or
gold) improves inductor Q by reducing Rs.
2.
Placing the inductor as far from the substrate as possible minimises Cp and
enhances the self-resonance factor.
3.
Doping the substrate very lightly or very heavily results in a large Rp. This
decreases the electrically induced losses in the substrate. Other high-frequency
effects, however, induce loss in heavily doped substrates.
4.
Operating at higher frequencies can improve Q, until other high-frequency effects
become significant.
11.2
Parameter extraction
For parameter extraction, spiral inductors with different structural and process
parameters have their two-port s-parameters measured using an HP8720B Network
Analyzer and Cascade Microtech with substrate grounded. After de-embedding the
parasitics of the probe pads the lumped elements in the inductor model (see Fig-
ure 11.3) are extracted from the complex propagation constant and characteristic
impedance. A typical parameter extraction procedure for the lumped elements in the
inductor model in shown in Figure 11.4.
To demonstrate the scalability of the model discussed above, Yue et al. [10] have
tested inductors with various structural parameters. The measured and modelled val-
ues of the individual elements are plotted in Figure 11.5 for two 8-nH inductors. Ls and
Rs are subject to eddy current effect in the conductor. At high frequencies, the penetra-
tion of magnetic field into the conductor is attenuated, which causes reduction in the
magnetic flux internal to the conductor. However, Ls does not decrease significantly
with increasing frequency because it is predominantly determined by the magnetic
flux external to the conductor. Thus, it is valid to model Ls as a constant. The skin
effect on Rs is more pronounced because Rs is inversely proportional to the effective
cross-sectional area. Cs is independent of frequency since it represents the metal-to-
metal cross-over capacitance between the spiral and the centre-tap; its extracted and
modelled values are 26 and 28 fF, respectively. The frequency behaviours of Rp and
Cp are governed by Cox, CSi and RSi. At low frequencies, the electric field terminates

Passive components
419
De-embedded 
S parameter
Solve for propogation constant (Γ) 
and characteristic impedance (Z0)
S to transmission 
matrix conversion
S11
A B
C D
=
=
=
A B
C D
S12
S21S22
2Z0
Rp
Cp
Cs
Ls
Rs
Γ·I·Z0
Γ·I
coshΓl
coshΓl
Z0sinhΓl
Z0
–1
 sinhΓl
Figure 11.4
Testing and parameter extraction procedure for the lumped elements
in the inductor model [After C. P. Yue et al., IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
1996 (155–158). ©1996 IEEE]
at the oxide-Si interface and Cp is primarily determined by Cox. Since almost all
energy is transmitted within the oxide layer along the spiral, little conduction current
flows in the silicon substrate and thus Rp is large.
As frequency increases, the electric field starts to penetrate into the silicon sub-
strate, whichreducesCp becauseoftheseriesconnectionofoxideandsiliconsubstrate
capacitances. The roll-off in Rp signifies increasing energy transmission and hence
more dissipation in the silicon substrate. At high frequencies, energy is transmit-
ted mainly within the silicon substrate causing Cp and Rp to approach CSi and RSi
respectively; Cox is effectively short-circuited. Figure 11.6(a) illustrates that at low
frequencies, Q is well described by ωLs/Rs. The rapid degradation of Q at high
frequencies is a combined effect of the substrate loss and the self-resonance (see
Figure 11.6(b)).
Figure 11.7(a) shows the effect of different metal schemes on Q. At 1 GHz, the
effective thicknesses of 1 µm and 3 µm Al are 0.84 µm and 1.83 µm, respectively.
After including the substrate factors, the ratio between their Q values at 1 GHz is 2.
The single-level 3 µm and triple-level 1 µm cases have the same Q since the former
suffers from strong self-induced eddy current and the latter from the combination of
selfandmutualeddycurrents. Figure11.7(b)illustratesthatincreasingoxidethickness
improves the Q since the substrate loss and self-resonance effects are suppressed. But
as frequency increases, the effect of Cox vanishes and the Q merge together. Lowering

420
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
10
(a)
(b)
25
20
15
10
5
0
0.1
1
10
0
50
100
150
200
250
8
6
4
Ls (nH)
Cp (fF)
Rs (Ω)
Rp (Ω)
2
0
0.1
1
Frequency (GHz)
Frequency (GHz)
10
0
Copper
Aluminum
Model
Copper
Aluminum
Model
5
10
15
20
25
Figure 11.5
The measured and modelled values of (a) Ls and Rs and (b)
Rp and Cp for 1µm thick spirals in copper (rCu = 2 µ-cm)
and aluminium (rAl = 3 µ-cm). (N = 7, w = 13 µm, l = 4.4 mm,
tox = 4.5 µm,
toxM1−M2 = 1.3 µm,
Csub = 1.6 × 10−3
fF/µm2,
Gsub = 4 × 10−8S/µm2, line spacing (s) = 7 mm, and outer dimension
(OD) = 300 µ m) [After C. P. Yue et al., IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., 1996
(155–158). ©1996 IEEE]
the silicon substrate resistivity decreases RSi and increases CSi, causing the Q roll-off
to occur at a lower frequency and a reduction of the self-resonant frequency (see
Figure 11.8(a)). Figure 11.8(b) illustrates the effect of layout area on Q for the same
inductance. The larger area inductors have higher Q at low frequencies because of
lowerseriesresistance. Asfrequencyincreases, thesubstrateeffectsbegintodominate
and the larger area inductors actually have lower Q. In Figure 11.9, Q contour plots
generated using the model described above along with some experimental data are
presented. Q is plotted as a function of inductance and outer dimension of square
spiral inductors. These contour plots serve as a design tool for achieving a specific
inductance with the highest Q possible for a given technology at the frequency of
interest.

Passive components
421
Copper
Aluminium
Model
Ls/Rs
10
1.0
(a)
(b)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Substrate loss factor
Self-resonance factor
8
6
4
Q
2
0
0.1
1
Frequency (GHz)
10
0.1
1
Frequency (GHz)
10
Copper
Aluminium
Model
Figure 11.6
The measured and modelled values of (a) Q and (b) substrate loss
factor and self-resonance factor for the inductors in Figure 11.5 [After
C. P. Yue et al., IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., 1996 (155–158). ©1996 IEEE]
11.3
Inductor simulation
Although the inductance value can be computed using analytical expressions dis-
cussed above or other similar expressions found in the literature, it is difficult to
accurately predict analytically the losses associated with a spiral inductor. This neces-
sitates the use of electromagnetic field solvers. While inductors are simple in physical
structure, their design and modelling encounter the following challenges:
•
electromagnetic field effect;
•
non-uniform current distribution in the metal lines;
•
components being bias as well as frequency dependent;
•
significant substrate coupling, particularly for coils placed on a lossy substrate
such as silicon;

422
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
8
6
4
Q
2
0
8
(a)
(b)
6
4
Q
2
0
0.1
1
10
Frequency (GHz)
0.1
1
10
Frequency (GHz)
3 levels of 1 µm Al in parallel
3 µm Al
2 µm Al
1 µm Al
Model
6.0 µm oxide
4.5 µm oxide
2.5 µm oxide
Model
Figure 11.7
(a) The effect of metal scheme on Q. (Ls = 8 nH, tox = 4.5 mm,
ρsi = 10 -cm, N = 7, w = 13 µm, s = 7µm, OD = 300 µm). (b) The
effect of oxide thickness on Q. (Ls = 8 nH, tAl = 3µm, ρsi = 10 -cm,
N = 6, w = 24 µm, s = 7 µm, OD = 400 µm) [After C. P. Yue et al.,
IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., 1996 (155–158). ©1996 IEEE]
•
a wide range of dimensions and patterns;
•
mutual inductance and capacitance due to adjacent metal lines;
•
different topologies (i.e., coils placed on top, inside or bottom of the wafer).
Inductors may be simulated using the freeware program ASITIC [25], but it was
found that this program underestimated the magnetic substrate eddy current effects.
By accurately calculating the fields in the substrate and the dielectric, Sonnet EM [26],
a planar full-wave EM solver (method-of-moments) package, can accurately calculate
inductance of a planar structure such as a spiral inductor. In Sonnet EM simulation,
the conductive layer is assumed to be infinitesimally thin with a finite sheet resistivity.

Passive components
423
8
Gsub=4.0×10–3 S/µm2
Gsub=1.6×10–3 S/µm2
6
4
Model
6 Ω-cm Si:
Csub=6.0×10–3 fF/µm2
10 Ω-cm Si: Csub=1.6×10–3 fF/µm2
Q
2
0
(a)
0.1
1
10
Frequency (GHz)
8
6
4
Q
2
0
(b)
0.1
1
10
Frequency (GHz)
550 µm, 41 µm 
Outer dimension, line width
550 µm, 24 µm 
300 µm, 13 µm 
Model
Figure 11.8
(a) The effect of substrate resistivity on Q. (Ls = 8 nH, tox = 4.5µm,
tAl = 1 µm, N = 7, w = 13 µm, s = 7 µm, OD = 300 µm). (b) The
effect of layout area on Q. (Ls = 8 nH, tox = 4.5µm, tCu = 1 µm,
ρsi = 10-cm, s = 7 µm) [After C. P. Yue et al., IEEE IEDM Tech.
Dig., 1996 (155–158). ©1996 IEEE]
11.3.1
ASITIC
Analysis and Simulation of Spiral Inductors and Transformers for ICs (ASITIC) is an
interactive CAD tool that aids RF/microwave and high-speed digital engineers to anal-
yse, model and optimise passive and interconnect metal structures residing on a lossy
conductive substrate. This includes inductors, transformers, capacitors, transmission
lines, interconnectandsubstratecouplinganalysis. ASITICallowsthecircuitdesigner
to plan and optimise the layout of a chip in the presence of magnetic and electrical
interaction and coupling through the substrate and oxide layers of the IC. Process engi-
neers can also employ ASITIC to assess the effect of process changes to the quality of

424
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
8
10
1.7
4.0
6.1
4.0
5.2
3.4
4.6
2.9
Measured Q
Measured Q
Measured Q
Measured Q
0.6 GHz
1.6 GHz
3.0 GHz
1.0 GHz
3
3
3
5
7
9
5
5
7
9
1
4
4
4
2
5
7
9
1
6
4
2
0
0
100
Inductance (nH)
8
10
6
4
2
0
Inductance (nH)
200
300
4000
100
200
300
400
Outer dimension (µm)
0
100
200
300
400
Outer dimension (µm)
0
100
200
300
400
Outer dimension (µm)
Outer dimension (µm)
Figure 11.9
Contour plots of Q as a function of inductance and outer dimension
of square spiral inductors. (tox = 4.5 µm, tCu = 1 µm, rCu = 2 µ-cm,
rsi = 10 -cm, s = 7 µm) [After C. P. Yue et al., IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
1996 (155–158). ©1996 IEEE]
passive devices and isolation. In high-frequency circuits, the most important effects
tend to be the most difficult to simulate. Passive device modelling, substrate coupling
and the package parasitics fall under this category. Hence designers are forced to be
conservative, often leading to sub-optimal performance. ASITIC calculations include
the electrically induced losses and coupling as well as the magnetically induced eddy
current losses. Skin effect and proximity effects, or eddy currents in the metallisation,
are also included.
ASITIC input file describes the substrate and metal layers of an IC process that
utilizes three to four substrate layers (bulk, epi, oxide and passivation) and three to
six metal layers. ASITIC can output s-parameters for inductors, transformers, bond

Passive components
425
pads and capacitors and generate parameters for SPICE circuit simulation. The final
design can be imported into layout tools.
11.4
Active inductors
Active inductors [27–29] solve many of the problems associated with the on-chip
inductor design, for example, area requirement is drastically reduced, standard low-
cost technology can be used with confidence and high value of quality factor (more
than 100) can be easily obtained by controlling the associated losses via negative
resistance feedback technique [30,31]. By impedance transformation, the capacitive
load can be transformed into an inductive reactance to achieve high Q. However, it
is imperative to generate a high Q inductance within other stringent RF requirements
such as stability, reproducibility, noise and linearity. Since field-effect transistors
utilize space more effectively they find application in active inductor design. How-
ever, the significant internal ohmic losses can degrade their performance [8]. Several
approaches to solve this problem have been introduced, including some promising
ones that achieve high-Q values by using negative resistance.
Active inductors using GaAs-based FET or bipolar processes have been inves-
tigated [32–37] and Q values of the order of several thousand have been reported
[38–40]. In spite of the advantage of the semi-insulating substrate of GaAs to reduce
losses, an economic choice for the VLSI industry is the low-cost Si-based processes.
Therefore, realisation of high-Q active inductor using low resistivity Si-substrate is
in high demand. Efforts have also been made to design active inductors in Si-based
CMOS processes, with Q values more than several hundred [41, 42] and even an
enhanced value of more than one thousand [43]. However, as the application circuits
are intended to be used at ultra-high frequency, SiGe/SiGeC HBTs are presently an
alternative to CMOS because of their higher cut-off frequencies. Although various
aspects of bipolar active inductor design are investigated [44,45], for Si-based pro-
cesses, reported Q value is 47 with 20 nH inductance at 1.8 GHz [46]. Indeed, the
potential of Si-heterostructure-based design of bipolar active inductors in advanced
BiCMOS process, which is the technology of choice in the present day, has not yet
been explored in detail [8].
Compared to lateral CMOS transistors, a vertical bipolar transistor is expected
to suffer less substrate loss, because comparatively less active area is exposed to the
substrate and highly doped buried layers act as shields for the substrate currents. The
schematics of the circuits, shown in Figures 11.10–11.12, are different topologies of
one-port bipolar active inductors. The circuit shown in Figure 11.10(a) is the well-
known cascade configuration with the collector of T1 fed back to base of T2. Base
terminal of T1 and the emitter terminal of T2 are grounded. This connection realises
a popular gyrator C-type active inductor [35].
The Smith chart plot of Figure 11.13(a) shows s11 or the input reflection coefficient
data simulated from the one-port type-I bipolar active inductor (see Figure 11.11(a)),
with Ro = 35 , designed using SiGe transistors. Most of the curve lies around
the periphery of upper half circle in the impedance Smith chart signifying high-Q

426
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
T1
(a)
(b)
1
T2
gm1
gm1gm2
C2
C1
C2
C1
vt
Figure 11.10
One-port bipolar active inductor in gyrator-C configuration: (a) Cir-
cuit diagram (b) its equivalent circuit [After A. Chakravorty, Com-
pact Modeling of Si-Heterostructure Bipolar Transistors and Active
Inductor Design for RF Applications, PhD Thesis, IIT Kharagpur
2005]
C0
R0
(a)
(b)
T2
gm1
C2
C1
C1R0
gm1gm2
gm1gm2
C2
ϖ1C1C2R0
1/gm1
C2
vt
T1
R0
C1
Figure 11.11
One-port high-Q active inductor incorporating negative resis-
tance (type-I): (a) Circuit diagram (b) its equivalent circuit [After
A. Chakravorty, Compact Modeling of Si-Heterostructure Bipolar
Transistors and Active Inductor Design for RF Applications, PhD
Thesis, IIT Kharagpur 2005]
inductive behaviour. The operating current is 1.9 mA and the transistors are biased to
operate in the linear region. The operating frequency range under investigation lies
is between 0.5 and 15 GHz, out of which 4–10 GHz range is of importance due to
enhanced Q values. The cut-off frequency fT at the specified operating current lies
above 24 GHz.

Passive components
427
R0
R0
R2
1
1
T2
T1
gm1 gm2 gm3
–1/gm2
vt
T3
C1
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.12
One-port high-Q active inductor incorporating constant negative
resistance (type-II): (a) Circuit diagrams (b) its simple equivalent cir-
cuit [After A. Chakravorty, Compact Modeling of Si-Heterostructure
Bipolar Transistors and Active Inductor Design for RF Applications,
PhD Thesis, IIT Kharagpur 2005]
Figures 11.13(b)–(d) show the equivalent inductance (L), resistance (R) and the
quality factor (Q) values of the designed inductor for a wide range of frequencies.
The tuning element Ro is varied from 30 to 40  and there is still room for critical
tuning. For Co = 60 fF, the peak Q varies from 14 to 57 at about 7.5 GHz as Ro
sweeps as shown in Figure 11.13(d). Here reasonable high-Q values are achieved
without critical tuning. It is observed that a suitable design of type-I inductor can
provide Q values more than 35 between f = 6.5 and 8.5 GHz. From Figure 11.13(a),
it is also clear that the input reflection coefficient curve, in spite of being on the
periphery of the Smith chart, remains near the low reactance values. This signi-
fies that this circuit produces low inductance value. Figure 11.13(b) shows that the
inductance value (L) of about 0.2 nH is achieved in the high-Q frequency band.
Though this range of inductance value is low, it may find its utility in some specific
applications.
11.5
Capacitors
The metal-insulator-metal (MIM) capacitors have attracted much attention in silicon
integrated circuit applications because of their high-conductive electrode and low
parasitic capacitance. Analog/mixed-signal processes use three major types of capaci-
tors: polySi-insulator-polySi (PIP), MIM and MOS-style (depletion or accumulation).

428
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
0.5
5.0
R0 = 30Ω, 35Ω, 40Ω 
C0 = 60 fF 
R0 = 30Ω, 35Ω, 40Ω 
C0 = 60 fF 
R0 = 30Ω 35Ω 40Ω 
C0 = 60 fF 
1.0
0.2
0.0
S11
R0=35Ω
–0.5
2.0
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
0.32
R0
R0
R0
R0
0.28
0.24
0.20
0.16
0
Quality factor, Q
Inductance, L (nH)
Resistance, R (Ω)
10
20
30
40
50
60
3
6
9
Frequency, f (GHz)
12
15
3
6
9
Frequency, f (GHz)
12
15
3
6
9
Frequency, f (GHz)
12
15
–2.0
15
12
9
6
3
0
Figure 11.13
Simulation results of one-port bipolar active inductor using SiGe tran-
sistors: (a) s11 plot in Smith chart, (b) inductance (L), (c) resistance
(R), and (d) quality factor (Q) over frequencies for different Ro val-
ues [After A. Chakravorty, Compact Modeling of Si-Heterostructure
Bipolar Transistors and Active Inductor Design for RF Applications,
PhD Thesis, IIT Kharagpur 2005]
By far, the most popular analog/mixed-signal capacitor is the MIM. MIM capacitors
have the inherent advantage that they are metal and, if implemented at the last metal
layer, have the entire inter-layer dielectric (ILD) stack between them and the substrate.
MIM capacitors are generally implemented in commercial CMOS Cu-damascence
processes [47,48] and the capacitors show excellent linearity with voltage and tem-
perature that are the requirement for analog applications. However, the selection
of the inner-layer dielectric is crucial. SiN is a popular choice due to its availabil-
ity in the back-end process although the low-temperature-deposited SiN is known
to show higher relaxation recovery voltages than oxide [49]. PECVD SiN displays
significant sensitivity to operation frequency, bias voltage and temperature when
compared to oxide [50]. SiN also displays frequency-dependent shifts that are con-
sistent with bulk nitride traps located within a tunnelling distance of the nitride metal
interface.

Passive components
429
The main problem of MIM capacitor is its non-scalability. One of the restrictions
with MIM devices is that process technologies do not scale the vertical spacing in
the back-end nearly as fast as the lateral spacing. The reason is that digital circuit
designs cannot tolerate large increases in the wiring capacitance from generation to
generation. Lateral flux (finger) capacitors solve this problem by using the lateral
capacitance (between the metal lines) rather than the vertical capacitance (between
the different ILD layers). As a consequence, the capacitance is under design control
and scales more effectively with the technology [4]. For a comprehensive review on
MIM capacitor for RF circuit applications, the reader may refer to a paper by Ng
et al. [51] in which the authors provide an overview of MIM capacitor integration
issues.
Silicon oxide and silicon nitride are dielectrics that are commonly used in con-
ventional MIM capacitors. Though they can provide good voltage linearity properties
and low temperature coefficients, their capacitance density will be limited owing to
low dielectric constants (ϵr ∼3.9 for SiO2, ∼7 for Si3N4). A 30 nm thick SiO2 MIM
capacitor has shown a voltage linearity of 20 ppm/V.
A high capacitance density is required for a MIM capacitor in order to minimise
chip area. Adoption of high-k material is a very efficient way to increase the capaci-
tance density. HfO2 is now being researched as a very promising candidate for gate
dielectrics in MOSFET applications. Furthermore, a very high performance HfO2
MIM capacitor, with a capacitance density of 3.0 fF/µm, has been demonstrated [52].
Further increase in capacitance density can be implemented by scaling down the
dielectric thickness, which, however, may result in higher voltage coefficients of
capacitance [53].
Another limitation of the MIM device is the thickness of the insulator region. In
contrast, MOS devices can take advantage of thin gate oxide processes to achieve high
capacitance per unit area. However, since one of the contacts is formed in silicon,
the series resistance of a MOS capacitor is quite large. In addition, the very high
gate leakage currents of modern scaled oxides at 180 nm node and beyond make
gate-oxide-based MOS devices excessively leaky for conventional applications.
11.6
Varactor
The varactor is one of the most important components in RFIC applications such as
VCOs. The type of varactor device available depends on the technology. They include
standard p-n junction varactors quasi-hyperabrupt varactors or MOS varactors. Some
technologies offer multiple types of varactors. Key characteristics of varactors include
low losses (high Q), sufficient capacitive tuning range, low parasitic capacitance, high
unit capacitance and high linearity at RF frequencies.
The most common type of varactor is a p-n junction, constructed using a typical
bipolar transistor collector–base structure. To enhance junction varactor performance,
an optional new quasi-hyperabrupt (QHA) varactor, formed from the intrinsic npn
collector–base junction with a specially tailored implant has been reported [54]. The
QHA varactor presents a larger capacitive tuning ratio, a good quality factor (Q)

430
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
performance and excellent linearity. The scalable quasi-hyperabrupt junction varactor
comprises the intrinsic npn collector–base junction with a specially tailored implant to
enhance its performance. The QHA varactor provides an increase in the capacitance
tuning range and excellent linearity while maintaining high Q.
MOS varactor is a thin-oxide MOS varactor device with n+ source and drain
shorted together. However, instead of n+ source and drain diffusions being in a
p-well, as with n-FETs, the MOS varactor is built in an n-well. The MOS varactor
includes n+ subcollector (NS) and deep trench (DT) levels. The variable capacitance
is achieved by controlling the gate-to-diffusion/n-well potential (Vgd), which takes
the silicon surface under the gate from depletion to electron accumulation. Generally
speaking, the MOS varactor is modelled as two capacitors in series: a gate-oxide
capacitor and a depletion capacitor. With a positive voltage Vgd, the MOS varactor
behaves like a parallel-plate capacitor with an accumulation layer underneath the
silicon surface. The device capacitance equals the gate-oxide capacitance. If the
device is reverse-biased, a depletion layer is formed in the n-well directly under
the gate. The device capacitance decreases because of the depletion capacitance in
series with the gate-oxide capacitance. The MOS-varactor model supports variable
channel lengths and widths and includes gate resistance, channel resistance, gate-
oxide capacitance, depletion capacitance fringe capacitance and parasitic substrate
capacitance.
11.7
Resistor
Precision polySi and metal thin film resistors are key passive elements in analog
circuits. The simultaneous presence of both poly- and metal resistors can add value in
a process, because the metal resistors are at the top of the stack and the poly resistors
at the bottom. Two widely separated locations allow designers to choose a resistor
that minimises parasitics for their particular circuit. Also, the presence of a front-
end resistor may enable in-line or early learning electrical evaluation on key circuit
elements.
The key figures of merit for resistors are tolerance, parasitic capacitance, temper-
ature coefficients and voltage coefficients. Traditionally, resistors are single crystal
silicon or polySi made from implants and layers already existing in the process
(e.g. gate poly). This simplifies the process but makes it more difficult to optimise
separate parts of the process. Metal thin film resistors can be built at any of the tradi-
tional metal layers. In addition, a metal thin film resistor can be built as a by-product
of the MIM capacitor process. TaN is frequently used as well, owing to its ready
availability in a Cu-damascene process as a Cu-diffusion barrier.
PolySi resistors exist in both silicided and unsilicided versions. Since the resis-
tance of polySi-silicided (polycide) resistors tends to be quite low (5–15 ohms/sq)
and the voltage coefficient tends to be quite high (100–600 ppm/V) there is a strong
tendency to use the unsilicided (or silicide-blocked) resistors [55]. The silicide-
blocking layer is usually an oxide or nitride and is frequently chosen to leverage
a pre-existing layer elsewhere in the process. Existence of a silicide-blocking layer

Passive components
431
Table 11.2
Passives in a 0.18 µm SiGe BiCMOS process [After D. Harame et al.,
Proc. 4th IEEE Intl. Caracas Conf. Devices, Circuits and Systems, 2002
(D052-1–D052-17)]
Resistors
Rs (/Sq.)
TCR (ppm/C)
Subcollector
8.1
1430
n+ Diffusion
72
1910
p+ Diffusion
105
1430
p+-PolySi
270
50
p-PolySi
1600
−1178
TaN
142
−750
Capacitors
Cp (fF/µm2)
Vcc (+5/−5 ppm/V)
MIM
1
<45
MOS
2.6
−7500/−1500
Inductor
L (nH)
max Q at 5 GHz
Al spiral inductor
≥0.7
18
Varactor
Tuning range
Q @ 0.5
c-b junction
1.64:1
90
MOS accumulation
3.1:1
300
also enables devices such as silicide-blocked diffusion resistors and silicide-blocked
MOSdevices [56]. Thesheetresistance, aswellasthethermalandvoltagecoefficients
of silicide-blocked polySi resistors, are very process dependent. Implant conditions,
grain boundary size, thermal activation and end-cap silicide quality can all impact
the key polySi resistor parameters. As a consequence, reported values for the major
resistor parameters vary widely. These key passive elements in the 0.18 µm SiGe BiC-
MOS technology are a good example of advanced passives development and they are
listed in Table 11.2. Passive component development summary is given in Table 11.3.
11.8
Interconnects
The increasing complexity of ICs demands a greater number of integrated transistors
and gates, which require more wiring for interconnectivity. In addressing interconnect
performance limits, it is important to understand what is meant by interconnect per-
formance. It is used synonymously with the operating frequency or speed, assuming
IC architecture and design remain constant. The international technology roadmap for
semiconductors(ITRS)projectsperformanceimprovementofadvancedULSIcircuits
likely to saturate beyond the 100-nm technology node, owing to the rapidly domi-
nating interconnect performance limitations, unless a paradigm shift from present
IC architecture is introduced [57]. Considerable efforts are being made to push the
interconnect performance limit.

432
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
Table 11.3
Passive component development summary [After D. Harame
et al., Proc. 4th IEEE Intl. Caracas Conf. Devices, Circuits and
Systems, 2002 (D052-1–D052-17).]
Device
Type
Issues
Solutions
Inductors
Spiral
Q
Thick dielectric
module/thick metal
10–20 -cm
substrates
Capacitors
Poly-Insulator-Si
Density
Optimise
Poly-Insulator-Poly
Reliability
processes
Metal–Insulator–Metal
Voltage rating
Offer variety
Vcc
Q
Resistors
polySi
Tolerance
Process control
BEOL thin film
TCR
Offer variety
Single-crystal
Parasitic C
Layout options
Current rating
for low C
Varactor
Junction
tuning range
Offer variety
MOS (accumulation)
Q
Layout
linearity
in model
Interconnect
Transmission line
CMOS
Low levels
compatibility
CMOS
Local interconnect
Electromigration
upper levels –
thick
loss
Copper
Interconnect optimisation has two conflicting requirements: it must remain fully
compatible with the base CMOS process for large digital circuit design as well as have
thick low resistance metals spaced far from the substrate by thick dielectrics as shown
in the previous section on inductors. The trend in VLSI CMOS metallisation is to
reduce the metal and dielectric thickness of each generation by almost a factor of 2.
The RF/analog solution to this apparent conflict is to have both CMOS compatibility
and improved passives by creating thick metal/dielectric add-on modules that are
added on top of the existing base CMOS metal layers. The evolutionary development
of add-on thick dielectric/metal modules in a 0.5 µm SiGe BiCMOS process is shown
in Figure 11.14.
The trend is towards reduced line widths together with larger die size, greater
number of interconnect layers and GHz clock frequencies. As signal frequencies
continue to rise, the effect of package parasitics also become important. As a conse-
quence, the electrical characteristics of the interconnections are becoming important

Passive components
433
MA
PI
AM
EI
MT
M3
M2
M1
V3
FT
MT
LM
V2
V1
CA
MC
CA
MC
CA
MC
V3
V4
AV
V4
V2
V1
V3
V2
V1
M4
M3
M2
M1
M4
M3
M2
M1
Figure 11.14
Cross-sectional view of metallisation development in a 0.5 µm SiGe
BiCMOS process. The inset shows an SEM micrograph of the top
(two) thick metal layers The difference in these three technologies is
the thick metallisation for passives improvement and analog scal-
ing. Cross-section is not to scale [After D. Harame et al., Proc.
4th IEEE Intl. Caracas Conf. Devices, Circuits and Systems, 2002
(D052-1–D052-17). ©2002 IEEE]
factors in determining the behaviour of integrated circuits. In fact, future submicron
integrated circuits will behave more and more like giant microwave circuits.
As VLSI technology shrinks to deep sub-micron (DSM) geometries (below
90 nm), the parasitic due to interconnects is becoming a limiting factor in determin-
ing circuit performance. An accurate modelling of interconnect parasitic resistance
(R), capacitance (C) and inductance (L) is thus essential in determining various chip
interconnect-related issues such as delay, crosstalk, IR drop, power dissipation and
so on. Cu has become the interconnect metal of choice because of its lower resistivity
as compared to Al, again to reduce resistance. Much work is also being pursued in
low dielectric constant (low-k) materials to replace deposited SiO2, as an inter-layer
(ILD) and inter-metal dielectric (IMD) to reduce interconnect capacitance.
The first step is to add one layer of thick dielectric/metal (3.0 µm oxide and 4.0 µm
aluminium-AM layer). As technology evolved an improved thick dielectric/metal

434
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
add-on module with two thick metal layers was created (3.0 µm oxide, 3.0 µm Cu-E1
layer, 4.0 µm oxide and 4.0 µm Al-MA layer). The second layer of thick metal allows
more complex inductor structures including stacked or transformer inductors. Stacked
inductor designs can significantly increase both the inductance and Q as well as reduce
the area. For example, with two thick metal layers the inductor Q is increased 40 per
cent over inductors of the same inductance with one thick metal layer.
11.9
Summary
Analog, mixed-signal and RF continue to be a challenge for digital CMOS design-
ers and manufacturers. The performance is ultimately limited by the accuracy of
the passive components in the technology. Conflicting scaling methodologies, com-
plex measurement and modelling support requirements, a multiplicity of interacting
features and increasingly complex process integration issues are the challenges to
overcome to support the next generation of product designs. The ability to accurately
construct and model passives with Qs > 15–20 at frequencies >10 GHz represents a
key enabler for new circuits and products.
A physical model for planar spiral inductors on silicon is presented. Physical phe-
nomena important to the prediction of Q are considered and analysed. The scalable
inductor model shows good agreement with measured and published data. However,
as the eddy current loss is approximately proportional to the cube of the inductor diam-
eter, strategies to minimise resistive parasitics by making large inductors (as is com-
mon in GaAs) are less effective in CMOS owing to the more conductive Si substrates.
Although the use of Cu or multi-tiered interconnect architecture yields lower
RC delay, there are still other performance limitations. Power consumption and
dissipation, for instance, is rapidly becoming unmanageable as the clock frequen-
cies continue to rise. Any increase in interconnect loading significantly increases
the power consumption in high-performance chips. Interconnect scaling has signifi-
cant implications for computer-aided design (CAD) methodologies and tools that are
causing the design cycles to increase.
References
1 D.L.Harame, K.M.Newton, R.Singh, S.L.Sweeney, S.E.Strang, J. B. Johnson,
et al., ‘Design automation methodology and rf/analog modeling for rf CMOS and
SiGe BiCMOS technologies’, IBM J. Res. Dev., vol. 47, pp. 139–175, 2003.
2 C.-S. Chang, C.-P. Chao, J. G. J. Chern, and J. Y.-C. Sun, ‘Advanced CMOS
technology portfolio for RF IC applications’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices,
vol. 52, pp. 1271–1285, 2005.
3 D.Harame, A.Joseph, D.Coolbaugh, G.Freeman, K.Newton, S.M.Parker, etal.,
‘The emerging role of SiGe BiCMOS technology in wired and wireless commu-
nications’, in Proc. IEEE Int. Caracas Conf. Devices, Circuits and Systems,
pp. D052-1–D052-17, 2002.

Passive components
435
4 T. H. Lee, and S. S. Wong, ‘CMOS RF integrated circuits at 5 GHz and beyond’,
Proc. IEEE, vol. 88, pp. 1560–1571, 2000.
5 D. J. Allstot, and W. C. Black, Jr., ‘Technology design considerations for
monolithic MOS switched-capacitor filtering systems’, Proc. IEEE, vol. 71,
pp. 967–986, 1983.
6 J. J. Wikner, and N. Tan, ‘Influence of circuit imperfections on the performance
of DACs’, Analog Integrated Circuits Signal Proc., vol. 18, pp. 7–20, 1999.
7 J. L. McCreary, ‘Matching properties and voltage and temperature dependence of
MOS capacitors’, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. SC-16, pp. 608–616, 1981.
8 A. Chakravorty, Compact Modeling of Si-Heterostructure Bipolar Transistors
and Active Inductor Design for RF Applications. PhD thesis, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kharagpur, 2005.
9 J. Long, and M. Copeland, ‘Modeling, characterization and design of monolithic
inductors for Silicon RF ICs’, in IEEE CICC Proc., pp. 185–188, 1996.
10 C. P. Yue, C. Ryu, J. Lau, T. H. Lee, and S. S. Wong, ‘A physical model for planar
spiral inductors on silicon’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 155–158, 1996.
11 K. B. Ashby, W. C. Finley, J. J. Bastek, and S. Moinian, ‘High Q inductors for
wireless applications in a complementary silicon bipolar process’, in IEEE BCTM
Proc., pp. 179–182, 1994.
12 J. N. Burghartz, M. Soyuer, K. A. Jenkins, M. Kies, M. Dolan, K. Stein, et al.,
‘Integrated RF components in a SiGe bipolar technology’, IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, vol. 32, pp. 1440–1445, 1997.
13 J. N. Burghartz, D. C. Edelstein, K. A. Jenkins, C. Jahnes, C. Uzoh,
E. J. O’Sullivan, et al., ‘Monolithic spiral inductors fabricated using a VLSI
Cu-Damascene interconnect technology and low-loss substrates’, in IEEE IEDM
Tech. Dig., pp. 99–102, 1996.
14 J. N. Burghartz, M. Soyuer, and K. A. Jenkins, ‘Microwave inductors and
capacitors in standard multilevel interconnect silicon technology’, IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 44, pp. 100–104, 1996.
15 S.-M. Oh, C.-W. Kim, and S.-G. Lee, ‘A 74%, 1.56-2.71 GHz, wide-tunable
LC-tuned VCO in 0.35 µm CMOS technology’, Microwave and Optical Technol.
Lett., vol. 37, pp. 98–100, 2003.
16 J. N. Burghartz, A. E. Ruehli, K. A. Jenkins, M. Soyuer, and D. Nguyen-Ngoc,
‘Novel substrate contact structure for high-Q silicon-integrated spiral inductors’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 55–58, 1997.
17 S. Stefanou, J. S. Hamel, P. Baine, M. Bain, B. M. Armstrong, H. S. Gamble,
et al., ‘Cross-talk suppression Faraday cage structure in silicon-on-insulator’, in
IEEE Intl. SOI Conf. Proc., pp. 181–182, 2002.
18 S. Stefanou S, J. S. Hamel, P. Baine, M. Bain, B. M. Armstrong, H. S. Gamble,
et al., ‘Ultralow silicon substrate noise crosstalk using metal Faraday cages
in an SOI technology’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 51, pp. 486–491,
2004.
19 J. N. Burghartz, M. Soyuer, and K. A. Jenkins, ‘Integrated RF and microwave
components in BiCMOS technology’, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 43,
pp. 1559–1570, 1996.

436
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
20 N. M. Nguyen and R. G. Meyer, ‘Si IC-compatible inductor and LC passive
filters’, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 25, pp. 1028–1031, 1990.
21 C. P. Yue, and S. S. Wong, ‘Physical modeling of spiral inductors on silicon’,
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 47, pp. 560–568, 2000.
22 H. M. Greenhouse, ‘Design of planar rectangular microelectronic inductors’,
IEEE Trans. Parts, Hybrids, and Packaging, vol. 10, pp. 101–109, 1974.
23 S. S. Mohan, M. M. Hershenson, S. P. Boyd, and T. H. Lee, ‘Simple accurate
expressions for planar spiral inductances’, IEEE J. Solid–State Circuits, vol. 34,
pp. 1419–1424, 1999.
24 Y. Cao, R. A. Groves, N. D. Zamdmer, J. O. Plouchart, R. A. Wachnik,
X. Huang, et al., ‘Frequency-independent equivalent circuit model for on-chip
spiral inductors’, in IEEE CICC Proc., pp. 217–220, 2002.
25 A. M. Niknejad, ‘ASITIC: Analysis and Simulation of Spiral Inductors and
Transformers for ICs, Univ. of California, Berkeley’, 2001.
26 Sonnet USA, Inc., ‘SONNET Manual’, 1999.
27 S. Hara, T. Tokumitsu, T. Tanaka, and M. Aikawa, ‘Broad-band monolithic
microwave active inductor and its application to miniaturized wide-band ampli-
fiers’, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., vol. MTT-36, pp. 1920–1924,
1988.
28 S. Hara, T. Tokumitsu, and M. Aikawa, ‘Lossless broad-band monolithic
microwave active inductors’, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech.,
vol. MTT-37, pp. 1979–1984, 1989.
29 F. E. van Vliet, F. L. M. van den Bogaart, J. L. Tauritz, and R. G. F. Baets,
‘Systematic analysis, synthesis and realization of monolithic microwave, active
inductors’, in IEEE MTT-S Dig., pp. 1659–1662, 1996.
30 B. Hopf, and I. Wolff, ‘Narrow band MMIC active filter using negative resistance
circuits in coplanar line technique’, in Proc. EuMC, pp. 1110–1112, 1995.
31 W. Li, B. L. Ooi, Q. J. Xu, and P. S. Kooi, ‘High Q active inductor with loss
compensation by feedback network’, Electron. Lett., vol. 35, pp. 1328–1329,
1999.
32 C. Leifso, J. W. Haslett, and J. G. McRory, ‘Monolithic tunable active inductor
with independent Q control’, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech., vol. 48,
pp. 1024–1029, 2000.
33 C. Leifso, and J. W. Haslett, ‘A fully integrated active inductor with independent
voltage tunable inductance and series-loss resistance’, IEEE Trans. Microwave
Theory and Tech., vol. 49, pp. 671–676, 2001.
34 K. W. Kobayashi, and A. K. Oki, ‘A novel heterojunction bipolar transistor VCO
using an active tunable inductance’, IEEE Microwave and Guided Wave Lett.,
vol. 4, pp. 235–237, 1994.
35 R. Kaunisto, P. Alinikula, and K. Stadius, ‘Active inductors for GaAs and bipolar
technologies’, Analog Integrated Circuits and Signal Proc., vol. 7, pp. 35–48,
1995.
36 R. Kaunisto, P. Alinikula, K. Stadius, and V. Porra, ‘A low-power HBT MMIC
filter based on tunable active inductors’, IEEE Microwave and Guided Wave Lett.,
vol. 7, pp. 209–211, 1997.

Passive components
437
37 G. F. Zhang, C. S. Ripoll, and M. L. Villegas, ‘GaAs monolithic microwave
floating active inductor’, Electron. Lett., vol. 27, pp. 1860–1862, 1991.
38 P. Alinikula, R. Kaunisto, and K. Stadius, ‘Monolithic active resonators for
wireless applications’, in IEEE MTT-S Dig., pp. 1151–1154, 1994.
39 H. Hayashi, and M. Muraguchi, ‘A novel loss compensation technique for high-Q
broad-band active inductors’, in IEEE Microwave and Millimeter Wave Circuit
Symp., pp. 103–106, 1996.
40 S. Lucyszyn, and I. D. Robertson, ‘Monolithic narrow-band filter using
ultrahigh-Q tunable active inductors’, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech.,
vol. 42, pp. 2617–2622, 1994.
41 D. R. Akbari, A. Payne, and C. Toumazou, ‘A high-Q RF CMOS differential
active inductor’, in IEEE Intl Conf. Electronics, Circuits and Systems Dig.,
pp. 157–160, 1998.
42 M. Grozing, A. Pascht, and M. Berroth, ‘A 2.5 V CMOS differential active
inductor with tunable L and Q for frequencies up to 5 GHz’, in IEEE MTT-S
Symp. Dig., pp. 575–578, 2001.
43 K. V. Chiang, K. Y. Lam, W. W. Choi, K. W. Tam, and R. Martins, ‘A modular
approach for high Q microwave CMOS active inductor design’, Proc. IEEE,
pp. 41–44, 2000.
44 C. F. Campbell, and R. J. Weber, ‘Design of a broadband microwave BJT active
inductor circuit’, Proc. IEEE, pp. 407–409, 1992.
45 D. P. Anderson, R. J. Weber, and S. F. Russell, ‘Bipolar active inductor real-
izability limits, distortion, and bias considerations’, Proc. IEEE, pp. 241–244,
1997.
46 G. D’Angelo, L. Fanucci, A. Monorchio, A. Monterastelli, and B. Neri,
‘High-quality active inductors’, Electron. Lett., vol. 35, pp. 1727–1728, 1999.
47 M. Armacost, A. Augustin, P. Felsner, Y. Feng, G. Friese, J. Heidenreich, et al.,
‘Ahighreliabilitymetalinsulatormetalcapacitorfor0.18 µmcoppertechnology’,
in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 157–160, 2000.
48 P. Zurcher, P. Alluri, P. Chu, A. Duvallet, C. Happ, R. Henderson, et al.,
‘Integration of thin film MIM capacitors and resistors into copper metalliza-
tion based RF-CMOS and Bi-CMOS technologies’, in IEEE IEDM Tech. Dig.,
pp. 153–156, 2000.
49 J. W. Fattaruso, M. D. Wit, G. Warwar, K. Tan, and R. K. Hester, ‘The effect of
dielectric relaxation on charge-redistribution A/D converters’, IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, vol. 25, pp. 1550–1561, 1990.
50 J. Babcock, S. Balster, A. Pinto, C. Dirnecker, P. Steinmann, R. Jumpertz, et al.,
‘Analog characteristics of metal-insulator-metal capacitors using PECVD nitride
dielectrics’, IEEE Electron Devices Lett., vol. 22, pp. 230–232, 2001.
51 C. H. Ng, C.-S. Ho, S.-F. Chu, and S.-C. Sun, ‘MIM capacitor integra-
tion for mixed-signal/RF applications’, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., vol. 52,
pp. 1399–1409, 2005.
52 H. Hu, C. Zhu, Y. F. Lu, M. F. Li, B. J. Cho, and W. K. Choi, ‘A high perfor-
mance MIMcapacitor using HfO2 dielectrics’, IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., vol. 23,
pp. 514–516, 2002.

438
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
53 A. Kar-Roy, C. Hu, M. Racaneli, C. A. Compton, P. Kempf, G. Jolly, et al., ‘High
density metal insulator metal capacitors using PECVD nitride for mixed signal
and RF circuits’, in Proc. IEEE Int. Interconnect Technology Conf., pp. 245–247,
1999.
54 W. Ni, K. Carrig, and X. Yuan, ‘The variety of varactor devices available in IBM
SiGe BiCMOS technologies’, MicroNews, vol. 2nd Quarter, pp. 5–8, 2002.
55 K. J. Kuhn, S. Ahmed, P. Vandervoorn, A. Murthy, B. Obradovic, K. Raol, et al.,
‘Integration of mixed-signal elements into a high-performance digital CMOS
process’, Intel Technol. J., vol. 6, pp. 31–41, 2002.
56 A. Salman, R. Gauthier, W. Stadler, K. Esmark, M. Muhammad, C. Putnam,
et al., ‘Characterization and investigation of the interaction between hot electron
and electrostatic discharge stresses using NMOS devices in 0.13 µm CMOS
technology’, in IEEE Rel. Symp. Proc., pp. 219–225, 2001.
57 Semiconductor Industry Association, ‘International Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors.’ San Jose, Calif., 2005.

Index
abrupt heterojunction 10
AlAs 200
Al(As,Sb) 200
(Al,Ga)As 200
alloy scattering 369
APLAC 17
ASITIC 423
ATHENA 47
ATLAS 47
Auger recombination 360
avalanche breakdown 277
avalanche multiplication 9
back-end process 2, 428
ballistic transport 100
band alignment 114, 204, 361
bandgap narrowing 361
temperature dependence 364
band offset 137
band-to-band tunneling 101
base-after-gate process 243
base-during-gate process 240
base pushout 355
base resistance 305
base transit time 355
BESOI 245
biaxial strain 69, 102
BiCMOS 234
Boltzman statistics 48
Boltzmann transport equation 33
BSIM 268, 269, 280
buried layer 155
carrier freeze-out 203, 222
capacitance-voltage 140
capacitor 427
carbon incorporation 256
chemical mechanical polishing 43
collector breakdown voltage 396
compact model 16
complementary SiGe HBT technology 247
compound semiconductor 45
collector resistance 307
conduction band 113
density of states 365
conduction band minima 365
current continuity equation 47
critical thickness 113, 373
cut-off frequency 323
de-embedding 287
density functional theory 23
density gradient model 167
density of states 140, 209
effective 363
temperature dependence 367
depletion capacitance 162, 430
device simulation 8
history 8
device simulator
BAMBI 9
BIPOLE 9
comparison 359
DESSIS 13, 359
DIOS 13
HQUPETS 9, 64
MEDICI 13
MINIMOS 9, 359
NEMO 359
PADRE 9

440
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
device simulator (Contd.)
PISCES 9
PROPHET 9
SCORPIO 359
SEDAN 9
DIBL 141
diffusion 34
diffusion coefficient 67, 354
diffusion equation 51, 168
diffusion length 65
drift-diffusion approximation 181
drift transistor 195
Early effect 304, 307, 329
Early voltage 324
Ebers-Moll model 303
ECAD 10
effective density of states 363
effective mass
longitudinal 366
transverse 366
temperature dependence 366
electromigration 333
electron mobility
stress-induced 46
emitter
wide bandgap 197
energy balance equation 166, 219
energy band 360
engineering
channel 117
drain 102
gate 120
gate dielectric 102
layout 132
substrate 102
source 102
epitaxy 42, 251
epitaxial growth 113, 155
equivalent oxide thickness 101
etching 37
FDSOI 124
Fermi-Dirac statistics 48
Fermi level 50, 123, 363
pinning 377
figures of merit 211
FinFET 184
finite difference method 7, 84
finite element method 7
flat-band voltage 101
front-end process 106
GaAs 200
(Ga,In)As 200
(Ga,In)P 200
gate dielectric 110
gate leakage 429
Gaussian distribution 11
generation and recombination 373
Gummel-Poon model 304
heterostructure
bipolar transistor 195
first SiGe transistor 199
issues 200
HBT model
compact 301
comparison 384
HICUM 312
MEXTRAM 310
parameter extraction 314
scalable 333
VBIC 305
heavy doping effect 362
HEMT 16
hetero-FETs 175
heterojunction 195, 201
heterostructure 224
HICUM 312
high injection effect 212
high-k dielectrics 108
h-parameter 211
hole mobility
stress-induced 46
hot carrier injection 10
hybrid substrate 106
hydrodynamic model 137, 181
IC-CAP 16
impact ionisation 356, 375
implantation 33
inductor
active 425
model 414
quality factor 417
parameter extraction 418
simulation 421
InP 200
integrated circuit 31

Index
441
interconnect 23, 431
inversion layer 174
ion implantation 33
ionised impurity scattering 116
ISE-TCAD 10
kink effect 153, 160
Kirk effect 310, 315, 355
knee current 256
laterial pnp transistor 239
lattice constant 197
lattice mismatch 103, 200, 282, 395
lattice temperature 167, 361, 376
leakage current 97, 396, 429
lifetime 374
lithography 35
local density approximation 23
LOCOS 6, 33
lumped element model 294, 418
majority carrier 158, 268
MASTAR 168
maximum available gain 389
maximum stable gain 389
mesa technique 235
metallisation 37
MEXTRAM 310
MIM capacitor 235
minority carrier
lifetime 354
mobility 369
recombination 374
misfit dislocation 205
mobility
engineering 104
enhancement 106, 111
orientation dependence 104
temperature dependence 307
SiGe 368
model parameter 269
modelling
heterostructure MOSFETs 281
multigate SOI device 182
RF MOSFET 285
SOI MOSFET 280
molecular beam epitaxy 206
Moll-Ross current relation 304
Monte Carlo method 33
Moore’s law 6, 234
MODFET 112, 120
MOS capacitor 375, 429
MOSFET
buried channel 112
double-gate 97, 163
FinFET 45, 184
mobility extraction 102
model evaluation 279
multigate FET 108
scaling issues 100
strain-engineered 97
strained-Si 54
surface channel 112
triple gate 97
MOSFET model
charge-based 268
compact 267
large-signal 287
surface-potential based 271
SP 273
HiSIM 275
MOS11 275
EKV 277
nanoelectronics 20
noise figure 211, 377
nonclassical CMOS structures 270
Non-quasistatic effect 52, 268
NORMAN 15
optimisation 20
oxidation 33
parameter extraction 18, 418
algorithm 316
parasitic
bipolar action 154
buried channel 118
capacitance 155
pnp 308
resistance 127
PDSOI 162, 280
Pearson IV distribution 34
phonon scattering 114, 164
piezoelectric effect 376
pinch-off 275
plasma processing 40
oxidation 84
Poisson’s equation 9, 47, 275
polycrystalline SiGe 79, 237

442
TCAD for Si, SiGe and GaAs integrated circuits
process flow 13
process integration 120
process simulation 11, 32
process simulator
GROFILMS 38
SUPREM 35
process-induced stress 104
pseudomorphic growth 249, 374
punchthrough 140, 167
quantum mechanical effect 270, 356
quantum well 200
quasi-saturation 305, 334
quasi-static approximation 274
reactive ion etching 35
recombination
Shockley-Read-Hall 374
regional approach 9, 267
relaxation time 377
relaxed-SiGe 71
resistor 430
RPCVD 206
RTCVD 206
SAMPLE 12
saturation current 306
saturation velocity 371
scaling
issues 100
lateral 236
MOSFET 6, 111
vertical 236
scattering
alloy 116
Coulomb 122
impurity 116
inter-band 113
intervalley 114, 178
phonon 114, 180
surface-roughness 174
Schrodinger-Poisson equation 48
segregation 35, 46
B 75
Ge 80
selective epitaxial growth 113, 245
selectively implanted collector 213, 340
self-aligned transistor technology 250
self-heating 216, 245, 280, 306
SENTAURUS 10
short channel effect 120, 140, 162
silicon-germanium (SiGe) doping 63
Arsenic 70
Boron 65
Phosphorous 70
silicon-germanium
BiCMOS technology 238
HBTs 208
figure-of-merit 211
low temperature 220
on SOI 245
oxidation 79
oxidation kinetics 81
plasma oxidation 84
simulation 213
transit time 219
silicon-germanium-carbon (SiGeC) 63
dopant diffusion 75
technology 233, 249
silicon-on-insulator (SOI) 153
devices 158
fully-depleted 162
partially-depleted 160
wafer fabrication 154
Silvaco TCAD tools 46
simulation
drift-diffusion 55, 181, 216
hydrodynamic 181
mixed-mode 10
Monte Carlo 225
process 10
simulation of
high-speed devices 351
III–V devices 376
strain-engineered MOSFET 136
SOI devices 165
strained-Si MOSFETs 171
SSGOI 173
SSOI 180
Smart-Cut 156, 159
SmartSpice 48
s-parameter 18, 211, 316
SPARTA 181
SPAYN 19
SPICE 304
parameters 14
SOI 153, 245
SOISPICE 282
SSOI 158
stability factor 211
STAG 282

Index
443
statistical process control 18
strain
engineering 45, 113, 127
global 104, 113
local 132
relaxation 89
substrate-induced 104, 111
process-induced 102, 106, 132
strained-Ge 371
strained layer 247
strained-Si 54
on insulator 136
strain-engineered
MOSFET 97
strain-engineering 127
CMOS technology 127
biaxial 110, 113
uniaxial 102, 129
strain relaxation 110, 254
strained-SiGe 204, 233
stress
contour 109
compressive 110
tensile 103
stressor 109, 132
substrate engineering 102
substrate-induced strain 104, 111
sub-threshold characteristics 124
superlattice 63
SUPREM 11
surface channel 112
surface
recombination 376
roughness 164
scattering 174
Synopsys TCAD tools 44
TCAD
evolution 12
role 339
SiGe/SiGeC BiCMOS process 254
strained-Si 171
process calibration 4, 16
ternary semiconductor 376
thermal conductivity
SiGe 120
thermal oxidation
SiGe 33
thermal stability 40, 250
threading dislocation 155
threshold voltage 121, 171, 270
tight binding model 23
TMA 10
TRADICA 332
TRIM 34
transit time 224
transistor scaling 1, 97, 334
transport
quasi-ballistic 219
trench isolation 43, 101
TSUPREM4 35
TSMC 107
tunnelling
direct 101, 163
quantum-mechanical 100, 126
uniaxial strain 102
UHVCVD 206
UTB 270
UTMOST 48
VBIC 305, 323
valence band density of states 366
valence band discontinuity 364
varactor 429
Vegard’s rule 204
velocity overshoot 55, 166, 270
velocity saturation 270
VISTA 15
virtual substrate 104
virtual wafer 19
virtual wafer fabrication 15
yield analysis 18
z-parameter 256


