
For your convenience Apress has placed some of the front 
matter material after the index. Please use the Bookmarks 
and Contents at a Glance links to access them. 

Contents
About the Author...........................................................................................vii
Acknowledgments...........................................................................................ix
Introduction: Of Daddies, Downturns, and World of Work Dogma........................ xi
  What You Know..................................................................................1
	 Career Management Means You.................................................................. 3
	 Finish Your Education...................................................................................15
	 Learn New Specialized Skills.......................................................................27
	 Find and Take the Contract Work............................................................39
	 Cross-Training and Volunteering................................................................53
	 Background Screens and Assessments ....................................................69
	 Interviewing, Part 1 ......................................................................................83
  Who You Know................................................................................93
Chapter 8:	 Building an Online Profile............................................................................95
Chapter 9:	 Researching Employers...............................................................................107
Chapter 10:	 Leverage Your Network, and Their Networks....................................119
Chapter 11:	 Mentors and Professional Associations..................................................133
Chapter 12:	 Zero In on the Company...........................................................................143
Part III  Where to Go and What to Do....................................................153
Chapter 13:	 Cool Tools for Getting a Job....................................................................155
Chapter 14:	 From Best Practice to Business Case.....................................................169
Chapter 15:	 Interviewing, Part 2.....................................................................................179
Chapter 16:	 The Onboarding Battle and Beyond........................................................193
Chapter 17:	 Internal Mobility...........................................................................................205
Chapter 18:	 Careers in Cloud Computing and Mobile Technology.......................215
Chapter 19:	 Careers in Big Data and Social Analytics...............................................227
Chapter 20:	 Traditional IT Careers Today....................................................................235
Appendix....................................................................................................... 245
Index.............................................................................................................. 255

Of Daddies, Downturns, 
and World of  
Work Dogma
It’s a far cry from the world we’d thought we’d inherit; it’s a far cry from the 
way we’d thought we share it.
—Neil Peart, Writer, and Rock Musician
Where your talent meets the needs of the world, there lies your calling.
—Aristotle
Four downturns in, this daddy takes a look back.
I was a teenager during the early 1980s recession, in my twenties during the 
early 1990s recession, in my thirties during the dot.com bust, and then, in my 
forties, when the global pool of investment money and financial algorithmic 
models melted down the world’s economic engine, I became a father to two 
beautiful little girls.
During the first two recessions I lived in and through, I had steady jobs—
working in the produce department at a grocery store in my hometown (and 
of course living at home since I was in high school), and then working in 
alumni relations and fundraising at San Jose State University, SJSU, my college 
alma mater. The third was a promising recruiting software company that 
became a dot.com demise. This latest downturn involved taking a shot at my 
own risky business endeavor that then led to various experiments, consulting 
and writing after leaving a long-time leadership position in a marketing 
software and services firm. Today I have a new career with an exciting (and 
always risky) funded software startup out of the UK and Silicon Valley. And 
I’m a writer. Always a writer.

Introduction
xii
Recently, I read that millennials (i.e., Gen Y, those born somewhere between 
the late1970s and the early 2000s) will have at least seven to eight careers in 
their lifetimes. I’m a Gen Xer and I’ve already had seven now myself. The top 
concern for many daddies (and mommies) of any generation today is to stay 
afloat financially in the Bermuda Triangle of jobs, homes, and keeping food on 
the table. Even in this latest (highly specialized) tech boom we’re in, IT pros 
who haven’t kept up with their skills to remain marketable and relevant, after 
being laid off and/or wanting to return to the workforce, will struggle with the 
rest of the world’s perpetual recovery.
For example, men have struggled more so during the latest recession, 
experiencing over 70 percent of the overall job loss between December 2007 
. On the other hand, women have struggled more during the 
.9 percent of the jobs added between June 2009 
and S eptember 2012. This means that during the recovery so far, “women 
have regained only 32.3 percent of the jobs they lost during the recession 
.2 percent.”1
E
.
Let’s take an even further look back at the careers of my dad and my 
.
distaste for turkey, as you can imagine. (I’ll talk more of him in Chapter 12). 
After high school, he joined the Air Force and became a mechanic, and then, 
after serving, he returned to his home town of Porterville, California, where 
he became mechanic foreman for the local Chevrolet dealer. This was back in 
the 1960s, when if you were a damn good mechanic, which he was, you could 
practically listen to a car, touch the hood like a Vulcan or a Jedi Knight, and 
diagnose its problem. After that, he went in a completely different direction 
and became a police officer, where he spent the rest of his career, complete 
with a short stint as a captain in the South Pacific. He eventually became a 
“special agent” (detective) in charge of the Forgery and Fraud division at the 
Visalia Police Department (my hometown), where he happily retired.
My grandfather (on my mom’s side), according to his own incessant quoting, 
was a “Jack of all trades and master of none.” A young family man during the 
Depression, he carried his pragmatic frugality with him in every career he 
embarked on. He worked on the railroads back in his home state of Missouri. 
He then moved the family West to California’s Central Valley, where he 
worked odds jobs before working on the Friant-Kern Canal construction. 
1 http://www.nwlc.org/resource/modest-recovery-reaching-women

xiii
Introduction
When he hurt his back, he went into life insurance sales until he retired. But 
even retirement didn’t slow him down; he worked as a custodian in a middle 
school for many years after. And throughout his whole life, he was an avid 
tinkerer, watch and clock fixer, and home gardener. I remember watching with 
magnetic fascination my grandfather fixing the tiniest of watches and watch 
parts with the biggest of hands and fingers. I never imagined in a million years 
that I could tinker or fix like that, or to chase people across paper as my 
detective dad did. Then again, I never imagined the seven careers I’ve had to 
date, or the fact that I would write a book about technology career 
development and management.
Through thick and thin, including many recessions and even a depression, my 
dad and grandfather both took care of their families, just as many parents 
. F
. That’s because the greatest gifts a 
.A
nd of course behind every daddy is a “mommy” who knows where the hell 
. At least for me and my family, that is. Growing up with 
strong, independent women as role models—my mom and sister in 
particular—was enough to sometimes to choke the Y out of my chromosome. 
God love ’em. 
Then came my lovely wife, the mother of my two daughters, born in the belly 
of the economic beast. I affectionately call her “The Mama.” The woman who 
approached me one day at the beach over 15 years ago. The woman who 
encouraged me to take the risks I’ve taken, to stretch myself in ways I never 
knew I could stretch (and I’m really not all that limber in the first place). The 
woman who told me to shut up and drive the time we had a rental car with a 
standard transmission while on vacation in Belize; I hadn’t driven a stick for 
over a decade at that point. The woman who can’t stand Macbooks but loves 
her PC and her iPad.
God, I love that woman.
All of them taught me about living the ultimate stretch assignment, doing 
something I hadn’t done before, and learning something I hadn’t learned 
before. Whether I failed or not the first time, or the third, wasn’t the point. 
The growth, they would all tell me in their own unique and colorful ways, is 
in the stretch. I learned to develop my agile emotional intelligence in all things 

Introduction
xiv
related to the world of work, career development, and management. They 
taught me to reach wisely, reach well, and “reach West” (which, appropriately, 
is the theme of my latest website and blog, Reach-West.com).
And now I’m passing all their wisdom on in kind to those who are reimagining, 
reengineering, reentering, or entering for the first time information technology 
careers, although much of what I write about in this book is applicable to any 
career. It’s about you taking ownership and reaching West—taking chances 
and stretching yourself to be the best at what you do, or as close as you can 
get.
S
So how do I get noticed when 
I
S
. 
N
I thought, but hundreds, if not thousands. No 
.
My experience in volunteering to speak at Hirewire, a local organization to 
help job seekers in Santa Cruz County with career development and job 
search advice, verified this sentiment from the woman above as well as many 
others who attend the monthly event. Multiply that across similar gatherings 
in municipalities all over the U.S. Mercy, it’s tough to get a job offer today.
The good news is that Computerworld’s 2013 Forecast2 revealed that 33% of 
the 334 IT executives who responded to their survey say they plan to hire in 
the next 12 months. That’s up for the third year in a row. Right on.
Ugh, but then there’s this: According to an HR Executive article from earlier 
this year titled “Not Ready for Recruiting,”3 companies are still not improving 
in finding and hiring the best people. In fact, in the 2012 Allied Workforce 
Mobility Survey from Allied Van Lines, a study highlighted in the article, two-
thirds of the 500 HR professionals polled say they have “extensive” or 
“moderate” plans for hiring this year. And 80 percent of larger companies—
with more than 10,000 employees—plan for “extensive” or “moderate” 
2 http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9231486/10_hot_IT_skills_for_2013.
3 http://www.hreonline.com/HRE/story.jsp?storyId=533348080.

xv
Introduction
recruiting. And yet, 52 percent of those respondents consider their recruiting 
programs to be only “somewhat successful.”
Ho-hum, diddly dumb.
A big disconnect that relates to all this is the fact that although many companies 
have made progress in creating high-quality candidate-experience career sites, 
when it comes to actually applying for the jobs, it’s like trying to traverse an 
M.C. Escher drawing where you end up where you never started from. Yep, 
read that one again. And then, imagine the painful application experiences 
you’ve had over the years.
Recruiting is getting more complicated than ever, and it’s amazing to me that 
companies aren’t making it easier for candidates to explore career oppor-
. Sourcing, 
Escher maze, losing quality hires like 
.
I wrote this book as well as continue to volunteer for an 
Hirewire and write about the world of work. I’ve experienced 
I’m sure many of 
. But thanks to my own trials and tribulations and some really 
I know a few career development 
. I have some tried-and-true strategies that will enable you to find and 
get the job you want. 
My goal is to give you all even a little bit of career development and management 
insight that you can take with you from job to job, project to project, 
promotion to promotion.
The Mama says shut up and drive. So let’s do it.
Growth means change and change involves risk, stepping from the known to 
the unknown.
—Author Unknown

I
pa r t
What You Know
Reconciliation

c h a p t e r
1
Career 
Against the run of the mill, static as it seems, we break the surface tension 
with our wild kinetic dreams.
—Neil Peart, writer and rock musician
 “Nobody’s going to do it for you.” You’re probably sick and frickin’ tired of 
hearing that, especially if you were one of the millions who lost their jobs in 
the past five years. Or, if you’re one of the many entering the technology job 
market that continues an accelerated rebound. Or, if you’re one of the many 
currently in a dead-end programming job, banging away on code while 
management bangs away on you. And you’re absolutely miserable. 
Yep, sick and frickin’ tired, but I’m going to tell you this a lot throughout this 
book, so sit tight: Nobody’s going to do it for you. No one is going to take 
care of your career management, your livelihood, your family, or your future. 
In fact, many of you mentioned above did what I did—you took a chance to 
start something of your own. Or in my case, it was to look to buy something 
to then make my own.
Early in 2010, at the very height of the recession, I had a great job running a 
marketing software and services company side by side with the founder, an 
East Coast transplant. The company had grown out of the fossilized remains 

Chapter 1 | Career Management Means You
4
of S
Beach— what Santa Cruz, California, was referred to in the late 
. Software sales were flat in 2010 and had 
. This was unfortunately no 
HR) 
. Much of the world had ground to a halt. The saving grace? Our 
agency services business was growing, meaning that a smaller percentage of 
our market wanted to hire us to be their marketing and PR agency of record. 
One of those clients, a small leadership-development firm with what I thought 
was pretty cool intellectual property (IP) and a possible future software 
footprint in the HR B2B marketplace, was looking for a buyer.
And I was looking for a new opportunity—something to truly call my own. I 
had helped dozens of clients launch and grow their businesses, including my 
current employer, so why not me?
At the time I had an affinity for leadership development, emotional intelligence, 
and people development. (Still do, thankfully.) So after research and due 
diligence, and many, many sleepless nights (partly from a toddler in tow and a 
new baby on the way at the time), I parted with my partner, boss, and friend, 
and the only stability I had known for over seven years. I started down my 
new path.
A path that lasted about five months. Holy shit.
What happened? Fortunately, I think about that less and less these days. But 
when the realization came that the business just wasn’t there; that I neglectfully 
didn’t see the burning forest beyond the pretty green trees; that it would take 

5
.
■ Mindful Moment Think about the risks you’ve taken throughout your tech career. Were they 
fruitful? Why or why not? And if you never have taken a risk, why not? 
Who The hell aM i?
Great question, I know. Who am I to tell you how to manage your career? You be the judge, but 
I’ll tell you this: I’ve sourced, recruited, hired, trained, managed, reviewed, and let go hundreds 
of staff during the various incarnations of my career—including technology professionals such 
as yourself. Over 25 years, I’ve learned a lot about myself and those I’ve managed and worked 
with, and I’ll tell you, it’s gotten more and more complicated with full-time, part-time, contract, 
and virtual work. And in the nearly 13 years I’ve been in the human resource and recruiting 
space, I’ve shared company with the likes of many diverse “world of work” thought leaders, 
practitioners, analysts, consultants, vendors, and employees of all flavors.
The good news is that I’m still learning (as it should be), and yet I do hope to pass on the 
knowledge I’ve gleaned over the years to you, the reader.
Who the hell am I? You tell me.

Chapter 1 | Career Management Means You
6
The Breakfast Club Career Panel
“I’m getting a really cool Breakfast Club vibe here. Are you? Do any of you 
know what The Breakfast Club is?”1
Most of the high school kids sitting with us in the circle nodded, some even 
smiled knowingly.
Right on, I thought.
Except that the cast in this real-life version included two classes of well-
behaved hip and sociable ninth and tenth graders and a career panel made up 
of a very smart gay female DA wearing a man’s suit and tie; a very passionate 
straight male martial arts school owner dressed in relaxed sports attire; and 
Silicon Valley sports coat and jeans.
A
DA even cried when she talked about the murder 
.
Santa Cruz, called Your 
F
Is Our Business, a community-based 501(C) (3) nonprofit organization 
. 
I
Santa Cruz County in making 
.
At first it was all pretty straightforward. We introduced ourselves and 
discussed what we do professionally.
I looked back in time and saw myself as the young, play-it-safe yet idealistic 
high school student, my world of work and life yawning before me in self-
serving complacency. Christ, if I could tell myself then what I know now.
But, hey, I now had an opportunity to play it forward and give the high 
schoolers the benefit of my wisdom.
“When I was your age, many moons ago, I wanted to be an architect and a 
writer. Fast-forward through a lot of life—the obligatory crazy years, college, 
careers, marriages, and now young children—and here I am, an architect of 
sorts, helping companies launch new products, and a writer. Always a writer 
. . . ”
The students then proceeded to ask us questions, such as:
1 The Breakfast Club was one of many John Hughes’s coming-of-age teenager movies in the 
1980s and 1990s.

7
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
• 
What inspired you to do what you do now?
• 
What do you like most about your job? What least?
• 
When did you know what you really wanted to do when you 
grew up?
• 
Do you regret any of the choices you’ve made?
Each of us answered in kind, a diverse mixture of experience and inspiration 
and one interesting similarity—the fact that we didn’t have any regrets, at 
least not the debilitating, need-for-meds kind that unfortunately too many 
people experience throughout their lives. 
No, we were all quite honest and transparent answering the questions, 
. Half of each class frowned 
DA and I said how old we were (while on the other hand, the 
.O
ne student said, “Ahhh. I don’t want to grow up.”
I smiled, knowing that our lives were flashing before their eyes. “Try not to 
. Enjoy the now, and every moment you’re in it, going forward. L
.”
I thought about an earlier question concerning regrets and choices, and 
I added, “But don’t be afraid to fail. Ever. Assess and learn from it, and get 
your butts right back in the game.”
Amen. I grew up in the belly of the Gen X beast, where there was only one 
winner per game and someone always had to lose. Always. None of this 
“everyone gets a trophy” crap and the fact that hard work doesn’t always 
equate to success. Sometimes, but not every time. And the fact that it is 
through failure that we can learn to see the other side of what we could be, 
of what we’re made of.
Each one of us on the career panel proceeded then to share our own 
aspirations and realities, our dreams and failures, and of course, our triumphs 
and what we’re passionate about. As the students warmed to us, they felt 
more comfortable asking us more pointed questions, and they listened to 
every word we spoke—just as we listened to every word they spoke.
“Thanks for keeping it real,” one student said to us when we finished. Others 
nodded in agreement.
Right on, I thought.

Chapter 1 | Career Management Means You
8
Queue the Simple Minds song from The Breakfast Club soundtrack: “Don’t you 
forget about me . . .”
Or you.
■ Mindful Moment  What did you want to be when you were in high school and why? Are you 
living your dream or someone else’s? What would make the dream yours? In other words, do you 
want to build the next Facebook? Then build it, baby.
Why I Learned WordPress
I
I hung on after the 
. Yes, I’d already experienced dead-end jobs and a 
. That led to what I’ll call a 
. 
So I
.
I had to rebrand 
. I picked a new business entity name, bought a 
HR B2B technology space. 
B
I learned how to use WordPress, even 
how to code my own site a little, and I refined my social media marketing skills 
even further.
During this rebranding phase, a wise sage and mentor of mine reminded me 
of this:
“The magic doesn’t happen just because you show up.”
Holy crap, how true that was (and is), no matter how good you are— which 
is why I drank some of his Kool-Aid (instead of mine with extra sugar), and 
listened to his hearsay.
That’s why I had named my new website Marcom HRsay, “Marcom” 
representing my marketing communications background and the “HR” in 
HRsay representing human resources, but it was to be read “hearsay.”
Everybody kept saying, “Oh, Marcom H-R-say. Very cool.”
They didn’t really get it. Even when I started consulting and my clients, 
prospects, and other industry folk started reading what I wrote in my blog, 
they still said:

9
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
“Oh, Marcom H-R-say. Very cool.”
Indeed, but it’s served me well. However, I evolved Marcom HRsay and just 
launched my new site titled Reach-West. “Reach west” is a metaphor for the 
ultimate stretch assignment, doing something you haven’t done before and 
learning something you haven’t learned before. And if there’s one thing I’ve 
learned in the last few years, it’s that we’re each our own best and worst 
individual contributors, managers, freelancers, solopreneurs, and business 
leaders—all wrapped up in one big, disruptive train wreck of an innovative 
person and personal brand.
It’s a lot of hard work, though, and we have to own it, we have to lead ourselves 
first. We manage Me, Inc. We are the C-suite. We are the board of advisers. 
. We are the shareholders. And we must have the fiscal 
. All of these 
. Not that we don’t need others’ insights in the form 
I’ll discuss later), but the messy magic is 
. L
. (Hey, it’s only the first chapter and 
I
.)A
s I wrote earlier, when I was growing up, I wanted to be an architect. And a 
. And a rock star drummer. I haven’t mentioned that part yet—
I still want to be. Quite the triple threat, I know.
What started as drawing Snoopy and other Peanuts characters, then cars and 
hot rods, led to drafting classes in high school and a love for designing homes 
and buildings. And what started as writing sweet little rhymes led to the dark 
prose of teenage questioning angst, then to hopeful short stories of love and 
redemption into adulthood, with a few “novel” beginnings to boot (writing 
has always been my “coding”). And last, what started as air drumming and 
eventually practice pads has never gotten any further than the love of 
drumming.
Instead, I went into higher-education philanthropy, high-tech marketing 
communications, and business development, all with a college degree in 
psychology. Why didn’t I major in architecture or English? First, because I had 
a touch of the early adult crazies that inspired me to want to learn more 
about the human mind and why we do the things we do, and maybe even help 
others along the way. (God knows I needed the help then.) Second, I actually 
did start a master’s degree in English after finishing my psychology degree, but 
then another stage of life got in the way—a divorce and a move over the 
mountains to the ocean. That put an end to that.

Chapter 1 | Career Management Means You
10
Many of us can relate to the path of “I wanted to be this but I fell into that, 
and that, and that,” and I had read a few years ago that millennials (i.e., Gen 
Y—those born somewhere between the mid-1970s and the early 2000s) will 
have at least seven or eight careers in their lifetimes. I’m a Gen Xer and I’ve 
already had seven.
From plan A to plan B to plans E, F, and G.
For those of you old enough, like me, you may remember the E-ticket rides 
at Disneyland. They were the most expensive ride tickets for the latest 
exciting and enchanting adventures Disney could dish up. E-tickets became a 
metaphor for an unusually interesting and thrilling experience.
And that’s what I’ve been working on now—my plan E-ticket—and that 
.
I
. Even though the recent 
Silicon Valley are positive and growing, at the same time 
. For those still out of work or 
. 
.
I
mind to, because that’s just B.S. There’s not enough life and career-coaching 
herbal remedies out there to close this global economic wound that festers 
still, even if you’re one of the lucky ones living in a tech center where dot-com 
part 2 is playing in 3-D.
I’m a cynical idealist: There just isn’t an infinite number of possibilities out 
there for us. Only a finite number. Sadly, we spend so much time focusing on 
what we’re not and how to get there that we fail to draw upon our strengths 
and develop them as fully as we can.
And instead we fail to get there.
You should always try to get there. Failure can and should always be an option 
when you’re learning to be better and to dream bigger. Always dream bigger. 
That’s what I’ll tell my daughters when they’re old enough to understand, 
because dreams are the catalysts for personal growth and change. Adaptability 
is huge these days in the world of work.
Hark, the HeaR-say.
So, to make a long story even longer, I put myself back out there on the street, 
going to networking events and conferences, sending out emails and making 

11
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
phone calls, and connecting and reconnecting with the industry folk I 
mentioned above—the C-folk, business owners, entrepreneurs, marketers, 
HR and recruiting professionals, and technology pros.
And, yes, I’m that architect and writer I’ve always wanted to be who now 
knows WordPress.
Taking ownership of my solopreneurial career path is what made all the 
difference in the world—and the fear of failure (and success) has subsided 
ever since.
That’s what I hope to instill in you after reading my book: to take ownership 
of your path.A
nd to hell with misery and mediocrity.
 Mindful Moment  What skills did you have to learn to remain relevant in the workplace? What A
ll right, enough “Debbie Downer,” “Me, Inc.,” “Nobody’s going to do it for 
. Silicon Valley has seen fairly consistent rate of job growth of 
. Right on. Imagine the Muppet’s Animal banging away on those drums. 
Once again it’s an exciting time to be in tech. Opportunity abounds, at least 
more now than during the last six years. And that means aligning your career-
ownership mindset with those employers who live and breathe it and who 
empower their teams.
In fact, it’s fascinating to watch a new tech company team being built, to see 
it rise from emotive steam, sweat, and tears,   then to take tangible shape into 
a business model, complete with product and/or service (that you hope 
rocks). I’ve been fortunate enough to be part of that process a few times and 
have witnessed it many times over. Maybe you have as well. Or maybe you will 
soon.
I’ve been out and about in Silicon Valley a lot lately, and there are startups 
sprouting up in multiple industries, including the HR/recruiting marketplace, 
from Santa Cruz to San Francisco.2
2  Especially in San Francisco. As described in  a recent San Jose Mercury News article, “In 
2011, companies in San Francisco raised $2.87 billion in venture capital, according to 
PricewaterhouseCoopers’ MoneyTree report. . . . According to PwC, San Francisco has led 
the world in venture capital since at least 2009.” http://sanjosemercurynews.ca.newsmemory.
com/publink.php?shareid=1e8eac555

Chapter 1 | Career Management Means You
12
Let’s get you in front of those recruiters—now. 
But wait—unfortunately many of these startups won’t make it out of the 
Silicon Valley startup “club scene,” as a recruiting technology friend recently 
told me. 
Don’t we wish that everyone was such a straight shooter in business today? 
There’s no need for sugar coating when it comes to launching a new endeavor, 
even if there’s a bevy of you and your fellow programmers ready to bang code 
until 3 a.m. and deploy, deploy, deploy.
The days of Pets.com and WebVan.com are long gone, right?
If you’re being sought out by a new, preferably sound business model tech play, 
.
O
QA
IT positions, ready to move on to your next 
.
B
I’m not talking about the funny American Pie catch phrase; I’m 
indoctrinated into the workplace culture with a series of fun activities, 
including free-form jams and breaking stuff.
Yep, breaking stuff—smashing metaphorical guitars on stage, shall we say. In 
other words, you are creating live code from day one, even if it crashes and 
burns (safely called agile development). For example, I’ve noticed that in the 
last few companies I’ve visited, the core development team sits at terminals in 
configurations that face one another, as if at any point in time of coding, fixing, 
and breaking they riff off one another, like jamming together on stage (and 
some with the same twisted rock-and-roll faces at times).
Can you dig that? Have you dug that? Would you like to dig that?
If you ever had the chance to see the Grateful Dead jam together back in the 
day, you’ll remember how intense every concert was, how the play lists varied 
from show to show, and how musicianship and the music were the number 
one priority for the band mates. 
Take Facebook, where according to an April 18, 2012, San Jose Mercury News 
article, every new programmer hire 

13
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
begins the six-week journey of a new employee class in Facebook’s “Bootcamp,” 
an experience shared by every engineering hire, whether they are a grizzled 
Silicon Valley veteran or a fresh-faced computer science grad. Since 2008, 
hundreds of Facebook’s engineers have passed through Bootcamp, which 
may lack the physical tests of military basic training but does provide the 
same kind of shared experience and cultural indoctrination into the world’s 
largest social network.3
So again, I’ll call it “business band camp” since I’m partial to music and I want 
to keep the metaphor going. If you’re longing to be one of those talented 
developer “musicians” (and I’m sure many of you are, as well as being Rush 
fans, I hope), then the best way for you to know is to do, and that means 
immediately working on whatever it is you’re composing once you’re on 
. O
f course, the band-camp metaphor is specific to software programming, but 
.
I want for you: to own your career management and to belong to 
. Because, besides helping you to gel with your new 
how happy you are where you are. This is what makes the employment brand.
And if the company gets that, and they get you, then rock on with your bad 
selves. That’s the visceral epitome of career management and workforce 
culture fit.
That’s where I hope to take you in this book.
■ Mindful Moment  Have you worked for companies that embrace the business band-camp 
concept? Were you able to break stuff to both fail and succeed?
The Tech Job Hunt Handbook Ahead
I’m sure you’re ready to get moving along, right? Then let’s.
I do hope the book ahead will give you a fresh perspective on the world of 
tech work and career management.
3  www.startribune.com/printarticle/?id=148024815

Chapter 1 | Career Management Means You
14
In Part I, “What You Know: Reconciliation,” Chapters 1–7, I open with why 
career management is your responsibility. Next, I discuss why education still 
plays an important role, as well as learning other specialized tech skills; why 
contract work isn’t always a bad thing; about staying cross-trained in other 
business skills; how volunteering can help enrich your skills; why understanding 
how employment assessments and background screens will affect your job 
search is critical; and why you must play well in video interviewing.
Then, in Part II, “Who You Know: Recognition,” Chapters 8–12, I tackle how 
to manage your online profile across social and business networks, research 
the companies you want to work for, how and when to leverage your networks 
and your networks networks, why keeping yourself real in an ever-transparent 
world is so important, the power of finding and engaging mentors and mentor 
.
A
III, “Where to Go and What to Do: Redemption,” Chapters 
I dig deeper into the various tools and services available today to help 
IT, engineering, and manufacturing.
L
You’re sharpening stones, walking on coals, to improve your business acumen.
—R.E.M.

C h A P T e r
2
Finish Your 
If I had never dropped in on that single calligraphy course in college, the Mac 
would have never had multiple typefaces or proportionally spaced fonts.
—steve Jobs
so what if steve Jobs didn’t finish college. neither did bill gates or Mark 
Zuckerberg, and look what that got them. 
The rest of us aren’t so fortunate. We still live in a global society that favors 
higher education and completion of college degrees. enrollment in college is 
higher than it’s ever been before. according to the bureau of labor statistics 
(bls), in october 2011, 68.3 percent of the 2011 high school graduates (over 
3 million) were enrolled in colleges or universities.
however, we now owe more in student loans than we own on our credit 
cards, forcing more college students to find work prior to graduating.
according to the “Pathways to Prosperity” study by the harvard graduate 
school of education in 2011, only 56 percent of college students complete 
four-year degrees within six years. only 29 percent of those who start two-
year degrees finish them within three years.
so much for the frickin’ college degree, right?
after my first year at san Jose state university (sJsu), back in the mid-1980s, 
i began working full time while taking a full load of classes. not because i had 

Chapter 2 | Finish Your Education
16
to or because I had $50K+ in student loans (I did have student loans throughout 
college but paid them off in short order), but because I had an opportunity to 
make some real money working for the university, running a student fundraising 
program for academic programs. After having spent my first year in college 
working at McDonald’s and washing motorcycles at a Honda dealer, this 
income helped me become more independent and pay for my own schooling.
Then something happened—I realized I just didn’t like college. At all. I stopped 
going to classes, turned in projects late, if at all, and performed dismally on 
tests. That led to incompletes and failing grades. The crazies I mentioned in 
Chapter 1 caught up with me, and book learning just wasn’t on the agenda. 
The irony (completely lost on me) was that I was a top student in high school, 
I had a scholarship to attend the local community college and 
Cal 
Poly. 
A
I dropped out of community college 
and I  ended up working for a year prior to attending SJSU. But after two and 
I stopped registering for classes. I kept working 
I began developing my marketing 
.
I worked for the very institution 
. And it was. With my 
working for it. Here I was learning the arts of philanthropy and marketing, 
along with hobnobbing with wealthy alumni, parents, and friends who gave to 
the university. Why the hell would I need a college degree? In psychology of 
all things? 
But the painful reality was that I knew I would need to have one, if only to 
advance any further from where I was. Sure, I already managed nearly 100 
student fundraising callers and 2.5 full-time staff, but I was going nowhere fast 
in the ranks of University Advancement, and in an institution of higher learning 
that issued bachelor’s and master’s degrees for those who completed them. 1
And nothing kills an alum donation faster than, “Oh, no, I never finished my 
coursework at San Jose State, so I do not have a college degree. But I still love 
the school. Go Spartans!”
My boss and colleagues at the time constantly reminded me of this fact—that 
my time there had an untimely expiration date unless I finished my degree.
1 University Advancement was the name of the alumni relations and fundraising department I 
worked for at SJSU.

17
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Add that to the fact that getting a higher-paying, white-collar job in any 
industry, including IT, would have been very difficult even with the direct work 
experience I had been accumulating. It was (and still is) a rarity indeed for the 
entrepreneur to ditch school for the bright lights of big business. And back 
then my constitution couldn’t deal. Plus, my irritable bowel syndrome 
rendered me virtually incapable of that kind of professional and financial risk, 
except for the “dropping out of college” part, of course.
I did finish my psychology degree after about a two-year break—with honors, 
all while taking a full load each semester and working full time at the university, 
thank you very much. I even immediately started a master’s degree in English 
literature with a focus on creative writing. Didn’t finish that one, but that’s a 
story for another time.
. True, the employed 
. What’s the solution, for both the 
Go back to school. It gives you some cover 
. Always wanted to finish your two-year or four-year 
Get an MBA or a Ph.D.? Get technical certification? Then do 
. Although education alone is no guarantee of job fit, companies do prefer 
. And recency counts. This chapter is going to 
show you which credentials matter most and why, and how best to obtain 
them.
■ Mindful Moment  Did you finish college? If not, what’s preventing you from going back? 
Means? Motivation? There’s always a way, from community college to four-year state college.
Today’s College Degree Reality
More than one-fourth (25.5 percent) of the class of 2012 that applied for a job 
already had one in hand, according to results of a National Association of 
Colleges and Employers (NACE) 2012 Student Survey.2 That’s up slightly from 
last year at this time, when only 24 percent of 2011 graduates who had applied 
for a job reported having accepted one. This is good news and a sign of 
economic healing.
2  The National Association of Colleges and Employers (NACE) connects campus recruiting 
and career services professionals, and provides best practices, trends, research, professional 
development, and conferences. www.naceweb.org/s05092012/job-market-2012/.

Chapter 2 | Finish Your Education
18
The current class also outpaced last year’s class in terms of job offers: 44.2 
percent of those who applied for a job received an offer, compared to 41.4 
percent of 2011 graduates.
Here’s the kicker, though: those most likely to receive jobs offers (50 percent 
or more of those applying for jobs receiving at least one offer) have degrees 
in:
• 
Accounting
• 
Engineering
• 
Computer science
Economics
Business administration 
. Unless, of course, you’re 
.
O
NACE student survey revealed that slightly more than half of 
.1 percent) reported that they had actually applied for a job. 
with results for the class of 2007 through the class of 2010, when the 
percentage of the class applying for jobs hovered between 42 and 50 percent.
According to the Raba Review, a moderate political, science, and technology 
blog, “[E]ducation in America produces more art majors than engineering 
majors, way more psychology majors than engineering majors, and four times 
more business majors than engineering majors. More disturbing is the fact 
that the trend is worsening with every passing year.”3
Let’s shine a light on the employment picture as it relates to majors and job 
categories. When you look at BLS data over the past few years, unemployment 
is high for the arts and media, while engineering, business, and financial 
operations are actually trending downward.
And according to a Bloomberg Businessweek article, and research by economists 
Nir Jaimovich of Duke University and Henry Siu of the University of British 
Columbia, about job recovery in the recession, “Ninety-five percent of the 
net job losses during the recession were in middle-skill occupations such as 
office workers, bank tellers, and machine operators. That’s what we all assume 
happens in recessions: the middle class is hit hardest, then eventually climbs 
3 http://rabareview.com/2011/04/20/college-education-in-america-poor-choice-of-majors.

19
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
back. Only, that comeback isn’t happening. Job growth since the end of the 
recession has been clustered in high-skill fields inaccessible to workers without 
advanced degrees or in low-paying industries.” 4
Without advanced degrees, indeed. Holy crap.
The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics can be a pain in the butt to pull data from, 
but when you do it and take the time to compare salaries across job fields, 
you again find engineering, business, and financial operations trumped only by 
management and legal positions.
■ Mindful Moment  Sure, that liberal arts degree sounded promising a decade ago when you 
RealityH
ere are three economic facts:
1.  Most firms are small.
2.  Most workers are employed at large firms.
3.  Startups create the longer-lasting sets of new jobs, but most 
startups fail.
According to economists’ figures, from 2003 to 2007, startups contributed to 
more job creation than other types of businesses. When you compare the 
private-sector job growth at established companies to literal startup job 
growth, you see that the private sector created 2.5 million net new jobs, while 
startups created over 3 million. The point is that, in the period between the 
two busts of the early 21st century, startups have been the job engines, 
whether they grow into big companies or not—which many don’t.
But here’s the rub: some economists say that today’s startups aren’t creating 
the same level of new job growth as they did in the past; there’s a downward 
trend, combined with the fact that many middle-skill occupations aren’t 
coming back. That’s not good news at all, because without startups there 
wouldn’t be any net job creation. The downward trend is quite worrisome, 
especially since only 78 percent of college grads are working in full-time jobs 
4  www.businessweek.com/articles/2012-05-03/the-recovery-squeezes-the-middle-class.

Chapter 2 | Finish Your Education
20
compared to only 54 percent of high school dropouts. You’d think it would be 
higher on the college grad side and even lower for the dropouts.
In the middle somewhere are the high school graduates with either no college 
credits, or some with college credits but no completed degrees, and this is 
turning out to be a huge differentiator in hot-growth tech regions like Silicon 
Valley. Many startups that I’ve worked and spoken with are increasing their 
college recruiting activities, which includes internship programs. When it 
comes to IT positions, there’s a “try before you buy” environment that gives 
the upper hand to the recruiters, hiring managers, and ultimately the 
employers.
When specific technical skills are scarce, recruiting students right out of 
.
L
. That’s not his real name, of course, but I want to share 
. Paul has 
HP and MySQL.
H
B2B software 
product.
But the road was fraught with potholes and bumps along the way. He told me 
he preferred not to remember how many times he was told he wasn’t qualified 
because he didn’t have a college degree. He went to college and completed 
coursework here and there, but he never finished his degree. Maybe in the 
1970s programmers without degrees could walk onto corporate campuses 
and get new jobs, but the reality in the decades since is that those days are 
long gone.
“Why can’t my aggregate experience over time validate my credibility as a 
damn good web applications developer? Even if I completed real-world 
projects in classroom settings, that’s still not enough to show how my skills 
shine and help a business take off, right?”
These are questions Paul and I chewed on, and ones I’ve debated internally 
and with others ever since my own college experience. Completing college, 
especially a four-year degree for either a B.A. or a B.S. (joke away if you want), 
has been a professional mainstream rite of passage, especially since the rise of 
the middle class following WW II. No longer was it only the upper classes 

21
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
that could pay for secondary education. College became accessible to the 
masses, even if today you want to argue that affordability.
Which you undoubtedly can, because private colleges now often cost 
anywhere from $40K to $60K per year (that’s for full-time tuition, housing, 
and all related costs, of course). Even at public universities, of which I’m a 
product, tuition is subsidized by taxpayers, but state budgets continue to get 
hacked away and so students fees rise and rise and rise again.
Life gets in the way, and Paul started a family and learned his skills on the job, 
unable to take the time or devote the money to completing a degree. Yet his 
real-world experience eventually helped him land the job he has now. 
However, when most IT job listings require a four-year degree, and senior-
. And if 
NFL rookie drafts in the first round, you’ll get paid 
.
I
I witnessed a woman holding a sign that read:
Education should not be a “debt” sentenceS
I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, it is that very thing. With 
the majority of college attendees have no choice but to incur student loan 
debt. However, there are alternatives, and I will touch on those at the end of 
the chapter.
■ Mindful Moment  Are you in a position where you can leverage your skills and experience over 
an incomplete education? Do you think it’s even possible? Find someone who has, like Paul, and 
listen to his or her story.
And for God’s Sake, Don’t Lie About It
We hear about them every year. The news stories of high-profile CEOs and 
other senior management folk who have lied on their resumes. Or they blame 
their recruiting firms about the lies on their resumes, as did the short-lived 
Yahoo CEO Thompson in 2012.
Basically, Thompson’s undoing came as a result of incorrect biographical 
references that said he held a bachelor’s degree in computer science from 

Chapter 2 | Finish Your Education
22
Stonehill College, as well as one in accounting from the same college. A 
former eBay Inc. executive, Thompson had earned a degree in accounting 
from the Easton, Massachusetts–based school, and that information was 
correctly listed in eBay regulatory filings and on some Yahoo press releases. 
Yet the incorrect degree, the computer science one he never received, still 
showed up in Yahoo’s April 27 10-K filing, as well as on the company’s website.
Regardless of who screwed up where, and they’re all at fault here—Thompson, 
the recruiting firm, and Yahoo—public indignation isn’t something Yahoo’s 
management and investors wanted dragged out to the center of the social 
information superhighway for the world to see, especially the Security and 
Exchange Commission (SEC). Thompson was out of a job faster than it took 
.
Bausch & Lomb CEO Ronald 
. In 2002, Zarrella lost a $1.1 million bonus after it was revealed that 
BA from New York University, as his official company 
. While he had been a student at NYU, Zarrella never 
.
A
Bausch & Lomb officials 
. He remained in his role for another six 
. 
There’s definitely a Dilbert-like injustice to all of this, and it may motivate 
some of you to pull off an Office Space “shave a penny off the bottom line” 
computer program pyramid scheme to stick it to the man, but I wouldn’t 
recommend that, either.5
No, you and I wouldn’t get that kind of publicity; we just wouldn’t get the job. 
Yet, we keep lying over and over again. According to my good friends at 
EmployeeScreenIQ, a background-screening firm, over 50 percent of resumes 
contain blatant lies and errors, purposely injected to boost the applicant’s 
appeal and chances of making the selection short list. In fact, most of those 
blatant lies on resumes are related to education, direct experience, and 
accomplishments with previous employers.
Diploma mills and faux employment-verification factories are big business 
globally, but don’t make the mistake of going down those paths. If you haven’t 
heard of these institutions, and I’m glad if you haven’t, know that, for a fee, a 
diploma mill can provide you with an illegitimate yet certified college diploma 
from a real or imaginary accredited university. And there are fake employment-
5  Office Space is a 1999 American comedy film satirizing work life in a typical 1990s software 
company, written and directed by Mike Judge.

23
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
verification firms that, for a fee, will tell your potential future employer you 
worked for Acme Dy-no-mite, Inc. and that you helped develop an open-
source desert-chase platform for Wile E. Coyote and Road Runner.
Does it matter if you’re a programmer with a handful of classes under your 
belt and you lie about your software engineering degree? I guess if you get 
caught because you really can’t handle the work, then, of course, that’ll leave 
scars.
■ Mindful Moment  Again, for God’s sake—don’t lie about it. Either go with the collected 
informal and format education you have or complete the formal degree.
Even with all the hubbub about our education system heading 
United States has the best system of higher education in 
Universitas 21.6A
lthough this was the first time Universitas 21 created these rankings, their 
networks, and diversity. 
However, the rankings did not factor in the affordability of attending the 
colleges, which is, of course, something I discussed earlier in this chapter. This 
is still good news, though—the fact that higher education remains “higher 
knowledge.” In fact, according to the Shanghai Jiao Tong University’s Academic 
Ranking of World Universities, more than 30 of the 45 highest-ranked 
institutions are in the United States (as measured by awards and research 
output).7
6 Universitas 21 is an international network of 23 leading research-intensive universities in 
fifteen countries. www.nytimes.com/2012/05/14/us/higher-education-ranking-judges-by-
country.html.
7 The Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) was first published in June 2003 by 
the Center for World-Class Universities and the Institute of Higher Education of Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, China, and is updated on an annual basis. ARWU uses six objective 
indicators to rank world universities, including the number of alumni and staff winning Nobel 
Prizes and Fields Medals, number of highly cited researchers selected by Thomson Scientific, 
number of articles published in journals of Nature and Science, number of articles indexed in 
Science Citation Index - Expanded and Social Sciences Citation Index, and per capita performance 

Chapter 2 | Finish Your Education
24
Overall, the United States has a total of 4,495 Title IV-eligible (financial aid 
available), degree-granting institutions: 2,774 four-year institutions and 1,721 
two-year institutions. In total, this is an average of more than 115 colleges per 
state. As of 2010, the United States had 20.3 million students enrolled in 
higher education, roughly 5.7 percent of the total population. About 14.6 
million of these students were enrolled full time.
I’m going to skip the four-year colleges for now; there are lots of sources 
available today on going back to school and getting or finishing a bachelor’s or 
a master’s degree, as well as where to find the financial resources you’ll need 
to go into deep debt—I mean, that you’ll need to go back to school. For those 
who’ve started a four-year degree and are thinking about rolling the dice and 
hooking up with a progressive tech disruptor in the space, hang tight—we’ll 
. (Plus, you’ll find more resources in the 
.)
S
.
I
. Here in Santa Cruz, California, 
I live, we’ve got Cabrillo College, a great school with a Career Technical 
E
CTE) program that includes compressed programs in: 8
• 
Computer & information systems
• 
Computer networking and system administration
• 
Computer science
• 
Digital media
• 
Engineering technology
There are also traditional two-year programs in computer science and 
engineering. Whether you’re just looking for the A.S. degree or maybe want 
to springboard into a four-year school, community colleges are where to 
start.
There are, additionally, myriad technical schools throughout the United States 
that offer flexible campus learning, as well as online learning and certification 
with respect to the size of an institution. More than 1,000 universities are actually ranked by 
ARWU every year, and names of the 500 best are published on the web.
8 www.cabrillo.edu/.

25
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
programs (in fact, many more colleges these days offer online learning; i’ll 
discuss certification in the next chapter). Many offer online information 
technology degrees starting at the top, with a master’s, and then moving 
down through a bachelor’s to an associate’s degree. These programs aren’t as 
cost-efficient as community colleges can be, but they are convenient and 
highly targeted for your technology learning needs. but be vigilant—many of 
these “technical” institutes have been or are being investigated for predatory 
and deceptive recruiting practices.
it’s as simple as doing a web search to find out the legit and not-so-legit.
There are also plenty of online college and technical school directories 
available that you’ll find once you’ve done your web search. (i’ll also list 
education-related resources at the end of the book.)
 Mindful Moment Have you ever considered attending your local community college? An 
whatever degree it was you started, or if you’re like Paul, who persevered and 
used his experience and timing to land a new startup gig, know that there’s a 
broad spectrum when it comes to the world of tech work. 
When we’re in boom times, which in tech we are once again, regardless of the 
rest of the world’s industries, there are those of you who take risks and jump 
to the job-creation engines—the startups—without a second thought about 
finishing your post-secondary education. and that may be a risky either way 
in the end, considering the likes of facebook’s iPo this year, as well as social 
networking and gaming companies tanking. not quite dot-com bust number 
one, but still risky.
There are lots more jobs in tech fields these days. in 2011, amazon hired 
22,500 people, bringing its workforce up to 56,200, and google hired 8,000 
people—more than ever before in a single year. 
While not all of these jobs require an engineering or software programming 
degree, getting a new gig today can be harder than getting into a top-tier four-
year college—and paying for it. competition among businesses for tech talent 
is crazy-tight for firms to hire those who are qualified, let along those who 

Chapter 2 | Finish Your Education
26
aren’t qualified. In fact, demand for these positions is greater than the skills 
that exist in the marketplace.
Skills that you’ll need to acquire to become competitive and remain relevant. 
Like I said, a little book learnin’ never hurt anyone.
In Chapter 3, I’m going to carry the education theme further and talk about 
certification programs you can take to update your professional skills—
everything from learning HTML5 to Ruby on Rails (or WordPress—don’t 
make fun). This is yet another way to stay fresh and relevant in the marketplace 
that you’re trying to get back into, or want to stay in, and then to use those 
new skills to promote yourself. As you’ll see, this is the time for “solopreneurs” 
and technical artisans—professionals whose software and hardware 
. 
■ 
  Competition for the best tech talent is crazy-tight these days. Firms have to 

c h a p t e r
3
Learn New 
Bill Gates is a very rich man today...and do you want to know why? The answer 
is one word: versions.
—Dave Barry, Pulitzer prize-winning American author and columnist
Maybe they didn’t finish college, but I’ll be damned if our famous (and infamous) 
tech captains of industry, and most of the minions who helped them get 
there, did one thing quite well—and that’s this: they constantly strove to be 
bigger, better, and badder.
Badder to the bone, baby. Meaning that they acquired new skills and upgraded 
themselves, and they ensured that their teams did the same. These days are 
no exception, because those who do these things are the ones who will 
survive the greatest recession since the Depression.  It’s not going to be easy 
for them, though, as it’s become more and more difficult for CIOs to find 
employees well-versed in ever-changing technologies like cloud computing, 
mobile, and big data and social analytics (which I’m going to cover at the latter 
chapters of the book). 
According to a Bloomberg Businessweek article from 2012, “job growth since 
the end of the recession has been clustered in high-skill fields inaccessible to 
workers without advanced degrees or in low-paying industries.”1
1 www.businessweek.com/articles/2012-05-03/the-recovery-squeezes-the-middle-class.

Chapter 3 | Learn New Specialized Skills
28
If you’re like me, you’re probably fed up with hearing about the “war for 
talent.” I mean, you just want a friggin’ job, right? A job with other smart folk 
and smart chieftains who want to build and grow and stay in business. Which 
is why it’s not really a war per se. It’s a mobilization of innovation and motivated 
minds—the leaders, the builders, the doers, and you. It’s all the combined 
latest and greatest skills that make up “rocket soup.” (Rocket soup is what 
Rocket, one of the characters from my daughter’s favorite Disney Junior 
shows, Little Einsteins, needs to run on.)
This is the way I felt early this year as I walked through Cruzioworks from my 
co-working space to the restroom and I passed the packed day-long classroom 
on covering HTML5.2 Or maybe it was jQuery. Or C#. Or PHP. Or Ruby on 
Rails. The times I went past the classroom when they were all on break I 
.” 
Santa Cruz, the laid-back little surfing 
Silicon Valley. Remember hearing 
“S
Beach” back in the dot-com day? That tide retreated and supposedly 
. Not true. It washes over me almost every day.
S
Flash to HTML5 to Ruby on Rails.
More than ever, it’s critical to stay fresh and relevant in the marketplace you’re 
trying to get back into, or want to stay in—to upgrade yourself—and then use 
those new skills to promote yourself in the marketplace. This is the time for 
“solopreneurs” and technical artisans—professionals whose software and 
hardware development and programming skills are highly specialized and in 
demand for today’s market and tomorrow’s. This chapter will show you that 
beyond credentials, you need new skills to keep you employable. It also shows 
which skills are in demand, why, and how best to get them.
■ Mindful Moment  When’s the last time you learned new IT skills? Have you investigated what 
employers are hiring for and why? Or are you sitting on your hands wondering where it all went 
wrong? Focus on getting off your hands and putting them to work.
2 A co-working facility in downtown Santa Cruz, California, and a tech innovation hotspot.

29
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Like Moore’s Law on Meth
Although the following list of hot IT skills may change in priority and scope in 
the coming year, many of them will still be relevant to you and your career 
aspirations in the near future. Yes, the tech world moves pretty darn fast 
these days. Remember how intricately difficult it was to build an HTML 
website in the late 1990s? And now folks like me can learn WordPress and 
build them even better.
According to Computerworld’s latest forecast survey, there are bevy of new 
technologies being beta-tested or piloted that could be unveiled next year.3 In 
fact, 77% of the 334 IT executives surveyed by Computerworld in June said 
so, which is up from 43% four years ago. H
ere’s a sample of what the IT execs said they were cooking up:
1.  Virtualization including server, storage, network and mobile 
virtualization.
2.  New mobile and wireless technologies for the medical industry, 
about a third of which are testing or piloting tablets. 
3.  Cloud computing projects involved in testing, training and 
development.
4.  Security technologies that allow consumers to make payments 
in restaurants or stores without a credit card to help eliminate 
fraud. 
These fields, in particular the cloud computing projects in training and 
development, include the most recent companies I’ve worked for and 
consulted with that are hiring. Remember, the world we live in is constantly 
changing—it’s like Moore’s Law on meth. As I mentioned earlier, back in the 
dot-com boom, the new Internet and Web 1.0 were all the rage, and new and 
old companies alike were scrambling to get online—to get anything online as 
fast as possible, without much thought to user interface and data extraction 
and other considerations we give to websites today. 
Combine that with the fact that it took a lot of storage and processing power 
to run websites and data centers. Thus, IT expenditures were the highest ever 
through most of the 1990s, with the enterprise storing and managing more 
data and computing power than ever before that still needed a lot of hands-
on, day-to-day project management. The IT labor shortage led to exorbitant 
3 www.computerworld.com/s/article/9231483/Forecast_2013_Giving_top_technologies_a_
beta_test

Chapter 3 | Learn New Specialized Skills
30
salaries for those who got the training and the certification. And in many 
cases there were many more jobs than there were qualified IT pros to fill.
Post dot-com and the world changed, those huge IT budgets of yore slashed 
to near nothing while many IT folks lost their jobs. Then it changed again 
during this latest recession, with many IT positions consolidated, dissolved, 
and even outsourced to data centers inside and outside of the United States.
So while we’re talking about the hot tech skills for 2012, let’s also talk about 
how the future of IT is being consolidated into three kinds of jobs: consultants, 
project managers, and developers. 
According to Jason Hiner, the editor-in-chief of TechRepublic:
4
IT jobs future into consultants, project 
. Where do you fall today and where would you like 
worker, which I’ll discuss in Chapter 4, and the fact that companies realize 
that writing project code in the Wild West of the new tech boom can be too 
uncontrolled if there isn’t any hierarchical leadership and project management 
to, well, manage the results. You should consider learning skills from both 
camps.
So let’s digress for bit onto the millennial/boomer divide and how it applies to 
your career management. Earlier this year I heard Malcom Gladwell speak at 
the SHRM Conference and Expo,5 and the first words out of his mouth were, 
“Let’s talk about millennials.”6 I immediately bristled and recalled how, in 
reality, there is no Gen X or millennial “type.”  My tendency is to think of all 
generations as Generation Now—anyone can learn anything at anytime.
4  TechRepublic is a website that helps IT decision-makers identify technologies and strategies 
to empower workers and streamline business processes. www.techrepublic.com/blog/hiner/
the-future-of-it-will-be-reduced-to-three-kinds-of-jobs/8717.
5  Society for Human Resource Management’s annual conference.
6 Malcolm Gladwell is the author of these New York Times bestselling books, The Tipping Point: 
How Little Things Make a Big Difference (2000) , Blink: The Power of Thinking Without Thinking 
(2005), and Outliers: The Story of Success (2008).

31
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
This is a mindset that includes employers treating people nongenerationally 
and talking straight. It holds that being passionate about what a person does 
is a major  tenet of the world of work, regardless of when that person was 
born. That today we’re not only loyal and committed to the work that moves 
and schools us, but also to the people who are part of that committed work—
because that’s the work that moves us all to do greater things for the world. 
That’s the view of work that makes it easier for startups to start up and for 
established companies to grow—creating new jobs and replacing some of 
those that were lost during the past five years, including full-time, part-time, 
flex time, contract and project work, and any combination of those and more 
that you can imagine. That’s the view of work that transforms technologies, 
processes, communities, and the very heart and soul of the world.
now.B
ut that’s not where Gladwell went during his keynote speech. What he 
do exist—and should co-
.
• 
Hierarchy
• 
Open networks
Gladwell explained so eloquently and intelligently is that we’ve gone 
from hierarchical, disciplined, and centralized social organizations (think 
boomers and Gen X) to collaborative, amorphous, organic, and open social 
networks (think Gen Y and Gen Z).
Which isn’t really a good or bad thing, because they’re two very different 
worldviews that have influenced dramatically the way we participate in the 
world of work. On the one hand, you’ve got the traditional top-down 
management structure that, according to Gladwell, began to break down in 
the 1970s when individuals started to demand more ownership of their career 
aspirations (and paychecks). And then those born in the 1980s and 1990s 
found knowledge and power in the collective world of work, those personal 
and professional social networks that have upended the traditional top-down 
structure.
But the amorphous nature of these open networks, versus the structured 
leadership of a strong few, tells a tale of two separate states of mind and 
heart. As an example, Gladwell highlighted the differences between the 
succinct success of the Civil Rights movement and the oblique success of the 
Occupy Wall Street movement. 

Chapter 3 | Learn New Specialized Skills
32
However, when combined, these viewpoints are a force to be reckoned with. 
Think of Apple: open social networks internally, yet run by a brilliant business 
mind who’s a formidable dictator.  (And any of you who have worked at Apple 
would most certainly concur.)
You can apply this view as a strategy for your own career management. Keep 
an open-network mindset, but manage your career with smart and disciplined 
leadership. Embedding some hierarchy into open-learning networks brews a 
magic that unites hearts and minds, including those of peers and prospective 
employers. That magic is what truly transforms technologies, processes, 
communities, and the very heart and soul of the world of work.
Where TECH skills fall today
. Since the big IT budgets of the 1980s and 1990s, large enterprises have been 
Rackspace, and IBM, all of whom provide data-center space and IT pros to help implement, 
manage, and fix problems. Consultancies give organizations an opportunity to buy IT services 
on demand in order to lower costs, get higher expertise, and provide ongoing coverage.
2. Project managers. As the age of specialization has evolved over the past five years, many 
business units, departments, and divisions are pulling in remaining IT pros to be their tech 
business analysts, helping management make more informed technology decisions. They will 
be the ones who gather the sound and the “Dilbertian” business requirements, the inane and 
nonsensical ones, while ensuring there’s only sound deployment, not a Dilbertian one. These 
individuals are the brave souls who have ventured away from the centralized IT fiefdom (or 
been exiled from) to help build and maintain better businesses from the business unit on up. 
These also the folks who help to vet outside tech vendors and consultants. 
3. Developers. Because software runs the world—and if you don’t think so, just look around—
the greatest job opportunities for IT pros are in engineering, programming, and coding. Because 
hardware has been scaled to be more efficient, Internet broadband has increased in bandwidth, 
and cloud-based SaaS development is hotter than hot, the need for software applications to run 
and integrate smoothly with other software apps is critical. All things social and mobile 
development are the new layers of software integration across hardware and  platforms, thus 
the need for these developers is exploding. 

33
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
■ Mindful Moment  There’s a lot of opportunity today in the tech field—if you have the right 
balance of developer and project-management skills in place. What opportunities would you like to 
work toward and make your own? What would it take to get there?
So It’s All About the Coding, Eh?
There you have it. It’s all about the coding: application development in the 
literal social media and mobile spaces, as well as pursuit of anything and 
everything via cloud computing, with a nod to big data analytics and a variety 
of other not as glamorous industries like manufacturing, medicine, biotech, 
.  The list goes on and on. 
IT touches every industry, and that means that, with the 
. Don’t think only about social 
Instragram sold for $1 billion 
. Just remind yourself where the valuations of Facebook, 
.S
I Chapter 2, I discussed going back to school to finish your college degree or 
get some sort of technical certification. That’s one place to start—by taking 
classes to acquire various new technical skills or to brush up on what you 
already know. Remember that this education can include night school or 
online courses, and you don’t have to complete a degree or get certification 
to learn new skills.
Here are some other ways to learn new tech skills.
Read, and Then Read Some More
I’ve been avid reader since I was a little boy, when science fiction was very 
popular with me. The movie Stars Wars appeared on the big screen when I 
was 12, and that was all it took when it came to my romanticizing technology 
and the heroes who use and abuse tech. I read many of the early Star Wars 
universe stories and many other sci-fi books like those by Isaac Asimov and 
Robert Heinlein. Fantasy was also a favorite of mine, especially when it 
blended alchemy, technology, and science, as in the Thomas Covenant The 
Unbeliever series by Stephen R. Donaldson and the Incarnation of Immortality 
series by Piers Anthony. Popular Mechanics, and Omni were favorite magazines 
at the time.

Chapter 3 | Learn New Specialized Skills
34
For me, I relate coding to writing; it’s built on a learning foundation and an 
open mind. A lot of reading goes into being a good writer—it’s by reading the 
works of many others that writers find their unique voice. The same goes for 
programming and other forms of IT work; reading will expand your mind and 
give breadth to your understanding of what’s possible. And this includes 
reading things outside your technical area of interest, as this broader exposure 
is what  neuroscientists tell us helps us connects those problem-solving dots.
To begin, a quick search on Amazon.com for best-sellers in the field of 
computers and technology will give you the latest and greatest in tech books 
to choose from. Or use your online bookseller of choice to do the same and 
cross-reference. (There are some books in Apple’s iBooks that may be 
.)
. 
B
TechRepublic and Computerworld,  there are myriad others, including 
the IEEE
 Computer Society publications, CNET News, Information Week, 
, Wired, Byte, and Technology Review.
A
OOCs7—Massive Open Online Courses—from major universities 
like S
Harvard joining forces with private industry. (I reference 
Appendix.) Immerse yourself in topics inside and 
outside of technology and broaden your reach. Stretch that mind, baby.
Play with Others Online
And then there’s playtime. No, I’m not talking about gambling or adult sites, 
either. I’m talking about collaborating with and learning from other like-
minded IT folks in a variety of exercises, Q&A sessions, or just general 
shooting the tech-shit talk.
User groups and online forums have been around since before the Internet 
was public, and before all things “social”—groups like IBM’s SHARE and UNIX 
networks, Compuserve, AOL, and Yahoo user groups. Also, when I worked 
at San Jose State University in the late 1980s and early 1990s, we were already 
online using e-mail, checking out other university websites, and collaborating 
with peers throughout the state university system.
Then came the rise of the social networks and now the talent networks, 
where prospective employers welcome you and your friends to talk among 
7 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Massive_open_online_course

35
.
kay, maybe you’re still making fun of me because i learned WordPress all by 
st century.
hTMl and css. and then later you learned PhP, MysQl, 
and rss, so you could do some stuff cooler than simple hTMl would allow.
or maybe you’re in the process of doing that. or maybe you’re currently 
learning how to wirelessly network your home office and all the peripherals.
or maybe you’re working on new algorithms that filter the overwhelming 
amount of online data to only what you want to know about.
That’s right—you’re playing with yourself. ain’t nothing wrong with that; it’s 
only natural. The best way to know is to do, so get to doing, would you?
■ Mindful Moment Make a list of your favorite tech pubs and online sites you frequent and 
write down the reasons why you like them and what you learn from each one. Same for where you 
go online to collaborate (if you do). And then make a list of projects you’ve tackled all by yourself, 
if nothing more than to learn. Do you see a pattern? What would you then change, if anything? 
.

Chapter 3 | Learn New Specialized Skills
36
Show Me, Don’t Tell Me
So now I’m going to turn everything we’ve covered on its head and see what 
we have yet to cover.
It’s important that I do this now, because of my friend Paul, whom I introduced 
in Chapter 2. Paul, who didn’t have the college degree or even much in the 
way of formal secondary tech education. For any of you out in the same  
situation as  Paul, you know how tough it is to stitch together your professional 
experience and your  formal and informal learning to create a credible and 
desirable IT pro who should be hired.
So if you’ve got any of the following creds, highlight them in your resume and/
LinkedIn profile: professional accomplishments and awards, peer and 
. Maybe you even mix worlds in online social and business 
I 
do).
.
E
B
conspicuous consumption and the newer term 
conspicuous conservation, I call the above example “conspicuous consummation”: 
the relatively recent phenomenon of engaging in online activities and sharing 
information that highlights your best professional (and personal) self in order 
to obtain or signal a high social status.
I’m certainly no economist by trade or training, but I do find the field 
fascinating, just as I find it fascinating how people show themselves in the best 
light online, whether they are doing a job search or just keeping themselves 
relevant and marketable.
I started thinking about this after reading about the economic term conspicuous 
conservation, naming a relatively recent phenomenon of engaging in activities 
that are environmentally friendly in order to obtain or signal a higher social 
status (for example, buying a Prius versus other hybrid gas/electric combo 
models). This concept was developed and analyzed by a brother-and-sister 
team of economists, Steve Sexton and Alision Sexton.
In my world-of-work concept, conspicuous consummation can be a valiant 
personal branding effort to get noticed, but is it enough to warrant a good  
evaluation when seeking a new job or consulting gig? 

37
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
The obvious answer is no, which is why employers use myriad screening tools. 
Then they throw in the interviewing, maybe a scenario-based exercise or two, 
reference checking, and a few other housekeeping-to-hire activities, and they 
have themselves a new employee (or not).
But what if there were a way to show your current employer or prospective 
employer some actual, real-time examples of yourself shining in action? No 
scenario-based acting models; I mean actual footage of you kicking butt and 
taking names. There are surveillance cameras already in places of business for 
security reasons,  like crime prevention (not to mention identification 
technologies that confirm our identities via fingerprints, retinas, breath, blood, 
DNA . . . whoa, Nellie!).A
gencies, vendors, and companies record external and internal meetings, 
I’d bet more video today, too). S
I don’t mean recording yourself alone at home, pantomiming a day in 
I do mean getting permission to record yourself in 
. Save those videos for your future 
. Or, if you’ve got your 
.
Crazy, I know, but video interviewing and screening have become mainstream, 
in both live virtual and recorded formats (will be discussed in Chapter 7). But 
what I’m suggesting may get the EEOCs, the ACLU, and the blood of many 
other privacy advocates boiling—not to mention direct supervisors, executive 
management, IT, and legal counsel—unless you obtain blanket permission up 
front. 
Maybe you have already realized that, on paper, you’re only worth your weight 
in words; that alone isn’t enough to display your past experience, education, 
and skill level, no matter what recent classes you’ve taken and skills you’ve 
upgraded.
This is the new millennium of tech specialization; smart generalists are going 
the way of the outsourced and offshored low-cost labor. It’s already been 
happening, and it’s leaving you behind.
Start storyboarding your “conspicuous consummation” movie. That’s where 
I’m going with the rest of this book, figuratively and literally.
As my dad always told me, “Show me, don’t tell me.” Upgrade yourself to 
conspicuous consummation.

Chapter 3 | Learn New Specialized Skills
38
■ Mindful Moment  Competition is fierce in tech fields today, especially for certain skills. Have 
you ever thought about recording yourself in IT action? Starting with a story is key, as is learning 
new skills, but then showing what you can do is the step that’s going to help you rise above the 
noise. Plan your storyboard today.

c h a p t e r
4
Find and Take 
the Contract 
You jump off a cliff and you assemble an airplane on the way down.
—Reid Hoffman, co-founder of LinkedIn
It’s like that. Any chance we take with our careers is a leap of faith that 
includes a magic act of proving we’ve got the goods of 10 men (and women) 
while we free-fall to our potential professional and economical doom.
How’s that for productivity and no sleep?
Oh, and while you’re assembling that airplane on the way down, note that you 
may be working on only part of the plane because it’s part-time project work 
you’re doing with a group of other contractors. Now, that’s accurate for many 
of us who’ve worked on project teams as full-time employees with other full-
time employees as well as independent contractors—contract work isn’t 
anything new to businesses today, especially for IT professionals.
But what is new is an interesting trend in the way we work: the rapid rise of 
freelance and contract work across traditional full-time roles and across 
industries. In fact, I’ve read multiple world-of-work pundits and economists 
who claim that, in the next decade or two, contract work may surpass full-
time employment.

Chapter 4 | Find and Take the Contract Work
40
. In any case, 
the amount of freelance work being done has been increasing for some time, 
especially during the latest economic ice age.
It’s feast or famine, but the flexibility of this feast is what can be so tasty, 
especially when you’re hands-on in the creating. Sometimes that’s out of 
necessity, sometimes it’s out of want, and sometimes it’s the very essence of 
survival so you keep food on the table. 
Freelance workers, contract workers—“free agents,” shall we say—are people 
who do not have any professional commitments that restrict their actions to 
whatever workplace role they fill, and that includes all nonsalaried jobs.
In 1997, author Dan Pink noted in an article in Fast Company magazine that 
there were approximately 25 million “free agents” in the United States.1 Early 
in 2012, KellyOCG’s latest research revealed that 44 percent of the active 
workforce in the United States is free agents.2 That’s nearly half for those of 
you keeping score at home, and that number is only expected to grow, 
1 www.fastcompany.com/magazine/12/freeagent.html
2 www.kellyocg.com/.

41
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
potentially beyond the numbers for full-time employment, at some point in 
the future.
Companies have been operating leaner than ever in the past few years because 
of the economic apocalypse (that’s still taking its toll), shedding millions of 
jobs of all shapes and sizes, many of which will never again see the light of day. 
For many different kinds of professionals, this situation has dire consequences: 
adapt or perish. 
Sure, in this post-apocalyptic world, where pockets of economic prosperity 
glow warm and lush, there are people today who’ve made the leap and have 
found sound employment. Silicon Valley is one prime example where tech is 
(still) crazy-hot, job growth is strong, and salaries are increasing. A decade ago 
 “the average wages of those in the lowest income categories 
. But 10 years later, the divide has reached 73 
.”3 Meaning that tech positions continue to rise in salary as compared 
.D
amn. Good gigs for those who can get it, right? However, even for many IT 
. This has accelerated the 
. Indeed, freelancers are lean businesses 
incarnate.
More companies and freelancers alike want to dial up the professional services 
and tech work, then dial it down, then dial it up, then dial it down again. That’s 
on-demand leanness, baby. That’s how the world of work works today and 
how it will work tomorrow. But it also means those of us who’ve become lean 
businesses incarnate are also experiencing a renaissance of innovation. More 
freelancers and solopreneurs around means more ideas surfacing that can 
make a better business biscuit, some truly innovative and tasty. 
For example, in the past 12 months I’ve come across dozens of new cloud-
based startups in the HR and recruiting software space, from “freemium” 
applicant-tracking systems, to social-recruiting platforms, to employee-referral 
programs, to talent community systems, to new assessment products—and 
it’s only the beginning. When it comes to software that may actually help you, 
the IT job seeker, find a good full-time, part-time, or freelance job, understand 
3 http://business-news.thestreet.com/mercury-news/story/wage-disparity-bay-areas-lower-
paid-workers-fail-keep-inflation-while-top-earners-see-bigge/1.

Chapter 4 | Find and Take the Contract Work
42
that we’re on the cusp of developing some of the most intelligent innovations 
yet. We’ll talk more of these in future chapters.
That’s really what it’s all about: better business biscuits, hot from the oven and 
slathered with butter and honey.
We all gotta eat, you know.
■ Mindful Moment  The amount of available freelance work is on the rise and has become a 
preferred choice by more and more companies, as well as professionals. Have you ever done any 
contract work? If so, how did the projects go? If not, have you ever considered it while looking for 
full-time work? 
Heck Do I Go?
I
IT careers, have applied for jobs 
. C. Escher mazes and traversing the bleak candidate 
.4
I profile here 
. All are easy to get started on and to search for jobs. 
In no particular order, let’s start with Elance.
Elance
At the time of this writing, Elance—“The Human Cloud,” as their tagline 
states (and I like)—touted over 60,000 jobs posted in one month, with nearly 
a third of those IT and programming jobs. They were founded in 1999 in the 
Bay Area. See Figure 4-1.
4  M. C. Escher was a Dutch graphic artist known for his often mathematically inspired 
woodcuts, lithographs, and mezzotints that featured impossible constructions, explorations 
of infinity, architecture, and tessellations. 

43
Tech Job Hunt HandbookF
. It’s just basic name and 
Facebook account. Read the terms carefully, because Elance requires all 
financial arrangements between you and the companies you work for to occur 
inside their payment system (not outside via checks or another service like 
PayPal). 
Once you’ve logged in the first time, and have verified your e-mail address, 
then you pick the category of free-agent jobs you’re interested in, which for 
most of you will be the IT and programming jobs. After that, you have a 
choice between a basic free account and a $10 individual account, the paid 
account giving you more visibility. But I’m just going with the free account—
on a budget here, you know?
After that you get a nifty online prompt, as well as an email highlighting what 
you do next. This includes:
1. Building a Profile that Shines
In later chapters, I talk about the value of keeping your online professional 
profiles up to date, but it’s important to mention here that your Elance profile 
is your online resume, so make it shine with your skills, experience, and 
volunteering efforts (see Chapter 5). The more complete your profile, the 
. Elance home page. Courtesy Elance.com.

Chapter 4 | Find and Take the Contract Work
44
more likely you’ll get noticed, which is the first step toward getting freelance 
work.
2. Familiarizing Yourself with Elance
Always make sure you understand the rules of the road for any online service 
you use. Elance is no exception. Follow their instructions before you start 
submitting work proposals.
3. Sending Great Proposals
This is true of any “work” you’re trying to secure, but make sure that you 
understand what a prospective “client” needs, what the scope of the work 
entails, and what skills and experience are required. And always proofread 
Always.
E
Elance University, which is filled with tutorials 
Elance members. There’s a great collaborative help 
Cooler.”
N
.
G
IT related. 
Setting up an account is easy, but I didn’t find a “join with Facebook” link, 
which always makes joining new online sites much easier. If you’re a programmer 
who’s worked on these sites, please make them compatible with all social 
networks, without violating the terms of service. Thank you. 
And remember, if you haven’t filled out many online forms, though I bet you 
have, you can also sign up with minimal information and complete the profiles 
later; you don’t have to sit for 30 to 60 minutes building your profile if you 
don’t have the time right now. Save your work and come back to it. After that, 
you pick one primary skill category and up to five skill subcategories, and then 
you choose up to five industries you’re interested in. Lastly, you can pick a 
basic free account or one of several tiered paid accounts (hey, these kids gotta 
make money, too).
After that you can continue to build your profile. There are lots of helpful 
profile completeness tips, and you get a nifty intro email as well. Another cool 
feature is that you can take a variety of skills tests—from .NET technology, to 
mobile technology, to Java, to you-name-it. But, if you’re a free basic user, 
you’ll have to pay for the tests, which run about $5 each. That’s not a high 

45
.
Freelancer
freelancer claims to connect with over 3.7 million employers and freelancers 
globally from over 230 countries and regions. That’s a lot of reach. founded 
in 2004 in australia, it also claims to have over 1.7 million projects posted for 
free agents. 
again, signing up for an account is really easy, and you can register via your 
facebook profile as well. once you verify your email address, you’re off to the 
profile races to add your skills and experience. (i actually received two email 
.) as 
. You can then select 
.
..
guru, there are lots of skills tests at $5 each that can help you 
them as many times as you like, by the way.)
.

Chapter 4 | Find and Take the Contract Work
46
then you can begin to build your profile. The freelancer accounts are free, as 
are most related services for the job seeker once your profile is at least 60 
percent complete.
oDesk
oDesk was founded in 2004 in the Bay Area and serves over 350,000 
businesses. According to its website, they’re ranked the number 1 free-agent 
marketplace by annual contractor earnings, posting nearly 400,000 jobs and 
serving nearly 300,000 job seekers in the first quarter of 2012. See Figure 4-2.
Figure 4-2. oDesk home page. Courtesy oDesk.com.
Just as with the others, creating an account an oDesk is as easy as filling out 
one short form, or connecting with your Facebook profile. Once you verify 
the registration email, then it’s time to build the profile, as for all the other 
sites. oDesk is just as intuitive as the others from a usability perspective, and 
its help center and support services are the most comprehensive I’ve seen of 
all the sites.
Another cool part of the oDesk services is that there are more than 300 free 
skills tests; it’s recommend that all contractors using their site check the list 
and take the tests that are relevant if they want potential employers to notice 
them. There is no penalty for failing any of the tests, and oDesk makes it free 
to retake the tests after 30 days. Freelancers can also hide any test scores 
they do not like, but don’t forget to make your passing test scores public! 
And Don’t Forget About LinkedIn
Hey, you can also use LinkedIn to search for freelance work, for free, in your 
existing account. Most listed positions are for full-time work, but you will find 

47
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
a smattering of freelance jobs. It may not be the same selection as you’d get 
from the other freelance sites, but if you’re like me, you’ll invest the time in 
more than one site.
Again, finding contract work is a full-time job. 
You can do it, though. Just know that investing the time on any of these sites, 
as well as others you’ll read about in this book, is only part of the grind. You 
really need to complete your online profiles, keep them consistent, and 
steadily search for and apply for that contract work you find listed. 
There is lots of technical project work being offered today, as validated by 
these free-agent marketplaces, so don’t be shy about participating. Jump on 
the opportunities when they’re offered. Of course, the more relevant any 
Chapter 3 and learning 
.
. No one needs to be 
. The 
IT and programming jobs today, even contract jobs, 
. 
■ Mindful Moment  Have you ever signed on with a freelance service site before? Review the 
freelance sites above and create a profile on at least one of them, and starting marketing your skills 
and experience.
And What the Heck Do I Do  
When I Get the Work?
C’mon, are you really asking me that? Some of the same principles of finding 
and retaining full-time and part-time work apply to the freelance world. One 
big exception, which I’m not going to cover in any detail here because I’m not 
a tax expert, is how to manage the tax implications of being self-employed 
(filing a Schedule C). 
I can’t help you there.
But I can help you with the following:

Chapter 4 | Find and Take the Contract Work
48
• 
How to manage the freelance work and your employer so 
you keep both. 
• 
How you can use your successful completion of contract 
work to secure full-time employment.
• 
How to negotiate the fee for your contract work and what to 
do if the company changes the scope of the work but does 
not want to increase the pay.
How to Manage the Work and Employer
This is easy, at least in the relative contextual ease of what you’ve done in 
your previous full-time employment. If you’re the consummate professional 
. Not 
.
IT prowess may not be known to the potential company, 
I’m talking face time).
I
. . .
Deliver. Deliver. Deliver.
Listen, I won’t yank your chain (excuse me, ladies). The fact is, contract work 
can be a tough gig. You go from one project to the next, constantly negotiating 
the scope and payment for each. But I’m of the belief, based on experience, 
that when you deliver quality work for a company, you’re more than likely to 
work for them again. Companies don’t like to constantly search for trusted 
partners, vendors, and consultants, which is why the larger companies have a 
vetting process for “preferred vendors.” This is especially true for partners in 
the tech fields, as well as those in marketing, sales, and business development. 
How to Secure Full-Time Employment
If you follow the above recipe for delivering consistent quality work, then 
you’re also taking steps toward securing more stable employment—but only 
if you’re aware of those opportunities and/or you talk with your contract 
employers about them. As mentioned earlier, companies have been hesitant 
to hire full-time personnel in this latest downturn—with the exception of 
highly skilled, tough-to-find IT pros.

49
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Like yourselves, of course.
Companies do screen their independent contractors for potential permanent 
gigs, but the incidence of this is much smaller compared to the growing 
number of freelance IT work assignments. Differentiating yourself among the 
global freelance resources just on the basis of your technical skills won’t be 
enough to glean salaried opportunities. You’ll need to really work on your soft 
skills as well—communications, collaboration, personal connections—in 
order to rise above the crowd.
I’m all about leading small and thinking big when it comes to those soft skills 
of career development, self-management, and personal leadership. The 
following “touchy-feely” activities will help you strengthen those skills. 
. In the world of contract work, you’ve got to be aware of 
. That’s 
. Most important, you have to ask if there 
.
. Being aware of your emotional state and of those around 
you is critical to managing both yourself and others (think emotional 
intelligence). That will pay back in kind with the right client or employer. How 
many times have you overreacted or underreacted to a situation? Knowing 
and living emotional an self-awareness facilitates better communications and 
team building in any organization, with and project, at home, and beyond. This 
doesn’t mean being a nice guy or gal all the time, or being a tyrant all the time; 
but it does mean being nice when that’s appropriate and being tough when 
that appropriate, too.
Keep the 360° focal strength.  This is hard to do when you’ve got multiple 
projects going, maybe trying to launch a business at the same time, and/or 
trying to land the right full-time gig—all while sustaining your family. Having 
stamina is about being economical with your focal strength and decision 
making—that is, what to do, what to delegate, and what to dump. Having 
stamina is key to long-term physical and mental awareness, as well as effective 
leadership. We all get tired, and that sometimes takes a toll on our performance. 
So you must learn to manage yourself economically, to become aware of your 
endurance levels and longevity.
And again, do the frickin’ work right and deliver it on time.

Chapter 4 | Find and Take the Contract Work
50
How to Negotiate Pay and Scope
So this is where it all comes together—the front end meets the back end. 
This is also where the world of freelance work gets the toughest.
I’ve done plenty of contract work in the past few years, and I’ve learned these 
two things (which are true for full-time employment as well):
• 
Most employers are looking to pay you the least amount 
possible.
• 
Most employers want to increase the scope of the work 
while continuing to pay you the least amount possible.
And I  had a decent professional brand going into these contract gigs. You’ll 
Adam and of bidding on 
IT pros. Maybe even thousands, 
. This competitive bidding situation parallels the 
.
S
. Most of us bend to 
.
B
. I’m sure there are those of you who look a prospective 
employer right in the eye and say, “I want $XXX because of y and z, and not 
a penny less.” And in response, there are employers who say, “Well, the 
project wasn’t budgeted for $XXX, and even though you’ve got excellent y 
and z, I can’t give you a penny more.”
Queue the crickets chirping.
Then there are the rest of us, who shoot way too high or aim way too low. 
Been there, done that. And even when a percentage of bidders are able to 
score big in the hot-tech bidding wars, today’s weak economy stymies things 
for everyone else. Plus, the variances in people’s experience—starting a 
freelance project for the first time or not; having a solid brand and prior 
success or not—make a difference in what fees are paid.
My advice is simple: think and react proactively, like a seasoned marketing and 
sales professional. Marketing and sales pros understand how to do this:
Research, research, research. Sure, life moves pretty fast, and you usually 
don’t have the luxury to fully understand the business you’re bidding for, 
especially when it’s project based and you’re not given a lot of upfront 
information. But make the time to understand the scope and potential pay 

51
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
scale, as well as the future opportunities of your target “market”—which, in 
this case, is going from freelance gigs to a full-time position.
There are many sites today that show typical salary ranges by industry, 
position, and geography, including Glassdoor.com, Salary.com, and Payscale. 
They also show how to calculate your rates as an independent contractor. 
Don’t go into your negotiations blind. Even a little knowledge can be a 
powerful tool when you attempt to ensure you’re getting paid at fair market 
value. It may be a game of chicken: who will spill the salary numbers first?
Generate awareness to make the business case. Regardless of the size 
of the company you’re working for, definitely document your own professional 
accomplishments after every gig you complete. And not just a random list—
. You 
.
. If you’ve ever had the 
.
But one thing you can do is to build in a little wiggle room regarding what you 
want to be paid, if you have the opportunity. This is an art more than a science 
because, as in sales, you’re always trying to pad the margin as much as you can 
in order to make a profit if and when the deal closes. If you shoot too high, 
you’ll insult and amuse the client and the negotiation may be short-lived. But 
if you aim too low, then you’ve wiped out your margin and any chance of going 
back up.
Think about it; it’s much more difficult to negotiate up than it is to negotiate 
down. If you ask for $90 per hour and the employer says okay, and you go 
home and think about and realize you should’ve asked for more, and then you 
come back and ask for more, the odds are the offer won’t change. However, 
the reality is that, until you’ve proven yourself with an employer, it will be 
difficult to negotiate very much on any projects. But just know that, as an 
individual contractor, you can beat out the bigger IT shops because you won’t 
have the same margins on top of the base hourly rates. Plus, IT contracting 
rates vary greatly depending on factors such as location, skills required, and 
specialization.
Do your homework. Make the business case in your proposal. And good luck 
in sealing the best-paying deal.

Chapter 4 | Find and Take the Contract Work
52
■ Mindful Moment  As with any job, it’s important to understand the scope of the work, complete 
that work within budget and on time, and ensure you are communicating and collaborating 
effectively each step of the way. Having a professional brand and a previous track record help with 
securing freelance work. But if you don’t have these, then start doing just that—creating the brand 
and the track record. Negotiating your pay and the scope of the work is an art more than a science, 
so do your homework and start pitching.

c h a p t e r
5
Cross-Training 
Action is the foundational key to success.
—Pablo Picasso
Indeed, it is. Because you know that sitting on your hands and hoping the skills 
and knowledge assimilation will happen by osmosis is only imaginary action.
But I know you’re up for the real action, though. I know that in your current 
world of work, or the one that you were just in before, you pushed yourself 
to learn other skills that may or may not have immediately impacted the core 
technical work you were doing. But it made you more valuable nonetheless. 
Maybe it was giving lunchtime presentations to your peers and supervisors to 
practice your public-speaking skills. Or maybe it was learning a database 
programming language like Cassandra because you’re ready to move out of 
front-end work. Or maybe it was learning Photoshop and Illustrator because 
you want your flair for design to shine. Or maybe it was learning WordPress 
and basic HTML so you could launch a blog site that would help promote your 
personal brand.
Or maybe it was moving from using paper documentation, handwritten and 
typed on an IBM Selectric III typewriter, to inputting on your first Texas 
Instruments desktop computer with an MS-DOS operating system, Lotus 
1-2-3, and WordPerfect.

Chapter 5 | Cross-Training and Volunteering
54
That was me back in the SJSU college days. When I started working for the 
academic fundraising program, everything we tracked, from total calls made to 
donations pledged, was solely paper-based and stored in old-fashioned filing 
cabinets.
Then the magic box appeared on the desk that I didn’t use—the TI desktop 
computer with the big ol’ 5.25-inch floppy disc drives. The desk was a 
paperwork-processing station that no one person owned. And being the new 
student supervisor at the time, I wanted to own it; I wanted to learn how to 
use that new computer. All throughout high school I had used a manual and/
or electric typewriter (I had learned how to type on an IBM Selectric III during 
my freshmen year in high school), and although we did add a couple of early 
Apple II’s to a side room in the administration building during my senior 
”—I never had the opportunity to 
. 
D
I want to learn how to use that computer! It wasn’t in the cards, 
. Nope. The program manager was going to be the only one to use it, 
.
But I
I pushed to be cross-trained on that amazing piece of alien 
. This wasn’t easy for me, as I despised 
. Mercy, all I wanted was to be liked, 
but I
to change and allow me to ask for what I wanted. Yes, I was young, naïve, and 
somewhat indecisive; and yet I knew exactly what could make it all better—
being cross-trained on the computer and finally learning the new realm of 
electronic files, formulas, and fascinating DOS prompt commands.
I requested for weeks that I be the one to manage the fundraising program 
data. Granted, the data went from the lowly desktop to a larger mainframe 
system buried elsewhere on campus, but we had to start somewhere, right? 
And the program manager did his best to do it all himself. He hired and 
managed over 75 student callers, on average who worked six days a week 
across double shifts including Sundays (and sometimes Saturdays, which made 
it seven days a week), and then transferred all the calling data from paper 
pledges to that precious computer.
Until one day he asked me, “Kevin, do you want to learn how to use the 
computer?”
Abso-frickin-lutely, Brother. (I didn’t really call him “Brother,” but you get the 
gist of my enthusiasm.) And learning to use that computer exposed me to 
other forms of cross-training in the fundraising business at the university, 
opening the doors to promotion and eventually to managing the university 

55
.
 Mindful Moment Remember when you wanted to learn that new task, to stretch yourself 
beyond your comfort level? Have you ever wondered how HR and recruiting personnel work with 
finance and executive management to locate and hire talent like yourself, as well as to run the   
company? Have you thought about how your role as an IT professional affects every facet of the 
business? Have you ever wanted to have a more well-rounded skills toolbox inside and outside to 
provide greater business value to your employer? Well, it’s time to think about that and make it 
happen.

Chapter 5 | Cross-Training and Volunteering
56
How Cross-Training Burns the Fat
If you’re sitting there, chatting with your colleagues a good part of the day, are 
you one of the employed majority who are “actively disengaged”? That’s fancy 
employee-engagement-survey results for,  “I really friggin’ hate my job.”
Many American workers across positons and industries are “not engaged” or 
“actively disengaged” in their work, meaning they are emotionally disconnected 
from their workplaces and are therefore less likely to be productive.
“I really friggin’ hate my job.”
Particularly, those with at least some college (and possibly a degree or 
technical certification) often are more “unhappy” than those who have only a 
. Why? So many jobs today are much more complex than 
. It’s the high school graduates (and nongraduates) 
days.
IT professional, may have been gainfully employed of 
late. B ut your feet most certainly have been held to the productivity fire, and 
. And unless, of course, you’ve been working for 
one of the progressive startups, with a bigger agenda of seeing their teams 
and products win big—and rewarding you for just that.
The more overworked, underappreciated, and underpaid you are, the less 
likely you will sing your employer’s praises and evangelize the brand. You’ll 
more than likely bitch and moan, or quietly uncouple your mind from the 
mothership and bide your time—bringing down your colleagues along the 
way—while you look for better opportunities elsewhere.
But what if you were given the opportunity to learn other parts of the 
businesses, to acquire related skill sets and experience that would complement 
your current domain and make you even more valuable to your employer (and 
to yourself as you become more marketable to others)?
It seems that this is possible. Maybe you’ve heard your supervisors or managers 
or HR, or all the bigwigs themselves, tout how the company’s all one big, 
happy community working together across departments to build a better 
business and a better world, the epitome of evangelical elasticity. 
You just gagged a little, didn’t you?

57
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Hold that gag just for a minute. Imagine if you were over 140 years old, had 
over 60K employees in over 36 countries, and were producing over $20 
billion in annual sales by selling diapers and feminine hygiene products, among 
related items.
Yes, the “Glamorous Life” by Shelia E.1 Indeed. What? Hey, I’m a happy daddy 
of two little girls and a contented husband of one lovely wife. I’m good with 
it all. My point is that even when you’re 140 years old, and work for an old-
time, bureaucratic institution, you can still change.
That was the message from Liz Gottung, the CHRO at Kimberly-Clark, whom 
I heard speak last year at an HR conference. That’s right, CHRO—chief human 
resource officer, the most glamorous job of them all. Don’t scoff. It’s teams 
Liz’s that are going screen and hire IT folks like you when you apply for 
.A
gain, imagine: you’re over 140 years old and steeped in  cultural tradition. B
elieve it or not, Kimberly-Clark is now in the midst of multiple change-
SaaS-deployed human capital 
HR as well as for Finance, IT, Customer S
. The good news is that if big, old companies can 
.  Many companies are in the midst of changing the way 
they hire, train, cross-train, and retain their workforce today—and that’s a 
good thing for us all.
To cross-train and retain—truly an revolution. It’s true that business and 
workforce management have evolved at a glacial pace compared to the speed 
of the technological advances that have made it easier to manage and share 
data across an enterprise. And the latest neuroscience research has revealed 
the true elasticity of the human brain—how we can keep learning and adapting 
throughout our lives. The next 5 to 10 years are going to be exciting!
Sometimes there are huge evolutionary spikes of change (relatively speaking, 
of course). I keep thinking that we’re right there on the verge of massive 
change, right at the front edge of the mainstream. When you think about 
what motivates highly skilled IT professionals such as yourselves, you know 
it’s the work you do, how you’re compensated for that work, the flexibility 
and autonomy you have to complete that work, the people you work with, 
and the ability to see the fruits of your collective labor, whether they be 
1  Shelia E. is a musician, percussionist and singer whose career was launched in the 1980s 
with the popular song “Glamorous Life.”

Chapter 5 | Cross-Training and Volunteering
58
completed projects, new products, service offerings, security or systems 
integrity.
Although major change directives come from the top, all change has to get 
buy-in internally, meaning it has to catch fire with the majority for that cultural 
shift to happen and stick. This buy-in comes from the empowerment of 
ownership, not entitlement, and it  lights the motivational fires.
Amen to evangelical elasticity.
The reality is that there are more motivated “communities” than other 
entities in any business organization. If you can more readily participate in the 
lateral, ladder, and lattice career-development moves described below, you 
and many others of the “actively disengaged” can burn the unhappy fat of 
.
 
  Have you worked for employers for whom it’s always “business as usual” 
How many talent-development professionals does it take to screw in a 
lightbulb?
Well, it depends on what kind of lightbulb and what it’s for. Meaning, it’s 
contextual. For as long as I’ve been in the HR and the recruiting space, I’ve 
know many a great training-and-development strategy and talked with many a 
great training-and-development practitioner. I have applied some of their ideas 
to the companies I’ve worked for.
This isn’t supposed to be a primer on talent management and development, 
but it’s important for you to understand that there are different flavors of 
opportunistic career “blow pops” in any company you work for. There’s a 
misconception that a smaller company provides more opportunities to learn 
all aspects of the business, but sometimes that’s not the case. It’s often the 
larger organizations that provide more career-development support, from 
onboarding to review time.
But then again, I’ve heard (and experienced)  of new employees who have 
been parachuted right into the jungle and left there to fend for themselves.  
Keep these examples in mind as you examine your current employer’s—or a 

59
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
prospective employer’s—willingness to provide cross-training opportunities, 
career development, and mobility of any kind.
Lateral move  This is when you’re unhappy with your current position and need a 
change of scene without leaving all together. 
Let’s be real: IT is hot, but it also has an inordinate amount of pressure on top 
and from underneath—like a fat, sweaty man sitting sealed atop a pot of 
boiling water. It’s not easy to move laterally if you don’t have the skills to do 
so. If your employer won’t help you get those skills, and you don’t want to get 
them yourself, then maybe you should just get out. You’ll know if you’re in the 
IT hotness, and if you’re not, then ask those who currently work there. It’s 
kinda tough to pivot from systems administration to applying progressive 
.A
s was mentioned in Chapter 4, IT has diversified into three camps: 
. The latter two are the internal 
. Sometimes the grass isn’t always greener elsewhere; the 
. You may 
IT project management or developer-type opportunities 
. O
f course, you’ll have to weigh a lateral move against what you have now—
your new boss would be, and any new skills you might learn that could increase 
your value long term. This can take time, but it’s time you should take. (I’ll talk 
in Chapters 9 and 10 about how to research jobs, people, and other 
organizations; some of the same principles can and should be applied to 
internal moves.)
The larger the enterprise, the more there might be opportunities to move. 
However, any kind of internal movement can be highly policitized, especially 
when you’re unhappy with a current boss and/or co-workers. Keep your 
badmouthing to a minimum and focus on the professional growth that’s 
possible when you want to move to the new business unit, department, or 
division. 
Ladder move This is he traditional career climb to the next best thing internally, if 
and when you qualify and/or are promoted.
Again, with the reality. How often do IT pros get promoted to CTO? How 
often does anyone get promoted to anything beyond the front lines? Hey, 
there’s always a chance to climb the ladder if you keep your nose clean, don’t 
watch the clock, don’t play Angry Birds of Warcraft or whatever the game du 
jour is (keep in mind that I had a first-generation Nintendo in college and 

Chapter 5 | Cross-Training and Volunteering
60
played the original Legend of Zelda until four in the morning or until my 
cigarettes ran out), work your ass off, brown-nose your boss, never sleep—
you get the idea.2
Traditional promotions do still ocurr in the world of work, so don’t get me 
wrong. You may have steller performance reviews and recommendations from 
your immediate supervisors and peers, as well as amazing project-management 
prowess—enough that middle to upper IT management has taken notice and 
really wants to promote you. And maybe that happens. Some of you will get 
to CTO or IT management, in some shape or form. 
But remember that seniority alone doesn’t give you a free pass.  You’re battling 
it out with five generations in the workplace, for fewer and fewer full-time 
. Okay, throw in a little art, too.
 This is the progressive move that takes you to new cross-trained 
N
. These are the rainbow, glitter, and unicorn mobility moves 
HR industry thought leaders are proposing today. Here’s what I 
. Tell your employer that you want more responsibility for 
. Say that you want to be aware of other opportunities in the 
organization as well as the recommended paths for how to get there, not to 
mention the other colleagues and mentors who can help get you there. And 
it doesn’t hurt to be able to control time and space, either.
Just like the lateral and ladder moves, lattice moves require you to not be 
afraid to find and ask for what you want and what you need. Controlling time 
and space is all relative. It doesn’t mean you’re going to get what you ask for; 
you may even get the proverbial squat. But you are the master of your  career 
destiny (and yes, it helps when your employer plays along), and the development 
work you do in a career context while looking out for the next opportunity. 
This opportunity may mean specific responsibilities and projects in the role 
you love, or a promotion to the new role you’ll love even more. 
It’s not a cliché, kids. You need to find a role that you love, with the kind of IT 
work that you love, with an employer that you at least get along with (you 
don’t have to love the employer)—and you need to do it all well. Do it here, 
do it there, do it everywhere. 
2 The Legend of Zelda is a high fantasy, action-adventure video game series created by 
Japanese game designers and developed and published by Nintendo.

61
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
That is all. No, I am not Dr. Seuss.
The Value of Informal Learning
In a moment, we’ll consider two different ways you can and should be cross-
trained in your current position (or tomorrow’s position) to potentially work 
yourself into the lattice. These suggestions are a blend of what I’ve experienced 
and the experiences of HR professionals I spoken with over the years. They 
focus more heavily on informal learning than formal. 
It’s been fairly well documented that handing employees a training manual and 
expecting them to understand the entire business accounting system they are 
supposed to maintain just ain’t gonna happen. Yes, training manuals can be 
to do as the way to learn.
. That means hands-on application of the 
. Think 
I mentioned in Chapter 1—knowing through doing, 
.C
onsider a study of time-to-performance that Sally Anne Moore did at Digital E
Corporation in the early 1990s.3 The study showed the disparity 
adopting, and to adapting those new skills. It’s all in the practice and application 
of skills in real time, with real systems, software, and co-workers,  that makes 
the magic work.
Two Ways to Gain Skills Informally
Think about these two learning paths:
1.  Take a portion of time every month to “job-shadow”  individuals 
from different desks, digs, departments, divisions—someone 
doing something that is of interest to you, relevant to what you 
do, and you can see how it impacts the bottom line. (Sorry, you 
can never get away from the bottom line, no matter how cool 
the CEO is.) Not only will this give you a better understanding 
of the business for which you work, you will meet others in the 
IT realm and beyond, some of whom could be mentors. But 
more important,  you will learn new skills and brush up on those 
skills you thought you had nailed. You know—the soft skills, like 
3 Sally-Ann Moore, “Time-to-Learning” (Digital Equipment Corporation, 1998).

Chapter 5 | Cross-Training and Volunteering
62
communicating empathically with your colleagues, subordinates, 
and bosses instead of shrieking like a banshee when you don’t 
get your way (followed by breaking desk knickknacks and 
incessant crying).
2.  There’s the old-fashioned impromptu (or scheduled) meeting of 
mentoring minds that includes white-boarding, collaborating, 
and scenario-based problem solving, whether it’s face to face or 
virtual. This is where sparks of innovation either ignite  or are 
snuffed out like nasty-smelling scented candle. With regularity 
and practice, you just might learn a little something or two, teach 
a little something or two, get noticed by that boss and your 
snarky colleagues, and be celebrated in the annals of businessdom. 
B
. You’re learning 
. There’s no guarantee of this, of course. 
. 
Really Happen
S
I’ve lived much of what I’m writing 
about. After the dot-com company I worked for went belly up, I worked as a 
marketing consultant and fiction/poetry writer. Don’t laugh. I had a little 
success and notoriety online, and I was making progress toward landing print 
pieces, but I saw no monetary rewards. At all. I’m sure some of you also have 
some great stories of what you did between the real gigs. Am I right? Like my 
keep-it-real friends always joked with me back then, “So, how did that poetry 
thing work out for you, Kev?”
Dammit. Not well.
It was then that I met up with the firm I worked for most of the 2000s—
HRmarketer.com, a marketing software and services firm. When I was hired, 
it was only as a half-time market researcher. I was to research and verify data 
that would then be entered into databases that were managed in the firm’s 
software product on behalf of its customers (something they still do and I use 
in my latest incarnation).
But it was solid work and a good job, and the world was still coming out of 
the first downturn of the 2000s. And then the fabulous lattice appeared like a 
vision—the firm’s founder was looking for leadership in the then-tiny ship, and 
I was looking for more. I began to take on more responsibility. I acquired new 

63
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
skills and experience as it related to developing, marketing, and selling B2B 
software—much more than the previous startup I had worked for. The more 
I aspired and proved myself, the more I became a trusted “partner” in a sense, 
eventually becoming and remaining president of the company until I left in 
2010.
From part-time researcher to president in just less than seven years. The 
empowering lattice environment can help make that happen— to you, as well. 
It’s not just at the smaller, supposedly more nimble firms, either. Don’t forget 
the cross-training story about Kimberly-Clarke mentioned earlier in this 
chapter. That’s a huge brand with over 60K employees.
It can happen. Really.
 Mindful Moment  Have you experienced job-shadowing or collaborative problem-solving 
Have-Nots
. The air conditioning didn’t 
work, so large fans swirled warm air back and forth between the open doors 
and open windows. They listened with guarded optimism, looking tired and a 
little lost.
We talked about resume best practices, and where to look for jobs, and how 
to optimize and leverage online professional profiles, and where to find 
freelance work. We talked about volunteer projects in your local community, 
not only to give back, but to exchange with one another via networking 
reciprocity; after all, we never know where our next opportunity could come 
from. At one point toward the end of my segment, I forced a smile, thinking 
of my own career path—the highs and lows, and the mediocre in-betweens. I 
wiped my sweaty brow and looked toward the windows, already somewhat 
regretting the cliché forming in my mind.
“Keep open all those windows of opportunity you find throughout your 
careers,” I said. “You never know when you’ll need them.”
These were the job have-nots—working-class to middle-class folks who have 
lost their jobs, whose careers have ground to a halt, whose personal lives have 
gotten in the way of their professional ones. This was also an experience for 
me of volunteering with Hirewire, a local organization helping job seekers.

Chapter 5 | Cross-Training and Volunteering
64
Consider one of the Hirewire attendees, an aerospace engineer in his late 
50s. He had been out of work for nearly three years, struggling to fill the hole 
in his resume and remain relevant and  become employable again.
Consider a service delivery professional in his early 40s, out of work for over 
a year and struggling to find value in the local employment-office workshops 
and counseling sessions.
Consider my best friend from college. In 1987, he wanted to be an airline 
pilot. He finished his college degree, flew hundreds of hours, finished all his 
flying certifications, and voilà! He became an airline pilot, first flying for a 
commuter airline and then for a global transport airline. But then just last 
month he was out of a job, laid off owing to the continued economic ice age.
C
.
C.
F
Sometimes the truth is contrary for the job have-
. And then again, sometimes there’s a breath of 
fresh air, like the note I recently received from another friend of mine:
All is moving along for me. . . . I’m doing some interesting work with 
companies both inside and outside of the HR space, which is keeping 
things fresh. And still managing to find (some) balance in life by 
following your advice from the last time we spoke about “keeping all 
the windows open.”
Ah, so much for clichés;  so much effort is needed to warm the world of work 
again. So much has been lost during this darkest of modern economic winters. 
So much needs to be reinvented and reinvested.
So much for the job have-nots.
But we can all make a little difference. This is why I volunteer for an organization 
like Hirewire: to be able to give something of value back that I’ve learned over 
the course of my career, to give back to those who are looking for work, 
looking to reinvent, looking to learn new skills and ways in which to get 
noticed in this jobless recovery. Every month, the jobs report has been a 
mixed bag of piss and vinegar, as well as  the tastiest IT Silicon Valley vino ever 
made. In fact, one journalist wrote, “It’s like job growth is sideways.”

65
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
.
Volunteer
.

Chapter 5 | Cross-Training and Volunteering
66
recruiting Generation Y talent (18–26-year-olds).  Nearly 
two-thirds of the respondents (62 percent) in a 2007 
Volunteer IMPACT survey  said they would prefer to work 
for companies that give them opportunities to contribute 
their talents to nonprofit organizations.7
Volunteering can also you improve both your hard and soft skills; encourage 
your job satisfaction and overall morale; upgrade your teamwork and 
leadership ability; enhance communication and collaboration with everyone 
you work with, supervise, and report to; and so much more. 
Volunteering is a gut thing for me first, though. Volunteeing should be about 
something that moves you and that you feel passionately about—even more 
. When I had my first girl, I 
I wanted to ensure a loving, stable environment for her. Considering 
that I  grew up with domestic violence and abuse, those memories became 
I decided that generating awareness of domestic 
I needed to do. A by-product of 
. I didn’t go into it looking 
I honed them from the volunteering nonetheless.
Hirewire, Ken Winters, also went into volunteering because 
he felt passionately about helping job seekers. Being a recruiter for over 10 
years, and running his own staffing firm called Staffback, Ken longed to help 
those he couldn’t place in jobs by giving them pointers on everything from 
resume writing to job search to interviewing tips. He saw too many local 
viable employees in the Scotts Valley and Santa Cruz area—many of whom 
were and are IT pros (ironically)—go month after month without a bite. As 
I’ve already mentioned in this chapter, I’ve seen them (you) as well, which is 
why I wanted to volunteer and give job-search pointers. At the same time, I’m 
improving my public-speaking skills, something I’ve wanted to do anyway.
So whether you’re looking for an opportunity to volunteer  on your own or 
via your employer, be aware that many employers offer incentives for their 
employees to volunteer. You and your employer can find myriad volunteer 
opportunities listed at VolunteerMatch (see Figure 5-1) and Idealist.org.
7  Deloitte & Touche USA, Volunteer Impact Survey (Deloitte & Touche USA, 2007).

67
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
I’ve worked for have given staff one or two days of paid time 
. At larger 
.5 million volunteer hours assisting their favorite 
.8 And in 2009, the more than 1.5 million volunteer 
hours reported by Walmart associates translated to more than $11 million in 
grant contributions.9
I could make a list a mile long of these (thankfully), but you get the point. 
Consider volunteerism as yet another way to grow professionally. The per-
sonal returns are invaluble.
 Mindful Moment  Giving your time can be hard when you’re cobbling together enough work 
to make a living, but volunteerism has been proven to benefit employee, employer, and community. 
Volunteering can improve both your hard and soft skills, your teamwork and leadership ability, and 
the communication and collaboration skills. 
8  www.microsoft.com/about/corporatecitizenship/en-us/serving-communities/community-
opportunities/employee-giving/.
9  www.walmartstores.com/CommunityGiving/201.aspx.
. VolunteerMatch. Courtesy of VolunteerMatch.org.

c h a p t e r
6
Background 
It is discouraging how many people are shocked by honesty and how few by 
deceit.
—Noel Coward, English playwright
Maybe you heard about it. The fact (or lack thereof) that ex-Yahoo CEO 
Scott Thompson had published bios, including the one in Yahoo’s annual 
report, that claimed that he had a bachelor’s degree in both accounting and 
computer science from Stonehill College. Unfortunately, his degree was 
actually in accounting only, not computer science as well.
Now, anything the CEO publishes about himself in an annual report, a legal 
document that CEOs must personally swear is truthful, must be, well, truthful. 
Funny how that works, right? Who frickin’ wants to be truthful when looking 
for work, particularly in the highly competitive IT world? We smirk about the 
high-profile idiots who lie about their experience, skills, and education—and 
there have been plenty of those. Then we shake our heads and curse them 
silently when we find out how much they’ll still take home, even after being 
severed.
We don’t get that. Not even close. If we lie on our resumes and our online 
profiles, and the lies are discovered after we’re hired, then the only result is 
that we’re fired. Bye-bye. Adios. Au revoir. Tschüs. Zài jiàn. Get out.

Chapter 6 | Background Screens and Assessments 
70
You Can’t Hide
And forget about your future employers’ not finding out about it, because in 
today’s ever-connected networked world, word gets around. In the United 
States, federal and state guidelines may vary, but for the most part, past and 
current employers need only reveal your “name, rank, and serial number”—
and your employment dates—during a reference check, but again, word gets 
around. Loose lips abound, whether they belong to the hiring managers, ex-
colleagues, management, or the recruiters and HR people themselves.
Yeah, I know you fudged a little here and a little there. Everybody does, right? 
I have. Not blatant fabrications, but a little embellishment of the truth never 
hurt anyone.
B
.  Imagine you’re the one doing the hiring (you may, 
IT teams in the past). I got the following examples 
EmployeeScreenIQ, an employment screening company.
. Would you? Like most employers, probably 
not.
U.S. Vice President 
Joe Biden, who famously exaggerated his educational qualifications in this way 
when running for office.
Here’s one more: 
Your leading candidate is an unbelievable performer—a real superstar 
with a track record of making huge profits for his previous companies. 
However, he left his last job citing “creative differences,” and a background 
check reveals several drug-related convictions. Do you hire him?
Maybe you don’t feel as strongly about this one, especially if you believe in 
giving people a second chance—but most moderate-to-conservative 
employers would not hire a troubled “star performer” (who might end up as 
a Charlie Sheen in the ranks, the primate example of this scenario1).
1 When actor Charlie Sheen lost his job on the sitcom Two and a Half Men, he went a little 
crazy, touting that he was “winning” the dispute.

71
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
The Background on Background Checks
Most background-screening firms estimate that nearly 50 percent of all 
candidates distort or exaggerate information on their resumes. That’s 50 
percent, mind you. Half of you. One out of every two of us, thus, are full of 
crap—or somewhere around there, relatively speaking. The most egregious 
form of resume and/or online profile “crap” involves fabricating the educational 
qualifications. Reread Chapters 2 and 3, and rethink that fabrication.
Employers today face a lot of  legislative and legal challenges connected with 
the hiring process. It’s a minefield out there.  The world’s crazy-litigious, so 
background checks are critical to protect an employer’s interests. Hey, I’m 
sure you’re not who they’re worried about, but there are many others who 
I’m with stupid” hat. Plus, background checks 
. Keep these points in mind:
• 
There are dozens of federal and state laws that affect hiring 
practices, employee rights, and labor relations—and new 
ones come into effect every year.
• 
There is increased enforcement  by the Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission (EEOC), challenging the use in 
hiring of credit and criminal histories (which is to your benefit, 
actually).
• 
Employers face a growing risk of being charged with 
discrimination (in 2011, the EEOC received 99,947 complaints 
charging discrimination—the highest number in its 46-year 
history). 
• 
There are legislative attempts to expand “protected class” 
status to include the unemployed and ex-offenders (again, 
not such a bad thing).
• 
There’s been an explosion of “failure to hire” suits, owing in 
large part to the tight job market and therefore a greater 
number of rejected applicants.
• 
There’s been an increase in lawsuits charging violations of the 
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA).
• 
There’s been legal action taken related to the use of arrest 
records in hiring. (PepsiCo recently lost a $3.1 million 
settlement related to this.)

Chapter 6 | Background Screens and Assessments 
72
• 
There have been costly challenges to companies’ not obtaining 
proper consent for conducting background checks that would 
ensure compliance with federal and state laws. (First Transit 
lost a $5.9 million settlement for failure to do so.)
• 
There have been “Ban the Box” initiatives at the state and 
local levels that call for the elimination on initial public 
employment applications of questions about past convictions. 
• 
Social media and other new technologies are being used as 
screening tools, even though hiring decisions are not supposed 
to be made on this basis, according to the Equal Employment 
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and the Fair Credit 
Reporting Act (FCRA); this is because information on social 
media isn’t always verifiable, as is criminal or employment 
information.
. Because of our slobbery, we must have 
. 
Background Screening—a Hiring Must
is that background screening is a hiring must these days, for most positions and most industries. 
Background screening ensures that  applicants are who they say they are in their resumes, 
online profiles, reference checks, and interviews. Background checks will expose or verify your 
criminal history, your employment history, your education history, your professional references, 
and sometimes your credit rating (depending on whether you’ll be working with financial 
records and/or managing money). Again, employers really need to make sure they’re hiring the 
right people—people who don’t make mistakes that will  come back and bite both the employer 
and the applicant in the ass. Really. We could spend hours just reviewing the lawsuits.
However, employers make mistakes as well, and they don’t always make the right decisions 
when hiring is based on the background screening. You as the applicant have protections under 
the EEOC and FCRA. 
For example, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission  “is responsible for enforcing 
federal laws that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or an employee because 
of the person’s race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), national origin, age (40 or older), 
disability, or genetic information.2 It is also illegal to discriminate against a person because the 
person complained about discrimination, filed a charge of discrimination, or participated in an 
2 www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/index.cfm.

73
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
employment discrimination investigation or lawsuit. Most employers with at least 15 employees 
are covered by EEOC laws (20 employees in age discrimination cases). Most labor unions and 
employment agencies are also covered. The laws apply to all types of work situations, including 
hiring, firing, promotions, harassment, training, wages, and benefits.
And the Fair Credit Reporting Act  “regulates the practices of consumer reporting agencies 
(CRAs) that collect and compile consumer information into consumer reports for use by credit 
grantors, insurance companies, employers, landlords, and other entities in making eligibility 
decisions affecting consumers. Information included in consumer reports generally may include 
consumers’ credit history and payment patterns, as well as demographic and identifying 
information4 and public record information (e.g., arrests, judgments, and bankruptcies). 
Consumer report information may be used by entities to predict the risk of future nonpayment, 
default, or other adverse events. The FCRA was enacted to (1) prevent the misuse of sensitive 
consumer information by limiting recipients to those who have a legitimate need for it; (2) 
improve the accuracy and integrity of consumer reports; and (3) promote the efficiency of the 
nation’s banking and consumer credit systems.” 3B
ut with regard to the social media, this is still a relatively  new phenomenon, 
. Thank God I didn’t have social media in college—and I 
.
Hey, if we all walked around naked all the time, with our curtains drawn and 
our shades down, which some of us do, then there would be a lot more reason 
for everyone else to stop and stare. Which is why background checkers and 
HR people are attracted to your Facebook page like a moth to the flame.
And then they judge and shake their heads, and sigh in disappointment, even 
in disgust (that’s why I only post pictures of my kids, like a good social daddy). 
Thankfully, that’s not the case for many of us, because otherwise we’d probably 
all see a lot more than just being naked. It’s not just the silly eccentricities we 
exhibit from day to day. Maybe we’d also see violent activity, racism, or other 
intolerance, as well as illegal activities, sexually explicit material—you name 
it—things we’d have to call 911 about. 
Maybe that hasn’t happened literally, but figuratively? The Internet is a minute-
by-minute, day-by-day online social playground. I’m talking about the vast 
amount of positive and negative information about us that’s online via the 
social media and social networking sites. Go ahead—Google yourself. (We’ve 
3 www.ftc.gov/os/2011/07/110720fcrareport.pdf.

Chapter 6 | Background Screens and Assessments 
74
all done it at this point.) If you’re disappointed that you don’t find any dirt, 
then you and I should talk.
Sadly, more people than we’d probably like to admit are pulling up their online 
shades and opening their social media curtains to share sketchy, inappropriate, 
and negative behavior that can destroy their careers and their aspirations. As 
a result, recruiting professionals and hiring managers are scouring the Internet 
these days to find out what else they can about you and me when we apply 
for jobs—and then they’re using that information to make hiring decisions, 
which is discriminatory and unfair, and could expose their companies to 
lawsuits.
Most hiring professionals I know are peering through your windows without 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or the Fair Credit 
R
Act  says—or in spite of the sensationalized litigation we’ve seen of 
late.
S
LinkedIn and Facebook profiles, Twitter 
, GitHub or Stack Overflow posts, BraveNewTalent talent community 
—whatever—keep in mind that the hiring personnel are  looking for 
not to hire you. So don’t give them any, if you can help it.
Games to Avoid
Here’s another list from my friends at EmployeeScreenIQ about what 
employers are looking for when they are screening applicants (and there are 
many background-screening firms out there today, all of which are going to 
help their clients with the following situations):
You provide a false date of birth with the intention of throwing off a 
criminal record search. That’s because most criminal records are filed by 
name and date of birth. Remember, they might consider asking you for a legal 
form of identification, such as a driver’s license or passport, that can be 
compared to the information you’re providing on the background-check 
release form.
You provide a false Social Security number with the intention of 
hiding places where you’ve lived. Again, they’re going to make sure you 
provide a valid form of identification that confirms your SSN.

75
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
You provide a false Social Security number to prove that you have 
the legal right to work in the United States. That’s what I-9 forms and 
E-Verify are for. 4
You intentionally omit a past employer from your job application. 
Listen, smart employers are going to compare your resume and/or your 
LinkedIn profile to the completed job application before they submit it for a 
background check. You may get away with a gap or two in the short term, but 
you should be the one to backfill the blanks in the best way possible.
You claim to work for an employer who doesn’t exist. C’mon, really? 
Don’t be an idiot and use an online employment mill that will charge you a fee 
to provide fake employment information and verification. You don’t wear 
IT work 
Chapter 
.
. Really? Again? Wasn’t the employment mill experience enough? 
. You 
.
. Hey, I’m not judging. Just be 
careful out there.
You claim to have worked for a company that went out of business, 
knowing that your new employer won’t be able to verify the work 
history. Tricky bastard, aren’t you? Well, savvier employers are even trickier, 
because they’ll ask you to provide a copy of your previous W-2s. Damn, is 
right. Don’t forget that your W-2s also show past salary, which employers 
know is the second-most falsely claimed information. And hey, you’re an IT 
pro. Money is currently raining down on you.
You use multiple social media profiles to hide inappropriate behavior 
or offensive content. Remember the part about seeing you naked through 
the open window? Yeah, that part. Maybe you’re smart and keep the nasties 
tucked away, but if you’ve ever hacked anything, you know there’s a back door 
to be found.
4 E-Verify is an Internet-based system that allows businesses to determine the eligibility of 
their potential employees to work in the United States.

Chapter 6 | Background Screens and Assessments 
76
.
And Another Thing…
i worked hard for my college degree at an accredited university. i’m sure many 
of you did as well. although i was always a good student, there was a time in 
college when i thought i’d just scrap the whole plan. but i hung in there and 
finished it, with honors. That didn’t mean i was guaranteed a job, but it did 
i’ve mentioned already in this book.
r
. right?
and 
. so when i read a report last year about a twist on the diploma-
i’m talking now about “visa mills”5—it’s 
.
united 
states. Yep, you heard me right. This is a huge scheme fueled by a profit-
sharing system that gave students who referred newcomers from abroad a 20 
percent cut in the tuition. damn. screw the drug business, i’m gettin’ into 
mills.
entrepreneurism runs amuck in a black market, which is usually a big part of 
the legitimate business markets. sadly the u.s. government currently condones 
these activities that allow such a black market in student visas. Think about 
this: over a decade after 9/11 occurred, when terrorists were in the u.s. on 
student visas, the department of homeland security (dhs) allows universities 
to issue f1 student visas—some universities questionable enough that they 
should be ineligible to issue the necessary paperwork. in fact, the dhs lists 
these schools as institutions on the list that international students can consult 
before pursuing a degree in the united states.
The students who attend these institutions are attracted for another big, bad 
reason: the promise of jobs upon completion of the program. unfortunately, 
.

77
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
many students return home with little education gained, no accredited degree, 
and broke to boot. And for those who do get jobs, it’s sometimes at the 
expense of those who have been unemployed for months, even years. 
Unfortunately, systems that recognize and accredit institutions of higher 
learning vary greatly around the globe, making it easy for diploma and visa 
mills to confuse and deceive. As of 2011, there had been nearly a 50 percent 
increase worldwide in the number of known diploma and accreditation mills, 
according to EmployeeScreenIQ and its partners.
As I said, screw the drug trade (but don’t really go down this rabbit-hole 
scheme, either).
Lastly, if an employer requests your social media login credentials, and/or 
.
 Mindful Moment  Not every employer will run you through a background screen, but if one 
Everyone  
Back to Preschool
Ah, Toddlerville. The world of my two-year-old and four-year-old daughters is 
a world of playtime. As it should be. Full of experiencing life moment by 
moment, for the first time—playing with me and the Mama (as I affectionately 
call my wife), playing with other kids, exploring their new worlds freely, getting 
the world around them explained, learning to share, and learning empathy, or 
emotional intelligence.6 Preschool starts again soon for my oldest, and my 
youngest will start next year. 
Many of us think that this is Toddlerville normal, but for many disadvantaged 
children and children who grow up in violent, dysfunctional homes, it’s not 
normal.
No playing. No learning. No empathy. No soft skills.
That’s what these things are called—soft skills—the cluster of personality 
traits, social graces, communications, language, personal habits, friendliness, 
and optimism that characterize relationships with other people. These soft 
6  Emotional intelligence (EI) refers to the ability to perceive, control, and evaluate emotions.

Chapter 6 | Background Screens and Assessments 
78
skills can make us, and without them, they can break us later on in life. 
Without them, life can be full of jail time, less pay than your peers, dysfunctional 
socialization, and the like.
Those without the soft skills have a horrible time finding and keeping a job. 
Last year, I heard University of Chicago economist James Heckman on NPR’s 
Planet Money7 talk about the Perry Preschool Program study run back in the 
early 1960s, in which researchers took a bunch of three-year-olds from poor 
families and randomly divided them into two groups. They gave one group 
free access to preschool. Then they followed both groups for 40 years.8
According to Heckman, the results were astonishing. Kids from the preschool 
group were less likely to be arrested and more likely to have a job. Among 
. Other studies show similar results. Heckman argued that using 
. Heckman stated:
I
Heckman also reviewed government job-training programs that 
. He found 
that the success rate for these training programs was nil. Zero. Nada. And, in 
the case of men versus women, the men were worse off than if they hadn’t 
done any training at all. The failure was the result  of a lack of soft skills.
The fact is, if you don’t acquire the soft skills by the time you’re five or six, it 
is much harder  to develop them; by the time you’re a teenager or young 
adult, it’s likely you will never acquire them.
Lastly, according to Heckman, for every $1 spent on high-quality preschool 
for disadvantaged kids, society gets from 7 to 10 percent per year in return 
based on those who develop soft skills, have better interpersonal skills, get 
better jobs and better salaries and have lower crime rates. Now, that’s a 
sound economic investment. If only we could send everyone back to preschool.
No, I’m not trying to make you feel bad if you didn’t go to preschool or if 
you’ve struggled with your soft skills and couldn’t care less about your 
emotional intelligence. I’m starting here as a precursor to employment 
assessments, because many more employers these days are screening for 
7  www.npr.org/blogs/money/2011/08/12/139583385/preschool-the-best-job-training-program
8  http://heckman.uchicago.edu

79
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
collaborative communication team-building skills; they see it as their way to 
build a culture of trust, higher productivity, and sound business growth for the 
organizational ecosystem, not just you and the engineering team you’re 
seeking to join.
Laugh if you want, but these are the firms you’re going to want to work for, 
startup, or established. These are the firms that are going to make it through 
the painful process of change management. I know what you’re thinking: Larry 
Ellison and Steve Jobs couldn’t give a shit about the unicorns and rainbows. 
But, hey, I never said you couldn’t be a hard ass and also know how to 
orchestrate folks from all folds, did I?
 Mindful Moment  Even if you’ve got the hard skills and experience employers want, and your 
today, from upwards of a gazillion different kinds of companies throughout the 
recruiting and HR space. Of course, I’m being facetious, but I only want you 
to know that there are a lot out there. And these assessments are used more 
often by larger companies across industries than by smaller ones and startups 
(unless you’re applying to an actual assessment startup). These applicant and 
employee assessment tools are provided by and/or included in talent-
acquisition systems (also known as applicant-tracking systems and other 
sourcing platforms), and they align with talent management systems (once 
you’re hired), training and development systems, performance review systems, 
workforce management systems, workforce planning systems, succession 
planning systems, leadership development systems, and even outplacement 
services systems. Beyond these software companies, there are assessment 
firms and/or professional services firms that offer all of these tools. That is, 
they use a variety of assessments on the market (including their own) to 
screen applicants and current employees of their client companies.
Some of their names you may have heard of: Taleo, Kenexa, SuccessFactors, 
Hogan Assessments, Development Dimension International, Profiles Interna-
tional, Halogen Software, ReviewSnap, Silkroad, TRACOM Group, Multi-
Health Systems—and again, a gazillion others.

Chapter 6 | Background Screens and Assessments 
80
But this part of the chapter isn’t about who and what these products are, or 
how to game these assessments. (Which I wouldn’t tell you even if I knew 
how, which I don’t.) You can’t game most scientifically valid and reliable 
assessments, anyway. I’m  just going to highlight the primary types of 
assessments you may encounter in your job search. You may have had 
experience with some of these in the past, but whatever the case, be aware 
of what employers are using to help them screen applicants for positions and 
current employees for  promotions.
Emotional Intelligence Assessments
I list this type first because I’m a huge proponent of nurturing emotional 
E
EI) is your ability to be aware of your own emotional 
. This is a big part of the soft 
I’ve been pushing, and individuals (and organizations) with higher EI are 
. The EI assessments may not be something 
. 
. 
Personality Assessments
I’m sure at some point in your career you were forced to take a personality 
test and/or a career assessment and/or an aptitude assessment.  Or maybe 
you took some of these on your own, just to figure out what the heck you’re 
all about. There are many free assessments online these days. Personality, 
career, and aptitude tests help determine what your type of personality is, and 
what your values, interests, and skills are as they relate to your personality. 
These tests are used to assess your aptitude for specific occupations or 
careers. There’s the Color Quiz and DiSC, and the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator, and IQ tests and myriad others.
Cultural Fit and Accountability Assessments
These are newer tools in the assessment market. Many people-development 
and leadership-development firms, some with their own proprietary tools 
and tests and others that license various tools and tests, are offering differing 
flavors for today’s employers.  These assessments evaluate whether or not 

81
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
you’re a team player, if you’re adaptable and can think on your feet, whether 
you’re accountable and take personal responsibility for your actions, and 
other related characteristics. Like other assessments, these can include paper-
based tests, online tests, and essay and/or interview questions.
Cognitive Ability Assessments
Although I’m a writer and a heavy reader, when I took the SAT way back in 
the day, I fell asleep during the reading comprehension part. Don’t tell anybody. 
Anyway, these assessments measure a variety of mental capabilities, such as 
verbal and mathematical ability, reasoning ability, and reading comprehension. 
Historically, cognitive ability tests have been useful predictors of job 
. Cognitive ability tests typically consist of multiple-
. Get those number 2 pencils sharpened.
. Typically, the tested areas are technical 
. You’ll probably run into versions of these where your IT domain 
possess the right body of knowledge. Like cognitive ability assessments, job-
knowledge assessments usually include multiple-choice items via paper test or 
online test, although sometimes there are essay items included in these 
assessments.
Work-Sample Assessments 
Work-sample assessments include tasks or work activities that will, it is 
hoped, mirror the tasks you’ll be required to perform once you’re hired. 
These tests can be constructed to measure almost any job task, but usually 
measure technical tasks, like operating hardware, repairing and troubleshooting 
hardware and software, organizing and planning your work, and other related 
activities.
Skills Inventories and Assessments 
As with many of the other assessment categories  mentioned, skills inventories 
and assessments literally capture information on your primary skills—what 
you excel at, what you’re okay at, and what you need a helluva lot of help at.  

Chapter 6 | Background Screens and Assessments 
82
You’re asked to apply your technical knowledge, programming knowledge, 
systems knowledge—you name it.  You can’t fudge these babies, so brush up 
on what you know (and some of what you don’t) and let your tech magic 
shine.
Employers are all about having adaptable and resilient workforces these days, 
and they are truly focused on three converging factors:
• 
Selecting employees with the right knowledge, skills, expe-
riences, and backgrounds.
• 
Providing the right training and development once candidates 
are on the job.
Establishing an organizational environment that facilitates 
innovation and creativity.
. That’s 
why I  want you to consider all the things that make you what you are and who 
. Remember, even once 
for.
 Mindful Moment  Employers use a variety of assessments to help them make better hiring, 
internal mobility, and promotion decisions. Be aware of what kinds of assessments exist and 
sharpen your those hard and soft skills, much like the number 2 pencils of old. They are still used, 
aren’t they?

c h a p t e r
7
Interviewing,  
In most cases, the best strategy for a job interview is to be fairly honest, 
because the worst thing that can happen is that you won’t get the job and will 
spend the rest of your life foraging for food in the wilderness and seeking 
shelter underneath a tree or the awning of a bowling alley that has gone out of 
business.
—Lemony Snicket (a.k.a., Daniel Handler), from Horseradish
And nobody wants that. In fact, the even better news is that you may not have 
to drive to the place of business that wants to interview you. That means if 
you don’t get the job, you don’t have to slink away to the parking lot and drive 
home to that aforementioned bowling alley.
I’m talking about video interviewing, of which there are two types: recorded 
and live virtual interviewing. Each one is pretty new to the world of work and 
the job-search grind, and both are still finding their way, but they do work and 
more and more employers are utilizing the technologies.
However, let’s first take a step back into maybe your own (perhaps painful) 
recent interviewing experience.
Job Interviews of Yore
Ah, the job interview. The all-important transaction between job candidate 
and potential employer. You’ve been phone-screened and assessed and 
included in the top tier of most qualified applicants. Maybe you’re in the top 
4

Chapter 7 | Interviewing, Part 1  
84
. Whatever the math, you’re ready to be 
.
So, what are the benefits you offer? I’ve got a wife and three kids, 
.”
Ugh, not the way you wanted to open, no matter how long you’ve been 
looking for work. Or maybe the interview starts off on the other foot, in his 
mouth: “Thanks for coming in today. We’re very interested in you for this job. 
Very interested. Wow—did anyone ever tell you how gorgeous you are?”
Idiot. Or maybe you come prepared and ask questions like, “How do you see 
this position collaborating with product marketing to drive B2B channel 
growth?”
Damn, you’re smart. Okay, maybe all of these are a bit contrived, but believe 
it or not they’re not too far from the truth of what I’ve experienced, and I’m 
sure some of you have as well. (No, I wasn’t the guy who told the candidate 
how gorgeous she was. I mean, she was, but that’s not the point.)
And no matter how good employers try to get at interviewing, no matter the 
behavioral technique or casual and personable style (which we’ll talk about 
more later in Chapter 15), no matter how prepared you are for any style of 
interview, we’re only human. And as I’ve already written, really frickin’ messy, 
but yet we do our best to answer the interview questions fully and honestly, 
as well as ask our own questions, and then read between the blurry lines . . . 

85
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
. . . to trust our very gut. Very scientific, you know. For example, I remember 
back in the day when I was with Tapestry.net and I sourced and recruited 
software developers. Here’s how it went after I did an initial phone screen and 
then presented the candidates—people like you—to the hiring managers:
Recruiter (me): 	
This candidate is great. You should interview him.
Hiring Manager: 	 Try again.
Recruiter: 	
Why? What was he missing?
Hiring Manager: 	 I don’t know. The skills were there, but just try again.
Recruiter: 	
[Sigh]
po-tay-to and I say po-tah-to. Right? If he just would’ve given that 
. Right? Well, I spoke 
IT business systems analyst candidate earlier this year, and she said 
I was pulling for 
.”A
ctually, she did count, because after 18 final-stage interviews in the course 
.
Alto to Santa Cruz just to hear that crap? You 
. You would’ve been better off driving to FedEx (what used to 
be Kinko’s, then FedEx Kinko’s) to do a live virtual interview. Alas, companies 
aren’t paying for services like that anymore. Now, they have Cisco TelePresence 
high-definition video conferencing service and are using it for executive 
interviews, collaboration sessions, and other meetings, but not necessarily for 
the myriad other jobs they interview for. 
But the fact is that companies are slowly warming to new options. For 
example, how about Skype, the free video and audio conferencing online 
service? It’s easy to install and use. My family has been using Skype to see and 
talk with family and friends for the past two years now, and I’ve been using it 
on the job to see and talk with colleagues, peers, and management team 
members, whether they’re across the globe or across town. Of course, the 
quality is highly dependent on your Internet connections on all ends of the 
conversation—I’ve been on some doozies where all you can hear is every 
third word and the rushing-air sounds of flying at 32,000 feet.
FaceTime—Apple’s video calling software for MacBooks, iPad, iPods, and 
iPhones—is yet another program I use to talk with family and friends, but I’ve 
never used it in a business context (yet). Lastly, and believe it or not only in 
the past few months, I have been experimenting with Google+ Hangouts, and 
I’ll tell you, it’s pretty damn cool. Especially when you can add cute little 

Chapter 7 | Interviewing, Part 1  
86
animations to your face and head. like a devil clown or a tiara on a Mohawk 
haircut. no, i don’t recommend using those on an interview. 
■ Mindful Moment Think about your best and worst interview experience—what were the 
details that contributed to both results? Were they both in-person interviews, or did either involve 
video? Did video make it better, worse, or are you still on the fence? Think about these things as 
you read on.
everybody’s Doing It. right?
.

87
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
• 
Most companies of over 1,000 employees are using live virtual 
interviewing platforms. Out of those, 25 percent say that 
their hiring and screening efforts have been great and 25 
percent say these efforts have been good.
Overall, larger employers have higher hiring volume and are looking for ways 
to shorten their hiring cycles, saving time and money; but they want more 
secure platforms that they can brand to do so. Because video interviewing has 
been perceived as expensive; at least until recently, smaller organizations have 
been less likely to pay for video interviewing, but that’s changing for many 
reasons I’ll highlight shortly. 
Regardless, more and more companies are digging the fact that video killed 
. For those who get that reference, do not scowl. I 
.2 I know I am.R
ecorded Video InterviewingL
. Let’s 
. Maybe you’ve recorded your own “intro” or 
. Maybe you’ve created a video resume or what’s 
CV (curriculum vitae—a fancy word for resume or 
. (You’ll 
see many more sprout up in the next few years.) If so, then you’re familiar 
with recording yourself talking about yourself in a professional way that you 
hope gets you noticed. These can be useful methods to attract positive 
attention. However, what I’m talking about is something a little different, a 
little more structured, with a standard format.
For example, HireVue, Async Interview, InterviewStream, and Wowzer are 
among the recorded video platforms that hiring companies use to screen 
applicants. One primary way these work is that you apply for a job for company 
X. If company X is interested in you, then a recruiter, hiring manager, or 
whoever’s doing the screening will invite you to the video interviewing 
platform. There, you log into the system, follow the instructions on setting up 
your profile, prepare yourself for the recorded interview process, and even do 
some test recordings to make sure you’re comfortable with all the hip gadgetry 
and functionality. 
Most of us have computers with built-in webcams these days, but for those 
who don’t, the interview firms will send you a webcam, usually for free, to 
2  www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iwuy4hHO3YQ.

Chapter 7 | Interviewing, Part 1  
88
use. Some hiring companies will require you not only to answer a series of 
questions via recorded video clips but also to answer other text-based 
screening questions, assessments, and other screening devices baked into the 
process. 
Live Virtual Interviewing
The counterpart to recorded video interviewing is live virtual interviewing. I 
already mentioned the free services that smaller companies are using—
FaceTime, Skype, and Google+ Hangouts. There are only a few true live 
virtual platforms out there built just for companies to conduct interviews, 
GreenJobInterview being one of the best to date (keep in mind that the free 
. 
. There, you log into the system, follow the instructions on setting up 
. 
S
not recording yourself answering predetermined questions. 
So when are employers utilizing video interviewing in their recruiting 
processes? Primarily they’re using it to screen out-of-the-area candidates. 
Most are also using video interviews after the phone screen as an interim step 
before bringing in a candidate for the face-to-face interview. It allows both you 
and the employer to gather more information and determine fit and interest 
level. Based on what they experience in this fairly new level of screening, the 
hiring folk can decide whether it’s warranted to bring you in again, even begin 
the reference-checking process if they so choose. Meaning they dig you.
Smaller companies use the free video services because, well, they’re free and 
their hiring volume is smaller. There’s no need for a software platform that 
can scale. Larger companies that have more investment in employment brand 
initiatives and Internet security—who can access information inside and 
out—need a scalable, more secure video interview platform (just as they need 
for most of the company-wide software purchases, many of which you’re 
probably been involved in).
Think about it, though: it’s a huge savings for organizations. We’re talking 
upwards of thousands of dollars saved on candidate travel expenses, per many 

89
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
open reqs, when they bring in top applicants for in-person interviews only. 
Video interviewing has allowed organizations to maybe consider candidates 
than that they would otherwise have relegated to the black hole of “We’re 
sorry, but we’re going to pass on you this time due to other, more qualified 
applicants”—if you even get a response. (Sadly, even with all the assessments 
and background screening and interviewing and other filtering methods I 
discuss in this book, hiring is such a subjective human endeavor that many 
times we miss out on the A talent that we somehow mistook for B talent.) 
But new and inexpensive methods of reaching out to more candidates at least 
offers the hope that recruiters and hiring managers will make fewer such 
mistakes.
Also, video interviewing saves you and your prospective employer tons of 
. You don’t have to reorganize your schedule to meet the hiring manager, 
HR, or whoever might be in the office when it’s inconvenient. You 
. U
nless you’re applying for a customer-facing position, like a sales engineer or 
. You won’t have to fake doctor’s 
. Listen, 
we’ve all been there, when we’ve “checked out.” Even when you work for half-
wits, they can pick up on the fact that you’re sick a lot or not meeting your 
deadlines because of your rash of other appointments and responsibilities. 
With video interviewing technology, you can interview conveniently, even at 
a prescribed live interview time—from a mobile device, a laptop, or home 
desktop, or when you get to recording your answers to preset questions from 
the companies interested in you. It doesn’t matter where the company is; as 
I’ve already stated, they could be across the street or around the globe.
The good news? Your stress level goes down when you don’t have to worry 
about making up stories for your current employer so you can get to that 
interview. You’re going to avoid all the many different travel-related 
inconveniences. If the interview is close to home, there’s driving your car 
that’s been overdue for an oil change since the first dot-com boom, or any 
worries that you may run into a co-worker—or God help you, your boss. And 
again, what if the interview is going well—and going long—and you still have 
to drive back to work? With video interviewing you’ll be in the comfort of 
your own homestead. And if the interview is for a company in another state, 
or another continent, you can avoid airport crowds, security shakedowns, 

Chapter 7 | Interviewing, Part 1  
90
flight delays, jet lag, wrinkled interview clothes, and potential out-of-pocket 
expenses (which are never potential, right?).
■ Mindful Moment  More companies are offering video interviewing to potential candidates, 
which saves wear and tear, time, travel, and your nerves, leaving you better mindfully prepared for 
the interview (I can’t help you with the other prep). Smaller companies leverage the free video 
interviewing services while larger companies prefer more scalable and secure video interviewing 
platforms. Either way, you can interview in the comfort of your home office.
A
. Nope, sorry. That’s not how it works (and none 
the B
Folds song3).
H
I know you’re a smarty pants IT pro, but make sure you have 
the right equipment to participate in video interviews: up-to-
date computer, decent webcam (preferably built into the 
computer), decent headset (it doesn’t have to be a mono one 
from 1975, and even though you can use your computer 
speakers and mic, a headset will reduce the white noise 
around you), and solid broadband Internet connection.
• 
Make sure you have a well-lighted, quiet place at home where 
you won’t be interrupted (not a public place like a Starbuck’s 
or Denny’s, please). Ensure that there’s either a blank wall 
behind you or something conservative and non-offensive, like 
pictures or a painting. Don’t fight with me on this one; you do 
not want to distract, only to accent your surroundings. Take 
down the Mötley Crüe and Lady Gaga posters, please.
• 
As in in-person interviews, find out ahead of time what kind 
of attire is appropriate. No, I didn’t say wear a suit and tie or 
a pantsuit; I said find out what is appropriate for that company 
and culture. When in doubt, default to between business 
3 www.youtube.com/watch?v=XxkM_cnjFfw.

91
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
casual and business formal. Remember, Davenport, Iowa, isn’t 
the same as Palo Alto, California. 
• 
If you’re recording your video responses via a platform, you 
usually get the opportunity to redo questions if you aren’t 
happy with your responses. Make sure you understand how 
the system works and use the practice sessions most of them 
allow.
• 
In a live virtual interview platform, you may be interviewed by 
multiple people at once, just as if you were in a panel in-
person interview, so be prepared no matter what!
• 
Here’s something that’s difficult even for those of us who 
have communicated via video chats and interviews: that we 
look at ourselves looking back at us in the little square on the 
screen, and not at our webcam, or at the very least, the 
people on the screen. Look at the camera and the others as 
though you were right there in the room with them. Oh, 
vanity.
• 
Somebody from the hiring company will usually contact you 
to explain the video interview process, recorded or live 
virtual, so make sure to take the call!
• 
Most video interviewing platform companies offer tech 
support services that will ensure you can interact face to 
face, in real time, with the hiring companies (their clients), 
anywhere in the world, and usually 24/7 (or something close 
to that). They’ll tell you what to wear, the best lighting to use, 
and so on. However, the free services do not offer any such 
support. So if you’re being interviewed by somebody via 
Skype, keep that in mind and double-check that everything 
works fine before the scheduled time.
• 
The video interviewing platforms also offer choice of VOIP 
services (computer audio) or a dial-in number so you can use 
a landline or your cellphone. With free services, it’s all 
computer audio (unless they’re using a free conference-call 
service to augment).
• 
Last, and certain not least, become familiar with the 
companies you’re interested in working for before you 
complete the interview. Video interviewing is no less 
important than being on the short list for face time with the 

Chapter 7 | Interviewing, Part 1  
92
hiring manager, so take the time to know how and why you’re 
the guy or gal for the job. Remember, you’re not that cool.
So there you have it. Video interviewing is here to stay, even if video resumes 
aren’t. (I’ll explain why later during online profiles.) If you prepare properly, 
nailing the virtual interviews can get you to that typical final stage of the in-
person interview, and in some cases, the job. This, of course, is contextual to 
the role and level you’re applying for, and whether or not it’s a “remote” 
position or you’ll work onsite. That means the virtual interview could be the 
final interview, and then you’re hired. We hope.
■ Mindful Moment  Just as in an in-person interview, take the time to prepare for your video 
n

pa r t
II
Who You Know
Recognition

c h a p t e r
8
Building an 
Online Profile
The reports of my death have been greatly exaggerated.
—Mark TwainO
kay, the resume is not dead yet, but I want it to die.
I
keeping it alive, making it better and making it work for you, the job seeker. 
To all my friends in this industry, please forgive me, as I also understand it’s 
probably not going anywhere for years to come. (And for those of you who 
are paying for professional resume and cover letter services, ask them if they 
can help you with your online profile.) I’ve had many recruiters tell me, “The 
resume is not dead. Trust me, it’s not dead.”
Again, I understand, but I still want the painfully ubiquitous resume to die a 
horrible death.
What’s Wrong with Resumes?
Why a painful death? Because the resume is a self-serving piece of inconsistently 
formatted and fudged professional drivel that really doesn’t help employers 
assess and hire for true quality of fit. Just ask any background-screening firm 
that does employment and education verifications. Remember that in Chapter 
6, I said nearly 50 percent of all candidates distort or exaggerate information 
on their resumes. That’s half of you. Damn.

Chapter 8 | Building an Online Profile
96
Sure, the resume helps employers sift and sort to reach the short list, but it’s 
a short list that’s almost half fabrication, on  average. And if you as the job 
seeker take that risk and blatantly lie or embellish your resume, and your 
prospective employer uncovers it, you are out of luck no matter what hot 
skills you have that they need.
Yes, many of us have stretched the truth at one time or another as it relates 
to our skills, experience, and achievements, but unfortunately embellishing 
the truth is still fabrication. It doesn’t make it any better than an outright lie, 
especially if you’re telling me you’ve been programming native iPhone and 
Android apps for the past six months, when you really only took an online 
course six months ago and helped to make one silly, farting app, one that isn’t 
.
IT pro of the 
. Silicon Valley has struggled to recruit and retain 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, the number of women working in 
. And according to Google’s own 
. These facts were referenced in a 
recent New York Times article about Google and the falling number of women 
in IT leadership.1 So ladies, flaunt those achievements. (I know—interesting 
choice of word, flaunt. But don’t look at me. Men should promote their 
achievements, and women should flaunt theirs?)
So what, then, do we use instead of this black-magic resume full of lies and 
deceit, or one that doesn’t pump you up enough?
Look to LinkedIn
Your online professional profile, of course. The one you better have completely 
up to date on LinkedIn, the granddaddy and grandmamma of online professional 
networks, where thousands of recruiting professionals are scouring and 
sourcing every day. (And I’m not even talking about the majority of recruiting 
pros who search for other online information about you across the Internet 
and at other social networks.) And by the way, much of the same advice you 
get about building your resume applies to the online profile as well, which is 
1 www.nytimes.com/2012/08/23/technology/in-googles-inner-circle-a-falling-number-of-women.
html?pagewanted=all.

97
.

Chapter 8 | Building an Online Profile
98
■ Mindful Moment Do you have an online professional profile  on LinkedIn? Do you use the 
standard and easily updated format  to promote and flaunt your skills, experience, and achieve-
ments? Or are you still cobbling together various iterations of your resume to then upload and 
email? Think about the benefits of having an online profile and read on.
Just the Facts, Jack. But First, the Story
I’ve seen dozens of resume formats over the years. Some sport simple, 
straightforward sections, and others have fancy schmancy formatting. There 
are many facets to context, even when it’s cubic zirconia, which is again why I 
. Since LinkedIn has set the standard here, this 
I’m going to focus on in this chapter. By no means am I a LinkedIn 
I’ve got plenty of industry friends who are, though. But I am an online 
I know it works and is more efficient than today’s 
. Yes, at the executive level it’s a different story; usually there are 
. As of 
LinkedIn has executive members from all 2011 Fortune 500 
Fortune 
. So there you go.
I’ll cover in this chapter, but not 
. Just enough to get you started or for you to update your current 
profile. (Which you probably haven’t touched since your last job search, right?)
Your Summary
Let’s start off with your story. Yep, your story—what I think is one of the 
biggest differentiators for you and your career aspirations, currently employed 
or not. You know that section in your LinkedIn profile called “Summary”? 
Well, that’s where we’re going to start. Think of a universal, all-purpose cover 
letter, one that conveys succinctly who you are in the great world of work at 
this very moment. Remember, and I’m going to tell you this more than once 
going forward, you can and should update your profile summary at least once 
a quarter if you’re gainfully employed and more regularly if you are actively 
seeking. 
Many of my recruiter friends concur. Your summary is especially the place in 
your profile where you highlight your story:
• 
Why you are where you currently are.
• 
What your current role is and where it is.
• 
Where you came from briefly, in the context of your skills, 
experience, and achievements.

99
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
• 
What your professional goals are.
• 
What your professional (and even personal, since they’re 
intertwined) philosophies are. (But that doesn’t mean 
espousing your extreme political or religious views. I’m all for 
transparency, but save the rants for your late-night blog 
posts.)
• 
What your hobbies and other personal interests are (there 
are other sections for interests and volunteering details).
• 
A little personality feature, injected here and there (without 
going over the top).K
eep it scannable, though. Too long and it won’t get read. You have only a few 
. N
ow, that doesn’t mean you can’t go longer, as in a traditional cover letter, but 
. Yes, you’ll get picked up in searches with the right keywords, which I’ll 
. Figure 8-1 shows an example of a LinkedIn profile 
.H
ere’s my summary. No judging or wagering, please.
For nearly 13 years, I’ve been a human resource and recruiting B2B software and 
services marketing strategist, business development and sales professional, evangelist, 
entrepreneur, analyst, advisor, manager, and writer.
My extensive knowledge of nearly 25 years in business development, marketing, 
sales, public relations, and more recently social media best practices, and my 
thorough understanding of the human resource and recruiting marketplace, has 
helped hundreds of B2B software and services companies grow their businesses on 
some level. I’ve increased visibility, thought leadership, and sales for most of the 
companies I’ve worked with and for.
I currently lead global messaging, product marketing, and go-to-market strategy for 
BraveNewTalent, the leading social platform where organizations build talent 
communities around relevant topics that attract, engage and develop their next-
generation workforce from future, current and past employees. 
Previously I was the Chief Strategy Officer at HRmarketer.com, an HR B2B marketing 
software and services firm. I’m also an advisor to JobEscrow, pioneers and inventors 
of the new “Employment Escrow” industry, as well as on the board of referalbon.us 
and co-founder of the TalentCulture “world of work” community that includes the 
highly popular weekly Twitter Chat #TChat. 

Chapter 8 | Building an Online Profile
100
I’ve been a top social influencer in leadership, human resources, talent management, 
and recruiting, as well as a prolific “HR business” blogger since 2004. I’ve authored 
multiple articles on marketing, business development, HR, recruiting, and leadership 
and am finishing a book titled Tech Job Hunt Handbook to be released at the end 
of the year. I speak at HR and recruiting industry events, and I also moderate HR/
recruiting/marketing-related webinars and roundtables. 
Lastly, I’m a proud father of two beautiful girls and loving husband to my beautiful 
wife. I enjoy reading and running, and I write regularly about fatherhood, responsible 
parenting, and domestic violence awareness and prevention.
Now, if your profile doesn’t have a “story” summary, it doesn’t mean you 
won’t be found and possibly even recruited, or that you won’t stand out from 
. A short bulleted list of accomplishments is better than a stick in 
. However, when you share your story in 
. 
Figure 8-1. Linked Profile and Summary Section. Courtesy of LinkedIn.com.

101
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Your Previous Jobs, Titles, and Descriptions
This one’s easy and pretty much the same information you’ve been embedding 
in your resumes for years—your current and previous employers, current and 
previous job titles, and current and previous job descriptions. Make sure your 
descriptions capture the most important points of what the company did/
does, what your role is/was, and any brief accomplishments you’ve had. 
Your Specialties, Skills, and Expertise  
(Think Key Words)
For any of you who are SEO gurus, or at least know enough to be dangerous 
I do, then you know to embed the right word combinations in your 
. This includes the specialties section and the skills and expertise 
Figure 8-2).
Figure 8-2. LinkedIn Skills & Expertise Section. Courtesy of LinkedIn.com.

Chapter 8 | Building an Online Profile
102
There is also the ability to now to list previous work samples and projects in 
your LinkedIn profile, which details and accentuates your skills and experience. 
You can also showcase your blogs and the websites you contribute to by 
feeding them into your profile. You can highlight your volunteer work, the 
professional organizations you belong to, any special awards and honors 
you’ve received, and much more. Fill in all those sections as well!
Your Education (even If It’s Incomplete)
Remember in Chapters 2 and 3 when I talked about going back to school and 
adding to your skill set? Well, make sure to tout that educational background 
in your profile, whether it’s completed or not, or if it’s still in progress.
Headline
I recommend reviewing a few other 
. It’s the 
.
H
Director of Product Marketing at BraveNewTalent
I currently do and whom I work for, but it could’ve been 
“E
I were in the 
market for a job. Whatever you put there, make  sure it summarizes who you 
are professionally, in a few key words.
And, of Course, Your Headshot
I don’t remember where the heck I heard  that men shouldn’t smile in their 
professional headshots, online or in print, but that women should. (Are we 
back to the promote versus flaunt choice?) They say that men shouldn’t smile 
because it’s creepy. Are you frickin’ serious? You know what’s creepy? Not 
putting any picture at all in your profiles. That’s creepy. And then adding to 
that remaining anonymous in your social network activity—when you’re 
posting blogs anonymously, commenting on other blogs anonymously, 
tweeting anonymously, etc. That’s really creepy. I certainly don’t want to 
offend any of the fine folk in the Anonymous.3 Really, I don’t. But it’s creepy, 
kids. Let me see the whites of your eyes. Please.
3  Anonymous is a loosely associated hacktivist group. It originated in 2003 on the imageboard 
4chan, representing the concept of many online and offline community users simultaneously 
existing as an anarchic, digitized global brain.

103
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Anyway, the idea that men shouldn’t smile in their online profile pictures is 
bullshit. See Figure 8-1—that’s me smiling. If I’m creepy to you, then so be it. 
But I’m not. Really, I’m not. Let’s have a group hug now, shall we?
Just make sure your headshot is professional looking, even if you appear 
casually dressed, as I do. It’s contextual for what you do, the industry you 
work in, and what you’re looking to do. If you’re looking for IT work in a 
conservative company, which you’ll know because of the research you have 
done (which we’ll get to), then maybe you should wear a coat and tie, or a 
business suit if you’re a woman (smiling, of course).
There’s the argument that hiring managers will make discriminatory selection 
decisions based on what you look like, so you should instead choose to not 
. Listen, we’re visual beings, and the fact is you’re going to be seen 
. If your tech skills, experience, and 
. Again, this is why 
. 
.R
ecommendations and Accolades
the standard three to five references you offer “on request” for your resume. 
Those are the LinkedIn recommendations you ask your current and previous 
employers, colleagues, collaborators, clients, customers, mentors, teachers, 
and/or friends to give you, which you in turn should always reciprocate. You 
simply ask someone in your LinkedIn network to provide a brief but glowing 
recommendation of you and the work you’ve done. 
How valuable are these recommendations? Well, that depends on what the 
recommendations say, who gave them, who’s reviewing them, and so on. But 
the consensus is that there is some additive, subjective value to them. It tells 
the recruiters and hiring managers that you were liked, were a pleasure to 
work with, and accomplished many different things at the organizations you 
worked for (which you’ve already been touting). It’s another part of the 
personality puzzle your prospective employers are trying to put together. 
Again, they’re subjective and aren’t truly valuable screening tools, but these 
recommendations are read and they can help differentiate you from other 
applicants who don’t have recommendations.

Chapter 8 | Building an Online Profile
104
And is it really that bad that you don’t have any recommendations? Most 
experts say “not necessarily,” since your skills, experience, and achievements  
will  shine through and, it is hoped, get you the interview.
How many recommendations are too many? I laugh when hear career 
management experts say that people with over 40 or 50 recommendations 
are “awfully showy.” What the hell does that mean? That’s bullshit, as far as 
I’m concerned. I’ve got that many; I’m in marketing, for God’s sake, and I 
understand the value of social networking in the 21st century. There are rough 
roads through the world of work these days, so smile really big and toot the 
hell out of your horn—as long as you back up the honking. Recommendations 
are a way to do that, to receive previous employer and peer validation that 
you can share on with other prospective employers and peers (even if you 
.
O
. Conversely, you can 
. Right?
A
. I can’t emphasize 
. Give recommendations to those who gave to you a recom-
. That’s one of the ultimate returns of investing in professional 
.
Oh, Yeah—You’ve Got to Connect
So, if you haven’t already figured it out, and I’m sure you have, to get the most 
out of having an online profile on a site like LinkedIn (besides having a glorified 
electronic resume), you need to connect. That means searching and finding 
your current and previous employers, supervisors, colleagues, collaborators, 
clients, customers, mentors, teachers, and/or friends—and sending them an 
invite to connect. You’ll be sought out as well, because we all have friends 
who are changing jobs, looking for jobs, getting promoted—you name it, they 
want to connect to share. You should do the same.
You’ve probably noticed that if you already have a LinkedIn profile, and have 
been contacted by recruiters, that many of the hiring pros have 500+ 
connections. Don’t feel insignificant if you don’t have that many, or even 100. 
It’s more about creating a relevant professional network that will help you help 
them help you over time. So get connected and make the most of your online 
profile. 

105
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
I always tell people to keep their windows of opportunity open, because they 
can never know what might present itself, no matter how happy they currently 
are. That’s why I recommend you update your profile at least once per quarter. 
Don’t frickin’ look at me that way. Just do it. Trust me.
A Word About Branching Out
Are there other professional networks out there like LinkedIn? you ask. Yes, 
there are. Although they are not as widely adopted as LinkedIn, and some 
have a different recruiting and career development purpose that I’ll talk about 
in later chapters, there are other professional networks like BranchOut. B
ranchOut is known as the “LinkedIn on Facebook”—because that’s what it 
. They currently have over 30 million registered users and over 500 million 
. BranchOut allows users in more than 200 countries to 
 S
LinkedIn, BranchOut gives you the ability to 
Facebook 
. This is important  because many Facebook users still prefer a 
.”A
lso important to note is that you cannot simply import your LinkedIn profile 
to create a BranchOut profile. Why? LinkedIn claimed it cut off the application 
programming interface (API) because BranchOut violated their Terms of 
Service, which is probably the case. But the competitive nature of these firms 
is crystal clear;  LinkedIn got the jump on things, but with nearly 1 billion 
registered users worldwide on Facebook, BranchOut is  going strong, as well 
(as does Facebook—watch what happens with their Social Jobs Initiative and 
more in 2013). Whatever you choose to do, be consistent across networks 
with your professional online profiles. 
That is all. 
■ Mindful Moment  When putting your LinkedIn profile together,  focus on your summary;  jobs, 
titles, and descriptions;  specialties; skills and expertise;  education; professional headline; and of 
course, a professional headshot of you smiling. I want to see it, so don’t try to pull a frowning fast 
one.

Chapter 8 | Building an Online Profile
106
Wait, What?
I know, I know. You really need to polish up that prettily formatted resume. 
Again I say, throw it the hell away. The online profile is the future. Trust me. 
For those of you who already have an online career profile that you manage 
(as well as you employers who source and recruit online and value the online 
profile over the resume), please evangelize to accelerate change in the rest of 
the world.
In fact, the entire career management industry can help by sharing some of 
the best practices for the resume that can, and should, be applied to the 
online profile, as follows:
Consistent standard layout for portability
Concise professional summary
Highlighted accomplishment relevant to the bottom line
Timeline of professional activities, with any gaps accounted 
for 
Search-optimized profile with key words for which you want 
to be found 
Multiple online recommendations 
Regularly updated, whether looking for a job or not
My progressive HR and recruiting practitioner friends have pointed out on 
more than one occasion that most IT job seekers who frequent online 
professional and personal social haunts are more likely to manage their career 
profiles online. Amen to that. They know, as we know, that there thousands 
of recruiting and hiring professionals scouring the online profiles every day. 
Your professional connections  could also be the back doors into the 
employers you’re interested in working for, as well as get you introduced to 
those folks you don’t know.
So do me a favor, oh digital native brothers and sisters, online savvy job 
seekers, hiring practitioners, career management professionals, and employers 
alike: share these recommendations with folks who may still write their 
resumes in longhand and then type them on an IBM Selectric III typewriter. 
Let’s get everyone to know the power of the online profile. The resume is 
dead! Long live the online profile!
■ Mindful Moment  Why do you keep creating so much work for yourself with the resume? 
You’re an IT pro. Think about it. Online professional profiles are the future.

C h A P T e r
9
Researching 
Some world views are spacious, and some are merely spaced.
—neil Peart, writer and rock musician
amn, i was wet behind the ears.1
would tell me just how much every single early morning i came to work. My 
only saving grace was the sweet rock that blared from the banged-up radio 
with a makeshift hanger antenna; the first song i heard the very first morning 
of work was billy squier’s “in the dark.”
of course i felt this way; i was young and inexperienced and prior to this i had 
a paper route. in fact, i wasn’t quite 16 yet when the non-union supermarket 
hired me to work in the produce department. i knew nothing about the 
market, the management team, my future co-workers, working conditions, 
perks—all i knew was that i’d be paid minimum wage, which was $3.35 per 
hour.
but i had my eye on the prize—my first car—a 1972 two-toned, red-and-
white chevrolet el camino with 175 horses under the hood, my first and only 
muscle car. all summer long, i worked split shifts from 6 to 10 in the morning, 
and then again from 3 to 7 at night.
i wasn’t fully aware that we were in a recession and unemployment hovered 
at 7.5 percent, and only a year and a half later we’d be at almost 11 percent 
.

Chapter 9 | Researching Employers
108
unemployment with nearly 11 million people out of work. What I did learn 
that year was that there were two symbiotic economic systems in California’s 
Central Valley bread basket—(illegal) Mexican migrant labor that worked the 
farms, and the rest of us; the shadow economy and the legitimate economy.
The crossroads for me was our back dock behind the supermarket, where all 
produce deliveries were made daily. Our large and offensively snarky produce 
manager haggled, purchased, and rejected the orders delivered to that back 
dock. Usually it was the local farmers who delivered their goods, but 
sometimes it was the (illegal and legal) foremen who delivered the produce 
orders.
I learned from the latter that they labored in crappy working conditions out 
. It depressed me a little, but again, I had my eye 
. (I did eventually get that El Camino, and I worked at the 
.) I learned quickly, though, that even 
I worked in, paychecks and taxes and all, wasn’t so 
I did in that beautiful car/truck. 
El Camino anyway?) 
I
I
I had just restocked the 
one, I worked there for two years. I imagine some of you have stayed in 
uncomfortable work environments during the past few years, unless you were 
laid off, waiting for tech jobs to start heating up again and your particular skill 
set is in demand. 
Stay Out of the Shadows
Nobody wants to work in misery, to nearly (or actually) cry after every long, 
strenuous day. Our work and personal lives are so tightly knit these days, that 
what we do is what we are is how happy we might or might not be. No one 
wants to work in a toxic environment; we want to love the work we do and 
hopefully enjoy the people we do the work with. This is why researching 
where you want to work next is so vitally important. You really must learn 
everything you can about a company you’re interested in prior to getting a 
query, a call, or an interview.
You want to be happier, but stay away from creepier, in the sense that there’s 
an ever-growing shadow economy out there today, including many entities 
that need talented IT pros such as yourself. 

109
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
For example, maybe you’ve heard that anyone can set up a company with as 
little as $600, with no proper identification, a company that can then rent a 
board and faux investors. You can create a shell company that can be run, 
anonymously, and sell whatever products and services you want—all the while 
avoiding paying corporate taxes in the United States. This is the proverbial 
offshore tax shelter we hear about based in Belize or Seychelles or Cyprus or 
the Cayman Islands.2
Incidentally, according to recent economic reports,3 the United States is the 
easiest place to set up a shadow company, with at least four states requiring 
no proper identification at all, which is against international law established by 
the United States and Europe. 
. There are, ahem, you know, some people who will pay you in hard 
. Hey, work is work is work, while “legal” corporations 
. In fact, it’s been reported that 
GDP comes from off-the-books transactions.4 
Screw the legitimate job search, I’m offshoring B
ut don’t go there.A
ll kidding aside, this is an unfortunate reality check: sometimes the best of 
and outdated tax and regulatory system, as opposed to helping transform the 
economic climate into a more transparent web of interactions that improves 
global commerce and job creation. 
I know it’s tempting. Dammit, if it wasn’t for those pesky, messy, meddling 
humans, the world of work would actually work flawlessly. We’d work together 
happily and collaboratively, without deceit, harassment, or discrimination. 
We’d all be accountable and personally responsible and have each other’s 
backs, we’d have reciprocal respect with our leaders, and reality TV would not 
be a reality.
There is lots of money to be made in tech—both in the shadow world and the 
legit world—but what’s money if you’re miserable? Again, this is why the 
employer research is so frickin’ important.
2 You still must, of course, pay all taxes due the U.S. government. 
3 www.nytimes.com/2012/07/29/magazine/my-big-fat-belizean-singaporean-bank-account.html 
4 www.freakonomics.com/2012/08/30/how-deep-is-the-shadow-economy-a-new-
freakonomics-radio-podcast/

Chapter 9 | Researching Employers
110
Look for the Smudged Glass
In the “world of work” I’ve worked in and written about for the past 13 years, 
we talk all about not-so-happy knowledge workers in global corporate offices 
big and small longing for something else. Go figure, right? Two downturns 
later, a contentious political and stagnant job environment, and little if any pay 
raises (with the exception of a stellar few of you) and you’ve got us mad as 
hell. In fact, according to the latest Gallup Employee Engagement Index 
information,5 70 percent of American workers are “not engaged” or “actively 
disengaged” in their work, meaning that productivity and loyalty to the work 
and teams goes to hell. Also according to the index report, “Americans who 
have at least some college education are significantly less likely to be engaged 
.”
IT pros who most likely have some if not a lot 
. Maybe you’ve worked for 
crappy conditions out in 
, and you’re ready to go window shopping. How do 
Internet now has a lot of valid data behind it, and that 
. 
I
. 
I’ll even go out on a “social” limb here and say that companies with good 
career opportunities and good workplace cultures are those that understand 
and embrace employment brand marketing, and have smudged glass doors. 
No need to scratch your heads, especially if you’re a job seeker. Let me 
explain.
■ Mindful Moment  There’s quite a bit of “sketchy” in the modern workplace today, both in 
shadow and the legit. Even with tech booming, knowing how a company culture functions, and 
what its dysfunctions are, can make a huge difference in your daily happiness and productivity. 
Dysfunction doesn’t scale otherwise and affects whether or not you want to work there, or stay 
there. Think about the time you cried after a long day of programming or sys admining. 
5 www.gallup.com/poll/155924/mondays-not-blue-engaged-employees.aspx

111
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
The Joys of Work–Life  
Window Shopping
Here’s how to get some insights into a potential employer. First, take a look 
at the company’s career page, Facebook corporate page, or any social point 
of presence. Wait, they don’t have any? Then I say move along unless there’s 
another professionally compelling reason for you to stay. I mean, corporate 
brands have struggled for the longest time to market their workplace cultures. 
If they feel like they don’t need to do it, that workers should feel honored that 
they were phone screened in the first place, then interviewed, and then 
offered a job at below market value (except in the Valley), forget it. You don’t 
want to work for a company like this. There are plenty of other employers, 
.F
Look at the people in the pictures on their website—do 
Are there any video testimonials from real people who D
oes it feel condescending? H
ave you seen the funny “Condescending Corporate Brand Page” on 
Facebook? It’s a comical look at the thin employer brand that’s pushed in the 
general corporate world, again with the happy stock photo models jumping in 
the air together because they’re so damn excited to be working together.
Funny, but true. How many of these pages have you seen across sites online, 
including the company’s own career site? I say if you’re not going to keep it 
real with real folk, don’t keep it at all. Wait, you’re paying that much for your 
mobile application developers? Well, okay…
Hey, don’t get distracted by the shiny objects. Stay focused with me. These 
career sites should also be mobile and social-friendly, which as you know 
means regardless of what device you’re using, you can check them and their 
jobs out easily and then share them easily across your online social networks. 
Remember, happy (passionate and hardworking) employees make for great 
employment branding, creative employment branding, great customer service, 
and ultimately overall product and service brand marketing. So when you see 
it—and trust me, you’ll know if it’s for real 9 times out of 10—then that’s 
really good.

Chapter 9 | Researching Employers
112
Now, if the employers are spouting jargon-filled rhetoric about work–life 
balance in their job descriptions, run in the opposite direction. How many 
times have we all read this drivel and thought, “Yeah, I’ve heard that before. 
Working 60+ hours per week and you want me to work on Labor Day? 
C’mon.”
No, it’s more like finding the right employer that gets integrating our 
professional and personal lives, because that’s the reality of modern life. Both 
worlds are highly intertwined, and it’s only the mindful presence of being in 
each appropriately when sometimes we find Zen—that moment of harmonic 
convergence in our lives when all things family, friends, co-workers, employers, 
work, and life become one.
L
Book Air on my lap and the hotspot 
. Fredrickson’s house rising up in the air via hundreds of 
Up.
. But we wouldn’t give it 
China because the intrinsic rewards outweigh the work–
. 
A
.
If I’m your employer, I’m going to do everything I can to foster the emotional 
connectivity and encourage the internal motivational drive, as well as move 
the motivation needle externally with “rewards” when appropriate. But I 
want you to work hard, I want results, I’m going to focus on pay-for-
performance, and if your position allows, I’m going to let you do it as you see 
fit (when, where, and how). I will be empathic and trust you, but I will not be 
a pushover.
And if you’re the employee, you’re going to demand flexibility in exchange for 
regular, quality output whenever, wherever, and however you’re doing it. You 
want to take time off when you need it, regardless of the reason, and you 
don’t want to be questioned. You want empathy and their trust and you will 
reciprocate. You want to to be pushed and pulled and challenged to learn as 
long as you’re enjoying what you’re doing in the context of what you’re doing 
(and the company’s thriving, of course).
That’s what we need to read on the career sites and in the job descriptions. 
Let’s find the employers that embrace the mindful workplace presence of 
frenetic Zen.

113
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Earlier this year, Glassdoor,6 a service I’m going reference again in this chapter, 
released its second annual Top 25 Companies for Work–Life Balance report7 
recognizing companies that offer the best balance between work and personal 
life. The report is based entirely on feedback shared by the employees 
themselves within the past year. The top five companies were MITRE, North 
Highland, Agilent Technologies, SAS Institute, and CareerBuilder. 
Some of your best referrals come from your peers, right? So I recommend 
that you check out companies like these and others that get good reviews, 
because they’re the ones that get it, at least most of the time. You use Yelp 
for food, don’t you?
 Mindful Moment  When window shopping for new employers, look for the real people and H
ave you reviewed your prospective company LinkedIn and BranchOut 
second-degree contact you might be able to get introduced to? The cool thing 
is that most professional networks show you who the people are via their 
photos and avatars. You might even see someone you know, but didn’t know 
you knew. 
You should make the time to do this because it’s still about who you know. 
Referrals are still one of the best ways to get noticed and maybe even get your 
foot in the door. In fact, you should research those organizations you’re 
interested in via all your professional social networks of choice, including 
LinkedIn, Facebook (and BranchOut), Twitter, Quora, GitHub, Stack Overflow, 
and more to find out who you might be connected to directly and even 
indirectly and what it is they might be saying about the companies you’re 
interested in. (Or what they’re not saying—you know, read between the 
lines.) Even better, reach out to these connections and ask them specifically 
about the companies you’re interested in. What are the recruiters and hiring 
6  An online social jobs and career community that helps employees, job seekers, employers, 
and recruiters find and share detailed information about specific jobs and companies across 
the globe.
7  www.glassdoor.com/Top-Companies-for-Work-Life-Balance-LST_KQ0,35.htm

Chapter 9 | Researching Employers
114
managers like (unless they’ve already been beating down your LinkedIn doors)? 
What are the pay and benefits like? What is the integrated work–life culture 
like? And so on. 
Find out as much as you can from your connections about who influences the 
applicant-selection decisions and do your best to connect with those people 
and share your interest in said jobs. Don’t overwhelm the contacts you know 
(and especially those you don’t), but don’t underwhelm them, either, by simply 
applying on the corporate career page—you know, the one with the pretty 
model stock photos offering images of faux Zen-like work–life balance.
Not everybody you find is going to be happy about where they work or have 
worked. In fact, we live between two worlds of business today—one where 
. And then 
. This is the one we’ve been working in for a long, 
. The one with the better alignment and balance is the one who 
.
A
. Use sites like the ones I describe next, 
.
■ Mindful Moment  Remember, it’s still about who you know. Use your professional “social” 
network connections to learn more about the companies and jobs you’re interested in before you 
go through the arduous application process.
Your Career Search Yelps (and Gulps)
If you’re familiar with Yelp, you know you can check out local businesses and 
read reviews from fellow consumers about what they think of those same 
businesses’ products and services. The Internet has gloriously democratized 
our shopping behavior and that’s a good thing. World-of-work websites like 
Vault and Glassdoor have done the same for those of us looking for work. 
These sites provide peer-reviewed company information for best and worst 
places to work—including the how, where, when, and why. They also include 
industry and profession rankings, resume and cover letter writing best 
practices (remember mine is the online profile), education recommendations, 
job listings, and lots of other career development information.

115
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Vault
Vault is the older of the two sites I’m referencing, launched in 1996 (see 
Figure 9-1). Ever since, they’ve touted themselves as the place for career 
intelligence. First, you have to register to access the industry blogs and 
newsletters, the company and profession overviews, and the job listings. 
That’s free, but to get even more intelligence, you’ve got to pony up about 
$10 per month for access. Either way there’s tons of information, too much 
information actually, which is indicative of the data firehoses that drown us 
daily. If you know anything about the psychology and economics of scarce 
attention, you know that the more that’s presented to us, the less we 
consume. Choose your career intelligence wisely with a site like Vault.
Figure 9-1. Vault. Courtesy of Vault.com.
Glassdoor
Glassdoor is a much newer career management portal, founded in 2007 and 
launched in 2008 (see Figure 9-2). What’s interesting about this site, and why 
I like it as well, is that you sign up for free, preferably with your Facebook 
account, as more than likely it’s integrated as a Facebook technology partner 
and logging in will make for a much better user experience. Once you sign in 
for the first time, you get full access to salaries, reviews, and interviews for 
one month. After that, you can get unlimited access if you simply post an 
anonymous salary, company review, or interview experience of your own. 

Chapter 9 | Researching Employers
116
A-ha! Yes, that’s one way they build out their peer-reviewed information. 
Much of the same career development information is available as in Vault, 
including career advice from a great group of professionals (I used to write for 
the Glassdoor blog in full disclosure), but you’ll also get interview reviews, 
which is really unique, giving you insight as to how companies run their 
interviews, what they ask, and what you should prepare for prior to having a 
video in-person interview. Also, when you sign-in via Facebook you get to see 
where your connections work and maybe get an intro or more like you can 
do when using LinkedIn and BranchOut. 
Figure 9-2. Glassdoor. Courtesy of Glassdoor.com.
Yes, we all want to see inside and understand what makes the companies 
we’re interested tick, and the quicker the better. A job search is a full-time job 
in itself, and most of us don’t have a lot of time to do research on the best 
places to work, so the more transparent and real a company’s guts is, the 
easier the research and the targeting. Of course, there’s no guarantee you’ll 
get the job, and it’ll still come down to who is the most qualified time and 
time again, but doing your homework can give you the edge. Going in blind 
can screw your chances. 
Keep in mind that whatever peer reviews you read about what it’s like to 
work in company X or work for boss Y aren’t the most objective insights 
you’ll ever read. Everybody likes to be liked, and even though these reviews 

117
.
 Mindful Moment To get a firehose of great company, profession, industry, and career 

c h a p t e r
10
Leverage Your 
More business decisions occur over lunch and dinner than at any other time, 
yet no MBA courses are given on the subject.
—Peter Drucker
Have you ever been to a Pink Slip Party? At these networking events, the 
recently laid off mingle with recruiters and employers. 
These events became popular during the dot-com downturn in the early 
2000s, and have continued ever since. Or maybe you’ve gone to Chamber of 
Commerce mixers, or career fairs, or tech conferences—all of these activities 
help to make up the greater body of business and professional networking. 
But it’s all personal, all the time, no doubt about that.
Many of you have had career coaches or professional mentors throughout 
your IT incarnations, and I’ll bet one of the primary world of work mantras 
you’ve had beaten into your bright but obstinate skulls (I’m with you there) is 
this one: “It’s not what you know, it’s who you know.” Ack, right? Add to that, 
“It’s not what you know, it’s who you know and how you leverage, you know, 
who you know.” And how you reciprocate—blah, blah, blah. 
However, this is the very nature of networking, and it’s not new just because 
of all things shiny social media today; it’s a misnomer that social recruiting is 

Chapter 10 | Leverage Your Network, and Their Networks
120
Internet 
. Networking by its very nature is a highly personal thing 
Rolodexes have been both 
.
K
Drucker quote in mind from the start of this chapter, social 
 truly came on the scene 40 years before we used the Mosaic 
client for earlier communication protocols such as FTP, NNTP, and Gopher, 
and then the Mosaic browser to publicly surf the Web and find online 
professional networks. Breakfast meetings, lunch meetings, and dinner 
meetings all allowed us to meet, network, and do business with one another 
while getting really tanked and higher than a drunken skunk. The AMC show 
Mad Men popularized the hyper-fiction reality that once was, but my ex-
father-in-law lived some of that in the 1960s in San Francisco. How did people 
not pass out and sleep all afternoon before the dinner drinking—I mean 
meeting?
Trade shows, conferences, seminars, coffee shops, golf courses, open houses, 
supermarkets, movie theaters, churches, synagogues, mosques, parks, 
playgrounds, political rallies, the DMV—I could go on and on, but you get the 
point, right? Networking can and does happen in nearly every social 
“community” aspect of life. Nothing new there, except that now that face-to-
face fire is fueled by the interconnectedness that online networks bring us 
today. 
Computers went from filling a football field to a single room to computing on 
a single server the size of a flying toaster (remember those screen savers?), 
and managing data and communications has changed dramatically. In my 

121
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
lifetime alone, I’ve gone from using a rotary telephone and file cabinets full of 
paper to using a smart phone as a computer and storing terabytes of data in 
the cloud.
It’s a crazy, cool science fiction world, and we live and breathe it!
When I worked at San Jose State University in the late 1980s and early 1990s, 
we were already online using email, managing a variety of interdepartmental 
data via the intranet and the Gopher protocol, and connecting and collaborating 
with an ever-growing network of other professionals at universities around 
the world. Then, of course, there were the online networking origins pre-
Internet that included IBM’s SHARE and UNIX groups, Compuserve, AOL, 
and the Yahoo! User Groups. Any of you “old school” techies out there know 
I’m talking about. These were the new, hip, and cool ways of networking 
. Recruiters caught on quickly, jumping into these IT user 
. 
. Applicant tracking systems were born to better track your 
. This was when I entered the HR and recruiting tech 
.net. We touted talent communities 
ested qualified applicants (IQA). Our talent communities (as we called them, 
something I’ll talk more about later on) consisted of databases of software 
developers, IT pros, and bilingual Japanese professionals (which was the 
primary origin of the company). But they weren’t really networked communities 
because there was only one-way communication with them—meaning we 
sent them job postings from our paying employers. Some applied, and we 
screened and presented the short lists to our clients. We served as a front 
end for the growing-but-new talent acquisition software market.
Lastly we entered the social and professional networking world we know 
today. This, of course, started in 2004 with LinkedIn, and then bloomed into 
Facebook, Twitter (more a communications channel than network, mind 
you), the Ning networks, Glassdoor, GitHub, Stack Overflow, Quora, Focus, 
and many, many others. Here’s a funny little story. After setting up my LinkedIn 
profile years ago, which made me member number 1,760,099 (okay, not an 
early, early adopter, but today there are over 175 million registered users, so 
there), I then decided to join MySpace. Yeah, remember that little gem of a 
social network? Well, 15 minutes after I set up my profile, I was propositioned 
by a lovely young lady. Sure it was a business proposition of sorts, but not the 
kind of professional hookup I was looking for.

Chapter 10 | Leverage Your Network, and Their Networks
122
Today we’re more connected with the world than we’ve ever been and with 
the rate of emerging markets coming online like in China and India, networking 
has never been easier.
So, now what?
■ Mindful Moment  The wonderful world of networking isn’t new—we’ve been meeting one 
another in myriad social business situations for decades. And now with the proliferation of online 
networking, connecting to one another and leveraging each other is easier than it’s ever been. How 
do you connect and leverage professionally online today?
Rates
In C
I talked up online profiles and why you should invest your time 
. If you’re not convinced 
. You’ve lived in this world, so you know what it’s .
technical debt) to shut down the U.S. federal government without the help of 
either hopelessly gridlocked party. You have to network with other 
professionals and organizations, communicate and collaborate with them, and 
work that network to get the “ins” you’ll need. That doesn’t even mean you’ll 
get an interview, but you sure as hell aren’t going to get them applying the 
traditional way.
In Chapter 9, I talked about researching the companies you’re interested in 
working for—window shopping, as I called it. The points about seeing who 
you’re connected with and where are worth reiterating here and expanding 
on further as they relate to leveraging networks.
Again I ask, have you reviewed your prospective company’s LinkedIn or 
BranchOut profile so you can see who you might know in the company, even 
if it’s a second-degree contact you might be able to connect with or at least 
get introduced to? The more you research and reach out, the more likely 
you’ll expose yourself to what I’ll call first- and second-degree burn rates—
increasing the likelihood you find the right fireplace to stoke and call home 
whether you’re actively looking or just a passive passerby wanting to keep 
those golden hands of opportunity warm.

123
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
You should make the time to do this because it’s still about who you know, 
who they are, who they know, where they are, and where you are in relation 
to all of it. Listen, referrals are still one of the best ways to get noticed and 
maybe even get your foot in the door—in fact, even in this latest downturn, 
referrals account for more than 40 to 50 percent of all hires. You should 
research those organizations you’re interested in via all your professional 
social networks of choice, not just LinkedIn, to find out who you might be 
connected to directly and even indirectly and what it is they might be saying 
about the companies you’re interested in (or what they’re not saying—you 
know, read between the lines). Reach out to these connections and ask them 
specifically about the companies you’re interested in. What are the recruiters 
and hiring managers like (unless they’ve already been beating down your online A
gain, find out as much as you can from your connections about who 
. Remember, don’t overwhelm 
.com, especially if you want either of the two most 
. I can and will repeat this mantra 
.
Then again, don’t spend inordinate amounts of time on the wrong networks. 
If you’re looking for jQuery folks to connect and network with, check out 
sites like GitHub; save the cute cat and kid pictures and crocheting tips for the 
folks in your Facebook stream. I’m not making fun of either; my grandmother 
taught me how to crochet when I was 12, and I do like cats and kids.
Networking with the right people is critical, even before you see a job to 
apply for at a company you’re interested in working at. It’s also important to 
let everyone you know that you’re seeking a new job opportunity. Your own 
network can and will help you make connections that you wouldn’t have 
imagined otherwise, which is why having a targeted list of companies at the 
ready might help you network into them and discover those inside the 
organization who can help.
Working with Recruiters
By the way, recruiters love to connect with people on LinkedIn, which might 
or might not be a good thing for you. On the one hand, I’ve heard from many 
“wanted” IT pros over the past year who are incessantly hounded by LinkedIn 

Chapter 10 | Leverage Your Network, and Their Networks
124
recruiter InMails (unsolicited e-mails), causing them to delete their profile. 
This is probably an extreme response, though. The same goes for you 
networking with recruiters; don’t pummel them with requests to help you 
find a job. Just as in all networking, connect with the recruiters, and get 
introduced to them, see if there’s synergy there, and see if you can help one 
another.
That is why it’s important at this stage to talk a little bit about working with 
recruiters. I have many good friends out there who are recruiters and damn 
good at what they do, and they do what they say they do. There are also a 
small contingent of recruiters who are just looking for their next commission 
check and could not really give a shit about you and your future.
R
. They can help you 
IT hotspots, show you what companies to look at, 
I mention again in 
C
.
. Whether 
You’re the boss, baby. So be the boss. Remember, recruiters can be valuable 
allies in the war for you, but be clear and concise from the beginning about 
what you’re looking for, the kinds of companies you want to work for, whether 
or not you’re open to relocating, what your skill sets are, and your strengths 
and experience. Don’t waffle too much or they might not want to help place 
you. If you’re looking for a stretch assignment, then practice your pitch as to 
why before you share it with a potential recruiter. Because they’re most likely 
talking to many other candidates at any given time, sometimes for the same 
tech positions you’re interested in, it’s important that you seep into their 
consciousness and be top of mind when the right positions come up.
Vet them. Ask for references and try to find other candidates they’ve placed 
that you can talk with. Were they sold placements? Were the candidates 
happy with their working (and personal) relationship with the recruiter? Do 
they play nice with others, especially the hiring managers you want to speak 
with? Just as they and the employers have done to you, search for them online 
and see what you can find. Check out their LinkedIn profile as well. If they 
write or blog about IT recruiting, read what they’ve written to see if it gels 
with you and your professional outlook. The more you know about them, the 

125
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
less likely that you’ll be played. And trust me, a lot of folks get played out 
there in the world of work. Don’t be one of them.
You gotta like them. A little. Yes, it is a business transaction between you 
and the recruiter, but you’ve also got to have some personal connection and 
rapport with this recruiter. They’re helping you get your next gig and you 
want it to be the right one, so having some appreciation of one another is 
important. If it doesn’t work out this time with the job the recruiter is trying 
to place you in, if you’ve got a solid relationship, there’s always the next time. 
Like any and all networking contacts, keep in touch with them and they’ll keep 
in touch with you. You don’t have to be Facebook friends and share kitten 
pictures, but don’t be a stranger either once you’ve networked or worked 
together.N
ow, if you’re a social introvert and prefer the online environment, then so 
. But don’t convince yourself that you don’t need any professional 
IT world today. Remember, it’s not about 
. N
o man or woman is an island, no matter how good you are at what you do; 
which brings me back to my point about it all being so frickin’ personal.
Indeed it is. What used to be the in-person first- and second-degree burn 
rates via all the networking activities I’ve already listed, has transformed itself 
into online networking, which has then come full circle to fueling the face-to-
face fire.
But really, you have to get out of the house and the office. You do. There is 
fresh air and the sun and there are the men and women you’ve met online to 
meet in person and have intelligent, soul-enriching conversations with, or just 
to shoot the shit with, at various events and in-person activities that just 
might get you your next job. You then bring those business cards back with 
you and connect with these people in the appropriate professional networks 
and start all over again.
Here’s my recommended online networking and job-search checklist:
• 
Create an online profile on LinkedIn and leverage across 
other professional “social” networks.

Chapter 10 | Leverage Your Network, and Their Networks
126
• 
Find the networks where like-minded IT professionals flock, 
share, and learn. Don’t join them and spend all day online 
talking shop, cats, and kids, however.
• 
Connect with previous employers, peers, colleagues, 
consultants, and friends.
• 
Check out their connections and companies and research 
those you’re interested in getting in front of—the proverbial 
back doors.
• 
Ask your network about the other connections and 
companies you’re truly interested in getting in front of to put 
a plan together of how.
Ask your network for introductions and referrals.
Reciprocate when your networks ask you for help.
Go outside and meet these people in person. Please.
I
. Nature 
. Be professionally personal and network, network, network.
■ Mindful Moment  To leverage your network means you have to have a network. Over the years 
you’ve worked with and have become connected with many like-minded IT and business 
professionals. Connect with them online and in person to grow professionally and find new 
opportunities.
From Networks to Talent Communities
That’s the way it begins—change—the movement from one state to another, 
from a static status quo state to a hopefully more progressive and productive 
state. It’s like moving from flat two dimensions to a vibrant three.
The change begins in small groups, the sharing of new knowledge of what can 
be done that hasn’t been done before and the return of that “change” 
investment—hence the importance of networking. The new knowledge fills 
the room, some of it permeating each exposed pore, entering the bloodstream 
and flooding our brains with possibility.
I spoke in the summer of 2012 with a smart group of HR and recruiting 
practitioners at the Northern California Human Resources Association 

127
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
(NCHRA) Santa Cruz Region meeting. My presentation was on social 
recruiting with a focus on talent networks and communities, the long tail of 
recruiting and quality over quantity—of change and what can be.
Most of the attendees were from smaller companies in the Santa Cruz area, 
but what was striking (and not surprising) was the fact that when I shared 
some recent research on social recruiting, which claimed that over 90 percent 
of employers would be engaged in it this year, everyone looked at me as if I 
just said we’d be riding magical unicorns in the big screen release of Everybody’s 
Doing It in 3-D. I mean, applicants apply, they get screened, interviewed, and 
hired. Get the butts in the seats and all that. 
Of course the reality is that although about half the room confirmed they use L
In for professional networking, sourcing, and recruiting (get on your 
Facebook company pages 
I mean no one—used or even understood what Twitter 
. Well, there was one attendee who said he kinda used it. Kinda.
. One HR practitioner even proudly said 
Facebook and Pandora during work hours. Oh, man. D
on’t kill my music. Mercy me. Am I right or what?B
ut none of the attendees balked at my from-the-hip truths (one recruiter in 
• 
There are a gazillion people on social media today.
• 
Recruiters do source and recruit using social media.
• 
Candidates do use social networking tools to search for jobs.
• 
Companies are still of mixed opinion as to recruiting value.
Yes, companies are still mixed as to the recruiting value of professional social 
networking, which is why I’ve written about talent communities the past two 
years, interviewing various HR and recruiting practitioners and vendors about 
them, speaking about them, dreaming about them (yes, really), and living and 
breathing inside one in particular—TalentCulture’s #TChat Twitter Chat1 
since November 2010—and now working for a talent community platform 
company called BraveNewTalent (see Figure 10-1). 
BraveNewTalent allows you to sign up for your own profile for free, or import 
your LinkedIn profile, and start connecting with other professionals, 
1 Twitter Chats are organized online discussions around specific topics or industries 
conducted on Twitter via a named hashtag Twitter stream that is easily followed in Twitter 
clients (#TChat, for example, which is all about the world of work).

Chapter 10 | Leverage Your Network, and Their Networks
128
.
.
Much of the social recruiting and talent network mainstream as it stands 
today relates to recruiting you for a company—the term talent community has 
been bastardized to date; as i mentioned earlier in this chapter, the company 
i worked for nearly 13 years ago said they were one, when they really weren’t.
but true talent communities can and should also form inside of companies 
with existing employees, and alumni, and their networks, both inside and 
out—a mass of hub-and-spokes circles within circles within circles that even 
the most progressive employers can only dream of maximizing return on.
Most everyone in the meeting agreed that the three-dimensional “unicorn” in 
the room is the fact that a talent community is only a community when those 
who belong collaborate, commiserate, and connect with one another regularly 

129
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
for what can amount to infinite combinations of reasons—including sharing 
original and curated content and learning from one another—but not 
necessarily applying for jobs outright. This, of course, can happen in existing 
social networks, other platforms, and software systems that help create talent 
communities, and a combination of all in between.
But the most common reality is that we usually end up with a two-dimensional 
network model, sourcing active candidates from a smattering of job postings 
and creating a database of people where occasional, hopefully relevant 
company and job information is shared with them. There’s just no true 
“community” inside.
You know what I’m talking about. When you’re looking for a job, you’re 
. Right? Why the hell would you want to stay and play?B
ut work with me here—what if you could network with other professionals 
It’s time for a bold new approach called talent communities. 
Chat is?H
owever, to be fair, many would argue (even me at times) that the major 
social networks of Facebook, Twitter (#TChat, duh), and LinkedIn can be 
talent communities. Closer to home for you, all the major job boards including 
and especially Dice (see Chapter 13), have IT-specific communities you can 
join, network in, and glean technical insight from, just as you can do at 
BraveNewTalent (although BraveNewTalent allows organizations and 
professionals to share relevant content inside, push it out to their other 
networks, and pull other content back in again—the “other content” I 
mentioned and closed networks). There are seemingly an infinite number of 
technical user groups online globally, regionally, and even in your local area 
that you can join. Just search for “Linux User Group” or your IT flavor of 
choice—and voila! Lastly, there are also other talent network and community 
services that are employer-specific that you could indirectly become a part of 
or be asked to join by your current or prospective employers like TalentCircles, 
Jobs2Web, Taleo (now Oracle), Kenexa (now IBM), and many other applicant 
tracking systems on the market today.
Just make sure you’re making them work for you, and not the other way 
around. Talent networks and communities are like any networking you do—
the return is only in the reciprocity, meaning always pay it forward to get paid 
back.

Chapter 10 | Leverage Your Network, and Their Networks
130
■ Mindful Moment  Have you ever thought of your online networks as communities? If so, what 
made them so? Do you share with and learn from one another? Do you find that this ongoing 
activity helps you become more valuable as a current or prospective employee? And really, you 
don’t know what a Twitter Chat is? 
To Learn, to Know, and to Do
In a sense you’ve already been connecting, communicating, and collaborating 
via all the “talent” networks I’ve highlighted to date and many others I haven’t. 
So in a sense, you’ve already participated in talent networks, some with 
. You can share and 
. 
BraveNewTalent (so much for 
.
C
HR and recruiting technology industry that’s touted 
I think is the most valuable contributions your networks make, 
besides helping you get a job, of course. Usually the platforms are nothing 
more than a crazy maze of bad roads.
Consider this: The U.S. Interstate Highway System construction was 
authorized in 1956 by the Federal Aid Highway Act. More than 55 years later 
its network includes nearly 50,000 miles of highway and about one-quarter of 
all vehicle miles driven in the country use this system. Add to that thousands 
and thousands of miles of other byways and bad roads and you’ve got a lot of 
endless driving going on.
Along the way there are a myriad of rest stops, fast food restaurants, gas 
stations, hotels and motels, run-of-the-mill and eclectic points of interest—
you name it. Along most major thoroughfares you’ll find plenty of places to 
stop and “refuel,” but there are times where there’s a whole bunch of nothing 
and you better be sure you’ve got enough fuel in “all tanks.” Add to that 
extreme hot and cold weather, accidents, and commuter gridlock and you’re 
along for one helluva ride.
The highways and byways are a means to an end; we’re not driving them for 
the journey, just the destination. Most of the time at least, unless it’s a first-

131
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
time vacation road trip experience—like your first true job hunt. Or even the 
next one, or the next one.
Like an M. C. Escher maze, the routes through social networks to job boards 
to career sites to applicant tracking systems are as endless as the miles and 
miles of bad roads we travel every day. Most career search drivers just want 
to get on and off, and yet we don’t really help them do that; we don’t provide 
them with a Zen-like GPS so they can get to where they’re going and apply for 
that dream job—you know, the one advertised on the big, religiously gaudy 
billboards along the highway: “Jesus is really sorry about the candidate 
experience. Have some fries and a Coke. Or a Pepsi.”
True talent communities give us plenty of quality rest stops that allow us all 
.
. This is the social heart of networking. Companies that are 
. 
Happy driving, kids!
■ Mindful Moment  The social heart of professional networking creates a talent community of 
learning and sharing that includes the entire organization ecosystem—new applicants, current 
employees, alumni, contractors, service providers, and customers. And yes, helping each other find 
new and exciting opportunities. But the intrinsic value of a reciprocal networking really does 
increase the value of the moving parts—and those are you, you, and you. You’ll find mentors and 
make yourself mentors, which is what I’ll discuss in the next chapter.

c h a p t e r
11
Mentors and 
I am not a teacher, but an awakener.
—Robert Frost
In case of personal Armageddon, flee to the sea. That’s all I’ve been able to 
think about these days each time I run from my house to the ocean and back 
again, usually about 4.5 to 5 miles, three times per week. I think about it 
because along the way I witness the destitute, the disenfranchised, the drug 
addicts, the mentally ill, and the miserably lost—the entire spectrum of fringe, 
from those who have chosen to live this way to those who have not.
Some are camped out in their cars, moving from space to space, sometimes 
just one space over to adhere to loitering and parking regulations. Others 
walk listlessly along the water, rifling through public and private trash cans for 
food while scanning the ground for change and smokable cigarette butts. And 
then there are those I can’t see, but I know are there—those camping in the 
creases, crevices, and cliffs in and around Santa Cruz. As I run along the water, 
I note at times that I’m less than five feet from the cliff edge that drops off to 
the cold Pacific below.
The fictionalized images from novels, stories, and movies about the end of the 
world come to mind vividly, but these individuals are real, and their stories 
real. To those who have experienced more recent personal Armageddons, 

Chapter 11 | Mentors and Professional Associations
134
who have lost most if not everything during the past four years, and who have 
given up on finding work, on getting back on their feet, and on staying relevant 
and marketable in the world of work—in life for that matter—I empathize. I 
do. It’s tougher than it’s ever been to stay gainfully employed over the long 
term. We’re all competing with five generations now for fewer full-time jobs 
in a world where being a generalist is as ubiquitous as a quick keyword search 
in Google or Bing, meaning you’ve been scrapped for automated efficiency. 
Pack your things and begin the exodus to the sea.
But even the sea brings red tides of danger for those without hope, especially 
those camped out on the cliffs. Job report after job report includes a recurring 
theme: “The changes don’t account for people who stopped looking for jobs.”
. The red tide of inaction in this 
IT hot spots. 
As I
I can’t help but think about why I run, about why I 
.
I
I’ve stretched myself professionally, taken chances, 
. 
And I ’m not talking about going back to school, not in the traditional sense. 
I’m talking about self-educating via reading, listening to, and watching relevant 
content found online across multiple social and professional networks, 
publications, blogs, and more (Chapter 3), or to “skill-up” as we’re saying at 
BraveNewTalent these days. We’re also skilling-up in the associations we 
belong to as well as the volunteer work we do.
And even more important to skilling-up, it’s about the networks we keep. I’ve 
reached out to my network to be mentored, and in turn have been a mentor 
to others.
It’s not the cliff that bothers me the most while I’m running. It’s the rising red 
tide without mentors to shadow our paths.
In case of personal Armageddon, stretch yourself and ask for help. 
Which is why I’m writing this book, volunteering to help job seekers, and 
participating in career panels, as I’ve mentioned elsewhere: I’ve experienced 
career development and management angst as much as the next person. I’ve 
become an informal mentor in a sense, not for the sake of saying it to make 
me feel better, but to do something that makes others feel better, and 

135
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
hopefully help them figure out how to get an “in” somewhere, somehow, 
some way.
It doesn’t matter what age, position, or experience level one is at; we all could 
use mentoring in our lives from an early age on, outside of our immediate 
family and friends (although I hope you have as well). When I began to hit the 
skids in the last year and a half of high school, after being “on top” in grades, 
student government, and sports, one of our high school counselors befriended 
me and told me to cut left when everybody else was cutting right. He 
mentored and counseled me in a way that no one had done before; he kept it 
real as they say, at the same time encouraging me to stretch myself in the 
direction I wanted to stretch. Writing was a big part of that. He’s the one who 
inspired me to be a mentor throughout the rest of my life.F
. Keeping my old 
. At one point, the three career panelists concurred 
. I added that today we’re not only loyal and 
. That’s the work that makes it easier for 
time, part-time, flex-time, contract, and project work, and any combination 
of those that you can imagine. That’s the work that transforms technologies, 
processes, communities, and the very heart and soul of the world.
“Follow your bliss,” one young man said, wearing a vibrant blue and black 
striped tie and Polo shirt combo. The room filled with nods and smiles. Right 
on, I thought. This career panel was put on by an amazing local organization 
called Your Future Is Our Business (where my wonderful wife worked early 
this year). YFIOB is a community-based 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization 
dedicated to fostering business–education partnerships that benefit students. 
Their mission is to support young people in Santa Cruz County in making 
informed educational and career decisions.
The two classes of high school students we spoke to—and this included a 
panel of me as marketing/tech guy, a midwife (who was actually the backup 
midwife for our second daughter’s birth), and a physical therapist and athletic 
trainer—were all very attentive as they asked us serious career development 
questions. I find it silly that those who long to label are scrambling to figure 
out just what to call the generation born in the mid-1990s and later. As far as 
I’m concerned, it’s silly and pointless, although one thing is clear: They’ll be 
the most tech-savvy generation from birth than any other previous.

Chapter 11 | Mentors and Professional Associations
136
And they are. They were amused that my high school had a computer lab of 
one computer, and that I had learned how to type on an IBM Selectric III 
typewriter there. They now have magic gadgets that even Steve Jobs hadn’t 
dreamed up yet.
Afterward, the young man who had said, “Follow your bliss,” came up to me 
and began asking me questions about getting into video game programming 
and telling me how he is already programming on his own now. I told him to 
keep learning and doing, because doing is knowing is growing. “So do,” I said. 
“And keep rocking those ties, Mister.”
This is why we are all Generation Now—each of us is a lifelong learner and 
mentor longing to find our bliss and to be committed to the work that moves 
. Amen.
■ 
  Mentoring is all about paying it forward—helping to nurture and guide 
I’ve already shared has to do with informal mentoring, which 
today. This is yet another extension of all the networking I talked about in 
Chapters 9 and 10—the very process of connecting with like-minded IT and 
business pros and talking shop could develop into an informal mentoring 
relationship. 
Informal Mentors
Please note that I am not a mentoring expert; I only know what has worked 
for me over the years. To share with one another what’s worked in your 
career and definitely hasn’t is a very powerful social learning and bonding 
activity. Mentors in your life could also come in the form of previous teachers, 
professors, parents, family members, old friends, new friends, online 
connections, previous supervisors, colleagues, clergy—whoever in your 
universe has had a positive impact on you and your life decisions.
In the broadest definition, mentors are supportive individuals who devote 
time to someone else (other than their own children). Even though mentors 
can fill any number of specific roles, they all have the same goal, which is to 
help others achieve their potential and discover their strengths. In our 
context, that means your career development and management. 

137
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Mentors help us define and reflect on our professional goals and then suggest 
ways for us to achieve them. Mentors helps us traverse the highways, byways, 
and bad roads of job searches and give us insight on the tough questions about 
what we want to be when we grow up—and we’re always growing up—and 
get greater perspective on the various facets of the IT industry of which we’re 
fond and that puts food on our tables, and sometimes a nice car in the 
driveway. Mentor and mentee (the recipient) relationships can even help you 
eventually land a new job, a promotion, or that lateral move across 
departments. Mentors can also be an open ear to bend when we need to 
bitch about our boss or whatever has gotten us down in the daily grind. 
Mentors can also be your friends, maybe even your lover or spouse (like 
mine), but it’s important to note that you’ll need to pick professional mentors 
. (Don’t sleep with your mentor, unless you marry them and plan to have 
. You heard it here first.)
. R
emember, you can read their online recommendations and even contact the 
. Yes, references. Even informal mentoring 
. Also, consider mentors outside of IT if you’re looking to get an outside 
business knowledge in finance, operations, marketing, sales, customer services, 
whatever the interest. The value to glean is counterbalanced by the value you 
give—mentees can mentor, too.
Whether you’re approaching the mentors or they’ve approached you, or 
you’re the mentor approachee, here is a checklist to consider as mentor and 
mentee:
• 
Understand each other’s expertise, beliefs, and attitudes to 
ensure some level of synergy exists. 
• 
Set realistic expectations of what you want out of the 
relationship and how often you’ll try to meet. This can include 
tutoring, job shadowing, career exploration and development, 
role playing, and other similar activities.
• 
Try to meet in person when and if possible, or at least 
virtually online via Skype or Google+ Hangout so you can 
have that all-important face time.
• 
Of course, phone calls and emails are fine, especially when 
you want to share recent challenges or accomplishments.

Chapter 11 | Mentors and Professional Associations
138
• 
Shooting the breeze is fine, but you should have an agenda at 
the ready; we’re all really busy and you want to make the 
most of your time. 
• 
Make sure to send each other opportunity and connection 
recommendations when appropriate. Remember, you’ve got 
each other’s back.
Formal Mentoring Programs
Most companies have some form of formal mentoring program in place. Many 
call it the buddy system or job shadowing, but in the end, it’s institutionalized 
mentoring—which doesn’t mean it’s bad, by the way. 
. In a world where 
. Compared to informal 
. 
B
. 
. 
F
learning and growth, which in turn increases productivity and delivers to the 
bottom line. And if we have any shares involved, profit sharing, quarterly 
bonus plans, or the like, we’ll truly care about making it work. I know, I 
know—money isn’t everything, but it’s a big something we live on.
Like the informal mentoring described earlier, you as mentee can learn a lot 
about the inner workings of your business, like how to traverse the jungle 
realm, who else to go to for answers and support and to learn other parts of 
the business, and those unspoken rules that need to be understood quickly to 
be successful. In formal mentoring programs, your mentors are usually senior 
staff and management, and they know more about how to manage your career 
paths internally. Stick to them like glue, baby. 
Lastly, I challenge you to pay it forward—to become a mentor someday, 
formally or informally, especially if you’ve never been one. For me, the rewards 
have been great and the tangible value has paid huge emotional, psychological, 
spiritual, and yes, even financial dividends.

139
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
■ Mindful Moment Most of our professional and personal lives involve informal mentors—
those individuals from any and every facet who give us guidance and advice and what we should 
be doing and how we should go about doing it. Also, many companies offer formal mentoring 
programs where you’re assigned a mentor on joining the ranks, which in turn helps you traverse 
the inner workings of the business, learn more about different parts of the business and how you 
fit in, and increase your value to your colleagues and the company.
Join the Professionals 
besides the formal and informal mentoring that can enrich you, there are 
iT associations out there today. if you’re not already a 
. These professional associations 
. The 
. adding associations to your resume and online profile can 
.
i hope) that professional networking and developing 
. Joining professional associations can give 
you a sense of security and trust. Professional associations also put on their 
own networking events, giving you yet another opportunity to connect with 
your peers. 
Most associations also conduct local or national conferences, giving you the 
opportunity to participate and learn about the latest and greatest in your 
career development, learn “best practices” and new ideas, hear from the 
thought leaders in your field, and meet with your peers. Professional 
associations give you yet another opportunity to find a mentor who can help 
you with your career development and management, or for you to become 
one yourself. 
The career resources available in many associations can be a huge boon for 
you. They usually have job listings online or in print available to members only, 
as well as a multitude of tips about building a better resume and cover letter 
or—better yet—online profile, and job search strategies that include 
interviewing and salary negotiating techniques. These associations can also 
have subject matter experts (sMes) who are available to answer your specific 
career-related questions. These could be in the form of seminars and webinars, 
or they might offer training or certification classes both in person and online. 

Chapter 11 | Mentors and Professional Associations
140
Here are 10 professional IT associations for you to consider. By no means is 
this an exhaustive list, so I encourage you to find others relevant to your part 
of the profession.
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM)
The ACM is a membership organization for computing professionals, delivering 
resources that advance computing as a science and a profession, enable 
professional development, and promote policies and research that benefit 
society. Membership dues are $99 per year and there are student dues 
available. Find out more at www.acm.org.
The AI
TP is, of course, an IT-focused professional association. Its goal is to 
IT business professionals that includes 
. Membership dues run approximately $100 to 
. Find out more at https://aitp.site-ym.com.
The AS
P is a professional trade association of 1,000 software developers who 
create and market applications such as desktop and laptop programs, software 
as a service (SaaS) applications, cloud computing, and smartphone apps. ASP 
was formed in April 1987 to strengthen the future of try-before-you-buy 
software as an alternative to conventional retail software. Its members, all of 
whom subscribe to a code of ethics, are committed to the concept of 
shareware as a method of marketing. Membership dues are $99 per year and 
student dues are available. Find out more at https://www.asp-software.org.
Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility (CPSR)
CPSR is a global organization promoting the responsible use of computer 
technology. Founded in 1981, CPSR educates policymakers and the public on 
a wide range of issues. CPSR has incubated numerous projects such as 
Privaterra, the Public Sphere Project, EPIC (the Electronic Privacy Information 
Center), the 21st Century Project, the Civil Society Project, and the CFP 
(Computers, Freedom & Privacy) Conference. Originally founded by U.S. 
computer scientists, CPSR now has members in 26 countries on six continents. 
Dues are $75 per year and there are student dues available. Find out more at 
http://cpsr.org.

141
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)  
Computer Society
The IEEE Computer Society is for computing professionals about technology 
information, inspiration, and collaboration. By making the most up-to-date 
and advanced information in the computing world easily accessible, the IEEE 
Computer Society is the source that computing professionals trust to provide 
high-quality, state-of-the-art information on an on-demand basis. Dues are 
$99 per year and there are student dues available. Find out more at www.
computer.org.
National Association of Programmers (NAP)
NAP is an association dedicated to programmers, developers, consultants, 
. Their goal is 
. Dues for certified 
. Find out more at 
.napusa.org.E
NPA is an organization for network computing 
. NPA founded the widely acknowledged and the industry’s only 
international Awards for Professionalism, which honor individuals for their 
outstanding achievements in network computing and meeting the values of 
professionalism. Dues are $125 per year. Find out more at www.npa.org.
Society for Technical Communication (STC)
The STC is the world’s largest and oldest professional association dedicated 
to the advancement of the field of technical communication. The Society’s 
members span the field of the technical communication profession and reach 
across every industry and continent, with members in almost 50 countries; 
membership is continuing to grow rapidly outside of North America and 
Europe. Dues are $215 per year and there are TC professional dues available. 
Find out more at www.stc.org.
SVForum
The SVForum is all about innovation, entrepreneurship, and leadership within 
the Silicon Valley ecosystem of individuals and businesses participating in 
emerging technologies. SVForum connects annually with more than 12,000 

Chapter 11 | Mentors and Professional Associations
142
engineers, technologists, and entrepreneurs, at more than 200 events, 
covering a wide range of topics from emerging technologies to product launch, 
and beyond. Dues are $145 per year and there are student dues available. Find 
out more at www.svforum.org.
Women in Technology (WIT)
WIT is a not-for-profit organization with the mission of advancing women in 
technology—from the classroom to the boardroom— by providing advocacy, 
leadership development, networking, mentoring, and technology education. 
With nearly 1,000 members in the Washington, DC, area, WIT strives to 
meet its vision of being the premier organization empowering women to be 
. Dues are $95 per year. Find 
.womenintechnology.org.
■ 
  Do you belong to a professional IT association? Joining one can provide 

c h a p t e r
12
Zero In on  
the Company
Son, sometimes you couldn’t find your ass from a hole in the ground, but I love 
you.
—Richard E. Grossman (My Dad)
. Pop, as I affectionately called him over the years. I use past 
battle with stage 3 melanoma, and this book is partly dedicated to him; he 
was one of my biggest mentors, besides being my dad. With his stellar work 
ethic, Pop taught me much over the years about the world of work, 
responsibility, flexibility, what it means to be persistent in the face of adversity, 
and the lifelong value of a smile. 
A master of levity, Pop injected humor and silliness into most everything he 
did. He infectious smile and laughter propagated to many others in his radius, 
the scar above his lip glinting under light like polished glass, a scar that came 
from years of repetitive punches to the same place as a child and then as a cop 
(and yes, he returned most of those in kind and then some). The scar added 
a richness to his character, like biscuits soaked in honey and butter—you 
could never get enough.
This all came from a law enforcement veteran of 32 years. Anyone who ever 
worked with him shared the same sentiment—from the most hardened cops 
and criminals (who he called his customers), to literal strangers he’d meet on 
the street, in the store, at the campground, in the post office, and in the 
doctor’s office. Everyone experienced his sunny disposition, his goofy humor, 
and his viral smile.

Chapter 12 | Zero In on the Company 
144
He inspired me to do the same—to be silly, to embrace life and all the people 
in it, to give life and all the people in it a second and third chance, and to laugh 
in the face of adversity. At the same time, he also inspired me to tackle life, 
punch it, and pin it to the ground, even if I grew up not finding my ass from a 
hole in it.
My dad was a mechanic in the Air Force. After serving, he returned to his 
hometown of Porterville, California, where he became mechanic foreman for 
the local Chevrolet dealer. This was back in the 1960s, when you could 
practically listen to a car and diagnose its problem. After that, he went in a 
completely different direction and became a police officer. That’s where he 
spent the rest of his career, complete with a short stint as a police captain in 
the South Pacific and then eventually a detective in charge of the forgery and 
Department (my hometown), from which 
.
H
Dick among his fellow officers because of his 
Columbo-esque1 investigation techniques using more 
. I 
.m. to go to work .
“Why do you like what you do?” I asked one time.
He shrugged and smiled. “Because I like chasing people across paper.”
“Cool. How do you do what you do? That’s a lot of paper.”
He removed his glasses and rubbed his eyes. “I’ve got to know as much as I 
can about each and every one of my customers in order to catch them. I need 
to know where they work or worked, where they shop or shopped, if they’re 
junkies or not, if they’re gamblers or not, what exactly their scams are and to 
what end. I need to know everyone they know—their family, their friends, 
their enemies.”
Pop had one of the best arrest records in the department. Banks and businesses 
loved him for the money he saved them and helped them recover. And, Tricky 
Dick to his core, the more information he had on his “customers,” the easier 
it was to map out the messiness they left behind. 
1 Columbo was an American detective mystery television series, starring Peter Falk as 
Columbo, a homicide detective with the Los Angeles Police Department.

145
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Humans are horrible decision makers and we’re inherently messy, no matter 
how smart we think we are. It’s like the gambler’s fallacy where we’ll put one 
more dollar into the slot machine because this time we’re gonna hit it big, 
even though we know the house wins most of the time. It’s the pleasure 
centers in our brains that we’re working on satisfying 24 hours a day, seven 
days a week, 365 days a year. Emotion trumps logic every single time; we trip 
and then we fall, but we get back up again to make the magic happen, because 
like I wrote in the beginning of this book, ain’t no one gonna do it for us. The 
magic only comes with practice.
We’re also inherently open and hungry for positive attention, even if we think 
we’re private. That’s also true when it comes to investigating your prospective 
employers, recruiters, and hiring managers. They will be digging up information 
. E
. Everybody does. Don’t look at me 
.
Dick? You really need to be just like 
. Follow the job and company “across paper” 
. Jobs are like perps—the more we chase after 
. But the more we know about the jobs, the 
. K
nowledge is a powerful weapon and gives you the line-of-sight into the jobs 
and career paths you want. Be prepared when called on.
I miss you, Pop.
■ Mindful Moment  So you’ve made it to the final stages of the job search and your tech skills 
and experience have attracted a company’s “hiring” attention. They want to meet with you now. 
Sweet. It’s time to start your due diligence. Yes, the job search can be a full-time job, but now it’s 
time to be a detective and uncover the clues that will help you get the job.
Get to Know Them
You’ve been doing your research, you’ve got them in your sights, and now 
you’ve got their attention. Maybe it’s one company or maybe it’s ten (it 
depends on what you got, where you are, and a little magical timing to tie it 
all together). Maybe you’ve been phone screened, maybe you’ve had a virtual 
or recorded video interview (Chapter 7), and now you’ve gotten the email 
and the call that they want you to come in to interview. You’re in the final 
stages of the job search. A lot of what I’ve already covered in this book will 
help you tremendously at this stage. So let’s review.

Chapter 12 | Zero In on the Company 
146
Remember all that rigmarole about building out your online profile (Chapter 
8) and then connecting and networking to past and present employers, 
colleagues, and friends? At this point, you’ve probably already done that, as 
well as connecting online with some of the folks in the early screening 
processes at the companies you want to work at, most likely a recruiter, an 
HR person, the business owner, the hiring manager, or some combination 
thereof. My rule of thumb is that if you’ve met them in some capacity during 
the job search process, then connect with them online. You’ll not only find 
out more about them and their connections (if they accept), but you never 
know when you might call on them in the future for opportunities. I didn’t say 
Facebook, I mean professionally like on LinkedIn, or in the membership 
association you belong to (see Chapter 11).
But that part only takes a 
. Yes, they have to accept your connection request to be officially 
. It’s kind of the new common courtesy 
.
. These connections on the inside could at some time move on to 
.
I digress. Get to “know” those who’ve been screening you to date and 
understand what similarities you share with them. It’s these commonalities 
that connect us emotionally. Likability is a simple fact of life and even with all 
the messiness and poor decision making, if you share common interests, then 
use them to your benefit. If you’re both runners, then prepare to talk about 
running. If you discover they have children, and so do you, then prepare to 
talk about your children. If they used to work at IBM, and so did you, then 
prepare to talk about your experience at IBM. If they used to work under Sue, 
and so did you, then prepare to mention it—but do not trash talk about Sue 
or anyone else related to Sue when you’re actually there talking about Sue. 
Even if the hiring manager gets messy, do not fall into that trap, no matter 
how much you might like one another.
By the way, do you know how savvy recruiters know when you’re in the 
throes of a job search? It’s not what I would’ve thought—when we update our 
profiles with the latest and greatest. That can be part of it, but it’s when you’re 
connections spike, meaning when you’re adding people to your network. 
Most of us actually update our profiles after we’re hired. I bring it up only 
because this gets you noticed in a way that could bring about other 
opportunities that you never imagined. Keep every window open.
c

147
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Go Outside and Feel the Burn
And then there’s the part about going outside, to see the very people who 
might be hiring you before they hire you, or other friends and confidants who 
can fill you in—just like your online connections—on the influencers and 
hiring folk you need to know. Maybe you’ve been coding until 4 a.m., but get 
yourself out there and find out more about prospective employers that might 
want you before you sit down for the final dance.
Duh, right? I know. We’re all really busy and that’s the beauty of online 
networks and connections. We don’t really have to go outside. We can IM, 
text, stream, Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, and G+ each other until we’re blue 
in the face. We can even still email each other. (Remember when our fearless B
ut if you are like me, and I’ll bet that’s the case, your online connections 
. You want to feel the burn of each other’s 
. Remember, there are physical cues that could be helpful to you 
. LC
hapter 7. It’s also still better than just the online chatter.
. You might not end up 
. The relationships you’ve taken the time to build online 
via your professional “social” networks foster real-time gatherings for break-
fast, lunch, and dinner, in coffee shops, on golf courses, at fitness centers, at 
gadgetry stores, at happy hours, at conferences and expos, in airports, in train 
stations, at bus stops, and in carpools—you name the physical venue and 
make time to be there.
Maybe you’re still hesitant to go outside, but think about the recruiters who 
are recruiting you. You know, the ones who have spammed you and called you 
out of the blue with offers of magical powers and golden treasures unimaginable. 
I know, I know—there are many very good IT recruiters out there, too, and 
I’m good friends with some of them. My point is that recruiters worth their 
salt aren’t afraid to get out there and find, connect, market, and sell. Granted, 
their very livelihood is dependent on the very same research and relationship-
building skills I’m advocating for you—yes, your very livelihood is dependent 
on it as well. There are so many parallels between recruiting, marketing, and 
sales. Get outside.
Did you know that recruit comes from the French word recrute, which literally 
means new growth? Those same recruiters who have survived the two 
downturns we’ve seen in the past 10 years aren’t afraid to find out as much as 

Chapter 12 | Zero In on the Company 
148
they can about you and your immediate professional connections. The best of 
the bunch are highly aggressive and not afraid to employ guerilla tactics in 
identifying and screening the best IT talent they can find.
And don’t forget what I just wrote about in Chapter 11: the benefits of 
professional association memberships. If you’re already in one of those I 
outlined, or others I didn’t, that’s another rich resource for you to find out 
more about the companies interested in you. Remember, professional 
associations put on their own networking events year round and sponsor 
numerous other events, as well as giving you ongoing direct access to members 
for yet another opportunity to connect with your peers and ask them lots of 
pointed questions. 
. Feel the burn, baby. 
I
it? N
I’m not talking about X-raying websites or hacking into databases. 
I mean really by guerrilla is to go beyond the usual when researching 
. Yes, you might glean enough of what you need 
you’ll be in the final interviewing stages with, then you’ll have to dig a little 
deeper. And by the way, when you arm yourself with a little more knowledge 
about the business you might be working for, you better position yourself 
contextually as it relates to your future role and where it fits into the greater 
business realm.
Remember in Chapter 9 when I talked about the career sites? Again, take a 
look at your prospective employer’s career page, Facebook corporate page, 
or any social point of presence. Is there anything on the page beyond job 
listings that gives you an idea of company culture? Look at the pictures of 
people on the company website. Do they look like real people who really 
work for the company and not pretty model stock photos? Are there any 
video testimonials from real people who work for the company talking about 
what it’s like to work there?
Speaking of videos, if you go to YouTube and search for the employers, you’ll 
probably find of bevy of employment brand videos (or at least a few) and 
employee testimonials that again, however subjective they most likely are, will 
give you some more information for your interview arsenal. For the more 
creative companies, you’ll probably find some hilarity as well. 

149
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
revisit glassdoor and Vault. You might have already used those sites to read 
company reviews, and manager and executive reviews, all posted by current 
and previous employees. but don’t forget that glassdoor also has interview 
reviews—people sharing their interview experiences from various companies.
subjective as they are, you might get some potentially valuable insight.
of course you can simply do a web search for the companies you’re 
interviewing with and scour social media sites for company comments and 
sidebars. if you’re going to work for a well-known brand, say an airline or a 
health care company, you’ll most likely find lots of smack online about these 
companies. customer service is the bane of many of them today, because 
they’re still so poor at it, and all things social have given us the platforms from 
which to spew forth our universal distaste. so who knows what you’ll find, 
.
nother place for you to check on the company websites is their resources, 
. here’s where you can read (and watch and listen to) 
.
. Think slideshare2 as well as the other “social” 
.) 
companies online; most companies show that in their “news” pages, and 
those mentions will also come up in web searches. Public companies will 
regularly share earnings reports and investment and investor news on their 
websites. startups and privates sometimes share investment and investor 
information online, usually to attract investments, but at least you’ll get a 
sense of who’s investing in whom if you’re familiar with the venture capital and 
private equity community. of course if you follow the stock market, you can 
check company earnings as often as you want online at sites such as Yahoo! 
finance3 and cnn Money.4
speaking of companies filing to go public, if you’re a truly a finance geek, you 
can check out s-1 filings and addendums to filings online. if you’re not familiar, 
an s-1 is a filing used by public companies to register their securities with the 
u.s. securities and exchange commission (sec). The s-1 filing contains the 
basic business and financial information on companies that want to sell shares 
and have public investors. investors can use these filings or “prospectuses” to 
2  www.slideshare.net
3  http://finance.yahoo.com
4  http://money.cnn.com/data/markets/

Chapter 12 | Zero In on the Company 
150
evaluate possible investment opportunities prior to a company’s initial public 
offering (IPO). You can use EDGAR,5 the Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, 
and Retrieval system, which performs automated collection, validation, 
indexing, acceptance, and forwarding of submissions by companies and others 
who are required by law to file forms with the SEC. How exciting is that. No, 
really.
Another resource you can use to research companies is Hoovers.6 Hoovers is 
a huge database of company, industry, and individual information that includes 
about 85 million corporations and other entities and 100 million people, 
covering 900 industries. You can access it for free for basic information, but if 
you want to dig deeper, you’ll have to pay the database piper.
A
C
Base.7 CrunchBase is a free directory of technology companies, 
. They tout nearly 100,000 companies, 131,000 people, and 
.
. That might 
have been true at some point for a short time, because knowledge is the 
. 
Look at all the content you can consume during your company research: cue 
the firehose and open wide. Add to that all the conversations you’ve had with 
colleagues, insiders, recruiters, hiring managers, and friends who give you a 
holistically subjective workplace culture overview (which is very important).
But remember, scarce attention and rote memorization of company clutter 
doesn’t necessarily arm you with the presentation skills you’ll need to win 
over your prospective employer. 
That’s why context is king and queen. Synthesizing everything you’ve learned, 
visualizing how you’ll then fit into the role within the organization, the business 
value you’ll bring to the business today and tomorrow (which we’ll talk about 
in Chapter 14), and how your skills and experience can be best applied to 
their current IT initiatives and why they’ll help drive the productivity, efficiency 
and the bottom line: that’s what matters if you want the right deal, a regular 
paycheck with growth opportunities.
5  www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml
6  www.hoovers.com
7  www.crunchbase.com

151
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Think again about the shotgun analogy. I’ve been using this in marketing and 
PR for years—the fact that so many companies load a piece of promotional 
content that they’ve spent a lot of time on, only to close their eyes and shoot 
without thinking through and researching exactly what they wanted to do, 
why they wanted to do it, and who they wanted to target.
Your window to capture anyone’s attention while making a memorable 
connection is pretty darn small. If you’ve ever read Malcolm Gladwell’s book 
Blink, you know that some of our best decisions are made in 20 seconds 
(think rapid cognition). Twenty seconds. Damn.
Here are three things to consider with your own personal marketing:
• 
Content. Of course we start with you and your consistent 
personal brand. You want your whole-brain marketing mes-
sages—your skills, experience, and the way you’re positioning 
yourself online and in person—to quickly engage and entice 
and motivate potential employers intellectually as well as 
emotionally. 
• 
Placement. What’s the context of your personal marketing? 
Are you targeting the right audience with the right pitch? 
Remember, your short-term and long-term personal 
marketing efforts are not one size fits all. Going in cold is 
never easy, which is why everything we’ve talked about with 
networking and researching and plenty of prep is key. How 
you use any other activities to spark interest and conversation 
definitely needs to be tailored to your employer audience.
• 
Structure. Are you optimizing your personal brand for your 
prospective employer’s experience? Is it easy to access 
everything about you that could help you get the job? Can 
they easily have a conversation with you if they want to know 
more—are you making it easy to contact you? Do your 
personal pitches have clear calls to action for what you want 
them to do and why you’re so valuable to their organizations?
Think like a contextual content marketer. Really.
Prepare for the final stages and the final interviews (more in Chapter 15) with 
the new/old three world of work Rs:
• 
Reach Out (to your networks)
• 
Research (the companies)
• 
Reverberate (to make the most of your networked impact)

Chapter 12 | Zero In on the Company 
152
■ Mindful Moment  Here you are—in the final stages of the job search with a prospective 
employer. You’ve been screened and scrubbed, and now they want to meet with you in person. 
Even if you’ve done a little preliminary research about the company, it’s time to do a little more on 
your primary contacts, other company insiders, and even deeper info about the company itself via 
financial reports, press releases, company thought leadership, and more. Synthesize and 
contextualize why they need you and what you will help the company do. 

pa r t
III
Where to Go 

c h a p t e r
13
Cool Tools for 
Getting a Job
Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic. 
—Arthur C. ClarkeE
.m. and you’ve got classes that you’re already struggling in starting at 7 a.m. 
night—playing video games.
My downfall? The original Legend of Zelda1 for Nintendo when I was in 
college. Oh did I love playing that game. Every. Single. Night. Fortunately for 
me and my grades, that was the last true video game I’ve played since. Nope, 
no Xbox, no PlayStation, Farmville, or Bejeweled or any of those other silly 
Facebook or online games. Bejeweled? C’mon.
Okay, there is the Nintendo Wii below our cable box and the Rock Band 
console in the hall closet, but still. Oh, and when Angry Birds came out it had 
a Pavolvian Zelda effect on me, but no matter who tries to tell me it’s beneficial 
to my work in [enter your line of business here], I still say it’s only a great way 
to let all the life stressors of the day roll away into a mind-numbing, highly 
addictive, slingshot world of vengeful ball-bearing birds and thieving chortling 
pigs. Please, no integrated work–life lessons here.
But can you imagine playing video games in your job search? Maybe you’ve had 
this experience where the game itself is a screening and recruiting tool. 
1 http://www.zelda.com

Chapter 13 | Cool Tools for Getting a Job
156
value in gaming for you as external new job candidate or internal transitional 
candidate in the world of work today. That’s particularly true when we’re 
talking about making the screening part more fun and “engaging” for you. (I 
know, there’s that buzz word again—how many times have you heard the 
recruiters and HR use that with you of late?)
As I talked about in Chapter 12, the value of using video game content to 
screen and recruit you depends on the work being screened for—it’s all about 
the context and what you’re being measured for, what skills they’re screening 
you for, and what experience they want to see come to life inside you. Not 
being recruited to a company as a double-sided-ax-wielding dwarf in the now-
ailing Second Life site where you can be whatever you want to be and hold 
meetings, or each other (kinda like a sexualized Dungeons & Dragons, which 
I also played back in the Zelda days, by the way). Being recruited to your 
company because you’re testing my skills at coding Javascript, along with 
having a little fun? Absolutely. Don’t you think?
According to the Entertainment Software Association:2
2 http://www.theesa.com

157
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
• 
The average game player is 30 years old and has been playing 
games for 12 years—is that you?
• 
The average age of the most frequent game purchaser is 35 
years old—is that you?
• 
Forty-seven percent of all game players are women. In fact, 
women over the age of 18 represent a significantly greater 
portion of the game-playing population (30 percent) than 
boys age 17 or younger (18 percent)—is that you?
Wow. I never would’ve guessed that last one, but it’s cool. And as a talent-
acquisition and talent-management evangelist, I totally get how gaming helps 
to screen and assess. In fact, social gaming to screen and recruit savvy IT pros 
. C
ompanies are programming in the test-taking “fun factor” that improves 
. It also—hopefully—further strengthens the 
.
I can’t tell you how to win the games because so many of them present 
. The results will always be 
.
I’ve watched how naturally my young daughters have 
taken to our iPods and iPads, launching and playing all the toddler learning 
games, videos, and interactive stories all on their own. But they are not just 
playing them—they are working with them and learning. For example, in one 
of the word-builder games, the application sounds out the word and then the 
individual letter sounds on the touch from the scattered letters that spell the 
word. This is pretty simple, yet extremely powerful and, yes, engaging. Imagine 
yourself playing these adult-skill games—how cool would that be versus the 
ol’ logic problems sometimes presented to you during interviews (see Chapter 
15)?
This is what IBM does. And Siemens. And Marriott. And L’Oreal. And the 
military. And many more companies that are launching entertaining social 
screening and recruiting games for you to play, and then if you get the job even 
initially trained and hopefully retained by. The analyst research firm Gartner3 
predicts that by 2014, more than 70 percent of 2,000 global organizations will 
have at least one “social gaming” application, which can range from recruiting 
to mastering a skill to improving employee health. How much fun is that for 
3 http://www.gartner.com

Chapter 13 | Cool Tools for Getting a Job
158
you all? We’ve certainly come a long way from hand-to-eye coordination with 
Pong, haven’t we?
Here’s my formula (thanks to my lovely daughters):
Career Management Gamification + Engaged Talent Communities  
= Highly Qualified External and Internal Applicants and Hires
Because unless they’re playin’, you may not be stayin’. And soon many will be 
playing. Have fun. Heck, some of you might even be involved in creating these 
screening and recruiting video games, giving “gaming the system” a whole new 
meaning.
Be the Operating System
L
U
States Army launched its America’s Army4 game. It has since become 
A
. The Army also then created a 
U.S. Army Experience Center located in Philadelphia 
. 
A
America’s Army website, players must adhere to the Rules of 
E
ROE) and grow in experience as they take on challenges in 
.” Like in the 
Army, accomplishing missions requires a team effort and adherence to the 
seven Army Core Values—loyalty, duty, respect, selfless service, honor, 
integrity, and personal courage. These are integral to being successful in 
America’s Army, which in turn lead to improved sourcing and recruiting into 
the Army. Screw Call of Duty—the Army’s got it goin’ on.
Something that might be closer to home for you is IBM’s CityOne game.5 
CityOne gives players the opportunity to improve industries such as banking, 
retail, energy, and water while providing city solutions worldwide in an online 
game. Players guide industries inside cities through a series of missions. 
Imagine a Sims-like game where players help green-up the environment by 
making critical decisions to improve the cities. How? By hitting revenue and 
profit goals, and increasing customer and citizen satisfaction, all on a limited 
budget. The key takeaways for IBM and you? Players learn about business 
process management, service reuse, and cloud and collaborative technologies 
that keep city organizations and systems more agile. In the same breath, IBM 
might identify you as a potential job candidate for any of their related divisions, 
4 http://www.americasarmy.com
5 http://www-01.ibm.com/software/solutions/soa/innov8/cityone/index.html

159
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
or identify a current employee that should be elsewhere in the organization. 
Again, that’s the purpose of these games: to identify skilled professionals, like 
you, in a variety of reality-based scenarios that are creative and fun.
Or, there’s always Celebrity Apprentice,6 a train wreck for a cause. 
Many assessment companies today, in all flavors and sizes and platforms, now 
offer employers the ability to generate social games on the fly via the Web 
and mobile devices that quiz, test, and evaluate personal and team-building 
strengths, cultural fit, emotional intelligence, and a myriad of other hard and 
soft skills. All in the name of challenging you to challenging fun. Good luck.
■ Mindful Moment  Have you ever played a video game in a job search to evaluate your skills 
Rooms 
HellO
r, more precisely, they might be the waiting rooms for hell.
Don’t look at me—they built them—the companies you want to work for. 
They wooed you in through their career site or the jobs posted elsewhere 
online, leading to a weak-but-saturated section of their warm and fuzzy 
employment brand, promising a brave new world of work. They provided 
overscripted and overproduced employee videos, and sometimes compelling 
job descriptions that promised competitive pay, flexible benefits, maybe some 
telecommuting time and open vacation time, and equipment and development 
allowances. You took the bait, uploaded your resumes or your LinkedIn 
profile, and then completed the application process.
These waiting rooms are, of course, well-branded with their logo likeness and 
taglines, and have hanging on the walls the LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter, G+, 
GitHub, Stack Overflow, Quora, Focus, and many other social and professional 
network logos, all lit up like Hamm’s beer signs from the 1970s with the 
rolling images of calmly moving rivers and canoes and tents up on the bank. 
You felt at home, and at peace, and you really thought you’d get that call.
6 Donald Trump’s reality TV show where stars compete in business tasks and win money to 
donate to their favorite charities.

Chapter 13 | Cool Tools for Getting a Job
160
but then nothing happened, and you grew impatient. Then you got really 
angry when the nothingness compounded and you finally bailed for supposedly 
greener pastures (and other online applications elsewhere). 
of course, i’ve been talking about the proverbial applicant tracking systems 
(aTs) and other similar crM databases that have been around since the late 
1990s, sucking us in ever since and trapping us forever. even if you think you 
know how to game the aTs with keywords, it still doesn’t mean you’re getting 
out of the waiting room black hole anytime soon. for both the active and 
passive among us, at least we’ll have automated job notifications, right? how 
cool is that? not very.
My point is that much work has gone into the same old mousetrap when it 
. That’s the black hole experience, from where no 
. You might have heard about this from your recruiter 
. again, this goes to the point about the black 
hole
s
aTss have had more sparkly light-sucking functionality over the 
 figuratively speaking, of course.
however, even if you’re getting into those companies via the back door from 
peer or recruiter referrals, most companies are going to want you to go 
through their hoops; they want to capture you in their databases so they can 
keep sending you jobs to apply for if you don’t get them the first time.
Think about it this way: a big part of the employment journey is the front 
end, so the front-end research you do, as well as the “candidate experience” 
of applying for the job, will certainly give you an indication of how much this 
employer wants you. The crappier the experience, the less likely the hiring 
process is going to be any better, much less the job itself. The more light 
shone on the experience, the more likely the companies will start feeling the 
backlash, publicly, and finally do something about their overall world of work 
culture.
for the second year in a row, the candidate experience awards7 has done 
just this—surveying actual applicants from hundreds of companies, and asking 
them how their candidate experience was. according to the candes, which is 
their short nickname for the awards, employers have the opportunity to 
benchmark their candidate experience against that of other companies (which 
7  http://www.thecandidateexperienceawards.org

161
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
is good for you), and they have the opportunity to participate in at third-party 
survey of their employment candidates (you) to see what they really think of 
the company’s process.
Thank goodness.
The 2012 awards, announced in October at the 15th annual HR Technology 
Conference & Expo, had more than 17,000 responses. Mercy. Winners (and 
companies you should check out for opportunities) included the following:
• 
Automatic Data Processing, Inc.
• 
Achievers
• 
AT&T
• 
Boston Scientific
• 
Capital One
• 
Cliffs Natural Resources
• 
Deloitte
• 
Deluxe Corporation
• 
Hyatt Corporation
• 
Intuit Inc.
• 
Mayo Clinic
• 
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
• 
PepsiCo
• 
Sage North America
• 
Sapient
• 
Wall Street Services
Dante’s Job Board Purgatorio
So if the company’s own job site is a potential waste of time, then what about 
the ubiquitous job boards?
We’ve already covered online profiles, professional “social” networking sites, 
and company research sites that can give you the insight you need on the 
companies and individuals you hope to be working for and with. 
But job boards? Really? Many in my industry have claimed that job boards are 
dead, just as many have claimed that the resume is dead—both claims being 

Chapter 13 | Cool Tools for Getting a Job
162
unfounded (even though, as you know, I want the resume to die). Nobody 
gets a job via a job board any more, right?
According to some of the latest research from Internet recruiting pioneers 
Gerry Crispin (one of the creators of the Candidate Experience Awards) and 
Mark Mehler of CareerXroads,8 over 20 percent of external company hires 
came from job boards—the more than 16,000 job boards in business today. 
Compare that to not quite 4 percent of hires coming from social media and 
28 percent coming from referrals (which, yes, in turn, can spring from social 
and many other sources).
So job boards aren’t dead, although there hasn’t been that much innovation in 
career seekers for decades. Then what’s so cool about job boards? Well, 
. When we went mobile, that is. 
. That’s not a surprise 
. What might be surprising, though, is that according to a 2012 
Bank report,9 about three quarters of the world’s population now has 
. The same report, titled 
“I
Communications for Development 2012: Maximizing 
. Some of you probably 
developed at least, what, a billion of them?
A much smaller but valuable subset for you are the mobile-friendly versions 
of job search apps from a variety of job boards and services, making it easier 
and more convenient to do the following:
• 
Search for relevant IT jobs.
• 
SMS or text for relevant IT jobs.
• 
Set up automated alerts for relevant IT jobs.
• 
Apply for relevant IT jobs by uploading your resume or 
submitting your LinkedIn profile (a work in progress via 
mobile devices and tablets because resumes, cover letters, 
and related work samples aren’t kept on those—unless you’re 
storing in the cloud).
8  http://www.careerxroads.com
9  http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/2012/07/17/mobile-phone-access-reaches-three-
quarters-planets-population

163
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
• 
Be sent application reminders to apply via your laptop or 
desktop and not your mobile devices.
• 
Review your application history for relevant IT jobs.
These could be native app downloads for Apple and Android products, or 
browser-based apps that are configured for mobile rendering via Javascript 
and HTML that don’t require a download (not all are created equal, by the 
way). The following is a short list of job boards that are IT specific or have a 
robust IT jobs database—but more important, they have mobile apps for your 
job search convenience.
Dice10D
ice is one of the biggest career sites for technology and engineering 
IT jobs to search from and a 
Ruby on Rails.
.com11
. Monster.com is a global 
who need people. It’s more of a solution site because it has gone from a “job 
board” to being a global provider of job-seeker, career management, 
recruitment, and talent management products and services. And they’ve got 
an IT resource talent community called Inside Tech.
CareerBuilder.com12
CareerBuilder has been around longer than Monster.com and claims to be the 
largest online job site in the United States. And yet like Monster, CareerBuilder 
has had to diversify its products and services to stay viable in the recruitment 
market, including job seeking, career management, recruitment, and talent 
management products and services. It has also launched CBmobile Ambassador, 
a mobile employee referral app that can help you search for jobs, refer jobs to 
your personal or professional networks, and share job openings via email or 
text message. One of a gazillion domains that CareerBuilder owns, Sologig is 
10  http://www.dice.com
11  http://www.monster.com
12  http://www.careerbuilder.com

Chapter 13 | Cool Tools for Getting a Job
164
a site they made their own and relaunched over five years ago. It is really more 
of an IT and engineering job portal than a talent community. 
Indeed13
Talk about another monster of a job search site: Indeed has more than 70 
million unique visitors and 1.5 billion job searches per month. Indeed is 
available in more than 50 countries and 26 languages, covering 94 percent of 
global GDP.
Simply Hired14
S
Hired is a job site with more than 30 million unique visitors per month 
. Simply Hired also connects employers and candidates via its 
. 
15
LinkU p is cool because it only aggregates jobs from company websites, 
. This way, 
LinkUp are technically always fairly current (dependent on the 
company websites, of course) and shouldn’t contain any fake jobs.
Beyond.com16
Beyond.com touts itself as a career network that connects job seekers and 
employers through 70 career channels and 3,000 industry and regional 
communities, including some that are IT and engineering focused.
You’ve also got recruitment tech companies that provide other companies 
with “quality mobile recruitment solutions”—say that five times fast now. 
Two of the most progressive are JIBE and Jobs2Web. Of course, unless you’re 
applying to companies who use companies like these, you won’t experience 
the fairly seamless flow from mobile touch point to applicant tracking system. 
Sorry, I can’t help you there.
13  http://www.indeed.com
14  http://www.simplyhired.com
15  http://www.linkup.com
16  http://www.beyond.com

165
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
But for what it’s worth, JIBE does integrate with all of the major ATSs, including 
Taleo, Kenexa, iCIMS, Jobvite, Peoplesoft, ADP Virtual Edge, and Silkroad—as 
does Jobs2Web. So if you’re applying to companies the traditional way, 
whether that’s via mobile access or your laptop/desktop, depending on the 
company, you’re bound to hit one of the above ATSs.
But Wait, There’s More
Hope comes in the form of two sites: GitHub and Stack Overflow. I talked of 
them a little in Chapter 2 and will expand more here because they’re both 
really the technical community sites de jour these days. Many of you have 
probably taken a dip in their knowledge-sharing pools.
I
. Since its launch in 2008, GitHub has amassed over 2.4 users and 
.1 million  repositories (software development projects) according to 
. “Git” refers to a very fast and efficient distributed version control 
GitHub is just that: a G
it revision control system. There are paid plans for those who want to 
. G
itHub creates a technical community where an entire ecosystem of folks 
.
In GitHub, you can create your own profile that lets you know what’s 
happening in the community. You’ll see an ongoing list of Open Source projects 
hosted at GitHub. And remember my whole rant about how the resume 
should die in Chapter 8? Well, GitHub profiles are being shared as the new 
online technical profile, much like many professionals already do with LinkedIn 
(although, again, many of you are tired of getting “hit on” by recruiters on any 
professional social network). GitHub also holds regular “meet-ups” in cities 
globally, because we all know how important face-time is to solidify the online 
relationships we’ve started. Kind of like network dating without the awkward 
intimacy expectations.
Then there’s Stack Overflow: a “question and answer” programming site for 
programmers. Like you. The site was launched in 2008 by Jeff Atwood and 
Joel Spolsky, and the name was chosen by the readers of Coding Horror17, Jeff 
Atwood’s programming blog. Stack Overflow prides itself from being scam-
spam free, even though it’s completely free (unusual for a site like this to be 
both). What’s cool about this site (if you haven’t already experienced it) is 
17  http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/

Chapter 13 | Cool Tools for Getting a Job
166
that it’s run you and your programming peers. You’re free to edit anything and 
everything inside it like a wiki, sharing your programming insight with many 
like-minded others, regardless of what programming language or what 
operating system you use.
I’m a big proponent of true online community, so Stack Overflow makes the 
grade here. They regularly appoint moderators from within the community, 
and sometimes they even hold moderator elections if there’s enough 
participation. You can register for free and if you’re interested, you can earn 
“reputation points” or “karma” and “badges” to win cool stuff. Yep, gamification 
is baked right into the Q&A platform for your participatory pleasure. Lastly, 
all the user-generated content is licensed under a Creative Commons license.
Holes
. The companies who are developing cool job search technologies are 
. Maybe 
I
. 
. 
You, however, are not. That’s the business reality of job search. And two 
downturns into this new millennium, you’re not going to be paying for any 
direct job-seeking tools beyond career management folks who help you prep 
your resumes, your cover letters, and your elevator pitch. No, most of the 
job-seeking tools available to you are free, as they should be, in markets 
bullish or bearish. Every single recruiting technology I’ve seen since the rise of 
the ATS has been about getting to the short list of supposedly qualified 
candidates quicker, faster, and better, not about getting you to the job quicker, 
faster, and better. Applicant-to-job matching algorithms have certainly 
improved, and you can sign up for a myriad of new services, for free, that claim 
to get you to the right job quicker, and to introduce you to networks of 
networks of networks—a referral free-for-all.
And that’s again why all the company, job, and people research I’ve written 
about as well as the networking, networking, networking is so important for 
you. Hiring is a human endeavor. No amount of cool technology will ever 
change that, even artificial technology—something I once touted when I 
worked for Tapestry.Net. Even if you know how to plant the right keywords 
in your resume, CV, or online profile—and I’m talking about search-optimizing 
them so the systems sorting and filtering on specific IT skills and experience 

167
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
will bring you up out of the black hole depths—you want to get the call so 
you can separate yourself from the screening layer.
There is one bright spot I see in the talent tech landscape as of today, though, 
that’s appropriately called Bright.18 It’s still early for the company, but for over 
a year and a half they conducted one of the largest resume-to-job description 
studies in history. Their study included more than 2.8 million resumes, 8.6 
million job seekers, hundreds of recruiters and HR professionals, and a team 
of 15 data scientists and engineers. The data from their research was then 
used to build the Bright Score, which launched in the summer of 2012.
The Bright Score looks at hundreds of features on a resume quickly, allowing 
them to analyze and score a holistic view of you, the job candidate, in the time 
I’ve heard that before). They claim to immediately identify the candidates 
I know they don’t—
. They claim to have calculated a billion B
right Scores with a comparative accuracy of 93 percent when tested against 
. 
. Hiring is still a human endeavor, which complicates things further. A
nd that takes us back to the black hole waiting rooms. There are those who 
.
The latter would be many of us (along with millions of others), although I’ve 
done the first two as well. Almost two years ago I had gone through a high-
level job search with a well-known firm in the HR B2B marketplace. Considering 
that they should know better the best practices of recruiting and hiring, I was 
left with inconsistent acknowledgment and no closure. Even thought I didn’t 
get the job, I was led to believe that there were other opportunities. And 
then nothing but crickets chirping in the night.
Right after that experience I wrote about how employers owe us, the 
applicants, at least two things regardless of the position level being applied 
for:
• 
Acknowledgment, simply that you’ve applied and we 
acknowledge that. Thank you.
• 
Closure, simply that you are or are not qualified for the 
position, that you are or are not getting the job, there are or 
18  http://www.bright.com

Chapter 13 | Cool Tools for Getting a Job
168
are not other opportunities available, and we acknowledge all 
these things in a consistent and timely manner. Thank you.
Two things. That’s it. I’m sure many of you agree. 
But this dysfunction is not really a function of technology. It’s a dysfunction of 
human ineffectiveness and process inefficiency that has remained mostly 
unchanged for decades when it comes to screening, recruiting, and hiring.
The experience just outlined was an active job search. But what happens 
when it’s a passive person being tapped? That would be me as well (along with 
millions of others). The past few years I’ve been “tapped on the shoulder” by 
a few known HR/recruiting B2B tech brands. Most of them were incompetent 
communication fests that led to more questions than answers.
A
. Again, crickets chirping in the night. You’ve just got to be 
. Leveraging the job search 
. Once you’ve been found, then 
.
.
E
. If they tap you on the shoulder, 
just ask them professionally (firmly, but nicely) to please speak in complete 
sentences and finish their story, hopefully the one that ends with you getting 
the job.
Thank you. There’s an app for that. It’s called the human brain.
■ Mindful Moment  Do you apply for jobs via job boards? Keep in mind that they’re not dead. 
Twenty percent of hires made today still come from job boards. What’s made them easier to deal 
with is the mobile technology permeating every aspect of our lives today. Granted, many of you still 
go in to the applicant black hole when you apply, but alas, don’t give up hope and don’t stop 
leveraging the little hipness you’re given. Video games and job boards—that’s what you get—so 
work them as well as you do your networks.

c h a p t e r
14
From Best 
Don’t tell me the moon is shining; show me the glint of light on broken glass.
—Anton Chekhov
They won’t call you just because you think you’re all that and a bag of tricks. 
Really, they won’t. Even after they’ve screened your resume, cover letter, 
online profile, blog, and shared ideas across open-source sites, and even if 
you’ve got the IT and business skills they’re looking for. If you’re not making 
your business case, you’re not getting the job. Being a jack-of-all-trades 
generalist and a best-practice-touting man or woman about town doesn’t 
hold the same cachet it used to have.
For decades after World War II, employers embraced generalists across a 
wide variety of roles and industries, even in some IT roles, because they 
wanted employees who knew a lot of little things. Not that they’d ever need 
all that widespread-yet-thin knowledge, but if they did, they’d have the upper 
hand and competitive advantage. Or so they thought.
Knowing a little about a lot of things didn’t necessarily solve the business 
problems at hand, though. The other decades-old issue of executive 
management keeping the top-down, hierarchical “do what we tell you when 
we tell you” method in place also no longer solved the day-to-day and long-
term business problems. The powers that be didn’t have all the answers, and 

Chapter 14 | From Best Practice to Business Case
170
.
1 http://www.newsobserver.com/2012/10/01/2383480/lenovo-expanding-in-guilford-county.
html#storylink=misearch
2 http://articles.cnn.com/2012-06-28/tech/tech_mobile_google-nexus-q-usa_1_foxconn-andy-
rubin-android?_s=PM:Tech
3 http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/25/technology/foxconn-plant-in-china-closed-after-worker-
riot.html

171
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
■ Mindful Moment  Millions of jobs aren’t coming back to the United States or Europe. You’ve 
heard that enough, I know. But software now runs the world, from anywhere and any time, 
automating many of the nontechnical tasks globally, leaving most of the IT work to the talented 
professionals such as yourself. And manufacturing, especially for many electronics and automobiles, 
will be happening in the United States (again), and already is. 
Be a Specialist
We’ve made some pretty special things over the years, haven’t we? The latest 
tech booms have resulted in software development, social networking, cloud 
. (That Apple won’t embrace yet, which bums me 
.)B
ut I digress. This has all been a good thing for you technology professionals—
. This is why I’ve been harping on 
. Now, knowing a lot about a few things that make the 
greatest impact on the organization you want to work for is where it’s at. I’m 
a big fan of the “blue ocean strategy,4” creating new business markets where 
there were none before, without immediate direct competition and the 
potential buyer segments as seemingly endless as the sea itself. It might sound 
like a lofty goal for the individual job seeker, but creating a specialized business 
case of who we are and who we can serve and new business paradigms we can 
breed in our wake, makes us more likely to differentiate ourselves in the 
marketplace. That’s better than being lost in yet another ATS.
Whatever the IT role, we’re in the age of the highly specialized specialist with 
nothing but opportunity in front of you all. For those individuals who not only 
have the skill sets employers want and need today, but also those who position 
themselves in the best employable light, that helps the organizations you’re 
interested in glean applicable insight to their business problems. That’s the big 
difference between having the right stuff and selling the right stuff; the 
difference between speaking best practice and making the business case.
The most successful companies today are the ones who hire and apply those 
business cases—the specialized matrices of leadership at all levels and in all 
4  http://www.blueoceanstrategy.com

Chapter 14 | From Best Practice to Business Case
172
roles. No, this ain’t socialized human capital, just plain ol’ capitalism with an 
evolving free market foundation. That gets smarter and smarter, more 
productive and efficient.
■ Mindful Moment  You as a technical professional know that the only way to remain relevant 
and marketable is to specialize—to know a lot about a focused area of expertise that solves the 
right business problems. Talking IT best practices is not the same as making the business case of 
why you should be the one they hire. 
E
. She’s in 
. I’m no resume-writing expert, but I do understand the 
.
S
Dedicated and hard-working, with an unmatched drive to 
produce results.
Continually recognized for an outstanding work ethic with 
positions of increasing responsibility.
• 
Strong communicator with the ability to work independently 
or in a team environment.
• 
Proven history of self-motivation and eagerness to take on 
new responsibilities.
Now, by no means am I making fun of her; she’s a very intelligent and sought-
after business professional and these are all admirable qualifications. However, 
they’re nonspecific best practices, and although they convey her strengths, 
they don’t really tell me exactly:
• 
What results she actually produced and how they impacted 
the business.
• 
How her work ethic prompted increased responsibility.
• 
How her independence and collaborative skills impacted the 
business.
• 
How her initiative impacted the business.

173
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
This got me thinking more and more about the differences between talking 
best practices and making the business case of why you should be hired. 
Listen, you might have the hottest skills west of the Mississippi and you could 
be in the warm embrace of recruiters schmoozing you to steal you away to 
paradise, but those recruiters might be thinking only about their payday. If 
they aren’t positioning you not only in the best but the right business case 
light and touting the problems you’ll help the organization solve, then you 
might find your friend the recruiter gone like a ghost.
During my tenure in the magnificent HR/recruiting marketing realm, both on 
the vendor side and the practitioner side, my colleagues and I spouted best 
practices over and over again to our “buyers”; that they should just buy 
“because.”E
.
. We market ourselves with our 
.
convince our potential “buyers” of their short- and long-term return-on-
investment (ROI). True, it’s more difficult to make the business case when 
you’re a brand new startup with limited, if any, results to date, but that will 
come with time, and the more you work on the direct experience spin, the 
quicker indirect generalities will fall away like failed business models.
Being bold and taking risks can come with making the business case as well. In 
fact, my dear friend is expanding her existing career—by starting her own 
business soon.
Right on. From the figurative to the literal career path magic. And from general 
best practice to career business case and you’re in … the door at least. There 
are no guarantees you’ll get the job, but no matter what you do, don’t stop 
making the case.
Some of you might be asking, “What about the gaps in my history? How do I 
make a business case with that?”
Consider this conversation that I had almost 12 years ago when I worked 
briefly as an internal sourcer and recruiter for a recruiting software and 
services company.

Chapter 14 | From Best Practice to Business Case
174
“If there are employment gaps or stints shorter than a year, screen 
’em out.”
“Why?” I asked.
“Because that means there are deficiencies, problems, or they’re 
flaky job jumpers and can’t be trusted. We’ve got clients to service 
with viable candidates with continuous work, and that means at 
least one year per job,” the client services manager answered.
I frowned. “But, what if our matching software identifies them as 
viable candidates? Shouldn’t we still keep them in the short list until 
they’re screened further?”
No, screen ’em out.”
But that doesn’t make good business sense until they’re at least 
.”
. “Are you serious?”
Yes, I  thought. I am. The irony is that in China and India, it’s common for 
U
States. 
United States. Only 
during the brief dot-com window did we see techies spring from job to job 
when demand was high, specialized skills came at a premium, and generalists 
were hired right off the street. (The hiring manager I was speaking with earlier 
must’ve missed that memo.)
I thought it was unfortunate then, and I think it is unfortunate now, that we 
still hold these gaps and job hops against job applicants, especially those who 
have been out of full-time work for any length of time, even if they’ve cobbled 
together part-time or project work just to stay alive. (Remember Chapter 4? 
The contingent workforce is on the rise.)
Sure hundreds of thousands of jobs have been added in 2012, and IT is hotter 
than ever in most metro regions, but it’s still not a great market considering 
that hundreds of thousands more have walked away from their job searches.
Maybe there are those of you, like me, who’ve walked away from full-time jobs 
and experimented with entrepreneurial endeavors and self-employment and 
contract work, and might even continue to do so. That results in the riddling 
of your resumes and online profiles with slight disfigurements that can be 
quite misleading. 

175
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Here’s my advice to you job seekers who have any or all of the above in your 
work history: Tell a story, keep it real, and make your business case.
■ Mindful Moment  Generalizing your qualifications that you’re hard-working, experienced, and 
a strong team player isn’t enough. Unmeasurable generalities won’t differentiate you from your 
competitors, the other folks vying for the same positions. You must be specific in the telling of your 
story—sharing what results your IT skills and experience produced and how they affected the 
business.
I can’t help you with backward employers whose HR pros, recruiters, and 
. I’ve been a writer throughout all previous 
I’m learning every day, I 
.F
LinkedIn profile titled S
ummary”? That’s something I already talked about in Chapter 8, but it’s 
. The summary is an opportunity for you to 
I’ve done blah, blah, and blah, because that’s one of the 
first things folks scan when they’re looking at your profile, besides your 
picture. (And yes, it could be your “summary” atop your resume, if you insist.)
Use the professional “Summary” sections across all your online networks to 
immediately highlight the following:
• 
Your career objective(s) and what you love to do.
• 
How your previous and current experience validates your 
career objective(s).
• 
Your results and accomplishments and how they could benefit 
a future employer, partner, or investor (hey, you never know), 
even if you’re not “in the market.”
• 
Your personal interests and how those round out your world 
as well as for a future employer, partner, or investor.
I try to update mine regularly, whether I’m looking or not. Write economically 
but make sure not to be too vague; specificity and the right keywords are 
critical for you to be found and get read. Use your voice and keep it real. 

Chapter 14 | From Best Practice to Business Case
176
In addition to the preceding suggestions, the following are for those of you 
who still craft and send cover letters, which is most likely many of you, 
because it’s our opportunity to truly home in on a specific role, sent along 
electronically with our resumes, profiles, or some combination thereof. Like 
the online summary, the following are long-established practices from many of 
my career management friends:
• 
Always include a cover letter with your resume or profile; it 
helps you stand out versus simply “applying” for the position.
• 
Customize the cover letter to the job you’re applying for. 
Remember all the research you did in Chapter 9? Make sure 
the hiring manager on the other end gets that you’re serious.
Incorporate the three whys—why you’re interested in their 
organization, why you’re interested in the role, and why 
you’re the one to bring the right problem solving to the role 
and team.
Keep your cover letter to one page. You’ll have the opportunity 
to share greater details of your work in other contexts via 
show-and-tell interviews and more.
Proofread, proofread, proofread—and then have someone 
else do it. It’s not just for spelling and grammar, which much 
of the English-speaking world is getting worse at, but it’s also 
to ensure you’re addressing the right contacts and companies. 
Nothing kills a job search quicker than addressing the wrong 
person.
It’s really a never-ending story, this job search journey we take, one that you 
should review and revise regularly at least every few months to ensure you’re 
making your business case. Because no one’s going to make it for you.
■ Mindful Moment  Make the time to fill in any gaps in your job experience and prep your pitch 
and your story. It’s a never-ending story, your job search, and you need to take the time to make 
the business case and talk ROI turkey. Do it in your online profile and your resume and your cover 
letters and your interviewing.
Breaking Best Practice Down Further
I’ve been in marketing a long time, particularly in B2B marketing, where I’ve 
helped hundreds of companies make the business case to other companies. 
Rarely do the companies have only one sole buyer; there are many different 

177
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
buyers and influencers to convince, and it’s no easy task when there are one 
or two holdouts, no matter the number of champions you have inside.
The job hunt is similar to B2B sales. As I’ve already mentioned, each of us is a 
business in practice; we’re either a startup, or we’re an established business. 
Companies are looking for our “products” to be purchased, acquired, and 
invested in. It takes time to make your business case—it’s a longer term sales 
cycle for many professionals today—and you’ve got to educate your “buyers” 
across multiple touch points over time, including using case studies (your 
previous accomplishments in the workplace). Then you must wait as they 
seep into their mindset until “Bam!”
Segue to personal marketing communications and business development. The 
B2B company—Me, Inc.—are busy 
.
.N
ow, how many conversations does it take to make the business case and 
. Wizard I’m not. (Although that would be an interesting case 
study if I were.)
Whatever the case, I’m not suggesting that you do a SWOT analysis,5 and 
spend an inordinate amount of time developing your personal brand and 
crafting your messages and pitches—the job search can be painful and tedious 
enough already, exposing you to social situations you might always struggle 
with. However, I do recommend you take the time to do the following:
• 
Create a succinct, one-sentence marketing message of who 
you are (even if it’s a little jam-packed): I’m a human resource 
and recruiting B2B software and services marketing strategist, 
business development and sales professional, evangelist, 
entrepreneur, analyst, advisor, manager, and writer. (That’s 
me, by the way, for those of you keeping score at home.) This 
is something you can use in your primary online profile, your 
other professional and personal profiles, as a headline to your 
5 A SWOT analysis is a strategic planning method used to evaluate the Strengths, 
Weaknesses/Limitations, Opportunities, and Threats involved in a project or in a business 
venture.

Chapter 14 | From Best Practice to Business Case
178
personal blog, in your cover letters—basically anywhere 
you’re pitching yourself and you want to leverage the 
proverbial yet consistent soundbyte: I am me. Hire me.
• 
Showcase your accomplishments with real-time results. 
Making the business case means highlighting how you’ve 
helped improve the previous organizations you’ve worked 
for. Faster time to market, increased revenues by X, reduced 
system downtime by Y: whatever the specifics are, tell them 
in a tight-knit story with the payoff being the results. Show 
them in fact, in the written word, in audio or video formats, 
the stories of your professional exploits by using your profiles 
or your blogs. Heck, bring them in person to show at your 
interview (laptop, tablet, flash drive). Just make sure your 
stories are true, consistent, and validated by your references. 
Profile yourself in a way that makes you unique, a blue ocean 
market unto itself; the employer who takes a dip into your 
warm water will swim unfatigued forever.
Speaking of those … again. Like the vetted case studies 
businesses use for marketing purposes, the career path 
accomplishments you craft in easily delivered stories and 
varied formats must be verifiable. Make sure you have your 
references and referrals at the ready to validate it all. Really. 
As I revealed in Chapter 6, people make things up all the time 
to further their careers, and no sooner than that misinfor-
mation is revealed, your career aspirations at that particular 
employer are most likely dead in the now bloody Red Sea, 
lost among the chum of your fellow competitors bleeding out 
their professional lies. You will need others to validate your 
business case, so make sure there won’t be any skeletons in 
your accomplishment closet.
Like I said, move from best practice to business case and you’re in. At least in 
for the final interview. That’s what we’ll talk about next.
■ Mindful Moment  Highlighting your previous accomplishments in consistent detail is critical 
to your job search. Think like a B2B marketer. Knowing that your message will take time to seep 
into the mindset of your buyer, the hiring manager and employer, the influencers like management 
and HR and possible colleagues, besides the referral champions you might have inside. Create a 
one-sentence marketing message, showcase your ROI in various mediums, and make sure your 
references will validate them.

c h a p t e r
15
Interviewing,  
When you go in for a job interview, I think a good thing to ask is if they ever 
press charges.
—Jack HandyG
ood God, how I miss “Deep Thoughts by Jack Handy,” from Saturday Night 
. 1 Anybody remember those?
I’ll bet the above quote is funny to many of you, while at the same time 
revealing the wonderfully painful experience known as the in-person job 
interview. The one where your mouth is dry, your forehead and hands are 
slick with sweat, and you say and do quite inappropriate things. 
And the interviewee hasn’t even entered the room yet. (Rim shot, please.)
Years and years (and years) ago, when I worked for San Jose State University, 
I was out to lunch with my boss one day. While this wasn’t an interview for a 
new position per se, it was an informal interview for a promotion within the 
program in which I worked. He had asked the week before if I wanted to go 
to a well-known Japanese restaurant in the heart of San Jose’s Japan Town. I 
joked that I didn’t eat sushi (at the time, anyway), and he half-smiled and told 
me that there was more to Japanese food than sushi.
What I didn’t tell him is that I had never eaten at a Japanese restaurant, so I 
really had no context other that what I had seen in movies and on TV, and 
from my friends who ate sushi.
1 http://www.deepthoughtsbyjackhandey.com.

Chapter 15 | Interviewing, Part 2 
180
.

181
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
■ Mindful Moment  Have you screwed up during an interview? Said something stupid? Did 
something stupid? Put both feet in your mouth while trying to explain how you singlehandly coded 
the entire Facebook platform, but then got shafted when it came to kudos? C’mon. Don’t be a 
doofus. Keep it real.
Get to Know Me
The interviewing dos and don’ts have been shared since the beginning of 
modern workplace time, all of them decades in the making. As I pointed out 
in Chapter 7, more and more companies are using a mix of recorded and live 
. But it does indicate that our Internet 
. Combined, 
. If you’ve ever done business around the globe, 
I’m doing now, you know what I mean. Who needs sleep anyway?B
ut, of course, there’s still a place for the live, in-person interview. Particularly 
. The startup culture prides itself on having its early 
teams, which usually are made up of in-house engineers. This helps to solidify 
product development as well as cultural cohesion. Can you still get that job 
virtually? I know a lot of folks in the HR/recruiting space who would say yes, 
and I feel that way too, especially those of us who’ve been working more 
remotely than not for years. 
But the process of in-person interviewing to hire local isn’t unique to the 
Valley startup culture. Many enterprises prefer to have their IT teams onsite, 
working together around the globe. It was only about five years ago when 
HP’s experiment of allowing their IT folks to work remotely was dismantled, 
and everyone was pulled inside again. Sure, there’s something to being close 
to the systems and servers, without issues of layered firewall remote access. 
Companies working on locked-down military and other sensitive and secretive 
government contracts have no choice in that regard. That’s why employers 
relocate the brainpower they need, and why in-person interviews for the 
short list in certain technical, managerial, and CTO positions will always be 
used.
Then again, engineering teams working together globally are virtually 
connected all over the world, though they may be hired locally. No matter 

Chapter 15 | Interviewing, Part 2 
182
where you end up working, you’ll more than likely still have an in-person 
interview with your future boss and team. Remember, whether you’ll be 
working down the street or around the world, hiring always has been and 
always will be a human endeavor. We prefer live, face-to-face meetings to live 
streaming whenever possible—usually in one-on-one interviews, group 
interviews, and relaxed social settings—to ensure a cultural fit.
I Can’t Say It Enough—You’re Not That Cool
So, after Tapestry.Net went belly up in 2001, and I did some consulting for 
about a year, I started to apply locally for product marketing positions at 
technology companies. One of those applications was for a marketing position 
Santa Cruz division of a tech company specializing in defense, homeland 
. Back then, just as most 
. 
A
About Us” pages. 
. 
I
. IT pros 
. Anyone applying at a technology 
a deep dive. Hiring managers worth their salt know that you’re not going to 
understand the r business underpinnings of the company, but you’d better 
know more than what’s in the “About Us” message.
That wasn’t my problem; the company’s information was quite clear. I just 
didn’t prepare enough. Period. I gave the position description and the “About 
Us” a cursory read, and I went into the interview thinking I’d be all right. They 
eviscerated me—the entire interview team, which included four individuals, 
all of whom I had known would be in the room. One question at a time. I’m 
surprised I wasn’t drenched in sweat by the end of the interview. It was 
horrible, and when I left, I tried to convince myself that I had a chance in hell.
Which I didn’t. And I was never called by the VP of marketing again.
Winging it isn’t the best interview strategy if you’re really interested in the job 
and in working for the company. This is why I’ve emphasized that you do your 
due diligence and research the company, the position, and the players prior to 
even getting the callback for an interview. The employers are doing their 
research on you—every little bit they can. 

183
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Remember, it’s also not just about what you know as you go into the interview; 
it’s also about the context of what you know. Meaning, how are you going to 
take all your skills, expertise, and knowledge and apply them in the role? How 
are you going to help move the business dials in the right direction? Chapter 
14 was all about making your business case and projecting your positive return 
for the company if they hire you. That is what’s going to elevate you above 
your competition. 
And lastly, if you know who’s going to be in the room, learn a little bit about 
each of them beforehand. Connecting personally with the interviewers can 
make all the difference in the final selection process, especially if you’ve already 
made the skill-and-expertise grade. Employers want to hire the best talent, 
sure, but we also like to work with those we like. S
.
. Shut Up.D
o let them talk some. Really. Actually, more than just some. Nothing kills an 
.” That was another interview problem I had: 
. Some of it did help me connect with a few of the 
. I could tell halfway through the interview 
I was talking way too much—but sadly, I didn’t shut up. Blah. Blah. Blah.
Most interview experts agree that you should answer the questions fully, yet 
succinctly—putting your responses in the context of how you’re going to 
solve problems and help the company. Conversely, don’t answer in short 
bursts of nervous word strings, meaning that you shouldn’t answer with a 
simple yes or no—or yes or no with a few qualifying words on the end. Those 
answers make it difficult for your interviewers to get to know you and to 
judge if you’re the right person for the position. 
Prior to your interviews practice listening to questions and focusing on 
responding concisely, going off on as few tangents as possible. You have no 
control over how interviewers approach the question asking; they could be 
ramblers themselves or stunted talkers (not much editorializing beyond the 
question).
And, good God, listen. I can’t emphasize that enough. No matter how nervous 
you are or how much is on the line. Listening is the most important part of a 
quality reciprocal communication. You may glean something that will help you 
seal the deal, whether you have more interview rounds to go or not. So, bring 
a note pad and take notes. The old-fashioned way. Actually, write in long-hand 
or some short-hand that you can read. But write. 

Chapter 15 | Interviewing, Part 2 
184
Some of you technophiles may be asking yourself: “Hey, why can’t I use my 
laptop or tablet? I used them in college to take notes. What’s the big dif?” 
Kids, if you’re writing down your notes, you’re much less likely to get distracted 
by your email or your social networks, or an instant message that comes in. 
And your future employer can see that you’re paying attention and writing, 
not distracted. However, there may be instances when you’re talking code 
shop with your interviewers and it’s encouraged that you have your laptop 
out to compare notes. You’ll know when it’s appropriate and when it’s not.
Listening is critical in the moment before you answer any question. You want 
to make sure you understand what is being asked and why. So do not be shy 
if you don’t understand the question or the context. Getting clarification 
conveys the impression that you’re listening and that you’re in the moment, 
. You can’t do much about a poor interviewer (which 
. (I know, what the hell is it with: “If 
Relax
I
. They are asking you 
will help you get the job—depending on your answers. The 
business case, the company, the hiring manager (if you know ahead of time), 
others who might be on the interview team, the better. In my late teens and 
early 20s, I used to suffer from severe panic attacks. If you’ve ever experienced 
them, you know that even 30 seconds of a panic attack feels like a frickin’ 
lifetime. What helped me long term was relaxation techniques that slowed 
my heart rate, lowered my blood pressure, relaxed my breathing rate, in-
creased the blood flow to my major muscles, and heightened my concentration, 
among other benefits.
Some relaxation techniques include:
Visualization. This was one of the first techniques I learned to help me 
relax. What you do is create images and a story in your head that takes you 
on a peaceful visual journey to a relaxing place or situation. Visualization can 
include using as many senses as you can to take the journey as real as you can. 
Years before I lived by the ocean, I imagined relaxing at the ocean and, mercy 
me, did that help. 
Progressive muscle relaxation. This technique is all about focusing in on 
a specific muscle group, tensing it and then relaxing it again. Usually, you start 

185
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
at your toes and work your way all the way up to the top of your head. Focus 
on slowly tensing and then relaxing each muscle group. It helps you become 
more aware of physical sensations and mindful of being in the moment. Sorry 
to get all Zen on you, but this works.
Lastly, and this should go without saying, especially if you are a nervous type, 
when you’re in the interview room, do not check your cellphone, your email, 
your texts, or Foursquare or Facebook. Do not eat or drink (unless otherwise 
sanctioned by the interviewers). Do not do anything but the interview.
Again with Just the Facts, Jack
This goes without saying as well, but needs a reminder: don’t make stuff up. E
. If you don’t know the answer, don’t invent it. Tell them you don’t know 
. Don’t make shit up. A
nd make sure you can answer any questions about what you’ve used to 
. This 
.
. Scenario-based interviewing happens quite 
. Maybe you’ll be asked to do some coding or to triage a network 
system problem. Who knows? Whatever it is, you better be prepared to put 
the money you want where your mouth is.
More than likely, you will be tested during the interview or in ensuing 
interviews (if there are multiple events). Stick to what you know, and don’t try 
to fudge what you don’t, especially if you’re given a whiteboard test and asked 
to solve a programming, engineering, networking problem—especially if it’s 
live, in front of God and everyone. Or, it may be a simulation test, in which 
they sit you down in a room and in front of a terminal and give you a business 
scenario they want you to try to solve. This test is not so much about whether 
or not you solve the problem but, rather, about how attempt to solve it—the 
paths you take, the resources you use, the questions you ask, and so on.
What About Gaps?
If you’ve got gaps in your professional history and you’re asked about them 
during the interview—which, if your interviewers are any good, they will—
don’t evade the question nor say you didn’t do anything in those gaps. We’ve 
all got our stories, and there are reasons those gaps exist. During the Hirewire 
z

Chapter 15 | Interviewing, Part 2 
186
volunteer sessions I’ve mentioned earlier in this book, that’s a question that 
comes up each time, especially for those reentering the workforce after a 
personal hiatus and those who have been out of work longer than six months.
So put your story together prior to the interview. Be able to look them in the 
eyes and tell them you were taking care of ailing parents, or sick children, or 
your own sick and/or injured self; or that you were laid off and have been 
looking for work ever since, and you’ve had X number of interviews to date 
and Y number of offers (if true, of course). Whatever the story, be prepared 
to manage the gaps and all else in between.
Stand up Straight and Look Me in the Eyes
N
. Think of how 
. Cultural considerations aside (I’m primarily talking 
United States, hand-shaking is a business social 
I’m concerned. This goes for 
. Be the one who reaches out first.
nice.
. That means a suit or sports coat and nice slacks, and a tie if 
you’re a man, and business dress or pants suit if you’re a woman. If you haven’t 
asked your network ahead of time, the recruiter, the hiring manager, or 
anyone inside the company where you’re going to interview, and you’re not 
sure what to wear, then default to business nice.
Regional differences do make a big difference, though. If any of you have lived 
and worked in the Bay Area and Silicon Valley, you know that culturally this 
area has had a long-time digression from traditional business wear—at least in 
the startup subculture and the long-time tech companies. I’ve been in meetings 
and even interviews with folks wearing a decent buttoned shirt, even a nice 
polo-type shirt, jeans, and even tennis shoes (not me, but everything else); 
these have been the dress du jour for men, and casual pants and blouses have 
been for women.
But not ratty T-shirts that say, “My other phone is not a Nokia.” Or tube tops 
or cut-off jeans or ripped jeans with gaping holes or tank tops or Elmo pajama 
pants (which I have, a gift from my girls), or anything else you would only feel 
comfortable wearing at home while eating nachos and playing video games or 
watching rom-coms.

187
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
But as you move outward from the Valley and pure California tech plays, the 
rest of the United States—and even the world—gets a little more formal with 
the business dress codes. Even if ties aren’t required for men (unless it’s crazy 
Hawaiian shirt and hat day—I have no idea what that means), jeans are 
probably frowned upon. Sports coats, however, are not. Plus, if you’re 
interviewing for any IT management or executive role, you most likely will be 
dressing traditional business nice.
Another thing about interview clothing: wear clothes that are comfortable 
and that will breathe. Remember, interviews can be stressful events, and when 
the heat’s on and you’re pummeled with questions (that you prepared for, of 
course), you want to stay cool. So don’t wear the wool sweater vest or the 
silk shirt under your sports coat. Cotton breathes; polyester not so much. A
nd when it’s cold in the office, which is possible depending on where you live 
. If you 
. This investment will go a long way toward your 
.A
nd don’t forget that how you carry yourself can make a big difference in how 
. Try not to slump your shoulders with your head down 
. Do your 
. Remain calm, and confident throughout. Focus on the task at hand—
answering the questions in a way that positions you as the best candidate. 
Make eye contact with everyone you meet, from the receptionist to the 
interviewers to the possible future colleagues. Now, I mean natural, confident 
eye contact. Don’t be a freak and make googly eyes at anyone or stare like a 
stalker on steroids. Just make natural eye contact with people, and when 
acknowledging questions or comments.
Squash the Smack Talk and The Potty Mouth
Listen, if you’re interviewing for a job for which you and the interviewer have 
mutual contacts—that either (a) you’ve both worked with or for, (b) are also 
interviewing for the position, or (c) are just people you know in the industry 
you’re in—do not talk smack, no matter how much you might be goaded by 
the interviewer. Do not do it. Ever. There are no do-overs. 
What constitutes smack? Badmouthing your former boss or company, or 
sharing less-than-flattering gossip about former colleagues. Listen, I worked 
with a few proverbial “dicks” and “bitches” over the years, but I learned early 
on what can happen if you vent to the wrong people. It’ll take only one person 
to share what you shared to come back around and bite you right on the ass. 

Chapter 15 | Interviewing, Part 2 
188
You’ve got to keep a lid on that trash talk because it can be a karmic backslap, 
no matter how much you might trust your interviewer. If you really feel you 
say these things without repercussion, then do so on your own time, when 
you’re out for drinks with the hiring folk. But even then, I wouldn’t. 
“It’s a small world after all,” and, you really need to check yourself, especially 
if there are any existing business relationships that could be beneficial to you 
that you didn’t uncover in your interview prep. Stay focused on the task at 
hand, which is to position yourself in the best light possible, making the 
business case and convincing them you’re right for the job.
And I don’t care how hip and fresh the company is that you’re interviewing 
with—skip the “F” bombs and other less fresh language. Cursing doesn’t 
. Let the hiring manager curse like a trucker (no offense to 
. Keep it clean, and talk hip and fresh tech shop.
E
. Now you must also be 
. 
Yes, many of you have already experienced it. After the initial “paper” screening 
and phone screening, maybe some gaming to test your problem-solving skills, 
and then a programming or networking or some kind of preliminary IT testing, 
you get called in for the interview. There’s always more fun to be had during 
live interviews, such as real-time logic tests, coding and other related technical 
tasks on whiteboards or computers, group interviewing, in-person simulations, 
and more.
Yeah, you knew it wasn’t going to be just straight questions about your skills 
and experience, right? They’ve got to know you can do the work, which is 
why you’ll be pushed even harder when you’re there in the office (remember 
your visualization exercises, please).
Take the logic tests as an example. Many tech companies are known for their 
ability to test your logic, to test your ability to work “out loud.” Google has 
been one of the most written about, as have Apple and Facebook and many 
other technology companies. But any firm, whether traditional tech or other 
industry hiring IT pros, may draw on technically challenging logic questions to 
test your skill in fending off—or employing—Jedi mind tricks during the 
interview.

189
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
For example, have you heard of this one? “What are dangling pointers?”
Don’t look at me. I had no idea. Do you know?
What I learned is that a dangling pointer is a pointer to storage that is no 
longer allocated, meaning no longer available. But, they are still nasty bugs 
that creep up much later and can crash a program way beyond the time they 
were created. They’re more like small inputs that are much more likely to fail 
on bigger, more complex inputs, making them difficult to locate. Engineers 
must know something about these dangling pointers because they can fry the 
most complex parts of a service.
And how many light bulbs does it take to answer a logic question? Too many. 
But let’s say I have 100 numbered light bulbs lined up in a row, and then I 
. And then I switched on every third light bulb so that any 
.A
re you following? I’m not. But let’s keep going. Then I do the same thing for 
. How many light bulbs are A
re you frickin’ kidding me? Not even the hint helped me. The answer (of 
. 
Wait, what?!?
The trick is to review how many light bulbs in the row have an odd number of 
factors—meaning that the first bulb has an odd number of factors and the 
second has an even number of factors, and the fourth has an odd number of 
factors. This means (supposedly) that one and four will remain lit. The ninth 
bulb will also have an odd number of factors, so it will remain lit.
I do not understand.
So the deal is that all the lights that are going to be on are perfect squares 
because they have an odd number of factors: one, four, nine, sixteen.
Right? Are you following?
So, after 100 passes, you can go up to 10 times 10, or 10 squared. That means 
you’ll have ten perfect squares: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. According to the 
solution I read, these correspond to the 1st, 4th, 9th, 16th, 25th, 36th, 49th, 
64th, 81st and 100th bulb, which will all remain on. And that means there will 
be ten total light bulbs that stay on. 
I’m so completely lost. Please help me.

Chapter 15 | Interviewing, Part 2 
190
.
■ Mindful Moment Interviewing isn’t rocket science, so let’s review. Do your research. Be 
prepared. Don’t blather. Listen, take notes, and answer their questions. Stick to what you know, 
back it up, and don’t bullshit. Exude confidence; shake hands and look them in the eyes. Please 
dress appropriately for the interview. Don’t talk smack and make no “F” bombs, please. Plus, be 
luck.
.
A Word about Salary
as i wrote in chapter 4, second to receiving or giving performance feedback 
(which you haven’t done yet because you haven’t got the job yet), or getting 
the new job (which you’re about to between here and chapter 16), negotiating 
your pay is the most uncomfortable thing to do in the world of work. ever. 
but it’s not for everyone. Much of what i wrote in chapter 4 about negotiating 
pay for contract work is applicable for permanent positions as well. remember 
those two things i’ve learned?

191
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
• 
Most employers are looking to pay you the least amount 
possible.
• 
Most employers want to increase the scope of the work 
while continuing to pay you the least amount possible.
Such is life and many of you I’m sure have experienced it. There are those of 
you who look your prospective employers right in the eye and say, “I want 
$XXX,000 per year because of Y and Z, and not a penny less.”
And in response, there are those employers who look you right in the eye and 
say back, “Well, the position wasn’t budgeted for $XXX,000 per year, so I’ll 
throw in more days off, and some stock options, because of your excellent y 
and z, but not a penny more.”D
amn.
. And today’s economy it makes it even more difficult with 
IT salaries modestly at best—or skyrocketing 
Silicon Valley for the best of you. S
. Do your research. Understand the scope of the job and the 
Glassdoor.com, Salary.com, and Payscale. 
Document your professional accomplishments from your latest and greatest 
roles. You’ve got to make the business case as to how your past experience 
and/or current position success has impacted the business—or will impact 
it—and why the company should invest in you further. And lastly, make sure 
you build in a little negotiating wiggle room. Remember, if you shoot too high, 
you’ll insult and amuse the employer and the negotiation may be short-lived. 
But if you aim too low, then you’ve wiped out your margin and any chance of 
going back up. It’s more sales art than science.
■ Mindful Moment  Negotiating salary is a painful affair for most professionals. How comfortable 
are you? If you are comfortable then you play the game like a seasoned marketing and sales pro 
like I referenced in Chapter 4—you do your research, make your business case, and you build in 
wiggle room to negotiate downstream, because upstream ain’t happening.

c h a p t e r
16
The 
Onboarding 
The best way to appreciate your job is to imagine yourself without one.
—Oscar Wilde
Right on. You got the job. Can you believe it? Aren’t you excited and relieved? 
After all that stressful soul-sucking and heart-wrenching—and sometimes 
enlightening and elevating—research, networking, screening, testing, simu-
lating, interviewing, twisted logic, whiteboarding, pitching, proving, and 
negotiating yourself to the your now-new employer, you’re ready to kick some 
IT ass.
But wait—you’ve got to onboard and acclimate first, deal with a stress of 
another kind, to prove yourself day after day after day to other humans you’ll 
be working with. It’s not like you’re going in cold, though. You should have a 
little jump on the matter, since you more than likely met the primary day-to-
day players you’ll be working for, reporting to, and collaborating with. You 
know, those wonderfully pesky, messy, meddling human beings.

Chapter 16 | The Onboarding Battle and Beyond
194
A
. I’ve said it before and I’ll say it again—if it weren’t for those 
flawlessly. We’d work together happily and collaboratively, without deceit, 
harassment, or discrimination. We’d all be accountable and personally 
responsible and have each other’s backs; we’d have reciprocal respect with 
our leaders, and reality TV would not be a reality.
We can dream, can’t we? I mean, you’ve been hired and now it’s time to be 
onboarded and get the employee handbook thrown at you. If you’re lucky 
enough to get one thrown at you. Just as I’ve written earlier, you have to own 
your career management and development when you’re job-searching. But 
you’ve got to own it on the job as well, no matter how accountable your 
colleagues and bosses are.
The Formal Yet Messy Process
Consider this: In 2011, more than 40 companies paid out more than $60 
million in settlements or unfavorable court judgments after the EEOC brought 
systemic discrimination cases.1 There are those, of course, who say that this 
1 www.goerie.com/article/20120819/BUSINESS05/308199983/Workplace-bias-under-fire.

195
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
kind of law enforcement hampers business growth with burdensome regu-
lations and policies.
Right. Let’s not forget the real reality TV of a group of really smart people 
who wiped billions of financial assets off the face of the earth only a few years 
ago. Nor maybe that idiot you used to work for who, to again quote my dad, 
“Couldn’t find his ass from a hole in the ground.” My point is that accountability 
isn’t baked into our DNA, but basic survival is. Unfortunately, we’ll do 
everything we can to fire the pleasure centers in our brains. Screw the pain, 
baby. Nobody wants that. This is why, as so much neuroscience research of 
late shows us, good people make really crappy decisions.
Like one of your new co-workers hitting on you because you’ve been so 
. Or another employee leaving racist 
.
. This is why new employees are assessed and employers 
. This is why they’re supposed to throw 
. This is why we have frickin’ rules and 
. This is why we have policies on use of social media. This is why 
.
I really wish it didn’t have to be this way, that companies big and small could 
onboard their new employees more freely and effectively, applying agile 
development techniques, buddy and mentor programs, business cross-training 
and immediate immersion in the workplace culture so as to promote 
connection, communication, collaboration, and business success—some of 
the feel-good stuff I’ve spouted in the pages of this book.
It’s necessary to have formal onboarding processes in place because of the 
very issues I’ve mentioned above. Most of us don’t have to worry about these 
situations; the harassment forms we sign off to acknowledge we’ve read them 
are really for the next guy or girl, not you or me. But the compliance side of 
getting a new job isn’t what’s going to keep you in the new job—it’s just going 
to keep you and your employer from potentially messy litigation.
It’s the necessary evil that hasn’t changed lives for the better. And what’s also 
part of the problem, which has led so many people to be “primed and ready” 
to look for new employment sooner rather than later, is an onboarding 
compliance-focused process that fosters faulty employee engagement. Too 

Chapter 16 | The Onboarding Battle and Beyond
196
many new hires are parachuted into their company jungles, left to find their 
way out and around among the Predators and Aliens.2 
Hey, you’re hired. Please fill out this paperwork. Here’s the employee manual. 
Here’s your brief orientation. Here’s your supervisor. Here are your colleagues. 
Here’s your first week’s worth of training.
Good luck.
Now, of course, it’s not that simple in real life, but not too far from the truth, 
either. How did we get here? More important for you, how do you stay there?
You stay there by doing a lot of what I’ve already outlined in this book—taking 
ownership in your career development every single day. Employers should 
. You can help 
. 
. And then your colleagues and the teams 
. Otherwise, if people don’t want to be there, they won’t stay 
. That includes you. When you’re a hot 
IT space, you’re definitely going to be more 
. 
R.
 Here we go again.
Engagement and retention start with your first experience with the employer’s 
brand, whatever that may be, and not on day one of your job. It continues 
throughout your tenure with that employer and even beyond, if and when you 
separate. And for more and more of us these days, all good things still do 
come to an end. Even after they come to an end—the first time—there may 
be an opportunity to return to that employer (as I have done in my past) and 
try out the sequel.
Onboarding is critical. Onboarding is treacherous. Onboarding can help you 
dramatically early on, and it can trip you up horrendously as well. The 
important time frame is the first six months: what am I gonna be doing? HR, 
recruiting, and career management folks tout the following as “best practices”; 
they can help you make the business case for keeping you around. In fact, 
these are onboarding questions and beyond that you should be asking during 
the final interview process, before the negotiation is over and you take the 
job.
2 For those who aren’t sci-fi fans, the Predator and Alien franchises are favorite “alien vs. 
human” movies.

197
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Who Are the Kingpins and Queenpins?
More than likely, you were introduced to some level of management during 
your interview process, at least to those whom you’ll be supporting, reporting 
to, or department and/or division you’ll be in. If you were hired in a supervisory 
and management role, with a team underneath you, then for sure you were 
introduced to key leadership. 
This is stuff you gotta know; people you gotta know. You probably knew some 
going in, if you did your backstory research prior to the final interview stages, 
but now that you’re in, you really need to understand the power structure.
You need to be seen to be known. You need to make yourself seen, and then 
. So, if you haven’t been 
. Yes, the larger the organization is, the less likely you’ll be rubbing 
. Companies that recognize that accessible leadership helps with 
. Because the very essence 
.
I
C-team 
. Heck, in some of the newfangled companies, everybody’s 
out in front of everyone else, sharing big open spaces with maybe a room or 
two for closed-door meetings when needed. This includes your leadership 
team, your teammates, and any subordinates if you’re a supervisor.
So don’t be shy—ask to meet see the whites of your leaders’ eyes.
And Why Should I Care?
Because these are the people who can and will make or break you. 
But even better than that, these are the people whom you can and will make 
or break.
You feel me? You see, even the most philanthropic not-for-profit still has an 
operating budget that includes securing tech talent like you, paying you a 
salary and, you hope, benefits, so you’ll help the organization fulfill its social 
mission. They still have to secure funding from outside resources in the form 
of grants, donations, and the like, which means keeping the knowledge base 
intact in order to function. And for-profits are no different; they need their 
employees to believe in what they’re building and selling.

Chapter 16 | The Onboarding Battle and Beyond
198
But if you’re not getting regular access to leadership, if you feel your voice isn’t 
being heard in the organization when you have valuable input regarding IT 
processes and systems, then you’re going to start falling out of love with your 
work—as well as falling out the door.
Now, there’s a big difference between quality time with your boss, or your 
boss’s boss, bending his or her ear to talk shop and share an idea or two, and 
camping out in your office or at your desk or in your car because you think 
you’ve got it all figured out and they’ve got it all wrong. 
I can’t help with you the latter. I’ve had employees who have gone overboard, 
even been borderline crazy, and then anything and anyone they come in 
contact with suffers. No, I can only help those of you who truly want to make 
. And 
. 
. That’s 
.
Right?
A
dumped into. However, the hippest tech companies, like Facebook, immediately 
get you breaking stuff if you’re a programmer, and that’s cool. The hack culture 
in and of itself is an empowering one, telling each new employee to step up 
and do, that there’s no time like the present to fail and learn and make it all 
better.
HR isn’t very good at the hack culture; by its nature, it really can’t be any good 
at it. Remember, it’s the one entity that must be accountable for the messy, 
pesky, hack-ridden folks we all are—the ones who can cost a company a lot 
of money in litigation. We have to regulate ourselves, to protect ourselves 
from one another. I wish that weren’t the case, but it is. No bones about it. 
So even getting to hack away from the get-go still means there will be some 
semblance of consistent new-employee orientation and training. You may not 
listen very closely during it, whether it’s one hour or one week, but you’re 
sure as heck going to be asked to sign off on the fact that you are a messy and 
pesky human being who may screw up at some point and cause a ruckus that 
we, as your employers, need to be protected from. 
Take advantage of this formal orientation, though. You may not meet all of the 
leadership team, but you will meet HR as well as other peers who will help 
you traverse the first weeks of jungle trudging. This is also where you’ll have 

199
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
a cursory look at what to do and what not to do (culture policies, social 
media policies, etc.), understand what non-comp benefits you have (free 
lunches, education allowance, equipment, etc.), and get a company overview, 
however hot and dry (or humid) it may be.
You’re only going to get the air-conditioning if you pay attention and sign off 
on the waivers. That’s just the way it is.
Please Insert the Ruby on the Rails Here
Maybe it is a hackathon from the get-go, or maybe not. But either way, there 
will be some form of training schedule for the first few weeks. The frequency 
. If for some odd reason you don’t 
.
I’m talking about involves the bigger business picture. It’s not 
. It’s about 
. How do all the 
And how together do they either build stuff, B
eyond meeting and knowing who the leadership team is, you’ll, of course, 
need to meet your peers and co-workers; you’ll learn and understand what 
the different engineering and systems teams are doing for the organization 
and how you’re all supposed to work separately together.
For example, in my current company, we’ve got two separate engineering 
teams working on two parallel software platforms, one that will eventually be 
retired and that’s being used to experiment with features and functionality, 
and the other that will become the new platform—bigger, faster, better. There 
are also front-end and UX engineering teams focused on each platform. They 
all meet regularly to ensure that the left hand knows that the right is doing; 
each new team member who’s added is immersed in cross-platform training 
and immediate building-and-breaking-stuff work. This helps to ensure product 
integrity and also solidifies the workplace culture. If you’re not feeling the 
team-building and training love from day one, I’d raise a red flag or three.
Work It with Cross-Training
I’m a big advocate of making the “world of work” stick to you in your new 
incarnation. I hope that, at some point, you’re cross-trained across various 
roles and departments, beyond your technical expertise. This isn’t about your 

Chapter 16 | The Onboarding Battle and Beyond
200
new employer turning you into localized bench strength for other respective 
positions; the company should have that baked into its talent strategy already. 
Especially if you’re in a large organization.
This is more about furthering your holistic knowledge of the business and the 
roles you and your colleagues play—how each facet affects the other. If you 
know that your next line of code will affect finance and procurement in a way 
that will improve their ability to better manage the company’s money and 
sharpen the purchasing decisions that are made, which in turn affects your 
ability to continue to code effectively, then you get clearer understanding of 
the why of your business.
If it’s not offered, recommend or ask for cross-training. It could be in the form 
. The goal is for you to understand the greater context 
Chapter 17).
IT issues and creative time-saving, 
. For decades, employers looked for 
IT. B
to the age of the “specialist” across roles, departments, and divisions. 
So know that you’ve been hired for your specialization, and then learn on the 
job and be cross-trained so you make your skills that much more valuable and 
sticky.
Me and My Shadow
Another onboarding process I hope your new employer envelops you in is 
some kind of shadow system or buddy mentoring system. Maybe when you 
were hired that was the case, and you were assigned a peer who helped hack 
away at the jungle growth to shed light on just where the hell you were, who 
the hell you were, and why the hell you were there.
Many large enterprises have institutionalized “buddy” systems, while most of 
the small organizations have not. I helped create some form of job shadowing 
at a few of the firms I worked for, giving new employees both a mentor and 
some form of cross-training to learn the broader business strategy. You may 
get some of this in the engineering teams you’re on, or it may be sanctioned 

201
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
and managed by hr and/or the learning and development professionals in 
your organization.
in a sense, it’s like pledging a sorority or fraternity. You’re assigned a big 
brother or big sister, or else you aggregate informally to help get through the 
onboarding (hopefully sans the hazing), especially that first team lunch where 
you can let your hair down a little (some literally and some figuratively) and 
get to know your peers. or, equate it more directly to a big sister or big 
brother program for wayward iT pros who need quality peer-to-peer 
interaction in order to survive the quantum physics of a potentially dilbertian 
society.
“Me and my shadow, taking the high road . . . ”
eviewing Your Performance  
.

Chapter 16 | The Onboarding Battle and Beyond
202
Nice-to-have versus a must-have; that’s what I mean by best practice vs. 
business case. You can talk all you want about performance management best 
practices, but we’re friggin’ busy here trying to run a business.
That’s the point, though. You need to receive regular performance feedback 
week to week and month to month. It doesn’t even have to be a formal 
process, as it is usually in large companies. In fact, there are companies without 
formal performance appraisal systems that have reported lower turnover, 
higher employee morale, and stronger relationships between managers and 
employees, among other benefits. 
Maybe this is the company you just joined. Lower turnover and higher 
productivity can be measured, as well as the impact on revenue. The point is 
A ship. These all 
.”
I
I have, you’ve heard the phase “Give it one 
.” Well, you want that reciprocity as well. You need to be 
the business.
And that’s my whole point here: regular one-on-ones with not just your 
immediate supervisor and/or team members but also with your peers and 
other cross-divisional workshops. These all help to give greater workplace 
cultural stability, performance feedback, and contextual traction as to the 
why, once again, you took the job.
The key is frequency. Once a year, at your annual performance review, isn’t 
going to cut it. I’ve held one-on-one’s with employees once a week, even if it’s 
only 30 minutes or less. It’s a time for you to reflect on your role and 
performance and to talk shop as much as it is for your supervisor to talk at 
you. Heck, it could be for a few minutes in different locations over time. For 
more formal meetings, the frequency should be monthly at a minimum, 
preferably for 30-60 minutes.
Having the face time can make all the difference, from onboarding to ongoing 
development. So if you’re not offered it from day one, ask for it from day zero.

203
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
■ Mindful Moment Getting the job is fantastic, but now you have to survive the jungle onboarding 
process. How do you do that? Well, you get to know your leadership team (and they get to know 
you), pay attention during any formal orientation processes you may have, be present in any 
ongoing greater business training activities they may put you through, request to be cross-trained 
if isn’t offered, request a peer mentor or “buddy” to help you along the way if it’s not a formalized 
process (or pick one yourself), and push for regular one-on-one’s. Face time is where the magic 
happens and how you find our regularly your impact on the business.

c h a p t e r
17
Internal 
I don’t view having too many good players as a problem.
—Billy Beane, Oakland A’s baseball coach and  
inspiration behind Moneyball
I
. Especially for those of you who employed and looking to grow and 
expand your skills and reach inside your organization. You know, like getting 
a promotion of transferring to another team or department for a new position 
you’ve had your eye on.
So per Billy Beane’s quote above, what’s also important is where those players 
are playing, how they’re playing together, and if they’re playing better together 
in the right positions because they’re expanding their knowledge and value to 
the organization as a result of crossing-training, stretch assignments, even 
new roles.
You don’t want to be thinking, “I don’t want to be out here doing nothing. It’s 
dangerous.” 
This was said by a 14-year-old boy in Chicago who should’ve been in school, 
but wasn’t because of the 2012 Chicago Teachers’ strike.1 The same goes for 
you, not wanting to be in there, in your new job, doing nothing. It’s dangerous 
to your development, mobility, and longevity.
1 www.nytimes.com/2012/09/13/education/chicago-teachers-strike-enters-third-day.
html?pagewanted=all.

Chapter 17 | Internal Mobility
206
You might’ve heard the quote, “An idle brain is the devil’s workshop,” which 
comes from H. G. Bohn’s Handbook of Proverbs,2 published in 1855. Its origins 
lay in the belief that hard work keeps people focused and out of trouble, 
whereas laziness breeds evil deeds. But with the latest in neuroscience 
research, we now know that our frontal cortex has much smaller windows of 
focal strength during the course of the day. We need idle periods, or breaks 
in thought, to allow our minds to rest and revitalize, letting what we’ve 
absorbed during those “focal spikes” to reengineer our synaptic pathways. 
That doesn’t mean that teenagers—or employees—should be roaming the 
streets unchecked, with no formal or informal learning and without growth 
options in place, however. 
If you’re lucky, you’re working for a progressive enterprise that understands 
. But 
. 
As I
. 
S
. Our decades-old 
. Employers still throw the 
E
Handbook at their new hires, make them sit in day-long training 
seminars where most have already checked out half way, and then silo their 
employees in self-branded promotional kiosks with limited if any exposure 
outside the imaginary but quite real “information control” firewall to valuable 
content from informal learning channels. Meaning, those employees are “doing 
nothing out there” while preventing you from doing anything inside, and that’s 
dangerous for your employer and for you. 
But we have access to informal learning channels, both inside and outside that 
imaginary firewall, via smart phones and tablet devices.
The democratization of learning and the potential of social mobility are here 
to stay. And employers and employees alike need to embrace the short bursts 
of quality peer-to-peer interactions and actionable insights. By letting you and 
I do what people have been doing for thousands of years—sharing knowledge 
across brand-agnostic open networks as opposed to orgs jamming self-serving 
job and brand info down your throat, the same companies can then channel 
the powerful mindshare and elevate the enterprise to one of empowerment 
and improvement.
2 http://books.google.com/books/about/A_Handbook_of_Proverbs.html?id=9ZXiOwAACAAJ.

207
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
In other words, help me get better so I can do better by you in more than one 
place.
“I don’t want to be out here doing nothing. It’s dangerous.”
The good news is, you and I are not “doing nothing.” The danger lies in 
employer resistance, not in employee idleness. So either find that progressive 
company to work for or make your own way in the world. 
The Constant Need for Roster Changes
Going back to the Billy Beane quote that began this chapter, consider that a 
team never has too many good players. Everyone else is looking to land those 
.F
I left a particular job many years ago, the company kept the 
. the “team captain,” for another decade. That was, 
.A
t another company, we kept a combination “expendable team member and 
.
I
. The fact is that no one likes to be 
fired, but unfortunately, too many employers hold on to the one thing that 
holds their businesses back—the wrong talent in the wrong place. And they 
hold onto that wrong talent for far too long. Instead, they need to understand 
where the right talent is and where it, needs to go.
I’m not just talking about those who, after tedious training, patience, and 
futile remedial “this is why we hired you” chats, continue to perform poorly, 
but also about the crappy bosses your employer hired and/or promoted to 
manage you and your peers.
The reality is, no matter where you work, if you’re one of the talented and 
happy employees who help maintain a great company, a company with super 
products and/or services, and with a strong bottom line, some of your not-
so-good teammates will occasionally have to be fired. If you’ve ever managed 
teams, you know what I’m talking about. If you’ve even worked with sub-par 
peers, you know what I mean.
Who are these not-so-good folks? They are the people who, after exhaustive 
training, coaching, mentoring, and counseling, still cannot do the job. And that 
includes front-line IT people and management (and, mercy, have I worked 

Chapter 17 | Internal Mobility
208
with some crazy-doozies in the past). The problem is that too many companies 
are pretty damn bad at letting go of people when they just can’t do the job; 
instead, they’re extremely relieved when those people leave on their own 
accord. But, far worse, these companies are also pretty damn bad at identifying 
who needs to be moved up (and when) to maximize the corporate culture 
and raise productivity.
It’s still an extremely tough job market right now—with the exception only 
being those with hot tech skills—so why would any subpar pariah leave a job 
if the employer dances around and says “you’re doing a great job”? The subpar 
wouldn’t, of course, and doesn’t. Unless the person were truly miserable, 
crying after work every night, and even then maybe not.
. I worked with a company 
CEO and VP of Human Resources had been working painstakingly for 
. Meaning, 
. 
I
IT 
. Unless you’re management and you can do 
. Either way, you’ve got to be a go-to guy or gal; you’ve got 
. Remember, there’s 
.
Nation Ball Is the Real Work Game
Ever play nation ball? I really loved the game when I was growing up. It was a 
two-tiered dodge ball variant that really rocked with fast-paced action, 
mystery, misery, intrigue, redemption, success, failure, and ultimate victory. 
It’s just like the workplace. Your workplace. Whether there are 25 employees 
or 25,000.
In nation ball (as in many games of my youth), there were usually these players:
• 
The Team Captains. The playground leaders who always 
picked the teams.
• 
The Go-To Guys and Gals. Those who are always picked 
in the first few rounds of team selection.
• 
The Expendable Crew Members. Those who had some 
nation ball skills, who aspired to be the go-to kids, but who 
were known for getting picked off early on.

209
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
• 
The Pariahs. Those who stood on the sidelines because 
they were never picked. If they were picked, they were the 
first to go. Always.
This was the hierarchy. HR was made up of the teachers and playground aides, 
the watchdogs, who only cared about maintaining order and compliance. 
There wasn’t a lot of T&D going on to facilitate better nation ball skills (or 
tetherball, or four square, or hopscotch, or kickball, or you name it).
It wasn’t about “everybody’s a winner” and “everybody gets to play.” You 
either fought to be a go-to or you remained expendable. Or you were a 
pariah, and then forget about it. Right or wrong, those were the rules of the 
playground—and they are probably the unspoken rules at your company 
.
. But the business of IT is crazy-
. So the pariahs are ignored; the focus is on the go-tos. A
re you a go-to?
. The people who go above and 
. They get to work early and work late. They get things done, finish 
projects on time, help grow the business, and own the knowledge capital of 
their organization—and can also include management.
The go-tos are the ones who get the inside moves—who have the internal 
mobility. The go-tos are the top talent your company wants to retain. But the 
very company that wants to keep you also jeopardizes its business in the way 
they treat you—they could lose you someday. 
Yes, there’s a ton of chatter about go-to folks having to do much more with 
much less, and maybe wanting to jump ship no matter how cold the water is. 
But, damn, look at those productivity numbers.
What do you do? You push yourself to be a go-to and you push your employer 
to treat you right. Oh, and watch out for the—
*smack*
 . . . ball.

Chapter 17 | Internal Mobility
210
Rain or Shine
Yes, we will play nation ball, rain or shine. We have to; we gotta eat, and we 
gotta be go-to’s. Whether we’re happy or not, rain or shine. But, damn. Long 
term, you want to be happy because you just got this frickin’ new job. So if 
you’re sitting there chatting with nine of your colleagues, are you already one 
of the seven who are “actively disengaged”?
As I referenced in Chapter 5, 71% of American workers are “not engaged” or 
“actively disengaged” in their work, meaning they are emotionally disconnected from 
their workplaces and are less likely to be productive.
Because many of today’s IT jobs are seriously complex and constantly changing, 
. Combine that with 
. 
N
Amens” to be loud and clear every time you walk through the 
. And yet, there’s no cross-training, no ongoing informal 
. No wonder you’re emotionally disconnected 
.
If you’re one of the motivated go-tos, then even in a stagnant mobility 
environment you may find other opportunities your colleagues can’t, which 
would at least keep you on board while others are jumping off the ship, or 
maybe even sinking the ship (including management). 
Maybe. 
Or maybe you’re in the right environment now that does offer the multiple 
moves inside. Rain or shine, right?
Either way, here’s again what I recommend: Push your new employer for 
empowered employment from the inside out. Request that you want more 
responsibility managing your internal career path or paths, with their assistance 
of course, and that you want to be aware of other opportunities throughout 
the organization as well as ways to get there.
Let’s Review All the Right Moves
I’m going to repeat a little of what I said about internal mobility in Chapter 5 
and expand on it. Keep these examples in mind as you examine the willingness 

211
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
of your current employer or a prospective employer: how willing are they to 
provide cross-training opportunities, career development and mobility of any 
kind?
• 
Lateral moves—when you’re unhappy with your current 
position and need a change of scenery without leaving all 
together.
This one can be tricky, however. Especially if you’re in a difficult 
position with a difficult boss and/or co-workers. If it’s a serious 
situation that is affecting your day-to-day activities inside as well as 
when you go home, then you definitely need to talk with HR and get 
the situation dealt with. If it’s not as serious, but serious enough to 
impact your career path, then keep it about your career path and 
other roles and skill sets you want to explore. Make it about you, not 
about them.
• 
Ladder moves—the traditional career climb to the next 
best thing internally if and when you qualify and/or are 
promoted.
This can be tricky as well, but still the traditional route to internal 
mobility is still engrained in the enterprise. And for the qualified few 
of you who do have an interest in taking on more responsibility and 
maybe even an IT supervisory/management role, then follow the 
bouncing political ball on how to get there. This is where not only 
your skills and experience play a role, but also your internal networking 
ability combined with your business insight. Meaning, you can 
articulate the context of how you can and will impact the business 
further if promoted. Remember, make that business case.
• 
Lattice moves—the progressive moves that take you to 
new cross-trained realms within your organization.
This is the optimal path of course. The one that is embedded in the 
agile enterprise where the fluidity of today’s workforce—full-time, 
part-time, contract—is understood by management and developing 
you and the teams you’re on as needed are part of the ongoing 
business growth strategy. Being able to reconfigure on-demand is a 
competitive imperative, so giving you the stretch assignments that 
increase fluidity makes for the lattice-driven organization. 
Here come more balls, by the way.
*smack* 

Chapter 17 | Internal Mobility
212
■ Mindful Moment In larger organizations, usually there are multiple IT reqs open at any given 
time unless there’s a hiring freeze, which happens. For the most part, opportunity abounds in the 
form of mobility opportunities, at least for the right person, and the same competitive nature of the 
beast you’ve dealt with looking for new work can also be just as brutal for internal opportunities. 
Remember, practice some of the same “no-smack-talking” tactics I discussed in Chapter 15, no 
matter how unhappy you are in your current role.
referrals, referrals, referrals
.

213
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Take a deep breath and stay frosty. Know when you should move, take a dive, 
or when you should stand still and catch what’s coming. The opportunities are 
flying your way, in the form of nation balls.
*smack*
■ Mindful Moment  It’s really simple—be a go-to employee who gets the job done while also 
getting the inside scoop on future internal opportunities. Own your career development and push 
your employer to support you in that process. You’ve got the job—now make a future out of it!

c h a p t e r
18
Careers in 
Cloud 
The New Religion, Part I
There’s no way that company exists in a year.
—Tom Siebel
This well-known statement from the founder of Siebel Systems, made back in 
2001, was in response to what Salesforce.com was already becoming—a force 
to be reckoned with.1 A Dreamforce to be reckoned with, actually, Dreamforce 
being the annual one-week Salesforce.com customer appreciation and partner 
conference that over 85,000 (in 2012) businesspeople attend.2 If you’ve ever 
attended, you know it gets more interactive and extravagant each year, and 
2012 was no exception. The conference was held at Moscone Center in San 
1 http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/2001/06/25/305460/index.htm.
2 http://www.salesforce.com/dreamforce/DF12/.

Chapter 18 | Careers in Cloud Computing and Mobile Technology
216
Francisco. In the grassy space between two of the conference buildings, huge 
HD screens projected the keynote speech to passersby, as well as to an 
audience lounging on bean bags, taking a break and checking their smartphones 
or tablets, or enjoying the free WiFi. Yep, bean bags and free WiFi. Everywhere, 
in all the Moscone Center buildings and in nearly every nook and cranny in 
between the buildings. The conference is an amazing business extravaganza—
I’ve never seen so many tieless men in sports coats, and women in pants suits, 
even in Silicon Valley. There weren’t as many men or women wearing jeans as 
I would’ve liked, but there were still enough to be true to California casual.
Into the Cloud
C
. Salesforce is a sales and marketing, 
. and employee-recognition cloud-
AppExchange, 
SF 
. Salesforce has been number one on Forbes magazine’s list of most 
.3 
Oracle’s annual revenue of $37 billion, but for a company 
.com, they’re 
. By the way, Oracle founder Larry Ellison 
.
Maybe you’ve never worked for Salesforce, or for any of the companies it has 
bought lately, like Radian6, Buddy Media, or Rypple, and so maybe you don’t 
care. But if you’ve been part of any cloud-based company in the past ten years 
or so, you know that the platform is much bigger and broader than the general 
public realizes. Software runs the world, and the world now floats atop the 
cloud that runs the world. The days of installed software, with the costly 
customizations, the upgrades, the annual licensing and consulting fees, are 
becoming olden times. No, cloud computing hasn’t completely replaced legacy 
ERP software systems like Oracle or SAP, but there’s a reason Oracle and SAP 
have been buying up the cloud-based companies that have gotten the formula 
right. It’s why Workday, a totally cloud-based human capital management 
platform, is taking on the big boys by going public as well this year.
3 http://www.forbes.com/sites/victoriabarret/2012/09/05/why-salesforce-com-ranks-1-on-
forbes-most-innovative-list/.

217
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
The Growth of the Cloud = Jobs
Every analyst firm, from Gartner to IDC to Forrester and many others (I 
worked at one of the smaller players in 2011 called Ventana Research, covering 
the HR technology space), have released relative numbers claiming that cloud 
computing will grow revenues in the gazillions over the next five to ten years, 
creating millions of direct programmer jobs and many new jobs we don’t even 
know about yet. According to research sponsored by Microsoft, and conducted 
by IDC in 2012, spending on public and private IT cloud services will generate 
nearly 14 million jobs worldwide from 2011 to 2015.4 And according to the 
2012 Gartner CIO Agenda Report, the top three priorities for that year were 
analytics and business intelligence, mobile technologies, and cloud computing.5
I entered the HR and recruiting technology space nearly 13 years ago, 
Internet had just started to transform the way companies recruited, hired, 
. Regardless of the industry, the technological 
.A
nd what’s been cool to watch is how these technologies have helped to 
you. These 
.
This application is really exciting for me. I continue to see some innovative 
cloud-based talent platforms, like the one I currently work for called 
BraveNewTalent. Human resources, recruiting, training, and talent-
management professionals are responsible for providing the highest quality 
and most efficient workforce processes to the entire organization. Yes, from 
my vantage point—and yours as job seeker—there’s obviously still a lot of 
work to be done a decade into the 21st century, but mercy, it’s still magical at 
times.
And Then There’s Mobile . . .
Think about it: creating applications for smartphones and tablets that will help 
promote workforce mobility and interactivity. Utilizing social media for 
recruiting and evaluating talent for hiring. Deploying integrated talent-
management applications and adopting workforce analytics and metrics across 
4 http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/news/features/2012/mar12/03-05CloudComputingJobs.aspx
5 http://imagesrv.gartner.com/cio/pdf/cio_agenda_insights.pdf

Chapter 18 | Careers in Cloud Computing and Mobile Technology
218
cloud platforms. Maybe it sounds a little like marketing jargon, but trust me—
this is cool stuff. It’s what I call “talent management re-imagined”: to acquire, 
to empower, and to retain—you. 
The new business technologies like social networking, mobile applications, 
and cloud computing (we’ll talk social analytics and big data in Chapter 19) are 
still in the early, mass-adoption phase at most companies. Remember, you’ve 
got some companies still recruiting via job boards and email, and then managing 
the process with spreadsheets. Ack! But for more and more companies, the 
cloud computing innovation is happening across departments—finance, 
operations, IT, supply chain, sales and marketing, and every other facet of 
business today.
. Use your imagination.
. Business today requires us to communicate and 
Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn), 
. And to do this, of 
computers, desktop computers, the Internet, and the magic of cloud 
computing.
You can’t turn around these days without seeing a smartphone or a tablet or 
netbook in your colleagues’ hands; and in the next few years, the market will 
be flooded with an even wider array of choices. The growth of the global 
virtual workforce, combined with the diverse “ways we now work,” has 
fuelled mobile development The combination of social media, collaboration, 
and mobile technologies is increasing the demand for real-time communications 
and 24-hour data access in the palm of every job seeker’s and employee’s 
hands.
The installed-based, on-premise software market continues to get compressed, 
with more and more companies moving to SaaS and cloud deployment to 
meet all their software needs. So the term “cloud computing” may be hip and 
fresh today; but for those of you who’ve been around the block more than 
once, you know it goes back to the days of the early Internet. Let’s talk about 
the different cloud technologies that are out there and the skills required to 
use these platforms.
Get me some of that new, cloud-computing religion!

219
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
■ Mindful Moment  Cloud computing has dramatically changed how software is developed and 
deployed, making it more cost-effective for organizations and a more efficient way to manage all 
kinds of business processes. The good news for you is that billions will be spent on cloud 
technologies in the next 5-10 years, as well as generating millions of jobs.
Lots of Cloud Computing
Just to be clear, “cloud computing” is the implementation of computing 
resources—both hardware and software—that are delivered as a service over 
a network, which usually means the Internet. According to most folks in the 
. It is also what the early Internet was called.N
ow, by no means am I cloud computing expert, but I do know that there 
. Just try searching for “cloud 
California, using a job- search tool like Indeed.com. When 
I did this, nearly 3,000 jobs came up, from software developers to network 
.B
widely accepted.6
Software as a Service (SaaS)
Software as a service (SaaS) is the form I’m most familiar with, as a software 
product marketer and a consumer. It’s also called “on-demand software” or 
“Web-based software” and it entails delivering software and data that are 
centrally hosted on the “cloud.” SaaS is typically accessed by users via a “thin 
client,” or what’s known as a computer dependent on another system like a 
server, via a Web browser.
Many business applications are delivered via SaaS these days, including human 
resource management, recruiting, and training, as well as other business 
activities like accounting, collaboration, customer-relationship management 
(known as CRM), management information systems, enterprise resource 
planning (know as ERP), invoicing, content management, and service desk 
management. 
6  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cloud_computing.

Chapter 18 | Careers in Cloud Computing and Mobile Technology
220
Platform as a Service (PaaS)
Platform as a service (PaaS) includes the same kinds of cloud computing 
services as SaaS, but provides a specific computing platform for a variety 
software components and modules. Users can also control the software 
configuration and deployment. The PaaS provider offers the networks, 
servers, storage, and related services. 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
Infrastructure as a Service is considered to be the most basic cloud service 
model, whereby cloud providers offer computers to run usually as virtual 
. The virtual machines can have many operating systems that are also 
.” They can run at the same time on a single host computer, 
,” or a virtual machine manager (VMM). 
. 
IaaS
Amazon EC2, Rackspace Cloud, Terremark, and Google 
C
Engine. 
D
separate from the physical machine using the client-server models—separate 
computers that use the Internet to access servers of information. In larger 
organizations, the server information is stored via the virtual desktop, as 
opposed to remote client local storage. This means that users can access all 
their applications, programs, processes, and data on a centrally run server, 
giving them the opportunity to run apps on a smartphone.
Data as a Service (DaaS)
Data as a service (DaaS) is closely related to SaaS. DaaS means that the data, 
which is the product, can be provided on demand to any user, no matter 
where it is located in the world. Service-oriented architecture (SOA) has 
given data the ability to reside almost anywhere. 
Storage as a Service (STaaS)
Storage as a service (STaaS) is when that large service providers offer 
subscriptions for leasing storage space. Because they can scale storage easily, 
the service providers can give customers a better deal than even their own 
storage could ever give them, as well as offsite backup alternatives.

221
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Security as a Service (SECaaS)
Security as a service (SECaaS) is when large service providers offer 
subscriptions for security services. Again, because they can scale these 
services easily, the service providers can give customers a better deal than 
their own security infrastructure could ever provide, including services such 
as antivirus, antispyware, authentication, and more. 
Test Environment as a Service (TEaaS)
Test environment as a service (TEaaS), also known as an “on-demand test 
environment,” creates a delivery service for software test environments 
Internet.A
PI as a service (APIaaS) allows for the development and hosting of APIs 
. These APIs can help generate multiple 
API calls, including REST, XML Web services, and TCP/IP.
I
ITaaS) creates a marketplace for in-house, enterprise IT 
organizations to purchase any of the above “as a service” services.
The Right Cloud Computing Skills
So now that you’re familiar with all the variations of cloud computing, and you 
want to get that next great position in cloud computing, let’s review WANTED 
Analytics most commonly advertised job titles for IT talent with cloud 
computing skills.7 WANTED Analytics is the exclusive data provider for The 
Conference Board’s Help-Wanted OnLine Data Series,8 the monthly economic 
indicator of hiring demand in the United States.
These titles may vary as time goes by, but consider: 
1.  Software engineer
2.  Senior software engineer
7  http://www.wantedanalytics.com.
8  The Conference Board is a global, independent business membership and research 
association. For more information head to http://www.conference-board.org/.

Chapter 18 | Careers in Cloud Computing and Mobile Technology
222
3.  Java developer
4.  Systems engineer
5.  Senior systems engineer
6.  Network engineer
7.  Senior Java developer
8.  Systems administrator
9.  Enterprise architect
10. Websphere cloud computing engineer
. Either way, there are key skills that you need to zero in on when 
.
H
Cloud computing
Java and Javascript
Linux
Structured query language (SQL)
• 
UNIX
• 
Software as a service (SaaS)
• 
VMware software
• 
Salesforce CRM
• 
Python extensible programming language
• 
Practical extraction and reporting language (Perl)
• 
.NET 
But besides the technical skills, you also need skills that will “round you out” 
as a valuable specialized IT business problem solver:
• 
Business and finance
• 
Enterprise architecture and business needs analysis
• 
Project management
• 
Contract and vendor negotiation

223
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
• 
security and compliance
• 
data integration and analysis (see chapter 19)
• 
Mobile app development and management (what’s next)
■ Mindful Moment Hey, there are lots of “[fill in the blank] as a service” opportunities out there 
for you if you’ve got the right IT skills and experience—or you’re going to get the right IT skills and 
experience. Remember everything this book has presented about how to package and present 
yourself.
rules the World
i
. i love my iPhone, iPod, and iPad (sorry to those who 
. i love the fact that all of my devices, including my Macbook air and 
i’m using. i love the delirious number of applications i have 
gPs, 
. i love the fact that my two- and four-year-old daughters 
.
o that means for those of you who are mobile computing and mobile 
application developers, i love you. in a strictly plutonic, slightly stalkerish way.
no need for the restraining order.
according to a 2012 World bank study, three-fourths of the world’s inhabitants 
now have access to a mobile phone.9 also, the number of active mobile phone 
subscriptions worldwide, both prepaid and postpaid, has grown from fewer 
than 1 billion in 2000 to over 6 billion now, of which nearly 5 billion are in 
developing countries. The number may even exceed the total human 
population at some point in the near future. and lastly, more than 30 billion 
mobile applications were downloaded in 2011.
There are nearly 700,000 active mobile apps available in the apple app store,10
and over 500,000 android active mobile apps; 11and there are thousands of 
.

Chapter 18 | Careers in Cloud Computing and Mobile Technology
224
new ones being developed every day. Earlier this year, the Apple app store 
reported receiving about 26,000 submissions every week.12
And just as I did for “cloud computing,” I searched for “mobile computing” 
jobs in California, using the job-search tool Indeed.com. Nearly 1,500 jobs 
came up, from software engineers to mobile security. (Of course, you can 
search for jobs geographically in any search tool like Indeed.)
The Right Mobile Computing Skills
You want me to love you? Well, then I want you to be the best mobile 
computing expert you can be, and that means loving:
Java and JavaScript
Objective C
C++
C#
.Net
HTML5
Google’s Android or Apple’s iOS, or both, then 
learn the programming languages (above) and software development 
environment (below) for that mobile platform.
Android and RIM (Blackberry)—Eclipse
Eclipse is a multi-language software development environment, as well as an 
integrated development environment (IDE), written mostly in Java.13 It can be 
used to develop mobile applications in Java and other programming languages, 
including Ada, C, C++, COBOL, Haskell, Perl, PHP, Python, R, Ruby (including 
Ruby on Rails framework), Scala, Clojure, Groovy, Android, and Scheme, by 
also using other plug-ins. 
iOS (Apple)—Xcode
Xcode is Apple’s development environment for creating iPhone and iPad 
apps.14 Xcode includes everything you need to develop—the Instruments 
12 http://articles.latimes.com/2012/mar/14/business/la-fi-tn-apple-26000-20120314.
13 http://www.eclipse.org.
14 https://developer.apple.com/xcode/.

225
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
analysis tool, iOS Simulator, and the latest Mac OS X and iOS software 
development kits (SDKs). The Xcode interface integrates code editing, UI 
design with Interface Builder, testing, and debugging in a single window. 
Windows Mobile—Visual Studio
Microsoft Visual Studio is an integrated development environment (IDE).15 It’s 
all about Windows development and is used for console and graphical user 
interface (GUI) applications and Windows Forms applications, websites, Web 
applications, and Web services. This includes both native code development 
and managed code for all platforms supported by Microsoft Windows, 
Windows Mobile, Windows CE, .NET Framework, .NET Compact Framework, 
Silverlight.S
OS) and computing platform for 
Accenture.16 The latest version, called S
Nokia N8. 
 Mindful Moment  Mobile devices are going to exceed the global population at some point in 
in on this job market. Cloud and mobile computing will generate millions of new jobs in the next 10 
years, and in this quick “innovate or die” world of work we live in, that’s the new reality of career 
security.
15 http://www.microsoft.com/visualstudio/eng/whats-new.
16 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symbian.

c h a p t e r
19
Careers in Big 
Machines don’t make the essential and important connections among data and 
they don’t create information. Humans do. 
–Jim Stikeleather, Executive Strategist, Innovation for Dell Services
I’m a huge Freakonomics fan—the books, the blog, the podcasts. Journalist 
Stephen J. Dubner and award-winning economist Steven D. Levitt really do 
give their fans and readers “the hidden side of everything.”1
And a lot of that means analyzing the raw data in a unique and interesting 
ways—ways that for the longest time couldn’t be done simply because the 
computing power and storage capacities just didn’t exist until the 1980s and 
1990s. In fact, it wasn’t until the 1990s, when true business intelligence 
systems (BI), arising from what was known as decision support systems in the 
1960s and then developed in the mid-1980s, were born. It was in 1989 when 
Howard Dresner, a business intelligence and performance management 
thought leader and former Gartner Research Fellow, proposed “business 
intelligence” as an umbrella term that included “concepts and methods to 
improve business decision making by using fact-based support systems.”2 Right 
on, Howard. Hence all the software companies at the time—like Oracle, IBM, 
1 http://www.freakonomics.com.
2 http://dssresources.com/history/dsshistory.html.

Chapter 19 | Careers in Big Data and Social Analytics
228
HP, SAP, SAS, and a slew of others old and new, big and small—jumped into 
the BI business to help companies manage all their disparate data siloed in 
various systems and databases. And there were the storage hardware and 
server companies that created cost-sensitive and cutthroat businesses so 
organizations could store more data in smaller spaces—spaces interconnected 
around the globe via a mishmash of outdated and spanking brand-new 
telecommunications technologies under the sea, underground, from towers 
atop buildings and mountains, and in space.
Are You Ready to Pass Out?
But then something else technical in nature was born—the Internet. Suddenly 
everyday people could access “data” fairly easily via their phone lines. And the 
online data combined with business data worldwide has grown exponentially 

229
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
over the years—to a point that now, according to IBM, human beings create 
2.5 quintillion bytes of data. Every day. 3
Did you get that? That’s 2,500,000,000,000,000,000 bytes of data. I’m just 
excited that my oldest daughter, who’s four, can count to 20. 
Oh, and by the way, that volume of data is just an average over the past two 
years. Can you imagine the next two years? For those of you keeping score at 
home, big data in the IT world is a collection of data sets so large and complex 
that it becomes difficult to process using smaller database management tools. 
It takes pretty powerful software, hardware processing power, and multiple 
servers to process it all, which we have today. In fact, software startups that 
are crunching somewhat large amounts of data for their customers can quite 
. B
.
Internet search, finance and business information, HR
 and recruiting information, biological research, meteorology, physics, 
. It’s also being collected from all over 
GPS signals. Just to name a few.
. Every day.
According to DOMO, a business intelligence company founded in 2011, the 
amount of data generated on the Internet every minute by a global Internet 
population of 2.1 billion people includes:4
• 
48 hours of video on YouTube
• 
684,478 pieces of content shared on Facebook
• 
3,600 new photos shared on Instagram
• 
27,778 new posts published on Tumblr
I’ve seen other, similar daunting stats. I mean, how do we make sense of all 
this? Maybe all this “big data” doesn’t rock you to your very core as it does 
me, but you’ve got to admit it’s a little unsettling. And even a little silly.
Don’t you think?
3 http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/bigdata/.
4 http://www.domo.com.

Chapter 19 | Careers in Big Data and Social Analytics
230
Rubber Chickens in Space
Equate the Internet to space; we inject a lot a silly crap into space because we 
can. We’re sending up more and more of it into our atmosphere every day, 
cluttering the view of the heavens. That’s why it’s comical that one of those 
objects sent into space earlier this year was a rubber chicken.
Work with me here. I am going somewhere.
Yes, a group of California students launched a rubber chicken into space, all in 
the name of science, and they named it Camilla.5
And then I dreamt that I received this email:
—Ben and the Pinterest Team
I’m never “pinterested” in having again. 
B
. Beyond the big three of social networks—Facebook, LinkedIn, and 
—some new social networks on the scene have grown quickly and 
. While I’m not an active user of Pinterest, Comscore had reported 
uniques in the United States. 6,7
What comes next? Noise and spam. A lot of it. That’s what happens when any 
new social channel gets big enough to bring regular value to early adopters 
and early mainstreamers—more content shared means more noise means 
more spam. The spam comes because it gets more difficult these days to 
differentiate between what’s legitimate and what’s garbage.
Check out another faux Pinterest email that an old colleague of mine received:
Hi!
Ivana Tosten mentioned you on a new pin that was added to “My Style”:
“I never thought losing weight could be so easy, but it turns out that there are 
products that actually work! See newsrapid2012.com it’s AMAZING!”
Click here to reply.
5 http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/04/21/rubber-chicken-camilla-sp_n_1442805.html.
6 http://www.comscore.com.
7 http://www.fastcompany.com/1834177/content-curators-are-new-superheros-web.

231
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Click here to follow back Ivana
—Ben & the Pinterest Team
Sure, many of you would get the fact that this was contextual spam, but there 
are those who wouldn’t and be pulled into the outer rings of crappy space.
Automated content curation and social analytics are still pretty new, but 
thank goodness they’re here, considering how much help the world needs 
(that they may not even be aware of) to aggregate, filter, read, and redistribute 
relevant content from across the realms of junked-up space—including 
Tweets, blog posts, news articles, Facebook Shares, LinkedIn Shares, Pinterest 
posts, and tons more.
. More specifically, and to be metaphorically correct for this 
Hubble telescope). 
Internet big data trending 
hotness. That’s what it’s all about these days.
And if you really want to reach Camilla the rubber chicken in the upper 
atmosphere, then good for you. Make sure to put a pin in it for me.
Through all of this, what’s fascinating to me is how all this relates directly to 
the quote from Jim Stikeleather at the beginning of this chapter. No matter 
how much data is out there, no matter how powerful the data analysis 
algorithms are, it still takes humans to connect the dots between what’s really 
happening and what’s not. It takes us to see that “hidden side of everything.”
For example, in one recent Freakonomics report, one of the producers went 
to Fort Benning in Georgia, where a whole bunch of feral pigs were devastating 
the land and equipment on the base. So, a cash bounty was provided to those 
hunters who eradicated the pigs, bringing in the pigs’ tails and details of how 
and where they were killed. What ended up happening was that, after three 
years and over $125,000 in bounty money, the pig population had actually 
grown dramatically, not declined. It was a head-scratcher, indeed. What they 
found out after crunching all the data, and then looking at it through the 
human lens, was that all the bait they had put out to attract the pigs had 

Chapter 19 | Careers in Big Data and Social Analytics
232
actually spurred their reproduction—hence, the unintended economic 
consequences of what was originally conceived.
Amen for the humans. And the jobs big data and social analytics are creating.
■ Mindful Moment  The sheer volume of data in the world today is unfathomable. The number 
of zeros alone at the end of the bytes of data pumping through our veins daily is enough to make 
me pass out multiple times. But the good news is that all this data of the democratization of the 
Internet is creating a whole bunch of big data and social analytics jobs.
The Biggest Data of All Is in the Works
I
. But as with all 
.
A
Kinsey & Company, the United 
S
.5 million people capable of 
.8
B
I did, there are lots of jobs available. But there’s just 
almost every business and industry. Just search for “big data” jobs using 
Indeed.com. At the time of this writing, nearly 18,000 jobs came up, from 
architect to engineer to programmer.. And there were nearly 2,700 on Dice.
com. (I’m listing both job boards again because Indeed.com aggregates the 
universe and Dice.com is used predominantly by companies and recruiters 
sourcing for specialized tech jobs.)
Tech experts agree that math, statistics, data analysis, business analytics, 
natural language processing, creativity, communications skills, and Hadoop are 
all critical to creating big data analytics frameworks and applying them to 
benefit businesses. Hadoop is an open-source software framework that 
supports tons of data and enables multiple applications and computers to 
work together. Hadoop can be learned via classes or can be self-taught.
Again, because there’s not a “big data profession” per se, here’s a list of the 
most common jobs with the skill sets required based on Computerworld 
research:9
8  http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/mgi/research/technology_and_innovation/big_data_the_
next_frontier_for_innovation.
9  http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9231445/Big_data_big_jobs_.

233
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Data Scientists: Today, these are the smartest folks in the room with the 
deepest of analytical insight, who are also assuming leadership positions in 
businesses. Lots of math and statistics here as well as artificial intelligence, 
natural language processing, and/or data management.
Data Architects: These are programmers who can put the method to the 
madness when it comes to that mountain of disconnected data. They usually 
have statistical backgrounds as well as programming and BI, and have the 
ability to look at data in new and innovative ways.
Data Visualizers: These are the folks who interpret the data and analytics 
for everyday business use. They give the data context and understandability 
for all in business to consume and learn from and to apply to daily operations. 
: These are the quality management and change 
. They are clear communicators and help to ensure the data analyses 
.
Engineer/Operators: These are the folks who take the big data 
. 
■ Mindful Moment  While there’s not a “big data profession” per se, there are more and more 
jobs available today including data scientists, data architects, data visualizers, data change agents 
and data engineers/operators that require sophisticated skill sets. Do you have what it takes? If 
not, get it while the gettin’s good.
Social Insights Can Be Pinteresting
No, I’m still not “pinterested” in what you’re sharing on Pinterest, but there 
are billions of dollars at stake for many companies that do. In the past few 
years alone, companies like Radian6, now part of the Salesforce Marketing 
Cloud, have been aggregating and analyzing what consumers have been saying, 
online across social networks and the greater Internet, about specific 
companies, products, and services—called “sentiment analysis.” This has 
spawned myriad sentiment analysis firms, also known as “social listening” 
software, trying to make sense of all the online chatter on behalf of their 
client companies.
While this kind of social listening is important for consumer businesses, 
business-to-business companies are finding more value in curating and sharing 

Chapter 19 | Careers in Big Data and Social Analytics
234
relevant and highly targeted content for their buyers, influencers, and even 
internal employees and applicants. They are drinking from the firehose and 
freezing the data “water” into flavored ice cubes so they don’t drown. This 
includes firms like curata and socialears.
as a long-time marketer, i know that all this analyzed information can be 
valuable as long as it’s kept in the context of who you’re targeting and why 
you’re targeting them. but the intricate algorithms that go into slicing and 
dicing all this social data is up to you smart folks. advanced analytics pros are 
in very high demand. The fact that traditional enterprise business intelligence 
reporting and query tools have made it into mainstream cloud computing 
products today and has given an edge to growing numbers of companies 
offering predictive analytics, data mining, text analytics, and other analytics 
. but like big data architects, 
. it 
. analytics experts also 
.
i searched for “social analytics” jobs, nearly 9,000 came up on indeed.
dice.com, and they ranged from software engineers to social 
. and according to WanTed analytics, the occupations that 
• 
computer systems analysts
• 
Management analysts
• 
Market research analysts
• 
software engineers (applications)
• 
industrial engineers
• 
operations research analysts
■ Mindful Moment Analyzing social data and providing the right insights to businesses today 
has only just begun. Developing the right algorithms via predictive analytics, data mining, text 
analytics, and other analytics techniques will help harness the wild horses of today’s Internet data, 
creating millions of new jobs for data analysts tomorrow.

c h a p t e r
20
Traditional IT 
Careers Today
And I said, “Well, gosh, can’t we—can’t we find some—some women that are 
also qualified”? I went to a number of women’s groups and said, “Can you help 
us find folks?”’ and they brought us whole binders full of women.
—Governor Mitt Romney, 2012 Presidential Candidate
work” consumer (both employee and customer)—are transforming IT 
innovation. All through the writing of this book, these are the three things 
that kept seeping into my mind and filtering my perception of the technology 
world today (and tomorrow).
For those of you who have children, you know as I do that we only want the 
best for them. We want them to have more opportunities to excel in school 
and work than we ever did. I see how bright and smart my girls are; and then 
when I read about the continued disparity between how many women go into 
science and technology versus how many men do, and how many women who 
do go into technology get compensated less than their male counterparts, of 
course I’m compelled to pull for the women. This situation has been slowly 
changing, and I hope to be a catalyst for changing it further. Guys, I’m not 
saying you don’t deserve to be where you are, but I do want more women—
my daughters, included—to deserve to be there as well when they work just 
as hard as the rest of us to get there.
Then there’s social. It has democratized everything. It has given us the content 
we want in the media we want, when we want it. It has given us the ability to 
connect and collaborate with anyone, anywhere in the world. It has given you, 

Chapter 20 | Traditional IT Careers Today
236
the job seeker, an insider view into organizations, and it has given organizations 
the same insider view into you. It has even helped to topple dictatorial 
regimes, for goodness’ sake. Social has given us, the workplace consumers, 
the power to transform how, where, when, and why we work. 
These are the traditional IT careers of today, and at this level of employment 
democratizion, we are developing some amazing hardware, software, and 
networking technologies at an exponential pace. Early adopters have to take 
Dramamine these days to be able to manage all the waves of change. 
But, yes, there’s still a limit on how far we’ve come. With all the online tools, 
social and professional networking sites, and job services available today, 
we’ve got political candidates looking for world-of-work gender equity in 
.
I
U.S.
. In fact, most economists agree 
GDP 
. Taxing employee healthcare 
. Or doing away with the mortgage interest write-off. Or 
. Maybe.
N
.
But these are all things that are out of our control. When it comes to skilling 
up, networking inside and out, making yourself more marketable and finding 
work, these are things that are within your control. 
That is why I wrote this book. When I left a great job two years ago for a 
business endeavor that went awry fast, I didn’t realize that the sometimes 
painful yet amazing journey I was about to embark on—the walkabout through 
the business wilderness during the height of the deep recession—would teach 
me to adapt and learn new skills quickly. I bought a domain and then launched 
a new website to reposition myself and my experience in the HR B2B 
technology space; but instead of using free blog services, I learned how to use 
WordPress and I refined my social marketing skills. 
So what, you say? You’re right; I’m not programming relational databases. But 
I was reprogramming my career and my life—that’s what we have control 
over. Here’s the point: no one’s going to manage your career for you. This is 
the new millennium of specialization, from advancing yourself technically to 
becoming business and marketing savvy. 
We went back to school. We learned new skills. We took the contract work. 
We got ourselves cross-trained, and we volunteered to stretch ourselves. We 

237
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
were given assessments and we passed background checks. We built a 
powerful online profile. We researched the employers we wanted to work 
for. We leveraged our networks and worked with recruiters. We found 
mentors and joined professional associations. We used all the latest job-
seeker tools at our disposal. We made our business case and got the final 
interview. We were interviewed online. We got the job and fought hard to be 
onboarded and trained for the long haul. We skilled up on the inside and kept 
our internal mobility opportunities open. We found opportunities in cloud 
computing and big data and more.
We did all this. Men and women alike. Nontraditional ownership of our own 
career development. Amen.B
. Come to think of it, in 
IT world they’ve all been binders full of men. Unshaven men wearing A
lcatraz” T-shirts and smelling of taco trucks and Mountain Dew, and playing R
ock Band or World of Warcraft or Words with Friends.O
kay, that’s an unfair exaggeration, and the chapter-opening quote has already 
SNL cold openings. And my apologies to my tech 
I’ve talked shop 
team members, who are creating system architecture, managing IT infra-
structure, setting up databases, working out UI, crunching code, fixing bugs, 
and dressing up the software. (No, you don’t smell of taco trucks.)
Mostly men, with the exception of one recent interaction where there was 
one woman in a development team of six. Interestingly enough, I’ve seen 
more female founders and CEOs in Silicon Valley than practicing technology 
professionals, so that may make more of a difference at some point.
In fact, most of my career in tech marketing, HR, and recruiting has included 
more female counterparts than men. Really. Although certainly not equal in 
opportunity and pay, there were more women in the workforce in the last 
two years, outpacing the men. And of the 15 job categories projected to grow 
the most in the next decade in the United States, all but two are occupied 
primarily by women.1 However, an IT World article from early 2012 about IT 
professionals stated:
While hard numbers related to the number of women who work in high-tech as 
technical support or managers in the private and public sectors in the U.S. 
1 http://www.bls.gov/ooh/About/Projections-Overview.htm.

Chapter 20 | Traditional IT Careers Today
238
today are hard to come by, some studies estimate women constitute 15% to 
25% of the ranks at most, and about 8% of managers. . . . To be sure, women 
in the U.S. aren’t coming out of undergraduate and graduate programs in 
computers sciences in huge numbers. As of 2009, only 18% of graduates in 
computer science were women. 2
Time to evolve, ladies and gentlemen, for all of you to benefit—and our 
children. My two little girls, both of whom take smart device usability to 
uncanny levels, may want to be in IT some day, and I’m going to be right there 
urging them on through school and into their careers. According to a study 
by the Anita Borg Institute, there needs to be a culture shift inside companies 
today.3 They need to recruit from bigger candidate pools and advertise 
positions more neutrally, removing stereotypes and culture references that 
. 
I
.
. I’m sure that most of you reading 
. You want to work with the best 
.
I
today, with professional networks, circles, pools, communities, playgrounds 
even—whatever you want to call them. You can meet and network with like-
minded IT pros, male and female alike, who are interested in specific yet 
gender-neutral careers, skills, hobbies, technologies—you name it. You can 
communicate with one another, challenge one another without malice, 
commiserate and collaborate about career commonalities. Brothers can 
encourage more of their sisters to go into tech, and sisters can encourage 
their brothers to stay in tech.
Either way, you’ll share binders full of growth opportunities with one another, 
just like the big open network playground we work together in today. 
And yes, you can still play video games (I’ve actually heard more women play 
video games these days than men. Really.)
2 http://www.itworld.com/networking/256428/least-1-woman-should-be-interviewed-every-it-
job-opening-advocacy-group-says.
3 http://anitaborg.org/. The Anita Borg Institute is an organization dedicated to increasing the 
role of women in technology.

239
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
No Matter What You Call It
Listen boys and girls, what’s new will soon be old. If you’ve been in tech for 
any length of time, especially the past two decades, you know innovation is 
rapid and never-ending. Every technology I’ve discussed in this book—cloud 
computing, mobile, big data, social analytics, and more—will evolve and 
become something new. But they’re all built on the great IT foundation of 
hardware, software, and network development, production, programming, 
and project management.
So, in a sense, it’s an oxymoron that innovation makes what’s old become new 
again. This is why it’s critical that you constantly “skill up” to keep yourself 
relevant and marketable, not only for a new job but also to progress in the 
I’ve pointed out in this book.H
ey, the U.S. automotive industry is experiencing a renaissance of sorts. At 
Indeed.com nationally and nearly 400 on Dice.com. (I’m listing both job 
Indeed.com aggregates the universe and Dice.com is 
.) This includes a variety of other manufacturing industries (over 42,000 
Indeed.com recently and over 
Dice.com). Engineering—from aerospace (over 9,500 on 
Indeed.com and over 1,600 on Dice.com), to biomedical (only 60 on both, but 
still), to nuclear (60 on both), to petroleum (30 on both)—is becoming more 
and more specialized and can offer lucrative opportunities for you, and you, 
and you, if you all get the right combination of skills, experience, and business 
know-how.
And many of the traditional IT skills are just as hot as the new ones. Case in 
point: according to Computerworld’s 2013 Forecast, the following are the top 
ten skills for 2013.4 In fact, 33 percent of the 334 IT executives who responded 
to their forecast survey said that they plan to hire in the next 12 months. 
That’s up for the third year in a row.
1. Programming and Application Development: According to the survey results, 
companies that have delayed application development projects during the 
downturn are now ready to rock. This includes finding people with experience 
in Java, J2EE, and .Net.
2. Project Management: I highlighted this earlier in the book. Project management 
skills are more and more critical to development projects, and if you want to 
4 http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9231486/10_hot_IT_skills_for_2013.

Chapter 20 | Traditional IT Careers Today
240
open up those lattice growth opportunities out there, you’ll master some 
basic leadership and coordination skills here. Development projects are 
getting more complex, involving coordination of global teams and getting 
applications to talk one another correctly.
3. Help Desk/Technical Support: With the complexity of business today, and the 
creation of new systems and electronic records applications, more and more 
technical support folks are needed to help others use these systems. Help 
desk technicians are a growing job market.
4. Security: Hacking for ill will is something companies grapple with every 
minute of every day, losing billions in lost data, time, and revenue every year. 
CIOs and other IT leaders have made security a number one priority, and the 
. So for you .
5. 
 As I mentioned in Chapter 19, “big data” and 
. Those who succeed in big data have a math/statistical 
. Data scientists 
.
6. 
: As I discussed in Chapter 18, “cloudy” days ahead are where it’s 
all at. Companies are moving from installed-based software to Software as a 
Service and cloud computing to save on licensing fees, overhead, and 
maintenance, so they need those of you with the cloud computing skills and 
experience.
7. Virtualization: This is a new one, but could be a growth opportunity for 
many of you. If you understand storage and virtual server clusters, and have 
some experience creating them, then this is a space for you. 
8. Networking: Hey, that’s the networked world we live in and we wouldn’t 
want it any other way. Companies need networking pros who’ve got the 
experience, still one of the most wanted skill sets in the IT world. 
9. Mobile Applications and Device Management: Again, in Chapter 18, I described 
how this is hotter than hot and will continue to be so for the next decade. 
More people globally are jumping online via their smartphones and tablets to 
access apps representing everything from entertainment to workplace 
management and productivity software. App development continues to lead 
the glamorous life in tech today.

241
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
10. Data Center: The older core-tech skills are still vitally important to the IT 
organization. Data center management, server, storage, and data backup skills 
are all quite high in demand. 
■ Mindful Moment  When it comes to IT skills, what is old is new again, and what is new will 
become old—faster than you can shake a stick at, as my Pop used to say. IT is hot—yes, indeed—
and even in industries such as automotive, manufacturing, aerospace, and energy, there are 
lucrative jobs to be found. But again, you’ve got to have a highly specialized skill set, direct 
experience, and the contextual business savvy, especially if you want to have a bigger role in the 
company long term.
EngagementA
ccording to the Gartner 2012 CIO Survey, the world has become expo-
CIOs and IT 
.5 In fact, 20 percent of them have reduced budgets yet again, and 
IT investment is to be made is getting more difficult, 
. But according to the survey, they do 
IT innovation.” 
Of course, this means investing in customer-relationship management, 
document management, mobile applications, supply-chain management, sales 
and marketing and services technologies, analytics, and social media.
See a pattern here? Customer interface doesn’t just mean your “buying 
customers.” It also means you, the employee or contractor customer, which 
also means that the IT and technology can now drive innovative business 
inside and out, as it should. At any given time, we can be employees and then 
we can be customers. The perpetually transparent (the ability to see inside 
and out of companies) grows and the ongoing engagement cycle repeats over 
and over again; social technology has democratized—and many conservative 
folk would say exacerbated—it all.
Meaning that now more than ever, we are the captains of our own industry. 
No longer does the evil empire hold us at bay (and in a dark, bleak hole in the 
applicant-tracking system). We’re the ones who brought the smart devices to 
work when work said you couldn’t play on Twitter or Facebook. (Or even 
LinkedIn, for that matter; I’ve heard of companies still blocking the professional 
5  http://www.gartner.com/technology/cio/cioagenda_findings.jsp.

Chapter 20 | Traditional IT Careers Today
242
network site at work.) We’re the ones who created the entertaining and 
collaborative apps for our smart devices that we brought to work. We’ve 
become the customer experience that drives IT innovation.
We are IT innovation. We are the nontraditional transforming the traditional.
And that was when my finger refused to post the benign tweet. The simple, 
straightforward tweet about the recent Recruiting Trends panel discussion on 
social media, transparency, and competitive advantage in the world of work, 
recruiting, human resources, and career management.6
You see, social media present ourselves as transparent or, rather, as out there 
in full view, driving the enterprise (crazy) to do the same, and it’s making 
. You’ve read the stories of social 
. Or of 
. 
C
Return key. And then, before I pressed it, I 
I posted to my blog anonymously because I didn’t want 
I was writing about my vagina.”
N
. Pins dropped. Uncomfortable shifting. Even the usually 
I know all too well hesitated. I 
I turned to look at them in the back row and they were all 
frozen in place. Only for a moment, but frozen mouths ajar nonetheless.
The vagina quote came from a refreshingly candid and smart Meredith Soleau, 
a human resource manager at a mega car dealership in the heartland. Meredith 
is also a humorist who writes her “Life’s Crazy Joke” blog.7 To be clear, as I 
was growing up, I was heavily influenced by my mom and my sister. Now I’ve 
got the Mama (the affectionate name I call my wife) and two young daughters, 
and I am quite in touch with all gender-scapes within myself. Really. But based 
on conversations with all kinds of organizations and professionals during the 
past few years, this literal and figurative metaphor of the unruly social world 
is all too real.
It’s social gone wild; it’s out of control, so organizations are still trying to 
figure out a way to control it, although we keep driving the IT innovation to 
“uncontrol” it. Remember that email and the public Internet were first viewed 
to be business destroyers, not enablers.
6  http://www.recruitingtrends.com.
7  http://www.lifescrazyjoke.com.

243
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Now, not everyone should be allowed to shoot social from the hip, I get that. 
You probably work with or have worked with some psychos who’ve been 
trying to friend you on Facebook every week for the past year, or who have 
posted the most political or gender-biased or bigoted blogs you’ve never 
wanted to see. Ever. 
Personal responsibility and impulse control don’t come easily, if ever, to 
everyone, including organizations themselves. But I’d argue that most of us do 
know better—the employed and the contracted, or those looking to be 
employed and contracted—in this ever-transitioning and fluid world of work. 
We’re already out there across a vast network of online and face-time 
configurations —co-mingling, venting, joking, laughing, offending sometimes 
still (unfortunately), engaging, sharing, learning, discussing, and developing 
.
IT and technology innovation—and for you 
. Choosing companies 
. 
I
freely, from the corporate site, to social sites, to professional networking 
sites, to associations, to everything else under the glorious sun. And then do 
it in a way that you and I can informally “skill up” at the same pace as the 
organization’s recent hires and current employees do (who continue to do 
more and more on their own, anyway). This will make you more relevant and 
hireable at some point in the future. That could mean you get a job with that 
firm, or maybe you show up on the radar of one of their competitors. Either 
way, it’s a win-win-win for you all. 
This can all be done via local networking events, conferences, association 
meetings, Facebook pages, LinkedIn groups, Twitter streams, and other online 
professional networks, as well as true talent community platforms’ the key is 
being social and, again, acknowledging that “customer experience is the best 
opportunity for IT innovation.”
Don’t be afraid to be selective and engage with companies that are willing to 
engage with you as the universal customer, especially when you and I are 
already doing it without them. 
Godspeed, my friends.

Chapter 20 | Traditional IT Careers Today
244
*Tweet*
■ Mindful Moment You are the customer. You really are. And you should be treated as if you’re 
in the market for a large purchase and investment, because that’s exactly what it is in this crazy 
light-speed world of work. Organizations that want the best IT talent—you and you and you—will 
welcome the transparent, innovative nature that we, as prospects, exhibit today; they can’t call all 
the shots as they did in the old days. Nearly every man, woman, and child is touched by nearly 
every single piece of hardware, software, and network you help to develop, QA, manage, and 
maintain, so the power you hold is greater than the sum of what makes you up. Don’t you ever 
forget that, kids. Good luck to you and let me know when you get that great new gig. Contact me 
at kevin@reach-west.com.

a p p e n d i x
Appendix
We All Need Lists of StuffL
. Career management stuff. World of work stuff. 
I
IT stuff. Eclectic educational stuff. Business/economy stuff. Happy 
. Hey, at least it’s in alphabetical order.
IT, business, and “life” resources 
I didn’t include in the book. Not everything here is literally about 
. By no means 
I frequent as well as others recommended to me from all my very 
HR, recruiting, career management, and technology friends, all of whom 
are well above my pay grade.
Good luck and enjoy. And if you’ve got a resource you dig that I didn’t list, 
please send it my way to kevin@reach-west.com. I’ll make sure to include it 
the next time.
40Tech
http://www.40tech.com
I love this: technology, the internet, hardware, software, gadgets, and video 
game articles and stuff “written from the perspective of the 40-something 
average guy.” Well, that’s me. There’s useful information here for any age, but 
older folks rock. And occasionally still roll. Evan Kline is the founder of 40Tech.
99% Invisible
http://99percentinvisible.org
This podcast/radio show is a favorite of mine. The host and producer, Roman 
Mars, creates shorts about design and architecture—but not always literally. 
It’s a great way to get those synapses firing in new and creative ways. 

Appendix
246
Allison Doyle
http://jobsearch.about.com/bio/Alison-Doyle-2335.htm
Allison is a long-time job search and employment expert who’s been writing 
for About.com since 1998. She’s got tons of experience in career development, 
online job search, HR, and the world of work in general. She is a great resource 
in any market.
All Things D 
http://allthingsd.com
This website is a Dow Jones news site devoted to all things technology, the 
internet, and media. It includes analysis and opinion. A great mix of media and 
. 
.com
Lars S chmidt is a friend of mine and currently the Senior Director of Talent 
A
Innovation at NPR (I am a big NPR fan). Lars is all about 
HR
.
http://arstechnica.com
Founded in 1998 by founder and editor-in-chief Ken Fisher, Ars Technica is all 
about the “alpha geeks”—IT and tech pros to the core. The site covers all 
that’s fresh and hip and popular. Quality content makes them a trusted place 
for tech news, policies, and whatever is latest and greatest in IT.
BetaBeat
http://betabeat.com
According to the editorial team, they’re all “about the characters who make 
this [tech] scene hum: the ambitious young angels, the eccentric hackers and 
the non-stop networkers. We’re here to take you behind closed doors for an 
inside look at how the deals really get done.” Right on. I’d check it out if I were 
you.
Bloomberg Businessweek
http://www.businessweek.com
Speaking of business sites, this is one of my favorites. A great range of business 
topics including lots of tech and innovation and solid writers.

247
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Brazen Careerist
http://www.brazencareerist.com
Brazen Careerist is all about virtual recruiting events and solid career advice 
and education to help folks of all types to “discover their strengths, refine 
their skills and find a job they love.” The keyword being love, the thing that 
often eludes us. 
Business Insider Tech
http://www.businessinsider.com
A great business site covering finance, media, technology, and other industry 
verticals. They bring the best of the web together for your business learning 
.
.careerdiva.net
I
Eve Tahmincioglu is someone you should 
. She’s been writing about business, career management, and the 
The New York Times, Time, Salon.com, and 
. She also has a weekly MSNBC.com column called “Your Career.” 
Rocketeer
http://www.careerrocketeer.com
I know Chris Perry, who founded this site, and he’s a very smart career 
development guy. His site is a career search and personal branding blog that’s 
all about owning your career path.
Career Sherpa
http://careersherpa.net
Hannah Morgan is all about helping the “lost” job seekers improve the way 
they look for work today, giving “no-nonsense” job search advice.
CareerTrend
http://careertrend.net
I’ve known Jacqui Barrett-Poindexter for a few years, and she’s the genuine 
deal when it comes to helping folks in career transition and those looking for 
a jump start. 

Appendix
248
Coursera
https://www.coursera.org
This is one of three online resources I didn’t include in Chapters 2 and 3, and 
they should be duly noted now (these related to the MOOCs I wrote about 
in Chapter 3—Coursera, Khan Academy and Udacity). The first is Coursera, 
an online learning portal with courses that include humanities, medicine, 
biology, social sciences, mathematics, business, computer science, and many 
others. This site can help you improve your skills and hopefully advance you 
along your career path—all for free.
Cube Rules
.com
D
If so, check out this career site from Scot Herrick. 
S
. 
.net
A
Gruber, but from what 
I
Apple. John’s site is new 
I already love it:
“If D
Fireball looks goofy in your browser, you’re likely using a shitty 
browser that doesn’t support web standards. Internet Explorer, I’m looking in 
your direction. If you complain about this, I will laugh at you, because I do not 
care. If, however, you are using a modern, standards-compliant browser and 
have trouble viewing or reading Daring Fireball, please do let me know.”
Digital Inspiration 
http://www.labnol.org
Amit Agarwal writes a personal technology column for WSJ India. He is a 
published book author and founder of Digital Inspiration, a blog about 
computer software, consumer gadgets, and web applications. Check it out.
The Economist
http://www.economist.com
Another one of my favorite pubs. The Economist has excellent writers who 
give insight and opinion on international news, politics, business, finance, 
science, and technology.

249
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
Fast Company
http://www.fastcompany.com
You haven’t heard of Fast Company? C’mon. Fast Company is a sweet publication 
with an editorial focus on tech innovation, ethonomics (ethical economics—
love it), leadership, and design. Where smart and hip business and tech meet. 
Freakonomics
http://www.freakonomics.com
Love. This. Stuff. I eat it like sugar. This is where New York journalist and 
author Stephen J. Dubner and award-winning economist Steven D. Levitt 
write about “the hidden side of everything.” Really. Must read and listen.
.comH
ere’s another freelance resource for you. FreelanceSwitch is a global 
.
.ghacks.netG
hacks is a technology news blog founded in 2005 by Martin Brinkmann. It’s 
contributions from freelance writers as well.
GigaOm
http://gigaom.com
Om Malik launched the GigaOM blog in 2006. It is, today, all about the 
intersection of business and technology. 
HackCollege 
http://www.hackcollege.com
HackCollege positions itself for college students, but hey, we’re all lifelong 
learners, right? This site educates all about the when and why of open source 
software.
JibberJobber
http://www.jibberjobber.com
I know, you need another job search service like you need a hole in the head, 
but Jason Alba’s JibberJobber service is a sound one. It’s like having a personal 
relationship manager that helps you do everything you need to do to manage 

Appendix
250
a job search and improve your networking. For those of you at home keeping 
score, Jason’s background is in IT and business strategy.
Keppie Careers
http://www.keppiecareers.com
Miriam Salpeter is a fantastic career management resource. She’s a social 
media strategist and consultant for job seekers and entrepreneurs. She also 
considers herself “a new economy job search coach” (love it), a resume writer, 
speaker, and author.
Khan Academy
http://www.khanacademy.org
The K han Academy is a not-for-profit that provides free education for “anyone 
.” They currently offer over 3,500 videos on arithmetic, physics, 
. You can access their video 
I’m concerned (and informal learning research).
.com
A
Lifehacker, a site that includes “tips, tricks, and downloads for getting things 
done.” Right on. 
Lost in Technology 
http://www.lostintechnology.com
Lost in Technology is all about, well, dealing with technology. So deal with it.
Mashable
http://mashable.com
You may have heard of it, but if not, Mashable is a great mainstream source for 
news, information, and resources about digital innovation. Mashable has over 
20 million monthly unique visitors and 6 million social media followers.
The Next Web 
http://thenextweb.com
Founded in 2008, The Next Web is an online publication with international 
news and about internet technology, business, and culture. 
2

251
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
NPR Planet Money
http://www.npr.org/blogs/money/
One of my economic and business faves indeed. I love their description: 
“Imagine you could call up a friend and say, ‘Meet me at the bar and tell me 
what’s going on with the economy.’ Now imagine that’s actually a fun evening. 
That’s what we’re going for at Planet Money.”
Personal Branding Blog
http://www.personalbrandingblog.com
Dan Schawbel’s personal branding insights are spot on. His blog is about how 
. Learn 
.R
eadWrite Web
.comR
eadWrite web was founded in 2003 by Richard MacManus. It’s considered to 
.
.com
Robert Scoble is a very smart guy who is an employee of Rackspace, a cloud 
computing and hosting company. He calls himself the “chief troublemaker,” 
which means you should read his stuff.
Scripting News
http://scripting.com
I did not know this, but Dave Winer created the internet. No, that’s not right. 
He actually helped create real simple syndication (RSS). The rest is history.
Six Revisions 
http://sixrevisions.com
Six Revisions was founded in 2008 by professional web developer/designer 
Jacob Gube. The site publishes useful articles for designers and web developers. 
TechCrunch
http://techcrunch.com
Like Mashable, TechCrunch is a well-trafficked technology site that profiles 
startups, and it reviews new internet products and other “breaking” tech 

Appendix
252
news. TechCrunch was founded in 2005 and now has 12 million unique visitors 
per month and more than 37 million page views per month. 
Tech Republic Career Management Blblog 
http://www.techrepublic.com/blog/career
As many of you may know, TechRepublic is an online trade publication and 
social community for IT professionals; on the same site there’s a great resource 
for career management. Check it out.
Unclutterer
http://unclutterer.com
The U
nclutterer is all about getting organized and staying that way. Good 
G
I need constant refreshers. 
.udacity.com
U
. There are lots of great courses offered in math, 
IT, so please do check out this site. The internet has now 
Udacity brings together great teachers from all 
.
The Unofficial Apple Weblog
http://www.tuaw.com
Founded in 2004, TUAW is a great source for Apple news, information, and 
analysis. The site is a rich Apple resource for developers, designers, and others 
as well. 
VentureBeat
http://venturebeat.com
VentureBeat is a great business and tech site. It provides news about innovation 
and a variety of technology trends such as social media, mobile, clean 
technology, games, and chips. 
Wired
http://www.wired.com
Another hip technology publication, Wired covers the latest technology 
trends.

253
Tech Job Hunt Handbook
WNYC’s Radiolab
http://www.radiolab.org
And speaking of shows that help you rewire your brain, Radiolab is an amazing 
show and a feast for the auditory senses. The subjects of science, philosophy, 
and human experience all converge here. Listen to it.

I
Index
A
ranking of World universities 
(arWu), 23
M. See association for computing 
Machinery (acM)
dy-no-mite, inc., 23
56
P Virtual edge, 165
TP. See association of information 
Technology Professionals (aiTP)
amazon ec2, 220
american Pie, 12
america’s army game, 158
android, 224
anita borg institute, 238
annual Performance reviews, and onboarding 
process, 201
anthony, Piers, 33
aPi. See application programming interface 
(aPi)
aPi as a service (aPiaas), 221
applicant tracking systems (aTs), 79, 97, 
121, 122, 160
application programming interface (aPi), 
105, 221
arWu. See academic ranking of World 
universities (arWu)
asimov, isaac, 33
asP. See association of software 
Professionals (asP)
association for computing Machinery 
(acM), 140
association of information Technology 
Professionals (aiTP), 140
association of software Professionals (asP), 
140
async interview, 87
aTs. See applicant tracking systems (aTs)
atwood, Jeff, 165
automated content curation, 231
B
background checks, 71
background screening, 69
assessments, 79
cognitive ability, 81
cultural fit and accountability, 80
emotional intelligence (ei), 80
job-knowledge, 81
personality, 80
and skills inventories, 81
work-sample, 81
background checks, 71
converging factors, 82
employers expectations, 74
hiding, 70
hiring, 72
social media, 73
soft skills, 77
visa mills, 76
beane, billy, 205
best practice, to business case, 169
highlighting accomplishments, 176

Index
256
Best practice, to business case (cont.)
measurable generalities, 172
specialist, 171
summary sections, 175
Beyond.com, 164
BI systems. See Business intelligence (BI) 
systems
Biden, Joe, 70
Big data
in IT world, 229
and social analytics, careers in, 227
passing out, 228
putting lens on data, 231
232
B
B
B
Businessweek article, 18, 27
BLS. 
 Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
B
BH.
 G., 206
B
B
Out, 97, 105, 113, 116, 122
BraveNewTalent, 74, 127, 128, 129, 217
Breakfast Club career panel, 6
Bright, 167
Bright Score, 167
Buddy Media, 216
Buddy mentoring system, and onboarding 
process, 200
Building, an online profile. See Online profile
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 15, 19, 96
Business band camp, 11
Business intelligence (BI) systems, 227, 240
Byte, 34
C
Cabrillo College, 24
Camilla, 230
Candidate Experience Awards, 160
Career, gaps in, 185
CareerBuilder.com, 113, 163
Career management, 3
Breakfast Club career panel, 6
business band camp, 11
Tech Job Hunt Handbook, 13
WordPress, 8
Careers
in big data and social analytics, 227
passing out, 228
putting lens on data, 231
right skills and contextual experience, 
232
rubber chickens in space, 230
social insights, 233
in Cloud computing (see Cloud 
computing)
in mobile technology (see Mobile 
technology)
Career search, 114
Glassdoor, 115
Vault, 115
Career Technical Education (CTE) program, 
24
CareerXroads, 162
Caring, and onboarding process, 197
Cassandra, 53
CBmobile Ambassador, 163
Celebrity Apprentice, 159
Chicago Teachers’ strike (2012), 205
CityOne game (IBM), 158
Civil Rights movement, 31
Client virtualization. See Desktop as a 
service
Cloud computing, 216, 218, 219, 240
APIaaS, 221
DaaS, 220
desktop as a service, 220
growth, 217
IaaS, 220
ITaaS, 221
PaaS, 220
SaaS, 219
SECaaS, 221
skills, 221
STaaS, 220
TEaaS, 221
CNET News, 34
CNN Money, 149

257
Index
Coding, 33
Coding Horror, 165
Cognitive ability assessments, and screening, 
81
College degree, 17, 19
Columbo-esque investigation technique, 144
Computer lab, 54
Computer Professionals for Social 
Responsibility (CPSR), 140
Computerworld, 29, 34
Computerworld research, jobs based on, 
232
Computerworld’s 2013 Forecast, 239C
omscore, 230C
onference Board, The, 221C
onspicuous conservation, 36C
onspicuous consummation, 36C
onsultants, 32C
onsumer reporting agencies (CRAs), 73C
ontract work, 39
Elance, 42
Freelancer, 45
Freelance.com, 45
full-time employment, 48
Guru, 44
LinkedIn, 46
negotiating pay and scope, 50
oDesk, 46
work and employer, management of, 48
CPSR. See Computer Professionals for Social 
Responsibility (CPSR)
CRAs. See Consumer reporting agencies 
(CRAs)
Creative Commons license, 166
Crispin, Gerry, 162
Cross-training, 53
actively disengaged workers, 56
gaining skills, 61
informal learning, value of, 61
job have-nots, 63
ladder moves, 59
lateral moves, 59
lattice moves, 60
and onboarding process, 199
responsibilities, 62
revolution, 57
talent-development professionals, 58
and volunteering, 65
Crunchbase, 150
CTE program. See Career Technical 
Education (CTE) program
Cultural fit and accountability assessments, 
and screening, 80
Curata, 234
D
DaaS. See Data as a service (DaaS)
Dangling pointer, 189
Data architects, 233
Data as a service (DaaS), 220
Data center management, 241
Data change agents, 233
Data engineer/operators, 233
Data scientists, 233
Data visualizers, 233
Decision support systems, 227
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), 76
Desktop as a service, 220
Desktop virtualization. See Desktop as a 
service
Developers, 32
Development Dimension International, 79
DHS. See Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS)
Dice.com, 163, 232, 234, 239
Digital Equipment Corporation, 61
DOMO, 229
Donaldson, Stephen R., 33
Dresner, Howard, 227
Dubner, Stephen J., 227
E
Eclipse, 224
EDGAR, 150
Education completion, 15
book learning, 25
college degree, 17
other side, 19
lying, 21
technical, and online, 23

Index
258
EEOC. See Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission (EEOC)
EI assessments. See Emotional intelligence 
(EI) assessments
Elance, 42
Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and 
Retrieval system, 150
Ellison, Larry, 79, 216
Emotional intelligence (EI) assessments, 80
Employee-engagement-survey results, 56
EmployeeScreenIQ, 22, 70, 74, 77
Employer and work, management of, 48
Employer expectations, during background 
screening, 74
E
Development Department, 65
E
Software Association, 156
Equal E mployment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC), 71, 72, 74
E
. C., 42
F
F
198, 230, 243
F
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), 71, 72, 
73, 74
Fast Company, 40
FCRA. See Fair Credit Reporting Act 
(FCRA)
Federal Aid Highway Act, 130
15th annual HR Technology Conference & 
Expo, 161
First- and second-degree burn rates, 122
Focus, 121, 159
Forbes magazine, 216
Formal learning, 61
Formal mentoring programs, 138
Freelance.com, 45
Full-time employment, 48
G
G+, 159
Gallup Employee Engagement Index, 110
Gaps, in career, 185
Gartner, 157
Gartner CIO Agenda Report (2012), 217, 
241
Generalities, measurable, 172
Generation Now, 30
GitHub, 35, 74, 113, 121, 123, 159, 165
Gladwell, Malcolm, 30, 151
Glamorous Life, 57
Glassdoor.com, 51, 113, 114, 115, 121, 149
Google, 96
Google Compute Engine, 220
Google Hangouts, 88
Google+ video chat, 85
Gottung, Liz, 57
Graphical user interface (GUI), 225
GreenJobInterview, 86, 88
Guerrilla tactics, 148
Guests, 220
GUI. See Graphical user interface (GUI)
Guru, 44
H
Hadoop, 232
Halogen Software, 79
Handbook of Proverbs, 206
Harvard Graduate School of Education, 15
Heckman, James, 78
Heinlein, Robert, 33
Help desk/technical support, in IT, 240
Help-Wanted OnLine Data Series, 221
Hiner, Jason, 30
HireVue, 87
Hirewire, 64, 66
Hiring, and background screening, 72
Hogan Assessments, 79
Hoovers, 150
HP, 228
HRmarketer.com, 62
HTML, 53
Hypervisor, 220
I
IaaS. See Infrastructure as a service (IaaS)
IBM, 157, 227, 229

259
Index
IBM Selectric III typewriter, 53
iCIMS, 165
IDC, 217
IDE. See Integrated development 
environment (IDE)
IEEE Computer Society. See Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE) Computer Society
Incarnation of Immortality, 33
Indeed.com, 164, 224, 232, 234
Informal learning, 61, 206
Informal mentors, 136
“Information and Communications for 
Development 2012:Maximizing 
Mobile”, 162
I
I
I
IaaS), 220
I
IPO), 150
I
IT, 235, 239, 241
I
dressing sense, 186
facts, answering, 185
gaps, in career, 185
listening and answering questions, 183
nonverbal communication, 186
relaxation techniques, 184
smack talk, 187
Inside Tech, 163
Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE) Computer 
Society, 34, 141
Integrated development environment (IDE), 
224, 225
Interested qualified applicants (IQA), 121
Internal mobility, 205
ladder moves, 211
lateral moves, 211
lattice moves, 211
rain/shine, 210
referrals, 212
roster changes, need for, 207
workplace, and nation ball, 208
Internet, 114, 228
data generation in, 229
Interviewing, 83, 179
follow up, 190
in-person job interview, 181
dressing sense, 186
facts, answering, 185
gaps, in career, 185
listening and answering questions, 183
nonverbal communication, 186
relaxation techniques, 184
smack talk, 187
job interview, 83
twisted logic, 188
video interviewing
incidence, 86
live virtual, 88
recorded, 87
things to keep in mind, 90
word about salary, 190
InterviewStream, 87
iOS (Apple), 224
IPO. See Initial public offering (IPO)
IQA. See Interested qualified applicants 
(IQA)
IT as a Service (ITaaS), 221
J
Jaimovich, Nir, 18
JIBE, 164
Job board, 161
Beyond.com, 164
CareerBuilder.com, 163
Dice, 163
Indeed, 164
LinkUp, 164
Monster.com, 163
Simply Hired, 164
Job have-nots, 63
Job interview, 83
Job-knowledge assessments, and screening, 
81
Jobs, Steve, 79, 136
Job search, 155
checklist, 125
final stages, 143
context, 150
face-to-face fire, 147

Index
260
Job search, final stages (cont.)
guerrilla tactics, 148
online connection, 145
preparation for, 151
playing video games in, 156
operating system, 158
waiting rooms, 159
fighting black holes, 166
GitHub, 165
job board, 161
Stack Overflow, 165
Jobs2Web, 129, 164
Jobvite, 165
K
KellyOCG
, 40
K
. See also IBM
K
Clark, 57
L
L
Lateral moves
cross training, 59
internal mobility, 211
Lattice moves
cross training, 60
internal mobility, 211
Leadership team, introduction to, 197
Learning
democratization, 206
formal, 61
informal, 61, 206
paths, 61
Lee, Geddy, 55
Legend of Zelda, 155
Levitt, Steven D., 227
Lifeson, Alex, 55
LinkedIn, 46, 74, 113, 116, 121, 122, 123, 
125, 159, 165, 230
current profile, 98
education, 102
getting connected, 104
previous jobs, titles, and descriptions, 
101
professional headline, 102
professional headshots, 102
recommendations and accolades, 103
skills, and expertise section, 101
specialties section, 101
story summary, 98
online professional profile in, 96
LinkedIn on Facebook. See BranchOut 
profile
LinkUp, 164
Live virtual interviewing, 83, 86, 88
Lotus 1-2-3, 53
Lying about education, 21
M
Macbook Air, 223
Macbook Pro, 223
Marcom H-R-say, 8, 9
Marketing, and sales pros, 50
Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs),  
34
McKinsey & Company, 232
Me, Inc., 177
Measurable generalities, 172
Mehler, Mark, 162
Mentors, 133
definition, 136
formal mentoring programs, 138
informal mentors, 136
and professional associations, 139
ACM, 140
AITP, 140
ASP, 140
CPSR, 140
IEEE Computer Society, 141
NAP, 141
NPA, 141
STC, 141
SVForum, 141
WIT, 142
Microsoft, 217
Microsoft Silverlight, 225
Microsoft Visual Studio, 225

261
Index
Microsoft Windows, 225
Milestone Payments, 45
MITRE, 113
Mobile applications and device management, 
240
Mobile technology, 217, 223, 224
Monster.com, 163
MOOCs. See Massive Open Online Courses 
(MOOCs)
Moore, Sally Anne, 61
Moore’s Law on meth, 29
Moscone Center (San Francisco), 216
MS-DOS operating system, 53
Health Systems, 79
Space, 121N
ational Association of Colleges and 
Employers (NACE), 17, 18N
ational Association of Programmers (NAP), 
141N
ation ball
expendable crew members, 208
go-to guys and gals, 208
pariahs, 209
team captains, 208
NCHRA. See Northern California Human 
Resources Association (NCHRA)
.NET Compact Framework, 225
.NET Framework, 225
Networking, 119, 240
early stages, 124
first- and second-degree burn rates, 122
job-search checklist, 125
online networking, 125
recruiters, working with, 123
referrals, 122
talent networks and communities, 126, 
130
Network Professional Association (NPA), 
141
New York Times, 96
Ning networks, 121
Nintendo Wii, 155
Nokia N8, Symbian^3 in, 225
Nonverbal communication, 186
Northern California Human Resources 
Association (NCHRA), 127
North Highland, 113
NPA. See Network Professional Association 
(NPA)
O
Occupy Wall Street movement, 31
oDesk, 46
Omni, 33
Onboarding process, 193
air-conditioning, 198
buddy mentoring system, 200
caring, 197
cross-training, 199
leadership team, introduction to, 197
messy process, 194
performance reviews, 201
shadow system, 200
training, 199
On-demand software, 219
On-demand test environment. See Test 
environment as a service (TEaaS)
Online connection, 145
Online education, 23
Online networking, 125
Online profile, 95
BranchOut, 105
current profile, 98
education, 102
getting connected, 104
previous jobs, titles, and descriptions, 
101
professional headline, 102
professional headshots, 102
recommendations and accolades, 103
skills, and expertise section, 101
specialties section, 101
story summary, 98
future, 105
LinkedIn, 96
resumes, 95
Oracle, 129, 216, 227

Index
262
P
PaaS. See Platform as a service (PaaS)
“Pathways to Prosperity” study, 15
Payscale, 51
Peoplesoft, 165
Performance reviews, and onboarding 
process, 201
Perry Preschool Program study, 78
Personality assessments, and screening, 80
Personal marketing, 151
content, 151
placement, 151
Pets.
Pink, D an, 40
Pink S
NPRs), 78
S), 220
IT associations, 139AC
M, 140
AIAS
CPSR, 140
IEEE Computer Society, 141
NAP, 141
NPA, 141
STC, 141
SVForum, 141
WIT, 142
Professional networking, 121
Profiles International, 79
Programming and application development, 
in IT, 239
Programming languages, 224
Progressive muscle relaxation, 184
Project management skills, 239
Project managers, 32
Q
Qualification statements, 172
Quora, 113, 121, 159
R
Raba Review, 18
Rackspace Cloud, 220
Radian6, 216, 233
Recorded video interviewing, 83, 87
Recruiters, working with, 123
Referrals, 113, 123, 212
Relaxation techniques, 184
progressive muscle relaxation, 184
visualization, 184
Researching employers, 107
career search, 114
Glassdoor, 115
Vault, 115
shadow economy, 108
smudged glass doors, 110
social network connections, 113
work–life window shopping, 111
Resumes, 95
ReviewSnap, 79
RIM (Blackberry), 224
Rules of Engagement (ROE), 158
Rush, 55
Rypple, 216
S
SaaS. See Software as a service (SaaS)
Salary.com, 51
Salesforce.com, 215, 216
Salesforce Marketing Cloud, 233
San Jose Mercury News, 12
San Jose State University (SJSU), 15, 34
SAP, 216, 228
SAS, 228
Saturday Night Live, 179
SDKs. See Software development kits 
(SDKs)
SEC. See Security and Exchange Commission 
(SEC)
SECaaS. See Security as a service (SECaaS)
Security, in IT, 240
Security and Exchange Commission (SEC), 
22, 149
Security as a service (SECaaS), 221

263
Index
Sentiment analysis, 233
Service-oriented architecture (SOA), 220
Sexton, Alision, 36
Sexton, Steve, 36
Shadow economy, 108
Shadow system, and onboarding process, 200
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 23
Shelia E., 57
SHRM Conference and Expo, 30
Siebel Systems, 215
Silicon Valley, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 20, 28, 41
Silkroad, 79, 165
Simply Hired, 164S
Henry, 18S
SU. See San Jose State University (SJSU)SSSS
Es. See Subject matter experts (SMEs)SOA.
 See Service-oriented architecture 
(SOA)S
. See also Big data, 227S
Ears, 234SS
Social media
and background screening, 73
and screening, 72
Social networking, 120, 121, 218
connections, 113
rise, 34
Society for Technical Communication (STC), 
141
Soft skills, screening for, 77
Software as a service (SaaS), 140, 219, 240
Software development kits (SDKs), 225
Soleau, Meredith, 242
Sologig, 163
Specialized business case, creation of, 171
Specialized skills, learning, 27
coding, 33
playing online, 34
playing with oneself, 35
reading, 33
conspicuous consummation, 36
Moore’s Law on meth, 29
Spolsky, Joel, 165
STaaS. See Storage as a service (STaaS)
Stack Overflow, 35, 74, 113, 121, 159, 165
Staffback, 66
Star Wars, 33
STC. See Society for Technical 
Communication (STC)
Stikeleather, Jim, 231
Storage as a service (STaaS), 220
Subject matter experts (SMEs), 139
SuccessFactors, 79
Summary sections, 175
SVForum, 141
SWOT analysis, 177
Symbian, 225
Symbian^3, in Nokia N8, 225
T
TalentCircles, 129
Talent communities, 129, 130
Talent-development professionals, 58
Talent networks and communities, 126
Taleo, 79, 165. See also Oracle
Tapestry.Net, 166
TEaaS. See Test environment as a service 
(TEaaS)
Tech Job Hunt Handbook, 13
Tech market, recruiters in, 124
Technical, and online education, 23
Technical debt, 206
Technology innovation, 243
Technology Review, 34
TechRepublic, 30, 34
Tech skills, 32
Terremark, 220
Test environment as a service (TEaaS), 221
Texas Instruments desktop computer, 53
Think Slideshare, 149
Thomas Covenant The Unbeliever, 33
Thompson, Scott, 69
TI desktop computer, 54
TRACOM Group, 79
Traditional IT careers, 235
culture shift, 238
innovation, 239, 241

Index
264
Traditional IT careers (cont.)
male and female workers, 237
skills, 239
business intelligence/analytics, 240
Cloud computing, 240
data center, 241
help desk/technical support, 240
mobile applications and device 
management, 240
networking, 240
programming and application 
development, 239
project management, 239S
aaS, 240
Chat, 129
U
U.S. I
Highway System, 130
V
Vault, 114, 115, 149
Ventana Research, 217
Video CV, 87
Video games, in job search, 156
operating system, 158
Video interviewing
incidence, 86
live virtual, 83, 88
recorded, 83, 87
things to keep in mind, 90
Virtualization, 240
Virtual machine manager (VMM), 220
Visualization, 184
VMM. See Virtual machine manager (VMM)
Volunteering, 65
VolunteerMatch, 65, 66
W
Waiting rooms, 159
black holes, 166
GitHub, 165
job board, 161
Beyond.com, 164
CareerBuilder.com, 163
Dice, 163
Indeed, 164
LinkUp, 164
Monster.com, 163
Simply Hired, 164
Stack Overflow, 165
Walmart associates, 67
WANTED Analytics, 221, 234
Web-based software, 219
Windows CE, 225
Windows Mobile, 225
Winters, Ken, 66
Wired, 34
Women in Technology (WIT), 142
WordPerfect, 53
WordPress, 8, 29, 53, 236
Work and employer, management of, 48
Work–life window shopping, 111
Workplace, and nation ball, 208
Work-sample assessments, and screening, 81
World Bank study (2012), 223
Wowzer, 87
X
Xcode, 224
Y
Yahoo! Finance, 149
Your Future Is Our Business (YFIOB), 6, 135
YouTube, 87
Z
Zarrella, Ronald, 22

Tech Job hunT
handbook
career ManageMenT for  
Technical Professionals
Kevin W. Grossman
Illustrations by Doug Ross

Tech Job Hunt Handbook: Career Management for Technical Professionals
Copyright © 2012 by Kevin W. Grossman
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or 
part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illus-
trations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or 
by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this 
legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material 
supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for 
exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is 
permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its cur-
rent version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use 
may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to 
-
-
or implied, with respect to the material contained herein.
President and Publisher: Paul Manning
Acquisitions Editor: Jeff Olson
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell, Louise Cor-
rigan, Morgan Ertel, Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Robert Hutchinson, Michelle 
Lowman, James Markham, Matthew Moodie, Jeff Olson, Jeffrey Pepper,   Douglas 
Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, Gwenan Spearing, Matt Wade, Tom 
Welsh
Coordinating Editor: Rita Fernando
Copy Editors: Carole Berglie, Teresa Horton
Compositor:  Bytheway Publishing Services
Indexer: SPi Global
Cover Designer: Anna Ishchenko
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York, 233 
Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505, e-mail 
orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com. Apress Media, LLC is a California 
LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance Inc (SSBM Fi-
nance Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation.  
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit www.apress.com. 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promo-
tional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, 
reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at www.apress.com/bulk-sales.
Any source code or other supplementary materials referenced by the author in this text is avail-
able to readers at www.apress.com. For detailed information about how to locate your book’s 
source code, go to www.apress.com/source-code/.

This book is dedicated to my father and mother,  
my wife, and my daughters. It’s a testament  
to their work ethic, love, and support, and  
a tribute to how my girls—the B-hive as they’re 
affectionately known—keep my heart abuzz with 
hope for the future of work.

About the Author
Kevin W. Grossman is a human resources and 
recruiting B2B software-and-services marketing 
strategist, business development and sales 
professional, evangelist, entrepreneur, analyst, 
advisor, manager, and writer. His passion for 
writing extends over 25 years in the “world of 
work” including marketing, HR and recruiting, 
technology, and higher education. He’s been a 
prolific business blogger since 2004, and his 
current website, Reach-West.com, encompasses 
all things HR, recruiting, and career management. 
It sometimes even includes a little bit of wit and 
. Kevin also speaks at HR and recruiting industry events and moderates HR
/recruiting/marketing–related webinars and roundtables. He’s currently 
the Director of Marketing at BraveNewTalent, the leading social platform 
where organizations build talent communities around relevant topics that 
attract, engage and develop their next-generation workforce. Most impor-
tantly, he’s a proud father of two beautiful girls and a loving husband to his 
beautiful wife. He also enjoys reading and running, and he writes regularly 
about fatherhood, responsible parenting, and domestic violence awareness 
and prevention. 

Acknowledgments
This book would never have been possible if it weren’t for my amazing wife. 
Her help with research and reading, her tireless motivation and encouragement, 
and the way she constantly told me, lovingly, to “shut up and drive” made this 
. I could never have completed the book without her. Thank you, A
my. I also want to thank my artist and illustrator friend, Doug Ross, whose 
. A 
HR, recruiting, career management, and 
Chat and world of work co-conspirator, Meghan M. Biro. And 
I want to especially thank my editor, Jeff Olson, who’s initial e-mail 
I had considered spam. Thank goodness I called you 
. The editorial process you’ve taken me through has been a journey 
. Thank you.B
ehind every decent writer is a damn good editor, a patient but motivating 
significant other, very smart friends, and the inspirational stories that make up 
the final one. To all of you IT professionals out there working hard to stay 
relevant and gainfully employed, I thank you. Keep reaching West, my friends. 

