Technology  
compuTer  
Aided design
Edited by
Chandan Kumar Sarkar
Simulation for VLSI MOSFET


TECHNOLOGY  
COMPUTER  
AIDED DESIGN
Simulation for VLSI MOSFET


CRC Press is an imprint of the
Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
Boca Raton   London   New York
TECHNOLOGY  
COMPUTER  
AIDED DESIGN
Edited by
Chandan Kumar Sarkar
Simulation for VLSI MOSFET

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2013 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20130304
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4665-1266-5 (eBook - PDF)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made 
to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all 
materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all 
material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not 
been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any 
future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in 
any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, micro-
filming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.
copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-
8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that 
have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identi-
fication and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

To our family members


vii
Contents
Preface.......................................................................................................................ix
The Editor.............................................................................................................. xiii
Contributors............................................................................................................xv
	 1	 Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design.............................1
Samar K. Saha
	 2	 Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) 
Physics..............................................................................................................45
Swapnadip De
	 3	 Review of Numerical Methods for Technology Computer Aided 
Design (TCAD)............................................................................................ 145
Kalyan Koley
	 4	 Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD......................................................155
N. Mohankumar
	 5	 Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool..................................... 187
Angsuman Sarkar
	 6	 Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD............237
Srabanti Pandit
	 7	 MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation.................... 267
Soumya Pandit
	 8	 Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici..... 363
Atanu Kundu


ix
Preface
In the era of System-on-Chip (SoC) fabricated with ultra-deep sub-micron 
complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology, the semi­
conductor industry has to keep pace with the increased performance-capacity 
demands from consumers. The current sub-90 nm CMOS technology poses 
several critical challenges to very large scale integrated (VLSI) circuit and 
device designers regarding the characteristic behavior and performance of 
MOS transistors. In addition, there is huge pressure on the designers for 
reduction of the design time for economic reasons. To cope with issues like 
design productivity gap and yield drop and also to ensure correct behav­
ior of each device, there is a need to involve computer aided design (CAD) 
methodologies and design automation tools. Technology computer aided 
design (TCAD) is an electronic design automation (EDA) tool that models 
the semiconductor device operation and fabrication based on fundamental 
physics through the computer aided simulations for design and optimiza­
tion of semiconductor processing technologies and devices. Research and 
development (R&D) cost and time for electronic product development can be 
reduced by taking advantage of TCAD tools, thus making TCAD indispens­
able for modern VLSI devices and process technologies. TCAD simulation 
is gaining importance because it is prohibitively expensive for academia as 
well as for the several fab-less design industries to use silicon prototype for 
design verification.
The motivation for editing this volume on TCAD simulation of VLSI 
MOSFET came about when I was looking for student-level reference materi­
als on TCAD simulation tools while teaching courses for postgraduate and 
senior undergraduate students. However, I could not find an appropriate 
book and was thus compelled to teach the course by consulting various user 
guides and manuals supplied with TCAD software and some semiconduc­
tor device textbooks. However, none of these caters to the intended purpose 
of introducing the physics of TCAD simulations to the students. Therefore, I 
found that there is a need for a book to provide the most up-to-date and com­
prehensive source of TCAD simulation of VLSI MOSFETs with an emphasis 
on the fundamental theory and the underlying physics.
This book is intended for senior undergraduate and postgraduate students 
of electrical and electronics engineering disciplines and for researchers and 
professionals working in the area of electronic devices. The purpose of the 
present edited volume is to rapidly disseminate to them the fundamental con­
cepts and underlying physics of TCAD simulation of MOSFETs. The objec­
tives of this book are to introduce the advantages of TCAD simulations for 
device and process technology characterization, to introduce the fundamen­
tal physics and mathematics involved with TCAD tools, to expose readers 

x
Preface
to two of the most popular commercial TCAD simulation tools, Silvaco and 
Sentaurus, to characterize performances of VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD 
tools, and to familiarize readers with compact modeling for VLSI circuit sim­
ulation. This volume provides the reader with comprehensive information 
and a systematic approach to the design, characterization, fabrication, and 
computation of VLSI MOS transistors through TCAD tools.
The chapters contain different levels of difficulty. Several example pro­
grams are supplied for illustration of the software tools and related physics. 
The book therefore provides a desirable balance between the basic concepts, 
equations, physics, and recent technologies of MOS transistors through 
TCAD simulation. The book is organized into eight chapters that encompass 
the field of TCAD simulation for VLSI MOSFET.
Chapter 1 provides an overview of the role, need, and advantages of 
TCAD tools in design, characterization, and fabrication of VLSI MOS tran­
sistors. The evolution of modern TCAD and its challenges are also provided. 
Chapter 2 reviews and analyzes the basic concepts and physics involved with 
nanoscale MOS transistors. The physical approach to the tools is described 
by basics of band theory, Poisson’s equation, continuity equation, drift dif­
fusion (DD), and hydrodynamic models. The physics of the scattering 
mechanisms and different mobility models used in TCAD simulations are 
discussed. Chapter 3 describes the basics and importance of numerical solu­
tion techniques applicable to TCAD. The numerical solution of the DD equa­
tions coupled with Poisson’s equation and its application to semiconductor 
device modeling is described. Chapter 4 provides a detailed overview of the 
two-dimensional/three-dimensional (2D/3D) device simulator Synopsys 
Sentaurus TCAD. The various tools involved are introduced in a compre­
hensive manner. The different software-related aspects of this tool for device 
simulations are described. Complete design examples explaining step by 
step the construction, simulation, and performance extraction of MOS tran­
sistors are provided. Chapter 5 attempts to present the MOSFET simulation 
using Silvaco TCAD tools. From basic syntax to choice of a complex model 
is presented in this chapter with emphasis on the usage of the SILVACO 
simulation software. An overview of the software developed by Silvaco to 
meet simulation needs of researching conventional and advanced MOSFET 
structures is also presented. The discussion is presented with examples to 
perform simulations of different types of MOSFETs. Chapter 6 discusses 
in detail the physics of nanoscale MOS transistors through TCAD simula­
tions. The various short channel effects involved with nanoscale MOS tran­
sistors are demonstrated through actual TCAD simulation results. Different 
technology aspects and engineering techniques for future MOSFETs are 
also introduced. Chapter 7 presents a comprehensive overview of compact 
modeling of MOS transistors for use in VLSI circuit simulation. The math­
ematical models for characterizing various ultra-deep sub-micron effects of 
sub-65 nm MOS transistors are introduced. The effects are demonstrated 
through actual simulation program with integrated circuit emphasis (SPICE) 

xi
Preface
simulation results using industry standard compact models. The various cir­
cuit performances of MOS transistors are discussed. Chapter 8 addresses 
process simulation of MOSFET using TSUPREM-4. The chapter is devoted to 
bringing the key fabrication issues and their implementation in TCAD pro­
cess simulation tool TSUPREM-4. It also considers how the output of process 
simulator TSUPREM-4 can be linked to device simulator MEDICI in order to 
analyze the performance of the fabricated device. An extensive list of refer­
ences is provided at the end of each chapter for more elaborate discussion of 
the issues and to motivate readers to engage in further research.
I wish to congratulate all contributors and their peers. Their convictions 
and efforts were key to the success of this enterprise. The compilation of 
this book would not have been possible without the dedication and efforts 
of all the contributing authors. Special thanks go to Gagandeep Singh and 
Laurie Schlags and staff members of CRC Press for their responsiveness 
and immense patience demonstrated throughout the publishing process of 
this book.
C.K. Sarkar


xiii
The Editor
Chandan Kumar Sarkar is Professor of Electronics and Telecommunication 
at Jadavpur University, Calcutta, India. He received B.Sc. (Hons.) and 
M.Sc. degrees in Physics from Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, India, 
in 1975, was awarded a Ph.D. degree in Radio Physics from Calcutta 
University in 1979, and was awarded the D.Phil. degree from Oxford 
University, Oxford, United Kingdom, in 1984. He has been teaching for 
over 22 years.
In 1980, Sarkar received the British Royal Commission Fellowship to work 
at Oxford University. He worked as a visiting scientist at the Max Planck 
Laboratory in Stuttgart, Germany, as well as at Linko Pink University in 
Sweden. Sarkar also taught in the Department of Physics at Oxford University, 
and was a distinguished lecturer of the IEEE EDS.
Sarkar has served as a senior member of IEEE and was chair of the IEEE EDS 
chapter, Calcutta Section, India. He served as Fellow of IETE, Fellow of IE, 
Fellow of WBAST, and member of the Institute of Physics, United Kingdom.
His research interests include semiconductor materials and devices, VLSI 
devices, and nanotechnology. Sarkar has published and presented more 
than 300 research papers in international journals and conferences and also 
mentored 21 Ph.D.s.


xv
Contributors
Swapnadip De
Electronics and Communication 
Engineering Department
Meghnad Saha Institute of 
Technology
Kolkata, India
Kalyan Koley
Electronics and Telecommunication 
Engineering Department
Jadavpur University
Kolkata, India
Atanu Kundu
Electronics and Communication 
Engineering Department
Heritage Institute of Technology
Kolkata, India
N. Mohankumar
Electronics and Communication 
Engineering Department
SKP Engineering College
Tiruvannamalai, Tamil Nadu, 
India
Soumya Pandit
Institute of Radio Physics and 
Electronics
University College of Science and 
Technology
University of Calcutta
Kolkata, India
Srabanti Pandit
Electronics and Telecommunication 
Engineering Department
Jadavpur University
Kolkata, India
Samar K. Saha
Compact Modeling
SuVolta, Inc.
Los Gatos, California
and
Electrical Engineering Department
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, California
Angsuman Sarkar
Electronics and Communication 
Engineering Department
Kalyani Government Engineering 
College
Kalyani, India


1
1
Introduction to Technology 
Computer Aided Design
Samar K. Saha
1.1  Technology Computer Aided Design (TCAD)
Technology computer aided design (CAD), commonly known as technology 
CAD or TCAD, is the electronic design automation that models integrated 
circuit (IC) fabrication and device operation. TCAD is the art of abstract­
ing IC electrical behavior by critical analysis and detailed understanding 
CONTENTS
1.1	
Technology Computer Aided Design (TCAD)...........................................1
1.1.1	 Process CAD........................................................................................3
1.1.2	 Device CAD.........................................................................................4
1.2	
A Brief History of TCAD...............................................................................5
1.2.1	 History of Device CAD......................................................................5
1.2.2	 History of Process CAD.....................................................................9
1.3	
Motivation for TCAD................................................................................... 10
1.3.1	 Motivation for Device CAD............................................................. 10
1.3.2	 Motivation for Process CAD...........................................................12
1.4	
TCAD Flow for IC Process and Device Simulation.................................15
1.4.1	 Generation of Simulation Structure...............................................15
1.4.2	 Verification of the Robustness of Simulation Structure.............. 16
1.4.3	 Calibration of Physical Models.......................................................18
1.4.4	 Coupled Process and Device Simulation Flow.............................22
1.5	
TCAD Application........................................................................................23
1.5.1	 TCAD in Device Research...............................................................23
1.5.1.1	 Double-Halo MOSFET Devices........................................24
1.5.1.2	 Sub-90 nm Split-Gate Flash Memory Cells....................27
1.5.2	 TCAD in Fabrication Technology Development (TD).................32
1.6	
Benefit of TCAD in TD Projects..................................................................35
1.7	
Summary........................................................................................................36
References................................................................................................................37

2
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
of process, device, and circuit simulation data. In general, TCAD includes 
lithography modeling to simulate the imaging of the mask by the lithography 
equipment, photoresist characteristics, and processing; front end process mod­
eling for simulating the physical effects of manufacturing steps used to build 
transistors up to metallization; device modeling using hierarchy of physically 
based models for the operational description of active devices; compact mod­
eling for active, passive, and parasitic circuit components; interconnect model­
ing to analyze the operational response of back-end architectures; reliability 
modeling for simulating the reliability and related effects on process, device, 
and circuit levels; equipment modeling for simulating the local influence of the 
equipment on each point of the wafer, especially in deposition, etching, and 
chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP) processes; package simulation for elec­
trical, mechanical, and thermal modeling of chip packages; materials model­
ing to predict the physical and electrical properties of materials; modeling for 
design robustness, manufacturing, and yield to simulate the impact of process 
variability and dopant fluctuations on IC performance and determine design 
specifications for manufacturability and yield of ICs; and numerical techniques 
including grid generators, surface-advancement techniques, solvers for sys­
tems of partial differential equations (PDEs), and optimization routines [1,2].
TCAD offers capabilities to analyze how structural factors such as the 
geometry and processes conditions influence the electrical behavior of 
devices and circuits. Simulation data help in quantifying the details of the 
behavioral models for ICs at the transistor and circuit levels and show physi­
cal limitations at the processing and manufacturing levels [3,4]. By reverse 
modeling, the extended TCAD tools can be used to develop IC fabrication 
technology from product concept (i.e., from the product specification to IC 
fabrication technology as shown in Figure 1.1) [1]. The extended TCAD tools 
can also be used to assess the manufacturability of IC fabrication processes 
as shown in Figure 1.2 [1,5].
Product
Speciﬁcations
Process
Speciﬁcations
Process
Simulation
Device
Simulation
Circuit
Simulation
Device
2
3
1
Models
Proﬁles
Process
Generate
Process Recipes
Generate
Process Proﬁles
Generate
Device Models
FIGURE 1.1
Extended TCAD use to generate product-specific IC process recipe by reverse modeling; in 
this approach, the sequential steps 1, 2, and 3 represent use of circuit, device, and process 
CAD, respectively. (From S.K. Saha, Managing technology CAD for competitive advantage: An 
efficient approach for integrated circuit fabrication technology development, IEEE Trans. Eng. 
Manage., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 221–229, May 1999. With permission.)

3
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
In the microelectronics industry, TCAD is widely referred to as front-end 
process modeling or process CAD and device modeling or device CAD. Therefore, 
unless otherwise specified, hereafter in this chapter TCAD refers to IC front-
end process CAD and device CAD only.
1.1.1  Process CAD
Process CAD refers to front-end process modeling that includes the numeri­
cal simulation of the physical effects of IC processing steps used to fabri­
cate transistors up to metallization. The process CAD is used to simulate the 
semiconductor processing steps such as oxidation and diffusion, deposition 
Manufacturing
Manufacturability:
Performance
Objectives
Process
Optimization
Yes
No
Check ?
Reliability/Circuit Simulation
Compact Model Parameter Extraction
Model
Calibration
Database
Device/Interconnect Simulation
Process Simulation
Parameter Selection
using Monte Carlo, or Response
Surface, or Neural Network Method
Create
Process Flow
Process Control Distribution
No. of Simulation Experiment
Optimized
Process
FIGURE 1.2
Flowchart showing the use of extended TCAD to evaluate the manufacturability of IC fabrica­
tion technology with respect to the target specifications. (From S.K. Saha, Managing technol­
ogy CAD for competitive advantage: An efficient approach for integrated circuit fabrication 
technology development, IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 221–229, May 1999. With 
permission.)

4
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
and etching, ion implantation, and annealing, and generate input data files 
for the device simulator as realistically as possible based on the microscopic 
information as shown in Figure 1.3 [1–5]. In the area of process simulation, 
physical models for process technology were rather limited in the 1960s and 
1970s, and the sophisticated process simulators with multidimensional mod­
els were not necessary for the large device geometry used during that time. 
In recent years, the physical understanding of IC processes has advanced sig­
nificantly. Moreover, the current evolution of IC devices into the nanoscale 
regime necessitates accurate multidimensional process models.
1.1.2  Device CAD
Device CAD refers to numerical simulation of IC device operation as shown 
in Figure 1.4. In general, the device CAD includes a suite of physical models 
describing carrier transport in materials. Device models range from the sim­
ple drift diffusion, which solves Poisson and continuity equations, to more 
complex and computationally challenging models such as the energy balance, 
which solves some higher moment simplification of the Boltzmann trans­
port equation (BTE). In addition, the complex physics of today’s nanoscale 
devices mandates the use of Monte Carlo (MC) codes, which stochastically 
solves BTE, and the use of Schrödinger solvers that account for quantum 
Process
Simulation
Process CAD
Output
Physical change: Oxide, Epitaxy, Gate.
Chemical/electrical change:
Process steps:
Structure: Mask.
Doping proﬁles;
Junctions;
Implant – Species, Dose, Energy.
Diﬀusion/Oxidation – Temperature, Time,
Rate, Pressure, Ambient (oxidation source).
Sheet resistance.
Input
FIGURE 1.3
IC fabrication process simulation using process CAD to generate input file for device simu­
lation; the “physical change” refers to the structural change of the device such as the oxide 
growth, whereas the “chemical change” refers to impurity diffusion; process CAD includes 
physical process models to perform numerical process simulation.
Device
Simulation
Device CAD
Output
Electrical Characteristics:
Structure:
Current versus Voltage;
Capacitance versus Voltage;
Physical: Gate, Oxide, Substrate
Electrical: Doping proﬁles,
Junction depth.
Transient.
Input
FIGURE 1.4
IC device simulation using device CAD to generate electrical characteristics of IC devices for 
circuit analysis; device CAD includes physical device models to perform numerical device 
simulation.

5
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
mechanical (QM) effects in metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transis­
tor (MOSFET) devices. The choice of the appropriate model depends on the 
problem and the level of detail required. Despite the significant advances 
of both numerics and physics, continuous development is required to meet 
the increasingly challenging industry needs for device exploration, scaling, 
and optimization. Therefore, the ability of device CAD to accurately model 
today’s device performance and predict tomorrow’s device limitations is of 
utmost importance [3,4].
Though the process CAD and device CAD refer to numerical simulation of 
different areas of computational electronics, they are synergistically linked. 
An understanding of the various IC processing steps is crucial to predicting 
device and circuit performance as shown in Figure 1.5.
1.2  A Brief History of TCAD
During the last four decades, technology CAD has evolved from one-dimen­
sional (1D) Direct current (DC) or steady-state simulation only during the 
1970s to full two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) simulation of 
today’s complex very large scale integrated (VLSI) circuit fabrication processes 
and devices. This evolution of process and device CAD has been possible due 
to advancements in the computer technology and mathematical models, thus 
providing cost-effective and efficient multidimensional numerical analysis 
of IC fabrication processes and devices. A large number of researchers have 
contributed to the evolution of TCAD. In this section, we present only a brief 
history of the major development in the device and process CAD leading to 
commercial TCAD tools.
1.2.1  History of Device CAD
The seminal work of Gummel in 1964 led to the foundation of device CAD. 
For the first time, Gummel reported 1D simulation results of bipolar junction 
transistors (BJTs) by sequentially solving the three PDEs in the drift-diffusion 
Process CAD
Device CAD
Process
Simulation
Process
Flow
Device
Simulation
Compact Model
Extraction
Circuit
CAD
IC
Design
FIGURE 1.5
Process and device CAD are synergistically linked to predict the influence of various IC pro­
cessing steps on device and circuit performance; here circuit CAD represents a modeling tool 
to analyze circuit performance.

6
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
system using an iterative method [6]. Gummel’s numerical approach was 
further developed and applied to simulate p-n junction by De Mari in 1968 
[7,8] and Read diode oscillator by Scharfetter and Gummel [9] in 1969. In the 
1969 publication, Scharfetter and Gummel reported a methodology for sta­
ble upwind discretization of the transport equations [9]. This method is still 
almost universally used and is responsible for making device simulation a 
computationally feasible design activity.
In 1968, the first 2D numerical solution of Poisson’s equation for a MOSFET 
was reported by Loeb et al. [10] and, in parallel, by Schroeder and Muller [11]. 
In 1969, the 2D simulation results on planar devices were published by Barron 
on MOSFETs [12] and Kennedy and O’Brien on junction field-effect transistors 
(JFETs) [13] by solving the Poisson equation and one continuity equation. In the 
same year, Slotboom reported the 2D simulation results on BJTs using the full 
two-carrier system [14], and in 1971 Reiser reported the first 2D transient simu­
lation results of metal-semiconductor field-effect transistors (MESFETs) [15].
During the 1970s, the major numerical techniques for 2D device simulation 
[16,17], including the first finite element analysis of the semiconductor equa­
tions [18,19], were reported. The finite element method can be considered a 
precursor to the development of the more general-purpose tools commonly 
used in the 1980s. In the late 1970s, some of the first publicly available device 
CAD tools were released including the first version of the CADDETH pro­
grams from Hitachi [20] to simulate single carrier field-effect transistor (FET) 
structures, the SEDAN program from Stanford University [21] to simulate 
1D bipolar device phenomena, and a special-purpose MOSFETs simulation 
program MINIMOS from Vienna [22].
Though the work on a general-purpose, non-planar multidimensional 
device CAD program began in the mid-1970s, the first device simulation pro­
gram successfully used for bipolar device analysis was FIELDAY [23] from 
IBM. Besides FIELDAY, the other first generation non-planar codes include 
the GEMINI program in 1980 [24] which solved only Poisson’s equation and 
PISCES-I in 1982 [25] which solved Poisson and a single continuity equation 
in the steady-state, both from Stanford University.
The real impact of a general-purpose device CAD tool came in the 
mid-1980s with the development of programs like PISCES-II at Stanford 
University [26,27], DEVICE at AT&T Bell Laboratories [28,29], BAMBI at 
Vienna [30], and HFIELDS [31] at the University of Bologna. Each of these 
programs worked for two carriers, allowed arbitrary device non-planarities, 
and included a more comprehensive set of materials, physical models, and 
simulation capabilities than the prior state-of-the-art. However, the primary 
advantages of these tools were improved computational methods such as 
the discretization and grid generation, non-linear and linear solution tech­
niques that made device simulation practical for device designers. It is worth 
noting that PISCES-II has been commercialized by Technology Modeling 
Associates (TMA), now Synopsys [32], and Silvaco [33] and is the source of 
widely used device simulators MEDICI and ATLAS, respectively.

7
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
Major advances in the numerical solution of BTE [34] also began in the late 
1970s. In 1979, the initial 2D MC device simulation results were reported by 
Warriner [35]; in 1982, the PDE for energy transport was first treated numeri­
cally in 2D by Cook and Frey [36]; in 1984, Fukuma and Uebbing used the 
energy balance model to predict velocity overshoot in silicon MOSFETs [37] 
and the hot carrier post-processors with lucky electron based approach were 
first implemented by Siemens [38]; in 1985, the first realistic 2D simulations of 
hetero-structure devices were reported from the University of Illinois [39]; in 
1986, Laux and Warren reported the coupled 2D Schrödinger-Poisson solver 
and directly introduced quantum mechanics in device CAD [40]; in 1988, an 
MC post-processor for silicon MOSFETs was developed at Bologna [41]; and 
the first general-purpose code incorporating hydrodynamic solutions was 
implemented in HFIELDS [42].
With the increasing complexities of IC devices due to continuous downscal­
ing of feature size, the 3D numerical analysis became critical. The first paper 
using 3D device simulation of MOSFET narrow channel effects was pub­
lished in 1980 [43]. The FIELDAY was the first of many programs extended 
into 3D in 1981 [44] by extending the grid uniformly in the depth plane. 
Also, in 1981 and 1982, the 3D device simulation results of narrow channel 
effects were published using the simulator WATMOS [45,46] which used a 
finite difference scheme numerical solution of Poisson’s equation. Following 
the approach of FIELDAY, almost every 2D simulation program has been 
extended to 3D by extending the grid uniformly in the depth plane [47–52]. 
The FIELDAY program solved Poisson’s equation and both carrier continuity 
equations. The program was later enhanced to include the hydrodynamic 
energy-balance equations, Fermi-Dirac carrier statistics, lattice energy equa­
tion, and incomplete ionization [53]. Thus, both drift diffusion and hydrody­
namic simulations were possible using FIELDAY.
In 1985, Hitachi announced CADDETH as a 3D device simulator designed 
to run on a supercomputer [49]. CADETH solves both Poisson’s equation and 
two current continuity equations using conjugate gradient-based methods 
for non-symmetric linear systems; distinguishes between three different 
materials, namely semiconductors, insulators, and metals; and implemented 
advanced physical models [49]. Another 3D simulator was developed by 
Toshiba in 1985, called TOPMOST [54,55]. TOPMOST was designed to ana­
lyze MOS structures and solve the semiconductor equations for the drift-dif­
fusion case. Both 1D and 2D simulations could be performed by pseudo-1D 
and pseudo-2D device models by reducing the number of points in the omit­
ted directions. TOPMOST was used to study the effect of the gate structure 
on the output characteristics [54] and subthreshold swing in 3D MOSFETs 
[55].
In 1987 Vienna announced 3D device simulator, MINIMOS Version 5 [56]. 
MINIMOS-5 is one of the first 3D device simulators [56–59] for MOSFET 
structures, SOI transistors, and gallium arsenide MESFETs. MINIMOS-6, 
released in 1994 [60], supports transient analysis and MC modeling to replace 

8
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
the drift diffusion approximation in critical device areas. The fundamental 
semiconductor equations, consisting of Poisson’s equation and two carrier 
continuity equations, are solved numerically in 2D or 3D space. MINIMOS 
is able to simulate planar and non-planar device structures along with AC 
small signal analysis and transient simulations.
The reported 3D device CAD tools from the industry include SMART 
[61] from Matsushita in 1987, PADRE [62] from Bell Laboratories, SITAR [63] 
from Siemens in 1988, MAGENTA [64] from Microelectronics and Computer 
Technology Corporation in 1989, and SIERRA [51] from Texas Instruments in 
1989. SIERRA solves Poisson’s equation and the carrier continuity equations 
for static, AC small signal, and transient cases. Based on SIERRA, TMA devel­
oped their first 3D device simulator known as DAVINCI in 1991 [32]. DAVINCI 
has been used to investigate the effects of radiation on DRAM cells and nar­
row channel effects in MOS structures. In January 1998, TMA merged with 
Avant!, and in 2001 Avant! merged with Synopsys, and DAVINCI has been the 
starting basis of the TAURUS 3D DEVICE program from Synopsys [32].
Some of the other reported 3D device CAD tools include HFIELDS-3D 
[65–67] from the University of Bologna in 1989, SECOND [68–70] from ETH 
Zürich and STRIDE [71] from Stanford University in 1991, FLOODS [72] from 
the University of Florida in 1994, and DESSIS [73] in 1996. The development of 
DESSIS began in 1992 in collaboration with Bologna, ETH Zürich, Bosch, and 
ST Microelectronics [73]. DESSIS is created by merging the device simulators 
HFIELDS from Bologna and SIMUL from ETH and circuit simulator BONSIM 
from Bosch to enable efficient mixed-mode IC circuit/device analysis [73]. In 
1993, Integrated Systems Engineering (ISE) was founded and took over the 
simulator. In 2004 ISE merged with Synopsys which took over DESSIS and is 
the basis of commercial Sentaurus device simulator from Synopsys [32].
With the evolution of IC technology and devices, TCAD is continuously 
evolving. Another notable device CAD tool includes MINIMOS-NT [74] 
reported in 1997. MINIMOS-NT is a generic 2D device simulator that allows 
the modeling of high electron mobility transistors. A new method is used 
which divides the device region into several sub-domains, referred to as seg­
ments, each segment with its specific physical models. The segmentation of 
device region allows appropriate physical models to be used where required, 
such as a hydrodynamic model in the channel region and drift diffusion 
solution for the non-critical region of the device. This increases the over­
all efficiency of device simulation with the desired accuracy. Also, with the 
ongoing reduction of feature sizes, atomistic simulations become reasonable 
to study the effects of random discrete doping in the channel region [75–77].
The device CAD tools are continuously evolving, and mathematical mod­
els describing the performance of advanced devices are continuously imple­
mented, especially in the commercial TCAD tools to model today’s complex 
IC devices.

9
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
1.2.2  History of Process CAD
After the invention of ICs in 1958, the IC industry was dominated by BJT tech­
nology through the 1960s. However, in the 1970s MOSFET technology began 
to overtake BJT technology in terms of the functional complexity and level of 
integration. Since the 1980s, complementary MOS (CMOS) technology with 
its cost-effective technology solution has become the pervasive technology 
for ICs. With aggressive scaling of MOSFETs in the mid-1970s, transistor 
dimensions soon reached the point at which first-order assumptions about 
the physical effects and dopant distributions began to break down. For the 
MOSFETs, the intrinsic device problem such as output conductance, velocity 
saturation, and subthreshold behavior all received substantial interest and 
effort. TCAD became critical to understand the many interrelated process 
and device effects in MOSFETs.
By the mid-1970s, the critical role of processing technology in establishing 
device characteristics was evident. Many important interrelated process and 
device effects were identified by means of computer coupled analysis tools. 
Industry leaders such as IBM and Texas Instruments had aggressive efforts 
to model process physics and relate these models to device characteristics 
and circuit statistics. A unified process and device simulator, the SITCAP 
program was developed at Katholieke University, Leuven, Belgium [78]. This 
program inputs process specifications such as processing times and temper­
atures along with simple mask geometries to output I–V and C–V curves, 
along with selected SPICE model parameters. And, a process analysis pro­
gram CASPER was jointly developed at Lehigh University (Bethlehem, 
Pennsylvania) and AT&T Bell Laboratories (Allentown, Pennsylvania) [79].
In 1977, the first version of 1D process simulator, SUPREM, was developed 
and released by Stanford [80]. Since then, the process models in SUPREM 
have developed substantially and evolved due to ongoing efforts at Stanford 
and at industrial and other research laboratories worldwide. Versions II 
and III of SUPREM were released in 1978 and 1983, respectively [81,82]. The 
release of a process simulator had a tremendous impact on the accuracy to 
which device simulations could be performed. Process simulation has con­
tinued to improve dramatically since the release of SUPREM. And the nota­
ble events in the evolution of process CAD include the development of the 
full 2D simulators such as SUPRA from Stanford [83] in 1982 and BICEPS 
from AT&T Bell Laboratories [84] in 1983. In 1986, the most advanced 2D 
process simulation program SUPREM-IV was developed at Stanford [85]. 
The SUPREM-IV included more physically based models including point 
defect calculations and stress dependent oxidation required for modeling 
ultra-small device structures. A 2D SUPREM-IV process simulation program 
has been commercialized by Crosslight [86], Sillvaco [33], and TMA [32] as 
CSUPREM, ATHENA, and TSUPREM4, respectively.

10
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
In 1992, ISE (now Synopsys [32]) developed 1D and 2D process simulators 
TESIM and DIOS, respectively. DIOS was a widely accepted tool prior to the 
introduction of the Sentaurus process by Synopsys in 2005.
The development of 3D process CAD tools began in the mid-1980s for 
accurate modeling of ultra-small geometry device technology [87,88]. In 
1993, FLOOPS was released from the University of Florida [89] and became 
the source of Synopsys 3D process simulator, Sentaurus process that was 
released in 2005 [32]. Other 3D process simulators include PROPHET from 
AT&T Bell Laboratories [90] released in 1994 and Taurus 3D process from 
TMA released by Avant! in 1998 [32].
The history of commercial TCAD began with the foundation of TMA in 
1979. TMA was the first commercial supplier of TCAD software that was 
the result of the TCAD research program at Stanford University under the 
supervision of Professor Dutton and Professor Plummer. Currently, the 
major sources of commercial TCAD tools are Silvaco [33] and Synopsys [32]. 
Synopsys TCAD tools include Taurus process/device TSUPREM4/MEDICI 
for 2D TCAD and Sentaurus process/device for both 2D and 3D TCAD. 
Silvaco TCAD tools include ATHENA for 2D process simulation, ATLAS for 
2D device simulation, and Victory process/device for 3D simulation.
1.3  Motivation for TCAD
The major motivation for the use of TCAD in the semiconductor industry 
is the cost-effective and efficient development of IC fabrication technology 
using device CAD to analyze device performance and process CAD to input 
realistic structural information from process flow to device CAD [1,5].
1.3.1  Motivation for Device CAD
The motivation for the use of device CAD in IC device analysis is the opti­
mization of device performance for specific applications. This optimization 
is a complex task due to the complexities of the equations describing semi­
conductor device performance. For semiconductor devices, particle conser­
vation is modeled by several cross-coupled non-linear PDEs: the interaction 
of charged particles due to electric fields is modeled by Poisson’s equation, 
and the particle concentrations relating to particle fluxes and generation and 
recombination are modeled by continuity equations. Also, electron and hole 
concentrations are exponentially related to potentials through Boltzmann, 
Fermi-Dirac, or other exponentially determined probability distribution 
functions. These equations are difficult to solve by hand, making computer 
aided analysis a desirable alternative. Again, by the introduction of the SPICE 
program from Berkeley in 1975, the circuit simulator became a useful design 

11
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
tool, essentially replacing the bread-boarding of prototypes [91]. However, 
for accurate circuit analysis, compact device models, commonly known as 
SPICE models, are required. For the generation of SPICE models the device 
CAD became a necessity. Thus, the widespread use of circuit simulation also 
motivated the development and use of device CAD for IC device analysis.
Figure 1.5 illustrates the use of device CAD to generate compact models 
for circuit analysis. Compact models such as BSIM4 [92] provide an excel­
lent framework to analyze different modes of MOSFET circuit behavior. 
However, in order for the BSIM4 model to be useful in practice, reliable val­
ues for the model parameters must be generated. Device CAD tools are use­
ful for linking fabrication conditions to BSIM4 parameters. For example, the 
device simulator uses inputs such as device geometry, doping profiles, and 
bias conditions to generate data files for device characteristics such as capaci­
tance (C) and current (I) versus voltage. The simulated data files are then 
used to extract BSIM4 model parameters for circuit analysis.
Another major motivation for using device CAD is to study the feasibil­
ity of realizing concept devices in manufacturing. As the MOSFET devices 
are scaled down, device performance is severely degraded by short channel 
effect (SCE), drain-induced barrier lowering (DIBL), quantum-mechanical 
(QM) effects, and so on. The use of device CAD is critical to minimize 
these physical effects and improve the device performance by optimizing 
the device structure. Figure 1.6 shows a nanoscale “double-halo” MOSFET 
device structure designed to suppress SCE, reduce DIBL and QM effects, and 
improve device performance [93–97].
The double-halo MOSFET structure as shown in Figure 1.6 includes a poly­
silicon gate, a gate oxide (TOX), vertically and laterally non-uniform channel 
doping profiles, shallow source-drain extensions (SDEs), deep source-drain 
(DSD) regions, and two halo profiles: first around SDE and the second around 
DSD regions to control DIBL from SDE and DSD junctions, respectively. A 
Body (B)
DSD
Spacer
SDE
Double
Halo
Double
Halo
Xj
Xjd
Leﬀ
Lext
Lg
TOX
Poly-Si gate (G)
FIGURE 1.6
An idealized double-halo MOSFET device structure showing the basic technology elements: Lg 
and Leff are the drawn and effective channel lengths, respectively, TOX is the gate oxide thick­
ness, Lext is the spacer width, and Xj and Xjd are the junction depths of the source-drain exten­
sion (SDE) and deep source-drain (DSD) regions, respectively.

12
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
super-steep retrograde (SSR) or “low-high” channel doping profile with a low 
impurity concentration at the silicon/silicon-dioxide (Si/SiO2) interface and a 
higher peak concentration at a finite depth below the interface is used to pro­
vide the non-uniform vertical channel profile [98]. The SSR profile is optimized 
to achieve the target threshold voltage (Vth) for the long and wide devices. 
The SSR profile also provides superior Vth control. The halo doping profiles 
are optimized to achieve the target leakage current for the nominal devices. 
In reality, the low-high channel doping profiles are achieved using multiple 
buried layers under an undoped epitaxial layer of appropriate thickness [99]. 
Because, in reality, the ion-implanted profiles are non-linear, more sophisti­
cated 2D/3D device analysis tools are required for device optimization. Thus, 
the device CAD use is critical to optimize the halo doping profiles in conjunc­
tion with other key technology parameters such as TOx and SDE junction depth 
(XJ) to realize the nanoscale double-halo MOSFETs in manufacturing.
In optimizing the double-halo device performance, it is critical to analyze 
the effect of scaling key technology parameters such as Xj and TOx on device 
performance. Figure 1.7 shows 2D device simulation results of drain cur­
rent (Ids) versus source-drain voltage (Vds) with a given gate-to-source voltage 
(Vgs). Two similar technologies are compared: one optimized for TOx = 1.5 nm, 
and the other with TOx = 1.0 nm. For both cases, the devices are optimized to 
achieve the same off-state leakage current, I
m
10 nA/
off ≅
µ
. From Figure 1.7, 
we find that for small values of Vds, the curves show almost identical val­
ues of Ids. At higher Vds, the device with the lower TOx shows substantially 
more current handling capability. Thus, both the technologist and the cir­
cuit designers are anxious to understand and control the dependencies of 
key technology parameters to realize the optimum circuit performance of 
double-halo CMOS technology. Therefore, the motivation to use device CAD 
is to understand the dependence of key building blocks of device structure 
on device and circuit performance.
1.3.2  Motivation for Process CAD
In the previous section, we have established the motivation for device CAD 
in determining circuit design parameters with reference to MOSFET devices. 
Now, let us discuss certain critical parameters in MOSFETs that depend 
directly on the quantitative features of the doping profiles within the device. 
Because doping profiles are determined by process variables such as ion 
implantation energy, total implanted dose, and drive-in time/temperature 
cycles, the dependence of device parameters on process variables provides 
motivation for process simulation.
For MOSFET devices, Vth and other device parameters are directly related 
to the distribution of the channel doping profile within the device struc­
ture. In order to produce accurate compact model para­meters such as VTH0, 

13
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
modeling Vth for large devices, K1 and K2 describing body effect, U0 describ­
ing inversion layer carrier mobility, PDIBL1 and PDIBL2 describing DIBL, 
and so on, the device simulator must have an exact description of the chan­
nel doping profile in all dimensions. This accurate description of channel 
doping profile can be generated using process CAD.
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
1.E–09
1.E–04
2.E–04
3.E–04
4.E–04
5.E–04
6.E–04
7.E–04
NMOS
PMOS
0.0
V(Drain) (V)
|I(Drain)| (A/µm)
|V(Gate)| = 1.0 V
|V(Gate)| = 0.8 V
|V(Gate)| = 0.6 V
|V(Gate)| = 0.4 V
TOX(eﬀ) = 1 nm; Lg = 40 nm
V(Source) = 0 = V(Body)
Xj = 14 nm; Leﬀ = 25 nm
~
(a)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
1.E–09
1.E–04
2.E–04
3.E–04
4.E–04
5.E–04
6.E–04
7.E–04
NMOS
PMOS
0.0
V(Drain) (V)
|I(Drain)| (A/µm)
|V(Gate)| = 1.0 V
|V(Gate)| = 0.8 V
|V(Gate)| = 0.6 V
|V(Gate)| = 0.4 V
TOX(eﬀ) = 1.5 nm; Lg = 40 nm
V(Source) = 0 = V(Body)
Xj = 14 nm; Leﬀ = 25 nm
~
(b)
FIGURE 1.7
I–V characteristics of double-halo MOSFETs for (a) TOX (eff) = 1 nm and (b) TOX (eff) = 1.5 nm; the 
simulation data are obtained for 40 nm devices with Leff = 25 nm and optimized for 
=
µ
I
nA
m
| |
10
/
off
 
at |V(Drain)| = 1 V; V(Gate) = V(Source) = V(Body) = 0). (From S. Saha, Scaling considerations for 
high performance 25 nm metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistors, J. Vac. Sci. Tech. B, vol. 
19, no. 6, pp. 2240–2246, November 2001. With permission.)

14
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Figure 1.8 shows the 2D doping profile of the 25 nm double-halo MOSFET 
structure shown in Figure 1.6. A number of details of the technology are 
apparent from the cross sections shown. First, the 2D halo doping contours 
from the source and drain regions approach a peak at a certain depth from 
the Si/SiO2 interface under the gate. The halo diffusion from the source and 
the drain regions has enhanced the p-type doping concentration at the center 
of the device under the gate region. With scaling TOX, the doping distribution 
within the device changes both laterally and vertically. Calibrated process, 
especially, diffusion models are essential for accurate generation of a 2D dop­
ing profile within the active region of the simulation structure. Therefore, 
process simulation is critical to reproduce the doping distributions within 
the structure for accurate device simulation and compact model parameter 
extraction for circuit analysis.
Thus, the motivation to use process CAD is to couple the relevant fabrica­
tion information into the device CAD. The process CAD captures the critical 
aspects of the target fabrication process to accurately determine device mod­
els for circuit analysis and predict the limitations in device performance. For 
most device parameters, the exact description of doping profile is needed to 
obtain agreement between the simulated and measured data.
P-type
Linear
5.31e+18
4.6e+18
4.2e+18
3.8e+18
5.31e18
1.4e18
G
D
S
Lg
5.31e18
1e18
4.2e18
3.4e+18
3e+18
2.6e+18
2.2e+18
1.8e+18
1.4e+18
1e+18
FIGURE 1.8
Simulated 2D-doping contours of a typical double-halo nMOSFET device with laterally and 
vertically non-uniform p-type channel doping generated using device CAD MEDICI; 2D 
cross-section shows S, G, and D are the source, gate, and drain terminals, respectively, and 
the outline of SDE and DSD junctions. (From S. Saha, Device characteristics of sub-20-nm 
silicon nanotransistors, in Proc. SPIE Conf. on Design and Process Integration for Microelectronic 
Manufacturing, vol. 5042, pp. 172–179, July 2003. With permission.)

15
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
1.4  TCAD Flow for IC Process and Device Simulation
TCAD flow for IC process and device analysis includes the (1) generation of 
simulation structure to numerically solve the PDEs that model IC processing 
and device performance, (2) verification of the robustness of the simulation 
structure and sensitivity of simulation results on grid space, (3) calibration of 
physical models for accuracy and predictability, and (4) coupled process and 
device simulation.
1.4.1  Generation of Simulation Structure
The first step in the numerical approach is the discretization of the simula­
tion domain in time and space. In this step, the device cross section is parti­
tioned into sub-domains or small cells, each of which is evaluated at discrete 
time intervals. Then in each of these cells, the PDEs are approximated by 
algebraic equations that include only the values of the continuous dependent 
variables at discrete points in the domain and the knowledge of the struc­
ture of the functions approximating the dependent variables within each 
cell. In case of process modeling, the time and space must be partitioned in 
such a way so that the concentrations of the various impurities present are 
constant over each individual cell during each time increment along with the 
diffusivity and other physical parameters. Finally, the solution is computed 
at each discrete point, known as the mesh or grid, within the domain. The 
grid spacing must be sufficiently dense so that all the relevant features of 
the doping profile are accurately represented. The increments of time must 
be short enough to model important physical effects. On the other hand, it 
is important not to use excessively small intervals to avoid time-consuming 
and expensive numerical solutions. The detailed discretization technique is 
discussed in the literature [100].
The layout of a mesh or grid in a simulation structure is a very important 
aspect of the numerical solution of PDEs, as it directly determines how well 
the discrete model represents the actual problem. There are a number of con­
siderations regarding grid selection. First, the points must be allocated to 
accurately approximate any physical quantities of interest including poten­
tials, concentrations, fields, and currents, as well as any irregularities in 
the geometry of the domain. Second, because the overall computation time 
depends on the total number of grid points, grid points must be optimized 
for computational efficiency. Finally, the finer grid must be allocated in the 
active regions of device operation under the biasing conditions [3,101].
Solution variables such as potentials, doping, charge, and recombina­
tion appear in the PDEs. Therefore, high grid densities must be allocated 
in regions where any of these quantities undergo rapid changes (e.g., p-n 
junctions). Conversely, the spacing between points could be relaxed in areas 
where values remain relatively constant without adding any significant 

16
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
contribution to the overall error (e.g., quasi-neutral regions deep inside the 
device). In addition, the simulation structure must be robust so that the sim­
ulated device performance is independent of grid density, and the robust­
ness of the simulation domain; that is, sensitivity of simulation results on 
grid must be checked [101] after the structure generation. Figure 1.9 shows a 
typical robust mesh of a MOSFET simulation structure.
1.4.2  Verification of the Robustness of Simulation Structure
In the previous subsection we discussed that an appropriate simulation 
domain is required to emulate the impurity distribution within the device 
as accurately as possible. Inaccurate mesh may cause fluctuation in the simu­
lation results. Therefore, it is critical to check the robustness of the simulation 
structure by varying the grid space to generate grid-independent simulation 
results [101].
Figure 1.10 shows the sensitivity of simulated I–V characteristics of nMOS­
FETs on grid allocation. Figure 1.10(a) shows the sensitivity of I–V data on 
vertical grid space, Y.GRID in the channel at the SiO2/Si interface. It is seen 
from Figure 1.10(a) that for Y.GRID ≤ 200 Å, the magnitude of Ids attains a 
maximum value and the electrical characteristics become insensitive to the 
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
Distance (Microns)
0.00
Distance (Microns)
FIGURE 1.9
A typical optimized mesh of an LDD MOSFET simulation structure; grid is denser in the gate 
oxide and channel region as well as at the source-drain junction. (From S. Saha, MOSFET test 
structures for two-dimensional device simulation, Solid-State Electron., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 69–73, 
January 1995. With permission.)

17
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
values of Y.GRID at the surface. Figure 1.10(a) also shows that the magni­
tudes of the measured and simulated data are closer for Y.GRID ≤ 200 Å. 
Thus, Y.GRID = 12 Å at the surface near the Si/SiO2 interface generates robust 
test structures for device simulation and accurately models critical physical 
effects such as inversion layer quantization in the MOSFET channel [98].
Figure 1.10(b) shows the sensitivity of I–V data on the lateral grid space, 
X.GRID in the channel region. It is also seen from Figure  1.10(b) that for 
5
4
3
2
Gate Voltage (V)
1
0
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
Measurement
Y.GRID = 12 A
Y.GRID = 35 A
Y.GRID = 100 A
Y.GRID = 200 A
Y.GRID = 140 A
Y.GRID = 250 A
Y.GRID = 300 A
Drain Current (A)
(a)
5
4
3
2
Gate Voltage (V)
1
0
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
Measurement
X.GRID = 200 A
X.GRID = 250 A
X.GRID = 300 A
X.GRID = 400 A
X.GRID = 350 A
X.GRID = 450 A
X.GRID = 500 A
Drain Current (A)
(b)
FIGURE 1.10
Sensitivity of grid density on MOSFET device performance; (a) sensitivity of vertical grid, 
Y.GRID on Ids and (b) sensitivity of lateral grid, X.GRID on Ids; here Lg = 0.8 μm, W = 40 μm, and 
TOX = 15 nm; all data are obtained at V(Drain) = 5 V and V(Body) = 0 = V(Source). (From S. Saha, 
MOSFET test structures for two-dimensional device simulation, Solid-State Electron., vol. 38, no. 1, 
pp. 69–73, January 1995. With permission.)

18
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
X.GRID ≤ 300 Å, the magnitude of Ids attains a maximum value, and the device 
characteristics are independent of X.GRID. It is obvious from Figure 1.10(b) 
that the simulated and measured data are in close agreement for X.GRID ≤ 
300 Å. Thus, X.GRID ≤ 200 Å can be used to reduce the uncertainty in the 
simulated electrical characteristics due to incorrect grid allocations and gen­
erate robust test structures for device simulation.
For simulation accuracy and computational efficiency, fine grid is allocated 
only in the regions of most physical importance as shown in Figure 1.9. The 
procedure to verify the robustness of the generated mesh by studying the 
electrical behavior as a function of grid space minimizes the probable errors 
in the simulation data due to incorrect grid allocation and therefore pro­
vides accurate calibration of the fundamental material parameters for device 
simulation.
1.4.3  Calibration of Physical Models
The accuracy of simulation results relates to the underlying physics, numer­
ical discretization issues, and the proper characterization of the models 
implemented in the process and device CAD tools. Over the years, the 
capabilities of TCAD point tools have significantly improved. However, due 
to the deficiencies in physical models, the simulation results are not 100% 
predictable and reliable. Although the development and implementation 
of advanced physical models have been moving ahead with a steady-state 
growth pattern, the characterization of the existing models is critical to 
make TCAD accurate. Therefore, the predictability issue must be addressed 
by proper calibration of the process and device models implemented in 
TCAD point tools. The calibration is a complex and time-consuming task. 
In the following section, a brief overview of physical model calibration is 
presented.
The physical process models implemented in the process CAD tool must 
be calibrated for the target technology under development. The calibration 
methodology includes designing short loop wafer fabrication experiments to 
calibrate all critical as-implanted as well as final doping profiles of all rele­
vant impurities in the simulation structures. For a typical CMOS technology 
this includes 1D doping profiles for (1) channel, (2) SDE, and (3) DSD regions 
along the cutlines shown in Figure 1.11.
In order to calibrate the physical device models implemented in device 
CAD tools, a set of appropriate device characteristics are measured from the 
fabricated wafers of the target technology. For a typical CMOS technology 
this includes Ids versus Vgs, Ids versus Vds, substrate current, Isub versus Vgs, and 
so on to characterize the physical device models [102,103]. Figures 1.12(a) and 
1.12(b) show a basic flow for process and device model calibration of a typical 
CMOS technology. As shown in Figure 1.12(a) coupled process and device 
CAD is used to calibrate 2D doping profiles.

19
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
For greater accuracy and predictability of simulation results, two levels of 
calibration are performed, namely (1) local calibration and (2) global calibra­
tion [1]. A brief outline of the calibration levels is presented below:
Local calibration: The physical models implemented in the process and 
device CAD tools can be characterized with the measured data of the 
target technology for predictive process and device simulation. During 
the IC fabrication process development cycle, a large number of mea­
sured data are generated. This experimental database of the target 
technology can be used to calibrate the process and device models and 
correlate simulation data with the measured data of the target technol­
ogy. The calibrated TCAD models and simulation files are transferred 
to manufacturing at the end of the technology development (TD) cycle. 
These models can be used with a higher degree of accuracy (1) to evalu­
ate the effects of process control variables on device and product perfor­
mance and (2) for manufacturing process control [104–107]. Therefore, 
the calibrated TCAD models of a particular process technology can be 
used for the predictive simulation of that technology.
Global calibration: In order to develop a new IC fabrication technology, 
the TCAD point tools must be accurate and must accurately predict 
new physical phenomena, as may emerge during the development 
phase. Unfortunately, due to the lack of accurate physical models, 
effective calibration methodologies must be developed for the suc­
cessful application of TCAD in designing a new technology. For the 
2D-CMOS cross-section to obtain 1D doping proﬁles along the cut lines:
NMOS / PMOS channel;
p-well
n-well
PMOS
p-substrate
NMOS
n+
n+
p+
p+
STI
NMOS / PMOS SDE;
A
B
C
F
E
D
NMOS / PMOS DSD.
A/D
B/E
C/F
FIGURE 1.11
A typical 2D-CMOS cross-section showing the cutlines along the depth of the simulation 
structure to obtain 1D doping profiles for process model calibration. (STI represents the shal­
low trench isolation.)

20
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
One-dimensional Calibration
Two-dimensional Calibration
One-dimensional Calibration
Process Model
Calibration
Calibration
Targets
Diﬀusivity of dopant-defect pair;
Diﬀusivity of defects;
Drain-Induced-Barrier Lowering (DIBL);
Surface recombination;
Damage by source-drain implant.
Implant moments/table;
Oxidant-Enhanced Diﬀusion (OED);
Segregation (set by channel proﬁle);
Diﬀusivity (in oxide for dose loss);
TOX (QM, Poly-depletion corrections).
Check SIMS
proﬁles
Match Vth
SCE
Match SIMS proﬁles
Adjust for dose loss
(a)
Impact Ionization
Isub vs. VGS
@ Vbs = 0, Vds ≥ Vdd 
Ids vs. Vds
@ Vbs = 0, Vgs = 0
Ids vs. Vgs (Ids vs. Vds)
@ Vbs = 0, Vds = Vdd
Ids vs. Vgs (Vth)
@ Vbs = 0, Vds = 50 mV
Band to band
Tunneling (BTBT)
High ﬁeld mobility
Work function
QM model
Low ﬁeld mobility
Device Model
Calibration
Device
Characteristics
(b)
FIGURE 1.12
A simplified process and device model calibration flow for a typical CMOS technology: (a) 
process model calibration using coupled process and device CAD; (b) device model calibration 
using device CAD with measured device characteristics. In (a), SIMS represents secondary ion 
mass spectrometry.

21
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
predictive application of TCAD, the numerical models must be ini­
tially characterized with a known previous generation of technology. 
These models can be applied to several similar technologies with 
the available experimental database. An iterative method of model 
updates to correlate the simulation and the measurement data must 
be continued up to an acceptable limit of tolerance of the simulation 
data with respect to the measurement data. This iterative method 
of model characterization with different known technologies and 
constant updating of the models provides a global calibration of 
the numerical models, which can be applied for next-generation 
IC fabrication process development with a higher degree of confi­
dence. In addition, the calibration database must include the data 
from a wider range of anticipated process conditions for the next-
generation process technology and device characteristics. Finally, a 
limited number of wafers of the target new technology should be 
processed concurrently for a local update of the globally calibrated 
models. These calibrated physical models and the model parameters 
will provide a higher degree of accuracy for simulation results and 
can be applied successfully in developing next-generation IC fabrica­
tion technology.
Calibration database: The calibration database used in simulation must 
include the measured doping profiles and device characteristics. The 
doping profiles must be obtained under a wide range of processing 
conditions covering the anticipated process variations of the target 
technology. The device characteristics must be obtained under vari­
ous biasing conditions of circuit operations. The database must also 
be updated to include any new physical phenomena observed in the 
fabrication facility. In order to develop the next-generation IC fabri­
cation technology, the database must also include the measured data 
of the anticipated doping materials under the anticipated processing 
conditions of the target technology. In reality, the individual process 
module for a new technology is developed prior to the start of the 
cycle for TD. Therefore, working with the unit process or the mod­
ule development group, the calibration database can be prepared to 
include the data for the development of a target technology. In addi­
tion, the measurement data for an advanced technology with respect 
to the newer fabrication equipment can be obtained in collaboration 
with the equipment vendors. Thus, the calibration database must 
have experimental data for all the possible effects of the existing and 
the target next-generation technology.

22
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
1.4.4  Coupled Process and Device Simulation
Process CAD is used for unit process development such as time and temper­
ature required for growing the MOSFET gate oxide, shallow trench isolation 
(STI) module for CMOS technology, and so on. Similarly, the device CAD is 
used to analyze the effect of process variables on device operation. However, 
the coupled process and device simulation allows IC designers to directly 
investigate the effect of process specifications on electrical variations in 
devices and circuits. The key task of process CAD is to capture the features 
that accurately reflect the performance limitations of a given fabrication 
technology.
Figure 1.13 presents an overview of the simulation flow that is used to link 
process specifications to circuit performance. For the most part, the user input 
is simply a description of how the actual fabrication sequence progresses. 
The process simulation generates a set of data with the structural informa­
tion like device geometry, doping distribution, and so on. The output of pro­
cess simulation is then used as the input of device CAD to perform device 
simulation to obtain I–V, C–V data. These simulation data are used to gener­
ate SPICE models by well-established parameter extraction techniques, and 
Circuit CAD
Circuit Simulation
Generate Compact Models
Calibrated
Device Models
Check Robustness of
Simulation Mesh
Calibrated
Process Models
Process CAD
Process Simulation
Device CAD
Device Simulation
Process Flow
Simulate C – V data
Simulate I – V data
FIGURE 1.13
Link IC process flow to circuit performance using coupled process and device CAD.

23
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
the SPICE models are used for circuit simulation. At each step, the emphasis 
is on focusing a broad spectrum of inputs into a coherent set of outputs that 
will be of maximum utility in the next step. Thus, the coupled process and 
device CAD can be considered as a “virtual factory” simulating ICs from the 
process flow analogous to wafer fabrication facility manufacturing ICs from 
the target process flow as shown in Figure 1.13 [104].
Through well-defined data exchange formats, the various levels of CAD 
are linked quite efficiently with or without simulation framework. The link­
age of process to device CAD occurs through the exchange of both topo­
graphic information and arrays of data representing dopant distributions.
1.5  TCAD Application
In the semiconductor industry the major use of TCAD is in advanced device 
research to study new device concepts, TD, and technology transfer process 
[1,105–107]. In the following subsections we discuss some examples of these 
TCAD usages.
1.5.1  TCAD in Device Research
TCAD is used to study the feasibility of new device concepts or exploratory 
devices for the next-generation IC fabrication TD. For exploratory devices, 
the fabrication process is yet to be determined. Therefore, only device CAD 
is used to design and optimize the device structure and device performance. 
In this case, the device structure is generated using analytical doping pro­
files. Figure 1.14 shows a typical flow to use device CAD in the feasibility 
study of new concept devices.
In Figure 1.14, the basic simulation flow includes device architecture by ana­
lytical doping profile, use of device CAD to simulate device characteristics, 
verification of the robustness of the simulation structure, and optimization 
of the device structure to achieve the target performance objectives. After 
device optimization, perform device simulation to generate I–V and C–V 
data, format device simulation data, and generate compact models for circuit 
analysis. In Figure 1.14, note that calibrated device models are required for 
accurate prediction of device performance. After achieving the target device 
performance by iterative device simulation, appropriate fabrication process 
is designed for technology optimization using coupled process and device 
CAD flow. To illustrate the use of device CAD in device development for the 
next-generation fabrication technology, let us discuss the architecture and 
performance of nanoscale double-halo MOSFETs and split-gate (SG) flash 
memory cells.

24
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
1.5.1.1  Double-Halo MOSFET Devices
It is well known that the conventional scaling of MOSFET devices in the 
nanoscale regime requires a reduction of the gate oxide thickness (TOX) and 
an increase in the channel doping concentration (NCH) to control SCE, DIBL, 
and leakage. However, the combination of such high NCH and ultra-thin 
Tox is likely to cause severe performance degradation due to higher Vth. In 
order to suppress SCE and control DIBL, typically, a single halo profile is 
used around SDE. However, as the MOSFET devices approach their ulti­
mate dimension near the 10 nm regime, both SDE and DSD regions near 
the source-end of the channel contribute to DIBL, resulting in higher Ioff 
and degradation in the subthreshold swing. In order to control DIBL from 
both SDE and DSD, we can use two halo doping profiles, one around SDE 
and other around DSD. Then use device CAD to optimize these halo dop­
ing profiles to control Vth, SCE, DIBL, and Ioff in the nanoscale MOSFETs. 
Therefore, our objective is to design high performance nanoscale MOSFETs 
with low leakage, fast switching, controlled SCE, and reduced DIBL and QM 
effects [93–97]. In order to achieve our objective an ideal structure shown in 
Figure 1.6 is used to optimize the device performance.
Circuit CAD
Circuit Simulation
Generate Compact Models
Calibrated
Device Models
Check Robustness of
Simulation Mesh
Device CAD
Device Simulation
Device
Speciﬁcations
Simulate C – V data
Simulate I – V data
FIGURE 1.14
A typical device CAD-based simulation flow to study new device concepts and generate elec­
trical device characteristics for circuit analysis.

25
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
In device architecture, the n/p MOS device structure shown in Figure 1.6 
includes an n+/p+ polysilicon gate, a gate oxide, vertically and laterally non-
uniform channel doping profile, shallow n+/p+ SDE, deep n+/p+ DSD, and 
two halo doping profiles: the first around SDE and the second around DSD 
regions. An SSR doping profile with a low impurity concentration at the Si/
SiO2 interface and a higher peak concentration at a finite depth below the 
interface is used to provide the non-uniform vertical channel profile [97, 
98]. The SSR profile is optimized to achieve a target Vth for the long channel 
devices. The SSR profile also provides superior Vth control caused by dopant 
fluctuations [108].
The non-uniform analytical lateral channel doping profile is achieved 
using two Gaussian halo profiles during drain-profile engineering [109]. The 
first halo doping profile is a heavily doped shallow profile defined on both 
sides of the gate region aligning at the gate edge. The peak concentration of 
the shallow halo profile is defined immediately below the SDE junction (Xj) 
to reduce DIBL due to SDE. The second halo profile is a lightly doped deep 
profile defined on both sides of the gate region by an offset distance from the 
gate edge. The peak concentration of the second halo doping is placed imme­
diately below the DSD junction (Xjd) to control DIBL due to DSD. The detailed 
fabrication procedure is described in [95]. After device architecture, device 
CAD is used to study the device performance of the double-halo MOSFETs.
A hydrodynamic model for semiconductors with full energy balance solu­
tion along with an analytical QM model [110] is used for device simulation 
[111]. The halo profiles along with the SSR channel doping profile are opti­
mized to the target Ioff  = 10 nA/μm. The 2D doping distribution of an optimized 
double-halo nMOSFET device is shown in Figure 1.8. And, Figures 1.15(a) 
and 1.15(b) show the simulated device performance of double-halo nMOS­
FET and pMOSFET devices with effective channel length, Leff = 25 nm.
Device simulation results in Figure  1.15 show excellent device perfor­
mance, thus achieving the target objective of this study. Thus, device CAD 
can be used to optimize exploratory devices and assess the feasibility of 
these devices for next-generation IC fabrication technology.
After device optimization using device CAD, an initial guess process flow 
is created to reproduce the analytical doping profiles used in device simula­
tion. Then the process CAD is used to perform process simulation and opti­
mize the process flow. Figure 1.16 shows only the section of process flow 
used to integrate the double-halo MOSFETs in advanced CMOS technology. 
The detailed process flow is described in [95].
In Figure 1.16, the shallow halo doping profile is implanted after the gate 
definition with peak concentration immediately below Xj. Then about a 2-nm 
wide offset spacer is used to implant the deep halo and SDE profiles. Because 
the depth of the shallow halo is ~Xj, SDE regions are encroached by about 2 
nm with the halo doping near the Si/SiO2 interface within the channel. Thus, 
the shallow doping profiles only enhance the channel doping by about 4 nm 
of Leff  ≅  25 nm near the Si/SiO2 interface. On the other hand, the deep halo 

26
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
doping profiles with depth ~ DSD junction depth diffuse laterally into the 
channel region to enhance the channel doping at a finite depth below the 
Si/SiO2 interface. Thus, the combination of double-halo profiles provides the 
non-uniform lateral channel doping while maintaining a lower channel dop­
ing concentration near the surface due to the SSR channel doping profile. The 
halo implant dose and energy are optimized to achieve the target value of Ioff 
1.0
0.5
–0.5
|V(Drain)| = 1.00 V
|I(Drain)| (A/µm)
|V(Drain)| = 0.05 V
S = 80 mV/decade
TOX(eﬀ) = 1 nm
Lg = 50 nm
Xj = 20 nm
Leﬀ = 25 nm
V(Source) = 0
V(Body) = 0
~
~
–1.0
1.E–09
1.E–08
1.E–07
1.E–06
1.E–05
1.E–04
pMOSFET
nMOSFET
1.E–03
0.0
V(Gate) (V)
(a)
1.0
0.5
0.0
V(Drain) (V)
nMOSFET
pMOSFET
–0.5
–1.0
0.E+00
1.E–04
2.E–04
|I(Drain)| (A/µm)
3.E–04
4.E–04
5.E–04
6.E–04
7.E–04
|V(Gate)| = 1.0 V
|V(Gate)| = 0.8 V
|V(Gate)| = 0.6 V
|V(Gate)| = 0.4 V
TOX(eﬀ) = 1 nm; Lg = 50 nm
Xj = 20 nm; Leﬀ = 25 nm
V(Source) = 0 = V(Body)
~
(b)
FIGURE 1.15
Device characteristics of double-halo MOSFETs obtained by device CAD: (a) Ids versus Vgs and 
(b) Ids versus Vds; the simulation data are obtained for 50 nm devices with Leff = 25 nm and 
optimized for 
=
µ
I
nA
m
| |
10
/
off
 at |V(Drain)| = 1 V; V(Gate) = V(Source) = V(Body) = 0. (From S. 
Saha, Design considerations for 25 nm MOSFET devices, Solid-State Electron., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 
1851–1857, October 2001. With permission.)

27
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
for the nominal devices of the target technology. The source-drain regions are 
optimized to achieve an improved device behavior, and the peak impurity 
concentrations for SDE and DSD profiles used are 2.5 × 1020 cm–3 and 3.7 × 1020 
cm–3, respectively [93,94].
1.5.1.2  Sub-90 nm Split-Gate Flash Memory Cells
Our second example of device CAD use in advanced device research and 
development is to study the feasibility of scaling split-gate (SG) NOR-type 
flash memory cells below 90 nm. A typical SG cell with top coupling gate 
(CG), called SG-TCG cell [112], is shown in Figure 1.17. The structure includes 
a select gate or word-line (WL) with gate oxide (Tox), a floating gate (FG) with 
tunneling oxide (Tox,tun), a CG with inter-poly oxide (Tox,IPO), an n+ source as the 
“Bitline” (BL), and an n+ drain as the “Sourceline” (SL). The FG is completely 
isolated within the gate dielectric and acts as a potential well to store charge 
by programming the cell using source-side injection (SSI) of hot carriers. The 
erase operation is performed by poly to poly Fowler-Nordheim tunneling of 
carriers from the FG to WL. The sharp FG-tip near the WL edge in Figure 1.17 
improves the erasing efficiency of the programmed cells. Because the cell 
structure in Figure 1.17 consists of two MOSFET devices in series, it is difficult 
to scale these cells in the sub-90 nm regime due to several constraints [113,114].
Dopant activation
DSD implant
DSD spacer formation
SDE implant
Deep halo (#2) implant
Ultra-thin oﬀset spacer formation
Shallow halo (#1) implant
Gate deﬁnition
Pad oxide
Halo 1
p(n) well
p(n) well
p(n) well
Gate
Gate
SDE
DSD
DSD spacer
Oﬀset spacer
Gate
Halo 2
TOX
TOX
TOX
FIGURE 1.16
Part of the process flow showing the integration of two halo profiles in CMOS technology 
to fabricate nanoscale double-halo MOSFET devices. (From S. Saha, Device characteristics 
of sub-20-nm silicon nanotransistors, in Proc. SPIE Conf. on Design and Process Integration for 
Microelectronic Manufacturing, vol. 5042, pp. 172–179, July 2003. With permission.)

28
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
The major scaling constraints of NOR-type SG-TCG cells are (1) the high 
value of SL programming voltage, VSL ≡ Vsp >> 3.2 V required for an effi­
cient hot-electron programming [113] and Vsp > floating gate (FG) transistor 
saturation voltage (VSL,sat) required to mitigate the risk of supply voltage fluc­
tuations [112]; (2) excessive program-inhibit leakage current, Ioff(BLI) causing 
inhibited cells susceptible to soft-write error [113,114]; (3) high program cell 
leakage current, Ir0, causing ineffective sensing of the write and erase states 
by the sense amplifiers [113,114]; and (4) degradation of program/erase (P/E) 
coupling ratio causing degradation in P/E efficiency [113,114].
Our objective is to design high performance sub-90 nm NOR-type SG-TCG 
cells within the above described scaling constraints. First, the requirement 
for Vsp >> 3.2 V makes the scaled SG-TCG cells susceptible to punchthrough 
at the operating conditions, causing degradation in the cell reliability. 
Therefore, in order to improve the punchthrough voltage, the channel dop­
ing concentration must be increased which in turn decreases the SL p-n 
junction breakdown voltage, BVj. Thus, we need to optimize the channel 
doping profile and use graded SL/BL p-n junctions to improve the overall 
cell breakdown voltage (BV) to achieve the target Vsp for the scaled SG-TCG 
cells. In this case, three channel doping profiles are used to optimize cell 
performance for the target Vsp value.
The next requirements are tolerable leakage currents Ioff(BLI) and Ir0 at the 
target SL voltage (VSL) for the sub-90 nm SG-TCG cells. Ioff(BLI) is the off-state 
leakage current of WL-MOSFETs, whereas Ir0 is the off-state leakage current 
of FG MOSFETs. Thus, Ioff(BLI) can be optimized to the target value required 
for the target Vsp using shallow BL-extension (BLE) and optimizing BL-halo 
to reduce SCE and DIBL. Similarly, to achieve the target Ir0 shallow SL junc­
tion along with a lightly doped FG-channel profile is used as shown in 
Figure 1.17. The target values of leakage currents at the required VSL = Vsp are 
Bulk
Gap to create
high lateral
electric ﬁeld
n+ Source
n+ Drain
SL
Coupling
Gate
Floating Gate
BL
Word Line
Tox
Tox,tun
Tox,IPO
FIGURE 1.17
An idealized SG-TCG flash memory cell structure used for scaling in the sub-90 nm regime: 
here, BL = bitline, Tox = WL-transistor gate oxide thickness, Tox,tun = tunneling oxide thickness, 
Tox,IPO = inter-poly oxide thickness and SL = Sourceline. (From S.K. Saha, Non-linear coupling 
voltage of split-gate flash memory cells with additional top coupling gate, IET Circuits, Devices 
& Systems, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 204–210, May 2012. With permission.)

29
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
obtained using device CAD. In this case, we can use device CAD to deter­
mine the maximum tolerable parasitic leakage current for BV > Vsp. In this 
example, the device simulation data show that Ir0 ~ 200 pA/cell at V(BL) = 0.8 V 
and V(FG) = 0 with WL device on and Ioff(BLI) ~ 200 nA/kbit at V(BL) = 1.8 V 
and V(WL) = 0 with FG device on are required to maintain Vsp = 6.5 V < BV. 
The detailed optimization technique is reported in the references [113,114].
The final requirement to design sub-90 nm SG-TCG cells is to account for 
the degradation of the coupling ratio in the scaled devices. The addition of 
top CG improves the programming coupling ratio, whereas the shallow BLE 
without overlap under the WL transistor improves the erase coupling ratio.
Thus, the use of shallow SL junction will control SCE and DIBL and 
improve scalability of SG-TCG cells. In addition, a shallow BL-junction will 
control DIBL and improve scalability of the cells. In this example, a shallow 
BLE and deep BL regions along with BL-halo are used to optimize the cell to 
the desired performance objective [112–114]. The final simulation structure of 
the optimized SG-TCG cell is shown in Figure 1.18.
Figure 1.19 shows device simulation results of the optimized SG-TCG cells. 
Figure 1.19 shows that Vth(WL) and cell read current (Ir1) as function of WL tran­
sistor channel length. In Figure 1.19(a), Vth(WL) is extracted from the extrapolated 
Ids − Vgs plots of WL-devices at Vds = 50 mV with overdrive V(FG) = 2.5 V. And 
Ir1 = Icell is obtained at the read condition, V(WL) = 2.5 V, V(BL) = 0.8 V, V(FG) = 1.8 V 
= V(CG), and V(SL) = 0. The device simulation data show acceptable read current 
Ir1 ≈ 22.2 μA for 65 nm cells optimized for Vsp = 6.5 V. Figure 1.19(b) shows the 
P-substrate
n+ BL
n+ BLE
n+
SL
CG
FG
BL
WL
Tox,tun
Tox,IPO
Tox
FIGURE 1.18
The final sub-90 nm SG-TCG flash memory cells structure generated using device CAD 
tool MEDICI: here, BL = bitline, WL = word line, FG = floating gate, CG = coupling gate, Tox 
= WL-transistor gate oxide thickness, Tox,tun = tunneling oxide thickness, Tox,IPO = inter-poly 
oxide thickness, SL = sourceline,  and BLE = shallow BL extension. (From S.K. Saha, Non-linear 
coupling voltage of split-gate flash memory cells with additional top coupling gate, IET Circuit, 
Devices & Systems, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 204–210, May 2012.)

30
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
simulated V(FG) versus V(SL) plots of the SG-TCG cells at V(CG) = 10 V. Similarly, 
Figure 1.20 shows an improvement in both programming coupling ratio due to 
CG and the new device architecture with shallow SL and BLE junctions.
The device simulation study clearly shows the feasibility of SG-TCG cell 
scaling near the 65-nm regime. After the device optimization, an initial guess 
process flow is created as shown in Figure 1.21 for complete technology opti­
mization using coupled process and device CAD as shown in Figure 1.13.
100
20
22
24
26
28
Icell (µA)
Vth (WL) (V)
Vth (WL)
Icell
30
32
34
36
38
40
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
WL Length (nm)
Ioﬀ (BLI) = 193 nA/kbit
Ir0 = 193 pA
~
~
(a)
6.5
6.0
5.0 5.5
4.5
3.5
2.5
1.5
0.5
0.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
WL = 65 nm
WL = 70 nm
WL = 80 nm
WL = 90 nm
WL = 100 nm
5.0
5.5
4.0
3.0
V(SL) (V)
V(FG) (V)
2.0
1.0
(b)
FIGURE 1.19
Simulated device performance of SG-TCG cells: (a) Vth and Icell versus WL-transistor channel 
length and (b) programming coupling voltage V(FG) as a function of programming voltage 
V(SL) obtained at function of programming voltage V(SL) obtained at V(CG) = 10 V. (From S.K. 
Saha, Design considerations for sub-90 nm split-gate Flash memory cells, IEEE Trans. Electron. 
Devices, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 3049–3055, November 2007. With permission.)

31
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
The device-simulation results show that the sub-90-nm SG-TCG flash-
memory cells can be achieved with tolerable Ir0 < 200 pA, IOFF(BLI) < 200 nA/kb, 
acceptable Ir1, and excellent T2P ≈ 30 μs and T2E ≈ 40 μs. Thus, the present 
design methodology demonstrates the feasibility of high performance sub-
90-nm split-gate flash-memory cells down to 65 nm with Ir1 ≈ 235 μA/μm 
along with efficient P/E characteristics. From the results of device CAD, a 
process flow is developed for coupled process and device simulation.
1.E+00
1.E–01
1.E–02
1.E–03
Programming Time (sec)
Vth (V)
1.E–04
1.E–05
1.E–06
2.5
3.5
4.5
5.5
6.5
7.5
8.5
9.5
10.5
11.5
12.5
Cell2: WL = 90 nm
Cell5: WL = 65 nm
(a)
1.E–04
Cell2: WL = 90 nm
Cell5: WL = 65 nm
1.E–05
1.E–06
Erase Time (sec)
Vth (V)
1.E–07
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
(b)
FIGURE 1.20
Programming/erase characteristics of SG-TCG cells: (a) programming at V(WL) = 1.2 V, V(SL) 
= 6.5 V, V(BL) = 0.3 V, and V(CG) = 10 V; and (b) erase; at V(WL) = 10 V and V(SL) = 0 = V(BL); 
from simulation data the time to program, T2P ≈ 30 μs and time to erase, T2E ≈ 40 μs. (From S.K. 
Saha, Design considerations for sub-90 nm split-gate Flash memory cells, IEEE Trans. Electron. 
Devices, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 3049–3055, November 2007. With permission.)

32
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
1.5.2  TCAD in Fabrication Technology Development (TD)
The coupled process and device CAD flow as shown in Figure 1.13 is used in 
IC fabrication TD. Typically, in the semiconductor industry, the next-generation 
IC fabrication technology is derived by scaling the current technology. In 
this case, the current generation fabrication process flow with appropriate 
modifications is used as the initial guess to optimize the process recipe of the 
next-generation technology. As shown in Figure 1.13, the initial guess process 
recipe is iteratively optimized using coupled process and device CAD to the 
target achievable device specifications; then the compact model parameters 
are extracted from the simulated device characteristics; and finally, circuit 
CAD is used to analyze the circuit performance. Figure 1.13 also shows that 
for accurate prediction of device and circuit performance, calibrated physical 
models are essential. Also, the calibration database with experimental dop­
ing profiles under various processing conditions and device characteristics 
Contact formation
Deep BL implant and anneal
BL-spacer deposition
BL-oﬀset spacer deposition: thickness ~ BLE junction depth
BL-halo implant
BL-halo-oﬀset spacer deposition
n+ WL-poly deﬁnition
n+ SL-poly formation
n+ CG-poly deﬁnition
n+ FG-poly deﬁnition
FG-transistor gate oxide growth: thickness ~ 9 nm
P-well 1 implant: peak concentration depth ~ 0.4 µm
P-well 2 implant: peak concentration depth ~ SL-junction depth
P-well 3 implant: deﬁnes WL Vth
SL-oﬀset spacer deposition
FG Vth-adjust implant
Inter-poly (FG – CG) oxide deposition: thickness ~ 12 nm
WL-transistor gate oxide growth: thickness ~ 13-nm
Ultra-shallow BLE implant
Ultra-shallow SL implant
FIGURE 1.21
The major technology steps to integrate sub-90 nm split-gate NOR-flash memory cells in a 
standard CMOS technology. (From S.K. Saha, Design considerations for sub-90 nm split-gate 
Flash memory cells, IEEE Trans. Electron. Devices, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 3049–3055, November 2007. 
With permission.)

33
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
are essential to validate the simulation results in each step of the optimiza­
tion process.
Besides the conventional TD approach described above, the initial guess 
process recipe can be efficiently obtained by “reverse modeling” as shown in 
Figure 1.1. As we discussed in Section 1.3, the ultimate motivation for TCAD 
is to extract circuit design parameters to enable designers to predict circuit 
performance of the target technology. In the TCAD flow in Figure 1.13, the 
circuit design parameters are generated by optimizing the initial guess 
process recipe of the current generation technology using coupled process 
and device CAD. However, for exploratory devices, the current generation 
technology does not exist; therefore, the initial process flow and recipe are 
obtained by reverse simulation flow (e.g., circuit CAD to process CAD), as 
shown in Figure 1.1. Because the ultimate goal of the new technology genera­
tion is to predict circuit performance, circuit/product specific process recipe 
will ensure the target circuit performance. The basic simulation flow for the 
product-specific IC process design is shown in Figure 1.22. The initial guess 
process recipe is generated by reverse engineering from the target product 
specifications in three sequential steps: (1) generation of device models using 
circuit simulation as shown in Figure 1.22(a); (2) generation of doping profiles 
Doping Proﬁles
Optimization
Target Product
Speciﬁcations
Optimized Device Models
Yes
No
Revise
Device
Models
Check?
Initial Guess
Device Models
Circuit Simulation
Generate
Product Speciﬁcations
(a)
FIGURE 1.22
Flowchart for the generation of initial guess process recipe using three-step approach: (a) optimi­
zation of device models to the target product specifications; (b) optimization of process profiles to 
the target device models; (c) optimization of process recipe to the target process profiles. (From S. 
Saha, Technology CAD for integrated circuit fabrication technology development and technology 
transfer, Proc. SPIE, vol. 5042, pp. 63–74, July 2003. With permission.) (continued)

34
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Generate Process
Recipe
Optimized
Device Models
Optimized Doping Proﬁles
Yes
No
Revise
Initial
Guess
Check?
Initial Guess
Doping Proﬁles
Model
Calibration
Database
Device Simulation
Extract
Device Models
(b)
Process
Optimization
Optimized
Impurities
Optimized Recipe
Yes
No
Revise
Initial
Guess
Check?
Initial Guess
Process Recipe
Model
Calibration
Database
Process Simulation
Generate
Doping Proﬁles
(c)
FIGURE 1.22
(continued) Flowchart for the generation of initial guess process recipe using three-step 
approach: (a) optimization of device models to the target product specifications; (b) optimiza­
tion of process profiles from the target device models; (c) optimization of process recipe to 
the target process profiles. (From S. Saha, Technology CAD for integrated circuit fabrication 
technology development and technology transfer, Proc. SPIE, vol. 5042, pp. 63–74, July 2003. 
With permission.)

35
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
within the device using device CAD as shown in Figure 1.22(b); and (3) gen­
eration of process recipe using process CAD as shown in Figure 1.22(c). This 
initial guess product-specific process recipe can then be further optimized 
using coupled process and device CAD as shown in Figure 1.13 to generate 
the final process flow and device specifications.
1.6  Benefit of TCAD in TD Projects
TCAD is widely used in advanced IC fabrication TD to optimize IC devices 
and fabrication processes through critical analysis and detailed understand­
ing of process, device, and circuit simulation data. The TCAD tools that accu­
rately predict the process and device characteristics of the anticipated wafer 
fabrication technology have shown great promise in nanoscale device and 
advanced IC manufacturing TD. Therefore, TCAD has become indispens­
able to reduce the development cycle time and cost of advance IC fabrication 
technology and products [1–5]. TCAD tools offer manufacturing and devel­
opment engineers vast improvements in flexibility, innovation, efficiency, 
and customer responsiveness [1].
In Section 1.3, we established the motivation and importance of TCAD in 
IC device and process architecture. It is obvious that the knowledge gained 
by TCAD is impossible to quantify. However, for industrial applications it 
is essential to quantify the benefit of TCAD in reducing TD cycle time and 
cost [1,5]. By conducting a survey of TCAD users, International Technology 
Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) reported about 32% reduction in devel­
opment time and about 30% in development cost by the appropriate use of 
TCAD [2]. Though this demonstrates high relevance and potential for the 
industrial use of TCAD, a survey-based benefit assessment is not adequate to 
undertake a TCAD-based development project in the industry. Therefore, a 
quantitative model to assess the benefit of TCAD use in a development proj­
ect is crucial for project managers.
In 1999, the basic formulations of a quantitative model to compute the 
benefit of TCAD use in IC development were reported [1] and the detailed 
analytical model to compute the benefit of TCAD was reported in 2010 [5]. 
In these reports, a set of realistic assumptions is used to derive a set of 
mathematical expressions to compute the cycle time and cost benefit of a 
TCAD-based project compared to that of the trial-and-error experimentation 
or “conventional” approach. The key assumption of this model is that the 
TCAD tools accurately predict the process and device characteristics of the 
target wafer fabrication technology. In order to develop a realistic analyti­
cal model to compute the benefit of TCAD over the conventional approach, 
a typical IC fabrication TD project is divided into three phases (ϕ): phase 1, 
generation of initial guess process recipe; phase 2, process optimization to 
generate process and device specifications; and phase 3, evaluation of process 

36
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
manufacturability. According to this model, the reduction in the develop­
ment cycle time, Δt, and cost, ΔC, on a project by TCAD use compared to the 
conventional approach is described by
	
t
Ftconv
≅
	
(1.1)
	
C
C
F
ROI
n
C
1
1
wfr
tcad
(
)
≥
−ρ +
+




−
	
(1.2)
	
≥
+
+
−ρ
⋅
⋅
−
C
C
F
ROI
A m n
C
[
(1
)(1
)]
wfr
p
tcad 	
(1.3)
where the model parameters in Equations (1.1)–(1.3) are as follows: F is the 
development cycle time reduction factor by a TCAD-based project compared 
to a conventional poject; tconv  is the conventional TD time without using 
TCAD; Cwfr  is the cost of processing a single wafer-lot in the fab; ρ is the 
fraction of the conventional TD wafers used in a TCAD-based project; ROI 
is the return on investment from IC sale; Δn is the reduction in the number 
of wafer-lots in the fab by using TCAD; Ctcad  is the total cost of implementa­
tion of CAD infrastructure; m is the total number of iterations required to 
optimize a technology in each phase of a TD project and is assumed to be the 
same for both conventional and TCAD-based processes; np  is the number of 
process-control variables p (e.g., ion implant) and defines the complexity of 
an IC fabrication technology; and 
=
φ
A
n n
w
/
x
y
n is the model parameter that 
depends on the number of project phases ϕ, the split conditions of implants 
(e.g., energy nx and dose ny), and the number of wafers in a wafer-lot wn.
By using the appropriate values of the parameters in Equations (1.1) and 
(1.2) or (1.1) and (1.3) for the TCAD tools that accurately predict the pro­
cess and device characteristics of the target wafer fabrication technology, 
the above analytical model provides a reduction in the TD cycle time of 
about 67% with multimillion dollar cost savings compared to the conven­
tional approach [1,5].
1.7  Summary
This chapter presents the mission and scope of extended technology CAD in 
IC process modeling and device performance analysis. A brief history of the 
evaluation of device and process CAD during the past four decades leading 
to the commercialization of TCAD software is described. The motivation for 
TCAD use is outlined with a few typical examples. A brief outline of TCAD 
flow including generation of robust simulation structure and physical model 
calibration for accurate IC process and device simulation is presented. A few 

37
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
examples of typical TCAD application, especially, in studying the feasibility 
of exploratory devices for the next-generation fabrication technology are dis­
cussed. Finally, an analytical cost model to compute the benefit of TCAD use 
in saving IC TD cycle time and cost over the conventional trial-and-error-
experimentation based TD project is discussed.
References
	
1.	 S.K. Saha, Managing technology CAD for competitive advantage: An efficient 
approach for integrated circuit fabrication technology development, IEEE Trans. 
Eng. Manage., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 221–229, May 1999.
	
2.	 International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors: Modeling and Simulation, 
2011, http://www.itrs.net/Links/2011ITRS/2011Chapters/2011Modeling.pdf.
	
3.	 R.W. Dutton and Z. Yu, Computer Simulation of IC Processes and Devices. Boston: 
Kluwer Academic, 1993.
	
4.	 R.W. Dutton and A.J. Strojwas, Perspective on technology and technology-
driven CAD, IEEE Trans. Computer Aided Design, vol.19, no. 12, pp. 1544–1560, 
December 2000.
	
5.	 S.K. Saha, Modelling the effectiveness of computer aided development projects 
in the semiconductor industry, Int. J. Eng. Manage. Econ., vol. 1, no. 2/3, pp. 
162–178, November 2010.
	
6.	 H.K. Gummel, A self-consistent iterative scheme for one-dimensional steady 
state transistor calculations, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 455–
465, October 1964.
	
7.	 A. De Mari, An accurate numerical steady-state one-dimensional solution of the 
p-n junction, Solid-St. Electron., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 33–58, January 1968.
	
8.	 A. De Mari, An accurate numerical one-dimensional solution of the p-n junc­
tion under arbitrary transient conditions, Solid-St. Electron., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 
1021–1053, November 1968.
	
9.	 D.L. Scharfetter and H.K. Gummel, Large-signal analysis of a silicon read diode 
oscillator, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 66–77, January 1969.
	 10.	 H.W. Loeb, R. Andrew, and W. Love, Application of 2-dimensional solutions 
of the Shockley-Poisson equation to inversion-layer M.O.S.T. devices, Electron. 
Lett., vol. 4, no. 17, pp. 352–354, August 1968.
	 11.	 J.E. Schroeder and R.S. Muller, IGFET analysis through numerical solution of 
Poisson’s equation, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 954–961, 
December 1968.
	 12.	 M.B. Barron, Computer Aided Analysis of Insulated Gate Field Effect Transistors, 
Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University, California, November 1969.
	 13.	 D.P. Kennedy and R.R. O’Brien, Electric current saturation in a junction field-
effect transistor, Solid-St. Electron., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 829–830, October 1969.
	 14.	 J.W. Slotboom, Iterative scheme for 1- and 2-dimensional d.c.-transistor simula­
tion, Electron. Lett., vol. 5, no. 26, pp. 677–678, December 1969.
	 15.	 M. Reiser, Difference methods for the solution of time-dependent semiconduc­
tor flow equations, Electron. Lett., vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 353–355, June 1971.

38
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
	 16.	 M.S. Mock, A two-dimensional mathematical model of the insulated-gate field-
effect transistor, Solid-St. Electron., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 601–609, May 1973.
	 17.	 M.A. Green and J. Shewchun, Minority carrier effects upon the small signal and 
steady-state properties of Schottky diodes, Solid-St. Electron., vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 
1141–1150, October 1973.
	 18.	 J.J. Barnes, A Two-Dimensional Simulation of MESFETs, Ph.D. Thesis, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, May 1976.
	 19.	 J.J. Barnes and R.J. Lomax, Finite-element methods in semiconductor device 
simulation, IEEE Trans. Electron. Dev., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1082–1089, August 
1977.
	 20.	 T. Toyabe, K. Yamaguchi, S. Asai, and M.S. Mock, A numerical model of ava­
lanche breakdown in MOSFETs, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 
825–832, July 1978.
	 21.	 D.C. D’Avanzo, M. Vanzi, and R.W. Dutton, One-dimensional semiconductor 
device analysis, Tech Report, No. G-201-5, Stanford Electronics Laboratories, 
Stanford University, California, October 1979.
	 22.	 S. Selberherr, W. Fichtner, and H.W. Potzl, MINIMOS—A program package to 
facilitate MOS device design and analysis, in Proc. NASCODE-I, pp. 275–279, 
June 1979.
	 23.	 P.E. Cottrell and E.M. Buturla, Two-dimensional static and transient simulation 
of mobile carrier transport in a semiconductor, in Proc. NASCODE I, pp. 31–64, 
June 1979.
	 24.	 J.A. Greenfield and R.W. Dutton, Nonplanar VLSI device analysis using the 
solution of Poisson’s equation, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 1520–
1532, August 1980.
	 25.	 C.H. Price, Two-Dimensional Numerical Simulation of Semiconductor Devices, Ph.D. 
Thesis, Stanford University, California, May 1982.
	 26.	 M.R. Pinto, C.S. Rafferty, and R.W. Dutton, PISCES II: Poisson and Continuity 
Equation Solver, Stanford University, California, September 1984.
	 27.	 M.R. Pinto, C.S. Rafferty, and R.W. Dutton, PISCES IIB: Supplementary Report, 
Stanford University, September 1984.
	 28.	 R.E. Bank, W.M. Coughran, Jr., W. Fichtner, E.H. Grosse, D.J. Rose, and R.K. 
Smith, Transient simulation of silicon devices and circuits, IEEE Trans. Computer 
Aided Design of ICs & Sys., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 436–451, October 1985.
	 29.	 R.E. Bank, W.M. Coughran, Jr., W. Fichtner, D.J. Rose, and R.K. Smith, 
Computational aspects of semiconductor device simulation, in Process and 
Device Modeling, ed. W.L. Engl, pp. 229–264, North-Holland: Amsterdam, 1986.
	 30.	 A.F. Franz and G.A. Franz, BAMBI—A design model for power MOSFETs, IEEE 
Trans. Comp. Aided Design of ICs, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 177–189, July 1985.
	 31.	 G. Baccarani, R. Guerrieri, P. Ciampolini, and M. Rudan, HFIELDS: A highly flex­
ible 2D semiconductor device analysis program, Proc. NASCODE-IV, pp. 3–12, 
June 1985.
	 32.	 Synopsys, Inc., Home page, http://www.synopsys.com/.
	 33.	 Silvaco, Inc., Home page, http://www.silvaco.com/.
	 34.	 T. Kurosawa, Monte Carlo calculation of hot-electron problems, J. Phys. Soc. 
Japan Suppl., vol. 21, pp. 424–426, 1966.
	 35.	 R.A. Warriner, Computer simulations of gallium arsenide field-effect transis­
tors using the Monte Carlo method, Solid-State Electron Devices, vol. 1, no. 4, 
pp. 105–110, July 1979.

39
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
	 36.	 R. K. Cook and J. Frey, Two-dimensional numerical simulation of energy trans­
port effects in Si and GaAs MESFETs, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., vol. 29, no. 6, 
pp. 970–977, June 1982.
	 37.	 M. Fukuma and R.H. Uebbing, Two-dimensional MOSFET simulation with 
energy transport phenomena, in IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 621–624, 1984.
	 38.	 C. Werner, R. Kuhnert, and L. Risch, Optimization of lightly doped drain 
MOSFETs using a new quasiballistic tool, in IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 770–773, 1984.
	 39.	 D.J. Widiger, I.C. Kiziyalli, K. Hess, and J.J. Coleman, Two-dimensional tran­
sient simulation of an idealized high-electron mobility transistor, IEEE Trans. 
Electron Dev., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1092–1102, June 1985.
	 40.	 S.E. Laux and A.C. Warren, Self-consistent calculation of electron states in nar­
row channels, in IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 567–570, 1986.
	 41.	 E. Sangiorgi, B. Ricco, and F. Venturi, MOS2—An efficient Monte Carlo simula­
tor for MOS devices, IEEE Trans. Comp. Aided Design of ICs & Sys., vol. 7, no. 2, 
pp. 259–271, February 1988.
	 42.	 A. Forghieri, F. Guerrieri, P. Ciampolini, A. Gnudi, M. Rudan, and G. Baccarani, 
A new discretization strategy of the semiconductor equations comprising 
momentum and energy balance, IEEE Trans. Comp. Aided Design of ICs, vol. 7, 
no. 2, pp. 231–242, February 1988.
	 43.	 E.M. Buturla, P.E. Cottrell, B.M. Grossman, M.B. Lawlor, C.T. McMullen, and 
K.A. Salsburg, Three dimensional finite element simulation of semiconductor 
devices, IEEE Intl. Solid State Circuits Conf. Dig., pp. 76–77, February 1980.
	 44.	 E. Buturla, P. Cottrell, B. Grossman, and K. Salsburg, Finite-element analysis of 
semiconductor devices: The FIELDAY program, IBM J. Res. & Dev., vol. 25, 
no. 4, pp. 218–231, July 1981.
	 45.	 S.G. Chamberlain and A. Husain, Three-dimensional simulation of VLSI 
MOSFETs, in IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 592–595, 1981.
	 46.	 A. Husain and S.G. Chamberlain, Three-dimensional simulation of VLSI 
MOSFETs: The three-dimensional simulation program WATMOS, IEEE J. Solid-
State Circuits, vol. SC-17, no. 2, pp. 261–268, April 1982.
	 47.	 W. Fichtner, R.L. Johnston, and D.J. Rose, Three-dimensional numerical simula­
tion of small-size MOSFETs, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., vol. 28, no. 10 pp. 1215–
1216, October 1981.
	 48.	 N. Shigyo, M. Konaka, and R. Dang, Three-dimensional simulation of inverse 
narrow-channel effect, Electron. Lett., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 274–275, March 1982.
	 49.	 T. Toyabe, H. Masuda, Y. Aoki, H. Shukuri, and T. Hagiwara, Three-dimensional 
device simulator CADDETH with highly convergent matrix solution algo­
rithms, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 2038–2044, October 1985.
	 50.	 M. Thurner and S. Selberherr, Comparison of long and short channel MOSFETs 
carried out by 3D MINIMOS, Proc. ESSDERC, pp. 409–412, 1987.
	 51.	 J.H. Chern, J.T. Maeda, L.A. Arledge, Jr., and P. Yang, SIERRA: A 3D device simu­
lator for reliability modeling, IEEE Trans. Comp. Aided Design of ICs, vol. 8, no. 5, 
pp. 516–527, May 1989.
	 52.	 P. Ciampolini, A. Pierantoni, M. Melanotte, C. Cecchetti, C. Lombardi, and G. 
Baccarani, Realistic device simulation in three dimensions, IEDM Tech. Dig., 
pp. 131–134, 1989.
	 53.	 E. Buturla, J. Johnson, S. Furkay, and P. Cottrell, A new 3D device simulation 
formulation, in Proc. Numerical Analysis of Semiconductor Devices and Integrated 
Circuits, pp. 291–295, 1989.

40
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
	 54.	 N. Shigyo and R. Dang, Analysis of an anomalous subthreshold current in a 
fully recessed oxide MOSFET using a three-dimensional device simulator, IEEE 
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 441–445, February 1985.
	 55.	N. Shigyo, S. Fukuda, T. Wada, K. Hieda, T. Hamamoto, H. Watanabe, 
K. Sunouchi, and H. Tango, Three-dimensional analysis of subthreshold 
swing and transconductance for fully recessed oxide (trench) isolated 
1/4-μm-width MOSFETs, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-35, no. 7, 
pp. 945–951, July 1988.
	 56.	 M. Thurner and S. Selberherr, The extension of MINIMOS to a three-dimen­
sional simulation program, in Proc. Numerical Analysis of Semiconductor Devices 
and Integrated Circuits, pp. 327–332, 1987.
	 57.	 M. Thurner, P. Lindorfer, and S. Selberherr, Numerical treatment of nonrect­
angular field-oxide for 3-D MOSFET simulation, IEEE Trans. Computer Aided 
Design, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 1189–1197, 1990.
	 58.	 M. Thurner and S. Selberherr, 3D MOSFET device effects due to field oxide, in 
Proc. European Solid-State Device Research Conf., pp. 245–248, 1988.
	 59.	 M. Thurner and S. Selberherr, Three-dimensional effects due to the field oxide 
in MOS devices analyzed with MINIMOS 5, IEEE Trans. Computer Aided Design, 
vol. CAD-9, no. 8, pp. 856–867, 1990.
	 60.	 C. Fischer, P. Habaš, O. Heinreichsberger, H. Kosina, P. Lindorfer, P. Pichler, 
H. Pötzl, C. Sala, A. Schütz, S. Selberherr, M. Stiftinger, and M. Thurner, 
MINIMOS 6 User’s Guide. Institut für Mikroelektronik, Technische Universität 
Wien, 1994. http://www.iue.tuwien.ac.at/software.
	 61.	 S. Odanaka, M. Wakabayashi, H. Umimoto, A. Hiroki, K. Ohe, K. Moriyama, H. 
Iwasaki, and H. Esaki, SMART: Three-dimensional process/device simulator 
integrated on a super-computer, in Proc. Intl. Symp. Circuits and Systems, 
pp. 534–537, 1987.
	 62.	 M.R. Pinto and R.K. Smith, PADRE, AT&T Bell Laboratories Internal 
Memorandum, 1987.
	 63.	 W. Bergner and R. Kircher, SITAR—An efficient 3D-simulator for optimization 
of nonplanar trench structures, in Proc. SISPAD 3 Conf., pp. 165–175, 1988.
	 64.	 T. Linton and P. Blakey, A fast, general three-dimensional device simulator and 
its application in a submicron EPROM design study, IEEE Trans. Computer Aided 
Design, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 508–515, 1989.
	 65.	 P. Ciampolini, A. Forghieri, A. Pierantoni, A. Gnudi, M. Rudan, and G. Baccarani, 
Adaptive mesh generation preserving the quality of the initial grid, IEEE Trans. 
Computer Aided Design, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 490–500, 1989.
	 66.	 P. Ciampolini, A. Pierantoni, and G. Baccarani, Efficient 3-D simulation of com­
plex structures, IEEE Trans. Computer Aided Design, vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 1141–1149, 
September 1991.
	 67.	 P. Ciampolini, A. Pierantoni, M. Melanotte, C. Cecchetti, C. Lombardi, and G. 
Baccarani, Realistic device simulation in three dimensions, in IEDM Tech. Dig., 
pp. 131–134, 1989.
	 68.	 G. Heiser, Design and Implementation of a Three-Dimensional, General Purpose 
Semiconductor Device Simulator. Hartung-Gorre Verlag, 1991.
	 69.	 G. Heiser, C. Pommerell, J. Weis, and W. Fichtner, Three-dimensional numeri­
cal semiconductor device simulation: Algorithms, architectures, results, IEEE 
Trans. Computer Aided Design of ICs & Sys., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 1218–1230, 
October 1991.

41
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
	 70.	 M. Noell, S. Poon, M. Orlowski, and G. Heiser, Study of 3-D effects in BOX isola­
tion technologies, in Proc. Simulation of Semiconductor Devices and Processes, vol. 4, 
pp. 331–340, 1991.
	 71.	 K.-C. Wu, G.R. Chin, and R.W. Dutton, A STRIDE towards practical 3-D device 
simulation—Numerical and visualization considerations, IEEE Trans. Computer 
Aided Design, vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 1132–1140, September 1991.
	 72.	 M. Liang and M. Law, An object-oriented approach to device simulation-
FLOODS, IEEE Trans. Computer Aided Design of IC Design & Sys., vol. 13, no. 10, 
pp. 1235–1240, 1994.
	 73.	 G. Baccarani, M. Rudan, M. lorenzini, W. Fichtner, J. Litsios, A. Schenk, P. Van Staa, 
L. Kaeser, A. Kampmann, A. Marmiroli, C. Sala, and E. Ravanelli, Device simula­
tion for smart integrated systems (DESSIS), in Proc. ICECS, pp. 752–755, 1996.
	 74.	 T. Simlinger, H. Brech, T. Grave, and S. Selberherr, Simulation of submicron 
double-heterojunction high electron mobility transistors with MINIMOS-NT, 
IEEE Trans. Electron. Devices, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 700–707, May 1997.
	 75.	 A. Asenov, Random dopant induced threshold voltage lowering and fluctua­
tions in sub-0.1μm MOSFETs: A 3-D atomistic simulation study, IEEE Trans. 
Electron Devices, vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 2505–2513, December 1998.
	 76.	 A. Asenov, A. Brown, J. Davies, and S. Saini, Hierarchical approach to atomistic 
3-D MOSFET simulation, IEEE Trans. Computer Aided Design of ICs and Sys., vol. 
18, no. 11, pp. 1558–1565, November 1999.
	 77.	 A. Asenov and S. Saini, Polysilicon gate enhancement of the random dopant 
induced threshold voltage fluctuations in sub-100 nm MOSFET’s with ultrathin 
gate oxide, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 805–812, April 2000.
	 78.	 H.J. DeMan and R. Mertens, SITCAP—A simulator of bipolar transistors for 
computer aided circuit analysis programs, in IEEE ISSCC Technical Dig., pp. 104–105, 
February, 14–16, 1973.
	 79.	 P.H. Langer and J.J. Goldstein, Impurity redistribution during silicon epitaxial 
growth and semiconductor device processing, J. Electrochemical Soc., vol. 121, 
no. 4, pp. 563–571, April 1974.
	 80.	 D.A. Antoniadis, S.E. Hansen, R.W. Dutton, and A.G. Gonzalez, SUPREM I—A 
program for IC process modeling and simulation, Stanford Technical Report, No. 
5019-1, May 1977.
	 81.	 D.A. Antoniadis, S.E. Hansen, and R.W. Dutton, SUPREM II—A program for IC 
process modeling and simulation, Stanford Technical Report, No. 5019-2, June 1978.
	 82.	 C.P. Ho, J.D. Plummer, S.E. Hansen, and R.W. Dutton, VLSI process model­
ing—SUPREM III, IEEE Trans. Electron. Dev., vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 1438–1453, 
November 1983.
	 83.	 D.J. Chin, M. Kump, H.G. Lee, and R.W. Dutton, Process design using coupled 
2D process and device simulators, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 
336–340, February 1982.
	 84.	 B.R. Penumalli, A comprehensive two-dimensional VLSI process simula­
tion program, BICEPS, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 986–992, 
September 1983.
	 85.	 M.E. Law, C.S. Rafferty, and R.W. Dutton, SUPREM-IV Users Manual, Stanford 
Electronics Laboratories, Stanford University, California, July 1986.
	 86.	 Crosslight Software, Inc., Home page, http://www.crosslight.com/.
	 87.	 S. Onga and K. Taniguchi, A three-dimensional process simulator and its appli­
cation to submicron VLSIs, in Proc. Sump. VLSI Tech., pp. 68–69, 1985.

42
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
	 88.	 S. Odanaka, H. Umimoto, M. Wakabayashi, and H. Esaki, SMART-P: Rigorous 
three-dimensional process simulator on a supercomputer, IEEE Trans. Comp. 
Aided Design, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 675–683, June 1988.
	 89.	 M. Law, FLOODS/FLOOPS Manual. University of Florida, Department of 
Electrical Engineering, 2000. http://www.tec.ufl.edu.
	 90.	 C.S. Rafferty, PROPHET user’s manual, AT&T Tech. Memo., May 1, 1991.
	 91.	 L.W. Nagel, SPICE2—A computer program to simulate semiconductor circuits, 
University of California, Berkeley, Memo ERL-M250, Electronic Research 
Laboratory, May 1975.
	 92.	 BSIM4.6.0 MOSFET Model—User’s Manual. http://www-device.eecs.berkeley.
edu/bsim/Files/BSIM4/BSIM460/doc/BSIM460_Manual.pdf.
	 93.	 S. Saha, Design considerations for 25 nm MOSFET devices, Solid-State Electron., 
vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 1851–1857, October 2001.
	 94.	 S. Saha, Scaling considerations for high performance 25 nm metal-oxide-semi­
conductor field-effect transistors, J. Vac. Sci. Tech. B, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 2240–2246, 
November 2001.
	 95.	 S. K. Saha, Transistors having optimized source-drain structures and methods 
for making the same, US Patent 6,344,405, February 5, 2002.
	 96.	 S. Saha, Device characteristics of sub-20-nm silicon nanotransistors, in Proc. 
SPIE Conf. on Design and Process Integration for Microelectronic Manufacturing, vol. 
5042, pp. 172–179, July 2003.
	 97.	 S.K. Saha, Method for forming channel-region doping profile for semiconductor 
device, US Patent 6,323,520, November 27, 2001.
	 98.	 S. Saha, Effects of inversion layer quantization on channel profile engineering 
for nMOSFETs with 0.1 μm channel lengths, Solid-State Electron., vol. 42, no. 11, 
pp. 1985–1991, November 1998.
	 99.	 K. Fujita et al., Advanced channel engineering achieving aggressive reduction 
of VT variation for ultra-low-power applications, in IEDM Tech. Dig., pp. 749–752, 
2011.
	100.	 S. Selberherr, Analysis and Simulation of Semiconductor Devices, Springer-Verlag, 
Vienna, 1984.
	101.	 S. Saha, MOSFET test structures for two-dimensional device simulation, Solid-
State Electron., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 69–73, January 1995.
	102.	 S. Saha, C.S. Yeh, and B. Gadepally, Impact ionization rate of electrons for accu­
rate simulation of substrate current in submicron devices, Solid-State Electron., 
vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 1429–1432, October 1993.
	103.	 S. Saha, Extraction of substrate current model parameters from device simula­
tion, Solid State Electron., vol. 37, no. 10, pp. 1786–1788, October 1994.
	104.	 S.K. Saha, Organizational visions of virtual manufacturing: Sociotechnical 
aspects of adopting technology computer aided design based manufacturing 
process, in Proc. IEMC’96, pp. 570–575, 1996.
	105.	 S. Saha, Technology CAD for integrated circuit fabrication technology develop­
ment and technology transfer, Proc. SPIE, vol. 5042, pp. 63–74, July 2003.
	106.	 S.K. Saha, Improving the efficiency and effectiveness of IC manufacturing tech­
nology development, in Technology and Innovation Management, D.F. Kocaoglu, 
T.R. Anderson, D.Z. Milosevic, K. Niwa, and H. Tschirky (eds.) Portland, OR: 
PICMET 1999, pp. 540–547, 1999.
	107.	 S.K. Saha, Improving the efficiency and effectiveness of technology transfer pro­
cess in the semiconductor industry, in Proc. IEMC’98, pp. 207–212, 1998.

43
Introduction to Technology Computer Aided Design
	108.	 S.K. Saha, Modeling process variability in scaled CMOS technology, IEEE Design 
& Test of Computers, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 8–16, March–April 2010.
	109.	 S.K. Saha, Drain profile engineering for MOSFET devices with channel lengths 
below 100 nm, in Proc. SPIE Conference on Microelectronic Device Technology, vol. 
3881, pp. 195–204, September 1999.
	110.	 M. J. van Dort, P. H. Woerlee, and A. J. Walker, A simple model for quantisation 
effects in heavily-doped silicon MOSFETs at inversion conditions, Solid-State 
Electron., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 411–414, March 1994.
	111.	 TMA MEDICI, Version 1998.4, Avant! Corporation, Fremont, California, 1998.
	112.	 S.K. Saha, Non-linear coupling voltage of split-gate flash memory cells with 
additional top coupling gate, IET Circuits, Devices & Systems, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 
204–210, May 2012.
	113.	 S.K. Saha, Design considerations for sub-90 nm split-gate Flash memory cells, 
IEEE Trans. Electron. Devices, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 3049–3055, November 2007.
	114.	 S.K. Saha, Scaling considerations for sub-90 nm split-gate Flash memory cells, 
IET Circuits, Devices & Systems, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 144–150, February 2008.


45
2
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-
Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
Swapnadip De
CONTENTS
2.1	
Introduction...................................................................................................47
2.2	
Band Formation Theory of Semiconductor...............................................48
2.2.1	 Band Formation in Silicon...............................................................51
2.2.2	 Band Structure in Compound Semiconductor.............................52
2.3	
Concept of Effective Mass...........................................................................54
2.4	
Basic Semiconductor Equations..................................................................55
2.4.1	 Gauss’s Law.......................................................................................56
2.4.2	 Poisson’s Equation............................................................................56
2.4.3	 Boltzmann Transport Equation......................................................57
2.5	
Carrier Transport..........................................................................................58
2.5.1	 Carrier Drift.......................................................................................59
2.5.2	 Diffusion Current............................................................................. 61
2.5.3	 Total Drift-Diffusion Current..........................................................64
2.5.4	 Einstein Relation...............................................................................64
2.6	
Carrier Recombination and Generation....................................................66
2.7	
Continuity Equation and Solution.............................................................68
2.8	
Mobility and Scattering...............................................................................72
2.9	
Different Distribution Laws........................................................................ 74
2.9.1	 Fermi-Dirac Distribution................................................................. 74
2.10	 Semiconductor Device Modeling...............................................................77
2.10.1	 Introduction.......................................................................................77
2.10.2	 Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) Generation/Recombination 
Model............................................................................................... 78
2.10.3	 Simple Recombination-Generation Model....................................82
2.10.4	 Impact Ionization Model..................................................................83
2.10.5	 Mobility Modeling............................................................................84
2.11	 Introduction to MOS Transistor..................................................................85
2.12	 Structure and Symbol of MOSFET.............................................................85
2.13	 Basic Operation of MOSFET........................................................................87
2.13.1	 Operation of MOSFET with Zero Gate Voltage............................87
2.13.2	 Operation of MOSFET with a Positive Gate Voltage....................87

46
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
2.13.3	 Effect of a Small VDS.........................................................................89
2.13.4	 Operation of MOSFET as VDS Is Increased....................................89
2.14	 Threshold Voltage of MOSFET...................................................................91
2.14.1	 Accumulation of Holes.....................................................................92
2.14.2	 Depletion............................................................................................93
2.14.3	 Inversion.............................................................................................94
2.14.4	 Surface Potential...............................................................................94
2.15	 Flat-Band Voltage: Effect of Real Surfaces.................................................99
2.15.1	 Equalization of the Fermi Levels....................................................99
2.15.2	 Oxide Charges.................................................................................100
2.15.3	 Interface Traps................................................................................. 101
2.15.4	 Flat-Band Voltage............................................................................ 101
2.16	 Expression of Threshold Voltage.............................................................. 102
2.17	 I–V Characteristics of MOSFET................................................................ 103
2.17.1	 Gradual Channel Approximation................................................ 103
2.18	 Depletion MOSFET..................................................................................... 112
2.19	 Transconductance (gm)............................................................................... 113
2.20	 Channel Length Modulation..................................................................... 114
2.21	 Substrate Bias Effects.................................................................................. 119
2.22	 MOS Transistor as a Switch.......................................................................120
2.23	 MOSFET Capacitance................................................................................. 121
2.23.1	 Overlap Capacitance....................................................................... 121
2.23.2	 Channel Capacitance......................................................................122
2.23.3	 Junction Capacitances.................................................................... 124
2.23.4	 Different MOS Capacitors Together.............................................125
2.23.5	 Summary of MOS Capacitances...................................................125
2.23.6	 Interconnect Capacitances.............................................................127
2.24	 Moore’s Law.................................................................................................127
2.25	 Introduction to Scaling..............................................................................128
2.26	 Constant Field Scaling...............................................................................128
2.27	 Constant Voltage Scaling...........................................................................129
2.28	 Why Constant Voltage Scaling Is More Useful than Constant 
Field Scaling.................................................................................................129
2.29	 ITRS Roadmap for Semiconductors.........................................................129
2.30	 Different Groups of MOSFETs..................................................................130
2.31	 Short-Channel Effects of MOSFET........................................................... 132
2.32	 Reduction of the Effective Threshold Voltage........................................ 132
2.33	 Hot Electron Effects....................................................................................135
2.34	 Avalanche Breakdown and Parasitic Bipolar Action.............................136
2.35	 DIBL (Drain-Induced Barrier Lowering)................................................. 137
2.36	 Velocity Saturation in MOSFET................................................................138

47
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
2.1  Introduction
The invention of the transistor in 1947 started the exponential growth of an 
industry that is now, some decades later, a several hundred billion dollar 
industry. The first bipolar transistor was announced in December 1947 by 
William Shockley, John Bardeen, and Walter Brattain at Bell Labs. The first 
metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) transistor and the first integrated circuits 
were demonstrated in the early 1960s. From that time on the development in 
the field of microelectronics was impressive. The integration density grew 
exponentially. Not only has the integration density been steadily growing, 
but pressure on the industry to deliver in short time-to-market has also been 
increasing, leaving minimal research and development times for new tech­
nology nodes. This has led to intense efforts in the field of numerical simula­
tion of the semiconductor manufacturing process and the resulting device 
structure, called technology computer aided design (TCAD). TCAD can 
reduce the number of test cycles with real semiconductor devices and drasti­
cally increase the possibilities to vary process parameters as doping concen­
trations, device geometries, materials, and their composition to a minimum. 
Here, TCAD gives the opportunity to analyze the effect of process variation 
within hours instead of weeks for real processing.
The fundamentals of semiconductors are typically found in textbooks dis­
cussing quantum mechanics, electro-magnetics, solid-state physics, and sta­
tistical thermodynamics. The purpose of this chapter is to review the physical 
concepts, which are needed to understand the fundamentals of semiconduc­
tor devices. We start from the concepts of energy bands, energy band gaps, 
and the density of states in an energy band. We then discuss the impor­
tant concept of effective mass. The analysis of most semiconductor devices 
requires some knowledge of Gauss’s law and Poisson’s equation, which are 
explained briefly. We then look at transport in semiconductors through the 
semi-classical Boltzmann transport equation (BTE). Two carrier transport 
mechanisms—the drift of carriers in an electric field and the diffusion of 
carriers due to a carrier density gradient—will be discussed. Recombination 
mechanisms and the continuity equations are then combined into the diffu­
sion equation. We then present the drift-diffusion model, which combines all 
the essential elements discussed in this chapter. The rapid developments in 
semiconductor technology over the past 20 years have caused huge interest 
2.37	 Mobility Degradation................................................................................. 140
2.37.1	 Vertical Electric Field Mobility Degradation.............................. 140
2.37.2	 Surface Scattering........................................................................... 140
2.37.3	 Horizontal Electric Field Mobility Degradation........................ 141
References.............................................................................................................. 142

48
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
in device modeling. The need to understand the detailed operation of very 
large scale integrated (VLSI) devices and compound semiconductor devices 
has meant that device modeling now plays a crucial role in modern tech­
nology. The main focus is on the phonon transition or Shockley-Read-Hall 
mechanism. It is of special interest for modeling the carrier generation and 
recombination at silicon/dielectric interface traps that are caused by negative 
bias temperature instability. Mobility modeling is also discussed in brief. 
The operation and types of the MOSFET (metal-oxide-semiconductor field-
effect transistor) or MOS transistor are discussed in detail. The steady down­
scaling of MOS transistor dimensions over the past two decades obeying 
Moore’s law is discussed along with the short-channel effects in detail.
2.2  Band Formation Theory of Semiconductor
The concept of electronic energy bands provides the basis for the clas­
sification of solids as good conductors, insulators, or semiconductors. 
Quantum physics describes the state of electrons in an atom according 
to the four-fold scheme of quantum numbers. The quantum number sys­
tem describes the allowable states the electrons may assume in an atom. 
Individual electrons may be described by the combination of quantum 
numbers they possess. Electrons may change their status, given the pres­
ence of available spaces for them to fit, and available energy. Because shell 
level is closely related to the amount of energy that an electron possesses, 
“leaps” between shell (and even subshell) levels require the transfer of 
energy. If an electron is to move into a higher-order shell, it requires that 
an additional energy be given to the electron from an external source. 
Conversely, an electron “leaping” into a lower shell gives up some of its 
energy, the expended energy manifesting as heat and sound released 
upon impact.
Leaps between different shells require a substantial exchange of energy, 
while leaps between subshells or between orbitals require lesser exchanges. 
When atoms combine to form substances, the outermost shells, subshells, 
and orbitals merge, providing a greater number of available energy levels for 
electrons to assume. When large numbers of atoms exist in close proximity 
to each other, these available energy levels form a nearly continuous band 
wherein electrons may transit.
The width of these bands and their proximity to existing electrons determine 
how mobile those electrons will be when exposed to an electric field. In metallic 
substances, as in Figure 2.1, empty bands overlap with bands containing elec­
trons, meaning that electrons may move to what would normally be a higher-
level state with little or no additional energy imparted. Thus, the outer electrons 
are said to be “free,” and ready to move at the beckoning of an electric field [1].

49
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
Band overlap will not occur in all substances, no matter how many atoms 
are in close proximity to each other. In some substances, as in Figure 2.2, a 
substantial gap remains between the highest band containing electrons (the 
so-called valence band) and the next band, which is empty (the so-called con­
duction band). As a result, valence electrons are “bound” to their constituent 
atoms and cannot become mobile within the substance without a significant 
amount of imparted energy [2–4]. These substances are electrical insulators.
Materials that fall within the category of semiconductors have a narrow 
gap between the valence and the conduction bands, as shown in Figure 2.3. 
Thus the amount of energy required to motivate a valence electron into the 
conduction band where it becomes mobile is quite low.
Very high energy
required for electron to
enter conduction band
Large band gap
Valence band
Conduction band
Insulator band gap
FIGURE 2.2
Energy band structure in insulator.
Electrons move from
valence to conduction
band freely
Valence band
Conduction band
Band overlap in metals
Overlap of the two
bands
FIGURE 2.1
Energy band structure of metal.

50
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
At low temperatures, there is little thermal energy available to push valence 
electrons across this gap, and the semiconductor material acts as an insula­
tor. At higher temperatures, the ambient thermal energy becomes sufficient 
to force electrons across the gap, and the material will conduct electricity.
The free electron model of a metal is used to explain the photoelectric effect. 
This model assumes that electrons are free to move within the metal but are 
confined to the metal by potential barriers, as illustrated by Figure 2.4. The 
minimum energy needed to extract an electron from the metal equals 
qΦM = work function. This model is used for analyzing metals but does not 
work well for semiconductors because the effect of the periodic potential due 
to the atoms in the crystal has been ignored. In semiconductors, the energy 
levels are grouped into bands. The behavior of electrons at the top and bot­
tom of such a band is similar to that of a free electron [5]. However, the elec­
trons are affected by the presence of the periodic potential. The combined 
effect of the periodic potential is included by adjusting the mass of the elec­
tron to a different value. This mass will be referred to as the effective mass.
Small band gap
small energy required
for electron to enter
conduction band
Valence band
Conduction band
Semiconductor band gap
FIGURE 2.3
Energy band structure in semiconductor.
Minimum energy
needed to extract an
electron from metal
L
Work
function
Electrons move
freely within metal
x
E
FIGURE 2.4
The free electron model of a metal.

51
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
2.2.1  Band Formation in Silicon
A schematic representation of an isolated Silicon (Si) atom is shown in 
Figure 2.5(a). In Si crystal each isolated Si atom has an electronic structure 
1s22s22p63s23p2. Ten out of fourteen Silicon atom electrons occupy energy 
levels close to the nucleus. The four remaining valence electrons are weakly 
Band Formation in Silicon
(a)
n = 1 shell has 2
electrons
n = 2 shell has 8
electrons
Si
14 e–
Equilibrium Spacing
(b)
4N states
4N states
Energy of Electron
Band gap
8N states 2N states
3s state
3p state
6N states
FIGURE 2.5
Energy band formation in silicon.

52
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
bound, and these electrons are involved in chemical reactions [6]. They deter­
mine the chemical and electrical properties of Silicon (i.e., 14 electrons can 
be distributed in 18 states—two 1s, two 2s, six 2p, two 3s, and six 3p states). If 
we consider N atoms, there will be 2N, 2N, 6N, 2N, and 6N states of type 1s, 
2s, 2p, 3s, and 3p, respectively. Figure 2.5(b) shows the band splitting of the 
silicon. Because the first two shells are completely filled and tightly bound to 
the nucleus, we have to consider n = 3 level for valence electron. The 3s states 
corresponding to n = 3 and l = 0 contain two quantum states per atom. This 
state will contain two electrons at T = 0 K. The 3p states corresponding to n = 
3 and l = 1 contain six quantum states per atom. This state will contain two 
remaining electrons of the individual Si atom (i.e., the band of ‘3s-3p’ levels 
contain 8N available states). When the inter-atomic spacing decreases, these 
energy levels split into bands, beginning with the outer (n = 3) shell. The 3s and 
3p bands merge into a single band composed of a mixture of energy levels. 
At the equilibrium inter-atomic distance, the bands again split, having four 
quantum states in the lower band and four quantum states in the upper band. 
At T = 0 K electrons will reside at the lowest energy state, thus the lower band 
(valence band will be full) and the energy states in the upper band (conduc­
tion band) will be empty. The band-gap energy Eg is the width of the energy 
between the top of the valance band and the bottom of the conduction band.
In other words, for inter-atomic spacing, this band splits into two bands 
separated by an energy gap Eg. The upper band (the conduction band) con­
tains 4N states, as does the lower band (the valence band). The energy gap 
contains no allowed energy levels for electrons to occupy, thus it is called 
forbidden band, Eg. The lower bands (1s, 2s, 2p) are fully occupied. But 4N elec­
trons originally in n = 3 shells (2N in 3s and 2N in 3p states) must occupy 
states in the valence band or the conduction band in the crystal. At 0 K the 
electrons will occupy the lowest energy states available to them. In the case 
of Si crystal, there are exactly 4N states in the valence band available to the 
4N electrons. Thus at 0 K every state in the valence band is totally filled, 
while the conduction band is empty.
2.2.2  Band Structure in Compound Semiconductor
A particularly interesting and useful feature of the III–IV compounds is the 
ability to vary the mixture of elements. For example, in the ternary com­
pound AlGaAs, it is possible to vary the composition of the ternary alloy 
by choosing the fraction of Al or Ga atoms. It is common to represent the 
composition by assigning subscripts to the various elements. For example 
AlxGa1–xAs refers to a ternary alloy in which a fraction of X of Al atoms and 
(1 – X) of Ga atoms are present. X can vary from 0 to 1, thus varying the 
optical and electronic properties. The composition Al0.3Ga0.7As has 30% of 
aluminum and 70% Ga atoms [7]. GaAs is a direct band-gap semiconductor 

53
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
material with a band gap of 1.43 eV. The direct (k = 0) conduction band mini­
mum is denoted as λ. The lowest-lying indirect minimum is denoted as 
L and the other as X. In GaAs, as shown in Figure 2.6 (top), there are two 
higher-lying indirect minima, but these are sufficiently far above λ and few 
electrons reside there.
In AlAs shown in Figure 2.6 (bottom), the direct transition minimum is 
much higher than the indirect minimum and so this material is an exam­
ple of indirect band-gap semiconductor with a band gap of 2.16 eV at room 
temperature. In the ternary compounds, all of these conduction band min­
ima move up relative to the valence band, as the composition X varies from 
0(GaAs) to 1(AlAs). However, the indirect minimum moves up less than the 
others when the compositions are above 38 percent Al. Also here this indirect 
minimum is actually the lowest-lying conduction band. AlGaAs is a direct 
band-gap semiconductor when X = 0 to X = 0.38 and is an indirect semicon­
ductor for higher Al mole fractions. GaAs1–xPx is generally similar to AlGaAs, 
which is also a direct band-gap semiconductor up to X = 0.45. This material is 
Direct Band Gap Material
X
L
E
k
1.43 eV
GaAs
Indirect Band Gap Material
X
L
E
k
2.36 eV
AlAs
FIGURE 2.6
Energy band diagram in GaAs and AlAs.

54
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
often used in light-emitting diode (LED) fabrication. Light emission is most 
efficient for direct materials, in which the electron can drop to the valence 
bands without changing k and therefore the momentum. By changing X, we 
can change the color of the light by changing the band gap [8].
2.3  Concept of Effective Mass
The effective mass of a semiconductor is obtained by fitting the actual E-k dia­
gram around the conduction band minimum or the valence band maximum 
by a paraboloid shown in Figure 2.7. While this concept is simple enough, 
the issue turns out to be substantially more complex due to the occasional 
anisotropy of the minima and the maxima. A single electron is assumed to 
travel through a perfectly periodic lattice. The parameter m* called the effec­
tive mass takes into account all the internal forces in the lattice. Electrons 
are considered as classical particles whose motions are governed by classical 
mechanics when all the internal forces are taken care of through the concept 
of the effective mass.
Now classical laws like F
m a
*
=
 are applied, where a is now directly related 
to external force. We know the electron momentum is p = mv = ℏk, where the 
symbols have their usual significances. Thus,
	
mv
p
m
m k
E
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
ℏ
=
=
=
	
(2.1)
E
k
FIGURE 2.7
Example of an E-K diagram.

55
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
The electron energy is parabolic with wave vector k.
	
ℏ
ℏ
ℏ
=
=
=
=
dE
dk
k
m
p
m
dE
dk
p
m
v
1
2
	
(2.2)
where v is the velocity of particle. dE
dk  is related to the velocity of the particle.
The electron mass is inversely related to d E
dk
2
2 . So
	
d E
dk
m
d E
dk
m
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
ℏ
ℏ
=
=
	
(2.3)
For a free electron the mass is a constant, so d E
dk
2
2  is a constant. Also
	
mE
k
2
ℏ
=
For a free electron total energy E is equal to the kinetic energy. So,
	
ℏ
ℏ
ℏ
ℏ
=




=
=
=
=
mE
m
mv
p
k
E
p
m
k
m
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
	
(2.4)
The E-k relationship is parabolic. The effective mass is a parameter that 
relates the quantum mechanical results to the classical force equations.
2.4  Basic Semiconductor Equations
The analyses of most semiconductor devices include the calculation of the 
electrostatic potential within the device as a function of the charge distri­
bution [9]. Electromagnetic and electrostatic theories are used to obtain the 
potential. Short descriptions of the necessary tools, namely Gauss’s law, 
Poisson’s equation, and the Boltzmann transport equation, are given below.

56
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
2.4.1  Gauss’s Law
Gauss’s law gives a relationship between the charge density, ρ(x), and the 
electric field, E(x). Considering no time-dependent magnetic fields, the one-
dimensional equation is given by
	
dE x
dx
x
( )
( )
= ρ
ε
	
(2.5)
Integrating the above equation, the electric field for 1D charge distribution 
is given as
	
∫
−
=
ρ
ε
E x
E x
x dx
(
)
(
)
( )
x
x
2
1
1
2
	
(2.6)
In three dimensions, application of Gauss’s law gives the divergence of the 
electric field:
	
E x y z
x y z
( , , )
( , , )
= ρ
ε
	
(2.7)
2.4.2  Poisson’s Equation
The electric field is defined as the negative gradient of the electrostatic potential, 
Ψ(x), or in one dimension, as the negative derivative of the electrostatic potential:
	
d
x
dx
E x
( )
( )
Ψ
= −
	
(2.8)
The electric field starts from a higher-potential region and points toward a 
lower-potential region.
Integration of the electric field gives the expression of potential as
	
∫
Ψ
−Ψ
= −
x
x
E x dx
(
)
(
)
( )
x
x
2
1
1
2
	
(2.9)
Putting the expression of the electric field from Equation (2.8) into Equation 
(2.5), the relation between the charge density and the potential is obtained as
	
d
x
dx
x
( )
( )
2
2
Ψ
= −ρ
ε
	
(2.10)
This equation is referred to as Poisson’s equation.

57
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
In three dimensions, the potential gradient is given by
	
∇Ψ(x,y,z) = −E(x,y,z)	
(2.11)
Combining Equations (2.11) and (2.7), the general form of Poisson’s equation 
is given by
	
x y z
x y z
( , , )
( , , )
2Ψ
= −ρ
ε
	
(2.12)
2.4.3  Boltzmann Transport Equation
The Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) is a semi-classical approach to car­
rier transport. It describes the evolution of the trajectory of a particle by using 
a combination of Newtonian mechanics and quantum probabilistic scatter­
ing rates. The former account for the classical motion of the particle, and 
the latter for dissipative processes from one energy state to another. Unlike 
quantum transport, the energy eigen-states are not determined during the 
solution but are pre-computed by an independent method. The BTE can be 
derived from the Liouville-von Neumann transport equation under simpli­
fying assumptions and ignoring all phase coherence [10,11]. A good intro­
duction to the BTE, its physical parameters, and its application for device 
simulation can be found in [10].
For deriving the BTE a phase space is considered about the points (x, y, z, px, py, 
pz)  as in [12], where (px, py, pz) are the angular components of p-type orbitals. The 
particles entering the considered phase space in time dt are equal to the number of 
particles in x
v dt y
v dt z
v dt p
F dt p
F dt p
F dt
(
,
,
,
,
,
)
x
y
z
x
x
y
y
z
z
−
−
−
−
−
−
 at some earlier 
dt time, where F is the external force on a particle and (Fx, Fy, Fz) are the respective 
directional components of the force. Let the number of particles per unit volume in 
the phase space be represented by f(x, y, z, px, py, pz). The change in this distribution 
function in time dt as a result of the external force and the movement of particles is 
given from [12] as df
f x
v dt y
v dt z
v dt p
F dt p
F dt p
F dt
(
,
,
,
,
,
)
x
y
z
x
x
y
y
z
z
=
−
−
−
−
−
−
f x y z p
p
p
( , , ,
,
,
).
x
y
z
−
The time derivative of this function from Taylor series is given by 
F
f
v
f
(
)
df
dt
p
r
= −
+
. However, if the scattering or collision of particles in the 
phase space due to particles from outside is considered, the time derivative 
takes the form
	
df
dt
F
f
v
f
s r p t
f
t
(
)
( , , )
p
r
collision
= −
+
+
+ ∂
∂
	
(2.13)
where 
f
t collision
∂
∂
 is the rate of change of distribution function due to collisions 
from other particles outside the phase space; s(r,p,t) is the term accounting 
for the generation-recombination processes; s(r,p,t) stands for the probability 

58
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
of having generation-recombination at a position r at time t having particle 
momentum p. If particle momentum is replaced by crystal momentum the 
time derivative of f is given by
	
f r k t
t
F
f r k t
E k
f r k t
s r k t
f
t
( , , )
1
( , , )
1
( )
( , , )
( , , )
k
k
r
collision
ℏ
ℏ
∂
∂
+
+
=
+ ∂
∂
	
(2.14)
This equation is the Boltzmann transport equation or continuity equation in 
6D-phase space.
Because the BTE does not include phase information, it is simpler to 
solve than quantum transport. There are several methods of solution of 
BTE. Among the earlier approaches was the Legendre polynomial expan­
sion [13]. Such methods did not achieve much success because the drastic 
approximations used to simplify the problem and to obtain analytical solu­
tions were valid only in the simplest cases and not for any practical devices. 
Other earlier methods were based on an iterative integration technique that 
worked well only for low-field transport [14]. In the 1960s, a method based 
on the Monte Carlo technique was suggested as a means to solve the BTE. 
It has achieved the most success among all other methods so far, due to its 
ease of programming, ease of including a variety of physical effects in the 
same framework, simple numerical algorithms, and low memory require­
ments (review in [15]). The Monte Carlo technique can simulate transport 
in complicated device geometries with complicated band structures [16,17]. 
However, the Monte Carlo technique suffers from several fundamental dis­
advantages (i.e., statistical noise in low-bias near-equilibrium conditions). 
These conditions involve events that occur at exponentially decreasing 
probabilities and cannot be detected by a stochastic method that has a well-
known convergence only for nearly uniform distributions. Some methods 
have been suggested to “enhance” the exponential tails of distribution 
functions so that they can be detected and that has provided some respite 
[18]. However, a stochastic method inherently has lesser accuracy than a 
direct numerical method with controlled discretization error. Among other 
significant methods to solve the BTE, the Cellular Automata methods, the 
Scattering matrix method, and the Spherical Harmonic method must be 
mentioned.
2.5  Carrier Transport
Current in a semiconductor is defined as the rate of flow of charge carriers. 
The flow of charge carriers called carrier drift is due to an externally applied 
electric field. The carriers move from a higher carrier density region to a 

59
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
lower density region. This movement of carriers called diffusion is due to the 
thermal energy. The total current in a semiconductor is equal to the sum of 
the drift and the diffusion currents.
When an electric field is applied to a semiconductor, the electrostatic 
force causes the carriers to first accelerate due to the electrostatic field. Then 
due to collisions with impurities a constant average velocity, v, is reached. 
Mobility is defined as the average drift velocity per applied electric field. 
Saturation velocity is reached at high electric fields. Carriers along the 
semiconductor surface are subjected to surface scattering as a result of 
which the mobility degrades. Due to variation in doping density, a density 
gradient is created in the semiconductor due to which diffusion of carriers 
takes place.
Both drift and diffusion mechanisms are related because the same parti­
cles and scattering mechanisms are involved. This leads to the Einstein rela­
tion which is a relationship between the mobility and the diffusion constant.
2.5.1  Carrier Drift
The drifting of a carrier in a semiconductor on application of an externally 
applied electric field, E, is shown in Figure 2.8. Due to the applied bias the 
carriers move with an average velocity, v [1].
The current flowing through the semiconductor can be expressed as the 
total charge divided by the time taken to travel from one electrode to the 
other—that is,
	
I
Q t
Q
L v
/
/
r
=
=
	
(2.15)
A
E
v
V
L
I
FIGURE 2.8
Drift of a carrier due to an applied electric field.

60
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
where tr is the transit time of carrier, moving with velocity, v, covering the 
distance L. The current density, J, can be expressed in terms of the charge 
density ρ as
	
J
I A
Q
AL v
v
/
=
=
= ρ
	
(2.16)
Considering negatively charged electrons, the current density is given by
	
J = −qnv	
(2.17)
Considering positively charged holes, it is given by
	
J = qpv	
(2.18)
where n and p are the semiconductor electron and hole density.
Due to scattering, the carriers move around the semiconductor randomly 
with a constantly changing path instead of a straight-line path along the 
electric field. This occurs when no electric field is applied externally and is 
due to the thermal carriers. Electrons in a non-degenerate electron gas have 
a thermal energy of kT/2 per particle per degree of freedom [1,19]. The typical 
thermal velocity is around 107 cm/s at room temperature, which is greater 
than the drift velocity in semiconductors. The movement of carriers in the 
semiconductor in the presence and absence of an electric field is shown in 
Figure 2.9.
When no external field is applied, the carriers move randomly with rapidly 
changing directions. On application of an external electric field, the holes 
move in the direction of the applied field, while the electrons move in the 
opposite direction.
The force on a carrier can be obtained from Newton’s law.
	
F
ma
m d v
dt
=
=
〈〉
	
(2.19)
x
E = 0
E ≠ 0
FIGURE 2.9
Random motion of carriers in a semiconductor with and without an applied electric field.

61
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
The force equals the difference between the electrostatic force and the scat­
tering force. The scattering force equals the ratio of the momentum of the 
carriers to the average time between collisions, τ—that is,
	
F
qE
m v
=
−
〈〉
τ 	
(2.20)
where q is the charge of a carrier particle.
Equating Equations (2.19) and (2.20):
	
qE
m d v
dt
m v
=
〈〉+
〈〉
τ 	
(2.21)
The average particle velocity can be obtained from Equation (2.21). In steady 
state, the carrier particles after acceleration reach a constant velocity. In 
such a condition, the velocity of the particle is proportional to the externally 
applied electric field. The mobility is defined as the average velocity per 
applied field.
	
v
E
q
m
µ = 〈〉=
τ
	
(2.22)
Mobility of a semiconductor particle is small when the mass is large and the 
time between collisions is small. In terms of mobility, the drift current den­
sity for electrons may be expressed as
	
J
qn
E
n
n
=
µ
	
(2.23)
Similarly, the drift current density for holes may be expressed as
	
J
qp
E
p
p
=
µ
	
(2.24)
considering the mass, m, of the semiconductor particle. But the effective 
mass, m*, rather than the free particle mass, m, must be considered for taking 
into account the effect of the periodic potential of the atoms:
	
q
m*
µ =
τ
	
(2.25)
2.5.2  Diffusion Current
Semiconductor devices fall into two broad categories: majority carrier 
devices and minority carrier devices. In the majority carrier devices, cur­
rent flow is dominated by electric ﬁeld driven current. In minority carrier 
devices, the current flow is dominated by the diffusion effects. Whenever 

62
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
there is a gradient in the concentration of mobile particles, the particles dif­
fuse from the regions of high concentration to the regions of low concentra­
tion. In addition to drift, this is the alternate mechanism that can lead to 
current flow. Suppose a drop of ink falls into a glass of water. Introducing a 
high local concentration of ink molecules, the drop begins to “diffuse”—that 
is, the ink molecules tend to flow from a region of high concentration to 
regions of low concentration. This mechanism is called diffusion. A similar 
phenomenon occurs if charge carriers are dropped into a semiconductor so 
as to create a non-uniform density. In the absence of an electric field, the car­
riers move toward regions of low concentration, thereby carrying an electric 
current so long as the non-uniformity is sustained. Diffusion is therefore 
distinctly different from drift.
The derivation is based on the idea that carriers at non-zero temperature 
(Kelvin) have an additional thermal energy equal to kT/2 per degree of free­
dom. Thermal energy drives the diffusion process. At T = 0 K there is no 
diffusion. Because thermal energy is random, the average value needs to be 
considered for deriving the diffusion current for a one-dimensional semi­
conductor [1].
Let the average values of the thermal velocity be vth, the collision time τ, 
and the mean free path l. The thermal velocity is the average velocity of the 
semiconductor carriers in the positive or the negative direction. The collision 
time is the time taken by the carriers to move with the same velocity before 
a collision occurs with another carrier. The mean free path is the average 
length a carrier moves between collisions. From this basic concept the ther­
mal velocity is given by
	
v
l/
th =
τ 	
(2.26)
In order to find an expression for diffusion current density, a variable car­
rier density n(x) is considered in Figure 2.10. The carrier densities of two 
x
0
+l
–l
n(–l)
n
n(+l)
FIGURE 2.10
Carrier density profile used to derive the diffusion current expression.

63
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
points x = –l and x = l are considered as in [1], which are one mean free path 
away from x = 0. The flux due to the semiconductor carriers at x = 0 due to 
carriers moving from x = –l is given by
	
v n
l
1
2
(
)
left right
th
η
=
−
−
	
(2.27)
The “1/2” term is because only half of the carriers move to the left while the 
other half moves to the right. The flux due to the semiconductor carriers at 
x = 0 due to carriers moving from x = +l is given by
	
v n
l
1
2
(
)
right left
th
η
=
+
−
	
(2.28)
The total flux of carriers at x = 0 may be obtained by subtracting the flux due 
to carriers moving from right to left from the flux of carriers moving from 
left to right:
	
v
n
l
n
l
1
2
{ (
)
(
)}
left right
right left
th
η = η
−η
=
−−
+
−
−
	
(2.29)
Considering small mean free path, the carrier density derivative may be 
obtained as
	
lv n
l
n
l
l
v l dn
dx
(
)
(
)
2
th
th
η = −
+ −
−
= −
	
(2.30)
The diffusion current density for electrons may be obtained by multiplying 
the flux with the charge of an electron:
	
J
q
qv l dn
dx
n
th
= −η =
	
(2.31)
Let the diffusion constant, Dn , be equal to the product of thermal velocity, vth, 
and the mean free path, l:
	
J
qD dn
dx
n
n
=
	
(2.32)
For holes the diffusion current density is given as
	
J
qD dp
dx
p
p
= −
	
(2.33)

64
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
2.5.3  Total Drift-Diffusion Current
Based on the concepts derived in the previous sections, we can now establish 
the drift-diffusion equations [3,20]. The total hole current density in a semi­
conductor is composed of the sum of the drift and the diffusion components 
of current. Similarly, the total electron current density in a semiconductor is 
composed of the sum of the drift and the diffusion components of current. 
For electrons the total current density is given as
	
J
qD dn
dx
qn
E
n
n
n
=
+
µ
	
(2.34)
Similarly for holes,
	
J
qD dp
dx
qp
E
p
p
p
= −
+
µ
	
(2.35)
The total current is the sum of the electron and hole current densities multi­
plied by the area, A, perpendicular to the current direction:
	
I
A J
J
(
)
tot
p
n
=
+
	
(2.36)
2.5.4  Einstein Relation
In a non-uniformly doped semiconductor the doping concentration decreases 
with increase in x. As a result, diffusion of majority carriers takes place from 
a high concentration to a low concentration region along the +x direction. 
The flow of electrons leaves behind positively charged donor ions. The sepa­
ration of positive and negative charges creates an electric field in the direc­
tion opposite to the diffusion process. At equilibrium the induced electric 
field prevents further diffusion.
When taking the electric field along the x direction, the energy bands are 
as shown in Figure 2.11. The potential energy increases in the direction of the 
electric field. The electrostatic potential, which varies in the opposite direc­
tion as it is defined in terms of positive charges, is given by
	
V x
E x
q
( )
( )
= −
	
(2.37)
From the definition of electric field
	
E x
dV x
dx
( )
( )
= −

65
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
Considering Ei as a convenient reference, the electron potential energy may 
be related to E(x) as
	
E x
dV x
dx
d
dx
E
q
q
dE
dx
( )
( )
(
)
1
i
i
= −
= −
−





=
	
(2.38)
Since the band diagram indicates electron energies, we know that the 
slope of this band must be such that electrons drift downhill in the field. 
Therefore E points uphill in the band diagram. At equilibrium no current 
flows. Putting
	
J
qp
qD dp
dx
0
p
p
p
=
µ Ε −
=
	
(2.39)
we get
	
x
D
p x
dp x
dx
( )
1
( )
( )
p
p
Ε
= µ
	
(2.40)
Also,
	
p
n e
i
E
E
kT
0
(
)/
i
F
=
−
so
	
x
D
KT
dE
dx
dE
dx
( )
1
p
p
i
F
Ε
= µ
−




	
(2.41)
x
Ei
Valence band
Conduction band
Electric ﬁeld
FIGURE 2.11
Energy band diagram of a semiconductor in the presence of an electric field E(x).

66
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
The equilibrium Fermi level does not vary with x. So
	
dE
dx
0
F =
and
	
dE
dx
qE x
( )
i =
Thus the equation takes the form D
kT
q
=
µ
. The relationship between drift 
parameter (μ) and diffusion parameter (D) is given by the Einstein relationship.
2.6  Carrier Recombination and Generation
Recombination is a process by which the electrons occupy the empty states 
associated with holes. The carriers as a result disappear. The energy released 
is the difference between the initial state energy and the final state energy 
of the electrons. The energy is emitted in the form of a photon for radia­
tive recombination. For non-radiative recombination, it is transmitted to one 
or more phonons, and for Auger recombination it is transferred as kinetic 
energy to another electron [1,2,21]. The different processes are shown in 
Figure 2.12.
Trap Aided
Recombination
Band-to-band
Recombination
Auger
Recombination
Ev
Ec
Et
E
FIGURE 2.12
Carrier recombination mechanisms in semiconductors.

67
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
In band-to-band recombination an electron moves from the conduction 
band into the valence band state associated with the hole. In case of direct 
band-gap semiconductors, it is a case of radiative transition. In trap-assisted 
recombination, the electrons fall into the band gaps caused by some defects 
or some foreign atoms. The electrons occupying those band gaps move into 
an empty valence band state, thus completing the recombination process. So 
this is a two-step transition of an electron from the conduction to the valence 
band called Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) recombination. Auger recombination 
is a process of recombination of an electron and a hole with the resultant 
energy given to another electron or hole. Auger recombination is different 
from band-to-band recombination due to this third electron or hole. All the 
recombination processes when reversed cause carrier generation instead of 
recombination. A single expression can be used to describe both generation 
and recombination processes. Generation of carriers by light absorption is a 
process that does not have recombination associated with it. This process is 
referred to as ionization. Impact ionization also belongs to this category. The 
different generation mechanisms are shown in Figure 2.13.
If the photon energy is large, an electron from the valence band may move 
into the conduction band generating an electron-hole pair as a result. This 
photon energy must be larger than the band-gap energy for electron-hole 
pair generation. Kinetic energy (Eph – Eg) is added to the electron and the hole 
due to absorption of the photon.
Carrier generation due to high-energy charged particles is similar except 
that the available energy may be far greater than the band-gap energy caus­
ing multiple electron-hole pairs generation. The high-energy particle gradu­
ally loses its energy and eventually stops [5,22].
Impact ionization is the counterpart of Auger recombination. It is caused 
by an electron/hole with energy, much greater/smaller than the conduction/
valence band edge. The process is shown in Figure 2.14.
The excess energy is transmitted to generate an electron-hole pair in band 
transition [23]. Avalanche multiplication is caused in semiconductor diodes 
Charged
Particle
Ionization
Eg
Eph > Eg
Generation by Absorption
of Light
Valence
band
Conduction
band
FIGURE 2.13
Carrier generation due to light absorption and ionization due to high-energy particles.

68
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
under high reverse bias as a result of this generation process. The accelerated 
carriers gain kinetic energy that is given off to an electron in the valence 
band, causing an electron-hole pair. The two electrons created in the process 
can create two more electrons causing an avalanche multiplication effect. 
Both electrons as well as holes take part in avalanche multiplication.
2.7  Continuity Equation and Solution
The continuity equation describes a basic concept, namely that a change in 
carrier density over time is due to the difference between the incoming and 
outgoing flux of carriers plus the generation and minus the recombination. 
If a volume of space is considered in which charge transport and recombina­
tion are taking place, we have the simple equality as in Figure 2.15(a). As a 
result of consideration of particle current, Net rate of particle ﬂow = Particle 
ﬂow rate due to current − Particle loss rate due to recombination + Particle 
gain due to generation.
Thus a continuity equation is based on the conservation of mobile charges [24]:
	
n
t
q
J
x
R
G
p
t
q
J
x
R
G
1
1
n
n
n
p
p
p
∂
∂=
∂
∂
−
+
∂
∂= −
∂
∂
−
+
	
(2.42)
where Gn and Gp are the electron and hole generation rates, Rn and Rp are the 
electron and the hole recombination rates, and 
J
x
n
∂
∂ and 
J
x
p
∂
∂ are the net flux of 
mobile charges in and out of x.
Valence band
Conduction band
Electric ﬁeld E
FIGURE 2.14
Impact ionization and avalanche multiplication of electrons and holes in the presence of a large 
electric field.

69
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
A solution to these equations can be obtained by substituting the expres­
sion for the electron and hole current. This then yields two partial differential 
equations as a function of the electron density, the hole density, and the elec­
tric field. The electric field is obtained from Gauss’s law as in Figure 2.15(b).
Let us now collect the various terms in this continuity equation. If δn is the 
excess carrier density in the region, the recombination rate R in the volume 
A⋅Δx may be written approximately as
	
= δ
τ ⋅
⋅
R
n A
x
n
	
(2.43)
where τn is the electron recombination time per excess particle due to both the 
radiative and the non-radiative components. The particle ﬂow rate into the 
same volume due to the current density J
x
( )
n
 is given by the difference of par­
ticle current coming into the region and the particle current leaving the region:
	
−
−
+
−




≅
∂
∂
⋅
J
x
e
J
x
x
e
A
e
J
x
x
x A
( )
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
( )
n
n
n
Small volume in which generation and
recombination occurs
Incoming
current
Outgoing
current
Current is conserved
(a)
Area of the
face, A
∆x
x
Jn(x)
Jn(x + ∆x)
(b)
FIGURE 2.15
(a) A conceptual description of the continuity equation. (b) Geometry used to develop the cur­
rent continuity equation.

70
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
If G is the generation rate per unit volume, the generation rate in the volume 
A · Δx is GAΔx. δn/τn is the net recombination rate of electrons and U = 
G − R—that is, Rate of electron buildup (U) = Increase in electron concentra­
tion in ΔxA per unit time (G) – recombination rate (R). The rates of electron 
buildup in volume A · Δx is then
	
⋅
∂
∂
≡∂δ
∂
=
∂
∂
−δ
τ




A
x
n x t
t
n
t
e
J
x
x
n
( , )
1
( )
n
n
As Δx approaches zero, we can write equations in the derivative form for 
electrons and holes as
	
n
t
e
J
x
x
n
p
t
e
J
x
x
p
1
( )
1
( )
n
n
p
p
∂δ
∂
=
∂
∂
−δ
τ
∂δ
∂
= −
∂
∂
−δ
τ
	
(2.44)
Using these expressions, the diffusion currents are
	
J diff
eD
n
x
J diff
eD
p
x
(
)
(
)
n
n
p
p
=
∂δ
∂
= −
∂δ
∂
	
(2.45)
The time-dependent continuity equation for electrons and holes, valid separately:
	
n
t
D
n
x
n
p
t
D
p
x
p
n
n
p
p
2
2
2
2
∂δ
∂
=
∂δ
∂
−δ
τ
∂δ
∂
=
∂δ
∂
−δ
τ
	
(2.46)
These equations are used to study the steady-state charge proﬁle in p-n 
diodes and bipolar transistors. In steady state,
	
n
x
n
D
n
L
p
x
p
D
p
L
n
n
n
p
p
p
2
2
2
2
2
2
∂δ
∂
=
δ
τ = δ
∂δ
∂
=
δ
τ
= δ
	
(2.47)

71
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
Here is the diffusion length for electrons, and Lp is the diffusion length for 
holes. Considering the case where an excess electron density δn(0) is main­
tained at x = 0, at point L in the semiconductor, the excess carrier density is 
maintained at δ(L). The general solution of the above second-order differen­
tial equation is
	
n x
A e
A e
( )
xL
xL
1
2
n
n
δ
=
+
−
	
(2.48)
When L
Ln
>>
 and 
L
( )
0
n
δ
=
, the semiconductor is much longer than Ln, for 
example in the case of the long p-n diode. A1 and A2 can be found from the 
boundary conditions. For a large value of x, 
0
n
δ =
 at x = ∞ and so A1 = 0. 
Similarly 
0
(0)
n
n
δ =
= δ
 at x = 0 giving A2 = 
(0)
n
δ
. The solution of the equa­
tion is given by
	
n x
n
e
( )
(0)
p
p
xLn
δ
= δ
−
	
(2.49)
It is seen from the above equation that the carrier density decays exponen­
tially in the semiconductor.
However, when L
Ln
<<
, the carrier density is linear from one boundary 
value to the other because over a short distance exponential can be approxi­
mated as linear. When excess carriers are injected into a thick semiconduc­
tor sample, both diffusion and recombination take place. Ln  represents the 
distance over which the injected carrier density falls to 1/e of its original 
value. It also represents the average distance an electron diffuses before 
recombination.
The probability that an electron survives up to a distance x without recom­
bination is given by
	
n x
n
e
( )
(0)
p
p
xLn
δ
δ
=
−
The steady-state distribution of excess holes causes diffusion and a hole cur­
rent in the direction of decreasing concentration.
	
J
x
qD
x
q D
L
p x
( )
( )
p
p
p
P
p
= −
δ
δ
=
δ
	
(2.50)
It will be useful for the current calculation of the p-n junction where the 
injection of minority carriers across a junction will lead to exponential 
distribution.

72
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
2.8  Mobility and Scattering
The relationship between the velocity of electrons and the applied elec­
tric ﬁeld is complex. When the electric field is low, the relationship is in a 
simple form. The distance versus time trajectory of an electron is shown in 
Figure 2.16. Considering d as the distance traveled in time t, the electron 
motion is described by
	
d = vt
	
v = μE
The velocity of electron v is proportional to the electric ﬁeld applied, and μ 
is the mobility. For a large electric ﬁeld the relation between the velocity and 
the applied ﬁeld is not so simple [2–4] and will be discussed later.
When no electric field is applied externally, the occupation of a state with 
momentum +ħk is the same as that with momentum −ħk. So no current flows 
in this case as the momentum gets canceled out. Figure 2.17(a) shows the 
distribution function in momentum space. When an electric ﬁeld is applied, 
the electron distribution shifts, as shown schematically in Figure  2.17(a), 
and there is a net momentum of the electrons. Current flows as a result.
For perfect and rigid crystal, no scattering of the electron takes place. On 
application of an external electric ﬁeld E, the electron behaves as a “free” 
electron in the absence of scattering. However, there are always imperfec­
tions due to which electrons scatter. The process is shown in Figure 2.17(b). 
The average behavior of the electrons represents the transport properties of 
the electrons.
Time Taken
d = vt
Also, v = µE
Movement of
electron in a
crystal
Electric ﬁeld E
Distance Travelled by
Electron
FIGURE 2.16
A typical electron trajectory in a sample, and the distance versus time plot.

73
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
In the absence of scattering, the electron transport is very simple although 
scattering dominates transport in semiconductor devices. Due to scattering, 
electrons in a semiconductor do not achieve constant acceleration. However, 
they can be considered as classical particles moving at a constant average 
drift velocity.
The electron suffers a scattering as it moves. In between scattering, the 
electron moves according to the “free” electron equation of motion. The 
scattering of carriers is mainly due to lattice vibrations caused by thermal 
energy. Carriers scatter from various imperfections in crystal, alloy disorder, 
and interface imperfections.
+k
+k
–k
–k
Electric ﬁeld E
No electric
ﬁeld
Σf (k) ≠ 0
Σf (k) = 0
(a)
Collisions or scattering in
electron path
Free electron
transport
Electric ﬁeld E
(b)
FIGURE 2.17
(a) Schematic of the electron momentum distribution function in the presence and absence 
of an electric ﬁeld. (b) Schematic view of an electron moving under an electric ﬁeld in a 
semiconductor.

74
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
On application of an electric field E, drift current flows in a semiconduc­
tor. The force experienced by an electron is given by F
qE
me dv
dt
= −
=
. The 
velocity of electrons will saturate at a constant value in steady state. In fact, 
F
m
m
e dv
dt
e v
=
+
τ , where the latter term represents the impeded force due to 
scattering which describes collision caused by lattice vibrations and crystal 
imperfections. At steady state (dv/dt = 0), the drift velocity is
	
V
F
m
qE
m
E
d
e
e
=
τ = −
τ = −µ
	
(2.51)
where
	
q
me
µ =
τ
	
(2.52)
is the mobility of the electron (or hole), and τ is the mean free time between 
collisions.
2.9  Different Distribution Laws
There are three distribution laws that govern the particle distribution among 
available energy states.
	
1.	Maxwell-Boltzmann probability function: Particles are distinguishable 
with no limit to the number of particles in each energy state.
	
2.	Bose-Einstein function: Particles are indistinguishable and no limit to 
the number of particles in each energy state.
	
3.	Fermi-Dirac probability function: Particles are indistinguishable and 
only one particle is permitted in each quantum state.
The Fermi factor that expresses the probability that a state at a given energy 
level is occupied by an electron has a value between 0 and 1. A probability 
of 0 means that the state is unoccupied and a probability of 1 means that the 
state is occupied. A probability of ½ means that the chance of the state being 
occupied is 50%.
2.9.1  Fermi-Dirac Distribution
The Fermi-Dirac distribution function, also called the Fermi function, gives 
the probability of occupancy of energy levels by Fermions. Fermions are half-
integer spin particles obeying the Pauli exclusion principle. As the Fermions 
are added to an energy band, they will fill the available states in an energy 

75
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
band. The states with the lowest energy are filled first, followed by the next 
higher ones. At absolute zero temperature (T = 0 K), the energy levels are all 
filled up to a maximum energy called the Fermi level. No states above the 
Fermi level are filled. At higher temperature, the transition between com­
pletely filled and completely empty states is gradual. The Fermi function 
provides the probability that energy level at energy, E, in thermal equilib­
rium with a large system, is occupied by an electron. The system is character­
ized by its temperature, T, and its Fermi energy, EF.
The Fermi-Dirac distribution function f(E) gives the probability that an 
electron has an energy E at a temperature T [25]. This is given by
	
f E
E
E
KT
( )
1
1
exp[(
)/
]
F
=
+
−
	
(2.53)
where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature in Kelvin, and EF is 
the Fermi level.
It is seen that at T = 0 K if E = EF, f(E) = 1/2. Similarly at T = 0 K if E > EF 
f(E) = 1/1 + exp(∞) = 1/1 + ∞ = 0. Also at T = 0 K if E < EF f(E) = 1/1 + exp(–∞) = 
1/1 + 0 = 1. The condition E < EF, f(E) = 1 shows that below the Fermi level all 
the states are occupied and the probability of finding an electron on a level 
with energy greater than Fermi energy is zero. It is therefore the energy of 
the highest filled level. At other temperatures E = EF and f(E) = 1/2. So the 
Fermi level is that energy at which the probability of a state being occupied 
is ½. At T = 0oK, no covalent bonds are broken and all the lower energy 
states up to E = EF are completely occupied. At any other temperature cova­
lent bonds are continuously broken, which generates electron-hole pairs. 
The recombination of electrons and holes also takes place at the same time. 
Due to this, the probability of the states being occupied below the Fermi 
level is slightly less than one, and there is a small probability that a few 
states are occupied just above the Fermi level. As shown in Figure 2.18, 
as the energy E = EF, the probability of occupancy of a state by an elec­
tron decreases exponentially as E increases in accordance with the above 
equation. f(E) gives the probability that a state at a given energy level is 
occupied by an electron. Then probability that a state is not occupied by 
an electron, or equivalently, the probability that there exists a hole in the 
valence band will be given by
	
f E
f E
E
E
KT
E
E KT
( )
1
( )
1
1
1
exp[(
)/
]
1
1
exp[(
)/
]
p
F
F
=
−
=
−
+
−
=
+
−
	
(2.54)
In general the position of EF is dependent on temperature. The occupation 
probability is at 0.5 at the Fermi energy. We may write f(E) = N(E)/g(E), 
where N(E) is the number of carriers per unit volume per unit energy, and 
g(E) is the number of quantum states per unit volume per unit energy. 

76
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Therefore, f(E) gives us the probability that a quantum state of energy E 
may be occupied.
The probability of energy above EF being occupied increases as tempera­
ture increases, and the probability of a state below EF being empty increases 
as temperature increases. We may note that the probability of a state being 
occupied above EF is the same as the probability of a state below EF being 
empty. The curve is symmetrical.
The Bose-Einstein distribution function is applicable to particles with inte­
ger spin called Bosons and includes photons, phonons, and a large number of 
atoms. Bosons do not obey the Pauli Exclusion Principle so that any number 
can occupy a single energy level. The Bose-Einstein distribution function is 
given by
	
f
E
E
E
KT
( )
1
exp[(
)/
]
1
be
F
=
−
−
	
(2.55)
This distribution function is only defined for E > EF.
The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution function applies to non-interacting 
distinguishable particles [9]. This function is also called the classical distri­
bution function because it provides the probability of occupancy for non-
interacting particles at low densities. The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution 
function is given by
	
f
E
E
E
KT
( )
1
exp[(
)/
]
mb
F
=
−
	
(2.56)
All three functions are almost equal for large energies. The Fermi-Dirac dis­
tribution reaches a maximum of 100% for energies, which are a few kT below 
Probability of Occupancy
1
T = 0° K
T1
EF
E
T2 > T1
T2
FIGURE 2.18
The Fermi function for electrons.

77
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
the Fermi energy, while the Bose-Einstein distribution diverges at the Fermi 
energy and has no validity for energies below the Fermi energy.
2.10  Semiconductor Device Modeling
2.10.1  Introduction
Rapid developments in semiconductor technology over the past 20 years 
have caused huge interest in device modeling. The need to understand the 
detailed operation of very large scale integrated (VLSI) devices and com­
pound semiconductor devices has meant that device modeling now plays a 
crucial role in modern technology.
As the size of the semiconductor decreases and the complexity of the phys­
ical structure increases, the nature of the device characteristics depart from 
those obtained from many of the classically held modeling concepts. The 
difficulty encountered in performing measurements on these devices means 
that greater emphasis must be put on theoretical results. Modeling also allows 
new device structures to be rigorously investigated prior to fabrication.
Semiconductor device models can be classified into two categories: 
physical device models and equivalent circuit models. Physical device 
models account for the physics of device operation, and equivalent cir­
cuit models are based on electrical circuit analogies representing electri­
cal behavior. The latter approach is generally limited in its applicability 
because of the frequency dependence and the non-linear behavior of most 
devices with respect to signal level. The advantage of this technique is that 
it is easy to implement. In contrast, physical device models can provide 
greater insight into the detailed operation of semiconductor devices but 
usually require lengthy analysis. The analysis requirements for physical 
models are typically satisfied using numerical techniques implemented 
on computers. With the advent of fast and powerful computing resources, 
this makes physical modeling techniques a very attractive proposition for 
the physicist.
Physical device models are solved using either bulk carrier transport 
equations, solutions to the Boltzmann transport equation, or quantum 
transport concepts. Historically, bulk transport solutions have satisfied 
most device models, while Boltzmann and quantum transport solutions 
have provided strong insight into the detailed device physics. However, the 
trend toward very small geometry devices, operating in the hot electron 
range, means that non-equilibrium transport conditions must be accounted 
for. The understanding of physical boundary conditions and device-circuit 
interaction is steadily improving, allowing more intricate models to be 
developed.

78
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
2.10.2  Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) Generation/Recombination Model
The generation/recombination process by phonon emission is shown in 
Figure 2.13. A lattice defect energy Et, as in Figure 2.12, is used in this trap-
assisted mechanism. Energy is transmitted/received by phonon during the 
recombination/generation process. This effect is known as Shockley-Read-
Hall (SRH) generation/recombination effect. The four sub-processes are 
described below as in [1,9]:
	
1.	Capture of electron: A conduction band electron is captured by a 
vacant trap in the semiconductor band gap. (Ec − Et) is the energy 
released to the crystal lattice in the form of phonon emission.
	
2.	Capture of hole: The electron in the trap now neutralizes a hole in the 
valence band. Because the direction of motion of the hole is opposite 
to that of the electron, the hole is captured by the trap in the semi­
conductor lattice band gap and energy of (Et − Ev) is generated in the 
form of a phonon.
	
3.	Emission of hole: A valence band electron moves to the trap in the lat­
tice band gap, thereby leaving a hole in the valence band. So it can be 
said that a hole moves from the trap to the valence band, as a result 
of which generating (Et − Ev) energy in the form of phonon.
	
4.	Emission of electron: Here an electron moves from the trap level to the 
conduction band as a result of which requiring (Ec − Et) amount of 
energy.
It is seen that both the generation and the recombination processes are 
two-step processes. Sub-processes 1 and 2 lead to recombination of 
electron-hole pairs, the excess energy equal to band-gap energy is trans­
ferred to the crystal lattice in the form of phonons. Sub-processes 3 and 4 
lead to generation of electron-hole pairs where energy needs to be supplied 
by the lattice.
For finding an expression of the total recombination rate Rtot, rates for the 
four sub-processes need to be determined. In this case traps are assumed 
to be of the acceptor type, which are neutral when empty and negatively 
charged when occupied by an electron. Similarly, the derivation for donor 
traps (neutral when occupied by electron and positive when empty) can be 
done.
Let the capture rate of an electron be ve capture
,
, proportional to the electron 
concentration in the conduction band n, the empty traps concentration nt
0, 
and a proportionality constant ke capture
,
. With the energy-dependent distribu­
tion function for electrons f E
( )
e
 and the density-of-states g E
( )
e
 we get
	
dv
k
E n g E f E dE
( )
( )
( )
e capture
e capture
t
e
e
,
,
0
=
	
(2.57)

79
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
The total conduction band electrons is given by
	
∫
=
∞
n
g E f E dE
( )
( )
e
e
Ec
	
(2.58)
Let the hole capture rate be vh capture
,
, hole concentration in the valence band p, 
the filled traps concentration nt
fill, with proportionality constant kh capture
,
. We 
get
	
=
dv
k
E n
f E g E dE
( )
( )
( )
h capture
h capture
t
fill
h
h
,
,
	
(2.59)
f E
( )
h
 is the distribution function for holes, and g E
( )
h
 is the hole density of state.
Total holes in the valence band is
	
p
g E f E dE
( )
( )
h
h
Ev∫
=
∞
	
(2.60)
The hole emission rate is vh emission
,
, and the proportionality constant is kh emission
,
:
	
=
−
dv
n k
E
f E g E dE
( ){1
( )}
( )
h emission
t
h emission
h
h
,
0
,
	
(2.61)
Electron emission rate ve emission
,
 is proportional to the concentration of filled 
traps and the proportionality constant ke emission
,
:
	
=
−
dv
n
k
E
f E g E dE
( ){1
( )}
( )
e emission
t
fill
e emission
e
e
,
,
	
(2.62)
The total trap concentration nt  is
	
n
n
n
t
t
fill
t
0
=
+
	
(2.63)
and the fraction of occupied traps foccupied  is given by [9,26]
	
f
n
n
f
n
n
1
occupied
t
fill
t
occupied
t
t
0
=
−
=
	
(2.64)
The net recombination rate for electrons becomes
	
=
−
−
dR
k
E n f E
k
E n
f E
g E dE
[
( )
( )
( )
{1
( )}]
( )
e tot
e capture
t
e
e emission
t
fill
e
e
.
,
0
,
	
(2.65)

80
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
In thermal equilibrium np
n p
ni
0
0
2
=
=
, which means that the respective cap­
ture and emission rates for electrons and holes are equal:
	
v
v
v
v
,
e emission
e capture
h emission
h capture
,
,
,
,
=
=
	
(2.66)
so
	
k
E
k
E
f
f
f E
f E
( )
( )
1
( )
1
( )
e emission
e capture
occupied
occupied
e
e
,
,
=
−
−
	
(2.67)
In thermal equilibrium, foccupied  is given by Fermi-Dirac statistics [9]:
	
f
E
e
( )
1
1
occupied
E E
kT
F
=
+
−




	
(2.68)
Hence,
	
k
E
k
E
e
e
e
( )
( )
e emission
e capture
E
E
kT
E E
kT
E
E
kT
,
,
t
F
F
t
=
=
−




−
−




−




	
(2.69)
The net recombination rate is modified as
	
=
−
−
dR
n f E
k
E
k
E n
f E
k
E g E dE
[
( )
( )
( )
{1
( )}]
( )
( )
e tot
t
e
e emission
e capture
t
fill
e
e capture
e
,
0
,
,
,
	
(2.70)
	
=
−
−




−














−
k
E
k
E
f
f
f E
f E
f
f E k
E g E n dE
1
( )
( )
1
1
( )
( )
(1
)
( )
( )
( )
e emission
e capture
occupied
occupied
e
e
occupied
e
e capture
e
t
,
,
,
	
	
	
(2.71)
	
=
−






−
−




e
f
f E k
E g E n dE
1
(1
)
( )
( )
( )
E
E
kT
occupied
e
e capture
e
t
,
Ft
F
	
(2.72)
with the trap’s quasi Fermi energy EFt .
The total electron recombination rate is given by
	
∫
=
−
−
−




∞
R
e
f
n
f E k
E g E dE
[{1
}(1
)
]
( )
( )
( )
e tot
E
E
kT
occupied
t
e
e capture
e
E
,
,
Ft
F
c
	
(2.73)

81
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
Let a capture cross section 
E
( )
e
α
 be introduced to rewrite ke capture
,
 as
	
k
E
E v
( )
( )
e capture
e
thermal
e
,
= α
	
(2.74)
with the thermal velocity for electrons
	
v
kT
m
3
thermal
e
=
	
(2.75)
For non-degenerate semiconductors near equilibrium the electron recombi­
nation is
	
=
−




−
−
−




−




R
n
N
e
e
f
K
(1
)
e tot
c effective
E
E
kT
E
E
kT
occupied
e capture
,
,
,
c
F
Ft
F
	
(2.76)
where Nc effective
,
 is the effective density of states for electrons and
	
K
n v
E
( )
e capture
t
thermal
e
e
,
=
<< α
>>
Considering
	
=
−
−




n
N
e
c effective
E
E
kT
1
,
c
t
	
(2.77)
and
	
p
N
e
v effective
E
E
kT
1
,
v
t
=
−




we get
	
R
n
f
n f
K
{ (1
)
}
e tot
occupied
occupied
e capture
,
1
,
=
−
−
In the stationary case the recombination rates for electrons and holes are equal,
	
R
R
R
e tot
h tot
tot
,
,
=
=
	
(2.78)
Therefore, we can calculate foccupied  as
	
f
k
n
k
p
k
n
n
k
p
p
(
)
(
)
occupied
e capture
h capture
e capture
h capture
,
,
1
,
1
,
1
=
+
+
+
+
	
(2.79)
Using this expression the total recombination rate is obtained as [3,9]
	
R
k
k
n
np
n p
k
n
n
k
p
p
(
)
(
)
tot
e capture
h capture
t
e capture
h capture
,
,
1
1
,
1
,
1
=
−
+
+
+
	
(2.80)

82
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
It is common to introduce carrier lifetimes for electrons and holes 
electron
Τ
 
and 
hole
Τ
 as
	
k
n
1
electron
e capture
t
,
Τ
=
and
	
k
n
1
hole
h capture
t
,
Τ
=
By using the capture cross sections for electrons and holes, 
E
( )
e
α
 and 
E
( )
h
α
, 
and the thermal velocities vthermal
e
 and vthermal
h
,
	
n v
E
1
( )
electron
t
thermal
e
e
Τ
=
α
	
n v
E
1
( )
hole
t
thermal
h
h
Τ
=
α
We come to the final formulation of the Shockley-Read-Hall model for the 
carrier generation-recombination model:
	
R
n
np
n
n
n
p
p
(
)
(
)
tot
t
i
hole
electron
2
1
1
=
−
Τ
+
+ Τ
+
	
(2.81)
2.10.3  Simple Recombination-Generation Model
In this model the recombination-generation rate is proportional to the excess 
carrier density. If the carrier density equals the thermal equilibrium value 
no net recombination takes place. The expression for the recombination of 
electrons in a p-type semiconductor is given by
	
U
R
G
n
n
n
n
n
p
p0
=
−
=
−
τ
	
(2.82)
The expression for the recombination of holes in an n-type semiconductor is 
given by
	
U
R
G
p
p
p
p
p
n
n0
=
−
=
−
τ
	
(2.83)
where τ is the average time of recombination of excess minority carrier.

83
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
The above expressions are valid only for minority carriers in a “quasi-
neutral” semiconductor. In steady state the recombination rates of the major­
ity and minority carriers are equal because recombination involves an equal 
number of holes and electrons. Majority carrier recombination depends on 
the excess minority carriers.
2.10.4  Impact Ionization Model
Impact ionization is a pure generation process similar to the Auger genera­
tion process. When a carrier moves into the conduction or valence band, the 
energy released is used to move an electron from valence to conduction band 
causing an electron-hole pair.
The two sub-processes in this case are the electron emission and the hole 
emission. While in the former a highly energetic electron in conduction 
band transfers energy to an electron in valence band, in the latter case, a 
hole in a valence band transfers energy to an electron in the valence band. 
As a result, the electron from valence band moves to the conduction band. 
The effect of impact ionization and avalanche multiplication is shown in 
Figure 2.14.
The current densities for electrons and holes are given as Je  and Jh. The 
generation rates are modeled proportional to these current densities as [9]
	
g
i J
q
g
i J
q
and
e
e e
h
h h
=
=
	
(2.84)
where ie  and ih  are the ionization rates for electrons and holes, respectively. 
The ionization rates are exponentially dependent on the electric field along 
the current flow direction. Let Eelectron
critical  and Ehole
critical  be the critical electric fields 
for electrons and holes. Let ie
∞ and ih
∞ be the ionization rates at infinite field 
for electrons and holes, respectively. The ionization rates for electrons and 
holes are given by
	
=
−





∞
i
i
E
E
exp
e
e
electron
critical
jelectron
	
(2.85)
and
	
i
i
E
E
exp
h
h
hole
critical
jhole
=
−





∞
	
(2.86)
where jelectron and jhole  are model parameters with values close to 1.

84
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
The total impact ionization rate is now found as
	
R
g
g
i J
q
i J
q
(
)
total IIR
e
h
e e
h h
,
= −
+
= −
+




	
(2.87)
This rate is independent of the electric field but depends on the carrier 
temperature.
2.10.5  Mobility Modeling
Mobility modeling is divided into four categories: low field mobility, high 
field mobility, bulk semiconductor mobility, and inversion layer mobility. 
In low field mobility the carriers are in equilibrium with the lattice and 
the mobility is very low. This mobility is inversely related to the impurity 
scattering. The low field mobility models for bulk materials include con­
stant mobility model, Caughey and Thomas model [27], Dorkel-Leturg 
model [28], Arora model [29], and Klaassen low-field mobility model 
[30]. The low field mobility is mainly affected by Coulomb scattering. In 
the high field case the mobility decreases with electric field as the high 
energy carriers take part in scattering and the mean drift velocity rises 
slowly with increasing electric field. Finally the drift velocity saturates 
to a constant value. The bulk mobility model is a three-step process. First 
the low field mobility is expressed as a function of lattice temperature 
and doping. Then the saturation velocity is expressed in terms of tem­
perature. And finally the low and high field junction region is described. 
The mobility models can further be classified into physical based, semi-
empirical, and empirical models. As carriers move under the influence 
of an electric field, the velocity saturates and so the effective mobility 
reduces because the drift velocity is equal to the product of mobility and 
the electric field. The field-dependent mobility expressions of Caughey 
and Thomas [27] are
	
E
E
v
( )
1
n
n
n
sat
n
0
0
1
n
n
µ
= µ
+ µ












β
−β
	
(2.88)
	
E
E
v
( )
1
p
p
p
sat
p
0
0
1
p
p
µ
= µ
+ µ












β
−β
	
(2.89)
where 
n0
µ
 and 
p0
µ
 are the respective low field electron and hole mobility, 
and E is the parallel electric field. The saturation velocities are calculated 

85
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
from the temperature-dependent model in [31] as
	
(
)
=
=
+
v
v
24 * 10
1
0.8exp
cm/sec
sat
p
sat
n
T
6
600
	
(2.90)
2.11  Introduction to MOS Transistor
The most important requirement for a field-effect transistor (FET) is zero or 
negligible gate leakage current. It is important to isolate the gate from the 
channel so that no current flows into the gate. One needs some kind of bar­
rier for the electron (or hole) from the gate to the source, the channel, and the 
drain. In MOSFET, an insulator provides the barrier. It is possible to grow a 
high-quality and reliable insulator using Silicon (Si). SiO2 is stable and makes 
a firm bonding with Silicon. This oxide makes selective diffusion and easy 
pattern transfer. This has led to the well-established silicon MOSFET technol­
ogy to become dominant. In MOSFET application of a large gate bias inverts 
the bands and induces the electrons (or holes) in a channel without the gate 
leakage. Over the last few years steady progress has been made on using the 
MOSFET concept with other semiconductors, notably (Gallium Arsenide) 
GaAs. GaAs n-MOSFETs have channel mobilities much higher than those in 
n-MOSFET based on the silicon as in [32]. However, GaAs technology does 
not provide a high-quality oxide. Thus, the widespread use of such devices 
is still not prevalent because of lack of good-quality oxide.
The Si technology is unique in the sense that a high-quality oxide SiO2 can 
be formed on the silicon wafer. The Si-SiO2 interface perfection is required 
for a field-effect device. Their higher areal density, better switching charac­
teristics, and lower power dissipation have made them the dominant device 
in electronic systems.
There are two basic types of MOS transistors: the n-channel and the 
p-channel. A circuit containing only n-channel devices is produced by an 
nMOS process. Similarly, a pMOS process fabricates circuits that contain 
only p-channel transistors.
2.12  Structure and Symbol of MOSFET
The structure of an n-channel MOS transistor is shown in Figure 2.19(a), con­
sisting of two n-type regions embedded in a p-type substrate, connected via 
metal or polysilicon to external conductors called the source and the drain. 

86
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
The symbol of MOSFET is shown in Figure 2.19(b). An n-channel MOS tran­
sistor is fabricated in a p-type semiconductor substrate, usually silicon [33]. 
Two n-type regions are made in the substrate and the current flows between 
these two regions. The region with the lowest applied potential is called the 
source and that with the highest potential is called the drain. On the surface, 
a thin silicon dioxide (SiO2) layer is formed and on top of this a conducting 
polysilicon material called a gate is deposited. An electron-rich layer called a 
channel can be created between the source and the drain underneath the gate 
when a positive gate bias is applied. When appropriate voltages are applied 
at the source and the drain, electrons can flow from the source into the drain. 
If the substrate material is n-type and the diffused regions are p-type, a simi­
lar structure will represent a p-channel MOS transistor. The gate plate must 
act as a good conductor and was in fact realized by metals like aluminum 
in the early generations of the MOS technology. However, it was discovered 
that the non-crystalline polysilicon exhibits better fabrication and physical 
properties. The bonding between the silicon substrate and polysilicon gate 
is better than that between the metal gate and the silicon substrate. Thus the 
metal M is replaced by a heavily doped polysilicon.
Here L and W denote the length and width of the channel, respectively. In 
the most common mode of operation of the transistor, the source and the sub­
strate are grounded and the drain is connected to a supply voltage VDD through 
a load resistor, which is positive for an n-channel transistor and negative for a 
p-channel transistor. In a MOSFET the channel charge is induced electrostati­
cally by the gate by using it as a capacitor without the need for doping.
Length L
Insulator oxide
SiO2
Oxide
thickess tOX
Width W
p type substrate
n+ Drain
G
S
B
D
Drain
Conductor
plate
Gate
Source
n+ source
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2.19
(a) An n-type NMOS device structure. (b) Symbol of MOSFET.

87
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
2.13  Basic Operation of MOSFET
2.13.1  Operation of MOSFET with Zero Gate Voltage
Let us consider the gate voltage equal to zero while the p-type substrate 
and the source are grounded (VSub = VS = 0) [34]. The drain is connected to 
a positive voltage source. Because the source and the substrate are at the 
same potential, no current flows in the source-substrate junction. The drain-
substrate junction is reverse biased, and except for a small reverse leakage 
current, no current flows in that junction. These back-to-back diodes prevent 
current conduction from the source to the drain, as in Figure 2.20(a). The 
depletion formation is shown in Figure 2.20(b). The MOSFET has a very high 
resistance between the source and the drain. It is operating in the “cut off” 
as there is no conducting channel between the source and the drain. Small 
current flows due to the second-order effect under the weak inversion, called 
subthreshold current.
2.13.2  Operation of MOSFET with a Positive Gate Voltage
In this case a constant positive bias is applied to the gate as in Figure 2.21(a). 
There is no gate current because the metal electrode is insulated from the 
silicon. However, the positively biased gate electrode attracts electrons 
from the semiconductor, and an electron-rich layer forms underneath the 
gate insulator. In effect, negative charges are induced in the underlying Si 
by the formation of a depletion region and a thin surface region containing 
mobile electrons.
Depletion layer
n+
n+
n+
n+
(b) Depletion layer formation
(a) nMOS
Operating in cut oﬀ mode as VGS < Vth
p-type bulk si
p-type bulk si
Source
Source
Drain
Gate
Gate
Drain
FIGURE 2.20
(a) Two reverse biased p-n diodes representing a MOSFET working in cutoff regime. (b) 
MOSFET operating in the “cut-off” mode.

88
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
The positive voltage on the gate causes the free holes to be repelled from 
the region underneath the gate [35]. The holes are pushed downward into the 
substrate, leaving behind a depletion region. The depletion region is popu­
lated by the bound negative charge associated with the acceptor atoms as 
in Figure 2.21(b). Also, the positive gate voltage attracts electrons from the 
source and the drain regions into the channel. When a large number of elec­
trons accumulates near the surface underneath the gate, an n region is cre­
ated, connecting the source and the drain regions, as in Figure 2.21(c).
The electron-rich layer underneath the gate is called the channel. The 
n-type source and the n-type drain are connected by the electron-rich chan­
nel. When a voltage is applied between the drain and the source, current 
flows between them. The gate bias creates an electric field that can either 
induce or prevent the formation of an electron-rich region at the surface of 
the semiconductor. The channel is created by inverting the substrate surface 
from p to n type. Hence the induced channel is also called an inversion layer 
and is shown in Figure 2.22.
Threshold voltage (VTH) in MOSFET is defined as the minimum gate volt­
age required to induce the channel. For an n-channel device, positive gate 
p-type
substrate
p-type
substrate
VG
VG
VG
VG
p-type
substrate
Drain
Drain
(a)
(b)
(c)
Drain
Source
Source
Source
+ –
+ –
+
–
+
–
n+
n+
n+
n+
n+
n+
FIGURE 2.21
(a) MOSFET with positive gate bias. (b) Formation of depletion region. (c) Formation of channel.

89
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
voltage greater than VTH is required to induce a conducting channel consist­
ing of electrons. For a p-channel device, a negative gate voltage larger than 
V­TH is required to induce a conducting channel consisting of holes.
2.13.3  Effect of a Small VDS
A small positive voltage VDS between the drain and the source induces a 
channel. This positive voltage VDS causes electrons to flow from the source 
to the drain through the induced channel, causing a flow of current. The 
magnitude of this current ID flowing from the drain to the source depends 
on the density of the electrons in the channel, which in turn depends on the 
magnitude of VGS. For VGS = VTH, the channel is just induced and the current 
is small. When VGS exceeds VTH more electrons are attracted to the channel 
and the current increases. We observe that the MOSFET is operating as a 
linear resistor whose value is controlled by VGS, and the channel is uniform 
when a small VDS is applied. Thus the MOSFET is said to operate in the linear 
or triode region.
2.13.4  Operation of MOSFET as VDS Is Increased
Let VGS be kept constant at a voltage greater than VTH. As VDS is increased the 
voltage drop across the length of the channel increases [36]. As one moves 
along the channel from the source to the drain, the voltage increases from 0 to 
VDS. So the voltage between the gate and points along the channel decreases 
from VGS at the source end to (VGS – VDS) at the drain end. Because the voltage 
is not constant, the channel is no longer of uniform depth; rather it will be 
Inversion layer formation
p-substrate
Source
Drain
VGS > Vth
n+
n+
FIGURE 2.22
Inversion layer formation in nMOS for positive gate bias.

90
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
tapered as shown in Figure 2.23. As VDS is increased, the channel becomes 
more tapered and its resistance increases correspondingly. Eventually, when 
VDS is increased to the value that reduces the voltage between the gate and 
the channel at the drain end to VTH—that is, VGD = VTH or VGS – VDS = VTH or 
VDS = VGS – VTH—the channel depth at the drain end decreases to almost zero, 
and the channel is said to be pinched off as shown in Figure 2.24. Increasing 
VDS beyond this has negligible effect on the channel shape, and the current 
through the channel remains fixed. The drain current saturates at this value, 
and the MOSFET is said to have entered the saturation region of operation. 
Because the current is constant in the saturation region, the MOSFET is 
said to operate as a constant current source whose value depends upon the 
applied gate voltage. The voltage VDS at which saturation occurs is denoted 
as VDsat = VGS – VTH. So for every value of VGS, there is a corresponding value 
p-substrate
Current ﬂow
n+
VGS ≥ Vth
VGS – Vth > VDS
VGS
VDS
n+
FIGURE 2.23
Current flow through the channel for small VDS.
p-type
substrate
Gate
Drain
Inversion layer is
pinched oﬀ near the
drain
Source
n+
n+
VGS ≥ Vth
VGS – Vth = VDS
VGS
VDS
FIGURE 2.24
Pinched off channel, with deeper depletion layer near the drain side.

91
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
of VDsat [37]. When VDS ≥ VDsat, the device operates in the saturation region. The 
region of the ID – VDS characteristic for VDS < VDsat is called the triode region.
2.14  Threshold Voltage of MOSFET
Conduction between the source and the drain takes place for MOSFET under 
the influence of the source-to-gate voltage. The current flow does not begin 
sharply, but it is assumed that if the gate voltage exceeds a given value called 
the threshold voltage Vth, conduction starts. The first step is to study the band 
diagram. The analytical expression of this important parameter comes from 
the study of the MOS structure. To understand the operation of the MOSFET 
we first need to examine the MOS capacitor, shown in Figure 2.25. An oxide 
layer is grown on top of a p-type semiconductor and a metal contact is placed 
on the oxide. In general, the insulator could be large band-gap material.
The MOS capacitor consists of a metal gate, an insulating oxide layer, and a 
semiconductor. The thickness of the oxide varies from 5 to 50 nanometers. We 
first consider the case of a hypothetical metal whose Fermi level is the same as 
that of silicon [38]. When such a structure is fabricated, the Fermi level of the 
system is unique, and because the metal has the same Fermi level as the sili­
con, the band structure is that shown in Figure 2.26. Work function is defined 
as the energy required for moving an electron from the Fermi level to the 
outside. In this idealized case let 
m
S
Φ
= Φ  so that there is no difference in the 
work functions. This condition is referred to as flat band for obvious reasons.
Metal
Oxide insulator
Semiconductor
FIGURE 2.25
A MOS capacitor.

92
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
2.14.1  Accumulation of Holes
When a negative bias is applied between the metal and the semiconductor, 
a negative surface charge is deposited on the metal at the metal oxide inter­
face, and the structure behaves as a parallel-plate capacitor whose electrodes 
are the silicon and the metal, with oxide as the insulator [39]. In response an 
equal net positive charge appears at the surface of the semiconductor at the 
silicon-oxide interface. This silicon charge whose thickness is approximately 
10 nm can also be considered as a surface charge. This hole-rich thin layer is 
called an accumulation layer.
The energy band diagrams are drawn for negative charges, whereas an 
electrostatic potential diagram is drawn for positive test charges. In metal, 
application of negative bias reduces the electrostatic potential, and as a result 
electron energies are raised in the metal relative to the semiconductor. The 
Fermi level for the metal rises above its equilibrium position by qV, where V 
x
x
x
Metal
Oxide
Silicon
Ev
Ev
Ev
EFM
EFM
–qVG < 0
–qVG << 0
–qVG > 0
EFM
EFM
Ev
EF
EF
EF
EF
Ei
Ei
Ei
Ei
EC
EC
EC
x
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
EC
FIGURE 2.26
Energy band diagram of MOSFET: (a) flat band, (b) accumulation, (c) depletion, and (d) 
inversion.

93
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
is the applied voltage. The difference between the Fermi level in the metal 
and the semiconductor is the applied bias.
Because 
m
Φ  and 
S
Φ
 do not change with applied voltage, but EFm  moves 
up relative to EFS, causing a tilt in the oxide conduction band, the energy 
bands of the semiconductor bend near the interface (the valence bands are 
bent to come closer to the Fermi level) accommodating the accumulation of 
holes at the interface as in Figure 2.27. The effect of depositing a negative 
charge in the gate of a MOS transistor causes hole accumulation.
An increase in surface hole concentration implies an increase in E
E
i
F
−
 
at the surface. Because the Fermi level within the semiconductor remains 
unchanged as no current flows though the MOS structure with increasing 
(E
E
i
F
−
), Ei  must move up in the energy near the surface. This results in band 
bending near the surface. From Figure 2.27 it is clear that near the surface the 
Fermi level lies closer to the valence band, creating a larger hole concentra­
tion than that arising from the doping of the p-type semiconductor.
2.14.2  Depletion
When a positive bias is applied to the metal, positive charges are depos­
ited on the metal and a corresponding net negative charge accumulates at 
the semiconductor surface. Such a negative charge in the p-type material is 
due to depletion of holes from the surface, leaving behind the uncompen­
sated ionized acceptors. Thus the hole concentration decreases, moving Ei  
closer to EF, bending the band down near the semiconductor surface as in 
Figure 2.28. If the positive voltage is increased, the band bends down more 
W
Accumulation
Carrier Density
S
+++
O
M
EFM
eVG
Z
n0
p0
EC
Ei
EF
EV
p
n
FIGURE 2.27
Energy band diagram for ideal MOS capacitor under the application of applied voltage.

94
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
strongly, resulting in inversion that occurs for the higher positive applied 
positive gate bias [39].
2.14.3  Inversion
If the positive bias on the metal side is increased further, the bands at the semi­
conductor surface bend down more strongly as shown in Figure 2.29. A large 
positive voltage can bend Ei  below EF . Thus the conduction band at the oxide-
semiconductor region comes close to the Fermi level in the semiconductor. This 
reverses the mobile charges from holes to electrons at the interface and the elec­
tron density increases. If the positive bias is increased until EC  comes close to 
the electron quasi-Fermi level near the interface, the electron density increases 
and the semiconductor near the interface has electrical properties of an n-type 
semiconductor. This n-type surface layer is formed not by doping, but by inver­
sion of the original p-type semiconductor due to the applied bias. This inverted 
layer is separated by the underlying p-type material by a depletion region.
2.14.4	 Surface Potential
Figure 2.30 shows the band bending of the semiconductor on the onset of 
strong inversion [37–39]. It is described by the quantity 
x
( )
Φ
, which mea­
sures the position of the intrinsic Fermi level with respect to the bulk intrin­
sic Fermi level. The band bending at the oxide-semiconductor interface is 
described in terms of the potential 
S
Φ  as in Figure  2.30. We notice that 
0
S
Φ =
 is the flat band condition for the MOS (Figure 2.26). When 
0
S
Φ <
, the 
Z
Carrier Density
W
n0
Ei
EF
EV
EFM
VG > 0
Electric ﬁeld E
Depletion
qVG
M
O
S
EC
p0
p
n
Na
FIGURE 2.28
Effect of applied electric field on the interface charge density in the ideal MOS capacitor: posi­
tive gate voltage (VG) creates a depletion region.

95
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
Z
n0
Ev
EF
Ei
EC
Na
Inversion
Electric ﬁeld E
p0
p
n
VG >> 0
n(interface) ≥ p0
W
EFM
qVG
Carrier Density
FIGURE 2.29
Band bending with increase of positive bias on the metal side of MOSFET.
Semiconductor
Z
Oxide
Surface
potential
qΦs
qΦF
eΦF = EF – Ei
At inversion
ΦS = 2ΦF
EF
Ei
EC
EV
Positive for p-substrate
Negative for n-substrate
FIGURE 2.30
Band bending of the semiconductor in the inversion mode.

96
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
bands bend up at the surface and holes accumulate. Similarly when 
0
S
Φ > , 
depletion takes place, and finally when ΦS > 0 and greater than 
F
Φ , the bands 
bend in such a way that Ei lies below EF, resulting in inversion.
The onset of inversion is a gradual process and is a function of gate bias. The 
strong inversion occurs when the electron concentration at the interface is equal 
to the bulk p-type concentration. Strong inversion means the surface will be as 
strongly n-type as p-type. So the intrinsic level Ei is at a position 
F
Φ  below the 
Fermi level at the interface. The surface band bending is given in (2.91) as
	
inv
(
)
2
S
F
Φ
= Φ 	
(2.91)
For an n-MOSFET, the substrate is p-type and 
F
Φ  is positive, and a positive 
S
Φ  is required for inversion. For a p-MOSFET the substrate is n-type and 
F
Φ  
is negative, causing inversion.
The charge density of the metal Qm is balanced by the channel depletion 
charge Qd and the inversion charge Qn. We are interested in calculating the 
threshold voltage (i.e., the gate voltage needed to cause inversion in the channel).
The total surface charge density is related to the surface field by Gauss’s 
law. This charge QS  is the total surface charge density at the semiconductor-
oxide interface region and includes the induced free charge in inversion and 
the background ionic charge. The charge QS is zero when the bands are flat.
For a larger positive gate voltage the surface potential increases. The hole 
concentration near the surface decreases while the electron concentration 
increases, according to the following relationships:
	
p
N
q
kT
exp
x
a
S
(
0) =
−Φ




=
	
 (2.92)
and
	
n
n
N
q
kT
exp
x
i
a
S
(
0)
2
=
Φ




=
	
 (2.93)
since
	
n
n
E
E
kT
exp
i
F
i
=
−




	
(2.94)
	
p
n
E
E
kT
exp
i
i
Fi
=
−




	
(2.95)
	
np
ni
2
=
	
(2.96)

97
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
The electron surface concentration is equal to that of hole (n(0) = p(0) = ni), 
when Ei coincides with EF at x = 0. This happens when
	
kT
q
N
n
ln
S
F
a
i
Φ = Φ =




	
(2.97)
as shown in Figure 2.31.
With further increase in the gate voltage, the electron surface concentra­
tion increases up to a point where n(x = 0) becomes equal to ppo = Na which 
is the original hole concentration in the substrate. This is because the band 
curvature at the surface (x = 0) places Ei at an energy qΦF below EF. In other 
words, the band curvature is equal to 2(Ei – EF) or 
2
S
F
Φ = Φ .
When this condition is met, the semiconductor surface is said to be in 
strong inversion.
For ΦF ≤ ΦS ≤ 2ΦF, the electron concentration is larger than the hole concen­
tration, and the surface is in weak inversion, while for 
2
S
F
Φ ≥Φ  it is in strong 
inversion as shown in Figure 2.32. The inversion layer is rich in electrons and 
hence is a good conductor. The MOS capacitor consists of two conducting 
electrodes (the metal gate and the inversion layer at the silicon surface). As 
in the case of accumulation, the capacitance of the MOS structure is again 
equal to Cox.
When an inversion layer is formed, electrons are the local majority carriers 
at the surface. Any subsequent increase in gate voltage increases the electron 
concentration in the inversion layer and produces a larger inversion charge 
Qinv. However, the thickness of the inversion layer remains very small. Its 
actual thickness is similar to that of an accumulation layer.
ΦS
Electron
concentration
Hole
concentration
Na
2ΦF
ΦF
Concentration in Log Scale
FIGURE 2.31
Hole and electron concentration as a function of surface potential.

98
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
The electron charge in an inversion layer can be thought of as a surface 
charge [40]. As in the case of an accumulation layer, the inversion charge 
depends exponentially on the surface potential:
	
Q
q
kT
exp
inv
S
α
Φ




	
(2.98)
When the gate voltage is increased beyond inversion, the surface potential ΦS 
increases very slightly above 2ΦF and one can assume that ΦS = 2ΦF when an 
inversion layer is present. Because the semiconductor is p-type, the electrons 
in the inversion layer are produced by a slow process called thermal genera­
tion at room temperature. They can also be produced by external generation 
(if a light source is present). If the semiconductor is in the dark and at cryo­
genic temperature, the inversion layer may never form.
In summary the following rules will be used to describe the relationships 
between the charge on the metal gate and the charge in the accumulation, 
depletion, and inversion layers as shown in Figure 2.33.
	
Q
Q
G
acc
−
=
  (accumulation)	
(2.99)
	
Q
Q
G
d
−
=
  (depletion)	
(2.100)
	
Q
Q
Q
G
d
inv
−
=
+
  (inversion)	
(2.101)
	
QG
−
 = charge at the back-side contact of the sample (dielectric mode)
Semiconductor
Oxide
Metal
Surface
potential
Z
–2qΦF
ΦS = 2ΦF
qΦF
–qΦF
EV
EF
Ei
EC
FIGURE 2.32
Band bending under strong inversion at the surface.

99
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
2.15  Flat-Band Voltage: Effect of Real Surfaces
2.15.1  Equalization of the Fermi Levels
The Fermi level of the metal gate and the silicon are so far considered equal. 
However, in practice this is not the case. In modern devices the gate material 
is not actually a metal, but heavily doped polysilicon. The doping concentra­
tion for that material is so high (≈1020 cm–3) that it can be considered as a metal. 
Let us first consider the metal and the semiconductor separately. The energy 
needed to extract an electron with an energy EFM from the metal is called the 
work function q
m
Φ . The work function in the semiconductor is denoted by Φ
q
.
sc  
The potential work function difference is 
ms
m
s
Φ
= Φ −Φ . It is to be noted that 
ms
Φ
 is negative for both n+ poly-silicon gate and n-type Si substrate and n+ 
poly-silicon gate and p-type Si substrate.
When a MOS structure is formed, the Fermi levels align, and the charge 
transfer causes a tilt in the oxide conduction band [40,41]. The bands bend 
down near the semiconductor surface to accommodate work function differ­
ence as shown in Figures 2.34(a),(b),(c). To go back to a flat-band condition a 
voltage must be applied to the gate. This voltage called work function difference 
is denoted by 
ms
Φ
:
	
E
E
q
ms
m
sc
F
FM
Φ
= Φ −Φ
=
−
	
(2.102)
Qinv
(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
Metal
Silicon
Oxide
Qd
Qd
QG
QG
Qacc
x
QG
xdmax
xd
x
x
x = 0
x
FIGURE 2.33
Charges in the MOS structure: (a) flat band, (b) accumulation, (c) depletion, and (d) inversion.

100
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
2.15.2	 Oxide Charges
Oxides grown on silicon contain positive charges due to the presence of con­
taminating metallic ions or imperfect Si-oxide bonds [40]. These charges can 
either be fixed or mobile in the oxide. However, for simplicity only the case 
of fixed charges is considered.
Let us consider an elementary real positive charge Q(Coulomb m–2) at a 
depth x in the oxide. Let x = 0 be defined at the metal/oxide interface as 
shown in Figure 2.35(a). Negative charges will appear in the metal and the 
silicon. The sum of these three charges is equal to zero. The charge in the 
silicon can be removed when an appropriate negative bias is applied to the 
gate as in Figure 2.35(b). If the charge is closer to the semiconductor, a larger 
compensation gate bias is required to remove it. In an actual device, charges 
Semiconductor
qΦMS
qΦm
qΦsc
Vaccum
EF
EC
EC
EC
EFM
EFM
EFM
EV
EF
EV
EF
EV
Gate
oxide
(c)
(a)
(b)
Metal
Semiconductor
Gate
oxide
Metal
Semiconductor
Gate
oxide
Metal
FIGURE 2.34
Energy band diagram of MOSFET when (a) the metal and the semiconductor are taken sepa­
rately, (b) no bias is applied, and (c) a bias equal to Φms is applied to the gate.

101
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
are distributed throughout the oxide. The compensating voltage is obtained 
as equal to
	
V
Q
C
Q
OX
OX
=
	
(2.103)
2.15.3  Interface Traps
A set of charges arise from the interface states at the Si-SiO2 interface. 
They are created by the sudden termination of the semiconductor crys­
tal lattice at the oxide interface. In the oxidation process, Si reacts with 
oxygen forming a SiO2 layer. When the oxidation process is suddenly 
stopped, some ionic Si left near the interface causes perturbation to the 
periodic crystal structure of the semiconductor and hence some Si-Si 
bonds are unfulfilled or dangling. As a result there are energy states in 
the band gap at the silicon surface. These states called interface states or 
interface traps can be charged positively or negatively, and depending on 
their nature and their energy with respect to the Fermi level will affect 
the surface potential.
2.15.4  Flat-Band Voltage
Flat-band voltage is defined as the voltage that must be applied to the gate to 
bring the semiconductor energy bands to a flat level. It can also be defined 
as the voltage applied to the gate such that there is no band bending in the 
(b)
(a)
Metal
Metal
Oxide
Oxide
x = 0
x = 0
x
x
x
Q
Q
ρ
ρ
x
tOX
tOX
Semiconductor
Semi
conductor
FIGURE 2.35
Single charge in an oxide for (a) VG = 0 and (b) an applied gate voltage.

102
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
semiconductor. Flat-band is achieved by applying a gate voltage that com­
pensates for the following:
• The differences in work functions of the semiconductor and the 
gate electrode
• The presence of charges in the oxide
• The interface traps
	
V
V
V
Q
C
Q
C
FB
Q
ms
i
ms
OX
OX
i
OX
=
+ Φ
+
= Φ
−
+
	
(2.104)
For simplicity the various oxide and interface charges are included in an 
effective positive charge Qit (C/cm2) at the interface. Qit  includes both Qi and 
QOX. This charge will introduce an effective negative charge in the semicon­
ductor. To compensate for these charges, a bias Vit
Q
C
it
OX
=
 must be applied to 
the gate. Flat band voltage can be given as
	
V
V
Q
C
FB
it
ms
ms
it
OX
=
+ Φ
= Φ
−
	
(2.105)
2.16  Expression of Threshold Voltage
The threshold voltage of a MOSFET is defined as the voltage that must be 
applied to the gate to form an inversion layer. In a MOS transistor, the gate 
voltage is equal to the sum of the potential drops in the semiconductor and 
the oxide given as
	
V
Q
C
G
S
G
OX
= Φ +
	
(2.106)
where QG is equal to the positive charge on the gate electrode. An equal 
amount of negative charge also exists in the semiconductor, composed of 
ionized impurities in the depletion region, and the free electrons at the 
oxide/silicon interface at the inversion. If the charge due to the free electrons 
is assumed to be much smaller than that due to ionized impurities when the 
inversion layer starts to form, the above equation can be written as
	
V
Q
C
V
2
G
F
d
OX
THO
= Φ −
=
	
(2.107)
VTH0 is called the ideal threshold voltage, and it is measured with respect to the 
source [40].

103
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
The flat-band voltage in Equation (2.105) must be added to the expression 
of the threshold voltage in (2.107), in order to accurately describe the actual, 
“non-ideal” threshold voltage given as
	
V
V
Q
C
Q
C
Q
C
2
2
TH
FB
F
d
OX
ms
it
OX
F
d
OX
=
+ Φ −
= Φ
−
+ Φ −
	
(2.108)
For strong inversion the voltage required must be strong enough to first 
achieve the flat band condition (first two terms of Equation 2.108), then to 
induce an inverted region (2ΦF term of Equation 2.108) and to accommodate 
the charge in the depletion region (last term of Equation 2.108).
The threshold voltage may be either positive or negative, depending on the 
doping concentration Na, the material used to form the gate electrode, etc. If the 
threshold voltage is negative, the n-channel MOSFET is a depletion-mode device. 
However, if VTH0  is positive, the device is an enhancement-mode MOSFET.
Depletion-mode devices have an inversion layer when the gate voltage is 
equal to zero. Such devices are sometimes referred to as “normally on.” 
Enhancement-mode devices called “normally off” require an applied positive 
gate bias to create the inversion layer. The value of the threshold voltage can 
be adjusted by applying a controlled amount of doping impurities in the 
channel region during device fabrication.
2.17  I–V Characteristics of MOSFET
The derivation of the MOSFET I–V relationship for different conditions 
needs several approximations. The analysis of an actual three-dimensional 
MOSFET would be a very complex task without these assumptions. Derivation 
of closed form I–V equations is not possible without these assumptions. Here 
gradual channel approximation (GCA) is used for deriving the I–V relationship, 
which will effectively reduce the problem to a one-dimensional current flow 
problem. This will allow us to devise simple current equations that are in 
agreement with experimental results. However, GCA has limitations, par­
ticularly in the case of short-channel MOSFETs.
2.17.1  Gradual Channel Approximation
A semiconductor bar carrying a current I is considered in Figure 2.36. If Qd 
coulombs per meter is the density of charge along the direction of current 
and v meters per second is the velocity of the charge, then
	
I
Q v
d
=
	
(2.109)
The total charge that passes through a cross section of the bar per unit time can 
be measured. With a velocity v, the charge enclosed in v meters of the bar must 

104
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
flow through the cross section in one second. Because the charge density is Qd, 
the total charge in ‘v’ meters is given by Q v
d .
In Figure 2.37(a) a coordinate system for the MOSFET structure is consid­
ered taking the x-direction parallel to the surface and the y-direction per­
pendicular to the surface. The origin of the x-coordinate is at the source end 
of the channel. The channel voltage with respect to the source end is denoted 
by V(x). Now let the threshold voltage Vth be constant along the entire chan­
nel region between x = 0 and x = L. However, in reality the threshold voltage 
changes along the channel because the channel voltage is not constant. Let 
the electric field component Ex along x-coordinate be dominant compared to 
electric field component EY along the y-coordinate. This allows us to reduce 
the current flow problem in the channel along the x-direction only.
Boundary conditions used are
	
V
V
0
x
S
(
0) =
=
=
	
(2.110)
	
V
V
x L
DS
(
) =
=
	
(2.111)
After one second
V meters
I
FIGURE 2.36
A semiconductor bar carrying current and snaps of the carriers after 1 second.

105
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
Let an n-channel MOSFET whose source and drain are connected to ground 
be considered. When VGS  = VTH, the inversion charge density produced by 
the gate oxide capacitance is proportional to VGS – VTH. For VGS ≥ VTH, any 
charge placed on the gate must be mirrored by the charge in the channel, 
yielding a uniform channel charge density equal to
	
Q
C
W V
V
(
)
d
OX
GS
TH
=
−
	
(2.112)
COX  is the gate/channel capacitance per unit area, where COX  is multi­
plied by W to represent total gate capacitance per unit length. Sometimes 
Body
Body
x = 0
(b)
(a)
p-type substrate
p-type substrate
L
x
n+
n+
n+
n+
Drain
Drain
x
L
Source
Source
Gate
Gate
VDS
VGS
VDS
VGS
+
–
+
–
VGS
VGS
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
x = 0
y
y
FIGURE 2.37
(a) Channel charge with equal source and drain voltages and (b) with only drain voltage.

106
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
expressions are described in terms of another capacitance known as gate/
channel capacitance Cg.
	
C
C
WL
g
OX
=
	
(2.113)
Now let the drain voltage taken be greater than zero as shown in Figure 2.37(b). 
Because the channel potential varies from zero at the source end to VD at the 
drain, the potential difference between the gate and the channel varies from 
VG to VG – VD. Thus the charge density at a point x along the channel can be 
written as
	
Q x
C
W V
V x
V
( )
[(
( )
]
d
OX
GS
TH
=
−
−
	
(2.114)
where V(x) is the channel potential at x. The drain current is given by
	
I
C
W V
V x
V
v
[(
( )
]
D
OX
GS
TH
= −
−
−
	
(2.115)
In this expression the negative sign is inserted because the charge carriers 
are negative and v denotes the velocity of the electrons in the channel. For 
semiconductors v = μE, where μ is the mobility of charge carriers and E = 
–dV/dx is the electric field.
Putting the value of v
	
I
C
W V
V x
V
dV x
dx
[(
( )
]
( )
D
OX
GS
TH
n
=
−
−
µ
	
(2.116)
The boundary conditions are V(0) = 0 and V(L) = VDS. Although V(x) can eas­
ily be found from this equation, the quantity of interest is ID. Integrating 
(2.116) we get
	
I dx
WC
V
V x
V
dV
[
( )
]
D
OX
n
GS
V
V
TH
x
L
0
0
DS
∫
∫
=
µ
−
−
=
=
	
(2.117)
The current equation of MOSFET in the triode region is given by
	
I
C
W
L
V
V
V
V
[(
)
1
2
]
D
n
OX
GS
TH
DS
DS
2
= µ
−
−
	
(2.118)
where L is the effective channel length.
Figure 2.38 plots the parabolas given by Equation (2.118) for different val­
ues of VGS. Calculating I
V
/
D
GS
∂
∂
, one can show that the peak of each parabola 
occurs at VDS = VGS – VTH, and the peak current is
	
I
C
W
L
V
V
1
2
(
)
D
n
OX
GS
TH
,max
2
=
µ
−
	
(2.119)

107
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
Here, (VGS – VTH) is the overdrive or effective voltage and W/L is the aspect ratio. 
If VDS ≤ VGS – VTH, we say the device is operating in the triode or linear region.
	
k
C
n
n
OX
′ = µ
 is known as the process transconductance parameter.
	
k
W
L k
W
L
C
n
n
n
OX
=
′ =
µ
 is known as the gain factor.
Equations (2.118) and (2.119) serve as the foundation for analog and digital 
CMOS VLSI design.
If in (2.118) VDS < 2(VG S– VTH), we have
	
I
C
W
L
V
V
V
[(
)
]
D
n
OX
GS
TH
DS
≈µ
−
	
(2.120)
The drain current is a linear function of VDS. This is also evident from the 
characteristics of Figure 2.38. For small VDS, each parabola can be approxi­
mated by a straight line. The linear relationship implies that the path from 
the source to the drain can be approximated by a linear resistor equal to
	
= µ
−
R
C
V
V
1
(
)
on
n
OX
W
L
GS
TH 	
(2.121)
Drain Voltage VDS
Drain Current ID
VGS1 – Vth
VGS1
VGS2
VGS3
VGS2 – Vth
VGS3 – Vth
FIGURE 2.38
Drain current versus drain-source voltage in triode region.

108
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
A MOSFET can therefore operate as a resistor whose value is controlled 
by the overdrive voltage (as long as VDS < 2(VGS – VTH)). This is shown in 
Figure 2.39. Thus in triode region, MOSFET operates as a voltage controlled 
resistor as in Figure 2.40.
However, if in Figure 2.38 the drain-source voltage exceeds VGS – VTH, the 
drain current does not follow the parabolic behavior for VDS > VGS – VTH. In 
fact, as shown in Figure 2.41, ID becomes relatively constant, and we say that 
the device operates in the saturation region as in [38,41].
If the drain voltage remains greater than the source voltage, then the volt­
age at each point along the channel with respect to ground increases as we 
move from the source end toward the drain end. From Figure 2.42(a), this 
effect arises from the gradual voltage drop along the channel resistance. 
Because the gate voltage is constant (as the gate is conductive but carries no 
current in any direction) and the potential at the oxide-silicon interface rises 
from the source to the drain end, the potential difference between the gate 
Approximate linear
operation in deep
triode region
VDS
VGS1
VGS2
VGS3
ID
FIGURE 2.39
Linear operation in deep triode region.
Source
Source
Source
Drain
Drain
Drain
Gate
Gate
Gate
FIGURE 2.40
MOSFET as a voltage-dependent resistor.

109
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
and the oxide-silicon interface decreases along the x-axis as in Figure 2.42(b). 
The density of electrons in the channel follows the same trend, falling to a 
minimum value at x = L.
The local density of inversion layer charge is proportional to 
−
−
V
V x
V
( )
.
GS
TH  
So if V(x) approaches V
V
GS
TH
−
, then Q x
( )
d
 drops to zero. In other words, as 
in Figure 2.43(a), if VDS  is slightly greater than V
V
GS
TH
−
, then the inversion 
1
100 µA
200 µA
300 µA
400 µA
500 µA
2
3
4
5
VDS in (V)
ID
Triode
region
VGS = 0.45 V(Cutoﬀ region)
VGS = 2.3 V
VGS = 2.75 V
Saturation region
VGS = 3.25 V
VDS(sat) = VGS – Vth
FIGURE 2.41
Plots showing saturation of drain current.
L
L
VG – VD
= VG – VD
ID
<VG
VG
VD
= VG
Potential
diﬀerence
VG
V(x)
(b)
Gate to body potential
drop
n+
+ –
+
–
n+
(a)
x
x
X-direction
FIGURE 2.42
(a) Channel potential variation. (b) Gate-substrate voltage difference along the channel.

110
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
layer stops at x ≤ L, and the channel is pinched off. As VDS  increases further, 
as in Figure 2.43(b), the point where Qd  equals zero gradually moves toward 
the source. So at some point along the channel, the local potential difference 
between the gate and the oxide-silicon interface is not sufficient to support 
an inversion layer.
No channel exists between L1 and L. But the device still conducts, as illus­
trated in Figure 2.44. Once the electrons reach the end of the channel, they 
experience the high electric field in the depletion region at the drain junction 
and are rapidly swept to the drain terminal.
Body
V(L1) = VGS – Vth
y
X-direction
x = 0
Pinch oﬀ
L1
L
p-type substrate
p-type substrate
(b)
(a)
n+
G
x = 0
y
L
X-direction
Pinch oﬀ
V(L) = VGS – Vth
D
Body
S
+
–
+
–
+1
–
+
–
VGS
VGS
VDS
VDS2 > VDS1
n+
n+
D
G
n+
S
FIGURE 2.43
(a) Pinch-off condition. (b) Pinch-off point shifts to source end for increasing VDS.

111
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
From the above observations, we examine (2.117) for a saturated device. 
The integral on the left-hand side of (2.117) must be taken from x = 0 to x = 
L1, where L1 is the point at which Qd drops to zero, and that on the right from 
V(x) = 0 to V x
V
V
( )
GS
TH
=
−
. As a result,
	
I dx
WC
V
V x
V
dV
[
( )
]
D
OX
n
GS
V
V
V
TH
x
L
0
0
GS
TH
1
∫
∫
=
µ
−
−
=
−
=
which gives
	
I
C
W
L
V
V
1
2
2
(
)
D
n
OX
GS
TH
,max
1
2
=
µ
−
	
(2.122)
Considering the approximation L ≈ L1, a saturated MOSFET can be used 
as a current source connected between the drain and the source. Current 
sources draw current from VDD  or inject current into ground as shown in 
Figure 2.45.
E
x
ID
L1
VS = 0
VG
VD
L
0
Drain
n+
n+
n+
+
–
+
–
FIGURE 2.44
Detailed operation in the pinch-off region.
I2
I1
I1
I2
VG
VG
VDD
VDD
FIGURE 2.45
MOSFET acting as a current source.

112
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
2.18  Depletion MOSFET
Some devices have an already fabricated channel even at zero gate voltage. 
Negative gate voltage is required to turn them off [41]. Such a normally on 
device is known as a depletion-type MOSFET. The MOSFETs that are off at 
zero gate bias are termed enhancement-type MOSFET. On application of a gate 
voltage the device turns on.
Figure 2.46 shows an n-channel depletion-type MOSFET. A doped n-chan­
nel region exists under the oxide, meaning that an electron inversion layer 
already exists with zero applied gate bias. In this type of device, a negative 
gate voltage will induce a space charge region underneath the oxide, reduc­
ing the thickness of the n-channel region. The reduced thickness decreases 
the channel conductance, which in turn, reduces the drain current. A positive 
gate voltage will create an electron accumulation layer, increasing the drain 
current. The ID – VDS characteristics and symbol for an n-channel depletion 
MOSFET are shown in Figures 2.47(a),(b). Figure 2.48 shows the ID – VGS curve 
for depletion mode and enhancement mode MOSFET.
B
n+
n+
p-type
substrate
Ion implanted n-type
channel layer
Source
Gate
Drain
VB = 0
FIGURE 2.46
Structure of a depletion MOSFET.

113
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
2.19  Transconductance (gm)
Since a MOSFET operating in saturation region produces a current in response 
to its gate-source overdrive voltage, we define a figure of merit that indicates 
how well a device converts a voltage to a current. In processing signals we deal 
with the changes in voltages and currents, so here we define a figure of merit 
as the change in the drain current divided by the changes in the gate-source 
voltage, called the transconductance, denoted by gm, expressed as
	
g
I
V
m
D
GS V
cons
t
tan
DS
= ∂
∂
=
	
g
C
W
L V
V
(
)
m
n
OX
GS
TH
= µ
−
	
(2.123)
(b)
(a)
VDS
Gate
Body
Source
Drain
VGS3 < 0
VGS = 0
VGS1 > 0
VGS2 > VGS1
VDS(sat) = VGS – Vth
ID
ID
FIGURE 2.47
(a) ID versus VDS characteristics for an n-channel deletion mode MOSFET. (b) Symbol of an 
n-channel deletion mode MOSFET.
VGS
ID
Enhancement mode
Depletion mode
FIGURE 2.48
ID–VGS characteristics for depletion mode and enhancement mode MOSFETs.

114
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
gm represents the sensitivity of the device. When gm is high, a small change 
in VGS results in a larger change in ID ⋅ gm in the saturation region is inverse of 
Ron in the deep triode region.
Also,
	
V
V
I
C
W
L
2
GS
TH
D
n
OX
−
=
µ
	
(2.124)
Putting the value of (2.124) in (2.123), we get
	
g
I
C
W
L
2
m
D
n
OX
=
µ
	
(2.125)
	
g
I
V
V
2
m
D
GS
TH
=
−
	
(2.126)
gm of a MOS transistor can be increased by increasing its width. However, 
this will also increase the input capacitance and the area occupied. Equation 
(2.123) suggests that gm increases with the overdrive if W/L is constant, 
whereas (2.126) shows that gm decreases with the overdrive if ID is constant. 
From (2.125) we see that gm increases in square law with ID if W/L is constant. 
These results are illustrated in Figure 2.49.
2.20  Channel Length Modulation
When V
V
V
V
DS
DSSat
GS
Th
=
=
−
, the inversion layer charge at the drain end 
becomes zero. We can say that the channel is pinched off at the drain end 
for this bias condition. If the drain-to-source voltage is increased beyond the 
W/L
Constant
W/L
Constant
ID
VGS – Vth
VGS – Vth
ID
Constant
gm
gm
gm
FIGURE 2.49
Variation of trans-conductance of MOSFET

115
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
saturation voltage so that V
V
DS
DSSat
>
, an even larger portion of the chan­
nel becomes pinched off. The effective channel length (i.e., the length of the 
inversion layer) is reduced to L − ΔL, where ΔL is the length of the channel 
region where inversion charge is equal to zero as in Figure 2.50. The pinch-
off point moves from drain end to the source end caused by increasing drain-
to-source voltage. The electrons traveling from the source toward the drain 
traverse the inverted channel section of length L and then are injected into 
the depletion region of length L − L′ = ΔL which separates the pinch-off point 
from the drain end.
The voltage remains constant at V
V
V
GS
TH
DSsat
−
=
, and the additional bias 
applied to the drain appears as a voltage drop across the narrow depletion 
region between the channel end and the drain region. This voltage acceler­
ates the electrons at the drain end of the channel and sweeps them across 
the depletion region into the drain. The channel length is reduced from L to 
L − ΔL, a phenomenon known as channel-length modulation which is similar to 
base-width modulation in BJT. The shortening of the channel causes a larger 
current called channel-length modulation.
Channel-length modulation in a MOSFET is caused by the increase of the 
depletion layer width at the drain end with increased drain voltage. This 
leads to a shorter channel length and an increased drain current. An exam­
ple of this is shown in Figure 2.51(a). The channel-length-modulation effect 
increases in small devices with low-doped substrates as in Figure 2.51(b).
p-substrate
δL
VGS
VDS
VGS ≥ Vth
VDS ≥ VGS – Vth
L
FIGURE 2.50
Reduction of channel length at saturation.

116
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
From (2.122) we get
	
α
−
=
−




−
I
L
L
L
L
L
1/(
)
1/
1
D
1
	
(2.127)
Neglecting higher-order terms in the series, we get
	
=
+




I
L
L
L
1/
1
D
	
(2.128)
Let
	
L
L
VDS
= λ
	
(2.129)
where λ is the channel-length modulation parameter.
(b)
L
∆L
Source
end
Drain
end
Drain voltage
Drain current
ID
Without channel
length modulation
With channel
length modulation
(a)
FIGURE 2.51
(a) Effect of increase in the drain current as a result of channel length modulation. (b) Channel 
length modulation.

117
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
Again from (2.122),
	
I
C
W
L V
V
2 (
)
D
OX
GS
t
2
= µ
−
	
(2.130)
Due to channel-length modulation, the effective channel length becomes L − ΔL. 
The drain current in saturation can be written as
	
I
C
W
L
L V
V
2(
)(
)
D
OX
GS
t
2
= µ
−
−
	
I
C
W
L V
V
V
2 (
) (1
)
D
OX
GS
t
DS
2
= µ
−
+ λ
	
(2.131)
The above equation is the modified current equation of a MOSFET consider­
ing channel-length modulation.
The saturation current is not dependent on drain bias if one does not con­
sider channel-length modulation (λ = 0). However, in reality the saturation 
mode current increases linearly with drain bias. The slope of this current–
voltage curve in the saturation region is determined by the channel-length 
modulation parameter λ. Thus, in the saturation region the graph is not a 
straight line, and there is finite slope caused by channel-length modulation 
as in Figure 2.51(a).
The I
V
D
DS
−
 characteristics showing the effect of channel-length modula­
tion are shown in Figure 2.52. The observed linear dependence of ID  on VDS 
in the saturation region is represented in (2.131) by the factor (1 + λVDS). From 
Figure 2.52 it is seen that when the straight-line I
V
D
DS
−
 characteristics are 
extrapolated, they intercept the VDS axis at the point VDS = VA
−
, where VA 
1
λ
Drain Voltage
VGS2 > VGS1
VGS2
VGS1
ID
–
FIGURE 2.52
Effect of VDS on ID in the saturation region.

118
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
is a positive voltage. Equation (2.131) indicates that ID = 0 at VDS = –1/λ. It fol­
lows that VA  = 1/λ.
Therefore, VA  is a process-technology parameter with the dimensions of V. 
For a given process, VA  is proportional to the channel length L that the designer 
selects for a MOSFET. The voltage VA  is referred to as the Early voltage.
 Equation (2.131) shows that when channel-length modulation is taken into 
account, the saturation values of ID  depend on VDS . Thus, for a given VGS, 
a change 
VDS  causes a corresponding change 
ID  in the drain current ID. 
The output resistance of the current source representing ID  in saturation is 
no longer infinite. The output resistance ro is defined as
	
=
∂
∂




−
=
r
I
V
D
DS
V
constant
0
1
GS
	
(2.132)
	
r
K W
L V
V
I
V
I
2
(
)
1
n
GS
t
D
A
D
0
/
2
1
= λ
−




= λ
=
−
	
(2.133)
Thus the output resistance is inversely proportional to the drain current [39,40].
The output conductance gDS can be expressed as
	
=
∂
∂




= λ
=
g
I
V
I
DS
D
DS
V
constant
D
GS
	
(2.134)
λ is proportional to 1/L, and ID  is proportional to 1/L:
	
L
1
λα
	
(2.135)
	
I
L
1
Dα
	
(2.136)
Output conductance gDS  is strongly dependent on channel length, and this 
strong dependence is expressed by
	
g
L
1
DS
2
α



Unlike the Early effect in bipolar devices, the amount of channel-length 
modulation is under the circuit designer’s control. Because λ is inversely 
proportional to L, for a longer channel, the relative change in L for a given 
change in VDS  is smaller. We may conclude that channel length modulation 
is more prominent in short-channel devices as shown in Figure 2.53.

119
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
2.21  Substrate Bias Effects
The derivation of linear mode and saturation mode current-voltage char­
acteristics is done based on the assumption that the substrate potential is 
equal to the source potential (i.e., VSB = 0). The threshold voltage is calcu­
lated without considering the substrate voltage. However, in many digital 
applications, the source potential can be larger than the substrate potential 
(i.e., VSB > 0). The influence of non-zero VSB must be accounted for by the 
threshold voltage VT. So the modified VT must be applied to the current 
characteristics. The threshold voltage is a function of the bulk-to-source 
voltage VBS through the substrate bias effect or backgate effect. The application 
of VBS (a negative voltage to avoid forward biasing the bulk-to source p-n 
junction) increases the depletion width, which increases the bulk charge as 
shown in Figure 2.54 and, thus, the threshold voltage. A solution to avoid 
the backgate effect is to make VBS = 0 by electrically shorting the source to 
the bulk as in Figure 2.55.
VDS
VDS
ID
ID
L1
L2 > L1
FIGURE 2.53
Channel length modulation is more prominent for short-channel devices.
Depletion
charge Qd
Negative depletion
charge Qd
p-substrate
p-substrate
B
B
S
S
VB < 0
VB = 0
VG
VG
p+
p+
n+
n+
n+
n+
+ –
+ –
FIGURE 2.54
Variation of depletion charge with body effect.

120
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
2.22  MOS Transistor as a Switch
When a MOS transistor is in the linear region, the device acts as a linear 
resistor under gate voltage control. The transistor can be used as an on–off 
switch, as in Figure 2.56, if it operates in linear and cutoff regions. When the 
transistor is on, it operates in the linear region. The switch is turned off and 
the channel disappears by setting V
0
GS =
. Hence, only a small amount of 
leakage current flows at the drain end. The switch is turned on by setting 
V
V
GS
DD
=
, and the current path provides a resistance Rch. For a p-channel 
MOSFET the switch is turned on if V
V
GS
DD
=
. If the transistor is connected 
in series with a high-impedance circuit, the total current flowing through 
the transistor and the voltage drop V
I R
DS
ds
ch
=
 across the channel will be 
very small. In this context an input voltage source signal, V
I R
DS
ds
ch
=
, which 
is either zero or VDD representing logical 0 or 1, respectively, is applied as 
shown in Figure 2.57. The output voltage Vo is either held at its previous logic 
value (if the switch is open) or its capacitance C is charged up to Vin (if the 
gate voltage allows the transistor path to be closed). The transistor used in 
this way is called a pass transistor, and the process of transferring the charge 
from the input node to the output under the influence of gate voltage is called 
charge steering.
n type substrate
Active contact
for bulk
Source and bulk terminal shorted
p+
n+ source
n+ drain
p well
FIGURE 2.55
Source and bulk are tied together to reduce backgate effect.
Switch
closed
Switch
open
1
0
FIGURE 2.56
MOS transistor as a switch.

121
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
2.23  MOSFET Capacitance
The importance of capacitance is that it determines the delay or the speed of 
the circuit. In this section some basic facts about capacitance in a MOS device 
are presented. The capacitance of a MOS network depends on a number of 
factors, such as the physical structure of the MOS devices, the terminal volt­
ages, and the network topology. We discuss these factors briefly.
2.23.1  Overlap Capacitance
The gate of the MOSFET is isolated from the conducting channel by the gate 
oxide layer that has a capacitance per unit area equal to COX
t
ox
ox
= ε . From the 
basic drain current equation of MOSFET, it is seen that COX  must be made 
as large as possible (i.e., the oxide thickness tOX  must be very thin). The total 
value of this capacitance is called the gate capacitance CG, and it can be divided 
into two elements, each with a different behavior. One part of CG contributes 
to the channel charge and is discussed in a subsequent section. Another part 
is solely due to the topological structure of the transistor. Let the transistor 
structure of Figure 2.58 be considered.
C
Vout
Vin
FIGURE 2.57
MOSFET as a pass transistor.
Gate-body
overlap
Drain
W
Source
Top view
Polysilicon gate
Ld
xd
xd
FIGURE 2.58
Overlap capacitance in MOSFET.

122
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Ideally, the source and drain regions should end at the edge of the gate 
oxide. In reality, both the source and the drain tend to extend somewhat 
below the oxide by an amount xd, called the lateral diffusion length. Hence, the 
effective channel of the transistor L becomes shorter than the length Ld (the 
length the transistor was originally designed for) by a factor ΔL = 2xd. It also 
gives rise to a parasitic capacitance between the gate and the source (drain) 
that is called the overlap capacitance. This capacitance is strictly linear and has 
a fixed value:
	
CGSO = CGDO = COXxdW = COW	
(2.137)
Because xd  is a technology-determined parameter, it is customary to com­
bine it with the oxide capacitance to yield the overlap capacitance per unit 
transistor width Co.
2.23.2  Channel Capacitance
This is the most important MOS parasitic circuit element, the gate-to-channel 
capacitance CGC is divided into CGCS, CGCD, and CGCB (being the gate-to-source, 
gate-to-drain, and gate-to-body capacitances, respectively), depending upon 
the operation region and terminal voltages. This varying distribution is 
best explained with the simple diagrams of Figure 2.59. When the transis­
tor is in cutoff as in Figure 2.59(a), no channel exists, and the total capaci­
tance CGC appears between the gate and the body. In the resistive region 
as in Figure 2.59(b), an inversion layer is created, which acts as a conductor 
between the source and the drain. Consequently, CGCB = 0 as the body elec­
trode is shielded from the gate by the channel. From symmetry, the capaci­
tance distributes evenly between source and drain. Finally, in the saturation 
mode as in Figure 2.59(c), the channel is pinched off. The capacitance between 
gate and drain is approximately zero, and so is the gate-body capacitance. 
Hence, all the capacitances are between the gate and the source.
The actual value of the total gate-channel capacitance and its distribution 
over the three components is best explained with the help of a number of 
charts. The plot in Figure 2.60(a) shows the evolution of the capacitance as a 
D
D
D
G
G
G
CGC
CGC
CGC
(a) Cut oﬀ
(b) Resistive
(c) Saturation
S
S
S
FIGURE 2.59
The gate-to-channel capacitance and their distribution over the other three terminals depend­
ing upon the operation region.

123
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
function of VGS for VDS = 0. For VGS = 0, the transistor is off as no channel is 
present, and the total capacitance, equal to WLCox, appears between the gate 
and the body. When VGS is increased, a depletion region is formed under the 
gate. This causes the thickness of the gate dielectric to increase, which means 
a reduction in capacitance. Once the transistor turns on (VGS = Vth), a channel 
is formed and CGCB drops off to 0. With VDS = 0, the device operates in the 
resistive mode and the capacitance divides equally between the source and 
the drain, or CGCS = CGCD = WLCox/2. A designer must avoid operation in this 
region.
When the transistor is on, the distribution of its gate capacitance depends 
on the degree of saturation, measured by VDS/(VGS – Vth). As in Figure 2.60(b), 
CGCD gradually drops to 0 for increasing levels of saturation, while CGCS 
increases to 2/3 COXWL. This also means that the total gate capacitance 
decreases with an increased level of saturation.
VGS
CGCS = CGCD
CGC
CGCB
Vth
WLCOX/2
WLCOX
(a)
VDS/(VGS – Vth)
CGCS
CGC
CGCB
0
1
WLCOX/2
2WLCOX/3
WLCOX
(b)
FIGURE 2.60
Distribution of the gate-channel capacitance as a function of VGS and VDS. (a) CGC as a function 
of VGS when VDS = 0. (b) CGC as a function of degree of saturation.

124
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
2.23.3	 Junction Capacitances
Another capacitive component is contributed by the reverse-biased source-
body and drain body p-n junctions. The depletion-region capacitance is non­
linear and decreases when the reverse bias is increased. To understand the 
components of the junction capacitance (called the diffusion capacitance), we 
must look at the source (drain) region and its surroundings. The detailed 
picture, shown in Figure  2.61, shows that the junction consists of two 
components.
The bottom-plate junction is formed by the source region (with doping ND) 
and the substrate with doping NA. The total depletion region capacitance for 
this component equals CBottom = CJWLS, with CJ as the junction capacitance 
per unit area.
The side-wall junction is formed by the source region with doping ND 
and the p+ channel-stop implant with doping level NA
+. The doping level 
of this stopper is usually greater than that of the substrate, resulting in a 
larger capacitance per unit area. Its capacitance value equals CSW = C’
JSWxj 
(W + 2LS). It is to be noted that no side-wall capacitance is counted for 
the fourth side of the source region, as this represents the conductive 
channel. Because xJ, the junction depth, is a technology parameter, it is 
normally combined with C′JSW to give a capacitance per unit perimeter, 
CJSW = C′JSW.xJ. An expression for the total junction capacitance can then 
be derived as
	
CDiff  = CBottom + CSW = CJ* AREA + CJSW*  PERIMETER
	
= CJLSW + CJSW (2LS + W)	
(2.138)
P-type substrate NA
LS
xj
Side wall
Bottom
Source
ND
Channel stop implant NA
+
W
Channel
FIGURE 2.61
Schematic view of the source junction.

125
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
2.23.4  Different MOS Capacitors Together
All the above contributions can be combined in a single capacitive model 
for the MOS transistor, shown in Figure 2.62. Its components are identified 
based on the preceding discussions.
	
CGS = CGCS + CGSO;  CGD = CGCD + CGDO	
(2.139)
	
CGB = CGCB	
(2.140)	
	
CSB = CSdiff;  CDB = CDdiff	
(2.141)
2.23.5  Summary of MOS Capacitances
The structure of a MOS transistor is that of a parallel-plate capacitor. The 
oxide layer acts as an insulator between the two conducting plates: the gate 
(in polysilicon or metal) and the substrate. The parallel-plate capacitance per 
unit area is given as
	
C
t
farad cm
/
OX
r
ox
0
2
= ε ε
	
(2.142)
where εr = 3.9 is the dielectric constant of the oxide, ε0 = 8.85 × 1014 F/cm2 is 
the free-space permittivity, and tox is the oxide thickness. The value of COX 
remains relatively constant but decreases slightly with increase in substrate 
Bulk
Gate
CSB
CDB
CGD
CGS
Source
Drain
FIGURE 2.62
Different capacitances in MOSFET.

126
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
voltage. For semiconductors, the capacitance values are very small and are 
expressed in units of picofarad (10–12 farad, denoted by pF) or femtofarad 
(10–15 farad, denoted fF). Similar parallel-plate capacitances are also formed if 
any overlap regions exist between the gate and the source or the gate and the 
drain. Even for self-aligned process, a certain amount of channel capacitance 
between the gate-to-source and the gate-to-drain will exist. These capaci­
tances are denoted CGSO and CGDO, respectively, and must be added with COX 
to find the total gate capacitance CG of the MOS transistor because they are 
all connected in parallel. The values of these capacitances are specified by the 
manufacturer with gate voltage VG, negative or zero—that is, with no deple­
tion region underneath the gate. With an increase in the gate voltage the 
phenomena of accumulation, depletion, and inversion start to take place. A 
depletion capacitance CD, formed between the gate and the depletion region 
boundary, connected in series with COX lowers the effective gate capacitance 
CG. This is shown in Figure 2.63. The value of CD depends on the depth of the 
depletion region. The initial depth of the depletion region depends on the 
built-in contact or barrier potential (typical value 0.7 V) and then increases 
with increasing VGS. As VGS is increased so as to exceed the threshold volt­
age Vth, inversion takes place and the channel forms the conducting plate 
instead of the substrate, the depletion capacitances no longer exist, and the 
total capacitance shows a marked increase compared to its original oxide 
capacitance value.
Here we have assumed that the gate voltage is static or varies very slowly 
so that the phenomena of accumulation, depletion, and inversion take place 
in proper sequence. If V varies very rapidly (i.e., when the signal frequency 
of the gate voltage is rather high), the channel may not be formed. On aver­
age the device will appear to be in the depleted state all the time, bringing 
in the effects of the depletion capacitances CD to reduce the total capacitance 
(Figure 2.63). This dynamic behavior of the capacitance does not really con­
cern us because we will have to operate at considerably lower frequency to 
guarantee proper switching of each transistor.
It is seen that one part of the capacitances CGS and CGD is due to the gate 
overlaps at the source and the drain sides. Even if there is no overlap, it is 
VGS
Vth
Gate
capacitance
FIGURE 2.63
Variation of the gate capacitance with gate voltage.

127
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
useful to visualize CG as consisting of a parallel connection of CGCS and CGCD 
because the channel can be viewed as a physical extension of the source and 
the drain regions. When the transistor is operating in the linear region, the 
two component capacitances have almost equal value; that is, CGCS = CGCD = 
0.5 CGC = 0.5 COXWL. When the transistor is saturated, the channel disappears 
near the drain end and we can assume that CGCS = CGC = 2/3 COXWL.
2.23.6  Interconnect Capacitances
The so-called stray or wiring capacitances of the paths connecting the active 
channels could become significantly high, depending on the length of the 
wire, accounting for a major part of the circuit delays. This is because the 
wiring capacitances need to be charged up together with the gate capaci­
tances for signals to be detected by the transistors. It is therefore convenient 
to be able to express the wiring capacitances in terms of the gate capacitance 
of a transistor of some standard size. It is also important to recognize that the 
diffusion wires are buried in the substrate, and their capacitance depends 
on two factors: the total area and the perimeter of the wire. The perimeter 
determines the so-called “side-wall” capacitance, which is at least 20% of the 
capacitance determined by the total area.
The relevant capacitances are denoted as
CG: gate capacitance (pF/μm2)
Cpln: p-channel source—drain capacitance
Cnln: n-channel source—drain capacitance
Cmf: metal-to-field oxide capacitance
Cmp: metal-to-polysilicon capacitance
Cmt: metal-to-oxide capacitance
Cpf: polysilicon-to-field oxide capacitance
2.24  Moore’s Law
Since the invention of the first calculation machines, miniaturization has been 
a constant challenge to increase speed and complexity in the microelectron­
ics industry. Linear scaling of device dimensions to a quasi-nanometer level 
allows building a complex system integrated on a chip which reduces the vol­
ume and power consumption per function, while increasing speed [42–45].
The steady downscaling of transistor dimensions over the past two decades 
has been the main stimulus to the growth of silicon integrated circuits (ICs) 
and the information industry. Moore’s law [42], which states that the number of 

128
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
transistors on a given chip can be doubled every two years, has been the guid­
ing principle of the continuous reduction of CMOS device dimension since 
Gordon Moore, co-founder of Intel, first predicted it in 1965. Over the last few 
decades, CMOS devices have been scaled down to the sub-100-nm regime. 
Although the basic device geometry has remained relatively unchanged, the 
gate length has been reduced from 10 mm in the 1970s to less than 0.1 μm in 
2001, and the gate oxide thickness from 1000 Å to less than 20 Å [43].
2.25  Introduction to Scaling
MOS transistors are scaled primarily due to the two reasons mentioned below:
	
1. Increased device packing density: The design of high-density chips in 
MOS VLSI technology requires that the packing density of MOSFETs 
be as high as possible, such that the sizes of the transistors are as 
small as possible.
	
2. Improved frequency response (transit time) is proportional to 1/L: 
If the length of the device is small, then the transit time required 
for the charged carrier to move from the source to the drain end is 
small, and thus the device can be operated at higher frequencies.
Two types of scaling are common:
• Constant field scaling
• Constant voltage scaling
Constant field scaling warrants a reduction in the power supply voltage as the 
minimum feature size is decreased, but it yields the largest reduction in the 
power-delay product of a single transistor. In contrast, power supply voltage is 
not reduced in the constant voltage scaling and is therefore the preferred scaling 
method because it provides voltage compatibility with older circuit technologies. 
The disadvantage of the constant voltage scaling is that the electric field increases 
as the minimum feature length is reduced. This leads to velocity saturation, mobil­
ity degradation, increased leakage currents, and lower breakdown voltages.
2.26  Constant Field Scaling
The principle of constant field scaling is that the device dimension and the 
device voltages are to be scaled in such a way that both the horizontal and 
vertical electric fields remain essentially constant [46]. To ensure the reliabil­
ity of the device, the electric field in the scaled device must not increase. This 

129
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
scaling attempts to preserve the magnitude of internal electric fields in the 
MOSFET, while the dimensions are scaled down. To achieve this, all voltages 
must be scaled down in proportion to the device dimension.
The channel length is scaled from L to αL (α > 1). To maintain a constant 
horizontal electric field, drain voltage must be scaled from VDS to VDS/α. The 
gate voltage should also be scaled from VGS to VGS/α, so that the gate and the 
drain voltages remain compatible. To ensure a constant vertical electric field, 
gate oxide thickness must also be scaled from tox to tox/α.
Because the channel length is being reduced, the depletion width also 
needs to be reduced. If the substrate doping concentration is increased by 
the factor (α), then the depletion width is reduced approximately by the same 
factor α, because VDS is reduced by 1/α.
2.27  Constant Voltage Scaling
In constant voltage scaling, all dimensions of the MOSFET are reduced by a 
factor of α (>1) as in constant field scaling. The power supply voltage and the 
terminal voltages, on the other hand, remain unchanged. Because the chan­
nel length is being reduced, the depletion width also needs to be reduced. If 
the substrate doping concentration is increased by the factor (α2), then deple­
tion width is reduced approximately by the factor α.
2.28  Why Constant Voltage Scaling Is More 
Useful than Constant Field Scaling
In constant field scaling, the scaling of voltages will be unpractical in many 
cases. In particular, the peripheral and interface circuitry may require cer­
tain voltage levels for all input and output voltages. To accommodate the 
different voltage levels, the multiple power supply arrangement is necessary, 
and complicated level shifters are required. To get rid of these external volt­
age level constraints, constant voltage scaling is preferred, knowing that it 
can cause serious device reliability issues. In actual technology evolution, 
the voltages need not be reduced with the same scaling factor.
2.29  ITRS Roadmap for Semiconductors
Due to the significant resources and investments required to develop the 
next generation of CMOS technologies, it is necessary to identify goals and 
put collective efforts toward developing new equipment and technologies. 

130
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
The semiconductor roadmap represents a consensus among industry leaders 
and gives projected needs based on past trends. The International Technology 
Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS) [47] is the standard accepted roadmap. 
Figure 2.64 shows the roadmap specifications for drive current and off-state 
leakage current for high-performance circuits, along with the associated 
power supply voltages and the technology nodes. The drive currents of the 
nMOSFET/pMOSFET are fixed at constant values of 750/350 µA/µm, while 
the off-state leakage current continually increases with scaling. The gate 
insulator needs to be aggressively scaled down to improve the drive current 
and to suppress short-channel effects. In the 130 nm technology node with 
a 70 nm physical gate length, the gate oxide thickness is only 15 Å, which is 
approximately six atomic layers thick. To continue past trends in CMOS scal­
ing, a sub-10 Å effective oxide thickness will soon be required, which is about 
four atomic layers thick. Beyond that point, SiO2 may lose its properties as an 
insulator, and we may need a different materials system. The roadmap distin­
guishes two different applications: high-performance and low-power circuits.
In summary, scaling improves cost, speed, and power per function with 
every new technology generation. All of these attributes have been improved 
by 10 to 100 million times in four decades—an engineering achievement 
unmatched in human history.
2.30  Different Groups of MOSFETs
Moving a design from an old technology to a newer one, with smaller 
design rules, has always been an interesting way to lower power consump­
tion and to obtain higher speed. The overall parasitic capacitances (i.e., gates 
1.8
2
180 nm node
LG = 140 nm
tOX = 25Å
LG = 120 nm
tOX = 22Å
130 nm node
LG = 85 nm
tOX = 17Å
LG = 100 nm
tOX = 19Å
LG = 80 nm
tOX = 16Å
LG = 70 nm
tOX = 14Å
100 nm
node
LG = 65 nm
tOX = 13Å
35 nm node
LG = 22 nm
tOX = 5.5Å
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
100
101
102
Target Supply Voltage (V)
Ioﬀ (nA/micrometer)
FIGURE 2.64
ITRS roadmaps for high-performance technologies for the year 1999. Plot of target IOFF versus 
VDD [47].

131
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
and interconnects) are decreased, the available active current per device 
is higher, and consequently, the same performance can be achieved with 
a lower supply voltage. Moving to a new technology generation, however, 
induces a scale down of the power supply voltage (Vdd), the threshold voltage 
(Vth), and the gate oxide thickness (TOX). Starting from the 0.18 μm technolo­
gies, it appeared that building a transistor with a good active current (Ion) 
and a low leakage current (Ioff) was becoming more difficult. The four main 
causes of limitations are as follows:
	
1. Voltage limits and subthreshold leakage
	
2. Tunneling currents
	
3. Statistical dispersions
	
4. Poly depletion and quantum effects
Two families of transistors were introduced: high-speed transistors and low-
leakage transistors. The threshold voltages of the two families are tuned dif­
ferently, using different channel doping. When moving to more advanced 
technologies, those two families are no longer sufficient regarding techno­
logical constraints. The ITRS introduces three main groups of transistors:
	
1. High performance (HP)
	
2. Low operating power (LOP)
	
3. Low standby power (LSTP)
A new kind of MOS device has been introduced in deep submicron technolo­
gies, starting from the 0.18 µm CMOS process generation. The new MOS, 
called a low leakage MOS device, is available as well as the original, called 
high-speed MOS.
For I/Os operating at high voltage, specific MOS devices called high volt­
age MOS are used. The high voltage MOS is built using a thick oxide, two to 
three times thicker than the low voltage MOS, for handling high voltages, as 
required by the I/O interfaces, shown in Figure 2.65(a),(b), and (c).
VDS
Low Leakage
High Voltage
High Speed
ION
ION
IDS
IDS
IDS
VDS
VDS
VGS = 1.8V
VGS = 1.8V
VGS = 1.8V
VGS = 3.3V
FIGURE 2.65
Three different types of MOSFETs introduced by ITRS roadmap.

132
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
2.31  Short-Channel Effects of MOSFET
A MOSFET device is considered to be short when the channel length is of 
the same order of magnitude as the depletion-layer widths (xdD, xdS) of the 
source and the drain junctions. Short-channel effects occur as the channel 
length L is reduced to increase both the operation speed and the number of 
components per chip.
The short-channel effects are attributed to two physical phenomena:
	
1.	The limitation imposed on electron drift characteristics in the channel
	
2.	The modification of the threshold voltage due to the shortening of 
the channel length
Reduction of channel length of MOSFETs leads to the short-channel effects 
such as:
• Reduction in the threshold voltage
• Drain-induced barrier lowering
• Increase in the saturation drain current with increasing VDS
• Increase in the off-state leakage current
• Punch-through effect
• Mobility degradation
• Increase in the parasitic resistance and the capacitance
• Hot carrier effect
All these effects are discussed in detail in the following sections.
2.32  Reduction of the Effective Threshold Voltage
In a long-channel device, channel formation is controlled by the gate and 
the substrate. The gate voltage controls all the space charge induced in the 
channel region. As the channel length decreases, the charge in the channel 
region decreases. As the drain bias is increased, the reverse biased space 
charge region at the drain extends farther into the channel and the gate con­
trol decreases (i.e., in a short-channel device the n+ type source and the drain 
induce a large amount of the depletion charge which cannot be neglected). 
For short-channel devices, the charge control of the channel is shared by the 
four terminals (gate, substrate, source, and drain), called charge sharing. The 

133
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
depletion regions of the source and the drain are very close to each other. 
Through a charge sharing mechanism as in Figure 2.66, this phenomenon can 
be explained as in [48]. In case of a short-channel device, a considerable por­
tion of the field lines emanating from the bulk charge terminate in the source 
and the drain regions instead of the gate. It is easier for the gate to deplete the 
amount of channel charge, lowering the threshold voltage of the device.
To sum up,
• Long-channel MOS transistor: The depletion is only due to the electric 
field created by the gate voltage.
• Small-geometry transistor: In addition to the previous contribution, the 
depletion charge near n+ regions contributes a significant amount of 
the depletion charge.
The expression of the threshold voltage in long-channel MOSFET thus 
overestimates the depletion charge supported by the gate voltage. Thus the 
amount of the gate voltage required to offset the depletion charge reduces. 
The estimated threshold voltage value from the threshold voltage expression 
of long-channel MOSFET will be larger than the actual value of the short-
channel MOSFET.
Imaged by the
source the drain
–
–
+
+
+ + +
+
+
+
+ + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
+
+
+
+ + +
+
+
Imaged by gate
p-substrate
n+ Source
n+ Drain
Poly
Oxide
Channel
inversion layer
Depeletion
region
Gate
FIGURE 2.66
Charge sharing between the source/drain depletion regions and the channel depletion region.

134
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
The deeper depletion region is accompanied by larger surface potential, 
making the channel more attractive for electrons. Thus the device can con­
duct more current. This effect may be considered as the reduction of Vth, as 
the drain current is the function of (VGS – Vth). Increase in VDS and reduc­
tion of channel length will decrease the effective threshold voltage. In other 
words, the bulk depletion charge contributed by the gate is smaller than the 
expected charge, controlled solely by the gate, as a significant portion of the 
total depletion region charge under the gate is actually due to the source 
and the drain depletion junction. As the threshold voltage is a function of 
bulk depletion charge induced by the gate, the expression must be modi­
fied to account for this reduction in the bulk depletion charge. The threshold 
voltage of the short-channel MOSFET can be expressed as Vth (SC) = Vth – VthO, 
where VthO is the change in threshold voltage from the long to the short-
channel MOSFET.
The depletion due to the source and the drain contacts encroaches 
substantially underneath the gate, decreasing the additional gate volt­
age required to create the strong inversion compared to the long-channel 
case. This is shown in Figure 2.67 where the source and the drain regions 
are assumed to be cylindrical with radius xj and the depletion depth of 
extent xd.
The amount of charge imaging on the gate electrode is assumed by a 
trapezoidal approximation to be
	
Q
qN x
L
L
2
B
A
d
/
/
= −
+



	
(2.143)
In the long-channel case,
	
Q
qN x L
B
A
d
= −
	
(2.144)
L´
n+
n+
xj
xd
L
FIGURE 2.67
Schematic of the channel region of a short-channel MOSFET.

135
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
The charge in the shaded regions image is on the gate and not on the con­
tacts. Thus the reduced bulk charge is the source of the reduced threshold 
voltage from
	
V
V
Q
C
2
T
F
FB
B
OX
= Φ +
−
	
(2.145)
	
V
V
Q
C
2
T
F
FB
B
OX
/
/
= Φ +
−
	
(2.146)
	
V
Q
Q
C
Q
C
Q
Q
1
T
B
B
OX
B
OX
B
B
/
/
=
−
=
−




	
(2.147)
Now as L
L
/ →, then Q
Q
B
B
/  ◊ 1 (i.e., the long-channel case).
2.33  Hot Electron Effects
The longitudinal electric field in the channel increases from the source to the 
drain ends. For abrupt source and drain junctions, the peak field is at the drain-
to-channel junction, and its value depends on VDS and L. When carriers move in 
the electric fields that exceed the value of the onset velocity saturation, they con­
tinue to acquire kinetic energy from the electric field, but their velocity is ran­
domized by the excessive collision such that their velocity along the electric field 
direction no longer increases but their random kinetic energy does. Depending 
on the statistics of scattering, a small fraction of the overall carrier population 
acquires a significant energy, and these are called hot carriers. The electric field 
heats the normal lattice electrons coming into the pinch-off region [49].
The carriers crossing from the inverted channel pinch-off point to the 
drain travel at their maximum saturated speed, and so gain their maximum 
kinetic energy in saturation. These carriers having high energy are called hot 
carriers. They travel from the source to the drain along the channel gaining 
kinetic energy at the expense of electrostatic potential energy in the pinch-
off region, and they behave as a hot electron. Some of them obtain energy 
to create impact ionization with silicon lattice atoms, as a result of which 
new electrons and holes are created: this effect is referred to as weak ava­
lanche. The new electrons created join the other channel electrons and move 
toward the drain. Some hot carriers in small numbers can acquire enough 
energy so as to surmount the Si-SiO2 interface barrier and thus move into 
the gate oxide as in Figure 2.68. Most of the injected carriers are collected by 
the gate electrode resulting in the gate current IG, reducing the input imped­
ance. Because the barrier potential for this process is very high, the number 
of hot carriers injected into the gate will be much smaller compared to those 

136
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
causing impact ionization. Therefore, the gate current will be smaller than the 
substrate current by a few orders of magnitude. It must be noted that carriers 
can also enter the gate oxide by tunneling. For direct tunneling, the oxide 
has to be very thin and the field is high. Even for the thicker oxide, the carrier 
with energy less than the energy barrier can tunnel through the barrier. This 
effect is called Fowler-Nordheim tunneling.
A small fraction of the high energy carriers create damage at the silicon-
oxide interface which manifests itself as an increase in the interface state 
density, and yet another fraction becomes trapped in the oxide. The traps 
in the oxide significantly affect reliability. The accumulation of such traps 
behaves as a fixed oxide charge, causing a change in the threshold voltage of 
the device, and this affects the gate’s control, giving rise to oxide breakdown.
A lightly doped drain (LDD) structure can reduce this hot-carrier effect. This 
is because, in such a case, part of the depletion region would be inside the 
drain, absorbing some of the potential that otherwise would exist in the 
pinch-off region, and lowering the maximal electric field.
2.34  Avalanche Breakdown and Parasitic Bipolar Action
An undesirable short-channel effect that occurs due to the high velocity 
of electrons in the presence of a large longitudinal electric field generates 
electron-hole pairs by impact ionization of the silicon atoms as in [50]. The 
presence of high longitudinal fields in a short-channel MOSFET can acceler­
ate electrons that can ionize silicon atoms by impacting against them.
Gate
Direct
tunneling
Fowler-Nordheim
tunneling
Injection over
barrier
Hot carriers
EC
EV
Silicon
Oxide
FIGURE 2.68
Three types of carrier injection into the gate causing hot carrier effects.

137
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
When the electric field in the channel is increased, due to high energetic 
hot electrons, avalanche breakdown occurs in the channel at the drain end. This 
increases the flow of current. The electrons are attracted by the drain, while 
the holes enter the substrate to form part of the parasitic substrate current.
There is also parasitic bipolar action taking place. The region between the 
source and the drain can act like the base of an n-p-n transistor, with the 
source playing the role of the emitter and the drain that of the collector. Holes 
generated by the avalanche breakdown move from the drain to the substrate 
underneath the inversion layer. The hole current forward biases the source-
body p-n diode. Also if the holes coming from avalanche are collected by 
the source and the corresponding hole current creates a voltage drop in the 
substrate material of the order of 0.6V, the normally reverse biased substrate 
source p-n junction will conduct appreciably. The electrons are also injected 
as the minority carriers into the p-type substrate underneath the inversion 
layer from the forward biased junction, similar to the injection of electrons 
from the emitter to the base. They can obtain enough energy as they move 
toward the drain to create new e-h pairs. These electrons arrive at the drain 
and create further electron-hole pairs through the avalanche multiplication. 
The positive feedback between the avalanche breakdown and the parasitic 
bipolar action results in breakdown at lower drain voltage. The process is 
shown in Figure 2.69, and the steps are as follows:
Process 1: Hot carriers having sufficient energy to overcome the oxide-
Si barrier are injected from the channel to the gate oxide (process 1) 
causing the gate current to flow. Trapping of some of this charge can 
change Vth permanently.
Process 2: Avalanching can take place producing electron-hole pairs.
Process 3: The holes produced by avalanching are collected by the sub­
strate contact causing parasitic substrate current Isub.
Process 4: Voltage drop due to Isub can cause the substrate-source junc­
tion to be forward biased.
Process 5: The forward biased substrate-source junction causes the 
minority electrons to be injected from the source into the substrate. 
Some of them are collected by the reverse biased drain and cause a 
parasitic bipolar action.
2.35  DIBL (Drain-Induced Barrier Lowering)
The population of channel carriers in the long channel devices is controlled by 
the gate voltage that creates the vertical electric field, whereas the horizontal 
field controls the current between the drain and the source. The current flow 
in the channel depends on creating and maintaining an inversion layer on 

138
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
the surface. If the gate voltage is not sufficient to invert the surface (VG < Vth), 
the carriers (electrons) in the channel face a potential barrier that blocks the 
flow. Increasing the gate voltage reduces this potential barrier and eventually 
allows the flow of carriers under the influence of the channel electric field.
In long-channel devices, the horizontal and the vertical electric fields can be 
treated as having separate effects on the device characteristics. When the device 
is scaled down, the drain region moves closer to the source, and its electric field 
influences the whole channel. The drain-induced electric field also plays a role 
in attracting carriers to the channel without the control from the gate terminal. 
This effect is known as drain-induced barrier lowering (DIBL) because the drain 
lowers the potential barrier for the source carriers to form the channel. The 
threshold voltage lowers to feel the impact of this effect. DIBL attracts carriers 
with a loss in the gate control resulting in increased off-state leakage current.
2.36  Velocity Saturation in MOSFET
Velocity saturation due to the mobility reduction is important in the sub-
micron devices. In the derivation of I-V relationship of the long-channel 
MOSFET, we explicitly assume that the mobility is a constant. However, this 
Impact
ionization
Holes
swept into
base
Potential drop due to hole current
make substrate-to-source junction
forward biased
Additional electron
injection into the
drain
Channel current
Oxide
(1)
+
–
–
–
RB
Isub
VG
VD
–
+
(4)
(3)
(5)
(2)
n+
n+
FIGURE 2.69
Impact ionization and parasitic bipolar action in a short-channel MOSFET.

139
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
assumption must be modified for two reasons. Two effects are combined in 
the transistors to account for this mobility; reduction due to the horizontal 
electric field, and the mobility reduction due to the vertical electric field.
The performance of short-channeled devices is also affected by the velocity 
saturation, which reduces the transconductance in the saturation mode. At low 
electric field, the electron drift velocity Vd in the channel varies linearly with 
the electric field intensity [51]. However, as the electric field increases above 
104 V/cm, the drift velocity tends to increase more slowly, and approaches a 
saturation value of Vd(sat) = 107 cm/s around the electric field = 105 v/cm at 300 K.
For a MOS device, if VDS = 5 V and the channel length L = 1 µm, the aver­
age electric field is 5 * 104 V/cm, and thus velocity saturation is more likely to 
occur in the short-channel devices for length L < 1 µm because drift velocity 
saturates around electric field = 105 V/cm.
Due to very high longitudinal electric field (drain bias) in the pinch-off region 
in long-channel devices, the carrier velocity saturates. This is more prominent 
in the short-channel devices as the corresponding horizontal electric field is 
generally even larger than long-channel MOSFET. For an ideal long-channel 
I-V relationship, the current saturation occurs when the inversion charge den­
sity becomes zero at the drain terminal or when VDS = VDS(sat) = VGS – Vth.
However, velocity saturation can change this condition. Velocity satura­
tion will yield an ID(sat) value smaller than that predicted in an ideal relation, 
and it will yield a smaller VDS (sat) value than predicted. In a short-channel 
MOSFET before attaining pinch off, carrier drift velocity saturates and thus 
the current saturation occurs at a low value of VDS. ID will be linear with 
VGS. The short-channel devices therefore experience an extended saturation 
region and tend to operate more often in saturation conditions than their 
long-channel counterparts, as shown in Figure 2.70.
VDS
In volts
IDS
In mA
VGS – Vth
VDSsat
0
Short channel
MOSFET
Long channel
MOSFET
FIGURE 2.70
Current saturates in short-channel devices for small VDS.

140
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
2.37  Mobility Degradation
There are two reasons for mobility reduction in MOSFET:
	
1.	Due to the vertical electric field
	
2.	Due to the horizontal electric field
2.37.1  Vertical Electric Field Mobility Degradation
A vertical electric field exists in MOSFET due to the applied gate voltage, 
which creates the conduction channel. When carriers move within the chan­
nel under the effect of the horizontal electric field, they feel the effect of the 
gate-induced vertical electric field, pushing carriers toward the gate oxide. 
This causes the carriers to collide with the oxide-channel interface. The 
oxide-channel interface is rough and imperfect, and carriers thus lose mobil­
ity. This effect is called surface scattering. It reduces mobility. If there is a posi­
tive fixed oxide charge near the oxide-semiconductor interface, the mobility 
will be further reduced due to additional coulomb attraction.
The effective inversion charge mobility is a strong function of temperature 
because of lattice scattering. As temperature decreases, mobility increases. The 
mobility used in the MOSFET model is not the mobility of electrons in the 
silicon crystal, called bulk mobility. Rather, it is a surface mobility. The surface 
mobility is lower than the bulk mobility because of increased scattering of 
the electrons at the silicon-oxide interface, as shown in Figure 2.71. The sur­
face mobility depends on how much the electrons interact with the interface 
and, therefore, on the vertical electric field that “pushes” the electrons against 
the interface. The higher the electric field, the lower is the surface mobility.
2.37.2  Surface Scattering
The mobility is reduced in a small dimension compared to a larger dimen­
sion due to an increase in the average vertical field in the inversion layer. As 
the channel length becomes smaller due to the lateral extension of the deple­
tion layer into the channel region, the longitudinal electric field component 
Ey increases, and the surface mobility becomes field dependent. Because the 
carrier transport in a MOSFET is confined within the narrow inversion layer, 
and the surface scattering (the collisions suffered by the electrons that are 
accelerated toward the interface by Ey) causes reduction of the mobility, the 
electrons move with great difficulty parallel to the interface, so that the aver­
age surface mobility, even for small values of Ey, is about half as much as that 
of the bulk mobility. The mobility in the inversion layer is distinctly lower 
than in bulk material. This is due to the fact that the electron wave-function 

141
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
extends into the oxide and the carrier mobility is lowered due to the lower 
mobility in the oxide.
2.37.3  Horizontal Electric Field Mobility Degradation
The mobility degradation due to the lateral field Ey (drain voltage) plays a 
more significant effect on the device current equations than does the normal 
field Ex (gate voltage). This is because an increase in the lateral field even­
tually causes velocity saturation of the carriers. For a given normal field, 
the velocity v of a carrier is proportional to Ey, at low lateral fields, and the 
proportionality constant is the surface mobility µs. However, as Ey increases, 
the carrier velocity tends to saturate. Carriers in the short-channel devices 
reach the velocity saturation at lower values of VDS than for the long-channel 
Carrier Surface Scattering
Drain
Inversion layer
Oxide
Space charge
Inversion charge layer
Induced space charge
P-substrate
Vertical E-Field
n+
VDS
+VGS
n+
FIGURE 2.71
Vertical electric field in a short-channel MOSFET and due to that, surface scattering is seen.

142
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
devices. This effect is due to the channel length reduction that implies higher 
horizontal electric fields for equivalent drain to-source voltages than the 
long-channel MOSFETs. The horizontal electric field within the channel is 
due to the voltage applied to the drain terminal. Due to this horizontal elec­
tric field, horizontal mobility also decreases.
References
	
1.	 Bart Van Zeghbroeck, Principles of Semiconductor Devices, Department of ECE, 
University of Colorado, 2007.
	
2.	 H.J. Juretschke, Crystal Physics, W.A. Benjamin, New York, 1974.
	
3.	 J.F. Nye, Physical Properties of Crystals, Oxford University Press, New York, 1979.
	
4.	 C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, Wiley, New York, 1976.
	
5.	 R.H. Bube, Electrons in Solids, 3rd ed., Academic Press, New York, 1992.
	
6.	 B.G. Streetman, Solid State Electronic Devices, 4th ed., Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ, 1995.
	
7.	 W.A. Harrison, Solid State Theory, Dover, New York, 1974.
	
8.	 W. VanRoosbroeck, Theory of flow of electrons and holes in germanium and 
other semiconductors, Bell Syst. Techn. J., vol. 29, pp. 560–607, 1950.
	
9.	 R. Entner, Modeling and Simulation of Negative Bias Temperature Instability, 
dissertation, Technical Universität Wien, Vienna, Austria, 2007.
	 10.	 M.S. Lundstrom, Fundamentals of Carrier Transport, 1st ed., Addison-Wesley, 
Reading, MA, 1990.
	 11.	 G. Baccarani, F. Odeh, A. Gnudi, and D. Ventura, Semiconductors Part II, A criti­
cal review of the fundamental semiconductor equations, The IMA Volumes in 
Mathematics and its Applications, vol. 59, pp. 19–32, Springer-Verlag, New York, 
1994.
	 12.	 Dragica Vasilesca and Stephen M. Goodnick, Computational Electronics, 1st ed., 
Morgan and Claypool, San Rafael, CA, 2006.
	 13.	 E.M. Conwell, High Field Transport in Semiconductors, Academic Press, New 
York, 1967.
	 14.	 D.L. Rode, Low field transport in semiconductors, Semiconductors and Semimetals, 
vol. 10, pp. 1–90, Academic Press, New York, 1972.
	 15.	 C. Jacoboni and L. Reggiani, The Monte Carlo method for the solution of charge 
transport in semiconductors with applications to covalent materials, Rev. Mod. 
Phys., vol. 55, pp. 645–705, 1983.
	 16.	 M.V. Fischetti and S.E. Laux, Monte Carlo analysis of electron transport in small 
semiconductor devices including band-structure and space-charge effects, Phys. 
Rev. B, vol. 38, pp. 9721–9745, 1988.
	 17.	 T. Kunikiyo et al., A Monte Carlo simulation of anisotropic electron transport in 
Silicon including full band structure and anisotropic impact-ionization model, 
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 75, pp. 297–312, 1994.
	 18.	 A. Pacelli and U. Ravaioli, Analysis of variance reduction schemes for ensemble 
Monte Carlo simulation of semiconductor devices, Solid S. Electronics, vol. 41, 
pp. 599–605, 1997.

143
Basic Semiconductor and Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) Physics
	 19.	 G.E. Moore, Cramming more components onto integrated circuits, Electronics, 
vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 114–117, 1965.
	 20.	 C.H. Snowden, Semiconductor Device Modelling, 1st ed., Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin, 1989.
	 21.	 W. Shockley and W. T. Read, Statistics of the recombinations of holes and elec­
trons, Phys. Rev., vol. 87, no. 5, pp. 835–842, 1952.
	 22.	 R.N. Hall, Electron-hole recombination in germanium, Phys. Rev., vol. 87, no. 2, 
p. 387, 1952.
	 23.	 D.J. Fitzgerald and A.S. Grove, Surface recombination in semiconductors, IEEE 
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 426–427, 1968.
	 24.	 D.K. Schroder, Semiconductor Material and Device Characterization, 3rd ed., Wiley 
Interscience, New York, 2006.
	 25.	 J.C. Maxwell, A dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field, Royal Society 
Transactions, vol. CLV, 1864.
	 26.	 T. Grasser, W. Gös, V. Sverdlov, and B. Kaczer, The universality of NBTI relax­
ation and its implications for modeling and characterization, in Proc. Intl. Rel. 
Phys. Symp., pp. 1–13, 2007.
	 27.	 D.M. Caughey and R.E. Thomas, Carrier mobilities in silicon empirically related 
to doping and field, Proc. IEEE, vol. 55, pp. 2192–2193, 1967.
	 28.	 J.M. Dorkel and P.H. Leturcq, Carrier mobilities in silicon semi-empirically 
related to temperature, doping and injection level, Solid State Electronics, vol. 24, 
pp. 821–825, 1981.
	 29.	 N.D. Arora, J.R. Hauser, and D.J. Roulston, Electron and hole mobilities in 
silicon as a function of concentration and temperature, IEEE Trans. on Electron 
Devices, vol. 29, pp. 292–295, 1982.
	 30.	 D.B.M. Klaassen, A unified mobility model for device simulation-I. Model 
equations and concentration dependence, Solid State Electronics, vol. 35, pp. 
953–959, 1992.
	 31.	 Silvaco Atlas User Manual, available at www.silvaco.com.
	 32.	 G. Baccarani, M. Wordeman, and R. Dennard, Generalized scaling theory and 
its application to 1/4 micrometer MOSFET design, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 
ED-31(4), p. 452, 1984.
	 33.	 R. Dennard et al., Design of ion-implanted MOSFETS with very small physical 
dimensions, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, SC-9, pp. 256–258, 1974.
	 34.	 N. Weste and K. Eshragian, Principles of CMOS VLSI Design: A Systems Perspective, 
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1993.
	 35.	 International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, available at http://
www.sematech.org, 2001.
	 36.	 B. Streetman, Solid State Electronic Devices, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 1995.
	 37.	  C.T. Sah and H.C. Pao, The effects of bulk charge on the characteristics of metal-
oxide-semiconductor transistors, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-13, no. 4, 
pp. 393–409, 1966.
	 38.	 S.M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1981.
	 39.	 Y.P. Tsividis, Operation and Modeling of the MOS Transistor, McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 1999.
	 40.	 B. Razavi, Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuit, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2001.
	 41.	 N. Arora, MOSFET Models for VLSI Circuit Simulation: Theory and Practice, World 
Scientific, 2007. Reprinted from Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 1993.

144
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
	 42.	 Gordon Moore, Cramming more components onto integrated circuits, Electronics, 
vol.38, No. 8, April 19, 1965.
	 43.	 Claudio Fiegna, The effect of scaling on the performance of small-signal MOS 
amplifiers, Proc ISCAS 2000, pp. 733–736, May 2000.
	 44.	 R.H. Dennard, F.H. Gaensslen, L. Kuhn, and H.N. Yu, Design of micron MOS 
switching devices, IEDM Dig. Techn. Pap., 1972.
	 45.	 R.H. Dennard, F.H. Gaensslen, H.-N. Yu, V.I. Rideout, E. Bassous, and A.R. 
Leblanc, Design of ion-implanted MOSFETs with very small physical dimen­
sions, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 9, pp. 256–268, 1974.
	 46.	 R.H. Dennard, F.H. Gaensslen, E.J. Walker, and P.W. Cook, 1μm MOSFET VLSI 
technology: Part II— Device designs and characteristics for high-performance 
logic applications, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 14, pp. 247–255, 1979.
	 47.	 International Technology Roadmaps for Semiconductors (ITRS), European 
Semiconductor Industry Association, JEITA, KSIA, Executive Summary, 1999 and 
2005 editions.
	 48.	 Ali Khakifirooz and Dimitri A. Antoniadis, MOSFET Performance Scaling—Part 
I: Historical Trend, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1391–1400, 2008.
	  49.	 Ali Khakifirooz and Dimitri A. Antoniadis, MOSFET Performance Scaling—
Part II: Future Directions, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1401–
1408, 2008.
	 50.	 S. Kang and Y. Leblebici, CMOS Digital Integrated Circuits, Analysis and Design, 
McGraw-Hill, New York 3rd ed., 1999.
	 51.	 S. Borkar, Design challenges of technology scaling, IEEE Micro, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 
23–29, July–August 1999.

145
3
Review of Numerical Methods for 
Technology Computer Aided Design (TCAD)
Kalyan Koley
3.1  Introduction
In this chapter we discuss the numerical method used in the simulator. In an 
iterative method for solving, we start with a guess for the solution (often just 
the zero vector) and then successively renew this guess, getting closer to the 
solution at each stage. This iteration is usually performed until it converges 
to a result and a desired accuracy is achieved. The power of most iterative 
methods lies in their ability to achieve this convergence efficiently. However, 
two conflicting issues for a particular iterative method are high speed and 
CONTENTS
3.1	
Introduction................................................................................................. 145
3.2	
Numerical Solution Methods.................................................................... 146
3.3	
Non-Linear Iteration................................................................................... 146
3.3.1	 Newton Iteration............................................................................. 146
3.3.2	 Gummel Iteration............................................................................ 147
3.3.3	 Block Iteration.................................................................................. 148
3.3.4	 Combining the Iteration Methods................................................ 148
3.4	
Convergence Criteria for Non-Linear Iterations.................................... 149
3.5	
Initial Guess Requirement......................................................................... 149
3.6	
Numerical Method Implementation........................................................150
3.7	
Basic Drift Diffusion Calculations........................................................... 151
3.8	
Drift Diffusion Calculations with Lattice Heating................................ 152
3.9	
Energy Balance Calculations..................................................................... 152
3.10	 Energy Balance Calculations with Lattice Heating............................... 152
3.11	 Setting the Number of Carriers................................................................153
3.12	 Important Parameters of the METHOD Statement................................153
3.12.1	 Restrictions on the Choice of METHOD.....................................154
3.12.2	 Pisces-II Compatibility...................................................................154
References..............................................................................................................154

146
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
convergence. Say, for example, to achieve a convergence for an equation a 
large number of iterations are needed. This will severely affect the speed and 
hence the time consumed. Conversely, a high-speed solver may not achieve 
a convergence. In the following sections the different iterative techniques 
implemented in technology computer aided design (TCAD) to achieve con­
vergence efficiently are described in detail.
3.2  Numerical Solution Methods
For semiconductor devices, different solution methods are used depend­
ing upon the situation. It is also possible to use several different numerical 
methods to obtain solutions. And in addition, different combinations of 
models for a particular numerical method are also required for solving 
equations. There are three different types of solution techniques commonly 
used for obtaining solutions for semiconductor devices. These are repre­
sented by (a) de-coupled (GUMMEL), (b) fully coupled (NEWTON), and 
(c) BLOCK. The de-coupled technique like the Gummel method solves for 
each unknown in an equation while keeping the other variables constant 
and repeats the process until a stable solution is achieved [1]. In fully cou­
pled techniques such as the Newton method, the total system of unknowns 
are solved together. Finally, in the combined or block method, the solution 
is obtained by solving some equations by the fully coupled method, while 
others are solved by the de-coupled method. Both techniques mentioned 
are broadly classified under the non-linear iteration method where the 
method converges to a solution nonlinearly and provides a more accurate 
result than its linear counterpart. In the next section these techniques are 
discussed in detail.
3.3  Non-Linear Iteration
3.3.1  Newton Iteration
For the solution of nonlinear systems, the scheme developed by Bank and 
Rose is applied. This scheme tries to solve the nonlinear system by using 
the Newton method: Each iteration of the Newton method solves a lin­
earized version of the entire non-linear algebraic system. The size of the 
problem is relatively large, and each iteration takes a relatively long time. 
However, the iteration will normally converge quickly (in about three to 
eight iterations) so long as the initial guess is sufficiently close to the final 
solution. Strategies that use automatic bias step reduction in the event of 

147
Review of Numerical Methods for Technology Computer Aided Design
non-convergence loosen the requirement of a good initial guess. Newton’s 
method is the default for drift-diffusion calculations in ATLAS. There 
are several calculations for which ATLAS requires that Newton’s method 
be used. These are DC calculations that involve lumped elements, tran­
sient calculations, curve tracing, and when frequency-domain small-signal 
analysis is performed. The Newton-Richardson method is a variant of the 
Newton iteration that calculates a new version of the coefficient matrix 
only when slowing convergence demonstrates that this is necessary. An 
automated Newton-Richardson method is available in ATLAS, and it 
improves performance significantly on most problems. The automated 
Newton-Richardson method is enabled by specifying the AUTO parameter 
of the METHOD statement [2]. If convergence is obtained only after many 
Newton iterations, the problem is almost certainly poorly defined. The grid 
may be very poor (i.e., it contains many obtuse or high aspect ratio trian­
gles), or a depletion region may have extended into a region defined as an 
ohmic contact, or the initial guess may be very poor.
3.3.2  Gummel Iteration
Each iteration of Gummel’s method solves a sequence of relatively small lin­
ear sub-problems. The sub-problems are obtained by linearizing one equa­
tion of the set with respect to its primary solution variable, while holding 
other variables at their most recently computed values. Solving this lin­
ear sub-system provides corrections for one solution variable. One step of 
Gummel iteration is completed when the procedure has been performed for 
each independent variable. Gummel iteration typically converges relatively 
slowly, but the method will often tolerate relatively poor initial guesses. The 
Gummel algorithm cannot be used with lumped elements or current bound­
ary conditions. Two variants of Gummel’s method can improve its perfor­
mance slightly. These both limit the size of the potential correction that is 
applied during each Gummel loop.
The first method, called damping, truncates corrections that exceed a max­
imum allowable magnitude. It is used to overcome numerical ringing in the 
calculated potential when bias steps are large (greater than 1 V for room tem­
perature calculations). The maximum allowable magnitude of the potential 
correction must be carefully specified: too small a value slows convergence, 
while too large a value can lead to overflow. The DVLIMIT parameter of 
the METHOD statement is used to specify the maximum allowable magni­
tude of the potential correction. By default, the value of this parameter is 0.1 
V. Thus, by default Gummel iterations are damped. To specify undamped 
Gummel iterations, the user should specify DVLIMIT to be negative or zero.
The second method limits the number of linearized Poisson solutions per 
Gummel iteration, usually to one. This leads to under-relaxation of the poten­
tial update. This “single-Poisson” solution mode extends the usefulness of 

148
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Gummel’s method to higher currents. It can be useful for performing low 
current bipolar simulations, and simulating MOS transistors in the satura­
tion region. It is invoked by specifying the SINGLEPOISSON parameter of 
the METHOD statement.
3.3.3  Block Iteration
ATLAS offers several block iteration schemes that are very useful when 
lattice heating or energy balance equations are included. Block iterations 
involve solving subgroups of equations in various sequences. The subgroups 
of equations used in ATLAS have been established as a result of numeri­
cal experiments that established which combinations are most effective in 
practice.
In non-isothermal drift-diffusion simulation, specifying the BLOCK 
method means that Newton’s method is used to update potential and carrier 
concentrations, after which the heat flow equation is solved in a de-coupled 
step. When the carrier temperature equations are solved for a constant lat­
tice temperature, the BLOCK iteration algorithm uses Newton’s method to 
update potential and concentrations [2]. The carrier temperature equation is 
solved simultaneously with the appropriate continuity equation to update 
the carrier temperature and carrier concentration.
When both the heat flow equation and the carrier temperature equations 
are included, the BLOCK scheme proceeds as described previously for the 
carrier temperature case, and then performs one de-coupled solution for lat­
tice temperature as a third step of each iteration.
3.3.4  Combining the Iteration Methods
It is possible to start with the GUMMEL scheme and then switch to BLOCK 
or NEWTON if convergence is not achieved within a certain number of itera­
tions. One circumstance where this can be very helpful is that the Gummel 
iteration can refine an initial guess to a point from which a Newton iteration 
can converge [3].
The number of initial GUMMEL iterations is limited by GUM.INIT. It may 
also be desirable to use BLOCK iteration and then switch to NEWTON if con­
vergence is not achieved. This is the recommended strategy for calculations 
that include lattice heating or energy balance. The number of initial BLOCK 
iterations is limited by NBLOCKIT.
Any combination of the parameters GUMMEL, BLOCK, and NEWTON 
may be specified on the METHOD statement. ATLAS will start with 
GUMMEL if it is specified. If convergence is not achieved within the 
specified number of iterations, it will then switch to BLOCK if BLOCK is 
specified; if convergence is still not achieved the program will then switch 
to NEWTON.

149
Review of Numerical Methods for Technology Computer Aided Design
3.4  Convergence Criteria for Non-Linear Iterations
After a few non-linear iterations, the errors will generally decrease at a char­
acteristic rate as the iteration proceeds. Non-linear iteration techniques typi­
cally converge at a rate that is either linear or quadratic. The error decreases 
linearly when Gummel iteration is used (i.e., it is reduced by about the same 
factor at each iteration). For Newton iteration the convergence is quadratic 
(i.e., small errors less than one are approximately squared at each iteration). 
The non-linear iteration is terminated when the errors are acceptably small. 
The conditions required for terminations are called convergence criteria. 
Much effort has gone into developing reliable default convergence criteria 
for ATLAS [3]. The default parameters work well for nearly all situations, and 
most users will never need to change them.
3.5  Initial Guess Requirement
Non-linear iteration starts from an initial guess. The quality of the initial 
guess (i.e., how close it is to the final solution) affects how quickly the solu­
tion is obtained, and whether convergence is achieved. Users of ATLAS are 
not required to specify an initial guess strategy. If no strategy is defined, 
ATLAS follows certain rules that implement a sensible, although not neces­
sarily optimum, strategy. There is some interaction between the choice of 
non-linear iteration scheme and the initial guess strategy. De-coupled itera­
tion usually converges linearly, although perhaps slowly, even from a rela­
tively poor initial guess. Newton iteration converges much faster for a good 
initial guess but fails to converge if started from a poor initial guess. One 
simple initial guess strategy is to use the most recent solution as the initial 
guess. Of course, there is no previous solution for the first calculation in a 
series of bias points. In this case, an initial solution is obtained for equilib­
rium conditions [3]. There is no need to solve the current continuity equa­
tions at equilibrium, and a solution of Poisson’s equation is quickly obtained. 
It is also possible to modify the initial guess in a way that makes some allow­
ance for the new bias conditions. Typical strategies include
• Using two previous solutions and interpolation to project a new 
solution at each mesh point.
• Solving a form of current continuity equation with carrier concen­
trations held constant. This strategy yields an improved estimate of 
new potential distribution.
• Modifying the majority carrier quasi-Fermi levels by the same 
amount as the bias changes.

150
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
• Parameters on the SOLVE statement can be used to specify an initial 
guess strategy. Five initial guess strategies are available.
• INITIAL starts from space charge neutrality throughout the device. 
This choice is normally used to calculate a solution with zero 
applied bias.
• PREVIOUS uses the currently loaded solution as the initial guess 
at the next bias point. The solution is modified by setting a different 
applied bias at the contacts.
• PROJECTION takes two previous solutions whose bias conditions 
differ at one contact and extrapolates a solution for a new applied 
bias at that contact. This method is often used when performing a 
voltage ramp.
• LOCAL sets the applied bias to the specified values and changes the 
majority carrier quasi-Fermi levels in heavily doped regions to be 
equal to the bias applied to that region. This choice is effective with 
Gummel iteration, particularly in reverse bias. It is less effective with 
Newton iteration.
• MLOCAL starts from the currently loaded solution and solves 
a form of the total current continuity equation that provides an 
improved estimate of the new potential distribution. All other 
quantities remain unchanged. MLOCAL is more effective than 
LOCAL because it provides a smooth potential distribution in 
the vicinity of p-n junctions. It is usually more effective than 
PREVIOUS because MLOCAL provides a better estimate of 
potential. This is especially true for highly doped contact regions 
and resistor-like structures.
When a re-grid is performed, the solution is interpolated from the original 
grid onto a finer grid. This provides an initial guess that can be used to start 
the solution of the same bias point on the new grid.
Although the initial guess is an interpolation of an exact solution, this type 
of guess does not provide particularly fast convergence.
3.6  Numerical Method Implementation
The Gummel method is effective where the system of equations is weakly 
coupled, with only linear convergence. The Newton method is effective where 
the system of equations is strongly coupled and has quadratic convergence. 
However, it may so happen that in a system of equations some of the quanti­
ties are weakly coupled while others are strongly coupled, or we can say a 

151
Review of Numerical Methods for Technology Computer Aided Design
mixed coupled system. In such cases the Newton method consumes extra 
time solving for quantities that are essentially constant or weakly coupled. In 
accession to that, the Newton method requires a more accurate initial guess 
for the problem to obtain convergence. In order to compensate for the issues 
associated with the Newton method, it is better to use the block method 
to achieve convergence efficiently. The block method provides a compara­
tively faster simulation time in the mixed case over the Newton method [4]. 
Because Gummel can often furnish better initial guesses to problems, it is 
more appropriate to start a solution with a few Gummel iterations in order to 
generate a better initial guess and then switch to Newton to attain the final 
solution. The different solution methods are carried out by including the fol­
lowing statement for simulation:
METHOD GUMMEL BLOCK NEWTON
The exact meaning of the statement and the combination of the solution 
method depend upon the particular models to which it is applied. In the fol­
lowing sections the insights of this statement with respect to different mod­
els are described in detail.
3.7  Basic Drift Diffusion Calculations
The isothermal drift diffusion model requires the solution of three 
equations for potential, electron concentration, and hole concentration. 
Specifying GUMMEL or NEWTON alone on METHOD statement will pro­
duce simple Gummel or Newton solutions of the equations as described 
earlier. For almost all cases the Newton method is preferred because of its 
quadratic convergence to produce more accurate solution; hence, it is set 
as the default method. However, there are also alternative methods such 
as specifying:
METHOD GUMMEL NEWTON
This will cause the solver to initially start with Gummel iterations and 
then switch to Newton, if convergence is not achieved. This method is very 
robust, even though it consumes more time to obtain solutions for any device. 
However, this method is highly recommended for all simulations with float­
ing regions such as silcon on insulator (SOI) transistors. A floating region is 
defined as an area of doping that is separated from all electrodes by a p-n 
junction. It may also be noted that BLOCK is equivalent to NEWTON for all 
isothermal drift-diffusion simulations.

152
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
3.8  Drift Diffusion Calculations with Lattice Heating
When the lattice heating model is added to drift diffusion, an extra equation 
is added. The BLOCK algorithm solves the three drift diffusion equations as a 
Newton solution and follows this with a de-coupled solution of the heat flow 
equation. The NEWTON algorithm solves all four equations in a coupled man­
ner. NEWTON is preferred once the temperature is high; however, BLOCK is 
quicker for low temperature gradients. Typically the combination used is
METHOD BLOCK NEWTON
3.9  Energy Balance Calculations
The energy balance model requires the solution of up to five coupled equa­
tions. GUMMEL and NEWTON have the same meanings as with the 
drift diffusion model (i.e., GUMMEL specifies a de-coupled solution, and 
NEWTON specifies a fully coupled solution). However, BLOCK performs a 
coupled solution of potential, carrier continuity equations followed by a cou­
pled solution of carrier energy balance, and carrier continuity equations. It is 
possible to switch from BLOCK to NEWTON by specifying multiple solution 
methods on the same line. For example,
METHOD BLOCK NEWTON
This will begin with BLOCK iterations and then switch to NEWTON if con­
vergence is still not achieved. This is the most robust approach for many 
energy balance applications. The points at which the algorithms switch is 
predetermined but can also be changed on the METHOD statement. The 
default values set by TCAD tool Silvaco work well for most circumstances.
3.10  Energy Balance Calculations with Lattice Heating
When non-isothermal solutions are performed in conjunction with 
energy balance models, a system of up to six equations must be solved. 
GUMMEL or NEWTON solve the equations iteratively or fully coupled, 
respectively. BLOCK initially performs the same function as with energy 
balance calculations, and then solves the lattice heating equation in a de-
coupled manner.

153
Review of Numerical Methods for Technology Computer Aided Design
3.11  Setting the Number of Carriers
ATLAS can solve both electron and hole continuity equations, or only for one or 
none. This choice can be made using the parameter CARRIERS. For example,
METHOD CARRIERS = 2
This specifies that a solution for both carriers is required. This is the default. 
With one carrier the parameter ELEC or HOLE is needed. For example, for 
hole solutions only,
METHOD CARRIERS = 1 HOLE
To select a solution for potential only, specify
METHOD CARRIERS = 0
3.12  Important Parameters of the METHOD Statement
It is possible to alter all of the parameters relevant to the numerical solution 
process. This is not recommended unless you have expert knowledge of the 
numerical algorithms [5]. All of these parameters have been assigned opti­
mal values for most solution conditions. It is beyond the scope of this chapter 
to give more details.
Two parameters, however, are worth noting at this stage:
	
1.	CLIMIT or CLIM.DD specifies minimal values of concentrations 
to be resolved by the solver. Sometimes it is necessary to reduce 
this value to aid solutions of breakdown characteristics. A value of 
CLIMIT = 1e-4 is recommended for all simulations of breakdown 
where the pre-breakdown current is small. CLIM.DD is equivalent 
to CLIMIT but uses the more convenient units of cm−3 for the critical 
concentration.
	
2.	DVMAX controls the maximum update of potential per iteration 
of Newton’s method. The default corresponds to 1 V. For power 
devices requiring large voltages, an increased value of DVMAX 
might be needed. DVMAX = 1e8 can improve the speed of high-
voltage bias ramps.

154
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
	
3.	CLIM.EB controls the cut-off carrier concentration below which the 
program will not consider the error in the carrier temperature. This 
is applied in energy balance simulations to avoid excessive calcula­
tions of the carrier temperature at locations in the structure where 
the carrier concentration is low. However, if this parameter is set too 
high so that the carrier temperature errors for significant carrier con­
centrations are being ignored, unpredictable and mostly incorrect 
results will be seen.
3.12.1  Restrictions on the Choice of METHOD
The following cases all require METHOD NEWTON CARRIERS = 2 to be 
set for isothermal drift-diffusion simulations. Both BLOCK and NEWTON 
are permitted for lattice heat and energy balance:
• Current boundary conditions
• Distributed or lumped external elements
• AC analysis
• Impact ionization
3.12.2  Pisces-II Compatibility
Previous releases of ATLAS (2.0.0.R) and other PISCES-II based programs 
use the SYMBOLIC command to define the solution method and the num­
ber of carriers to be included in the solution. In the current version of ATLAS, 
the solution method is specified completely on the METHOD statement. The 
COMB parameter that was available in earlier ATLAS versions is no longer 
required, as it is replaced by either the BLOCK method or the combination of 
GUMM EL and NEWTON.
References
	
1.	 Sentaurus TCAD Manuals, Synopsys Inc., Mountain View, CA.
	
2.	 Taurus Medici Manuals, Synopsys Inc., Mountain View, CA.
	
3.	 ATLAS User’s Manual, Silvaco Int., Santa Clara, CA, May 26, 2006
	
4.	 M.K. Jain, S.R.K. Iyengar, and R.K. Jain, Numerical Methods for Scientific and 
Engineering Computations, New Age International, New Delhi, India, 2004.
	
5.	 M.K. Jain, Numerical Solution of Differential Equations, 2nd ed., New Age 
International, New Delhi, India, 2008.

155
4
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
N. Mohankumar
4.1  Introduction
Technology computer aided design (TCAD) is a design technique that 
involves computer simulation procedures to develop and characterize semi­
conductor processing technologies and devices. The two major components 
of a TCAD design process are process simulations and device simulations. 
CONTENTS
4.1	
Introduction.................................................................................................155
4.2	
Design Flow.................................................................................................156
4.3	
Sentaurus Structure Editor........................................................................156
4.3.1	
Design of a 2D Bulk Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor 
Field-Effect Transistor (MOSFET) of Channel Length 100 nm.... 158
4.3.2	 Meshing............................................................................................ 168
4.4	
Mesh.............................................................................................................. 169
4.4.1	 Design Continuation...................................................................... 170
4.5	
Sentaurus Device........................................................................................ 170
4.5.1	 Input-Output Files of the Tool...................................................... 171
4.5.2	 Physical Models............................................................................... 173
4.5.2.1	 Transport Equations........................................................ 174
4.5.2.2	 Poisson Equation and Continuity Equations............... 174
4.5.2.3	 Drift-Diffusion Model..................................................... 174
4.5.2.4	 Quantization Models....................................................... 175
4.5.2.5	 Mobility Models...............................................................177
4.5.3	 Design Continuation......................................................................180
4.6	
Tecplot.......................................................................................................... 182
4.6.1	 Input Files........................................................................................ 182
4.7	
Inspect..........................................................................................................183
4.8	
Parameterized Scripting............................................................................183
4.9	
Sentaurus Workbench................................................................................185
4.10	 Summary...................................................................................................... 186
References.............................................................................................................. 186

156
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Current major suppliers of TCAD tools include Synopsys, Silvaco, and 
Crosslight. Synopsys provides both process and device simulation tools. 
It supports a broad range of applications such as complementary metal-
oxide-semiconductor (CMOS), power, memory, solar cells, etc. In addition, 
Synopsys provides tools for interconnect modeling and parasitic extraction 
procedure which are required for optimizing the performance of an inte­
grated circuit chip.
In this chapter, we discuss techniques for device simulation using the 
Synopsys tool suite. The tool suite includes tools for constructing device 
structures, meshing, simulation, visualization of electrical characteristics, 
plotting of various curves, and extraction of performance parameters. The 
working of each tool is described with the help of examples. The principles 
of operations involved are also discussed. The details of each tool are not 
provided, but readers are referred to corresponding user guides.
4.2  Design Flow
A typical design flow consists of either the creation of a device structure 
by a process simulation (Sentaurus Process or Taurus TSUPREME-4) tool or 
through computer aided design (CAD) operations and process emulation 
steps (using tools like Sentaurus Structure Editor). The constructed device is 
meshed intelligently using tools like Sentaurus Mesh/Noffset 3D. Sentaurus 
Device is used to simulate the electrical characteristics of the device. It simu­
lates numerically the electrical behavior of a single semiconductor device 
in isolation or several physical devices combined in a circuit. Terminal cur­
rents, voltages, and charges are computed based on a set of physical device 
equations that describes the carrier distribution and the conduction mecha­
nisms. Finally, Tecplot SV is used to visualize the output from the simulation 
in 2D and 3D, and Inspect tool is used to plot the electrical characteristics. 
The design flow is shown in Figure 4.1.
4.3  Sentaurus Structure Editor
Sentaurus Structure Editor is a device editor and process emulator based on 
CAD technology, used for constructing a semiconductor device. As shown 
in Figure 4.2, it has three distinct operational nodes: 2D structure editing, 
3D structure editing, and 3D process emulation. Using Sentaurus Structure 
Editor, device structures are constructed or edited interactively using a 
graphical user interface (GUI) facility. Alternatively, devices can be generated 

157
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
in batch mode using Scheme scripting language. When a GUI action is per­
formed, Sentaurus Structure Editor prints the corresponding Scheme com­
mand in the command-line window. From the GUI, 2D and 3D device models 
are created geometrically using 2D or 3D primitives such as rectangles, 
polygons, cuboids, etc. In the process emulation mode (Procem), Sentaurus 
Structure Editor translates processing steps such as etching and deposition, 
Curve Display
and analysis by
Inspect
2D/3D Scientiﬁc
Visualization and
Plotting of
Simulated Data by
Tecplot_SV
takes *_msh.dat and *_msg.grd ﬁles as input
*_des.dat (contains ﬁnal spatial solution for all the
variables on the structure mesh)
*_msh.dat (contains the doping information)
*.sat ﬁle (model geometry in ACIS format)
*.scm ﬁle (script contains various parameter settings)
*.bnd or *.tdr ﬁle (boundary ﬁle containing device structure)
*.cmd ﬁle (mesh command ﬁle containing doping information)
*_msh.grd (contains the mesh geometry information)
*_msh.log (used as log ﬁle)
*_des.plt (contains electrical output data like
currents, voltages, charges at electrodes)
*_des.log (protocol ﬁle that is generated
whenever Sentaurus Device is run)
generates
generates
takes the *.bnd or *.Idr ﬁle and *.cmd ﬁles as input
takes *_des.cmd, *_msh.dat and *_msg.grd as input
generates
Device Simulation
by Sentaurus
Device
Grid Generation by
Meshing Engine
(Sentaurus Mesh/
Noﬀset3D/Mesh)
Device Creation by
Sentaurus Structure
Editor (2D/3D
Structure Editing) or
3D Process
Emulation
Device,
Geometry
and
Technology
Parameters
FIGURE 4.1
Design flow of device simulation process using ISE-TCAD, Synopsys.

158
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
patterning, fill, and polish into geometric operations. Procem supports vari­
ous options such as isotropic or anisotropic etching and deposition, round­
ing, and blending. The working of the Structure Editor is explained with the 
help of a design example, which is presented in the next sub-section.
4.3.1  Design of a 2D Bulk Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Field-Effect 
Transistor (MOSFET) of Channel Length 100 nm
The 2D metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) structure that we attempt 
to create in Sentaurus Device Editor (SDE) is shown in Figure  4.3. The 
step-by-step design process using commands is illustrated pictorially in 
sequence in Figures 4.4 to 4.12.
 Here we illustrate the steps required to create a rectangle that will be used 
as bulk silicon material. This involves the creation of a rectangle whose diag­
onally opposite corner coordinates are required to be specified, and com­
mands are as follows. SDE will consider rectangular material as “Silicon” 
and this will be named “region_1”. As this is a 2D MOS Device, the Z coor­
dinate is considered to be 0.
3D Structure
Editing
2D Structure
Editing
3D Process
Emulation
Sentaurus
Structure
Editor
FIGURE 4.2
Operational modes of Structure Editor.
y
p
Substrate
Gate
Oxide
n+
Source
n+
Drain
x
FIGURE 4.3
Schematic of 2D MOS structure. Positive X and Y axes are right-hand side and downward 
direction, respectively. For 2D MOS device, Z coordinate is always considered to be 0.

159
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
To start Sentaurus Structure Editor, on the command line, enter:
sde
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position -0.1 0.0 0.0) (position 0.1 0.2 0.0)
“Silicon” “region_1”)
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position -0.05 -0.002 0.0) (position 0.05 0 0.0)
“Oxide” “region_2”)
FIGURE 4.4
Schematic of bulk silicon creation in SCE by drawing a rectangle using a command whose 
corner coordinates are (–0.1 0.0 0.0) and (0.1 0.2 0.0).
FIGURE 4.5
The creation of oxide on the bulk silicon by using sequential command.

160
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
One needs to run the sequential command to get the entire structure [1–4]. 
Sequential command will now create another rectangle on the bulk silicon 
material which will be used as oxide or gate oxide. The material has been 
selected by command “Oxide” whose diagonally opposite corner coordinates 
are (–0.05  –0.002 0.0) and (0.05 0 0.0), and this oxide region is named “region_2”.
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position -0.05 -0.002 0.0) (position 0.05 -0.08 0.0)
“Molybdenum” “region_3”)
(sdegeo:define-contact-set “gate” 4 (color:rgb 1 0 0) “##”)
(sdegeo:set-current-contact-set “gate”)
FIGURE 4.7
MOS structure with gate contact on top.
FIGURE 4.6
Molybdenum gate on oxide material. This is the actual MOS structure. Rectangular molybde­
num material corner coordinates are (–0.05, –0.002, 0.0) and (0.05, –0.08, 0.0).

161
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
(sdegeo:define-2d-contact (list (car (find-edge-id (position 
0.0 -0.08 0)))) “gate”);gate contact position and contact name
For the external connection to the 2D MOS device, a 2D gate contact has 
to be defined. Here contact is defined at the gate edge with proper coordi­
nate point. Though the coordinate can be anywhere at the gate edge, for this 
device the middle point of the gate edge has been selected with coordinates 
(0.0 -0.08 0) and contact name “gate”.
(sdegeo:define-contact-set “body” 4 (color:rgb 1 0 0) “##”)
(sdegeo:set-current-contact-set “body”)
FIGURE 4.8
Body contact in which contact edge point coordinate (0.0 0.2 0) has been selected by the 
program.
FIGURE 4.9
Source/drain 2D contact at position (–0.075 0 0) “source”.

162
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
(sdegeo:define-2d-contact (list (car (find-edge-id (position 
0.0 0.2 0))))”body”)
(sdegeo:define-contact-set “source” 4 (color:rgb 1 0 0) “##”)
(sdegeo:set-current-contact-set “source”)
(sdegeo:define-2d-contact (list (car (find-edge-id (position 
-0.075 0 0)))) “source”)
(sdegeo:define-contact-set “drain” 4 (color:rgb 1 0 0) “##”)
(sdegeo:set-current-contact-set “drain”)
FIGURE 4.11
The SDE diagram after refinement window selection, source/drain and bulk material doping.
FIGURE 4.10
SDE shows the final MOS structure with all the contacts. Here another source/drain contact 
point is created here whose coordinate is (0.075 0 0) and name of “drain.”

163
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
(sdegeo:define-2d-contact (list (car (find-edge-id (position 
0.075 0 0)))) “drain”)
Now the device requires proper doping at a different place to work as a 
MOSFET. For that purpose a different place has to be selected for doping. 
The techplots showing electrostatic potential and conduction band energy 
FIGURE 4.12
Complete structure of the 2D MOSFET in Sentaurus Editor after proper meshing at different 
places.
FIGURE 4.13 (See color insert)
Tecplot_sv showing electrostatic potential across the device at VGS = 2.0 V, VDS = 2.0 V.

164
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
FIGURE 4.15
Inspect showing VGS versus ID both in normal and logarithmic plots at VGS = 2.0 V, VDS = 2.0 V.
FIGURE 4.14 (See color insert)
Tecplot_sv showing conduction band energy (eV) across the device at VGS = 2.0 V, VDS = 2.0 V.

165
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
Region 1
Region 2
Region 6
Region 4
Region 9
Region 11
Region 3
Region 10
Region 8
Gate height = 20
Origin
TOX = 3
Region 5
Region 7
Lg/2
Lg
Lg/2
xsw = 100
xsw = 100
tSub = 50
tSi = 70
xsd = 50
Ysw
xsd=50
FIGURE 4.16
Construction of a proposed parameterized MOSFET.
FIGURE 4.17
Creation of Region 1 shown in Figure 4.16.
FIGURE 4.18
Creation of Region 2 shown in Figure 4.16.
FIGURE 4.19
Creation of Region 3 shown in Figure 4.16.

166
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
FIGURE 4.22
Creation of Region 6 shown in Figure 4.16.
FIGURE 4.23
Creation of Region 7 shown in Figure 4.16.
FIGURE 4.24
Creation of Region 8 shown in Figure 4.16.
FIGURE 4.20
Creation of Region 4 shown in Figure 4.16.
FIGURE 4.21
Creation of Region 5 shown in Figure 4.16.

167
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
across the device are shown in Figures 4.13 and 4.14. The characteristic plots 
in normal and logarithmic scale are shown in Figure 4.15. The diagram of 
a proposed parameterized MOSFET is shown in Figure 4.16. Figures 4.17 
to 4.27 show the construction steps of the 11 Regions of the parameterized 
MOSFET structure shown in Figure 4.16. The following command [1] will 
select a different place as a rectangular window, and doping in that window 
is possible according to the requirement and command:
(sdedr:define-constant-profile “ConstantProfileDefinition_1” 
“BoronActiveConcentration” 0.4e18)
(sdedr:define-constant-profile-material 
“ConstantProfilePlacement_1”
“ConstantProfileDefinition_1” “Silicon”)
Here the profile name is “ConstantProfileDefinition_1” and the dop­
ant is “BoronActiveConcentration” as boron is needed to be implanted 
in the bulk material whose doping concentration is 0.4e18 (0.4 × 1018) per cm3 
and whose name is mentioned as “BoronActiveConcentration”. This 
FIGURE 4.25
Creation of Region 9 shown in Figure 4.16.
FIGURE 4.26
Creation of Region 10 shown in Figure 4.16.
FIGURE 4.27
Creation of Region 11 shown in Figure 4.16.

168
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
“ConstantProfileDefinition_1” will be placed wherever it will find “Silicon” 
material [1]. In this way, the entire bulk material will be doped by boron with 
a doping concentration of 0.4 × 1018 per cm3.
(sdedr:define-refeval-window “RefEvalWin_1” “Rectangle”
(position -0.1 0 0) (position -0.05 0.03 0))
(sdedr:define-constant-profile “ConstantProfileDefinition_2”
“ArsenicActiveConcentration” 1e+20)
position(sdedr:define-constant-profile-placement 
“ConstantProfilePlacement_2” “ConstantProfileDefinition_2” 
“RefEvalWin_1” 0 “Replace”)
Now source/drain doping is needed, and for this purpose two rectangular 
areas must be selected. For source doping, a rectangular window has been 
selected by the command line whose corner coordinates are (–0.1 0 0) and 
(–0.05 0.03 0). This is named “RefEvalWin_1” and a doping profile has been 
selected “ArsenicActiveConcentration” as Arsenic is required as a dopant 
whose doping concentration is 1020 per cm3, and finally this profile definition 
name is “ConstantProfileDefinition_2”. Similarly, using the command below, 
drain doping has been done. Here the “Replace” command [1] will replace 
previous boron doping by new arsenic doping with the mentioned doping 
profile.
(sdedr:define-refeval-window “RefEvalWin_2” “Rectangle”
(position 0.05 0 0) (position 0.1 0.03 0)) position
(sdedr:define-constant-profile “ConstantProfileDefinition_3”
“ArsenicActiveConcentration” 1e+20)
(sdedr:define-constant-profile-placement 
“ConstantProfilePlacement_3” “ConstantProfileDefinition_3” 
“RefEvalWin_2” 0 “Replace”)
4.3.2  Meshing
The input and output files of Sentaurus Structure Editor are:
• Scheme script file (.scm)
	
	 This is a user-defined script file that contains scheme script com­
mands describing the steps to be executed by Sentaurus Structure 
Editor in creating a device structure. This file can be edited to change 
its contents.
• ACIS SAT file (.sat)
	
	 This file contains the model geometry in native ACIS format and 
cannot be edited directly.

169
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
• DF-ISE boundary file (.bnd)
	
	 This is a boundary representation file written in the DF-ISE for­
mat. It can be directly loaded into Sentaurus Structure Editor and 
then to mesh engines.
• DF-ISE doping and refinement file (.cmd)
	
	 This is a DF-ISE format file containing doping and mesh refine­
ment information that, in conjunction with the corresponding 
boundary file, uniquely defines the geometry of the model.
4.4  Mesh
Mesh Generation Tools is a suite of tools that produce finite-element meshes 
for use which are required in semiconductor device simulation or pro­
cess simulation. Once the device structure is created, meshing is usually 
required before the device can be numerically solved for its electrical pro­
perties. The Mesh Generation Tools are composed of three mesh generation 
engines: Sentaurus Mesh, Noffset3D, and Mesh. The choice of which mesh 
generator to use in an application depends largely on the geometry of the 
device. These mesh generators generate high-quality spatial discretizations 
for 1D, 2D, and 3D devices using a variety of mesh generation algorithms 
and procedures. Meshing basically involves defining a meshing strategy 
where the maximum and minimum sizes of the meshes are defined. These 
definitions are then placed in a specific region that may be a material or a 
device region or a user-defined refinement/evaluation (Ref/Eval) window. 
Ref/Eval windows are areas in which a certain mesh refinement or dop­
ing profile is to be applied. In some cases, the mesher can be instructed to 
refine the mesh in areas of steep doping gradients or near interfaces. For 
example, in the channel of a MOS transistor, a dense meshing is suitable 
near the silicon-oxide interface. The tightness of the grid spacing may be 
relaxed toward the bulk. This keeps the problem at a minimum of central 
processing unit (CPU) time.
Files in the Mesh Generator tool:
Input files: *.bnd or *.tdr and *.cmd files from SSE
Output Files: *_msh.dat (contains the doping information), *_msh.grd 
(contains the mesh geometry information), and *_msh.log (used as 
log file)

170
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
To summarize, after meshing, the device is divided into numbers of criss­
cross points (which depend on the size of the mesh). Every point contains the 
following information:
	
1.	Location of the point
	
2.	Material of the point
	
3.	Doping concentration of the point
This information may also be stored in a single *_msh.tdr file instead of 
*_msh.grd and *_msh.dat to enable the user to input a single file instead of 
two files to the next stage (i.e., Simulation).
4.4.1  Design Continuation
The following commands are used to mesh the generated structure:
(sdedr:define-refeval-window “RefEvalWin_4” “Rectangle”
(position -0.1 -0.08 0) (position 0.1 0.2 0)) ;global meshing
(sdedr:define-refinement-size “RefinementDefinition_1” 0.005 
0.005 0 0.005 0.005 0)
(sdedr:define-refinement-placement “RefinementPlacement_1”
“RefinementDefinition_1” “RefEvalWin_4”)
(sdedr:define-refeval-window “RefEvalWin_3” “Rectangle”
(position -0.05 -0.002 0) (position 0.05 0.03 0))
(sdedr:define-refinement-size “RefinementDefinition_2” 0.001 
0.001 0 0.001 0.001 0)
(sdedr:define-refinement-placement “RefinementPlacement_2” 
“RefinementDefinition_2” “RefEvalWin_3”)
(sde:build-mesh “mesh” “-P -discontinuousData -f -t -d -F tdr “ 
“crc”);
This last command will generate a file name crc_mesh.tdr which is required 
for further simulation of the device.
4.5  Sentaurus Device
Sentaurus Device is a comprehensive device simulator framework for simu­
lating the electrical, thermal, and optical characteristics of silicon-based and 
compound semiconductor devices. The device simulation tool simulates the 

171
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
characteristics of the devices as a response to external electrical, thermal, or 
optical signals and boundary conditions.
4.5.1  Input-Output Files of the Tool
The input command file of Sentaurus Device consists of several command 
sections, each of which executes a relatively independent function. The 
default extension of this file is _des.cmd. The input command file typically 
consists of the following sections:
	
1.	File
	
2.	Electrode
	
3.	Physics
	
4.	Plot
	
5.	Math
	
6.	Solve
The File section describes the various input files and output files. The 
essential input file consists of the information regarding the device geo­
metry and field values (_msh.tdr), for example, the doping on the structure. 
In addition, an optional parameter file can be specified. The device geometry 
information consists of the regions and materials of the device, location of 
the contacts, and the mesh points including the location of nodes and ver­
tices. The optional parameter file (.par) consists of the user-defined model 
parameters. The Sentaurus Device simulation tool produces several output 
files. The Current file contains the electrical output data, such as currents, 
voltages, and charges at each of the contacts. The default extension of this file 
is _des.plt. In addition, a log file is generated that contains all the informative 
texts that the tool has downloaded during a run, including the error mes­
sages. The default extension of this file is _des.log.
The Electrode section consists of the definitions of the various contacts of 
the device, together with their initial bias conditions. Any special boundary 
condition for a contact can also be defined here. It may be noted with care 
that each electrode defined here must match (case sensitive) an existing con­
tact name in the structure file, and only those contacts that are named in the 
Electrode section are included in the simulation process.
The Physics section consists of a declaration of the physical models that 
are to be used in the simulation procedure. Typically it consists of the carrier 
mobility model, the band-gap narrowing model, the carrier generation and 
recombination model, etc. With the use of a qualifier in the Physics section, 
it can be specified in which material or regions the models are to be acti­
vated. For example, Material = “[material name]”, Region = “[region name]”. 

172
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
In this section, the models are declared on activation only. The model param­
eters, if different from the default, are defined and loaded using the optional 
Parameter file specified in the File section. The Physics section typical of a 
simple NMOSFET simulation is given here.
Physics {
Mobility (DopingDep HighFieldSat Enormal)
EffectiveIntrinsicDensity(OldSlotboom)
}
The Plot section is used to specify the solution variables that are to be 
saved in the Plot file after the simulation process is completed. The solution 
of these variables can later be visualized using tools like Tecplot SV.
The Math section is used to control the numeric solver involved in the 
simulation process. A typical Math section is shown below which may be 
used as a guideline.
Math {
Extrapolate
RelErrControl
NotDamped=50
Iterations=20
}
• Extrapolate: In quasi-stationary bias ramps, the initial guess for a 
given step is obtained by extrapolation from the solutions of the pre­
vious two steps (if they exist).
• RelErrControl: Switches error control during iterations from using 
internal error parameters to more physically meaningful parameters.
• NotDamped = 50: Specifies the number of Newton iterations over 
which the right-hand side (RHS) norm is allowed to increase. With 
the default of 1, the error is allowed to increase for one step only. It is 
recommended that NotDamped > Iterations be set to allow a simula­
tion to continue despite the RHS-norm increasing.
• Iterations = 20: Specifies the maximum number of Newton iterations 
allowed per bias step (Default = 50). If convergence is not achieved 
within this number of steps, for a quasi-stationary or transient sim­
ulation, the step size is reduced by the factor decrement and simula­
tion continues.
The Solve section defines a sequence of solutions to be obtained by the 
solver. To simulate the Id–Vg characteristic, it is necessary to ramp the gate 
bias and obtain solutions at a number of points. By default, the size of the 
step between solutions points is determined by Sentaurus Device. As the 

173
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
simulation proceeds, output data for each of the electrodes (currents, volt­
ages, and charges) are saved to the current file after each step and therefore 
the electrical characteristic is obtained. This can be plotted using Inspect. 
The Solve section is shown below.
Solve {
Poisson
Coupled {Poisson Electron}
Quasistationary (Goal {Name=“gate” Voltage=2})
{Coupled {Poisson Electron}}
}
• Poisson: This specifies that the initial solution is of the nonlinear 
Poisson equation only. Electrodes have initial electrical bias condi­
tions as defined in the Electrode section.
• Coupled {Poisson Electron}: The second step introduces the continu­
ity equation for electrons, with the initial bias conditions applied. 
In this case, the electron current continuity equation is solved fully 
coupled to the Poisson equation, taking the solution from the previ­
ous step as the initial guess. The fully coupled or “Newton” method 
is fast and converges in most cases.
• Quasistationary (Goal {Name = “gate” Voltage = 2})
• {Coupled {Poisson Electron}}
The Quasistationary statement specifies that quasi-static or steady-state 
“equilibrium” solutions are to be obtained. A set of Goals for one or more 
electrodes is defined in parentheses. In this case, a sequence of solutions 
is obtained for increasing gate bias up to and including the goal of 2 V. A 
fully coupled (Newton) method for the self-consistent solution of the Poisson 
and electron continuity equations is specified in braces. Each bias step is 
solved by taking the solution from the previous step as its initial guess. If 
Extrapolate is specified in the Math section, the initial guess for each bias 
step is calculated by extrapolation from the previous two solutions.
4.5.2  Physical Models
The Physics section allows a selection of the physical models to be applied in 
the device simulation [2]. The physical phenomena that actually occur within 
semiconductor devices are very complicated and are generally described 
using differential equations (partial and full) of different levels of complex­
ity. The coefficients and the boundary conditions required for solving the 
equations depend on the structure of the device, the principle of action, 
and the applied bias. Sentaurus Device allows for arbitrary combinations of 
transport equations and physical models. 

174
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
4.5.2.1  Transport Equations
Depending on the device required to be simulated and the level of modeling 
accuracy required, four different simulation models can be selected:
• Drift-diffusion isothermal simulation: Described by basic semiconduc­
tor equations and is suitable for low-power density devices with 
long active regions.
• Thermodynamic: Accounts for self-heating and is suitable for devices 
with low thermal exchange, particularly, high-power density devices 
with long active regions.
• Hydrodynamic: Accounts for energy transport of the carriers. Suitable 
for devices with small active regions.
• Monte Carlo: Allows for full band Monte Carlo device simulation in 
the selected window of the device.
4.5.2.2	 Poisson Equation and Continuity Equations
The three fundamental equations that dictate the charge transport in semi­
conductor devices are the Poisson equation and the electron and hole conti­
nuity equations. The Poisson equation is given as:
	
⋅ε
= −
−
+
−
−ρ
q p
n
N
N
(
)
D
A
trap 	
(4.1)
where ε is the electrical permittivity, q is the elementary electronic charge, n 
and p are the electron and hole densities, ND  is the concentration of ionized 
donors, NA  is the concentration of ionized acceptors, and 
trap
ρ
 is the charge 
density contributed by traps and fixed charges. The keyword for the Poisson 
equation is Poisson. The keywords for the electron and hole continuity equa­
tions are electron and hole, respectively. They are written as:
	
⋅
=
+
∂
∂
→
J
qR
q n
t
n
net
 
−
⋅
=
+
∂
∂
→
J
qR
q p
t
p
net
	
(4.2)
where Rnet  is the net electron–hole recombination rate, Jn
→
 is the electron cur­
rent density, and Jp
→
is the hole current density.
4.5.2.3  Drift-Diffusion Model
The drift-diffusion model is widely used for the simulation of carrier transport 
in semiconductors and is defined by the Poisson and continuity equations, see 
(4.1) and (4.2), where current densities for electrons and holes are given by:
	
J
nq
J
pq
n
n
n
p
p
p
= −
µ
Φ
= −
µ
Φ
→
→
	
(4.3)

175
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
where μn and μp are the electron and hole mobilities, and Φn and Φp  are the 
electron and hole quasi-Fermi potentials, respectively.
The thermodynamic or non-isothermal model extends the drift-diffusion 
model to account for electrothermal effects. It assumes that the charge carriers 
are in thermal equilibrium with the lattice. In this model the electron and hole 
temperatures are assumed to be equal to the lattice temperature. The ther­
modynamic model is described by (4.1), (4.2), and lattice heat flow equations. 
Because the size of power devices is extremely large compared to that of CMOS 
devices, the drift-diffusion model including thermodynamic effects is usually 
sufficient in terms of accuracy. The drift-diffusion transport model, however, 
fails to describe the internal and external characteristics of deep submicron 
semiconductor devices. In particular, the drift-diffusion approach cannot 
reproduce velocity overshoot and often overestimates the impact ionization 
generation rates. The Monte Carlo method for the solution of the Boltzmann 
kinetic equation is the most general approach. However, it suffers from high 
computational requirements. Hence, it cannot be used for the routine simula­
tion of devices in an industrial setting. The hydrodynamic (or energy balance) 
model is a good compromise. In the hydrodynamic transport model, carrier 
temperatures are allowed to be different from the lattice temperature.
4.5.2.4  Quantization Models
Some features of current MOSFET devices such as oxide thickness, channel 
width, etc., have reached their quantum-mechanical length scales. Therefore, 
the wave nature of electrons and holes can no longer be neglected. Quantization 
effects in a classical device simulation are included by incorporating potential, 
like quantity 
n
Λ  in the classical carrier density formula as follows:
	
n
N F
E
E
kT
C
F n
C
n
n
1/2
,
=
−
−Λ




	
(4.4)
An analogous quantity 
p
Λ  is used for holes. Sentaurus Device implements 
four quantization models—that is, four different models for 
n
Λ  and 
p
Λ . 
They differ in accuracy, computational expense, and robustness:
• The van Dort model is a numerically robust, fast, and proven model. 
However, it is only suited to bulk MOSFET simulations. The impor­
tant terminal characteristics are well described by this model, but it 
does not give the correct density distribution in the channel.
• The 1D Schrödinger equations make up the most accurate quantization 
model. It can be used for MOSFET simulation, and quantum well and 
ultrathin silicon-on-insulator (SOI) simulation. However, the simula­
tion procedure is slow and often leads to convergence problems that 
restrict its use to situations with small current flow. It is used mainly 
for the validation and calibration of other quantization models.

176
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
• The density gradient model is numerically robust but significantly 
slower than the van Dort model. It can be applied to MOSFETs, 
quantum wells, and SOI structures. It gives reasonable description 
of terminal characteristics and charge distribution inside a device. 
Compared to the other quantization models, it can describe 2D and 
3D quantization effects.
• The modified local-density approximation (MLDA) is a numerically 
robust and fast model. It can be used for bulk MOSFET simulations 
and thin SOI simulations. Although it sometimes fails to calculate 
accurate carrier distribution in the saturation regions because of its 
one-dimensional characteristic, it is suitable for three-dimensional 
device simulations because of its numeric efficiency.
Due to the wide usage of the density gradient model, we briefly discuss 
this below.
The density gradient model for 
n
Λ  in (4.4) is given by a partial differen­
tial equation:
	
ℏ
ℏ
{
}
Λ = −γ
+
= −γ
m
n
n
m
n
n
12
ln
1
2 (
ln )
6
n
n
n
2
2
2
2
2
	
(4.5)
where γ is a fitting parameter. The density gradient equation for electrons 
and holes is activated by the eQuantumPotential and hQuantumPotential 
switches in the Physics section. These switches can also be used in region 
wise or material wise in the Physics section. In metal regions, the equa­
tions are never solved. Apart from activating the equations in the Physics 
section, the equations for the quantum corrections must be solved by using 
eQuantumPotential or hQuantumPotential, or both in the Solve section. For 
example:
Physics {
eQuantumPotential
}
Plot {
eQuantumPotential
}
Solve {
Coupled {Poisson eQuantumPotential}
Quasistationary (
Do Zero InitialStep=0.01 MaxStep=0.1 MinStep=1e-5
Goal {Name=“gate” Voltage=2}
){
Coupled {Poisson Electron eQuantumPotential}
}
}

177
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
4.5.2.5  Mobility Models
Sentaurus Device provides several options for the description of carrier 
mobilities. The various causes of mobility degradation can be individu­
ally modeled. In the simplest case, the mobility is considered to be a func­
tion of the lattice temperature. This is referred to as the constant mobility 
model and accounts only for phonon scattering. This should only be used 
for undoped materials. In doped semiconductors, scattering of the carriers 
by charged impurity ions leads to degradation of the carrier mobility. This 
is modeled in Sentaurus Device [4]. In the channel region of a MOSFET, 
the high transverse electric field forces carriers to interact strongly with 
the semiconductor–insulator interface. Carriers are subjected to scattering 
by acoustic surface phonons and surface roughness. This phenomenon of 
mobility degradation at interface is also modeled in Sentaurus Device. The 
carrier-carrier scattering effect can also be modeled. The carrier-carrier 
contribution to overall mobility degradation is combined with mobility 
contributions from other degradation models following Matthiessen’s rule. 
The Philips unified mobility model unifies the description of majority and 
minority carrier bulk mobilities. In addition to describing the temperature 
dependence of the mobility, the model takes into account electron–hole 
scattering, screening of ionized impurities by charge carriers, and cluster­
ing of impurities. The mobility degradation due to high electric field can 
also be modeled in Sentaurus Device.
4.5.2.5.1  Doping-Dependent Mobility Degradation
The models for the mobility degradation due to impurity scattering are acti­
vated by specifying the DopingDependence flag to Mobility:
Physics {Mobility (DopingDependence...)...}
Different models are available and are selected by options to 
DopingDependence: Physics {Mobility (DopingDependence ([Masetti | 
Arora |UniBo])...)...}
If DopingDependence is specified without options, Sentaurus Device uses 
a material-dependent default. The default model used by Sentaurus Device 
to simulate doping-dependent mobility in silicon was proposed by Masetti 
et al. This is as follows:
	
P
N
N
C
C N
exp
1
(
/
)
1
(
/
)
dop
c
tot
const
tot
r
s
tot
min1
min 2
1
µ
= µ
−



+ µ
−µ
+
−
µ
+
α
β
	
(4.6)
The reference mobilities 
min1
µ
, 
min 2
µ
, and 
1
µ ; the reference doping concentra­
tions Pc , Cr Cs ; and the exponents α and β are accessible in the parameter 
set DopingDependence. The corresponding values for silicon are given in 
Table 4.1.

178
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
4.5.2.5.2  Mobility Degradation at Interfaces
In the channel region of a MOSFET, the high transverse electric field forces 
carriers to interact strongly with the semiconductor–insulator interface. 
The carriers are thus subjected to scattering by acoustic surface phonons 
and surface roughness. The models in this section describe mobility degra­
dation caused by these effects. To select the calculation of field perpendicu­
lar to the semiconductor–insulator interface, specify the Enormal option to 
Mobility:
Physics {Mobility (Enormal...)...}
The surface contribution due to acoustic phonon scattering has the form:
	
B
F
C N
N
F
T
K
(
/
)
( /300 )
ac
n
tot
n
k
0
1/3
µ
=
+
λ
	
(4.7)
And the contribution attributed to surface roughness scattering is given by:
	
F F
F
/
)
sr
n
ref
A
n
*
3
1
µ
=
δ
+ η




−
	
(4.8)
These surface contributions to the mobility are then combined with the bulk 
mobility according to Mathiessen’s rule:
	
D
D
1
1
b
ac
sr
µ = µ + µ
+ µ
	
(4.9)
where Fref = 1 V/cm, Fn = Normal electric field, D = exp (–x⁄ lcrit) (where x is 
the distance from the interface and lcrit is a fit parameter). In the Lombardi 
TABLE 4.1
Masetti Model: Default Coefficients
Symbol
Parameter Name
Electrons
Holes
Unit
μmin1 
Mumin1
52.2
44.9
Cm2/Vs
μmin1
Mumin2
52.2
0
Cm2/Vs
μ1
Mu1
43.4
29.0
Cm2/Vs
pc 
Pc
0
9.23 × 1016
cm–3
cr 
Cr
9.68 × 1016
2.23 × 1017
cm–3
cs
Cs
3.34 × 1020
6.10 × 1020
cm–3
α
Alpha
0.680
0.719
1
β
Beta
2.0
2.0
1

179
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
model, the exponent in (4.8), A* is equal to 2. According to another study, an 
improved fit to measured data is achieved if A* is given by:
	
A
A
n
p N
N
N
*
(
)
(
)
ref
v
tot
v
1
=
+ α
+
+
⊥
	
(4.10)
The respective default parameters that are appropriate for silicon are given 
in Table 4.2.
4.5.2.5.3  High-Field Saturation
In high electric fields, the carrier drift velocity is no longer proportional 
to the electric field; instead, the velocity saturates to a finite speed vsat. The 
high-field saturation models include three sub-models: the actual mobility 
model, the velocity saturation model, and the driving force model. With 
some restrictions, these models can be freely combined. The actual mobil­
ity model is selected by flags eHighFieldSaturation or hHighFieldSaturation. 
The default is the Canali model whose parameter values for Silicon are given 
in Table 4.3. The Canali model originates from the Caughey–Thomas for­
mula but has temperature-dependent parameters, which were fitted up to 
430 K by Canali et al. [5]:
	
(
)
µ
=
α +
µ
α +
+




α+
µ
β
β
F
( )
(
1)
1
low
F
v
(
1)
1/
low hfs
sat
	
(4.11)
TABLE 4.2
Lombardi Model: Default Coefficients for Silicon
Symbol
Parameter 
Name
Electrons
Holes
Unit
B
B
4.75 × 107
9.925 × 106
Cm/s
C
C
5.80 × 102
2.947 × 103
Cm5/3/V–2/3s–1
NO
NO
1
1
Cm–3
λ
Lambda
0.1250
0.0317
1
K
K
1
1
1
δ
Delta
5.82 × 1014
2.0546 × 1014
Cm2/Vs
A
A
2
2
1
α⊥ 
Alpha
0
0
cm–3
N1
N1
1
1
cm–3
V
Nu
1
1
1
η
Eta
5.82 × 1030
2.0546 × 1030
V2cm–1s–1
lcrit
L-crit
1 × 10–6
1 × 10–6
cm

180
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
where 
low
µ
 denotes the low-field mobility, and Fhfs  is the driving field. The 
exponent β is temperature dependent according to:
	
T
K
300
0
exp
β = β 



β
	
(4.12)
4.5.3  Design Continuation
This file “crc_des.cmd” is required to apply voltage at its different terminals. 
This file script is given here.
* Quantum
File{
Grid	
= “ crc_mesh.tdr “
Plot	
= “crc_des.tdr”
Current	
= “crc_des.plt”
Output	
= “crc_des.log”
}
Electrode{
{Name=“source” Voltage=0.0}
{Name=“drain”	
Voltage=0.0}
{Name=“gate”	
Voltage=0.0}
{Name=“body” Voltage=0.0}
}
Physics{
* DriftDiffusion
eQuantumPotential
EffectiveIntrinsicDensity(OldSlotboom)
Mobility(
DopingDep
eHighFieldsaturation(GradQuasiFermi)
hHighFieldsaturation(GradQuasiFermi)
TABLE 4.3
Canali Model Parameters (Default Values for Silicon)
Symbol
Parameter 
Name
Electrons
Holes
Unit
β0
Beta0
1.109
1.213
1
βexp 
Betaexp
0.66
0.17
1
α
alpha
0
0
1

181
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
Enormal
)
Recombination(
SRH(DopingDep)
)
}
Plot{
*— Density and Currents, etc
eDensity hDensity
TotalCurrent/Vector eCurrent/Vector hCurrent/Vector
eMobility hMobility
eVelocity hVelocity
eQuasiFermi hQuasiFermi
*— Temperature
eTemperature Temperature * hTemperature
*— Fields and charges
ElectricField/Vector Potential SpaceCharge
*— Doping Profiles
Doping DonorConcentration AcceptorConcentration
*— Generation/Recombination
SRH Band2Band * Auger
AvalancheGeneration eAvalancheGeneration 
hAvalancheGeneration
*— Driving forces
eGradQuasiFermi/Vector hGradQuasiFermi/Vector
eEparallel hEparallel eENormal hENormal
*— Band structure/Composition
BandGap
BandGapNarrowing
Affinity
ConductionBand ValenceBand
eQuantumPotential
}
Math {
Extrapolate
Iterations=20
Notdamped=100
RelErrControl
ErRef(Electron)=1.e10
ErRef(Hole)=1.e10
}

182
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Solve {
*- Build-up of initial solution:
NewCurrentFile=“init”
Coupled(Iterations=100){Poisson eQuantumPotential}
Coupled{Poisson Electron Hole eQuantumPotential}
*- Bias drain to target bias
Quasistationary(
InitialStep=0.01 Increment=1.35
MinStep=1e-5 MaxStep=0.2
Goal{Name=“gate” Voltage=2.0 }
){Coupled{Poisson Electron Hole eQuantumPotential}
}
*- gate voltage sweep
NewCurrentFile=“”
Quasistationary(
InitialStep=1e-3 Increment=1.35
MinStep=1e-5 MaxStep=1.1
Goal{Name=“drain” Voltage=2.0}
){Coupled{Poisson Electron Hole eQuantumPotential}
CurrentPlot(Time=(Range=(0 1) Intervals=20))
}
* none
}
This will generate output files “crc_des.tdr”, “crc_des.plt”, and “crc_des.log”.
4.6  Tecplot
Tecplot is a plotting software with extensive 2D and 3D capabilities for visu­
alizing data from simulations and experiments. Tecplot can be started at the 
command prompt without loading any data file:
> tecplot_sv
4.6.1  Input Files
Two types of files can be loaded into Tecplot SV. The first type is the .tdr file. 
This file is used to describe a device structure, corresponding meshing, and 
the values of the field quantities existing in the corresponding device. The 
other type is the .plt file. Datasets included in this file are used by Tecplot SV 
to generate X-Y plots. Loading can be performed initially when Tecplot SV is 
started from the command line or interactively after Tecplot SV has started.

183
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
4.7  Inspect
Inspect tool is used for efficient viewing of X-Y plots such as doping profiles 
and I-V curves. An Inspect curve is a sequence of points defined by an array 
of x coordinates and y coordinates. Inspect extracts parameters such as junc­
tion depth, threshold voltage, and saturation currents from the respective 
X-Y plot. It is possible to manipulate curves interactively by using scripts. 
Inspect features a large set of mathematical functions for curve manipulation 
such as differentiation, integration, and to find min/max. The inspect script 
language is open to tool command language (TCL) and therefore inherits all 
the power and flexibility of TCL. To start inspect, at the command line type: 
inspect.
4.8  Parameterized Scripting
This section describes the use of script language for constructing parameter­
ized devices. This technique enables the user to generate a device of various 
geometries without explicitly specifying the coordinates while constructing. 
This considerably reduces the device construction time.
; Model for Halo doped/Conventional DG Tunnel FET device
; Model for Asymmetric Heavily/Lightly Doped DG MOSFET
; All Dimensions in Nanometer initially
(sde:clear)
(define Lg 100)	
;Gate length	 (considered the X direction)
(define tsi 70)	
;Channel Thickness (considered the Y 
direction)
(define Toxf 3)	
;Oxide thickness
(define xsw 100)	
;shallow source drain length
(define ysw 33)	
;shallow source drain depth
(define sub 50)	
;substrate depth
(define GateHght 20) ;Gate Height thickness
(define Xsd (/Lg 2)) ;S/D width along X direction
(define Nsd 3.7e20) ;Constant Source drain doping (p++ type)
(define Nssd 2e20) ;Constant shallow source Drain doping 
(n++ type)
(define Ns 1e16) ;Constant reto Channel doping (n type)
(define Na 1e18) ;Constant sub Channel doping (n type)
(define Nd 1e16) ;Constant delta Channel doping (n++ type)
; TCAD Sentaurus by default assumes all dimensions in 
micrometer. Thus, all the definitions stated above are 

184
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
considered in micrometer. However, to convert the dimension 
from micrometer to nanometer, the following steps are performed.
(set! Lg (/Lg 1e3))
Let us consider the first command i.e., (set! Lg (/Lg 1e3)). 
Here, the originally defined value of Lg=100 micrometer is 
divided by 1e3 (1×103) to finally set the value of Lg to 100 
nanometer.
(set! tsi (/tsi 1e3))
(set! Toxf (/Toxf 1e3))
(set! Xsd (/Xsd 1e3))
(set! Xsp (/Xsp 1e3))
(set! xsw (/xsw 1e3))
(set! ysw (/ysw 1e3))
(set! sub (/sub 1e3))
(set! GateHght (/GateHght 1e3))
(define d_Xmax (+ (+ Xsd (+ Xsd Lg)) (* xsw 2)))
(define d_Ymax (+ (+ (+ Toxf GateHght) tsi) sub)) ;
Let us illustrate the steps required to create region 1. This involves the cre­
ation of a rectangle, the coordinates of whose diatonically opposite corners 
A and B are to be specified.
;create substrate
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position (* (+ (+ (/Lg 2) xsw) Xsd) -1) tsi 0)
(position (+ (+ (/Lg 2) xsw) Xsd) (+ sub tsi) 0)
“Silicon” “Body_3”)
;create channel_2
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position (+ (/Lg 2) xsw) tsi 0)
(position (* (+ (/Lg 2) xsw) -1) ysw 0)
“Silicon” “Body_2”)
;create channel_1
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position (/Lg -2) 0 0)
(position (/Lg 2) ysw 0)
“Silicon” “Body_1”)
;create shallow source
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position (/Lg -2) 0 0)
(position (- (/Lg -2) xsw) ysw 0)
“Silicon” “source_sh”)

185
Device Simulation Using ISE-TCAD
;create shallow drain
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position (+ (/Lg 2) xsw) 0 0)
(position (/Lg 2) ysw 0)
“Silicon” “drain_sh”)
;create source
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position	 (* (+ (/Lg 2) xsw) -1)	
	
0	
0)
(position	 (* (+ (+ (/Lg 2) xsw) Xsd) -1)	
tsi	
0)
“Silicon” “Source”)
;create drain
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position	 (+ (/Lg 2) xsw)	
	
0	
0)
(position	 (+ (+ (/Lg 2) xsw) Xsd)	
tsi	
0)
“Silicon” “Drain”)
;create oxide
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position (/Lg -2) 0 0)
(position (/Lg 2) (* Toxf -1) 0)
“SiO2” “oxide”)
;create oxide spacer
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position	 (* (+ (/Lg 2) xsw) -1)	
	
0	
0)
(position	 (* (/Lg 2) -1)(* (+ Toxf GateHght) -1)	 0)
“SiO2” “oxide_2”)
;create oxide spacer
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position	 (+ (/Lg 2) xsw)	
	
0	
0)
(position	 (/Lg 2)	
(* (+ Toxf GateHght) -1)	
0)
“SiO2” “oxide_1”)
;create gate electrode
(sdegeo:create-rectangle
(position (/Lg -2) (* Toxf -1) 0)
(position (/Lg 2) (* (+ Toxf GateHght) -1) 0)
“PolySi” “gate”)

186
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
4.9  Sentaurus Workbench
Sentaurus Workbench is the complete graphical environment that inte­
grates various Sentaurus tools. It is used throughout the semiconduc­
tor industry to design, organize, and run simulations. Simulations are 
comprehensively organized into projects. Sentaurus Workbench auto­
matically manages the information flow, which includes preprocessing 
of user input files, parameterizing projects, setting up and executing tool 
instances, and visualizing results. Sentaurus Workbench allows users to 
define parameters and variables in order to run comprehensive paramet­
ric analyses. The resulting data can be used with statistical and spread­
sheet software.
4.10  Summary
TCAD refers to the use of computer simulations to model semiconductor 
processing and devices. The two major functionalities of TCAD are device 
simulation and process simulation. The device simulation process starts 
from construction of the devices based on geometry and process parameters. 
Subsequently, the device is meshed intelligently and simulated. The various 
electrical characteristics can be visualized and plotted. This chapter demon­
strates the device simulation procedure through examples using Sentaurus 
TCAD tool of Synopsys.
References
	
1.	 Integrated Systems Engineering (ISE) TCAD Manuals, 2006, Release 10.0.
	
2.	 Saha, Samar. Extraction of substrate current model parameters from device 
simulation, Solid-State Electronics, Volume 37, Issue 10, October 1994, Pages 
1786–1788.
	
3.	 Saha, Samar. Design considerations for 25 nm MOSFET devices, Solid-State 
Electronics, Volume 45, Issue 10, October 2001, Pages 1851–1857.
	
4.	 MOSFET test structures for two-dimensional device simulation, original 
research article, Solid-State Electronics, Volume 38, Issue 1, January 1995, Pages 
69–73.
	
5.	 Canali, C., G. Majni, R. Minder, and G. Ottaviani, Electron and hole drift veloc­
ity measurements in silicon and their empirical relation to electric field and tem­
perature, IEEE Trans. on Electron Devices, vol. ED-22, pp. 1045–1047, 1975.

187
5
Device Simulation Using 
Silvaco ATLAS Tool
Angsuman Sarkar
CONTENTS
5.1	
Introduction................................................................................................. 188
5.1.1	 History of Silvaco Technology Computer Aided Design 
(TCAD)............................................................................................. 189
5.1.2	 Device Simulation Challenges...................................................... 189
5.1.3	 Application of Device Simulation.................................................190
5.2	
How the Device Simulator ATLAS Works..............................................190
5.3	
ATLAS Inputs and Outputs...................................................................... 192
5.4	
Simulation Setup......................................................................................... 194
5.5	
Brief Review of Electro-Physical Models Employed in ATLAS........... 195
5.6	
Choice of METHOD in ATLAS................................................................. 197
5.7	
Mobility Models in ATLAS.......................................................................199
5.8	
Benchmarking of MOSFET Simulations.................................................202
5.8.1	 Method of Simulator Calibration..................................................203
5.8.2	 Calibration of Process Simulator..................................................204
5.8.3	 Calibration of Device Simulator...................................................204
5.9	
Importance of Mesh Optimization...........................................................204
5.9.1	 Strategy to Obtain a Satisfactory Mesh.......................................205
5.9.2	 Mesh Re-Gridding..........................................................................206
5.10	 Introduction to Other Tools from Silvaco Used in Conjunction 
with ATLAS.................................................................................................206
5.10.1	 Process Simulation Tools...............................................................208
5.10.2	 ATHENA and ATLAS....................................................................209
5.11	 Example 1: Bulk n-Channel MOSFET Simulation..................................209
5.11.1	 Program for Bulk n-Channel MOSFET Simulation................... 210
5.11.2	 Simulation Results.......................................................................... 212
5.12	 Example 2: Silicon-on-Insulator (SOI) MOSFET Simulation................ 213
5.12.1	 Program Description for SOI MOSFET Simulation................... 213
5.12.2	 Simulation Results.......................................................................... 219
5.13	 Example 3: 0.18 µm Bulk nMOS Transistor with Halo Implant........... 219
5.13.1	 Program for 0.18 µm Bulk nMOS..................................................220
5.13.2	 Simulation Results..........................................................................225

188
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
5.1  Introduction
One of the critical issues for the fabrication of integrated circuits (ICs) is 
precise design of the operation of the circuits containing huge numbers of 
transistors. It is quite natural to predict the device operation by computer 
calculations using the simulators and device models. Devices scaled down 
to deca-nanometer range, operating at their physical limits, put stringent 
requirements on the modeling and simulation of device characteristics [1]. 
Computer aided modeling and simulation plays a crucial role in the devel­
opment and prediction of the properties of modern technologies. Because 
of trial manufacturing and circuit redesign, the cost of modern, highly 
dense ICs containing deep sub-micron devices is very high. Simulation 
allows visualization and better understanding of the microscopic physical 
phenomenon and effects taking place over very small lengths or over small 
periods in macroscopic dimensions. To achieve these goals, over the past 
twenty years, two/three-dimensional numerical technology computer aided 
design (TCAD) device simulation tools have evolved into a well-accepted 
and extremely important branch of electronic design and automation (EDA) 
tools. It is suitable for the analysis and characterization of semiconductor 
structures and devices standing alone and/or coupled in integrated circuits 
[2]. TCAD has already been considered an invaluable tool in the research and 
development of new technology at the level of semiconductor process and 
device design.
The goal of this chapter is to introduce the device simulation of metal-
oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) using Silvaco (Silicon 
Valley Corporation) TCAD device simulation tools using selected examples. 
The chapter illustrates the key aspects of Silvaco TCAD tools, showing their 
capability to understand the physical behavior and potential of a device 
structure. Silvaco TCAD device simulators provide unique insight into the 
internal operation of the analyzed device structure using a variety of com­
plex physics-based models and advanced numerical solvers securing stable 
calculations.
5.14	 Example 4: Volume Inversion Double-Gate (DG) MOSFET.................226
5.14.1	 Program for Structure of DG MOSFET.......................................227
5.14.2	 Program to Obtain Potential Variation of DG MOSFET...........228
5.14.3	 Simulation Results..........................................................................229
5.14.4	 Program to Obtain Ids-Vgs Characteristics of DG MOSFET.......231
5.14.5	 Simulation Results..........................................................................232
5.15	 Summary......................................................................................................232
References..............................................................................................................233

189
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
Any semiconductor device is represented by a structure whose electrical 
and physical properties are discretized onto a mesh of nodes. The two/three-
dimensional device structure may be the output of the process simulator or 
can be supplied from an input file containing the mesh information, types 
of materials, doping profiles in specific regions, names of the terminals, and 
properly defined boundary conditions with applied external electrical, opti­
cal, mechanical, magnetic, and thermal fields. An extensive set of electro-
physical models is also supplied to characterize the behaviors of various 
physical effects present in a semiconductor. A device simulator calculates 
the output characteristics by solving a set of partial differential equations 
through iterative numerical techniques.
Two-dimensional device simulation with properly selected calibrated 
models and a well-defined appropriate mesh structure are very useful for 
predictive parametric analysis of novel device structures.
5.1.1  History of Silvaco Technology Computer Aided Design (TCAD)
Examples of early numeric simulation of semiconductors can be found in 
[3,4]. The journey of modern commercial TCAD started with the devel­
opment of two famous general-purpose simulation software programs. 
SUPREM (Stanford University Process Engineering Models) and PISCES 
(Poisson and Continuity Equation Solver) came as an outgrowth of the 
research done at Stanford University. SUPREM3 is a one-dimensional pro­
cess simulator, while SUPREM4 is a two-dimensional process simulator. 
PISCES is the corresponding two-dimensional device simulator. TSUPREM4 
and MEDICI are the versions of these programs of Technology Modeling 
Associates (TMA) formed in 1979. ATHENA and ATLAS are commercial 
equivalent alternatives of these programs, as Silvaco later licensed these pro­
grams from Stanford University. The other major TCAD vendor is Integrated 
Systems Engineering (ISE). Their equivalent alternative products are DIOS 
and DESSIS from ISE.
Many other specific MOSFET device simulators have been developed, such 
as MINIMOS from the Technical University of Vienna, SEQUOIA Device 
Designer, FLOOPS/FLOODS from the University of Florida, IBM’s FEDSS/
FIELDAY, Agere’s PROPHET/PADRE, APSYS, C-SUPREM and PROCOM 
from Crosslight, and Visual TCAD from Cogenda.
5.1.2  Device Simulation Challenges
There was always skepticism within the industry about the ability of TCAD 
device simulation procedure to correctly predict the experimental results. 
The primary reason for these discrepancies includes the lack of adequate 
models to describe the physical behavior of the actual device, the selection of 
appropriate electro-physical models, proper optimization of mesh structure, 
and the constant evolution of technology. As the technology scales down, 

190
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
MOS transistors with channel lengths as small as 10 nm are now being 
actively studied both theoretically and experimentally [5]. Advances in scal­
ing of MOSFET resulted in new physical effects like quantum mechanical 
effects, stress effects, introduction of new materials, etc., which are becom­
ing pertinent to deep sub-micron devices. Therefore, the current challenge 
in device simulation is to address those new physical effects [5,6] in order to 
obtain accurate results.
5.1.3  Application of Device Simulation
The goal of the device simulation procedure is to use the output of the simu­
lation process for predictive analysis of the properties and behavior of the 
simulated device structure with a unique insight into the internal process 
and structure operation, along with the possibility of further optimization 
and development. Two- and three-dimensional modeling and the simulation 
process contribute to a better understanding of the properties and behavior 
of the new devices by identifying the inevitable parasitic devices attributing 
to standard malfunction behaviors and degraded performances. Based on 
the interpretation of experimentally obtained data along with the result of 
device simulation, new structures and devices with modified layouts and 
concentration profiles can be designed and verified. More on TCAD applica­
tions can be found in [7,8].
5.2  How the Device Simulator ATLAS Works
ATLAS is a device simulation tool. The framework of ATLAS combines sev­
eral one-, two-, and three-dimensional simulation tools into one compre­
hensive device simulation package. This allows for the simulation of a wide 
variety of modern semiconductor devices.
ATLAS is a physically based predictive device simulator that predicts the 
electrical characteristics associated with specified physical structures and 
bias conditions to provide insight within device operation and behavior.
To simulate a device in ATLAS, a description of the device is required. 
Descriptions of the device meshed with a two- or three-dimensional grid 
are provided via ASCII command line instructions supplied to ATLAS. The 
two- or three-dimensional grid approximating the device structure consists 
of a number of grid points known as nodes. The maximum number of grid 
points is limited to 20,000, a constraint set by ATLAS.
Figure 5.1 illustrates the main components of semiconductor device simu­
lation. There are two main strongly coupled sets of equations that must be 
solved consistently. They are the transport equations governing the flow of 
the charges within the semiconductor, and the fields driving such charge 

191
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
flow. Such fields are obtained from the solution of Maxwell’s equations. 
These quasi-static fields are calculated from Poisson’s equations with the aid 
of available boundary conditions. These fields are the driving forces for the 
charge transport.
In ATLAS, the transport of carriers is calculated at every node of the grid 
by applying a set of differential equations, derived from Maxwell’s laws 
along with physical models (i.e., with appropriate numerical solvers invoked 
by the user). A set of differential equations on the grid is applied. With a bias 
point specified, the properties of the carriers in the device are solved through 
an iterative procedure. This facilitates the user to analyze electrical, thermal, 
and optical characteristics of the devices through simulation without having 
to manufacture the actual device and also to determine static and transient 
terminal currents and voltages in DC, AC, or transient modes of operation.
In order to complete a simulation run, ATLAS solves six equations for 
every point on the mesh structure defined. They are the Poisson’s equation, 
two carrier continuity equations, two energy balance equations, and the lat­
tice heat flow equation. The choice of techniques in solving these numerical 
equations can strongly affect the convergence time of a complete simulation 
run. However, in some circumstances it is sufficient to solve only one (either 
hole or electron) carrier continuity equation. It is possible to supply param­
eters to the METHOD statement to specify which carrier (electron, hole, 
or both) continuity equation is to be solved. The choice can be made using 
the parameters CARRIERS. For example, to include both electron and hole, 
the user must specify “CARRIERS = 2” and for only holes “CARRIERS = 1 
HOLE” in the METHOD statement.
The user has to provide the structural information of the device to be sim­
ulated (appropriate mesh structure) to invoke the appropriate physical mod­
els and their associated numerical solvers and to set the desired bias profile 
for ATLAS to predict the electrical behavior of a particular device.
Device Simulation
Transport Equations
Electromagnetic
Fields
Electronic structures,
Lattice dynamics
E, B
J, ρ
FIGURE 5.1
The ATLAS device simulation approach.

192
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
5.3  ATLAS Inputs and Outputs
To set up a device simulation, the first step required is to define the mesh 
structure of the device. Mesh structure can be created by entering text-based 
command line instructions in DECKBUILD or graphically by DEVEDIT. 
The text-based commands like Mesh, region, electrode, doping, etc., require 
definition of a structure given in a particular order, shown in Figure 5.2. 
Examples in Sections 5.11, 5.12, and 5.14 demonstrate the creation of device 
structure using command line instructions. It is possible to create the same 
structures using DEVEDIT (GUI-based structure and mesh editor) which 
work in conjunction with ATLAS. DEVEDIT is normally preferred to solve 
the problems of inadequate or excessive triangles to generate non-uniform 
mesh structure. DEVEDIT is also useful for re-meshing a device structure 
suffering with unsatisfactory mesh density during the process and the 
device simulation, or in an intermediate stage between the process and the 
device simulation. But it is worth mentioning that numerical process simula­
tor ATHENA should not be replaced by DEVEDIT when it is important to 
obtain a device structure close to the real-world fabricated device. DEVEDIT 
produces two types of output: (1) standard Silvaco structure file format (*.str) 
containing mesh, region, impurity information, etc., and (2) command for­
mat (*.de) containing list of DEVEDIT instructions to specify the current state 
of mesh development. The Meshbuild command creates a mesh using the 
mesh parameters available. DEVEDIT file should be saved into two formats: 
(1) standard Silvaco structure (*.str) to be used in subsequent device simula­
tion using tools like ATLAS and TONYPLOT or (2) command file (*.de) with 
the possibility to change the structure and mesh at a later time. The output of 
the process simulator ATHENA also produces structure file to be simulated 
using ATLAS (demonstrated via example in Section 5.13).
In summary, simulations generally use two inputs: a text file that has com­
mands for ATLAS to execute and a structure file that defines the structure 
of the device. The text file with simulator-specific commands is created with 
DECKBUILD. The syntax of the input file statement is:
<statement> <parameter>=<value>.
The parameters can be real, integer, character, or logical.
The designer uses ATLAS to solve the input files to generate and visualize 
output data. ATLAS provides three types of output:
	
1.	Run-time output: The progress of the simulation and error or warning 
messages are given by the run-time output. The various parameters 
displayed during the SOLVE statement are (a) “proj” denoting the 
initial guess methodology used (previous, local, or init); (b) “i,j,m” 
indicates the iteration number of outer loop, inner loop for decoupled 

193
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
method and numerical method used; m = G, B or N denoting G = 
Gummel, B = Block, and N = Newton, respectively. (c) x,rhs denotes 
norms of the equation being solved, and (d) (*) indicates the error 
measure.
	
2.	Log files: These contain the electrical information, or more precisely 
I-V data, generated with the currents and terminal voltages applied 
during device analysis.
(a) Structure Specification
• Structure MESH specification
• Structure REGION specification
• ELECTRODE placement
• DOPING profile specification
(b) Model Specification
• Defining MATERIAL type for 
each region (SiO2 or Al, etc.)
• Invoke appropriate physical 
MODELS
• Setting boundary conditions 
and CONTACT information
• INTERFACE specification
(c) Numerical Method Selection
• Invoke suitable numerical solv-
ers such as Gummel, Newton, 
or Bulk METHOD for differ-
ent operating conditions with 
appropriate parameters such as 
number of iteration, error limit, 
etc.
(d) Solution Specification
• LOG file declaration to contain 
I-V characteristics
• Solution of device using SOLVE 
with intervals for bias voltage 
(or drive current) specification
• Specifying data types to be 
solved (e.g., recombination 
parameter, bad energy, etc.).
(e) Result Analysis
• Parameter extraction via 
EXTRACT command
• Analyzing device structure 
with different bias condition 
using graphical post-process-
ing tool TONYPLOT
FIGURE 5.2
The order of each command group to be specified in ATLAS from (a) to (e).

194
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
	
3.	Silvaco general structure file: The structure files store the two- and 
three-dimensional data relating to the values of solution variables 
such as electric field, electrostatic potentials, etc., within the device 
for a single bias point.
The log files and the solution structure files are visualized using 
TONYPLOT. Figure  5.3 summarizes the various input and output tech­
niques available for device simulation using ATLAS.
5.4  Simulation Setup
Once a structure file is defined in ATLAS, the remaining part of the setup 
(except for result analysis) consists of providing command line instruc­
tions that must be used to instruct ATLAS in order to complete a simulation 
run. The order in which these instructions are given is important and can 
be divided into five groups of statements outlined in Figure 5.2. Failing to 
adhere to this order may result in premature termination of a simulation 
run, or in an error message being produced. The order of statements within 
each group such as structural definition, model specification, and solution 
groups is also important. Failing to place these statements in proper order 
may result in aforementioned complications.
Solution
ﬁles saved
in structure
Structure
ﬁle
Devedit
Athena
Deckbuild
Command
ﬁle
ATLAS
input
Tonyplot
ATLAS device
simulator
Log ﬁles
ATLAS
output
Runtime
output
&
parameters
extracted in
deckbuild
FIGURE 5.3
Input and output in ATLAS.

195
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
5.5  Brief Review of Electro-Physical 
Models Employed in ATLAS
The accuracy of the results obtained by device simulation process using 
ATLAS depends on the models used in the simulation process. Normally 
physics-based models are used to account for the complex dependencies of 
the device properties on dimensions and other process variables. Generally, 
the model parameters are derived from measurements and characteristics of 
the devices.
The drift-diffusion (DD) model is the simplest current transport model 
and is derived from Boltzmann’s transport equation (BTE). It is famous for 
its simplicity and most efficient approach. Over a long period of time, this 
model has been at the core of semiconductor device simulation. The robust 
discretization of the DD equations proposed by Scharfetter and Gummel 
[9] is still in use today. In isothermal simulation, this simplest DD model 
includes three partial differential equations (PDEs): Poisson’s equation and 
current continuity equations for electrons and holes. The total current den­
sity at any point (sum of electron and hole current) of the structure is found 
after solving the free electron and hole concentrations using potential and 
variable parameters like mobility, electric field and generation-recombination 
rate, etc.
As technology moves forward, devices scale down to sub-micron regime, 
without scaling the supply voltages proportionately. This results in a large 
electric field inside the device. As this large electric field changes quickly 
over small lengths, it brings about non-local and hot-carrier effects that tend 
to dominate device performance. Therefore, non-stationary carrier transport 
phenomenon such as velocity overshoot, which substantially influences the 
on-current (mainly the drift-current) of the MOSFET should be taken into 
account in the simulation. This makes the suitability of the DD model highly 
questionable for the simulation of nanometer MOSFET, as it neglects non-
stationary effects.
As a result, transport models have been refined and extended to capture 
the practical transport phenomena more accurately. To address this issue, 
extensions of the DD model have been proposed. The extensions add a bal­
ance equation for the average carrier energy. They also add a driving term to 
the current relation, proportional to the gradient of the carrier temperature.
A non-isothermal thermodynamic model is chosen where self-heating 
effects are involved. Therefore, additional PDEs corresponding to non-
isothermal temperature distribution must be coupled [10].
A more complex hydrodynamic (HD) or energy balance model is chosen 
for deep sub-micron devices, which involves solution of six coupled par­
tial differential equations: three basic semiconductor equations and three 

196
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
energy balance equations. The individual electron and hole temperatures are 
calculated from the energy balance equation.
In the HD model the equation set of the DD model is extended by the 
energy balance equation to allow for non-stationary carrier transport. The 
disadvantages of the HD model are that it is less stable than DD, it is less effi­
cient in terms of computation time than DD, and it sometimes overestimates 
the current in MOSFET [11].
The typical hierarchy of the MOSFET simulation approach consists of DD, 
HD, and Monte Carlo (MC) methods. MC is most reliable for calculation 
of on-current. Unfortunately, the added accuracy comes at the expense of 
higher computational complexity as compared to HD and DD. Thus MC is 
not suitable for investigations where large numbers of different transistors 
are to be simulated. Even 3D simulations necessary for FinFETs are diffi­
cult with MC. Furthermore, because of its statistical nature, the MC method 
has serious problems in calculating the very low subthreshold currents of 
MOSFETs accurately.
In a recent study, it was shown that the DD on-current is 10% less than 
MC-current calculated for a 100-nm MOSFET [12]. For shorter length 
MOSFET such as 40 nm, the difference of on-current is about 40% [13]. 
However, the on-current simulated by DD can be improved by adjusting 
the mobility model used. For the calculation of subthreshold current, the 
DD model is best suited for both long and short channel MOSFETs [14]. 
Granzner et al. [15] suggested that modifications of the velocity-field char­
acteristics in the DD simulations are suggested to improve the accuracy of 
the DD model, and for the simulation of subthreshold current the standard 
DD model is best suited.
To incorporate quantum-mechanical effects (QMEs) that are significant for 
highly scaled deca-nanometer devices, the Schrödinger equation should be 
solved self-consistently in order to obtain the most accurate simulation result.
Therefore, to achieve maximum predictive capability one needs to 
move toward the quantum transport regime of the hierarchical struc­
ture shown in Figure  5.4. The green function’s approach [16] shown 
in Figure  5.4 is most difficult in terms of complexity of equations and 
numerical efficiency.
The details of various advanced electro-physical models to characterize 
the properties and behavior of analyzed semiconductor device structures 
can be found in the user manual of simulator ATLAS [17].
Physical models are specified in the “MODELS” statement depending on 
the material used and physical nature of the device. For example, the state­
ment “MODELS CVT SRH FERMIDIRAC” enables the Lombardi mobil­
ity model (constant voltage and temperature, CVT), Shockley-Read-Hall 
recombination with fixed carrier lifetimes (SRH) and Fermi-Dirac statistics 
(FERMIDIRAC) for common long-channel Si-MOSFET simulation.

197
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
5.6  Choice of METHOD in ATLAS
The equations can be solved either by a fully coupled (Newton), de-coupled 
(Gummel), or combined (Block) manner. The coupled solutions with all equa­
tions solved at once are best when the interactions between the equations 
are strong (e.g., high current producing sufficient local heating). Newton’s 
method is a fully coupled procedure that solves the equations simultane­
ously, through a generalization of the Newton-Raphson’s method for solving 
the roots of an equation. However, they need a good initial guess as to the 
solution variables for reliable convergence. Unless special techniques such 
as projection are used for calculating the initial guess, the voltage step size 
during a bias ramp in a fully coupled solution might be small in order to 
obtain reliable convergence. Also, the Newton method may spend extra time 
solving the quantities that are weakly coupled or almost constant. Newton’s 
method is the default method or drift-diffusion calculation in ATLAS. Other 
than that, ATLAS requires Newton’s method for DC calculations using 
lumped elements, transient calculations, and frequency-domain small-
signal analysis.
Most accurate, at the same time most diﬃcult solution
type, can be solved for small number of particles
Include correlations in both time and space domains,
higher accuracy with a higher numerical complexity
In addition to all classical features, quantum correction
terms are present to obtain more exact solution
In addition to all classical Hydrodynamic features, quantum
correction terms are present to obtain more exact solution
Appropriate for circuit design
Compact models
Drift-diﬀusion equations
Hydrodynamic models
Self consistent Schrödinger’s
Equation solution
Green’s Function
Quantum Monte Carlo
Quantum Hydrodynamics
Boltzmann’s Transport equation
Monte Carlo Method
Approximate
Easy, Fast
Exact
Exactness of Solution
Diﬃcult
Numerical Complexity
Simpler and eﬃcient, but not suitable for sub-micron
devices, can not capture non-stationary carrier transport
Extension of DD model with energy balance equation, can
treat velocity overshoot eﬀect
Accurate up to classical limits
Quantum
Approaches
Semi-classical
Approaches
FIGURE 5.4
Hierarchy of transport model in Silvaco ATLAS.

198
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
On the other hand, de-coupled solutions where a subset of the equation 
is solved while others are held constant has shown an advantage when the 
interaction between the equations is small (typically low voltage and current 
levels). They tolerate a relatively poor initial guess for convergence. They tend 
to either diverge or take excessive central processing unit (CPU) time once 
the interaction among the equations becomes stronger. Gummel’s method 
cannot be used with lumped elements or current boundary conditions. In a 
typical fully de-coupled procedure, if we choose quasi-Fermi level formula­
tion, at first non-linear Poisson’s equation is solved. The potentials obtained 
are substituted into continuity equations that are now linear and solved 
directly. The results in terms of quasi-Fermi levels are substituted back to 
Poisson’s equation until the convergence is reached, as shown in Figure 5.5.
In general, Gummel’s method is useful where the system of equations is weakly 
coupled, but it has only linear convergence. The Newton method is useful when 
the system of equations is strongly coupled and has quadratic convergence.
Gummel’s method can provide better initial guess to the problems. 
Therefore, it is possible to start a solution using few Gummel’s iterations to 
generate a good initial guess and then switch to Newton to complete the 
simulation [18], as shown in Figure 5.6.
The combined method will solve some equations fully coupled and the 
remaining others using a de-coupled method. The Block method can pro­
vide faster simulation than Newton’s method for solving quantities that are 
weakly coupled. They involve solving a subgroup of equations in various 
sequences. In non-isothermal drift-diffusion simulation using Block method, 
Solve hole concentration for
new p
Repeat
until
satisﬁed
Solve electron concentration for
new n
Solve Poisson’s equation for
new V
Guess V, n, p
FIGURE 5.5
Uncoupled numerical solution.

199
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
Newton’s method is solved for a constant lattice temperature to update car­
rier concentration and potential, after which a heat flow equation with the 
appropriate continuity equation is solved using a de-coupled method to 
update carrier temperature and carrier concentration.
5.7  Mobility Models in ATLAS
The choice of carrier mobility models is one of the most important decisions 
of TCAD device simulation. This is governed by physical parameters, ambi­
ence, and operating conditions.
Electrons and holes accelerate by electric fields but lose momentum due to 
various scattering processes like lattice vibrations (phonons), impurity ions 
or other carriers, surfaces, and other material imperfections. Various micro­
scopic phenomena affect the macroscopic mobility specified in the transport 
equation. Hence these mobilities are functions of the local electrical field, 
doping concentration, lattice temperature, and many other parameters. 
Based on the operating region, mobility models can generally be classified 
into four types: (1) low field, (2) high field, (3) bulk semiconductor region, and 
(4) inversion region.
From an alternative perspective, mobility models can be categorized 
into three types: (1) physically based, (2) semi-empirical, and (3) empirical. 
Extract electron,
hole concentration,
current density, I-V
characteristics etc.
Discretization of
semiconductor
equation
Set up device
dimensions,
numerical
properties, bias
conditions,
temperature,
doping proﬁle etc.
Initial
guess for
Φ, Φn
and Φp
Yes
No
No
Yes
Converged?
Iterative
Gummel’s
Block method
solve for Φ, n, p
Current C
Continuity?
Newton’s
method for
better accuracy
FIGURE 5.6
Steps for numerical solutions.

200
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Physical-based mobility models are obtained from fundamental calcula­
tions using a lot of approximations, and they rarely match the experimental 
data. In a semi-empirical model, to obtain an agreement between the model 
and the experimental result, the coefficients of the physical-based models 
are allowed to vary, keeping the power law dependencies preserved. In con­
trast, it is possible to vary the power-law dependencies in a purely empirical 
model, exhibiting the lowest physical content and a narrower range of validity. 
The most popular mobility models used in ATLAS are listed in Table 5.1.
Low field mobility degrades upon phonon and impurity scattering and 
is valid for carriers present in the bulk under low electric field. The high 
TABLE 5.1
Summary of the Popular Mobility Model Used in ATLAS
Model
Behavior
Syntax
Features
Constant 
low-field 
mobility model
Low-field 
behavior
MUN, MUP, TMUN, 
and TMUP are 
specified in 
MOBILITY statement
Constant low-field mobility 
with only temperature 
variation
Concentration-
dependent 
low-field model
Low-field 
behavior
CONMOB in MODELS 
statement and 
parameters in 
MOBILITY statement
Look up table based, valid 
for Si, GaAs at 300 K
Concentration, 
temperature-
dependent 
analytical model
Low-field 
behavior
ANALYTIC in 
MODELS and 
parameters in 
MOBILITY statement
Based on Caughey-Thomas 
formulae, valid between 77 
and 450 K
Arora’s analytical 
model
Low-field 
behavior
ARORA in MODELS 
and parameters in 
MOBILITY statement
Alternatives to analytic 
model, doping and 
temperature dependent
Masetti analytical 
model for 
low-field 
mobility
Low-field 
behavior
MASETTI in MODELS 
and parameters in 
MOBILITY statement
Optimized for room 
temperature, concentration 
dependent
Carrier-carrier 
scattering model
Low-field 
behavior 
with 
carrier-
carrier 
scattering
CCSMOB parameter in 
MODELS and 
parameters in 
MOBILITY statement
Temperature, doping, and 
carrier-carrier scattering 
dependent, useful when 
carrier concentration is 
very high such as forward 
bias power devices
Klassen unified 
low-field 
mobility model
Low-field 
behavior
KLA parameter in 
MODELS and KLA.N 
and KLA.P 
parameters in 
MOBILITY statement
Temperature dependent, 
doping dependent, 
includes the effect of lattice 
scattering, impurity 
scattering, carrier-carrier 
scattering, and impurity 
clustering. Uses separate 
mobility for majority and 
minority carriers, useful 
for bipolar devices

201
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
electric field dependent parameter decreases with increasing high electric 
field, making the velocity of the carrier constant known as saturation velocity.
Bulk mobility modeling generally requires:
	
1.	Identification of low field mobility as a function of doping and lat­
tice temperature
	
2.	Identification of saturation velocity as a function of temperature
	
3. Description of transition between high and low field region
TABLE 5.1 (CONTINUED)
Summary of the Popular Mobility Model Used in ATLAS
Model
Behavior
Syntax
Features
Lombardi (CVT) 
inversion layer 
mobility model
Inversion 
layer
CVT on the MODELS 
statement and 
parameters in 
MOBILITY statement
Transverse field, doping, and 
temperature-dependent 
parts of mobility are 
combined. Overrides any 
other mobility model used 
in MODELS statement
Yamaguchi 
inversion layer 
mobility model
Inversion 
layer
YAMAGUCHI in 
MODELS and 
parameters in 
MOBILITY statement
Low-field, doping-
dependent mobility with 
surface-degradation 
dependent on parallel filed 
included
Tasch model
Inversion 
layer
TASCH in MODELS 
statement and 
parameters in 
MOBILITY statement
Explicitly for MOSFETs, 
includes transverse field 
dependence for planar 
devices with very fine 
mesh structure
Shirahata model
Inversion 
layer
SHI in MODELS 
statement and SHI.N 
and SHI.P parameters 
in MOBILITY 
statement
General-purpose MOSFET 
mobility model, an 
alternative surface 
mobility model that can be 
combined with Klassen 
model
Watt surface 
mobility model
Perpendicular 
electric field 
dependent
SURFMOB parameter 
on the MODELS 
statement and 
parameters in 
MOBILITY statement
Includes phonon scattering, 
surface roughness 
scattering, and charged 
impurity scattering
Saturation 
velocity model
Parallel 
electric field 
dependent 
mobility
FLDMOB parameter on 
the MODELS 
statement and BETAN 
and BETAP 
parameters in 
MOBILITY statement 
Caughey and Thomas 
expression is used to 
calculate field-dependent 
mobility, getting reduced 
at high field due to 
velocity saturation effect, 
model parallel field 
dependence for Si and 
GaAs

202
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
In ATLAS, low field mobility for the bulk region includes:
	
1.	Constant mobility model
	
2. Caughey and Thomas model (doping and temperature dependent) [19]
	
3.	Arora model (doping, temperature and carrier-carrier scattering 
dependent) [20]
	
4.	Klaassen unified low-field mobility model (unified minority and 
majority carrier mobility, includes lattice scattering, carrier-carrier 
scattering, impurity-clustering effects at high concentrations) [21,22]
It is important to model mobility dependent on the transverse electric field 
associated with inversion layers in order to obtain accurate results. ATLAS 
supports five major transverse field-dependent mobility models. They are 
the CVT (Lombardi) MODEL [23], Watt model [25], Shirahata model [26], 
Yamaguchi model [27], and Tasch model [28].
In ATLAS, the CVT [23] model is selected by specifying CVT on the model 
statement. This model overrides any other mobility model specification. In 
the CVT model, three different components based on transverse field and 
doping concentrations are combined using Mathiessen’s rule [24]. The com­
ponents are µAC, µsr, and µb. µAC is the surface mobility limited by scattering 
with acoustic phonons. µsr is a mobility component limited by surface rough­
ness. µb is the mobility component limited by scattering with optical inter-
valley phonons. According to Mathiessen’s rule the total mobility in a CVT 
model is given by 
T
AC
sr
b
1
1
1
1
µ
= µ
+ µ
+ µ
−
−
−
−.
The Watt model (SURFMOB) [25] is a surface mobility model and is acti­
vated by specifying the parameter WATT in the MODEL statement. The Watt 
model takes into consideration the phonon scattering, surface scattering, and 
charge impurity scattering mechanisms in the inversion layer.
The Shirahata model [26] is enabled by specifying the SH parameter of 
the model statement. It is a general-purpose MOS mobility model that takes 
into account the screening effect in inversion layers and perpendicular field 
dependence for thin gate oxides. When the user enables Shirahata model, 
ATLAS automatically enables Klaassen’s model [21,22].
The Yamaguchi model [27] and the Tasch model [28] are selected by set­
ting YAMAGUCHI and TASCH, respectively, on the MODEL statement. The 
model overrides all mobility models other than CVT.
ATLAS invokes filed dependent mobility models if FLDMOB is specified 
in the MODEL statement. FLDMOB should always be specified unless one of 
the inversion layer mobility models (exhibits parallel field dependency itself) 
is specified.
In ATLAS, it is possible to use more than one mobility model. The 
default mobility model is the constant low field mobility µno and µpo for 
electron and hole, respectively. Values of µno and µpo may be specified in 
the MATERIAL statement using the parameters “MUN” and “MUP”. This 

203
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
particular constant mobility is of no practical use because it leads to unre­
alistic high carrier velocity at high electric fields. Therefore, in order to 
achieve a successful prediction of a MOSFET device, it is necessary to use 
multiple non-conflicting mobility models simultaneously. It is also neces­
sary to know which models are overriding others when conflicting mobil­
ity models are defined.
In ATLAS the mobility model to be used is specified in the MODEL state­
ment. Detailed parameters associated with the chosen mobility models are 
specified on a separate MOBILITY statement.
For example, the ATLAS model statement shown below uses the constant 
voltage and temperature (CVT) Mobility Model for MOSFET in an ATLAS 
program. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to discuss in detail the param­
eters of the mobility model used.
models srh conmob fldnob b.electrons=2 b.holes=l evsatmod=0 
hvsatmod=0 cvt boltzmann print numcarr=1 electrons temperature=300
mobility material=CVT parameter bn.cvt=4.75e+07 bp.cvt=9.92 
5e÷06 cn.cvt=174000 cp.cvt=884200 taun.cvt=0.125
taup.cvt=0.0317 gamn.cvt=2.5 gamp.cvt=2.2 mu0n.cvt=52.2
mu0p.cvt=44.9 mu1n.cvt=43.4 mu1p.cvt=29 mumaxn.cvt=1417
mumaxp.cvt=470.5 crn.cvt=9.16e+16 crp.cvt=2.23e+17 csn.cvt=3 
43e+20 csp.cvt=6.1e+20 alphn.cvt=0.68 alphp.cvt=0.71
betan.cvt=2 bctap.cvt=2 pcn.cvt=0 pcp.cvt=2.3e+15
deln.cvt=5.82e+14 delp.cvt=2.0546e+14
5.8  Benchmarking of MOSFET Simulations
Computer simulations allow modified devices to be tested within a few hours, 
although this can stretch out to days, and simulations also do not consume 
valuable raw materials or production time. However, the accuracy of computer 
models is always subject to question. This has led to the development of many 
different models for carrier mobility as well as different carrier transport models.
5.8.1  Method of Simulator Calibration
Typical TCAD tools, including both the process and the device simulators, 
are accurate, or predictive, but only for a sufficiently stable and mature tech­
nology, and after a lengthy calibration procedure [29]. This poses the issue of 
the relevance of device simulation for the development of a new technology 

204
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
node, in which new processes and materials are introduced which are not 
under complete control until the technology is finally released, and for 
which doping profiles and geometry are not known with sufficient accu­
racy. However, although not fully predictive, the positive aspects of TCAD 
that make them useful are that they still provide optimization guidelines, 
explanations of the characterization results, and insights into the transport 
mechanisms. Therefore, it is extremely important to calibrate the process 
and device simulator tools not just to reproduce qualitative behaviors but 
also to obtain accurate device characterization.
5.8.2  Calibration of Process Simulator
Selection of the appropriate process coefficients and the process models of 
processes like diffusion, ion-implantation, etc., is the most critical part of the 
entire calibration procedure of a process simulator creating a virtual two-
dimensional device simulator. Thereafter the lengthiest task is to match the 
profiles of the actual device with the virtual device, for example, doping pro­
file extraction from a physical device. The matching procedure effectively 
calibrates the simulator for a given process. It is a tedious task to tune the 
large number of undefined coefficients present in the empirical-based mod­
els in the process simulator considering the length of the subsequent process 
simulation runs.
The matching process is iterative. An exact match is rarely obtained. 
Generally there will be slight discrepancies between the structure generated 
by the process simulator and the physical fabricated device.
5.8.3  Calibration of Device Simulator
To calibrate a device simulator (ATLAS), the experimental I-V characteristics 
of the device obtained are set to best match the output of the DECKBUILD 
ATLAS program based on the same device dimension and structure. In 
order to obtain a match between the electrical characteristics of a real fab­
ricated device and that with a simulated one, different advanced mobil­
ity models taking care of different scattering along with different doping 
profiles and different carrier transport models are analyzed iteratively, as 
shown in Figure 5.7.
5.9  Importance of Mesh Optimization
A mesh refers to a collection of volumetric elements whose union defines 
the interior and exterior of the device. The large number of small surface 
mesh elements allows finer geometrical resolution resulting in more accu­
rate simulation.

205
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
In ATLAS, advanced nonlinear iterative solvers are employed for numeri­
cal solution of PDEs. Higher accuracy is correlated with the large number 
of nodes obtained from a dense mesh, but the tradeoff is between a lon­
ger elapsed time and memory. In order to obtain the desired accuracy and 
efficiency of solution, the mesh structure should be optimized. Very dense 
mesh is used in the region of interest of the device structure where the gra­
dient of impurity and potential and current density is high. For example, in 
a MOSFET, very dense mesh is used in the channel region under the gate-
oxide interface and in the drain region where electric field is the highest. The 
tradeoff between the requirement of accuracy and computational time (com­
plexity) dominated by the specification of the mesh structure causes prob­
lems for users. This problem always causes a dilemma for users. The time 
needed to complete a simulation run is roughly proportional to Na, where 
N is the number of nodes (grid points) and a is a constant that varies from 2 
to 3 depending upon the complexity of the problem. Unfortunately, the size 
of the device pushes the number of nodes used close to 20,000—the maxi­
mum number of nodes permitted by ATLAS. The meshing procedure is thus 
extremely relevant to the way nodes are distributed throughout the device. 
ATLAS uses triangular meshes. It is shown that although optimal mesh gen­
eration is not exactly deterministic, guidelines and heuristics for defining 
satisfactory meshes with good triangulation scheme yield better results [30].
5.9.1  Strategy to Obtain a Satisfactory Mesh
	
1.	Generate enough points to provide the required accuracy.
	
2.	Do not generate many unnecessary points that impair accuracy.
	
3.	Minimize or avoid generation of obtuse triangles and long, thin tri­
angles which tends to impair accuracy, convergence, and robustness.
Circuit
Simulation
Change Structure or
Change Materials or
Change Physical Models
TCAD
Simulator
TCAD
Program
Extract
Parameters
Experimental Data
from Real
Fabricated MOSFET
Devices
Yes
No
Match?
FIGURE 5.7
Method for calibration.

206
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
	
4.	Transition from a region with larger-sized triangles to a region with 
small triangles must be smooth (i.e., avoid abrupt discontinuity).
	
5.	Generate dense mesh in critical areas where the movements of electrons 
and holes are rapid in order to prevent information loss and accuracy.
	
6.	Use coarse mesh density for non-critical areas.
	
7.	For a symmetrical structure, simulators allow simulation of one-half 
of the structure and then reflection of the results on the other half to 
save computational time and memory.
5.9.2  Mesh Re-Gridding
Re-gridding is used for refinement of regions of the initial/base mesh 
according to some specified criterion. If the value of the specified solution 
variable (such as carrier concentration, doping concentration, electric field, 
etc.) exceeds a certain value or when the change in the value within a mesh 
triangle exceeds a certain value, then mesh refinement will take place. 
ATLAS supports mesh re-gridding based upon doping or a wide range of 
suitable solution variables as the basis for mesh refinement. Regrid algo­
rithms will search for the triangle that satisfies the criteria specified for 
refinement. Once they are identified, those triangles will be divided into 
four congruent sub-triangles. Grid solution quantities (electric field poten­
tial, carrier concentration, etc.) are interpolated into the new nodes using 
linear or logarithmic interpolation. The initial or base mesh is referred to 
as “level 0,” and new triangles are referred to as “level 1.” After all level 
0 triangles are examined, level 1 triangles will be examined by the same 
procedure. Therefore, sub-triangles of level 1 become level 2 triangles. 
This process continues until no more triangles meet the refinement cri­
terion. It is possible to specify the “maximum level” which is the limit­
ing factor for amount of refinement and size of the grid after refinement. 
Re-gridding can produce obtuse triangles causing inaccurate results. 
Therefore, smoothing should be performed on both the initial grids and 
subsequent re-grids.
5.10  Introduction to Other Tools from Silvaco 
Used in Conjunction with ATLAS
Virtual Wafer Fab (VWF) is a suite of software programs used to create 
a multifunctional environment for the simulation of semiconductor 
technology. VWF of Silvaco allows cost and yield estimation as well 
as comprehensive parametric analysis of semiconductor processing 

207
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
by integrating process simulation, device simulation, and para­
meter extraction within an interactive graphical user-friendly inter­
face. ATLAS can be used as a stand-alone or as a core tool in a VWF 
environment.
DECKBUILD is the software to run the code and provides the general 
input and output interface for Silvaco (for all TCAD modules) for 
changing and altering the code. ATLAS works in conjunction with 
DECKBUILD. The top half of the DECKBUILD window is the com­
mand input listed in the form of a program created by a text edi­
tor. The bottom half of the DECKBUILD window is where program 
execution and “extract” information is listed as the program runs 
and the execution/results are displayed.
DEVEDIT is a program that allows for structure editing, structure 
specification, and grid generation graphically by drawing on the 
screen. All of Silvaco’s programs use a mesh or grid. Mesh or grid 
is used to determine the level of detailing the simulation will gen­
erate in a specific area of the device. Therefore, it allows users to 
cut down the simulation time by removing detailing from areas 
with less interest containing uniform or no reaction to change/
alter simulation results. The creation of these meshes is the main 
function of DEVEDIT; however, it is also used for the editing and 
specification of two- and three-dimensional devices created with 
the VWF tools.
TonyPlot is the graphical plotting program used to plot the data 
extracted from the simulation using ATLAS. Simulation results 
do not automatically load into TonyPlot when a simulation is 
complete. Users have to save results into a file that can be opened 
directly from TonyPlot. The data can be plotted as desired by the 
user either in 1D x-y data, 2D contour data, Smith charts, or polar 
charts. Measured data can also be imported and plotted in the 
above-mentioned types. The overlay feature helps in comparing 
the multiple simulation runs. It annotates plots to create meaning­
ful figures for reports and presentations. It enables 2D structure 
plots to be cut by multiple, independently controlled 1D slices. 
It supports plotting of user-defined equations with the variables 
being either electrical data (e.g., drain current) or physical param­
eters (e.g., electric field).
S-Pisces and Blaze are two primary simulators used for silicon device 
and advanced heterojunction devices, respectively. In addition, there 
are other simulators like Giga, MixedMode, ESD, TFT, Luminous, 
and LASER to supplement available process and device simulators 
with specialized capabilities. Giga supports non-isothermal calcula­
tions. ESD provides the simulation of electrostatic discharge phe­
nomenon. TFT provides the support for simulation of devices with 

208
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
amorphous and polycrystalline materials. MixedMode provides the 
ability to simulate circuits using a combination of SPICE models and 
ATLAS devices. Luminous and Laser support general optoelectronic 
and semiconductor laser devices, respectively.
Mixed-mode simulations with mesh-based device structures within 
a circuit defined by SPICE models are also supported in order to 
enhance the capability. For the transient mode of simulation, the 
device properties are re-solved at any increment of time. In addition 
to the device design, the mixed device/circuit simulation environ­
ment allows users to evaluate the device performance in a real circuit, 
and there is no limitation as to whether a compact model ever exists 
or not for the device under test. By examining the simulation results 
for the new structure, designers can make tradeoffs among design 
parameters to achieve optimal device characteristics. MIXEDMODE 
is a circuit simulator of Silvaco to provide mixed-mode circuit simu­
lation of multiple device structures simulated using device simula­
tion and compact circuit models.
Device 3D, INTERCONNECT3D, and THERMAL3D provide support 
for three-dimensional device capabilities for three-dimensional 
simulation, parasitic extraction, and three-dimensional thermal 
analysis.
5.10.1  Process Simulation Tools
Semiconductor process simulation involves the numerical solution of 
equations describing the physics of dopant diffusion, silicon oxidation, 
lithography, ion implantation, etching, and deposition steps resulting in 
geometry and doping profiles that define a device. A number of programs 
each specialized to solve a specific set of equations are used to simulate the 
entire process flow. However, the various programs use different solution 
strategies.
ATHENA is a framework program that integrates several smaller pro­
grams into a more complete process simulation tool. This program focuses 
upon the simulation of fabrication processes. In ATHENA, devices are cre­
ated through simulation of the fabrication process. To optimize the device 
characteristics, changes in process parameters supplied to the ATHENA 
process simulator environment are required, as certain process parameters 
change the device characteristics. ATHENA consists of four primary and 
several secondary tools. The primary tools are SSuprem4 for simulating ion 
implantation, diffusion, oxidation, and silicidation process for silicon; Flash 
for simulating implantation and diffusion for advanced materials; Elite for 
topography simulation; and Optolith for lithography simulation. ATHENA 
also provides options for modeling silicides, Monte Carlo modeling of ion 
implantation, etc.

209
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
5.10.2  ATHENA and ATLAS
ATLAS is very often used in conjunction with the ATHENA process simu­
lator to take advantage of the automatic interface between them. ATHENA 
predicts the physical structures that result from the processing steps. The 
resulting physical structures are used as input by ATLAS, which then predicts 
the electrical characteristics for a particular bias. Therefore, it is possible to 
determine the effect of process parameters on device characteristics by the 
combination of ATHENA and ATLAS. However, it is much more difficult to 
control the actual device parameters and its operation in the ATHENA pro­
cess simulator environment in comparison to the ATLAS device simulator 
environment. It is possible to precisely control the device structure, materi­
als, and doping concentrations in specific regions through the given code 
syntax in ATLAS. However, a change in the individual process parameter 
affects the entire structure of the device in ATHENA, which makes a device 
constructed in ATHENA more difficult to characterize. However, a device 
realized in ATHENA is much closer to a true fabricated transistor.
5.11  Example 1: Bulk n-Channel MOSFET Simulation
Figure 5.8 shows the schematic cross-sectional diagram of an n-channel bulk 
MOSFET with channel length L = 80 nm, oxide thickness tOX = 2 nm, junction 
P-type
substrate
80 nm
2 nm
Gate
Source
Drain
70 nm
30 nm
50 nm
50 nm
n+
n+
FIGURE 5.8
An n-channel bulk MOSFET.

210
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
depth Xj = 30 nm, n+ source/drain having uniform doping concentration 1020 
cm–3, and with a p-type substrate doping of 1018 cm–3. To simulate this device 
using ATLAS, the following steps are required. The ATLAS program code 
provided in the text demonstrates the use of these steps to simulate the device.
Step 1: Generate the device structure file using ATHENA/Atlas/
DEVEDIT.
1.1: simulator specification
1.2: mesh definition
1.3: region definition
1.4: electrode specification
1.5: doping specification
1.6: contact specification
Step 2: Set the material model.
Step 3: Set the method used to do the calculation.
Step 4: Obtain the initial solution.
Step 5: Run the simulator to obtain a solution for a different bias condition.
Step 6: Display the results.
5.11.1  Program for Bulk n-Channel MOSFET Simulation
# Program to simulate n-channel bulk MOSFET
# In DECKBUILD # indicates a comment line, not a part of the program.
# Step 1: Generate the device structure
# 1.1 simulator specification
go atlas
# 1.2 mesh definition
mesh space.mult=1.0
# mesh definition in x direction
# loc stands for location, specifying the location of the grid 
line
x.mesh loc=0.00 spac=0.01
# spac stands for spacing, specifying mesh spacing at a given 
location
x.mesh loc=0.05 spac=0.001
x.mesh loc=0.09 spac=0.004
x.mesh loc=0.13 spac=0.001
x.mesh loc=0.18 spac=0.01
# mesh definition in y direction
y.mesh loc=-0.002 spac=0.0005

211
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
y.mesh loc=0 spac=0.0004
y.mesh loc=0.03 spac=0.008
y.mesh loc=0.10 spac=0.01
# 1.3 region definition
region num=1 y.min=0 silicon
region num=2 y.max=0 oxide
# 1.4 electrode declaration
electrode name=gate number=1 x.min=0.05 x.max=0.13 top
electrode name=source number=2 left length=0.05 y.min=0 y.max=0
electrode name=drain number=3 right length=0.05 y.min=0 y.max=0
electrode name=substrate number=4 bottom
# 1.5 doping specification of distribution, type
doping uniform conc=2e18 p.type region=1
doping uniform conc=1e20 n.type x.left=0 x.right=0.05 y.min=0 
y.max=0.03
doping uniform conc=1e20 n.type x.left=0.13 x.right=0.18 
y.min=0 y.max=0.03
# 1.6 contact specification
# n.poly sets n+ doped polysilicon as contact material with 
workfuction=4.17eV
contact name=gate n.poly
contact name=source neutral
contact name=drain neutral
contact name=substrate neutral
#Step 2: Set the material model
models mos print
#Step 3: Set the specific method used to do the calculation
method newton trap
#Step 4: generate initial solution at zero bias
solve init
#Step 5: Run the simulator to obtain solution for different 
bias condition
#solution for different drain bias
solve vdrain=0.1 outf=solve_vdrain1
solve vdrain=0.2 outf=solve_vdrain2
solve vdrain=0.3 outf=solve_vdrain3
solve vdrain=0.4 outf=solve_vdrain4
# ramp gate bias with a specific drain bias solution
load infile=solve_vdrain1

212
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
#output the result in a specific log file
log outf=gate1.log
solve name=gate vgate=0 vfinal=1.2 vstep=0.1
load infile=solve_vdrain2
log outf=gate2.log
solve name=gate vgate=0 vfinal=1.2 vstep=0.1
load infile=solve_vdrain3
log outf=gate3.log
solve name=gate vgate=0 vfinal=1.2 vstep=0.1
load infile=solve_vdrain4
log outf=gate4.log
solve name=gate vgate=0 vfinal=1.2 vstep=0.1
#Step 6: Display the results
# display all the log files overlaid together
tonyplot -overlay gate1.log gate2.log gate3.log gate4.log
quit
5.11.2	 Simulation Results
Figure 5.9 shows the simulated Id – Vgs characteristics for the MOSFET device 
structure shown in Figure 5.8 with drain bias 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4 V.
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
Gate-to-source Voltage Vgs in [V]
Drain Current Ids in [A]
0.2
0.0
0.0
1.0×10–4
2.0×10–4
3.0×10–4
4.0×10–4
5.0×10–4
Vds = 0.1 V
Vds = 0.2 V
Vds = 0.3 V
Vds = 0.4 V
6.0×10–4
FIGURE 5.9
Id – Vgs characteristics of a bulk n-channel MOSFET with channel length L = 80 nm, tOX = 2 nm.

213
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
5.12  Example 2: Silicon-on-Insulator 
(SOI) MOSFET Simulation
A fully depleted silicon-on-insulator (SOI) device is a silicon-based device 
built upon a thick SiO2 layer as an insulating substrate that starts at or 
within the depletion layer. SOI technology appears as an interesting alterna­
tive to standard planar bulk devices [31,32]. This thick silicon dioxide layer 
is also known as the buried oxide (BOX) layer. The silicon layer above the 
BOX is where the device is fabricated. A fully depleted SOI device offers 
many advantages over bulk silicon MOSFETs, like reduction in junction 
capacitances between drain (source) and body, decrease in leakage currents, 
improvement in cross-talk immunity [33], low level of dielectric loss with 
high resistivity SOI substrates important for radio frequency (RF) applica­
tions [34], and higher immunity to radiation effects. The SOI structure not 
only kills the latch-up and improves digital error immunity, but it also allows 
for better control of the channel, leading to an improved subthreshold slope 
and lower short-channel effects. However, the SOI circuits suffer from sev­
eral dynamic floating body effects [35]. In this example, a simplified version 
of the SOI MOSFET device is created using ATLAS with a facility to vary 
parameters like gate length, doping, etc., easily. To perform this simulation, 
the main Silvaco tools used are DECKBUILD, ATLAS, and TONYPLOT. The 
following text illustrates the use of the commands with required explana­
tions to complete the device simulation.
5.12.1  Program Description for SOI MOSFET Simulation
Step 1: Declare and initialize variables used.
	
	 Variables are useful for ease of changing certain parameters when 
a code is being run multiple times with different values. For a new 
design, only the values declared with a set command need to be altered.
# Program for SOI Device Simulation
# To open ATLAS in DECKBUILD
go atlas
#location of the midpoint of the silicon thickness i.e. sMp=tSi/2
set sMp=0.0125
#location of the bottom of the silicon thickness i.e. sTsi=tSi
set sTsi=0.025
#location of the end of the bottom oxide layer thickness
set sToxb=0.1

214
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
# location of the start of the front (gate) oxide layer thickness
set sToxf=-0.002
# minimum x location of gate electrode
set gmin=1
# maximum x location of gate electrode
set gmax=2
Step 2: Define the mesh to construct the structure.
	
	 The first step in defining the structure of a SOI device is to set the 
mesh with a larger number of points in the areas of interest. The first 
mesh command must be the mesh space multiplier command. This 
command will tell ATLAS the scaling factor of the mesh. In this 
case, the device is rectangular, not cylindrical. The default mesh 
symmetry is rectangular. To specify cylindrical symmetry, a cylin­
drical parameter must be appended in the first mesh statement.
	
	 The mesh will be less dense for a large number and more dense for 
a smaller number. The value for this is normally set to equal 1. Mesh 
statements are entered in as vertical and horizontal lines in microns 
and as distance from the center line. ATLAS divides the grid using a 
triangle format. The user can use a dense mesh density in the region of 
interest.
mesh space.mult=1.0
# mesh definition in x direction
x.mesh loc=0.00 spac=0.50
x.mesh loc=1.15 spac=0.02
x.mesh loc=1.5 spac=0.1
x.mesh loc=1.85 spac=0.02
x.mesh loc=3 spac=0.5
# mesh definition in y direction
y.mesh loc=$sToxf spac=0.02
y.mesh loc=0.00 spac=0.005
y.mesh loc=$sMp spac=0.02
y.mesh loc=$sTsi spac=0.01
y.mesh loc=$sToxb spac=0.25
Step 3: Define the regions with different numbers and correspond­
ing locations.
	
	 After defining the mesh structure, it is necessary to define the 
regions. For this example of SOI MOSFET, three regions are to be 
defined: (1) gate oxide layer for insulating gate contact, (2) silicon 
region with thickness tSi, and (3) buried oxide (BOX).

215
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
	
	 The regions will be used to assign materials and properties to the 
device. The regions must be defined along the mesh lines, and the 
statements will be similar to those used for the mesh states. ATLAS 
allows the user to define up to 200 different regions for one device. 
If the designer overlaps any of the two regions, ATLAS will assign 
the material type to the last region that was defined. The entire two-
dimensional mesh area must be defined into regions or ATLAS will 
not run successfully.
# region definition
region number=1 x.min=0 x.max=3 y.min=$sToxf y.max=0 
material=Oxide
region number=2 x.min=0 x.max=3 y.min=0 y.max=$sTsi 
material=Silicon
region number=3 x.min=0 x.max=3 y.min=$sTsi y.max=$sToxb 
material=Oxide
Step 4: Define the names of each electrode with corresponding location.
	
	 The electrodes are to be defined in order to tell the program about 
the location of the metal contacts like gate, source, and drain. One 
can observe the dissimilarities between the fabrication process and 
ATLAS program because the top oxide layer and the electrodes are 
defined before the silicon is doped. ATLAS requires the structure 
to be defined in this order in order to achieve easier calculation. 
Because the gate electrode is above the top oxide layer, both the y.min 
and y.max values can be set to sToxf (–0.002), which will put it above 
the oxide layer, but with no thickness. Similarly, the substrate elec­
trode is located below the bottom oxide layer.
# electrode definition
electrode name=gate number=1 x.min=$gmin x.max=$gmax 
y.min=$sToxf y.max=$sToxf
electrode name=source number=2 x.min=0 x.max=0.5 y.min=0 y.max=0
electrode name=drain number=3 x.min=2.5 x.max=3 y.min=0 y.max=0
electrode name=substrate number=4 x.min=0 x.max=3 y.min=$sToxb 
y.max=$sToxb
Step 5: Set the contact and interface properties.
	
	 The command “contact” is used to tell ATLAS how to treat the 
electrode. In the default condition, an electrode in contact is assumed 
to be ohmic. If the designer wants the electrode to be treated like 
a Schottky contact, the design must use the workfunction. The gate 
contact material is set to n+ doped polysilicon by the n.poly parame­
ter. In another approach, instead of using the material name (n.poly) 
required, workfunction can be mentioned by setting the workfunc­
tion parameter to the required value. For example, the statement 
“contact name=gate workfunction=4.17” is equivalent to the 

216
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
statement “contact name=gate n.poly” because the workfunc­
tion of n+ polysilicon equals 4.17 eV.
	
	 The fabrication process, no matter how well controlled, intro­
duces interface states at the SiO2-Si interface, which critically 
affects the electrical characteristics of the device. Interface states, 
whether inherent, process related, or operationally generated, were 
found to cause degradation in device parameters such as trans-
conductance, carrier mobility, and threshold voltage and to gener­
ally reduce device reliability and lifetime [36,37]. The “interface” 
statement is used to define the interface charge density interfaces 
between semiconductors and insulators. It indicates that all inter­
faces between semiconductors and oxide have a fixed charge of 3 × 
1010 C/cm2 [37].
contact name=gate n.poly
interface qf=3e10
contact name=source neutral
contact name=drain neutral
contact name=substrate neutral
Step 6: Define doping in the MOSFET structure.
	
	 The next action, doping, is one of the most important actions a 
designer does to affect the electrical properties of the structure 
being designed. Silvaco allows the designer to specify the type of 
dopant and the concentration. It also allows the designer to specify 
the distribution of the doping material. ATLAS has the ability to 
distribute the dopants in a uniform, analytical Gaussian, or other 
supported profiles. For this device, all the doping will be defined in 
region 2, where the silicon is located. Initially a p-type uniformly 
distributed doping is specified in the whole region 2. It is followed 
by a Gaussian distribution n-type doping specification targeting 
the source and the drain region of the structure. The concentra­
tion listed in the command for Gaussian doping in the source and 
the drain will have the peak concentration = 1 × 1020 cm–3 at y = 
0 and the characteristics = 0.05 which is the principal characteris­
tic length of the implant (standard deviation) for which the doping 
level will drop off in a vertical direction. The lateral fall-off outside 
the x-coordinates mentioned in the doping statement is defined by 
the lat.char parameter.
# p-type doping with a uniform concentration throughout all of 
the silicon doping uniform conc=2e17 p.type direction=y regions=2
# Gaussain doping profile in the source
doping gaussian characteristic =.05 conc=1e20 n.type x.left=0 
x.right=$gmin y.top=0 lat.char=0.05 direction=y

217
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
# Gaussain doping profile in the drain
doping gaussian characteristic =.05 conc=1e20 n.type 
x.left=$gmax x.right=3 y.top=0 lat.char =.05 direction=y
Step 7: Save and display the structure file.
	
	 The “master” after the name of the out file specifies that the output 
file needs to be written as a standard structure file instead of binary 
format. The generated MOSFET structure can be visualized with the 
help of TonyPlot.
struct outf=SOI.str master
tonyplot SOI.str
Step 8: Select the models used in this simulation.
	
	 In this simulation, for mobility standard concentration dependent 
(conmob) and parallel field dependent mobility (fldmob) to model, the 
velocity saturation effect is chosen. For carrier statistics, Fermi-Dirac 
and band-gap narrowing (bgn) are chosen. The parameters evsatmod 
and hvsatmod with b.electrons and b.holes supplied are used to select a 
particular field-dependent equation to be used. Carrier generation and 
recombination are the processes by which the semiconductor material 
is moved away from thermal equilibrium and returned to equilibrium 
after being disturbed from it. For recombination Shockley-Read-Hall 
(SRH) and Auger recombination models are chosen.
	
	 In the presence of heavy doping (greater than 1018cm–3), the 
p-n product in silicon becomes doping dependent [38]. As dop­
ing increases, the band gap decreases, where the conduction band 
decreases the same amount as the valence band is raised. This fea­
ture is considered by using the model “BGN” (band-gap narrowing).
# model specification
models auger srh conmob fldmob b.electrons=2 b.holes=1 evsat­
mod=0 hvsatmod=0 bgn temperature=300
Step 9: Define the numerical methods.
	
	 The Newton method is chosen with a maximum number of itera­
tion equal to 25. To overcome the problem with diverging solution 
with a poor initial guess, a “trap” statement is used, where maxtrap 
is the maximum allowed number of trials (default = 4) with the 
bias step reduced by the factor supplied in the parameter known as 
atrap. To enhance the performance for slow convergence, a variant 
of Newton’s method known as the Newton-Richardson method is 
enabled by the autonr parameter.
# method specification
method newton itlimit=25 trap atrap=0.5 maxtrap=4 autonr

218
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Step 10: Solve for specified bias.
	
	 The initial guesses for potential and carrier concentrations must 
be made from the doping profile at zero bias by using the “solve 
init” statement, when no previous solutions are available. If the user 
omits this statement, ATLAS automatically evaluates this before exe­
cuting the first “solve” statement.
	
	 It is most difficult to obtain good convergence for the first two non-
zero solve statements because they use solution at zero bias provided 
by the “solve init” statement as a poor initial guess. This is why the 
first two non-zero solve statements should use small voltage steps. 
However, once their solutions are obtained, by the use of the projec­
tion algorithm, the remaining solve statements obtain a good initial 
guess, resulting in good convergence.
# Set the initial values and solve
# solve the device for zero bias
solve init
# solve for drain bias with 0.01 then 0.05 to finally to 0.1
# first two non-zero solve statements are given small bias step
solve vdrain=0.01
solve vdrain=0.02
solve vdrain=0.1
# Extraction of Id-Vds characteristics or different Vgs
solve vgate=1.0 outf=solve_vgate1
solve vgate=1.5 outf=solve_vgate2
solve vgate=2.0 outf=solve_vgate3
solve vgate=2.5 outf=solve_vgate4
load infile=solve_vgate1
log outf=SOI11.log
solve name=drain vdrain=0 vfinal=2.0 vstep=0.1
load infile=solve_vgate2
log outf=SOI21.log
solve name=drain vdrain=0 vfinal=2.0 vstep=0.1
load infile=solve_vgate3
log outf=SOI31.log
solve name=drain vdrain=0 vfinal=2.0 vstep=0.1
load infile=solve_vgate4
log outf=SOI41.log
solve name=drain vdrain=0 vfinal=2.0 vstep=0.1

219
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
Step 11: Display the output characteristics.
# plot of the log files overlaid together
tonyplot -overlay SOI11.log SOI21.log SOI31.log SOI41.log
# denotes end of the program
quit
5.12.2	 Simulation Results
Figure 5.11 shows the simulated Id-Vds characteristics for the n-channel fully 
depleted SOI MOSFET device structure displayed in Figure 5.10 for gate bias 
1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 V, respectively.
5.13  Example 3: 0.18 µm Bulk nMOS 
Transistor with Halo Implant
The device used for this simulation is a LDD 0.18 µm [39] n-channel MOSFET. 
The device is fabricated using silicon with a <100> orientation. The p-type 
substrate is formed by doping with 3 × 1013 atoms/cm3 of boron. The n– region 
is formed by implanting a dose of 1015 atoms/cm3, and the n+ region is formed 
by implanting 5 × 1015 atoms/cm3 of arsenic. The program starts with a mesh 
definition. The mesh is defined for one-half of the symmetric MOSFET struc­
ture. After all the process fabrication steps, the structure will be mirrored 
Buried Oxide
65 nm
25 nm
n+
n+
100 nm
100 nm
100 nm
Source
Gate
Drain
2.0 nm
FIGURE 5.10
Cross-sectional diagram of a fully depleted n-channel SOI MOSFET.

220
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
to generate full MOSFET structure. The different steps performed to simu­
late the fabrication of n-channel MOSFET followed by extraction of different 
MOSFET parameters of it are described below. The status of the MOSFET 
structure and the effect of every successive process step can be visualized by 
inserting a command for plotting the structure (tonyplot structure_name.
str) after every step described below.
5.13.1  Program for 0.18 µm Bulk nMOS
Step 1: Provide mesh definition and structure declaration.
# start process simulator ATHENA
go Athena
# Define mesh for x-plane
line x loc=0.15 spac=0.1
line x loc=0.2 spac=0.006
line x loc=0.4 spac=0.006
line x loc=0.6 spac=0.01
# Define mesh for y-plane
line y loc=0.0 spac=0.002
line y loc=0.2 spac=0.005
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
0.0
0.0
Drain-to-source Voltage Vds in [V]
Drain Current Ids in [A]
2.0×10–4
4.0×10–4
6.0×10–4
8.0×10–4
1.0×10–3
1.2×10–3
1.4×10–3
Vgs = 1.0 V
Vgs = 1.5 V
Vgs = 2.0 V
Vgs = 2.5 V
FIGURE 5.11
Plot of drain current Ids as a function of drain-to-source voltage Vds for gate-to-source voltage 
Vgs = 1.0 V, 1.5 V, 2.0 V, and 2.5 V, respectively, obtained by simulation for an n-channel fully 
depleted SOI MOSFET.

221
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
line y loc=0.5 spac=0.05
line y loc=0.8 spac=0.15
# structure declaration
struct outfile=nmos_bulk.str
Step 2: Initialize silicon substrate of crystal orientation 100 with 1.0 × 
1015/cm3 boron dopant added. A space multiplier (Space.mult = 2) is 
used to speed up the process. Decrease the space multiplier param­
eter to obtain a denser mesh with more accuracy.
init orientation=100 c.boron=1.0e15 space.mul=2
Step 3: Grow a smooth thin layer of SiO2 of depth 10 to 15 nm on the sub­
strate to reduce the channeling effect and to prevent contamination 
of the substrate. The simplest deposit method in ATHENA is confor­
mal deposition. It is used when the exact shape of the deposited layer 
is not critical. Dry oxidation is performed for 30 minutes at 1000°C. 
Then etch to obtain a uniform blanket of oxide of 0.02 µm thick.
diffus time=30 temp=1000 dryo2 press=1.00 hcl=3
etch oxide thick=0.02
Step 4: Use the default dual Pearson model to choose a boron implant 
with a dose of 8.0 × 1012 ions/cm2 with energy 100 keV. An n-channel 
MOS transistor must be developed on p-type silicon as this material 
under the gate must be inverted. Therefore, the next step is implanta­
tion of boron to create a p-well in the substrate. The nMOS fabrica­
tion could have started with an initial p-type substrate, but p-well 
implantation reviewed here is common in industry. ATHENA offers 
three different models for ion implantation [40]: (1) dual Pearson 
(default), (2) single Pearson, and (3) Monte Carlo.
implant boron dose=3.0e13 energy=200 pearson
Step 5: Move and settle the boron atoms. As a result of the ion implan­
tation step, the net doping peaks at an average penetration depth 
with a specific doping concentration. In order to enhance the doping 
uniformity, the substrate is heated to high temperatures so that the 
boron atoms are given enough energy to move and settle more uni­
formly in the substrate. As a result of this heating in the presence of 
oxygen, an oxide is formed. Wet oxidation is used.
diffus temp=950 time=100 weto2 hcl=3

222
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Step 6: Further propel the p-well into the substrate and increase the 
doping uniformity by performing more diffusion steps with vary­
ing temperatures, temperature change rates, and processing envi­
ronments known as welldrive.
diffus time=50 temp=1000 t.rate=4.000 dryo2 press=0.10 hcl=3
diffus time=220 temp=1200 nitro press=1
diffus time=90 temp=1200 t.rate=-4.444 nitro press=1
Step 7: Etch all present oxide layers in order to obtain a surface on which 
to begin the process of defining physical MOSFET parameters.
etch oxide all
Step 8: Perform sacrificial cleaning in order to ensure that the surface is 
free from damage due to previous fabrication steps. In this process, 
a thin layer of silicon is sacrificed by first oxidation and then removal 
of the oxide produced.
diffus time=20 temp=1000 dryo2 press=1 hcl=3
etch oxide all
Step 9: Perform deposition of gate oxide by dry oxidation, with the 
thickness of the gate oxide playing a major role in determining the 
MOSFET characteristics that can be altered by controlling time and 
temperature.
diffus time=3 temp=895 dryo2 press=1.00 hcl=1
Step 10: Define the threshold voltage by implanting boron through the 
gate oxide. A higher dose of boron implant will lead to higher thresh­
old voltage because it will be more difficult to invert the p-channel.
implant boron dose=1.5e13 energy=45 pearson
Step 11: Use conformal deposition of polysilicon to create the gate.
depo poly thick=0.2 divi=10
Step 12: Begin patterning of the polysilicon gate by etching 0.35 µm 
from the left side.
etch poly left p1.x=0.51
Step 13: Perform implantation through the deposited gate oxide layer t 
from the light drain/source.

223
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
method fermi compress
diffuse time=5 temp=900 weto press=0.8
implant arsenic dose=1.0e15 energy=30 pearson
Step 14: Implant p-doped halo (NMOS).
implant boron dose=3.0e13 energy=15 tilt=30 fullrotat
Step 15: Form an oxide spacer to provide a barrier of isolation and to 
aide in patterning for the next implantation.
depo oxide thick=0.10 divisions=8
etch oxide dry thick=0.10
Step 16: Form the heavy drain/source region by implantation with arse­
nic instead of phosphorus as in the case of the light drain/source.
implant arsenic dose=5e15 energy=60 pearson
Step 17: Perform annealing in the presence of nitrogen to diffuse the 
drain/source created.
method fermi compress
diffuse time=1 temp=1000 nitro press=1.0
Step 18: Etch the oxide layer above the drain/source region to pattern 
the source/drain contact metal.
etch oxide left p1.x=0.35
Step 19: Deposit aluminum to create electrodes with a low ohmic contact.
deposit alumin thick=0.03 divi=2
Step 20: Etch away unwanted materials.
etch alumin right p1.x=0.33
Step 21: Mirror the structure to obtain the full symmetrical device.
structure mirror right
Step 22: Define the electrodes and save the obtained structure.
electrode name=gate x=0.59 y=0.1
electrode name=source x=0.2

224
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
electrode name=drain x=1.0
electrode name=substrate backside
save outfile=nmos_bulk.str
Step 23: Extract different MOSFET parameters and plot the structure.
# to extract gate oxide thickness
extract name=“gateox” thickness oxide mat.occno=1 x.val=0.59
# extract final S/D junction depth Xj
extract name=“nxj” xj silicon mat.occno=1 x.val=0.2 junc.
occno=1
# extract the N++ regions sheet resistance...
extract name=“n++ sheet rho” sheet.res material=“Silicon” mat.
occno=1 x.val=0.2 region.occno=1
# extract the sheet rho under the spacer, of the LDD region...
extract name=“ldd sheet rho” sheet.res material=“Silicon” mat.
occno=1 x.val=0.49 region.occno=1
# extract the surface conc under the channel....
extract name=“chan surf conc” surf.conc impurity=“Net Doping” 
material=“Silicon” mat.occno=1 x.val=0.6
# potting the structure
tonyplot nmos_bulk.str
The program to extract different parameters, threshold voltage, and Ids-Vgs 
characterization using the structure generated with ATHENA code is described 
above. The threshold voltage is extracted by finding the intersection of the maxi­
mum slope of the Ids-Vgs curve with the x-axis. The output of the extract com­
mand will appear in the lower DECKBUILD window after running the code.
go atlas
# IMPORT THE structure to use the auto-interface between 
ATHENA and ATLAS
mesh inf=nmos_bulk.str
# model definition
models cvt srh numcarr=2
# method specifiatiion
method newton itlimit=25 trap atrap=0.5 maxtrap=4 autonr 
nrcriterion=0.1 tol.time=0.005 dt.min=1e-25
#solve for id-vgs by ramping gate voltage and store the answer 
in the log file

225
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
solve init
solve vdrain=0.1
log outf=bulkHalo.log master
solve name=gate vgate=0.1 vfinal=1.5 vstep=0.1
# plot the log file
tonyplot bulkHalo.log
# extraction of threshold voltage
extract name=“vt” (xintercept(maxslope(curve(abs(v.”gate”),abs
(i.”drain”)))) - abs(ave(v.”drain”))/2.0)
quit
5.13.2  Simulation Results
Figure 5.12 shows the Ids-Vgs characteristics of an n-channel MOSFET simu­
lated using program 5.13.1 for two different devices. One of them is a pock­
eted device that considers the halo implantation process step, and the other 
is a non-pocketed device that omits the halo implantation process step. A 
process called pocket implant or halo implant is introduced in which the locally 
high doping concentration in the channel near the source/drain junctions 
is created. The technology has been given prominence to tailor the short-
channel performances of diminuend devices. Therefore, it is widely used to 
reduce threshold voltage roll-off and punch-through [41–46].
1.4
0.00000
0.00002
0.00004
0.00006
0.00008
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
1E–18
1E–15
1E–12
1E–9
1E–6
With halo implant
Without halo implant
Gate-to-source Voltage Vgs in [V]
Drain Current Ids in [A] Shown in Log Scale
Drain Current Ids in [A] Shown in Linear Scale
FIGURE 5.12
Simulation data of the drain–current Ids versus the gate–source voltage Vgs for devices with and 
without halo implantation.

226
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
A highly doped halo surrounding either the source or drain proves to be 
effective in increasing switching speed by more than a factor of two over the 
conventional MOSFET [47]. It reduces leakage current and, hence, reduces 
static power dissipation [48]. However, careful tuning of pocket implant 
parameters in order to obtain desired electrical performance of nano-
MOSFETs is always necessary. Variations of pocket implant energy, implant 
dosage, and tilt angle influence the characteristics of nano-n-MOSFETs 
[49,51]. However, careful tradeoffs between minimum channel length and 
other device electrical parameters are required.
Figure 5.12 demonstrates an increase of the subthreshold current due to 
the drain-induced barrier lowering suffered by the non-pocketed device 
compared to the pocketed device. At low gate voltages, the additional poten­
tial barriers created by the pockets are strong enough for controlling the cur­
rent, resulting in a comparative lower current for halo-doped MOSFETs in 
the subthreshold region.
5.14  Example 4: Volume Inversion Double-Gate (DG) MOSFET
As CMOS scaling is approaching its limits, DG MOSFET is becoming a very 
promising solution for the fabrication of high-performance devices for low-
power applications [35].
A DG MOSFET is considered electrostatically superior (channel is con­
trolled by the gate voltage, not by the drain to source voltage) compared 
to single-gate MOSFET due to its strong coupling between the conduction 
channel and gate electrodes.
The use of symmetric DG MOSFET allows the suppressing of short-chan­
nel effects like drain-induced barrier lowering (DIBL) and subthreshold 
slope degradation, making unnecessary the conventional use of high chan­
nel doping densities and gradients compared to a bulk MOSFET [52,53]. 
Here symmetric means that the same voltage bias is applied to the two gates 
having the same work function. The use of an undoped body [54,55] also 
results in enhanced mobility by reducing charged-impurity scattering and 
in reduced device parameter variation by eliminating the statistical fluctua­
tion of dopant concentration [56–58]. Therefore, doping of the DG MOSFET is 
not desired and is usually not used, but there is always a small unintentional 
doping density ~1015 cm–3 during fabrication [59]. Therefore, a lightly doped 
DG MOSFET is considered in this simulation.
In this example, ATLAS is used to simulate 50 nm DG n-MOSFET having 
abrupt source/drain junctions (i.e., Leff = Lmet = 50 nm [60]). The device param­
eters are as follows: channel width W = 50 nm, channel length L = 50 nm, sili­
con thickness tSi = 20 nm, equivalent gate oxide thickness tox = 2 nm, doping 
concentration of the silicon channel NA = 1015 cm–3, doping concentration of 

227
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
the source/drain contact regions ND = 1020 cm–3, and mid-gap metal gate with 
workfunction 4.74 eV.
5.14.1  Program for Structure of DG MOSFET
# Program to generate the structure of DG MOSFET
go atlas
mesh space.mult=1.0
# mesh definition in x direction
x.mesh loc=0.00 spac=0.01
x.mesh loc=0.05 spac=0.001
x.mesh loc=0.075 spac=0.005
x.mesh loc=0.1 spac=0.001
x.mesh loc=0.15 spac=0.01
# mesh definition in y direction
y.mesh loc=-0.002 spac=0.001
y.mesh loc=0 spac=0.0004
y.mesh loc=0.01 spac=0.001
y.mesh loc=0.02 spac=0.0004
y.mesh loc=0.022 spac=0.001
# region definition
region num=1 y.min=0 y.max=0.02 silicon
region num=2 y.min=-0.002 y.max=0 oxide
region num=3 y.min=0.02 y.max=0.022 oxide
# electrode definition
electrode name=gate number=1 x.min=0.05 x.max=0.1 top
electrode name=gate1 number=2 x.min=0.05 x.max=0.1 bottom
electrode name=source number=3 left length=0.05 y.min=0 
y.max=0
electrode name=drain number=4 right length=0.05 y.min=0 
y.max=0
# doping specification
doping uniform conc=1e15 p.type region=1
doping uniform conc=1e20 n.type x.left=0 x.right=0.05 region=1
doping uniform conc=1e20 n.type x.left=0.1 x.right=0.15 
region=1
# save and display the structure
save outfile=dgmos.str
tonyplot dgmos.str
quit
Quantum confinement effects will not be taken into account here, because 
silicon film thickness greater than 10 nm [61] and length greater than 10 nm 

228
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
are being considered. Quantum mechanical tunneling from source to drain 
(through the barrier) degrades device performance for extreme short length 
devices, but for channel lengths longer than about 10 nm, MOSFETs behave 
classically [62].
The surface potential ΨS is the most natural variable for the formulation of 
MOS device physics. It is defined as the difference between the electrostatic 
potential at the SiO2/Si interface and the potential in the neutral bulk region 
due to band bending. Recently there has been wide consensus in the com­
pact modeling community that traditional threshold-voltage-based models 
have reached the limit of their usefulness and need to be replaced with more 
advanced models based on surface potential referred to as surface-potential-
based models, because an accurate physical description of MOSFET can be 
easily obtained by the use of surface-potential-based models.
5.14.2  Program to Obtain Potential Variation of DG MOSFET
# Program for obtaining variation of surface and body center 
potential
go atlas
# IMPORT THE MESH structure
mesh inf=dgmos.str
# contact specification
contact name=gate n.poly workfunction=4.74
# two separate electrodes gate and gate1 are shorted by 
“common” parameter
contact name=gate1 n.poly workfunction=4.74 common=gate
contact name=source neutral
contact name=drain neutral
# model declaration
models auger srh conmob fldmob bgn temperature=300
# method definition
method newton itlimit=25 trap
# solution for specific gate and drain bias
solve init
solve vdrain=0.0
solve vgate=0.0
# saving the structure file
save outf=dg.str
# extraction of surface potential where y.val=0.0 
(semiconductor front gate oxide interface) along the depth and 
saving the curve in a file

229
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
extract name=“srp_profile1” curve(depth, potential 
material=“Silicon” mat.occno=1 y.val=0.0) outfile=“extract1.
dat”
# extraction of channel center potential where 
y.val=0.01(center of the SOI silicon semiconductor body 
y=tSi/2) along the depth and saving the curve in a file
extract name=“srp_profile2” curve(depth, potential 
material=“Silicon” mat.occno=1 y.val=0.01) outfile=“extract2.
dat”
# plot the files in the same window overlaid
tonyplot -overlay extract1.dat extract2.dat
quit
5.14.3  Simulation Results
Figure 5.14 shows the variation of surface and channel center potential of 
DG MOSFET shown in Figure 5.13 using the simulation of codes listed in 
Sections 5.14.1 and 5.14.2. Figure 5.14 portrays the potential with gate and 
drain bias equal to zero. However, it is possible to obtain potentials for vari­
ous bias conditions by changing the gate and the drain bias in the program 
listed in Section 5.14.2, subjected to convergence of the solution attained.
Figure 5.15 presents the surface potential ΨS and potential at the center of 
the channel Ψ0, evaluated for gate voltage varying from 0 V to 1.5 V in steps 
of 0.1 V by changing the program for every step change. It is observed that 
below threshold, while the semiconductor charge is small, there is volume 
inversion, and the potential remains essentially flat (ΨS = Ψ0) throughout the 
Back gate
2 nm
2 nm
50 nm
50 nm
50 nm
20 nm
n+
n+
Source
Drain
Front gate
FIGURE 5.13
A fully depleted thin-film DG SOI MOSFET.

230
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
Distance along the Channel from Source to Drain in [nm]
0
0.0
0.1
0.2
Surface Potential in [V]
0.3
Surface potential ΨS
Channel center potential Ψ0
Vds = 0.0 V, Vgs = 0.0 V
0.4
0.5
0.6
FIGURE 5.14
Plot of surface potential and channel center potential versus position along the channel from 
source to drain for Vds = 0 V and Vgs = 0 V.
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Gate-to-source Voltage Vgs in [V]
Potential in [V]
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
Crossover
point
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Vds = 0.0 V
Surface potential ΨS
Channel center potential Ψ0
FIGURE 5.15
Variation of surface potential ΨS and channel center potential Ψ0 versus gate-to-source voltage 
Vgs with x = L/2 for a fixed channel length L = 50 nm and Vds = 0.0 V.

231
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
entire silicon film thickness, with both ΨS and Ψ0 closely following the gate 
voltage. As the gate voltage increases toward threshold, the electron den­
sity becomes significant. As a result, ΨS continues to increase slowly, and Ψ0 
starts to depart from ΨS and later saturates after being pinned to a maximum 
value. The mobile charge near the silicon surfaces screens the gate field from 
the center of the silicon film, and ΨS and Ψ0 become de-coupled (i.e., there 
is no volume inversion). The channel potential versus gate voltage charac­
teristics for the devices having equal lengths but different thicknesses pass 
through a single common point termed the crossover point [63], which is also 
shown in Figure 5.15.
5.14.4	 Program to Obtain Ids-Vgs Characteristics of DG MOSFET
# Program to obtain Id-Vgs characteristics
go atlas
# IMPORT THE MESH
mesh inf=dgmos.str
# contact specification
contact name=gate n.poly workfunction=4.74
contact name=gate1 n.poly workfunction=4.74 common=gate
contact name=source neutral
contact name=drain neutral
# model declaration
models auger srh conmob fldmob bgn temperature=300
# method definition
method newton itlimit=25 trap
# initial solution and drain bias specification
solve init
solve vdrain=0.05
#solve vdrain=0.1
#solve vdrain=0.5
#solve vdrain=1.5
# output log file declaration
log outf=dg1.log
# solution to obtain solution for id-vgs characteristics by 
ramping Vgs
solve name=gate vgate=0 vfinal=1.2 vstep=0.05
# plotting the structure
tonyplot dg1.log
quit

232
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
5.14.5	 Simulation Results
Figure 5.16 shows the horizontally translated Ids-Vgs characteristics for low 
(Vds = 0.05 V) and high (Vds = 1.5 V). The translation is known as DIBL and is 
characterized by the number of millivolts of translation per volt of change in 
drain voltage. In this case the DIBL is equal to 63.58 mv/V, which is satisfac­
tory because well-designed MOSFETs typically exhibit DIBL < 100 mV/V.
Figure  5.16 also indicates subthreshold swing (SS) characterized by the 
slope of the Ids-Vgs curve in the subthreshold region, which is the number 
of millivolts of increase in gate voltage needed to increase the drain current 
by a factor of 10. The theoretical lower limit of SS is 60 mV/decade at room 
temperature, while for well-designed MOSFETs the tolerable value for SS is 
less than 80 mV/decade in order to ensure a rapid transition between the off 
and on states (i.e., a small SS).
5.15  Summary
This chapter presents a comprehensive overview about MOSFET simula­
tion using Silvaco TCAD tools. The strategy and methodology applied for 
MOSFET device simulation using Silvaco are emphasized. An overview of 
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
Gate-to-source Voltage Vgs in [V]
Vds = 1.5 V
Vds = 0.05 V
Drain Current Ids in [A]
SS = 72.6 mV/decade
DIBL (mV/V)
= (0.2866 – 0.1994)*103/(1.5 – 0.05)
= (63.58)
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1E–12
1E–11
1E–10
1E–9
1E–8
1E–7
1E–6
1E–5
1E–4
0.01
1E–3
FIGURE 5.16
Drain current as a function of gate-to-source voltage for two different values of Vds. Also shown 
is the calculation of DIBL and the subthreshold slope.

233
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
the software developed by Silvaco in order to meet the simulation needs 
for researching conventional and advanced MOSFET structures is also pre­
sented. In addition, several examples with source codes are provided for 
the task of simulating different types of MOSFETs that are in use today. It 
was shown how it is possible to obtain unique insight into the behavior of 
MOSFETs by performing device simulation using Silvaco TCAD tools.
References
	
1.	 Semiconductor 
Industry 
Association, 
International 
Roadmap 
for 
Semiconductors, 2011 (available at http://public.itrs.net/)
	
2.	 H. Masuda, T2CAD: Total design for sub-m process and device optimization 
with technology-CAD, in Simulation of Semiconductor Devices and Processes, H. 
Ryssel and P. Pichler, Eds. Vienna, Austria: Springer, 1995, vol. 6, pp. 408–415.
	
3.	 J.J. Barnes and R.J. Lomax, Finite element methods in semiconductor device sim­
ulation, IEEE Trans. on Electron Devices, vol. ED-24, August 1977, pp. 1082–1088.
	
4.	 P.E. Cottrell and E.M. Buturla, Steady-state analysis of field effect transistors via 
the finite element method, IEDM Technical Digest, December 1975, pp. 51–55.
	
5.	 M.S. Lundstrom, R.W. Dutton, D.K. Ferry, and K. Hess, Eds., IEEE Trans. Electron 
Devices 47(10), 2000. Special Issue on Computational Electronics: New Challenges and 
Directions.
	
6.	 J. Dabrowski, H.-J. Mussig, M. Duane, S.T. Dunham, R. Goossens, and H.-H. 
Vuong, Basic science and challenges in process simulation, Advances in Solid 
State Physics, vol. 38, 1999, pp. 565–582.
	
7.	 M. Duane, TCAD needs and applications from a user’s perspective, IEICE 
Transactions, vol. E82-C, no. 6, 1999, pp. 976–982.
	
8.	 J. Mar, The application of TCAD in industry, SISPAD Proceedings, 1996, pp. 
64–74.
	
9.	 D.L. Scharfetter and D.L. Gummel, Large signal analysis of a silicon read diode 
oscillator, IEEE Transaction on Electron Devices, vol. ED-16, 1969, pp. 64–77.
	 10.	 M.V. Fischetti and S.E. Laux, Monte Carlo simulation of submicron Si MOSFETs, 
in Simulation of Semiconductor Devices and Processes, G. Baccarani and M. Rudan, 
Eds. Bologna: Technoprint, 1988, vol. 3, pp. 349–368.
	 11.	 K. Banoo and M. S. Lundstrom, Electron transport in a model Si transistor, Solid 
State Electron., vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 1689–1695, Sept. 2000.
	 12.	 S.E. Laux and M.V. Fischetti, Monte Carlo study of velocity overshoot in switch­
ing a 0.1-micron CMOS inverter, Proc. IEDM, Washington, DC, 1997, Tech. Dig. 
IEDM, pp. 877–880.
	 13.	 J.D. Bude, MOSFET modeling into the ballistic regime, Proceedings of the SISPAD, 
Seattle, WA, 2000, pp. 23–26.
	 14.	 C. Fiegna, H. Iwai, M. Saito, and E. Sangiori, Application of semiclassical device 
simulation to trade-off studies for sub-0:1 _m MOSFETs, Proc. IEDM, San 
Francisco, CA, 1994, Tech. Dig. IEDM, pp. 347–350.
	 15.	 R. Granzner, V.M. Polyakov, F. Schwierz, M. Kittler, and T. Doll, On the suit­
ability of DD and HD models for the simulation of nanometer double-gate 
MOSFETs, Solid State Electronics, Physica E, vol. 19, 2003, pp. 33–38.

234
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
	 16.	 G.D. Mahan, Many-Particle Physics, New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum, 2000.
	 17.	 Silvaco International, Santa Clara, CA, ATLAS User’s Manual, 2010.
	 18.	 Kazautaka Tomizawa, Numerical Simulation of Submicron Semiconductor 
Devices, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1993.
	 19.	 D.M. Caughey and R.E. Thomas, Carrier mobilities in silicon empirically related 
to doping and field, Proc. IEEE, vol. 55, 1967, pp. 2192–2193.
	 20.	 N.D. Arora, J.R. Hauser, and D.J. Roulston, Electron and hole mobilities in sili­
con as a function of concentration and temperature, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 
vol. 29, 1982, pp. 292–295.
	 21.	 D.B.M. Klaassen, A unified mobility model for device simulation—I. Model equa­
tions and concentration dependence, Sol. St. Elec., vol. 35, no. 7, 1992, pp. 953–959.
	 22.	 D.B.M. Klaassen, A unified mobility model for device simulation—II. 
Temperature dependence of carrier mobility and lifetime, Sol. St. Elec., vol. 35, 
no. 7, 1992, pp. 961–967.
	 23.	 C. Lombardi, S. Manzini, A. Saporito, and M. Vanzi, A physically based mobility 
model for numerical simulation of nonplanar devices, IEEE Trans. Comp. Aided 
Design, vol. 7, 1992, pp. 1154–1171.
	 24.	 M. Lundstrom, Fundamentals of Carrier Transport, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 2000.
	 25.	 J.T. Watt, Surface Mobility Modeling, presented at Computer Aided Design of 
IC Fabrication Processes, Stanford University, California, August 1988.
	 26.	 M. Shirahata, H. Kusano, N. Kotani, S. Kusanoki, and Y. Akasaka, A mobil­
ity model including the screening effect in MOS inversion layer, IEEE Trans. 
Computer Aided Design, vol. 11, no. 9, September 1992, pp. 1114–1119.
	 27.	 Ken Yamaguchi, Field-dependent mobility model for two-dimensional 
numerical analysis of MOSFETs, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 26, 1979, 
pp. 1068–1074.
	 28.	 G.M. Yeric, A.F. Tasch, and S.K. Banerjee, A universal MOSFET mobility degra­
dation model for circuit simulation, IEEE Trans. Computer Aided Design, vol. 9, 
1991, pp. 1123–1126.
	 29.	 M.E. Law, K.S. Jones, L. Radic, R. Crosby, M. Clark, K. Gable, and C. Ross, 
Process modeling for advanced devices, Proc. Mater. Res. Soc. Symp., vol. 810, 
2004, pp. C3.1.1–C.1.7.
	 30.	 Chae Soo-Won and Klaus-Jürgen Bathe, On automatic mesh construction and 
mesh refinement in finite element analysis, Computers & Structures, vol. 32, 
no. 3–4, 1989, pp. 911–936.
	 31.	 J.-P. Colinge, Fully-depleted SOI CMOS for analog applications, IEEE Trans. 
Electron Dev., vol. 45, no. 5, 1998, pp. 1010–1016.
	 32.	 D. Flandre et al. Fully depleted SOI CMOS technology for heterogeneous micro­
power, high-temperature or RF microsystems, Solid-State Electron., vol. 45, no. 4, 
2001, pp. 541–549.
	 33.	 J.-P. Raskin, A. Viviani, D. Flandre, and J.-P. Colinge, Substrate crosstalk 
reduction using SOI technology, IEEE Trans. Electr. Dev., vol. 44, no. 12, 1997, 
pp. 2252–2261.
	 34.	 C. Raynaud et al. Is SOICMOSa promising technology for SOCs in high fre­
quency range? 207th Electrochemical Society Meeting, Proc. Silicon Insulator 
Technol. Dev., Quebec City, Canada, May 2005, Electrochemical Society, 
Pennington, N.J., pp. 331–344.

235
Device Simulation Using Silvaco ATLAS Tool
	 35.	 J.-P. Colinge, Silicon-on-Insulator Technology: Materials to VLSI, Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic, 1991.
	 36.	 E.H. Poindexter, MOS interface states: Overview and physicochemical perspec­
tive, Semicond. Sci. Technol., vol. 4, 1989, pp. 961–969.
	 37.	 E. Takeda, C.Y.-W. Yang, and A. Miura-Hamada, Hot-Carrier Effects in MOS 
Devices. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1995.
	 38.	 A. Schenk, Finite-temperature full random-phase approximation model of band 
gap narrowing for silicon device simulation, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 84, no. 7, 1998, 
pp. 3684–3695.
	 39.	 A. Burenkov, K. Tietzel, and J. Lorenz, Optimization of 0.18 μm CMOS devices 
by coupled process and device simulation, Solid-State Electron., vol. 44, no. 4, 
2000, pp. 767–774.
	 40.	 J.D. Plummer, M.D. Deal, and P.B. Griffin, Silicon VLSI Technology—Fundamentals, 
Practice and Modeling, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2000.
	 41.	 Y. Okumura, M. Shirahata, T. Okudaira, A. Hachisuka, H. Arima, T. Matsukawa, 
and T. Tsubouchi, A novel source-to-drain nonuniformly doped channel 
(NUDC) MOSFET for high-current drivability and threshold voltage control­
lability, IEDM Tech. Dig., 1990, pp. 391–394.
	 42.	 B. Yu, H. Wang, O. Milic, Q. Xiang, W. Wang, J.X. An, and M.-R. Lin, 50 nm gate-
length CMOS transistor with super-halo: Design, process, and reliability, IEDM 
Tech. Dig., 1999, pp. 653–656.
	 43.	 C.F. Codella and S. Ogura, Halo doping effects in submicron DI_LDD device 
design, IEDM Tech. Dig., 1985, pp. 230–231.
	 44.	 D.G. Borse, M. Rani K.N., N.K. Jha, A.N. Chandorkar, J. Vasi, V.R. Rao, B. Cheng, and 
J.C.S. Woo, Optimization and realization of sub-100 nm channel length single halo 
p-MOSFETs, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 49, no. 6, June 2002, pp. 1077–1079.
	 45.	 T. Hori, A 0.1-μm CMOS technology with tilt-implanted punchthrough stopper 
(TIPS), IEDM Tech. Dig., 1994, pp. 75–78.
	 46.	 R. Gwoziecki, T. Skotnicki, P. Bouillon, and P. Gentil, Optimization of Vth roll-
off in MOSFETs with advanced channel architecture-retrograde doping and 
pockets, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 46, no. 7, July 1999, pp. 1551–1161.
	 47.	 A. Akturk, N. Goldsman, and G. Metze, Increased CMOS inverter switching 
speed with asymmetric doping, Solid State Electron., vol. 47, no. 2, February 
2003, pp. 185–192.
	 48.	 A. Bansal and K. Roy, Asymmetric halo CMOSFET to reduce static power dis­
sipation with improved performance, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 52, no. 3, 
March 2005, pp. 397–412.
	 49.	 J.-G. Su, C.-T. Huang, S.-C. Wong, C.-C. Cheng, C.-C. Wang, H.-L. Shiang, and 
B.-Y. Tsui, Tilt angle effect on optimizing HALO PMOS and NMOS perfor­
mance, in Proc. of IEEE IEDM, 1997, pp. 11–14.
	 50.	 Heng-Sheng Huang, Shuang-Yuan Chen, Yu-Hsin Chang, Hai-Chun Line, and 
Woei-Yih Lin, TCAD simulation of using pocket implant in 50 nm n-MOSFETs, 
presented at International Symposium on Nano Science and Technology, Tainan, 
Taiwan, 20–21 November 2004.
	 51.	 B. Yu, C.H. Wann, E.D. Nowak, K. Noda, and C. Hu, Short channel effect 
improved by lateral channel engineering in deep-submicrometer MOSFETs, 
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 44, April 1997, pp. 627–633.

236
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
	 52.	 H.-S.P. Wong, K.K. Chan, and Y. Taur, Self-aligned (top and bottom) double-gate 
MOSFET with a 25-nm thick silicon channel, IEDM Tech. Dig., 1997, pp. 427–430.
	 53.	 S. Tang, L. Chang, N. Lindert, Y.-K. Choi, W.-C. Lee, X. Huang, V. Subramanian, 
J. Bokor, T.-J. King, and C. Hu, FinFET—A quasiplanar double-gate MOSFET, 
ISSCC Tech. Dig., 2001, pp. 118–119.
	 54.	 Y. Taur, Analytic solutions of charge and capacitance in symmetric and asym­
metric double-gate MOSFETs, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 48, no. 12, 
December 2001, pp. 2861–2869.
	 55.	 Y. Taur, D.A. Buchanan, W. Chen, D.J. Frank, K.E. Ismail, S.-H. Lo, G.A. Sai-
Halasz, R.G. Viswanathan, H.-J.C. Wann, S.J. Wind, and H.-S. Wong, CMOS 
scaling into the nanometer regime, Proc. IEEE, vol. 85, no. 4, April 1997, pp. 
486–504.
	 56.	 K. Takeuchi, R. Koh, and T. Mogami, A study of the threshold voltage variation 
for ultra-small bulk and SOI CMOS, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 48, no. 9, 
September 2001, pp. 1995–2001.
	 57.	 A.R. Brown, J.R. Watling, and A. Asenov, A 3-D atomistic study of archetypal 
double gate MOSFET structures, J. Comput. Electron., vol. 1, no. 1/2, July 2002, 
pp. 165–169.
	 58.	 H.-S.P. Wong and Y. Taur, Three-dimensional “atomistic” simulation of dis­
crete microscopic random dopant distributions effects in sub-0.1 μm MOSFETs, 
IEDM Tech. Dig., 1993, pp. 705–708.
	 59.	 K. Chandrasekaran, Z.M. Zhu, X. Zhou, W. Shangguan, G.H. See, S.B. Chiah, S.C. 
Rustagi, and N. Singh, Compact modeling of doped symmetric DG MOSFETs 
with regional approach, Nanotech Proceedings, WCM, vol. 3, pp. 792–795, June 
1–5, 2006, Boston, MA.
	 60.	 Y. Taur and T.H. Ning, Fundamentals of Modern VLSI Devices. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 1998.
	 61.	 A. Ortiz-Conde, F.J. Garcia-Sanchez, and S. Malobabic, Analytic solution of 
the channel potential in undoped symmetric dual-gate MOSFETs, IEEE Trans. 
Electron Devices, vol. 52, no. 7, July 2005, pp. 1669–1672.
	 62.	 M.S. Lundstrom and Z. Ren, Essential physics of carrier transport in nanoscale 
MOSFETs, IEEE Trans. Electron Dev., vol. 49, January 2002, pp. 133–141.
	 63.	 B. Ray and S. Mahapatra, Modeling of channel potential and subthreshold slope 
of symmetric double-gate transistor, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 56, no. 2, 
February 2009, pp. 260–266.

237
6
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI 
MOSFETs through TCAD
Srabanti Pandit
6.1  Introduction
The feature size of metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) transistors has been 
scaled down for higher packing density, reduced cost, and better performance. 
This reduction in the device dimensions has more or less followed Moore’s 
law, according to which the complexity of device integration is approximately 
doubled every 18 months. The scaling procedure has pushed the transistor 
dimensions well below the micrometer scale and into the deep sub-micro- 
meter range [1]. However, in this domain, several fundamental limitations 
due to the physics of the device lead to the deviation of the scaling process 
from Moore’s prediction. Several physical effects (short channel effects [SCEs], 
CONTENTS
6.1	
Introduction.................................................................................................237
6.2	
Synopsys Technology Computer Aided Design (TCAD) Tool Suite.....238
6.3	
Device Architecture and Simulation Setup............................................240
6.4	
Short Channel Effects (SCEs)....................................................................242
6.4.1	 Threshold Voltage Roll-Off............................................................242
6.4.2	 Drain-Induced Barrier Lowering (DIBL).....................................246
6.5	
Mobility Degradation.................................................................................249
6.6	
Drain Characteristics..................................................................................251
6.6.1	 Velocity Saturation..........................................................................251
6.6.2	 Output Resistance...........................................................................252
6.7	
Inverse Narrow Width Effects (INWEs)..................................................254
6.7.1	 Gate Fringing Field Effect..............................................................254
6.7.2	 Dopant Redistribution...................................................................257
6.8	
Advanced Device Structures.....................................................................259
6.8.1	 SOI Structures.................................................................................260
6.8.2	 Double Gate (DG) MOSFETs......................................................... 261
6.9	
Conclusion...................................................................................................264
References..............................................................................................................265

238
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
inverse narrow width effects [INWEs], and gate leakage current) critically 
affect the performances of deep sub-micron MOS transistors [2,3].
The SCEs mainly arise from the increased field at the drain end. The gate 
starts to lose its control over the channel due to the perturbations caused 
by the lateral drain field. The INWEs in the narrow devices are primarily 
caused due to the combined effect of gate fringing field and dopant redistri­
bution phenomena. Further, gate leakage currents arise due to tunneling of 
carriers through the thin gate oxide layer. To summarize, the channel length 
and width reduction are associated with physical phenomena that primarily 
involve the roles of the vertical gate field and/or the lateral drain field. The 
depletion depths and the electrostatic potentials get altered along the chan­
nel length and the channel width. This ultimately leads to an overall degra­
dation of the desired behavior or performance of the devices. The behavioral 
study of devices includes the study of parameters like threshold voltage roll-
off, drain-induced barrier lowering (DIBL) effect, transconductance, sub­
threshold slope degradation, output resistance, etc.
Synopsys technology computer aided design (TCAD) device simulator is 
used efficiently in order to study the device behavior. The simulations are 
based on numerical computations that yield reasonably accurate results.
The rest of the chapter is divided as follows. Section 6.2 presents a brief 
introduction to the tools of the TCAD simulator used in this chapter. Section 6.3 
discusses the device architecture and simulation setup. Section 6.4 deals with 
the study of SCEs. Section 6.5 covers mobility degradation. In Section 6.6 we 
study the drain characteristics, and in Section 6.7 we deal with the INWEs. 
This is followed by a study of an advanced device structure in Section 6.8. 
Finally, a conclusion is given in Section 6.9.
6.2  Synopsys Technology Computer Aided 
Design (TCAD) Tool Suite
Synopsys TCAD tool suite is used for the study of the deep sub-micron 
devices in this chapter. This tool suite includes tools for creating device 
structures, meshing of the created structure, its simulation, scientific visual­
ization and plotting of simulated data, curve display, and extraction of per­
formance parameters. The tools used here are briefly discussed. The details 
of the tool suite have been described in Chapter 4, and the respective user 
guides [4] should be consulted for detailed descriptions.
	
1.	Sentaurus Structure Editor (SSE): This tool is used for device structure 
creation. The structures are generated or edited interactively using 
the graphical user interface (GUI). The Synopsys meshing engines 

239
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
may be configured and called by interfacing through SSE. In addi­
tion, SSE generates the necessary input files (the TDR boundary file 
and mesh command file) for the meshing engines that generate the 
TDR grid and data file for the device structure. Alternatively, devices 
can be created in batch mode using scripts. This option is useful for 
creating parameterized device structures.
	
2.	Mesh: This engine helps to mesh the structure created with SSE. The tool 
produces finite-element meshes for use in semiconductor device simu­
lation. The mesher generates high-quality spatial discretizations for 1D, 
2D, and 3D devices using a variety of mesh generation algorithms.
	
3.	Sentaurus device: This tool is used to simulate the electrical characteristics 
of the device. Upon specification of necessary input files, the simulated 
outputs are generated in separate files. Terminal currents, voltages, and 
charges are computed based on a set of physical device equations that 
describe the carrier distribution and the conduction mechanisms.
	
4.	Tecplot SV: This tool has extensive 2D and 3D capabilities and is used 
for scientific visualization and plotting of simulated data.
	
5.	Inspect: The electrical characteristics are plotted with the help of this 
tool. It is basically a curve display and analysis program. The curves 
are specified at discrete points.
The basic tool flow is illustrated in Figure 6.1. The various files associated 
with each tool are also shown.
*.scm
*.sat
*.bnd or *.tdr
*.cmd
Sentaurus
Structure Editor
Inspect
Tecplot_SV
Mesh
*_msh.tdr
*_des.cmd
*_msh.log
*_des.tdr
*_des.log
Sentaurus Device
FIGURE 6.1
Basic tool flow using Synopsys TCAD.

240
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
6.3  Device Architecture and Simulation Setup
Figure 6.2 shows the schematic cross-section along the length of a typical 
bulk metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) structure 
that is used for simulation. It consists of an n+ polysilicon gate, a gate oxide, a 
uniformly doped channel, shallow n+ source-drain extension (SDE) regions, 
and deep source-drain (DSD) regions.
Here, channel length is along the x-axis and depth of the device is along 
the y-axis. Lg is the drawn gate length, Leff is the effective channel length, tox 
is the gate oxide thickness, and xj is the depth of the SDE region. For sim­
ulation purposes, the real device is created using the Sentaurus Structure 
Editor (SSE). The default width of the device along the z-axis is 1 µm. The 
device has 
=
L
nm
65
eff
, 
=
t
nm
3
ox
, 
=
x
nm
40
j
 and power supply V
V
1.2
DD =
. 
The SDE and DSD regions are doped with arsenic with concentrations of 2.5 
× 1020 cm–3 and 3.7 × 1020 cm–3, respectively. The channel is doped with boron 
with a uniform concentration of 1 × 1018 cm–3. The constructed structure as 
obtained from TCAD Structure Editor is shown in Figure 6.3.
The structure is subsequently meshed using the tool ‘Mesh’. The meshing 
strategy ensures that fine elements are generated for the important regions 
of the device (active region), and coarse elements are generated for the bulk 
regions. The meshed structure is shown in Figure 6.4 that shows the zoomed-
in view of the active region of the transistor. The meshing strategy keeps the 
problem at a minimum of computer processor time with reasonable accu­
racy. In one of our devices, in the channel region, the meshing element sizes 
are 0.00475 µm in x- and y-directions and 1 µm in the z-direction.
The meshed structure is then simulated using the tool ‘Sentaurus device’. 
The hydrodynamic (or the energy-balance) transport model [4] is used as 
the physical model for simulation purposes. This model serves to describe 
Spacer
tox
DSD
SDE
Leﬀ
Body
Gate G
Lg
xj
y
x
FIGURE 6.2
A typical bulk MOSFET structure.

241
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
properly the characteristics of the devices in the deep sub-micron regime. The 
hydrodynamic model consists of a basic set of partial differential equations 
(Poisson equation and continuity equations) and energy-conservation equa­
tions that are solved by considering the carrier temperature to be different 
Polysilicon gate
Spacer
Gate oxide
Doping Concentration [cm–3]
1.0E+22
4.8E+18
2.3E+15
8.6E+11
–4.8E+14
–1.0E+18
SDE
Depletion Contour
p-sub
–0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
–0.1
–0.05
0
0.05
X[um]
Y[um]
0.1
0.15
0.2
DSD
FIGURE 6.3 (See color insert)
Bulk MOSFET structure created using TCAD.
0
0.05
0.1
–0.1
–0.05
0
0.05
X[um]
Y[um]
0.1
FIGURE 6.4 (See color insert)
A zoomed-in view of the active region of the meshed structure.

242
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
from the lattice temperature. The eQCvanDort flag [4] is specified to take 
into account the quantization effects in the classical device simulation. The 
OldSlotboom model [4] that takes care of the lattice-temperature dependence 
of the band gap and band-gap narrowing is used for the determination of 
the silicon intrinsic carrier concentration. The following mobility models are 
used: Masetti model [4] in silicon that explains the carrier mobility degrada­
tion due to scattering of carriers by the dopant impurity ions; Canali model 
[4] that explains degradation due to high electric fields, thus taking care of 
the velocity saturation effect; and Lombardi model that explains the mobility 
degradation at interfaces due to a transverse electric field [4].
6.4  Short Channel Effects (SCEs)
The short channel effect is the decrease of the threshold voltage of a MOS 
transistor as the channel length is reduced [5]. The SCE is pronounced under 
high drain bias.
6.4.1  Threshold Voltage Roll-Off
Figure 6.5 shows the variation of the electrostatic potential along the depth 
of the device at a particular position along the length of the channel. This 
figure is obtained using the tool ‘Tecplot SV’ after the simulated files are 
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Electrostatic Potential (V)
0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6 0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Depth (um)
0.1
0.12
0.14
FIGURE 6.5
Electrostatic potential variation along the depth near the middle of the channel.

243
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
loaded. The device is sliced using an x-cut tool [4]. It is to be noted that the 
electrostatic potential values obtained through TCAD are all computed from 
an arbitrarily defined reference potential. In particular, for silicon, the stan­
dard approach is to set the reference potential equal to the Fermi potential 
of an intrinsic semiconductor. The figure illustrates that with a certain gate 
bias, the electrostatic potential in the semiconductor is maximum at the 
surface (y = 0) and gradually decreases to zero beyond the depletion depth 
where the bulk material is neutral.
The field patterns (i.e., the electrostatic potential contours in the deple­
tion region of a long channel and a short channel bulk MOSFET) are shown 
in Figures  6.6(a) and 6.6(b), respectively. These figures are obtained after 
the respective structures are simulated using the tool ‘Sentaurus device’ 
of TCAD and then visualized using the tool ‘Tecplot SV’. The long device 
(Figure  6.6a) has an effective channel length, Leff of 1 µm, and the short 
device (Figure 6.6b) has an effective channel length of 65 nm. As seen from 
Figure 6.6(a), the potential contours are almost parallel to the oxide-silicon 
interface. The electric field is thus one-dimensional, being along the verti­
cal direction only for almost the entire length of the channel. However, in 
Figure 6.6(b) the field is two-dimensional (i.e., the components of the electric 
field along both directions are appreciable). It is also seen that for a given 
gate bias, the electrostatic potential at a particular depth from the oxide-
silicon interface is higher for the shorter device. In other words, the surface 
potential (electrostatic potential at the surface) of the shorter device is more, 
with a greater band bending at the oxide-semiconductor interface. This is 
the key difference between a short channel and a long channel MOS tran­
sistor. The depletion width is thus more for the shorter device, as seen from 
Equation (6.1) [5]:
	
W
qN
2
d
Si
s
a
=
ε ψ
	
(6.1)
where Wd is the depletion width, and ψs is the surface potential.
The white colored contour in Figure 6.6(b) is the depletion width contour. 
The greater depletion depth in the shorter device means that the depletion 
charge is effectively reduced. This leads to a reduction in the threshold volt­
age of the shorter device. Equation (6.2) shows the dependence of the thresh­
old voltage on the depletion charge density [5]:
	
V
V
Q
WL C
2
th
FB
B
d
eff
ox
=
+ ψ +
	
(6.2)
where Vth  is the threshold voltage, VFB  is the flat-band voltage, ψB is the dif­
ference between Fermi level and intrinsic level, Qd  is the depletion charge 

244
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
density, and Cox  is the gate oxide capacitance per unit area. Thus, as Qd 
decreases, Vth  also decreases.
The two-dimensional field pattern in a short channel device is due to the 
close proximity of the source and drain regions. In a short channel device, 
Electrostatic Potential [V]
1.6E+00
1.2E+00
7.8E–01
3.7E–01
–3.6E–02
–4.5E–01
0
0.5
1
–1
–0.5
0
X[um]
Y[um]
0.5
1
(a)
–0.05
0
0.05
0.1
–0.1
–0.05
0
X[um]
0.05
0.1
Y[um]
Electrostatic Potential [V]
1.6E+00
1.2E+00
7.8E–01
3.7E–01
–3.6E–02
–4.5E–02
(b)
FIGURE 6.6 (See color insert)
Electrostatic potential contours in (a) long channel 
=
µ
L
m
1
eff
 and (b) short channel 
=
L
nm
65
eff
V
V V
V
(
1.0 ,
0.05 )
gs
ds
=
=
.

245
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
the source-drain distance is comparable to the depletion width in the vertical 
direction [6]. The source-drain potential exerts a strong influence on the gate 
potential over a significant portion of the channel length. According to the 
charge sharing model [5,6], when the drain bias is low, all of the depletion 
charges beneath the gate are not imaged on the gate charges. Rather, some of 
them are the terminating centers of the field lines originating near the source 
and drain junctions. Thus there is an effective reduction in the depletion 
charge density that ultimately leads to the threshold voltage roll-off. This 
is in contrast to the long channel devices where almost all of the depletion 
charges are imaged on all the gate charges.
The threshold voltage roll-off as obtained from the TCAD simulator is 
shown in Figure 6.7. Different devices of varying effective lengths are simu­
lated. The threshold voltages of the different devices are then determined 
using the tool ‘Inspect’ by the constant current (CC) technique [7]. The refer­
ence current is taken to be 10–6 A/µm. It is seen that for long channel lengths 
the threshold voltage remains almost constant. However, as the channel 
length is decreased the threshold voltage falls from its long-channel value. 
This is due to the gradual reduction of the gate control over the channel in 
the shorter devices. The drain field starts to exert its influence over the gate 
field in the shorter devices.
The simple assumptions of the charge sharing model, however, render it 
invalid for high drain and substrate biases. It is therefore unable to explain 
the drain-induced barrier lowering (DIBL) that is discussed next.
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
00
200
400
Eﬀective Gate Length, Leﬀ (nm)
Treshold Voltage, Vth (V)
600
800
Vsb = 0.1 V
Vsb = 0.0 V
1000
FIGURE 6.7
Threshold voltage roll-off for two different substrate biases 
=
=
V
V V
V
(
1.0
,
0.05
)
gs
ds
.

246
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
6.4.2  Drain-Induced Barrier Lowering (DIBL)
For long channels, as seen in Figure 6.6(a), the surface potential is flat over 
most of the channel region of the device. The surface potential is mainly 
controlled by the gate voltage and acts as a barrier to the electrons (for 
n-channel MOSFET). The electrons are not able to surmount this barrier 
below the threshold condition. However, in case of short devices, the source 
and the drain fields penetrate deeper into the middle of the channel. This 
lowers the barrier between the source and the drain. The electrons are then 
able to overcome the reduced barrier and move toward the drain end. This 
increases the subthreshold current. The threshold voltage of the short chan­
nel device is thus lower than that of a long channel device. As the drain bias 
is increased the barrier is lowered further, resulting in a further decrease 
in the threshold voltage. This phenomenon is referred to as the DIBL effect. 
The surface potential plots as obtained from TCAD simulation for the long 
and the short channel devices are shown in Figure 6.8 to illustrate the DIBL 
effect. The shorter device has been studied with two drain biases.
In the figure, the variation of surface potential along the length of the device 
is obtained by using the y-cut tool of ‘Tecplot SV’ for each of the devices. The 
surface potential is then plotted against normalized channel length where 0 
is the center of the channel, –1 is the source end, and 1 is the drain end.
It is shown in Figure 6.8 that with a very small drain bias (V
V
0.05
ds =
), the 
surface potential at the source end is nearly equal to the built-in potential 
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
–1
0
Normalized Channel Length
Leﬀ = 1 µm, Vds = 0.05 V
Leﬀ = 65 nm, Vds = 0.05 V
Leﬀ = 65 nm, Vds = 0.5 V
Surface Potential (V)
1
FIGURE 6.8
Surface potential plots as obtained through device simulation.

247
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
barrier, Vbi of the source-substrate junction. As the drain bias is increased 
(V
V
0.5
ds =
), the surface potential at the drain end rises to V
V
bi
ds
(
)
+
. Thus the 
surface potential at the drain end rises by 0.45 V (0.50–0.05 V). Keep in mind 
that the surface potential values in TCAD are measured relative to a refer­
ence. The absolute values are to be calculated accordingly. The DIBL effect 
for the 65 nm MOSFET as obtained from the simulation results is shown in 
Figure 6.9. The DIBL coefficient obtained is –0.18.
The threshold voltage roll-off and DIBL can be minimized in three ways: 
(1) reduction of the oxide thickness to achieve better gate control over the 
channel, (2) reduction of the depletion width, and (3) reduction of the source-
drain junction depth. The depletion width is reduced by increasing the 
doping concentration in the channel. The source-drain junction depth is 
effectively reduced by introducing the source-drain extension structure.
Figure 6.10 shows the DIBL effect as obtained from the simulation results 
of a MOSFET with a lower SDE depth. 
=
=
=
L
nm x
nm t
nm
65
,
25
,
2.2
eff
j
ox
, 
and power supply V
V
1.2
DD =
. The threshold voltages are calculated using 
the constant current technique. The DIBL coefficient in this case is calculated 
to be –0.11.
Figure 6.11 shows the subthreshold characteristics of the 65 nm MOSFET 
as obtained from TCAD simulation results. It shows plots of the drain cur­
rent (in log scale) against the gate voltage for two different drain voltages. 
It is seen that with the increase in the drain bias, the subthreshold current 
increases. For very short devices, the subthreshold slope degrades because 
the surface potential is controlled more by the drain than the gate. Eventually, 
the gate loses all its control, and punch-through takes place when a high 
L = 65 nm
0.24
0.22
0.2
0.18
0.16
0.14 0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Drain-to-source Voltage, Vds (V)
Treshold Voltage, Vth (V)
0.4
0.5
FIGURE 6.9
The DIBL effect, Leff = 65nm, xj = 40nm, tox = 3 nm.

248
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
0.2
0.19
0.18
0.17
0.16
0.15
Treshold Voltage, Vth (V)
Drain-to-source Voltage, Vds (V)
0.14
0.13
0.12
0.11
0.1 0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
L = 65 nm
0.6
FIGURE 6.10
The DIBL effect, Leff = 65 nm, xj = 25 nm, tox = 2.2 nm.
10–3
Vds = 0.5 V
Vds = 0.05 V
10–4
10–5
10–6
10–7
10–8
10–9
0
0.2
0.4
Vgs (V)
Drain Current, Ids (A/um)
0.6
0.8
1
FIGURE 6.11
Subthreshold characteristics for two different drain biases (Leff = 65 nm).

249
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
drain current persists irrespective of the gate voltage. The subthreshold 
swings (SSs) for the low and high drain biases as obtained from Figure 6.11 
are 90 mV/decade and 95 mV/decade, respectively.
6.5  Mobility Degradation
The mobility of carriers in the MOSFET channel is significantly lower than 
that in the bulk silicon [6]. At the surface boundary, lattice (or phonon) scat­
tering is increased due to the presence of crystalline discontinuity. At high 
vertical fields, surface roughness scattering severely degrades the carrier 
mobility. Channel mobility is also affected by the oxide and interface traps 
at the Si-SiO2 interface [6].
Figure 6.12 shows the plot of transconductance, gm against Vgs for the 65-nm 
device for two different substrate biases under low and high drain biases. 
Figure 6.12(a) is for a small drain bias, with 
=
V
V
0.05
ds
, and Figure 6.12(b) is 
for a comparatively higher drain bias with 
=
V
V
1.0
ds
. The transconductance 
plots are obtained by differentiating the curves of the I
V
ds
gs
−
 characteristics. 
This is done by using the ‘diff’ command in the ‘Inspect’ tool. In Figure 6.12(a) 
it is observed that when the drain bias is low, the transconductance starts to 
fall off from a high value beyond a certain gate voltage. This is explained as 
follows. When the vertical electric field is very high (in this case it is greater 
than 1.6 × 106 V/cm for an oxide thickness of 3 nm and gate bias greater 
than 0.5 V), the mobility decreases very rapidly due to reasons discussed 
earlier. Thus, at low drain bias, the drain current and the transconductance 
are degraded significantly at high gate voltages. Also note that at low Vds, the 
parasitic source-drain resistance plays a significant role in determining the 
drain current. The peak drain current and consequently the transconduc­
tance decrease in the linear region (low Vds) due to this resistance.
However, if the drain bias is high as in Figure 6.12(b), the transconductance 
does not fall off. This is due to velocity saturation. The mobility degradation 
of the carriers is somewhat counterbalanced by the high drift velocity of the 
carriers under high drain bias. For very short channel transistors, the drain 
current Ids  becomes limited by the velocity saturation effect. This saturated 
drain current is given as [6]
	
I
C Wv
V
V
(
)
dsat
ox
sat
gs
th
=
−
	
(6.3)
Consequently, the transconductance is also fixed at a constant value.
It is interesting to note from Figure 6.12 that the maximum value of the 
transconductance at low Vds is much lower than that at high Vds. This is 
explained as follows.

250
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Vsb = 0 V
Gate-to-source Voltage, Vgs (V)
gm (S/um)
0.8
1
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Vsb = 0.5 V
0.00016
0.00014
0.00012
0.0001
8E–05
6E–05
4E–05
2E–05
0
0.001
0.0008
0.0002
0.2
0.4
Gate-to-source Voltage, Vgs (V)
gm (S/um)
0.6
0.8
0
0.0004
0.0006
Vbs = 0.5 V
Vbs = 0 V
FIGURE 6.12
Transconductance versus Gate-to-source Voltage; (top)Vds = 0.05V and (bottom) Vds = 1.0V.

251
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
The drain current, Ids may be written as
	
I
V
R
R
ds
ds
ds
Ch
=
+
	
(6.4)
where RCh  is the channel resistance, and Rds  is the source-drain resistance 
due to the lightly doped SDE regions, or,
	
R
V
I
Ch
ds
ds R
0
ds
=
=
or Equation (6.4) may be written as
	
=
+
=
+
=
=
I
I
1
1
ds
V
R
R
R
ds R
R
I
V
0
ds
Ch
ds
Ch
ds
ds ds Rds
ds
0
	
(6.5)
Therefore, when Vds  is low, it is due to Rds , that Ids  drops from its value, 
Ids R
0
ds= . Thus the maximum value of the transconductance is lowered at low 
drain bias.
6.6  Drain Characteristics
A significant effect that critically affects the I-V characteristics of a deep sub-
micron MOS transistor is velocity saturation.
6.6.1  Velocity Saturation
In a short channel device, the saturation of the drain current may take place 
at a much lower Vds value than the Vds value of the longer device. This limits 
the saturation current of the device. This is illustrated in Figure 6.13 where 
two curves are drawn: the upper one is for the long channel, and the lower 
one corresponds to the shorter device. It is seen that the shorter device expe­
riences an early saturation (i.e., the current saturates at a lower drain voltage). 
This occurs due to velocity saturation and is explained as follows. In the 
presence of velocity saturation,
	
V
m
V
V
L
1
1
ds
gs
th
sat
eff
sat
=
−
+ ξ
	
(6.6)
where 
sat
ξ
 is the critical electric field beyond which the velocity saturates, 
and m is the bulk charge factor [8]. Equation (6.6) shows that the short chan­
nel Vdssat  is an average of 
L
sat
eff
ξ
 and long channel Vdssat(
)
V
V
m
GS
th
=
−
. Thus short 
channel Vdssat is smaller than long channel Vdssat. Hence the drain current for 
the shorter MOS transistor saturates earlier compared to the long channel 
value.

252
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
6.6.2  Output Resistance
Figure 6.14 shows the simulated drain characteristics of a 65 nm MOSFET. As 
seen in Figure 6.14, for the short channel MOSFET, the drain current increases 
beyond saturation. There are two reasons for this. First, due to the increase 
of drain voltage, threshold voltage falls and hence the current increases. This 
is the DIBL effect. Second, as Vds is increased beyond the saturation voltage, 
the saturation point (the point along the channel length where carriers attain 
the saturation velocity) where the surface channel collapses moves slightly 
toward the source [6]. That is, the conducting channel length deceases. As a 
result, the current increases beyond the saturation point. This is the channel 
length modulation effect.
The increase in the current beyond the saturation point implies that the 
output conductance is finite. A plot of the output resistance against the 
drain-to-source voltage is shown in Figure 6.15. It is seen from the curves 
that in the subthreshold region, the drain current is low so that the output 
resistance is high. In the strong inversion region, the drain current is high so 
that output resistance is low. In weak inversion, with the increase of drain 
bias, the drain current increases due to various second-order effects such 
as channel length modulation, DIBL effect, etc. Thus the output resistance 
value falls. However, in strong inversion, the increase of drain current with 
the increase of drain bias due to the above effects is somewhat counterbal­
anced by the carrier mobility degradation effect due to the applied gate bias. 
Therefore the overall increase of drain current is small. Hence the output 
resistance remains nearly constant.
0.0007
0.0006
0.0005
Drain Current, Ids (A/um)
0.0004
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001
00
0.2
0.4
0.6
Drain-to-Source Voltage, Vds (V)
Leﬀ = 1000 nm
Leﬀ = 65 nm
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
FIGURE 6.13
Drain current versus drain-to-source voltage (Vgs = 1.1 V).

253
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
0.0008
0.0007
0.0006
0.0005
0.0004
0.0003
0.0002
0.0001
0 0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Drain-to-source Voltage, Vds (V)
Vgs = 0.6 V
Vgs = 0.8 V
Vgs = 1.1 V
Vgs = 0.4 V
Vgs = 0.2 V
Drain Current, Ids (A/um)
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
FIGURE 6.14
Drain characteristics of a 65 nm MOSFET.
Vgs = 1.1 V
Vgs = 0.8 V
Vgs = 0.4 V
16000
14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Drain-to-source Voltage, Vds (V)
Output Resistance, Rout (ohm/um)
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
FIGURE 6.15
Output resistance versus drain voltage (Leff = 65 nm).

254
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
6.7  Inverse Narrow Width Effects (INWEs)
As the device dimension is reduced along its width, we come across effects 
known as the narrow width effects. In LOCOS isolated devices, threshold 
voltage increases with a decrease in the width of the device. The deep sub-
micron devices isolated using the shallow trench isolation (STI) process are 
associated with a decrease in the threshold voltage with a reduction in the 
channel width. This effect associated with the STI MOSFETs is known as 
the inverse narrow width effect (INWE) [5]. Narrowing the channel width 
of a transistor affects its performance to an extent comparable to the effects 
caused by shortening the channel length [9,10]. Hence the study of MOS tran­
sistor performances along the width dimension becomes important for the 
design of low power complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) 
circuits and memory cells [11,12].
The INWE is primarily caused due to two reasons. First is the combined 
effect of gate fringing fields through trench oxide and dopant redistribution 
phenomenon [13,14]. Second is the effect of STI stress [15]. The effect of the lat­
ter is dominant for comparatively larger widths, while the former is dominant 
for narrower widths [15]. STIMOS transistors with channel widths below 1 µm 
exhibit threshold voltage roll-off where the INWE effect is the dominant cause.
6.7.1  Gate Fringing Field Effect
Figure  6.16 shows the schematic of the cross-section along the width of 
the STIMOS device. The field lines originating from the gate terminate on 
charges under the gate through the thin gate oxide. Some of the field lines 
also terminate on charges along the trench oxide sidewalls. These are the 
fringing field lines.
Figure 6.17 shows the cross-section along the width of a typical STIMOS 
device as obtained by using the appropriate slicing tool of ‘Tecplot SV’. The 
electrostatic potential contours are shown in the figure. It is seen in the figure 
that the depletion depth (the white contour is the depletion contour) is non-
uniform and varies along the width of the device. In wide MOS devices, the 
enhanced depletion region near the sidewalls caused due to the gate fringing 
field is a small percentage of the total depletion volume and can be neglected. 
The depletion depth may then be considered to be uniform throughout the 
width without resulting in too much of an error in the analysis of the device 
performances. For devices with small widths, the depletion volume near the 
sidewalls becomes a large percentage of the total depletion volume. This is 
referred to as the gate fringing field effect and is illustrated in Figure 6.18.
MOS devices with varying channel widths are created using the Sentaurus 
Structure Editor and are then simulated using the tool ‘Sentaurus device’. 
The simulated devices are then visualized using the tool ‘Tecplot SV’. The 
depletion depths along the width are noted and then plotted as in Figure 6.18. 

255
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
It is observed from Figure 6.18 that as the device becomes narrower, the gate 
fringing increases.
The effect of gate fringing is modeled by a parasitic fringe capacitance. The 
higher depletion depths at the trench oxide sidewalls are associated with a 
higher surface potential. Figure 6.19 shows the schematic representation of 
Gate
Poly gate
Normal ﬁeld lines through
gate oxide (SiO2)
Fringing ﬁeld lines through
trench oxide (SiO2)
Depletion region contour
p-substrate
Width, W
y
z
x
FIGURE 6.16
Cross-section along the width of a trench-isolated MOSFET including gate fringing fields.
0.05
0
–0.05
–0.1
–0.0.5
0
Polysilicon gate
Depletion Width Contour
p-sub
STI oxide
Gate oxide (SiO2)
Electrostatic Potential [V]
5.3E–01
3.4E–01
1.4E–01
–5.5E–02
–2.5E–01
–4.5E–01
Width (um)
Depth (um)
0.05
0.1
0.15
FIGURE 6.17 (See color insert)
Cross-section along the width of a trench-isolated MOSFET.

256
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
the variation of the depletion depth and the corresponding surface potential 
along the width of the device.
In Figure 6.19(a) the depletion depth at the trench-oxide sidewall is d
,
wmax  
decreases to a value dw, remains constant at dw  beyond a critical point zb, 
and then finally increases again to dwmax  at the other sidewall. Figure 6.19(b) 
shows the variation of the surface potential 
S
ψ  along the width of the device. 
SM
ψ
 is the surface potential in the middle of the device; 
ST
ψ
 is the surface 
potential at the trench oxide sidewall edges.
Figure 6.20 shows the surface potential profile along the width of a typical 
simulated device. The gate fringing field through the trench oxide causes the 
surface potential at the sidewall edges to increase in comparison to that at 
the middle of the channel width.
The sidewall surface potential 
ST
ψ
 varies with Vgs  in a similar fashion 
as the surface potential at the middle 
SM
ψ
 does with Vgs. A typical device 
has been simulated for different gate biases, and the results are as shown in 
Figure 6.21.
The surface potential at the center of the device is related to that at the 
trench-oxide sidewalls by the relation [13,16]
	
l
d
ST
SM
ψ
= ψ
+
	
(6.7)
where l is close to unity, and d is a numerical constant expressed as
	
d
nkT
q
=
–1
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
Width (normalized)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
–0.014
–0.016
–0.018
–0.02
–0.022
–0.024
Depletion Depth (um)
–0.026
–0.028
W1 = 40 nm
W2 = 200 nm
W3 = 400 nm
W4 = 2000 nm
FIGURE 6.18
Gate fringing field effect for STI MOSFETs.

257
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
where kT
q  is the volt equivalent of temperature. The value of n lies between 1.2 
and 2.3 for devices with largely varying dimensions like 200 nm gate length 
to 40 nm gate length having substrate doping ranging from 1017/cc to 1019/cc.
6.7.2  Dopant Redistribution
The depletion charge density does not remain constant along the entire width 
of the channel. This is due to the non-uniformity of the doping concentration 
x
x
z
z
W
zb
W
0
0
dw
dwmax
Channel width
Channel width
Surface potential
Depletion depth
ΨST
ΨSM
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 6.19
(a) Variation of depletion depth along the channel width. (b) Variation of surface potential 
along the channel width.
0.45
0.4
0.35
–0.06
–0.04
–0.02
0
Width (um)
Electrostatic Potential (V)
0.02
0.04
0.06
FIGURE 6.20
Plot of surface potential against the width of the device.

258
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
along the width of the channel which is caused by dopant redistribution 
(comprised of dopant segregation [17–19] and transient-enhanced diffusion, 
TED [20]). After the gate oxidation processing step, dopant atoms in the 
active channel regions of the transistors start to diffuse out to the adjacent 
trench oxide/Si interface. This is referred to as the dopant segregation effect 
[21]. In particular, boron in NMOS transistors gets depleted at the STI edges 
and segregates to the oxide/Si interface [17]. Boron segregation reduces the 
B-concentration near the STI edges. If the active area of the device is nar­
row enough, boron segregation would reduce the boron concentration sig­
nificantly even at the center of the channel [19]. Further, during the silicon 
processing step, ion implantation of the dopant impurities dislodges silicon 
atoms from their lattice sites, which are known as interstitial silicon atoms. 
A subsequent annealing step repairs some of these lattice damages. The 
remaining interstitial silicon atoms play an active role in the diffusion of 
the dopant impurities. High concentrations of these silicon atoms enhance 
boron diffusion. This phenomenon is known as transient-enhanced diffu­
sion (TED). The TED process leads to a substantial decrease of the boron 
concentration in proximity to the STI edge relative to the center of the chan­
nel [20]. Again if the device is narrow enough, the decrease in the boron 
concentration may take place significantly even at the center of the channel. 
The doping profile along the channel width is expressed as [22]
	
N z
N
N
erf
z
W
Dt
erf
z
W
Dt
N
2
2
2
2
2
a
t
t
( ) =
−




+





−
−











+
	
(6.8)
1.5
1
0.5
00
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Gate-to-source Voltage, Vgs (V)
Ψs (V)
ΨSM 
ΨST 
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
FIGURE 6.21
Simulation results showing variation of ψST and ψSM with Vgs (Vsb = 0V).

259
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
where Nt is the doping concentration at the trench oxide sidewalls, Na  is the 
substrate doping concentration, and 
Dt
2
 is the diffusion length.
Figure 6.22 shows the plot of the peak concentration against channel width. 
The figure shows that for large widths, the doping concentration of the chan­
nel is equal to Na. However, as the width decreases, the peak concentration in 
the channel is reduced due to dopant redistribution.
Figure 6.23 shows the plot of the INWE on the threshold voltage of bulk STI 
MOSFETs with 
=
L
nm
40
eff
. Different devices with varying channel widths 
are created using Sentaurus Structure Editor. The source and drain regions 
are doped with arsenic. A Gaussian doping profile is considered with a peak 
concentration of 1 × 1019 cm–3. The peak concentration, peak position, and con­
centration value at the junction depth are specified to the simulator. The chan­
nel is doped with boron with a maximum concentration of 3 × 1018 cm–3. An 
analytical doping profile, identical to that described by Equation (6.8) has been 
defined to incorporate the phenomenon of dopant redistribution. The specified 
parameters are maximum concentration and inflection point. The constructed 
structure is subsequently meshed and simulated using the respective tools. 
The meshing strategy ensures that fine elements are generated for the critical 
parts of the device (active region) and coarse elements for the bulk regions.
6.8  Advanced Device Structures
Scaling of MOSFETs has led to several serious limitations; for example, 
(1) device performance compromised due to undesirable effects such as 
threshold voltage roll-off, drain-induced barrier lowering (DIBL), degraded 
× 1018
3.4
3.2
3
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Width, W (micron)
Peak Doping Concentration, Nc (/cu.cm)
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
FIGURE 6.22
Variation of the peak channel doping concentration with the channel width.

260
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
subthreshold slope; (2) technological barriers like the manufacturing of 
optical equipment required for the reduction in the wavelength of light for 
lithography procedures; (3) gate-oxide thickness reduction leading to quan­
tum mechanical tunneling, which in turn necessitates the introduction of 
gate dielectric materials with high dielectric constants so that the physical 
thickness of the dielectric can be increased; and (4) high doping between 
the source and drain which increases the parasitic capacitance between the 
source, drain, and the substrate.
All of the above led to the development of the silicon-on-insulator (SOI) 
technology.
6.8.1  SOI Structures
SOI structures are of two types. These are partially depleted SOI (PDSOI) 
and fully depleted SOI (FDSOI). In PDSOI, the silicon film is larger than 
the sum of the gate depletion widths from the front and back ends. These 
devices exhibit a floating body effect (kink effect). This occurs when carriers 
of the same type as the body, generated by impact ionization near the drain, 
are stored in the floating body. This alters the body potential and hence the 
threshold voltage. A way to minimize this is to use body contacts. However, 
the body effect advantage is lost in that case. In FDSOI, the silicon film is 
thin enough that the entire film is depleted before the threshold condition 
is attained. These devices exhibit a steeper subthreshold slope as compared 
to the bulk devices. The FDSOI devices were found to perform better than 
the PDSOI.
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
Width, W (log scale)
Treshold Voltage Change, ∆VthINWE (mV)
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
–100
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
Vsb = 0 V
Vsb = 0.5 V
FIGURE 6.23
Inverse narrow width effect (INWE) on the threshold voltage versus channel width (Vgs = 1.0V, 
Vds = 0.05 V, Vsb = 0.5 V).

261
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
Figure 6.24 shows the schematic of a conventional thin film SOI MOSFET 
structure. Most of the electric field lines as shown in Figure 6.24 from the 
source and drain propagate through the buried oxide (BOX) layer before 
reaching the channel layer. The SOI structures exhibited lower leakage, low 
junction capacitance, low latch-up, and better subthreshold swing [23–25]. 
The performance of these devices in regard to SCEs depends on the silicon 
film thickness, BOX layer thickness, and doping concentrations [26].
In the deep sub-micron regime, the merits offered by the FDSOI devices 
diminished, and then double gate structures were found to be more promising.
6.8.2  Double Gate (DG) MOSFETs
The DG-MOSFETs are very attractive to improve the performance of CMOS 
devices and to overcome some of the difficulties faced in the downscaling of 
MOSFETs into the deep sub-micron regime. Threshold voltage roll-off, DIBL, 
off-state leakage, etc., are significantly reduced; hence, these devices are pre­
ferred in nanoscale circuits [27–29].
Figure 6.25 shows the schematic diagram of a typical DG-MOSFET. It con­
sists of a silicon slab sandwiched between two oxide layers. A metal or a poly­
silicon film contacts the two oxide layers [26]. These act as the front and back 
gate electrodes that create inversion layers near the two Si-SiO2 interfaces 
Gate
Drain
Source
Buried oxide (BOX)
Silicon substrate
(Back gate)
FIGURE 6.24
Conventional thin film SOI MOSFET.
Gate
Gate
Drain
Source
FIGURE 6.25
A typical DG-MOSFET.

262
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
upon the application of a suitable bias. Thus there are two MOSFETs that 
share the same source, drain, and substrate.
The salient features of a DG-MOSFET are control of the SCEs by device 
geometry and not by doping (channel doping or halo doping) as done in 
bulk MOSFETs. The two gate electrodes jointly control the carriers, thereby 
screening the effect of drain field from the channel. Additionally, the thin 
silicon channel leads to a stronger coupling of the gate potential with the 
channel potential. The reduced SCEs lead to greater scalability than bulk 
MOSFETs. The undoped body (intrinsic channel) reduces mobility degrada­
tion by eliminating impurity scattering, thereby improving the carrier trans­
port. The random microscopic dopant fluctuations are also avoided [30]. The 
current drive (or gate capacitance) per unit area is increased [31].
The DG-MOSFETs are again of two types, symmetric DG-MOS and asym­
metric DG-MOS [23]. In the former, the two oxide thicknesses are the same, 
the two gates have the same flat-band voltage, and the gates are connected 
together. In the latter, the two oxide thicknesses are different.
Figure  6.26 shows the cross-section along the length of a DG-MOSFET 
structure as seen in the tool ‘Tecplot SV’ of TCAD.
Figure  6.27 shows the subthreshold characteristics of the simu­
lated DG-MOSFET for two drain biases. The lower curve corresponds 
to 
=
V
V
0.05
ds
, and the upper one corresponds to 
=
V
V
0.5
ds
. The subthresh­
old swing for 
=
V
V
0.05
ds
 is calculated to be 75 mV/decade, and that for 
=
V
V
0.5
ds
 is 80 mV/decade.
Front gate
Front oxide
Back oxide
Back gate
Drain
Source
0
0.02
0.04
–0.04
–0.02
0
X[um]
Y[um]
0.02
0.04
FIGURE 6.26 (See color insert)
A typical DG-MOSFET structure as simulated in TCAD.

263
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
Figure  6.28 shows the DIBL effect as obtained from TCAD results. The 
DIBL coefficient is calculated to be –0.10. It is seen that the DG-MOSFETs 
show a steep subthreshold swing and a high drive current. However, the 
limitations of DG-MOSFETs in relation to how far it can be scaled come from 
the SCEs, such as threshold voltage roll-off and DIBL.
The DG-MOSFETS are associated with the following phenomena:
	
1.	The SOI-based DG-FinFETs exhibit self-heating effects [8] because the 
device is thermally insulated from the substrate by the BOX layer. 
This consequently alters the output characteristics of the device, 
especially in the sub-micron regime.
	
2.	Quantum mechanical effects: Due to the ultra thin nature of the silicon 
channels, quantization effects are seen. This affects the distribution 
and mobility of carriers [32].
	
3.	Volume inversion: As the silicon film is reduced, the inversion layer 
is formed not only near the two oxide interfaces, but the entire 
silicon film gets inverted. The carriers are no longer confined to 
the interfaces but are distributed throughout the entire silicon 
volume [26]. This phenomenon is found to increase the mobility 
of the carriers by reducing their scattering at the oxide and inter­
face traps.
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
10–6
10–7
10–8
0.0
0.2
0.4
Gate-to-source Voltage, Vgs (V)
Drain Current, Ids (A/µm)
0.6
0.8
1.0
Vds = 0.05 V
Vds = 0.50 V
FIGURE 6.27
Subthreshold characteristics of DG-MOSFETs for two different drain biases (Leff  = 65 nm).

264
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
	
4.	Misalignment of top and bottom gates: The DG-MOSFETs are difficult 
to fabricate; in particular, the achievement of a perfect vertical align­
ment of the top and the bottom gates poses a serious problem. Any 
misalignment between the gates leads to device performance degra­
dation due to overlap capacitance and loss in current drive [3].
6.9  Conclusion
The performances of MOSFETs in the sub-micron regime are limited 
by several physical phenomena such as the short channel effects along 
the channel length that mainly consist of the threshold voltage roll-off, 
drain-induced barrier lowering, and subthreshold slope degradation. 
Apart from these, mobility degradation, transconductance, and output 
resistance are also affected. The inverse narrow width effect along the 
channel width consists of the combined effect of gate fringing and dopant 
redistribution that leads to a threshold voltage roll-off. All of these effects 
have been studied for a typical bulk MOSFET with the help of the TCAD 
device simulator. Additionally, a typical double gate (DG) MOSFET has 
also been studied with TCAD. The TCAD studies reveal the device behav­
ior accurately.
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
00
0.1
0.2
0.3
Drain-to-source Voltage Vds (V)
DG-FinFET, L = 65 nm
Treshold Voltage, Vth (V)
0.4
0.5
0.6
FIGURE 6.28
The DIBL effect (L = 65 nm).

265
Study of Deep Sub-Micron VLSI MOSFETs through TCAD
References
	
1.	 International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, 2007.
	
2.	 Wong, H.S.P., Frank, D.J., Solomon, P.M., Wann, C.H.J., and Welser J.J., Nanoscale 
CMOS, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 87, no. 4, pp. 537–570, April 1999.
	
3.	Wong, H.S.P., Beyond the conventional transistor, IBM J. Res. Dev., vol. 46, 
no. 2/3, pp. 133–168, March/May 2002.
	
4.	 TCAD Sentaurus Manuals, Version C-2009.06, Synopsys Inc., Mountain View, CA.
	
5.	 Tsividis, Y.P., Operation and Modeling of the MOS Transistor, 2nd ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1999.
	
6.	 Taur, Y., and Ning, T.H., Fundamentals of Modern VLSI Devices, Cambridge 
University Press, United Kingdom, 1998.
	
7.	 Conde, A.O., Sanchez, F.J.G., Liou, J.J., Cerdeira, A., Estrada, M., and Yue, Y., A 
review of recent MOSFET threshold voltage extraction methods, Microelectronics 
Reliability, vol. 42, pp. 583–596, 2002.
	
8.	 Cheng, Y., and Hu, C., MOSFET Modeling and BSIM3 User’s Guide, Norwell, MA: 
Kluwer Academic, 2002.
	
9.	 Agrawal, B., De, V.K., and Meindl, J.D., Three-dimensional analytical subthresh­
old models for bulk MOSFETs, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 
2170–2180, December 1995.
	 10.	 Lin, S.C., Kuo, J.B., Huang, K.T., and Sun, S.W., A closed-form back-gate-bias 
related inverse narrow-channel effect model for deep-submicron VLSI CMOS 
devices using shallow trench isolation, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 47, no. 
4, pp. 725–733, April 2000.
	 11.	 Roy, K., Mukhopadhyay, S., and Mahmoodi-Meimand, H., Leakage current 
mechanisms and leakage reduction techniques in deep-submicrometer CMOS 
circuits, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 91, no. 2, pp. 305–327, February 2003.
	 12.	 Lau, W.S. et al., Anomalous narrow width effect in p-channel metal-oxide-semi­
conductor surface channel transistors using shallow trench isolation technol­
ogy, Microelectronics Reliability, vol. 48, pp. 919–922, June 2008.
	 13.	 Pandit, S., and Sarkar, C.K., Modeling the effect of gate fringing and dopant redis­
tribution on the inverse narrow width effect of narrow channel shallow trench 
isolated MOSFETs, 24th IEEE Annual Conference on VLSI Design, pp. 195–200, 2011.
	 14.	 Pandit, S., and Sarkar, C.K., Analytical modelling of inverse narrow width effect for 
narrow channel STI MOSFETs, International Journal of Electronics, vol. 99, no. 3, pp. 
361–377, 2012.
	 15.	 Pacha, C., Martin, B., von Arnim, K., Brederlow, R., Schmitt-Landsiedel, D., 
Seegebrecht, P., Berthold, J., and Thewes, R., Impact of STI-induced stress, 
inverse narrow width effect, and statistical VTH variations on leakage currents 
in 120 nm CMOS, ESSDERC, pp. 397–400, 2004.
	 16.	 Pandit, S., and Sarkar, C.K., A compact threshold voltage model for narrow 
channel nano-scale MOSFETs, IEEE International Conference on Computers and 
Devices for Communication, 2009, pp. 1–4.
	 17.	 Wang, R.V., Lee, Y.H., Lu, Y.L.R., McMahon, W., Hu, S., and Ghetti, A., Shallow 
trench isolation edge effect on random telegraph signal noise and implications 
for flash memory, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 2107–2113, 
September 2009.

266
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
	 18.	 Arnaud, F., and Bidaud, M., Gate oxide process impact on RNCE for advanced 
CMOS transistors, IEEE Proceedings of ESSDERC 2002.
	 19.	 Nouri, F., Scott, G., Rubin, M., and Manley, M., Narrow device issues in deep-
submicron technologies—The influence of stress, TED and segregation on 
device performance, IEEE Proceedings of ESSDERC 2000, pp. 112–115.
	 20.	 Ghetti, A., Benvenuti, A., Molteni, G., Albenci, S., Soncini, V., and Pavan, A., 
Experimental and simulation study of boron segregation and diffusion dur­
ing gate oxidation and spike annealing,Technical Digest of IEEE Electron Devices 
Meeting, pp. 983–986, 2004.
	 21.	 Dabrowski, J., Mussig, H.J., Zavodinsky, V., Baierle, R., and Caldas, M.J., 
Mechanism of dopant segregation to SiO2/Si (001) interfaces, Phys. Rev. B, vol. 
65, pp. 245–305, 2002.
	 22.	 Fung, S.K.H., Chan, M., and Ko, P.K., Inverse-narrow-width effect of deep sub-
micrometer MOSFETs with Locos isolation, Solid-State Electronics, vol. 41, no. 12, 
pp. 1885–1889, 1997.
	 23.	 Lu, H., and Taur, Y., An analytic potential model for symmetric and asymmetric 
DG MOSFETs, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1161–1168, May 2006.
	 24.	 Sadachika, N., Kitamaru, D., Uetsuji, Y., Navarro, D., Yusoff, M.M., Ezaki, T., 
Mattausch, H.J., and Mattausch, M.M., Completely surface-potential-based com­
pact model of the fully depleted SOI-MOSFET including short-channel effects, 
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 2017–2024, September 2006.
	 25.	 Trivedi, V.P., and Fossum, J.G., Scaling fully depleted SOI CMOS, IEEE Trans. 
Electron Devices, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2095–2103, October 2003.
	 26.	 Colinge, J.P., FinFETs and Other Multi-Gate Transistors, New York: Springer, 2008.
	 27.	 Jung, H.K., and Dimitrijev, S., Analysis of subthreshold carrier transport for 
ultimate DG MOSFET, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 685–691, 
April 2006.
	 28.	 Masahara, M. et al., Demonstration, analysis, and device design considerations 
for independent DG MOSFETs, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 
2046–2053, September 2005.
	 29.	 Iniguez, B., Fjeldly, T.A., Lazaro, A., Danneville, F., and Deen, M.J., Compact-
modeling solutions for nanoscale double-gate and gate-all-around MOSFETs, 
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 2128–2142, September 2006.
	 30.	 Wong, M., and Shi, X., Analytical I-V relationship incorporating field-dependent 
mobility for a symmetrical DG MOSFET with an undoped body, IEEE Trans. 
Electron Devices, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1389–1397, June 2006.
	 31.	 Colinge, J.P., Multiple-gate SOI MOSFETs, Solid-State Electronics, vol. 48, pp. 
897–905, 2004.
	 32.	 Trivedi, V.P., and Fossum, J.G., Quantum-mechanical effects on the threshold 
voltage of undoped double-gate MOSFETs, IEEE Electron Dev. Lett., vol. 26, no. 8, 
pp. 579–582, August 2005.

267
7
MOSFET Characterization for 
VLSI Circuit Simulation
Soumya Pandit
CONTENTS
7.1	
Introduction.................................................................................................269
7.2	
Device Models for Circuit Simulation.....................................................270
7.2.1	 Necessity of Device Models..........................................................270
7.2.2	 Definition and Categories of Device Models..............................271
7.2.3	 Commercially Used Compact Models.........................................272
7.3	
Threshold Voltage Characterization........................................................273
7.3.1	 Threshold Voltage Characterization for Long Channel 
MOS Transistor...............................................................................273
7.3.1.1	 Uniform Channel Doping...............................................273
7.3.1.2	 Vertical Channel Engineering........................................275
7.3.1.3	 Halo/Pocket Implantation..............................................277
7.3.2	 Threshold Voltage Characterization for Short Channel 
MOS Transistor...............................................................................278
7.3.2.1	 Short Channel Effect Reduction.....................................281
7.3.3	 Techniques for Threshold Voltage Extraction.............................282
7.3.3.1	 Constant Current Method...............................................282
7.3.3.2	 Extrapolation in the Linear Region Method................282
7.3.3.3	 Second Derivative Method.............................................282
7.3.4	 Simulation Results and Discussion..............................................282
7.3.4.1	 Simulation Setup..............................................................283
7.3.4.2	 Threshold Voltage Characterization with 
Substrate Bias Effect.........................................................283
7.3.4.3	 Threshold Voltage Characterization for Short 
Channel Transistors.........................................................283
7.3.4.4	 Threshold Voltage Extraction.........................................286
7.4	
I-V Characterization...................................................................................288
7.4.1	 Current Density Equations............................................................288
7.4.2	 Channel Inversion Charge Density..............................................290
7.4.3	 Carrier Mobility Degradation Model........................................... 291
7.4.4	 Carrier Velocity Saturation Model...............................................293

268
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
7.4.5	 Basic MOSFET I-V Model...............................................................294
7.4.6	 MOSFET I-V Model with Velocity Saturation.............................295
7.4.7	 Parasitic Source Drain Resistance................................................297
7.4.8	 Output Resistance...........................................................................298
7.4.9	 Subthreshold I-V Model.................................................................300
7.4.10	 Characterization of Poly-Silicon Gate Depletion Effect.............303
7.4.10.1	 Reduction of Gate-Source Voltage.................................303
7.4.10.2	 Effect on Threshold Voltage...........................................304
7.4.10.3	 Effect on Oxide Thickness..............................................305
7.4.10.4	 Electrical Oxide Thickness.............................................306
7.4.11	 Simulation Results and Discussion..............................................306
7.4.11.1	 Variation of Drain Current, Transconductance, 
and Output Resistance with Gate Voltage....................306
7.4.11.2	 Subthreshold Characteristics.........................................309
7.4.11.3	 Variation of Transconductance Generation 
Efficiency, Intrinsic Gain, Linearity, and Cutoff 
Frequency..........................................................................309
7.4.11.4	 Variation of Drain Current and Output Resistance 
with Drain Bias................................................................. 315
7.5	
Hot Carrier Effects Due to Impact Ionization......................................... 317
7.5.1	 Hot Carrier Injection (HCI)........................................................... 319
7.6	
Characterization of Gate Dielectric..........................................................320
7.7	
Capacitance Characterization................................................................... 321
7.7.1	 Capacitance Components in a MOS Transistor.......................... 321
7.7.2	 Characterization of Intrinsic Capacitances (Meyer’s 
Approach)........................................................................................322
7.7.2.1	 Intrinsic Capacitances in the Linear Region................323
7.7.2.2	 Intrinsic Capacitances in the Saturation Region......... 324
7.7.2.3	 Intrinsic Capacitances in the Subthreshold Region.... 324
7.7.2.4	 Intrinsic Capacitances in the Accumulation Region....325
7.7.2.5	 Charge-Based Approach.................................................325
7.7.2.6	 Effect of Poly-Silicon Gate Depletion Effect and 
Finite Inversion Charge Layer Thickness.....................326
7.7.3	 Characterization of Extrinsic Capacitances................................326
7.7.3.1	 Characterization of Fringing and Overlap 
Capacitances.....................................................................326
7.7.3.2	 Characterization of Junction Capacitances..................328
7.7.4	 Simulation Results and Discussion..............................................329
7.8	
Noise Characterization..............................................................................331
7.8.1	 Characterization of Thermal Noise in MOS Transistor............332
7.8.2	 Characterization of Flicker Noise in MOS Transistor...............334
7.8.2.1	 Physical Mechanisms of Flicker Noise.........................334
7.8.2.2	 Empirical Approach for Characterization of 
Flicker Noise.....................................................................335

269
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
7.1  Introduction
With the continual downscaling of metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) tran­
sistors to the sub-90 nm regime, several secondary issues related to the tran­
sistor device physics, hitherto considered to be insignificant, are found to 
play significant roles in circuit performances. The circuit designers therefore 
need proper understanding of the various parameters related to geometry 
as well as performances of a single MOS transistor and the effect of these on 
the performances of an overall very large scale integrated (VLSI) circuit. A 
detailed characterization of the MOS transistor device to be used by them 
for the design is therefore an essential requirement prior to the design task, 
especially in sub-90 nm design domain. The objective of this chapter is to 
present a comprehensive discussion on the characterization of sub-90 nm 
MOS transistor for VLSI circuit simulation purpose. The discussion is lim­
ited to conventional bulk MOS transistor only, because this has been the 
most widely used device for VLSI circuit simulation, considering the cost 
and expertise required for fabrication.
The pedagogical approach used in this chapter is that initially the various 
characteristics are discussed qualitatively. This is followed by introduction 
7.8.2.3	 Characterization of Flicker Noise through 
Physics-Based Model.......................................................335
7.8.3	 Simulation Results and Discussion..............................................339
7.9	
Statistical Characterization.......................................................................343
7.9.1	 Classification of Process Variability.............................................344
7.9.2	 Sources of Random Intra-Die Process Variations and Their 
Effects...............................................................................................344
7.9.2.1	 Random Discrete Dopant (RDD)...................................344
7.9.2.2	 Line Edge Roughness (LER)...........................................345
7.9.2.3	 Oxide Thickness Variation (OTV).................................346
7.9.3	 Characterization of Process Variability.......................................346
7.9.3.1	 Design Corner Approach................................................346
7.9.3.2	 Monte Carlo Simulation Approach...............................348
7.9.3.3	 Statistical Corner Approach...........................................348
7.9.4	 Simulation Results and Discussion..............................................348
7.9.4.1	 Statistical Characterization of RDD..............................349
7.9.4.2	 Statistical Characterization of Line Edge 
Roughness (LER)..............................................................349
7.9.4.3	 Statistical Characterization of OTV...............................354
7.9.4.4	 Statistical Characterization of Simultaneous 
Variations..........................................................................354
7.10	 Summary and Conclusion.........................................................................360
References..............................................................................................................360

270
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
of standard mathematical models. The use of these models in a BSIM4 com­
pact model (which is one of the most widely used industry standard compact 
models) is thereafter discussed briefly. The purpose of this chapter is to pres­
ent the primary important characteristics of VLSI metal-oxide-semiconductor 
field-effect transistor (MOSFET) to the integrated circuit (IC) designers in a 
manner such that they are aware of the internal workings of the SPICE simu­
lation tool. The readers are encouraged to refer to appropriate BSIM manuals 
and SPICE model user guides for the exact mathematical formulations and 
the complete modeling works. SPICE simulation results are provided to sup­
port the theoretical discussion, as required.
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. Section 7.2 emphasizes the 
importance of the use of device models for VLSI circuit simulation. The vari­
ous categories of device models and the publicly available device models 
are also discussed. Section 7.3 presents the detailed characterization of the 
threshold voltage of an n-channel enhancement mode transistor. Section 
7.4 discusses the I-V characteristics, supported with results. Sections 7.5 
and 7.6 discuss the impact ionization process and the gate dielectric model. 
Characterizations of MOS capacitances are discussed in Section 7.7. Noise 
and statistical characterization are discussed in Sections 7.8 and 7.9, respec­
tively. Finally, Section 7.10 presents a summary and conclusion of the chapter.
7.2  Device Models for Circuit Simulation
7.2.1  Necessity of Device Models
An outline of the IC simulation procedure is illustrated in Figure 7.1. The pro­
cedure starts with a set of desired specifications for the circuit to be designed. 
This acts as the input to the procedure. A particular topology of the circuit 
(transistor-level topology) is then selected by the designer. This choice is pri­
marily based upon the designer’s experience. The circuit is described either 
schematically or through a textual description, referred to as the netlist of 
the circuit. The circuit is subsequently analyzed through SPICE simulation 
tool. The SPICE simulation tool internally uses a set of device models for 
the components of the circuits and solves a set of network theory equations 
through standard numerical algorithms [1].
The performance parameters of the circuit are extracted and compared with 
the desired specifications. If the extracted parameters satisfy the desired specifi­
cations, the design is completed. Otherwise the simulation procedure is carried 
out iteratively either by changing the circuit description or circuit parameters 
and conducting further analyses until the specifications are satisfied.
From 1970 onward, SPICE has been the sole tool used by IC designers for 
circuit simulation. The development of this tool started at the University 

271
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
of California, Berkeley, in the late 1960s and continued until the 1990s. The 
commercial SPICE simulation tools used today by designers (e.g., HSPICE 
[Synopsys], SPECTRE [Cadence], ELDO [Mentor Graphics]) are all based upon 
the original SPICE simulation tool developed at the University of California. 
All of these simulators internally use appropriate device models for faithful 
description of behaviors of the devices used in the circuit. Thus the use of 
appropriate device models, not the internal algorithms, is responsible for the 
success of a circuit simulation program [2]. The accuracy and reliability of a 
circuit simulation process in predicting the device performances accurately 
depend upon the accuracy of the internal device models.
7.2.2  Definition and Categories of Device Models
Device models are defined as the link between the physical world (technol­
ogy, manufacturing, etc.) and the design world (device simulation, timing 
Desired Speciﬁcations
Circuit Description
Circuit Analysis
Circuit Simulation Process
Design Veriﬁcation
Device Models
OK
Designed Circuit
Not OK
FIGURE 7.1
Outline of the IC simulation flow.

272
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
simulation, etc.) of the semiconductor industry [3]. There are three categories 
of device models: numerical models, look-up table models, and analytical or 
compact models. The numerical models are based upon numerical solutions 
of carrier transport equations, device geometry, and doping profile-related 
equations. Although these techniques provide accurate results, they are 
computationally very intensive. Therefore these techniques are not suitable 
for simulation of large circuits. However, these may be used for exploration 
of novel device structures and associated performances. The TCAD device 
simulation tools as discussed in the earlier chapters are based upon this 
approach. The look-up table approach, on the other hand, uses measured 
device current and capacitances (and in some cases small signal parame­
ters) as functions of bias voltages and device sizes for characterizing device 
performances that are subsequently used for circuit simulation purposes. 
This approach is used when good physical models of any device are not 
available and is sometimes used in fast circuit simulators. The most popular 
approach that is used for circuit simulation purpose is the third approach 
(i.e., the use of analytical or compact models). A compact model is charac­
terized by a set of mathematical equations whose parameters are used as 
inputs to a SPICE-like circuit simulation program [3]. The physical compact 
model equations are derived based upon the physics of the device. These 
equations are expected to reproduce the device characteristics for differ­
ent device dimensions, range of temperature, process variations, etc. Good 
physical compact models are usually complex because they consider several 
physical phenomena. In order to make the equations simple so as to avoid 
the convergence problem of the circuit simulator, some approximations are 
sometimes judiciously made keeping the physics intact. Fitting parameters 
are often introduced to improve the accuracy of the model. Apart from 
accuracy, a desirable requirement from a compact model is some prediction 
capability. This helps the designers to predict any statistical behavior of the 
circuit and to explore circuit performances under migrated technology.
7.2.3  Commercially Used Compact Models
The development of a physical compact model for a MOS transistor began in 
the 1970s. Since then, more than 100 models, including MOS 1, MOS 2, MOS 3, 
MOS 9, PCIM, Level 28, ISIM, BSIM1 (Berkeley Short Channel IGFET Model), 
BSIM2 and BSIM 3, BSIM 4, PSP (Pennsylvania State University’s Surface 
Potential Model), HiSIM (Hiroshima University STARC IGFET Model), and 
EKV (Enz-Krummenacher-Vittoz) have been reported. Out of them, BSIM3, 
BSIM 4 PSP, HiSIM, and EKV are mostly used in commercial circuit simulators. 
The basic idea behind the development of all of these models is to include exact 
physics-based analytical equations in the model structure and then use fitting 
parameters to calibrate the equations with measured results. The generations of 
compact models have evolved to include more and more physical effects of the 
transistor device and thus to make the models more and more accurate.

273
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
In order to ease the task of circuit designers for predicting the circuit per­
formances with technology generation, predictive technology model (PTM) 
has been developed by Zhao and Cao [4] based on physical models and early 
stage silicon data. The PTM of bulk CMOS is successfully generated for 130 nm 
to 32 nm technology nodes, with effective channel length as low as 13 nm. 
These have been used in the present chapter for device characterization.
7.3  Threshold Voltage Characterization
Accurate characterization of threshold voltage is one of the most important 
requirements for precise description of transistor behavior and the effect of 
such behavior on circuit performances. It may be noted that all the commer­
cially available compact models mentioned earlier accurately characterize this 
important quantity. Consequently, the SPICE simulation tool by using such 
models properly takes care of the effects of threshold voltages of the indi­
vidual MOS transistors on the circuit performances. However, it is essential 
for the designers to properly understand the behavior of this quantity under 
varying bias conditions and geometry of the device, at least in general, in 
order to intuitively justify the SPICE simulated performances of the circuits.
7.3.1  Threshold Voltage Characterization for 
Long Channel MOS Transistor
Throughout this chapter, the discussion is centered on n-channel enhance­
ment mode transistor. In general, the conclusion drawn for an n-channel 
MOS transistor equally holds true for p-channel MOS transistor, with rever­
sal of polarity of the bias voltages. Historically the source terminal is the con­
ventional voltage reference mostly due to the dominance of digital circuits 
where source is considered as the reference voltage terminal.
7.3.1.1  Uniform Channel Doping
The schematic diagram of a long channel MOS transistor with uniformly 
doped substrate is shown in Figure 7.2. The theoretical definition of thresh­
old voltage is based on the strong inversion condition. The threshold voltage 
is defined as the gate voltage when the surface potential or band bending 
reaches 
Φ
2
F  and the silicon charge (the square root) is equal to the bulk 
depletion charge for that potential [5]. This definition is valid for long chan­
nel MOS transistors. Based on the threshold voltage value, the operating 
region of a MOS transistor is broadly divided into three parts: First, if the 
applied gate bias is greater than the threshold voltage (VGS > VT), the inver­
sion charge density is larger than the substrate doping concentration and the 

274
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
transistor operates in a strong inversion region. In this region, drift current is 
the dominant carrier transport mechanism. Second, if the applied gate bias 
is much smaller than the threshold voltage (VGS > VT), the inversion charge 
density is smaller than the substrate doping concentration and the transis­
tor operates in a weak inversion or sub threshold region. In this region, the 
diffusion current is the dominant carrier transport mechanism. Last, if the 
applied gate bias is very close to the threshold voltage, the inversion charge 
density is close to the substrate doping concentration and the region of oper­
ation is called a moderate inversion region. In this region, both diffusion and 
drift currents are equally important.
The threshold voltage of a long and wide channel MOS transistor with 
uniform doping is given as [5]
	
=
+ Φ −
V
V
Q
C
2
T
FB
F
B
ox
	
(7.1a)
	
=
+ Φ +
ε
Φ
V
V
qN
C
2
4
T
FB
F
Si
A
F
ox
	
(7.1b)
In (7.1a) and (7.1b), VFB is the flat band voltage, Φ =
ln(
)
F
kT
q
N
n
A
i
 is the Fermi 
potential, NA is the uniform p-type substrate doping concentration, and Cox is 
the oxide capacitance per unit area. QB is the depletion charge per unit area. 
For NMOS transistor QB is negative, and for PMOS transistor QB is positive. 
With the application of substrate bias VBS (<0 for NMOS and >0 for PMOS), 
the bulk depletion charge region is widened and the threshold voltage is 
increased as given as [5]:
	
(
)
=
+ Φ +
ε
Φ −
V
V
qN
V
C
2
2
2
T
FB
F
Si
A
F
BS
Ox
	
(7.2a)
Channel length L
Depletion
region
p-substrate
B
n+
n+
D
S
Induced n-type channel
G
SiO2
FIGURE 7.2
Cross-sectional view of n-channel MOSFET.

275
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
This can be alternatively written as follows:
	
(
)
=
+ γ
Φ −
−
Φ
V
V
V
2
2
T
T
F
BS
F
0
	
(7.2b)
Here the quantity VT0 is referred to as the zero substrate bias large geometry 
threshold voltage. The factor
	
γ =
ε qN
C
2
Si
A
ox
	
(7.3)
is referred to as the body-effect parameter. The substrate sensitivity is 
defined as
	
= −
γ
Φ −
= −
ε
Φ −
dV
dV
V
q
N
C
V
2 2
2
2
2
T
BS
F
BS
Si
A
ox
F
BS
	
(7.4a)
At 
=
V
0
BS
, this is equal to
	
= −
ε
Φ
= −
ε
= −
= −
−
dV
dV
C
q
N
C
W
C
C
m
1
4
1
(
1)
T
BS
ox
Si
A
F
ox
Si
dm
dm
ox
	
(7.4b)
In (7.4b), m is referred to as the body-effect coefficient, Wdm is the width of the 
depletion region, and Cdm is the depletion capacitance.
This model is derived based on the assumption that the transistor is of 
long channel length and width and the substrate doping concentration is 
uniform. However, in current VLSI MOS transistors, the channel is doped 
non-uniformly in both vertical and lateral directions. These are collectively 
referred to as channel engineering. In addition, the channel lengths are 
very short. Therefore, the basic model needs to be modified. The follow­
ing sub-sections describe how the vertical and lateral channel non-uniform 
doping effects are incorporated in industry standard compact models.
7.3.1.2  Vertical Channel Engineering
In the process of making a VLSI MOS transistor, several ion implantation 
doping process steps are required to adjust the threshold voltage and to sup­
press the punch-through and hot-carrier effects. The regions underneath 
the interface are doped with various concentrations along the vertical direc­
tions. The schematic diagram of a VLSI MOS transistor using vertical chan­
nel engineering is shown in Figure 7.3(a).
A shallow implantation of channel dopants of the same type as substrate is 
designed to obtain the desired threshold voltage value, and another deep implan­
tation of channel dopants of the same type as substrate is designed to suppress 
the punch-through and drain-induced barrier lowering (DIBL) effect. A typical 
high-to-low doping profile in the vertical direction and the corresponding step 

276
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
function approximation are shown in Figure 7.3(b). With non-uniform vertical 
doping, the body bias coefficient γ becomes dependent on substrate bias.
Contrary to the uniform doping concentration NA, the doping concentra­
tion in the channel region is denoted by NCH and that in the deep substrate 
region is NSUB. Two body-effect parameters γ1 and γ2 are to be defined by 
substituting appropriate concentrations in (7.3). However, this makes the 
expression for threshold voltage difficult to compute. Therefore, a compact 
representation of threshold voltage in the presence of a non-uniform vertical 
doping profile as used in BSIM4 is given by [6]
	
(
)
=
+
Φ −
−
Φ
−
V
V
K
V
K V
2
2
T
T
F
BS
F
BS
0
1
2
	
(7.5)
In (7.5), K1 and K2 are the two key parameters responsible for characterizing 
the vertical non-uniform channel doping effects. The values of these coef­
ficients are determined by fitting (7.5) to measured threshold voltage data.
Lg
G
S
D
Spacer
1: Channel
2: Treshold voltage adjust
3: SCE adjust
4: Punch through control
1
2
3
4
B
Lext
TOX
(a)
Step
approximation
Doping proﬁle
NSUB
NCH
XT
Depth
Substrate Doping Concentration
(b)
FIGURE 7.3
(a) A MOS transistor illustrating vertical channel engineering. (b) High-to-low channel doping 
profile.

277
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
7.3.1.3  Halo/Pocket Implantation
For suppression of short channel effects, local high doping concentration 
regions near the source and drain junction edges are generally employed. 
This is known as lateral channel engineering or halo/pocket implanta­
tion. With this type of channel engineering, the doping concentration in 
the channel along the channel length becomes non-uniform. The schematic 
diagram of a VLSI MOS transistor using lateral channel engineering is 
shown in Figure 7.4(a). The lateral non-uniform doping with higher doping 
Spacer
DSD
SDE
Halo
L
Xj
Xjd
Lext
Lg
TOX
Gate G
Body B
(a)
Position Along the Channel
N (x)
NP
L
Lx
Lx
NP
NCH
(b)
FIGURE 7.4
(a) A MOS transistor illustrating lateral channel engineering. (b) Step doping profile approxi­
mating the variation of the channel concentration from source to drain side.

278
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
concentration near the source/drain regions results in an increase in the aver­
age doping concentration in the channel and in turn results in an increase in 
the threshold voltage. This is sometimes referred to as reverse short channel 
effect (RSCE), because it helps to compensate charge sharing effects from the 
source/drain fields [7].
The lateral non-uniform doping concentration is approximated by a step 
doping profile along the channel, as shown in Figure  7.4(b). The average 
channel doping is given by [7,8]
	
(
)
=
−
+
=
+
−



≅
+




N
N
L
L
N
L
L
N
L
L
N
N
N
N
L
L
2
2
1
2
1
eff
CH
x
P
x
CH
X
P
CH
CH
CH
PE0
	
	
(7.6)
In (7.6), NP is the pocket concentration. LPE0 is a fitting parameter extracted, 
whose value is to be extracted from the measured data. With the introduction 
of lateral doping, the threshold voltage model in (7.5) is modified as follows [8]:
	
(
)
=
+
Φ −
−
Φ
+
−
+
+
−




Φ
V
V
K
V
L
L
K V
K
L
L
2
2
1
1
1
2
T
T
F
BS
F
PEB
BS
PE
F
0
1
2
1
0
	
(7.7)
In (7.7) the following BSIM4 model parameters are identified:
• K1 and K2 model the effects of a non-uniform vertical channel dop­
ing profile on threshold voltage.
• LPE0 and LPEB model effects of non-uniform lateral channel doping 
profile on threshold voltage. LPEB models VT(VBS) dependence.
• At zero substrate bias, only the term LPE0 represents lateral non-unifor­
mity, and as the channel length is reduced, due to the fourth term, the 
threshold voltage increases. This is significant for a short channel MOS 
transistor.
7.3.2  Threshold Voltage Characterization for 
Short Channel MOS Transistor
The threshold voltage of a long channel device is found to be independent 
of the channel length and the applied drain voltage. However, in short chan­
nel devices, it has been experimentally found that the threshold voltage of a 
MOS transistor decreases as the channel length is reduced or the drain bias 
is increased. This effect is known as the short channel effect [5,7]. In addi­
tion, the dependence of the threshold voltage on the body bias becomes weak 
as the channel length is reduced.

279
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
The long channel theory of MOS transistor is based upon the assumption 
that the depletion charge underneath the gate is controlled by the vertical 
electric field due to the applied gate bias. However, in a short channel device 
the channel length is comparable to the MOS depletion width in the vertical 
direction, and the source-drain potential has a significant effect on the band 
bending over a major portion of the device. The earlier assumption related 
to long channel device does not remain valid for short channel devices. The 
depletion charge under the gate is actually induced by the gate together with 
the source and the drain. Therefore, the channel charge may be considered 
to be shared by the gate as well as the source and drain. This is illustrated in 
Figure 7.5(a). Consequently, smaller gate voltage is required to induce inver­
sion in short channel MOS transistors compared to long channel transistors. 
Lg
Gate
Gate oxide
n+ drain
n+ source
Depleted by drain
Depleted by source
Body
L
(a)
0.25
25 mV
Surface Potential
Curve C: L = 1 µm
Vds = 5 V
Curve B: L = 1 µm
                      Vds = 0.5 V
Curve A: L = 6 µm
Vds = 0.5 V
0.5
0.75
0.9
y/L
(b)
FIGURE 7.5
(a) Sharing of gate depletion charge by source and drain. (b) Variation of surface potential to 
lateral distance (normalized to the channel length L) for three different cases highlighting the 
reduction of the source-drain potential barrier for lower channel length and higher drain bias.

280
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
This leads to a smaller value of threshold voltage in short channel transis­
tors compared to long channel transistors. This approach of explaining short 
channel effect is referred to as the charge sharing approach [7].
The decrease in the threshold voltage due to the reduction of channel length 
and increase in the drain bias can be explained by considering the surface 
potential. As the channel length decreases and the drain bias increases, the 
potential barrier (p-type region) between the source and the drain for the 
carriers (electrons) is lowered. Hence, less gate voltage is required to bring 
the surface potential to Φ
2
F.
In effect the threshold voltage is lowered. This is called DIBL [5,7]. The con­
cept of DIBL is explained in Figure 7.5(b), illustrating the surface potential 
plots along the channel for three different (long and short channel) devices 
[5]. It is observed that with small channel length and high drain bias, the 
potential barrier between the source and the drain is the lowest.
The short channel effect in threshold voltage is incorporated in a BSIM4 
compact model as follows [8]:
	
(
)
=
+
Φ −
−
Φ
+
−
+
+
−




Φ
+
V
V
K
V
L
L
K V
K
L
L
V
2
2
1
1
1
2
T
T
F
BS
F
PEB
BS
PE
F
T
0
1
2
1
0
	
(7.8)
In (7.8), ΔVT represents the reduction of threshold voltage due to short chan­
nel effect. A simple and accurate model, derived in [9] is
	
(
)
= −
−ψ
+
−
V
V
V
[2(
)
]
2cosh
1
T
bi
s
DS
L
l
eff
t
	
(7.9a)
Through several approximations, (7.9a) reduces to [7]
	
= −
−ψ
+
−
V
V
V
e
[3(
)
]
T
bi
s
DS
L
lt 	
(7.9b)
In (7.9a) and (7.9b), Vbi is built-in potential of the source/drain (S/D) junction. 
This is given by
	
=




V
kT
q
N
N
n
ln
bi
DEP
SD
i
2
	
(7.10)
In (7.10), NDEP is the channel concentration at the edge of the depletion bound­
ary, and NSD is the source-drain doping concentration. In (7.9a), lt represents 
the characteristic length given as
	
=
ε
ε η
l
t W
t
Si ox
dm
ox
	
(7.11)

281
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
In (7.11), Wdm/η represents the average depletion width in the channel. In 
order to improve the flexibility of the model equations over different tech­
nology generations, several fitting parameters are introduced. The following 
equations are used in BSIM4 to represent SCE and DIBL, respectively [8]
	
(
) = −
⋅
−
−ψ
V
SCE
DVT
DVT
V
0.5
0
cosh(
1
)
1
[
]
T
L
l
bi
s
eff
t
	
(7.12)
The characteristic length is given by
	
(
)
=
ε
ε
+
⋅
l
t W
DVT
V
1
2
t
Si ox
dm
ox
BS 	
(7.13)
The DIBL effect is modeled in BSIM as follows [8]:
	
(
)
(
)
= −
⋅
−
+
⋅
V
DIBL
DSUB L
l
ETA
ETAB V
V
0.5
cosh(
/ )
1
0
T
eff
t
BS
DS
0
	
(7.14)
	
=
ε
ε
l
t W
t
Si ox
dm
ox
0
	
(7.15)
	
=
ε ψ
W
qN
2
dm
Si
s
DEP
	
(7.16)
In these, DVT0, DVT1, DVT2, DSUB, ETA0, and ETAB are the SPICE BSIM4 
model parameters whose values are to be extracted from measured data. 
DVT2 and ETAB account for the body bias effect on short channel effect and 
DIBL, respectively.
7.3.2.1  Short Channel Effect Reduction
It is observed that the threshold voltage roll-off is dependent upon the 
characteristic length lt as defined in (7.11). It is well known that the roll-off 
decreases with reduction in S/D junction depth Xj. However, this term has 
not been included in the model. Following Brews’ approach [10], the charac­
teristic length is redefined as
	
(
)
∝
l
X t W
t
j ox
dm
2
1/3 	
(7.17)
Therefore, in order to have VT less sensitive to charge sharing and DIBL 
effect, X j, tox, and Wdm  should be reduced.

282
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
7.3.3  Techniques for Threshold Voltage Extraction
This sub-section outlines three commonly used approaches for extraction 
of the threshold voltage value from the measured drain current versus gate 
voltage transfer characteristics. A good review of these techniques including 
the background theory and others is provided in [11].
7.3.3.1  Constant Current Method
In the constant current method, the threshold voltage is evaluated as the 
value of the gate voltage, corresponding to a given arbitrary constant drain 
current IDS and drain voltage 
<
V
mV
100
.
DS
 A typical value for this arbitrary 
constant drain current is 
×
−
W
L
A
(
/
)
10
m
m
7
, where Wm and Lm are the mask 
channel width and length, respectively. Because of its simplicity, this is the 
most widely used method in industry. However, this method has a serious 
drawback of being totally dependent on the arbitrary chosen value of the 
drain current.
7.3.3.2  Extrapolation in the Linear Region Method
The extrapolation in the linear region method is another very popular 
method for extracting the threshold voltage from the measured transfer 
characteristics of a MOS transistor. Both the drain current and the linear 
transconductance are degraded significantly at high gate voltages because 
of the decrease of mobility with the increasing normal field. The technique 
consists of determining the gate voltage intercept (i.e., 
=
I
0
DS
) of the linear 
extrapolation of the 
−
I
V
DS
GS  curve at its maximum first derivative point (i.e., 
the point of maximum transconductance). This is referred to as the linearly 
extrapolated threshold voltage VON. VON  is obtained by subtracting V /2
DS
 
from the intercept. The main drawback of this method is that the maximum 
slope point is often slightly greater ∼
−
kT q
kT q
( 2
/
4
/ ) than the threshold volt­
age VT at ψ
= Φ
(inv)
2
s
F  due to mobility degradation effects and the presence 
of significant source and drain series parasitic resistances.
7.3.3.3  Second Derivative Method
In this method, the threshold voltage is determined as the gate voltage at which 
the derivative of the transconductance 
=
dg
dV
d I
dV
(
/
/
)
m
GS
D
GS
2
2
 is maximum.
7.3.4  Simulation Results and Discussion
In this sub-section the discussion on characterization of threshold voltage 
for VLSI MOS transistors is reviewed through SPICE simulation results. In 
the subsequent discussion considerably long channel width is considered 
so as to avoid the narrow channel width effect on the threshold voltage.

283
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
7.3.4.1  Simulation Setup
For all the simulation results provided in this chapter, conventional bulk 
NMOS transistor has been selected. A 45-nm technology node has been 
selected, and the drawn channel length of the transistor is taken to be 65 
nm, if not mentioned otherwise. The supply voltage is taken to be 1 V. The 
physical oxide thickness is 1.1 nm and the electrical oxide thickness is 1.75 
nm, considering poly-depletion effect and inversion layer thickness. The 
substrate is uniformly doped with concentration equal to 3.24E18/cm3. The 
source/drain concentration is 2E20/cm3. The source/drain junction depth 
is 14 nm. The HSPICE simulation tool has been used to obtain all the simu­
lation results, with BSIM4 as the compact model. The model parameters 
of the corresponding predictive technology model [4] have been taken for 
simulation purposes.
7.3.4.2  Threshold Voltage Characterization with Substrate Bias Effect
The variation of threshold voltage of a large geometry MOS transistor 
=
=
µ
W
L
m
(
10
) is shown in Figure 7.6(a). It is observed that the threshold 
voltage increases from its zero substrate bias value as the substrate voltage is 
increased. The value of zero substrate bias long geometry threshold voltage 
VT0  as observed from Figure 7.6(a) is 0.466 V. The threshold voltage variation 
with substrate bias follows (7.5). Noting the values of the necessary model 
parameters from the model file, the theoretical curve is drawn and com­
pared with the simulation results. It is observed that the theoretical curve 
closely follows the simulation results.
The variation of the substrate sensitivity of threshold voltage with the sub­
strate bias is shown in Figure 7.6(b). The sensitivity obtained from theoretical 
formulation is also shown in Figure 7.6(b).
7.3.4.3  Threshold Voltage Characterization for Short Channel Transistors
The variation of threshold voltage with channel lengths of a MOS transistor 
is shown in Figure 7.7(a). It is observed that as the channel length is reduced 
from 100 nm onwards, the threshold voltage reduces. This is referred to 
as the threshold voltage roll-off. The effect is more pronounced when the 
applied drain bias is high. This is demonstrated in Figure 7.7(b). The amount 
of threshold voltage roll-off as observed from the simulation results for dif­
ferent substrate bias and drain bias are summarized in Table 7.1. It is observed 
that with the increase in substrate bias, the short channel effect increases. 
This is easy to understand considering the fact that with the increase in sub­
strate bias, the depletion width increases and consequently the short channel 
effect increases as suggested in Brew’s relation.
The DIBL effect is shown in Figure 7.8. The DIBL coefficient η is defined as 
the slope of the curve η =
(
)
(
)
=
−
=
(
)
V
V
V
V
V
V
1
0.1
0.9
T
DS
T
DS
. From simulation results, its 

284
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
0.66
VDS = 50 mV
VGS = 1 V
Teoretical
Simulation
0.64
0.62
0.60
0.58
0.56
0.54
0.52
0.50
0.48
0.46
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
VBS (V)
VT (V)
–0.8
–1.0
(a)
Teoretical
Simulation
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
VBS (V)
–0.8
–1.0
–0.20
–0.19
–0.18
–0.17
–0.16
–0.15
–0.14
dVT /dVBS
VDS = 50 mV
VGS = 1 V
(b)
FIGURE 7.6
(a) Variation of threshold voltage with substrate bias for n-channel MOS transistor. (b) Substrate 
sensitivity of threshold voltage.

285
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
660
VDS = 50 mV
VBS = 0 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = –1 V
640
620
600
580
560
540
520
500
480
460
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
L (µm)
VT (mV)
–0.8
–1.0
(a)
VBS = 0 V
VDS = 1 V
VDS = 50 mV
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
L (µm)
VT (mV)
0.8
1.0
VBS = 0V
470
465
460
455
450
445
440
435
430
(b)
FIGURE 7.7
(a) Threshold voltage roll-off for low drain bias. (b) Simulation results showing that the thresh­
old voltage roll-off increases with increased drain bias.

286
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
value is found to be 0.0342, and the theoretical value as calculated from the 
model discussed earlier is 0.0346.
7.3.4.4  Threshold Voltage Extraction
The threshold voltage extraction method through extrapolation in the linear 
region method is shown in Figure 7.9 and that through the second derivative 
method is shown in Figure 7.10. The threshold voltage as extracted from the 
constant current method, linear extrapolation method, and second deriva­
tive method for low drain bias and different substrate bias are summarized 
TABLE 7.1
Amount of Threshold Voltage Roll-Off at Low and High Drain Bias 
for Different Substrate Bias
VDS = 50 mV
VDS = 1V
Roll-Off
VBS = 0 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = –1 V
VBS = 0 V
ΔVT(mV)
1.55
1.70
1.86
32.16
VGS = 1 V
L = 65 nm (VBS = 0 V)
L = 65 nm (VBS = –0.5 V)
L = 65 nm (VBS = –1 V)
L = 1 um (VBS = 0 V)
640
620
600
580
560
540
520
500
480
440
420
460
0.0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
VDS (V)
VT (mV)
–0.8
–1.0
FIGURE 7.8
Simulation results illustrating the DIBL effect.

287
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
VDS = 50 mV
VBS = –1 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = 0 V
2.0 m
1.8 m
1.6 m
1.4 m
1.2 m
1.0 m
800.0 µ
600.0 µ
400.0 µ
0.0
–200.0 µ
200.0 µ
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
VGS (V)
ID (A)
0.8
1.0
FIGURE 7.9
Threshold voltage extraction: extrapolation in the linear region method.
VDS = 50 mV
VBS = –1 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = 0 V
25.0 m
20.0 m
15.0 m
10.0 m
5.0 m
0.0
–5.0 m
–10.0 m
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
VGS (V)
dgm/dvGS (s/v)
0.8
1.0
FIGURE 7.10
Threshold voltage extraction: second derivative method, evaluated at VDS = 50 mV.

288
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
in Table 7.2. For the constant current method, the constant current is taken to 
1 μA, the channel width is 10 μm and the channel length is 65 nm.
7.4  I-V Characterization
Precise knowledge of the I-V characteristics of a MOS transistor is a basic 
requirement for a good VLSI designer. The fundamental current transport 
equations are introduced, followed by channel charge, mobility, and veloc­
ity saturation effects. The I-V models for long and short channel devices are 
derived, followed by some advanced issues.
7.4.1  Current Density Equations
The total current density is the sum of the drift current density and the dif­
fusion current density, written as
	
=
µ ξ +
J
qn
qD dn
dx
n
n
n
	
(7.18a)
	
=
µ ξ −
J
qp
qD dp
dx
p
p
p
	
(7.18b)
The total conduction current density is thus 
=
+
J
J
J
n
p. The diffusion coef­
ficients Dn  and Dp  for electrons and holes are related to the corresponding 
mobilities µn and µp through Einstein’s relationship [5]. Thus the current 
densities are written as follows:
	
=
µ ξ +
µ
J
qn
kT
dn
dx
n
n
n
	
(7.18c)
	
=
µ ξ −
µ
J
qp
kT
dp
dx
p
p
p
	
(7.18d)
TABLE 7.2
Threshold Voltage Value Extracted through Different Methods
Extracted Value of the Threshold Voltage at 
VDS = 50 mV. W = 10 μm L = 65 nm
Method
VBS = 0 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = –1 V
Constant current
0.457 V
0.559 V
0.645 V
Linear extrapolation
0.409 V
0.502 V
0.583 V
Second derivative
0.462
0.558
0.636

289
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
The electric field ξ, which is defined as the electrostatic force per unit charge, 
is written as ξ = −ψ
d
dx
/
i
. It may be noted that gradual channel approximation 
has been assumed, according to which the variation of the electric field in the 
y-direction (along the channel) is much less than that in the x-direction (perpen­
dicular to the channel). With this the conduction current densities are written as
	
= −
µ
φ
J
qn
d
dx
n
n
n 	
(7.19a)
	
= −
µ
φ
J
qp
d
dx
p
p
p 	
(7.19b)
The quasi-Fermi potentials φn  and φp  are defined as [5]
	
φ ≡ψ −




kT
q
n
n
ln
n
i
i
	
(7.20a)
	
φ ≡ψ +




kT
q
p
n
ln
p
i
i
	
(7.20b)
The electron current density at a point (x,y) in the channel is
	
= −µ
J
x y
q
n x y dV
y
dy
( , )
( , )
( )
n
n
CS
	
(7.21)
Here VCS(y) is the quasi-Fermi potential. The total current at any point y 
along the channel is
	
∫
=
µ
I
y
qW
n x y dV
dy dx
( )
( , )
DS
n
CS
x
0
i
	
(7.22)
The integration is carried out from x = 0 to x = xi, the bottom of the inversion 
layer where ψ = ΦF. There is a sign change as the drain current flows in the 
negative y direction. The inversion charge density is defined as
	
∫
= −
Q
y
q
n x y dx
( )
( , )
inv
x
0
i
	
(7.23)
With this the drain to source current is given as
	
∫
( )
= µ
−
⋅
I
W
L
Q
V
dV
[
]
DS
n
inv
V
CS
0
DS
	
(7.24)

290
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
The quasi-Fermi potential 
=
V
y
( )
0
CS
 at y = 0(source) and 
=
V
y
V
( )
CS
DS  at y = 
L(drain).
7.4.2  Channel Inversion Charge Density
With reference to Figure 7.11, the following assumption is made. The inver­
sion layer in the channel of a MOS transistor is a sheet of charge and there is 
no potential drop or band bending across the inversion layer. This is referred 
to as the charge sheet approximation [5]. This inversion layer forms a capaci­
tor with the gate, the oxide being the dielectric. Also it forms another capaci­
tor with the body, the depletion layer being the dielectric. Thus the inversion 
layer is coupled with both gate and substrate of the transistor. The inversion 
charge density in strong inversion is given by
	
= −
−
−
+
−
Q
C
V
V
y
V
C
V
V
y
[
(
( )
)
(
( ))]
inv
ox
GS
CS
T
dm
BS
CS
0
	
(7.25)
Simplification of (7.25) leads to the following expression for inversion 
charge density:
	
= −
−
−
Q
C
V
mV
y
V
(
( )
)
inv
ox
GS
CS
T 	
(7.26)
where
	
≡
+ α =
+
=
+
m
C
C
t
W
1
1
1
3
dm
ox
ox
dm
	
(7.27)
In (7.26), 
=
−
=
−α
=
−
−
V
V
V
V
V
V
m
V
(
1)
T
T
C
C
BS
T
BS
T
BS
0
0
0
dm
ox
 has been taken 
using (7.4b).
Inversion layer
G
n+ D
tox
y
x
n+ S
– – – – –
xb
xt
–
Wdm
B
Depletion layer
FIGURE 7.11
Inversion layer forms one capacitor with the gate and another capacitor with the body. Surface 
mobility is a function of the average electric fields at the top and the bottom of the inversion 
charge layers.

291
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
As defined earlier, m is referred to as the body-effect coefficient.* The value 
of m is typically 1.2, however, it can be taken to be unity for simplified cal­
culations. Clearly the bulk charge factor is closely related to the body-effect 
parameter, as observed also from (7.4b).
The inversion charge density in the weak inversion region is given by [7]
	
 −
ε
Φ
ψ −Φ −




Q
q
N
U
V
U
4
exp
2
inv
Si
CH
F
T
s
F
CS
T
	
(7.28)
In (7.28), 
=
U
kT q
/
T
 is the thermal voltage, and NCH  is the effective channel 
concentration.
7.4.3  Carrier Mobility Degradation Model
In the inversion layer of a MOS transistor, the current flow is determined by 
the surface mobility, whose value is much lower than the bulk mobility of the 
carriers. This is because of several mechanisms of scattering, primarily the 
phonon or the lattice scattering, the coulombic scattering, and the surface 
roughness scattering [5]. For good quality interfaces, phonon scattering is 
the dominant mechanism at room temperature.
The surface mobility is a function of the average of the electric fields at the 
top and the bottom of the inversion charge layer. These fields are shown in 
Figure 7.11.
From Gauss’s law using the depletion layer as the Gaussian box, it is pos­
sible to write
	
(
)
ξ
= ε
=
−
−Φ
ε
Q
C
V
V
2
xb
B
Si
ox
T
FB
F
Si
	
(7.29a)
Considering the Gaussian box to be a box that encloses both the depletion 
and the inversion layer, we have
	
ξ
=
+
ε
Q
Q
xt
B
inv
Si
	
(7.29b)
From (7.29a) and (7.26), we have, after substitutions,
	
(
)
ξ
= ε
−
−Φ
C
V
V
2
xt
ox
Si
GS
FB
F 	
(7.29c)
It is to be noted that the effect of the lateral field is ignored and m = 1 for simplicity.
*	 Some authors refer to this as the bulk-charge factor.

292
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
The average electric field is defined as
	
ξ
=
ξ
+ ξ
1
2 (
)
eff
xb
xt
	
(7.30)
Substituting from (7.29a) and (7.29c), and after some simplifications for n+ 
poly-gate n-channel MOS transistor
	
ξ
=
+
+
V
V
V
t
0.2
6
eff
GS
T
ox
	
(7.31)
Physically, ξeff means the average electric field experienced by the carriers in 
the inversion layer. The dependence of the surface mobility of the carriers on 
this average electric field and hence on the gate bias is given by the following 
empirical relationship [3]:
	
(
)
µ =
µ
+
ξ
ξ
υ
1
s
0
eff
0
	
(7.32)
In (7.32), µ0 is the low field surface mobility, ν is a constant whose value is 
~1.85 for electrons at the surface, and ~1.0 for holes at the surface. ξ0 is the 
critical electric field (~0.9 MV/cm for electrons at surface and ~0.45 MV/cm 
for holes at the surface). The model proposed in (7.32) fits experimental data 
well, but because it involves a power function, it is difficult to integrate the 
model in a circuit simulation program. A Taylor series expansion of (7.32) 
and retaining only up to three terms, the following expression for the verti­
cal field mobility degradation model is derived:
	
(
)
(
)
µ =
µ
+
+
+
+
U
U
1
s
A
V
V
t
B
V
V
t
0
2
GS
T
ox
GS
T
ox
	
(7.33)
In (7.33), UA and UB are two parameters, whose values are to be extracted 
from the experimental I-V data. The substrate bias dependence of the mobil­
ity is incorporated by introducing another parameter UC in (7.33). With this, 
the model becomes [6]
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
µ =
µ
+
+
+
+
+
U
U V
U
1
.
s
A
C
BS
V
V
t
B
V
V
t
0
2
GS
T
ox
GS
T
ox
	
(7.34)
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
µ =
µ
+
+


+
+
+
U
U
U V
1
1
s
A
V
V
t
B
V
V
t
C
BS
0
2
GS
T
ox
GS
T
ox
	
(7.35)

293
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
These two different models are incorporated in SPICE simulator by using suit­
able mobility selector flags. It may be noted that all the mobility degradation 
models discussed above include the effect of vertical electric field only. It is 
observed that the mobility in a strong inversion region is a function of the 
gate bias. In the subthreshold region, the variation of Qinv  with VGS  cannot 
be modeled accurately. Therefore, μs becomes constant in the subthreshold 
region.
7.4.4  Carrier Velocity Saturation Model
Carrier velocity is another important physical phenomenon that critically 
affects the I-V characteristics of a short channel VLSI MOS transistor. If the 
lateral electric field is small, the drift velocity of the carriers is given by
	
= µ ξ
vd
s
y	
(7.36)
In (7.36), µs is the surface mobility and is independent of the lateral field ξy. 
However, as the lateral field ξy becomes high, the carrier velocity no longer 
follows (7.36). With the increase of the lateral field, the kinetic energy of the 
carrier increases. When the energy of the carrier exceeds the optical phonon 
energy, an optical phonon is generated by the carrier, and in this process 
the carrier loses its velocity significantly. Consequently, the kinetic energy 
and therefore the drift velocity of the carriers cannot exceed a certain value. 
This limiting velocity is called the saturation velocity. The vd-ξy relationship 
is illustrated in Figure 7.12. An accurate model for the drift velocity is given 
by [3]
	
(
)
=
µ ξ
+




ξ
ξ
α
α
v
1
d
s
y
1/
y
sat
	
(7.37)
Lateral Field (×104 V/cm)
Carrier Velocity (cm/s)
FIGURE 7.12
Carrier velocity saturation.

294
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
In (7.37), α = 2 for electrons and α = 1 for holes. ξsat is the critical electric field 
at which the carrier velocity becomes saturated and is linked with the satu­
ration drift velocity of the carrier as ξsat = 2vdsat/µs. For electrons, vdsat varies 
between ~6–10 × 104 m/s and that for holes between ~4–8 × 104 m/s. The model 
presented in (7.37) fits experimental data well but suffers from the drawback 
that it is computationally difficult to be incorporated in any circuit simulation 
program. In BSIM, a piece-wise velocity-field relationship is thus suggested. 
This is as follows [6]:
	
= µ ξ
+
ξ < ξ
ξ
=
µ
=
ξ ≥ξ
ξ
ξ
v
v
v
v
1
2
d
s
y
y
sat
sat
dsat
s
d
dsat
y
sat
y
sat
	
(7.38)
This model is in accordance with the experimental data.
7.4.5  Basic MOSFET I-V Model
Substituting (7.26) in (7.24) and carrying out the simple integration, we get 
the following expression as the basic MOSFET I-V model:
	
= µ
−
−




I
W
L C
V
V V
m V
(
)
2
DS
ns
ox
GS
T
DS
DS
2
	
(7.39)
The following observations are made from (7.39):
• The drain current is proportional to the channel width W, surface 
electron mobility µns, lateral electric field VDS/L, and the average 
inversion charge density 
−
−
C
V
V
mV
(
/2)
ox
GS
T
DS
.
• When the applied drain bias is small, the term V /2
DS
2
 can be 
neglected so that the drain current is linearly proportional to 
the drain bias VDS , which means that the transistor is acting as 
a resistor.
• As the drain bias increases, the average inversion charge density 
decreases and dI
dV
DS
DS  decreases. By differentiating (7.39) w.r.t VDS and 
putting equal to 0, we get
	
= µ
−
−
=
=
=
−
dI
dV
W
L C
V
V
mV
V
V
V
V
m
[(
)
]
0
at V
DS
DS
ns
ox
GS
T
DS
DS
DSsat
DSsat
GS
T
	
(7.40)

295
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
• The drain current that flows when the drain bias is saturated is 
referred to as the drain source saturation current. This is given as
	
(
)
=
µ
−
>
I
W
mL C
V
V
V
V
2
DSsat
ox
ns
GS
T
DS
DSsat
2
	 (7.41)
• Substituting 
=
−
VDSsat
V
V
m
GS
T  for V
y
( )
CS
 in (7.26), it is found that the 
inversion charge disappears at the drain side. This phenomenon is 
referred to as pinch-off. After the pinch-off region in the channel, 
there exists a depletion region. The electrons after reaching the 
pinch-off region are swept down by the drain bias and thus constant 
current flows, which is given by (7.41).
• Equations (7.39) and (7.41) form the basic I-V model for a long channel 
MOS transistor. Because of its simplicity, these equations are widely 
used by the designers for hand calculations. In addition, these are 
used in first-generation SPICE models [3].
• The transconductance parameter is defined as
	
=
=
µ
g
dI
dV
C
W
L I
2
m
DS
GS V
ns
ox
DS
DS
	
(7.42)
	
	 It is observed that when a MOS transistor operates in the strong 
inversion region, the transconductance is proportional to the square 
root of the drain current.
7.4.6  MOSFET I-V Model with Velocity Saturation
Assuming the inversion charge density to be given by (7.26), the drain cur­
rent from (7.24) is
	
∫(
)
= µ
−
−
+ ξ
I
C
W
L
V
mV
V
1
DS
ns
ox
GS
CS
T
dV
dy
dV
dy
V
1
0
CS
sat
CS
DS
	
(7.43)
In (7.43), the velocity saturation effect given by (7.38) has been assumed and 
ξ =
y
dV
dy
CS . Performing the simple integration, we arrive at the following 
model for the I-V characteristics:
	
= µ
+
−
−




ξ
I
C
W
L
V
V V
m V
1
1
(
)
2
DS
ns
ox
V
L
GS
T
DS
DS
2
DS
sat
	
(7.44)

296
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Comparing (7.44) and (7.39), we see that
	
(
)
=
+ ξ
I
I
long channel
7.39
1
DS
DS
V
L
DS
sat
	
(7.45)
Thus the effect of velocity saturation is to reduce the long channel drain cur­
rent by the factor + ξ
1
V
L
DS
sat . When VDS is small or L is large, this factor reduces 
to 1 (i.e., velocity saturation becomes negligible). The drain current model in 
(7.44) is valid before the carrier velocity saturates (i.e., in the linear or triode 
region).
If the drain voltage (and hence the lateral electric field ξy) is sufficiently 
high, the carrier velocity near the drain saturates. At this stage, the channel 
may be considered to be split into two portions: one adjacent to the source 
where the carrier velocity is field dependent, and the other near the drain 
where the carrier velocity is saturated to vdsat. At the junction between these 
two portions, the channel voltage is VDSsat , and the lateral electric field is ξsat. 
Therefore, the saturation drain current is given as
	
=
−
−
I
WC
V
V
mV
v
(
)
DSsat
ox
GS
T
DSsat
dsat 	
(7.46)
Comparing (7.46) with (7.44), we arrive at the following expression for satura­
tion drain voltage:
	
=
−
+ ξ
V
m
V
V
L
1
1
DSsat
GS
T
sat
	
(7.47)
The following observations are made from (7.46) and (7.47):
• When the channel length is large or the gate overdrive voltage 
−
V
V
(
)
GS
T  is low, ξ
>>
−
L
V
V
(
)
sat
GS
T , 
≈
−
V
V
V
m
(
)/
DSsat
GS
T
, we arrive 
at (7.40) (i.e., the long channel saturation drain voltage).
• For the very short channel transistor, ξ
<<
−
L
V
V
(
)
sat
GS
T , 
≈ξ
V
L
DSsat
sat
 
the drain current becomes
	
=
−
−
ξ
I
WC v
V
V
m
L
(
)
DSsat
ox
dsat
GS
T
sat
	
(7.48)
• Thus, IDSsat  is linearly proportional to 
−
V
V
(
)
GS
T , instead of the long 
channel quadratic dependence. In addition, IDSsat  is proportional to 
W but less sensitive to L.

297
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
• The classical long channel model suggests that drain current satu­
rates when the inversion charge density becomes zero, a phenomenon 
referred to as pinch-off. However, a more accurate description of the 
cause of drain current saturation is that the carrier velocity reaches 
its maximum value vdsat  at the drain. Thus instead of the pinch-off 
region, there is a velocity saturation region next to the drain where 
the inversion charge density given as 
=
−
−
Q
C
V
V
mV
(
)
inv
ox
GS
T
DSsat  
does not vanish.
• In order to increase IDSsat, there must be an increase in 
−
C
V
V
(
).
ox
GS
T  
This is achieved by reducing tox, minimizing VT, and increasing VGS. 
The limit of tox is determined by oxide tunneling leakage and reli­
ability. On the other hand, the lower limit of VT is determined by the 
leakage current in the OFF state. The maximum value of VGS is the 
supply voltage VDD, which is determined by concerns over power 
consumption and reliability.
• It may be noted that for low power analog circuit operations, gate 
overdrive voltage 
−
V
V
(
)
GS
T  is often taken to be nearly 0.1 V and 
assuming ξ
=
×
V cm
6
10
/
sat
4
 and L = 50 nm, ξ
>
−
L
V
V
(
)
sat
GS
T , so that 
the transistor exhibits some long channel characteristics and conse­
quently the long channel model may be used.
7.4.7  Parasitic Source Drain Resistance
It follows from (7.17) that for short channel effect immunity, the source/
drain junction depth must be reduced. Therefore, as shown in Figure 7.13, 
extra processing steps are performed to produce the shallow S/D junction 
extension between the deep junction and the channel. To further minimize 
dopant diffusion, the doping concentration in the shallow S/D extension 
SDE
DSD
S
RS
G
D
RD
Silicide
Silicide
Contact metal
Lext
TOX
Gate G
Body B
SDE
FIGURE 7.13
Source/drain series resistance in the SDE region.

298
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
is kept much lower compared to that in the deep S/D region. The shallow 
S/D extension along with light doping leads to parasitic S/D resistance. 
This is shown in Figure  7.13. The parasitic source and drain resistances 
are important device parameters that critically affect the MOS transistor 
performances. The drain current in the linear region with high gate bias 
is severely degraded due to this resistance, because channel resistance is 
lowest under such a bias condition. This is modeled in the presence of this 
resistance as follows:
	
=
+
I
I
1
DS
DS
R I
V
0
S DS
DS
0 	
(7.49)
In (7.49), IDS0 is the intrinsic current expression given by (7.44). RS is the para­
sitic source resistance. It appears from (7.49) that the effect of the series resis­
tance is lowest in the saturation region, where VDS is high. A second effect of 
this resistance is the increase of VDSsat, as follows:
	
=
+
+
V
V
I
R
R
(
)
DSsat
DSsat
DSsat
S
D
0
	
(7.50)
In (7.50), RS and RD are the parasitic source and drain resistances, respectively.
Reducing the value of these resistances is thus an important task for both 
circuit and device designers. A popular option is to cover the drain and 
source regions with a low resistivity material such as titanium or tungsten. 
This process is called silicidation and it effectively reduces the sheet resistance 
of the S/D regions by a factor of 10. Another option to be used by the circuit 
designer is to make the transistor wide. With a process that includes silicida­
tion and proper attention to layout, parasitic resistance may be reduced.
7.4.8  Output Resistance
A typical I-V curve and its output resistance are shown in Figure 7.14. The 
drain current in the output I-V curve is divided into two parts: (1) the linear 
region, in which the drain current increases with the drain voltage, and (2) 
the saturation region, in which the drain current weakly depends upon the 
drain voltage. However, the output resistance curve reveals more detailed 
information about the various physical mechanisms involved in the satura­
tion region. The output resistance is the reciprocal of the derivative of the I-V 
curve, and it is shown in Figure 7.14. The physical causes of such variation 
of the output resistance are the influences of drain voltage on the threshold 
voltage and a phenomenon called channel length modulation. The output 
resistance is divided into four regions.
The first region is the linear or triode region. In this region, the output 
resistance is very small because of the strong dependence of drain current 
on drain voltage. The other three regions belong to the saturation region, 

299
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
namely channel length modulation (CLM) region, DIBL region, and sub­
strate current induced body effect (SCBE) region. The SCBE results in a dra­
matic decrease in output resistance in the high drain bias region.
The drain current has a weak dependence on the drain voltage in the satura­
tion region. Therefore, by Taylor series expansion of IDS  at 
=
V
V
DS
DSsat, we have
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
=
+ ∂
∂
−
≡
+
−




I
V
V
I
V
V
I
V
V
V
V
V
I
V
V
V
,
,
(
,
)
1
DS
GS
DS
DS
GS
DSsat
DS
GS
DS
DS
DS
DSsat
DSsat
DS
DSsat
A
	
(7.51)
In (7.51) we have
	
=
=
−
−
I
I
V
V
Wv
C
V
V
mV
(
,
)
(
)
DSsat
DS
GS
DSsat
dsat
ox
GS
T
DSsat 	
(7.52)
	
=
∂
∂




−
V
I
I
V
A
DSsat
DS
DS
1
	
(7.53)
Here VA is called the Early voltage and is introduced for the analysis of out­
put resistance in the saturation region only. It is assumed that a specific Early 
voltage parameter can be computed independently for each of the different 
regions of the output characteristics, namely the CLM region, DIBL region, 
and SCBE region. These can be calculated analytically; however for accuracy 
it is better to determine them from measurement results.
Triode
3.0
1.5
0
1
2
VDS (V)
4
12
IDS (mA)
RO (kΩ)
CLM
DIBL
SCBE
FIGURE 7.14
Typical behavior of MOSFET output resistance.

300
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
It is instructive for IC designers to use the following set of equations for all 
sorts of hand analysis works.
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
= µ
+
−
−




<
=
−
−
+
−




>
=
ξ
−
ξ
+
−
ξ
I
C
W
L
V
V
V
m V
V
V
I
Wv
C
V
V
mV
V
V
V
V
V
V
L V
V
m
L
V
V
1
1
2
1
DS
ns
ox
V
L
GS
T
DS
DS
DS
DSsat
DS
dsat
ox
GS
T
DSsat
DS
DSsat
A
DS
DSsat
DSsat
sat
GS
T
sat
GS
T
2
DS
sat
	
	
(7.54)
The parameters VT and VA are to be extracted from measurements. For simplic­
ity, the value of the body-effect coefficient m may be considered to be unity.
7.4.9  Subthreshold I-V Model
When the applied gate voltage is smaller than the threshold voltage VT, 
ideally the drain current is zero. However, this does not happen in real 
devices and the drain current remains at a non-negligible level for several 
tenths of a volt below VT. This occurs because the inversion charge density 
does not drop to zero abruptly. Subthreshold characteristics are significant 
in scaled CMOS digital applications, because they describe how a transis­
tor switches OFF. Thus, the subthreshold region, immediately below VT, in 
which Φ < ψ < Φ
2
F
s
F is referred to as the weak inversion region. Contrary 
to the strong inversion region, in which the drift current dominates, 
subthreshold conduction is dominated by the diffusion current, arising 
due to a gradient in minority carrier concentration. In weak inversion, an 
n-channel MOS transistor operates as an n-p-n bipolar transistor, where 
the source acts as the emitter, the substrate as the base, and the drain as 
the collector.
The inversion charge density is repeated here from (7.28)
	
 −
ε
Φ
ψ −Φ −




Q
q
N
U
V
U
4
exp
2
inv
Si
CH
F
T
s
F
CS
T
	
(7.55)
In order to derive a relationship between ψ s  and VGS, the following expan­
sion is made [12]:
	
≈
+ ∂
∂ψ
ψ −
Φ
ψ =
Φ
ψ =
Φ
V
V
V
(
1.5
)
GS
GS
GS
s
s
F
1.5
1.5
s
F
s
F
	
(7.56a)

301
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
It is known that 
=
V
V
GS
T  when ψ = Φ
2
s
F. Therefore, from (7.56a), we have
	
=
+ ∂
∂ψ
Φ
ψ =
Φ
ψ =
Φ
V
V
V
0.5
T
GS
GS
s
F
1.5
1.5
s
F
s
F
	
(7.56b)
Therefore, from (7.56a) and (7.56b), we have
	
=
+ ∂
∂ψ
ψ −Φ
ψ =
Φ
V
V
V
(
2
)
GS
T
GS
s
s
F
1.5
s
F
	
(7.56c)
In addition, we have the following relationship:
	
=
+ ψ + γ
ψ
V
V
GS
FB
s
s 	
(7.57)
From (7.57),
	
∂
∂ψ
=
+
γ
ψ
ψ =
Φ
V
1
2
GS
s
s
1.5
s
F
	
(7.58)
Substituting the value of γ from (7.3) and considering,
	
= ε
C
W
dm
Si
dm
	
(7.59)
with Wdm as given in (7.16), the following relationship is achieved:
	
∂
∂ψ
≈
+
≡
V
C
C
n
1
GS
s
dm
ox
	
(7.60)
From (7.56c), (7.58), and (7.60), we get
	
=
+
ψ −Φ
V
V
n(
2
)
GS
T
s
F
	
(7.61)
(7.61) is widely used for developing compact models in the subthreshold 
region. Here n is referred to as subthreshold swing factor. It may be noted 
that the subthreshold swing factor n is not equal to the body-effect coeffient m, 
although very closely related. Substituting (7.61) in (7.55), we get
	
 −
ε
Φ
−
−




Q
q
N
U
V
V
nV
nU
4
exp
inv
Si
CH
F
T
GS
T
CS
T
	
(7.62)

302
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Substituting this in (7.24) and performing the simple integration, the follow­
ing expression for the subthreshold drain current is obtained:
	
= µ
ε
Φ
−




−
−








I
W
L
q
N
U
V
V
nU
V
U
4
exp
1
exp
DS
n
Si
CH
F
T
GS
T
T
DS
T
2
	
(7.63)
This can be alternatively written as
	
=
−




−
−








I
I
V
V
nU
V
U
exp
1
exp
DS
GS
T
T
DS
T
0
	
(7.64)
In (7.64), I0  is defined as
	
= µ
ε
Φ
I
W
L
q
N
U
4
Si
CH
F
T
0
0
2 	
(7.65)
In (7.64), n is referred to as the subthreshold swing factor. From experimental 
data it has been found that the subthreshold swing factor is a function of 
channel length and the interface state density. The interface traps located 
at the oxide-silicon interface exchange carriers with the silicon. The charge 
trapped in them depends on the value of the surface potential ψ s. This is 
modeled by an incremental capacitance in parallel with the depletion capaci­
tor. In addition, there are coupling capacitors between the drain/source and 
channel. With these considerations, the subthreshold swing factor as defined 
in (7.60) is modified in the BSIM compact model as follows [5,8]:
	
=
+
+
+
m
C
C
C
C
C
1
NFACTOR
dm
ox
it
DSC
ox
	
(7.66)
The parameter NFACTOR as introduced in (7.66) is for compensating any 
error while calculating the depletion width capacitance. The value of this 
parameter is close to unity. Cit is the interface trap capacitance per unit area. 
The capacitance CDSC is sensitive to the body bias as well as to the drain bias 
that is incorporated in the model as follows:
	
=
+
+
⋅
−
C
C
C
V
C
V
DVT
(
)
0.5
cosh(
1
)
1
DSC
DSC
DSCD
DS
DSCB
BS
L
lt
	
(7.67)
This should be included in (7.66) for computing the exact value of the sub­
threshold swing factor. The various capacitance parameters in (7.67) are to 
be extracted.

303
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
7.4.10  Characterization of Poly-Silicon Gate Depletion Effect
The use of poly-silicon gates is considered as an advantage in modern CMOS 
technology. This is because the source and drain regions can be self-aligned 
to the gate, thus eliminating parasitic from overlay errors. The poly-silicon 
is usually heavily doped to behave almost similar to that of metal. However, 
in many process technologies, it is not possible to dope the poly-silicon gate 
to arbitrarily high concentrations. Therefore, a thin depletion layer is formed 
at the interface between the poly-silicon and the gate oxide, with the applica­
tion of gate voltage.
7.4.10.1  Reduction of Gate-Source Voltage
Although the depletion region is very thin, its effect cannot be ignored in 
the deca-nanometer MOSFETs, because the gate oxide thickness is also very 
small. This is especially critical with the dual n+-p+ poly-silicon gate process 
in which the gates are doped by ion implantation. The effect of the presence 
of such a depletion region is that the voltage drop across the gate oxide and 
the substrate is reduced, because part of the gate voltage will be dropped 
across the depletion region in the gate. Consequently, the effective gate volt­
age is reduced.
Figure 7.15 shows an n-channel MOS transistor with a depletion region in 
the n+ poly-silicon gate. Let us assume that the doping concentration in the 
poly gate near the interface is Np, and the potential drop across the depletion 
region in the poly-silicon gate is ψ p. From the depletion approximation, the 
depletion charge density in poly-silicon is
	
=
ε
⋅
ψ
=
γ
ψ
Q
q
N
C
2
p
Si
p
p
ox
p
p 	
(7.68)
Poly gate depletion (width Wdp)
S
D
TOX
Inversion layer
B
Depletion in substrate (width Wdm)
n+
n+
+ + + + + + + + +
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
G
Lg
Np
n+
FIGURE 7.15
Poly gate depletion phenomenon.

304
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
In (7.68), ψp is the potential drop across the poly-silicon gate, and γp is given by
	
γ
=
ε
q
N
C
2
p
Si
p
ox
	
(7.69)
The potential balance equation is given by
	
=
+ ψ + ψ
+ ψ
V
V
GS
FB
p
ox
s 	
(7.70)
The potential drop across the oxide ψox  in (7.70) is given by
	
ψ
=
= γ
ψ
Q
C
ox
p
ox
p
p 	
(7.71)
While writing (7.71), it has been considered that the normal component of 
electrical displacement is continuous across the interface. From (7.70) and 
(7.71), the following quadratic equation can be derived:
	
−
−ψ −ψ
γ
−ψ =
V
V
(
)
1
0
GS
FB
s
p
p
p
2
2
	
(7.72)
Solving (7.72), and taking the positive root, the effective gate voltage is found 
to be
	
=
−ψ =
+ ψ + γ
+
−
−ψ
γ
−




V
V
V
V
V
2
1
4(
)
1
GS eff
GS
p
FB
s
p
GS
FB
s
p
_
2
2
	
(7.73)
Substituting the value of γ p  from (7.69) in (7.73),
	
(
)
=
+ ψ + ε
ε
+
ε
−
−ψ
ε
−






V
V
q
N t
V
V
q
N t
1
2
1
GS eff
FB
s
Si
p ox
ox
ox
GS
FB
s
Si
p ox
_
2
2
2
2
	
(7.74)
It is observed that if 
=
t
A
30
ox
0, the effective gate voltage can be reduced by 
up to 10% due to the poly-silicon gate depletion effect. In a BSIM compact 
model, Np  is denoted by NGATE  and is considered as a model parameter.
7.4.10.2  Effect on Threshold Voltage
Let us now investigate the effect of poly-silicon gate depletion on the thresh­
old voltage of a MOS transistor. The condition for charge balance is
	
= −
+
Q
Q
Q
(
)
G
B
inv 	
(7.75)

305
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
When the gate is positively biased, the positive charge on the gate is sup­
ported by the depletion charge due to the donor ions at the poly-Si/SiO2 
interface of an n+ poly-silicon gate. From (7.68),
	
ψ = γ
= γ
=
+
γ
Q
C
Q
C
Q
Q
C
(
)
p
p
p
ox
G
p
ox
B
inv
p
ox
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
	
(7.76a)
The potential drop across the oxide is
	
ψ
= Q
C
ox
G
ox
	
(7.76b)
Substituting the values of ψ p  and ψox  from (7.76a) and (7.76b) in (7.70),
	
=
+ ψ +
+
γ
−
+
V
V
Q
Q
C
Q
Q
C
(
)
(
)
GS
FB
s
B
inv
p
ox
B
inv
ox
2
2
2
	
(7.77)
Considering the fact that at threshold, ψ = Φ
2
s
F  and 
→
Q
0
inv
, the threshold 
voltage in the presence of the poly depletion effect is given by
	
=
+ γ
V
V
Q
C
T p
T
B
p
ox
0
0
2
2
2
	
(7.78)
Thus it is observed that due to the poly-silicon gate depletion effect, the 
threshold voltage is increased by an amount
	
γ
γ
γ
Φ
Q
C
~
2
B
p
ox
p
F
2
2
2
2
2
7.4.10.3  Effect on Oxide Thickness
Because a depletion layer is present in the gate, it may be thought that a poly-
silicon gate capacitor is added in series with the oxide capacitor. The effect of 
this is that the oxide dielectric thickness is increased, such that the effective 
oxide thickness is
	
 =
+ ε
ε
=
+
t
t
W
t
W
3
ox
ox
ox
Si
dp
ox
dp 	
(7.79)
In (7.79), Wdp is the poly-silicon gate depletion width that is related to the 
potential drop in the depletion region through
	
=
ε ψ
W
qN
2
dp
Si
p
p
	
(7.80)

306
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
7.4.10.4  Electrical Oxide Thickness
It may be noted in this connection that the charge sheet approximation con­
sidered in all calculations presented so far is not true in a fine sense. The 
assumption that the inversion layer is infinitely thin therefore needs rigor­
ous consideration. To properly calculate the shape of the inversion region, 
Poisson’s equation has to be solved simultaneously with Schrödinger’s equa­
tion, which governs the behavior of tightly confined particles. The average 
location of the inversion charge below the Si-SiO2 interface is called the inver­
sion layer thickness tinv. Then the effective (often called the electrical oxide 
thickness, in compact model terminology) that determines the capacitive 
coupling between the gate and the channel charge becomes
	

=
+ ε
ε
+
=
+
+
t
t
W
t
t
W
t
(
)
3
3
ox
ox
ox
Si
dp
inv
ox
dp
inv 	
(7.81)
The solution to the poly-silicon depletion effect is to dope the poly-silicon 
heavily. However, very heavy doping may cause dopant penetration from the 
gate through the oxide into the substrate. Poly-silicon gate depletion effect is 
eliminated in advanced MOS technology by replacing the gate material with 
a pure metal. NMOS and PMOS transistors may require two different metals 
(with metal work functions close to those of n+ and p+ poly-silicon) in order to 
achieve the optimal threshold voltage [13].
7.4.11  Simulation Results and Discussion
7.4.11.1  Variation of Drain Current, Transconductance, 
and Output Resistance with Gate Voltage
The variations of drain current with applied gate bias and low drain bias 
for three different substrate biases are shown in Figure 7.16. It is observed 
from the figure when the gate bias is just above threshold voltage, the cur­
rent increases at a faster rate, compared to high gate bias. This is because 
of the carrier mobility degradation phenomenon occurring at higher gate 
bias. This is also demonstrated through Figure 7.17, which shows the varia­
tion of the transconductance with applied gate bias for low drain bias. The 
same graphs plotted for high drain bias are shown in Figures 7.18 and 7.19, 
respectively. It is observed that with high drain bias, the mobility degra­
dation phenomenon affecting the drain current is somewhat counterbal­
anced due to the high drift velocity of the carriers. The variation of output 
resistance with applied gate bias is shown in Figure 7.20. It is observed that 
when the transistor operates in the subthreshold region, the output resis­
tance is very high. This is simple to explain by considering the fact that in 
the subthreshold region, a very small amount of drain current flows. On 
the other hand, in a strong inversion region, the output resistance drops 
and the value remains fairly constant with increase of gate bias.

307
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
VDS = 50 mV
VBS = –1 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = 0 V
2.0 m
1.8 m
1.6 m
1.4 m
1.2 m
1.0 m
800.0 µ
600.0 µ
400.0 µ
0.0
–200.0 µ
200.0 µ
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
VGS (V)
ID (A)
0.8
1.0
FIGURE 7.16
Variation of drain current with applied gate bias for three different substrate biases and low 
drain bias.
VDS = 50 mV
VBS = –1 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = 0 V
5.0 m
4.5 m
4.0 m
3.5 m
3.0 m
2.5 m
2.0 m
1.5 m
1.0 m
0.0
–500.0 µ
500.0 µ
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
VGS (V)
gm (s)
0.8
1.0
FIGURE 7.17
Variation of transconductance with applied gate bias for three different substrate biases and 
low drain bias.

308
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
VDS = 1 V
VBS = –1 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = 0 V
9.0 m
8.0 m
7.0 m
6.0 m
5.0 m
4.0 m
3.0 m
2.0 m
0.0
–1.0 m
1.0 m
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
VGS (V)
ID (A)
0.8
1.0
FIGURE 7.18
Variation of drain current with applied gate bias for three different substrate biases and high 
drain bias.
VDS = 1 V
VBS = –1 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = 0 V
20.0 m
18.0 m
16.0 m
14.0 m
10.0 m
12.0 m
8.0 m
6.0 m
4.0 m
0.0
–2.0 m
2.0 m
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
VGS (V)
gm (s)
0.8
1.0
FIGURE 7.19
Variation of transconductance with applied gate bias for three different substrate biases and 
high drain bias.

309
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
7.4.11.2  Subthreshold Characteristics
The subthreshold characteristics for low drain bias and high drain bias 
are shown in Figures 7.21 and 7.22, respectively. The three important per­
formance parameters, related to switching behavior of a MOS transistor, 
extracted from the subthreshold characteristics are ION, IOFF, and subthres­hold 
slope S, respectively. The ON and OFF currents are defined as the drain-
source current flowing through the transistor when the applied gate bias is 
either high or zero, respectively. The subthreshold slope is determined as 
=
=
−
S
d
I
dV
nkT q
( (log
)/
)
2.3
/
DS
GS
10
1
 (i.e., the amount of gate voltage required 
to change the drain current by an order of magnitude). The values of these 
three parameters are summarized in Table 7.3. From the results, the value of 
the subthreshold swing factor n for the two drain biases are calculated and 
shown in Table 7.3. Thus, the simulation results clearly demonstrate that high 
drain bias (i.e., DIBL effect) deteriorates the subthreshold characteristics of a 
MOS transistor.
7.4.11.3  Variation of Transconductance Generation Efficiency, 
Intrinsic Gain, Linearity, and Cutoff Frequency
An important analog performance parameter of MOS transistor is the 
transconductance generation efficiency that is measured as g
I
/
m
DS, which 
VDS = 0.8 V
VBS = 0 V
600
500
400
300
200
0
100
0.2
0.4
0.6
VGS (V)
Ro (kΩ)
0.8
1.0
FIGURE 7.20
Variation of output resistance with gate bias.

310
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
VDS = 50 mV
VBS = –1 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = –0 V
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
–12
0.2
0.0
0.4
0.6
VGS (V)
log (IDS) (A)
0.8
1.0
FIGURE 7.21
Subthreshold characteristics for low drain bias.
VDS = 1 V
VBS = –1 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = 0 V
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
0.2
0.0
0.4
0.6
VGS (V)
log (IDS) (A)
0.8
1.0
FIGURE 7.22
Subthreshold characteristics for high drain bias.

311
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
measures the amount of transconductance generated per unit drain cur­
rent. The variation of this parameter with applied gate bias is shown in 
Figure 7.23. It is observed that the transconductance generation efficiency 
is highest when the transistor works in a weak inversion region. As the 
gate bias increases, such that the transistor moves on to a strong inver­
sion region, the value of this parameter reduces. This is because in the 
weak inversion region, a very small amount of current flows through the 
transistor so that the ratio of transconductance to drain current is high. 
In a strong inversion region, the drain current increases so that the ratio 
falls. Theoretically, the maximum value of this factor is found to be 
nU
1/
T, 
TABLE 7.3
ION, IOFF, and Subthreshold Slope S for an NMOS Transistor of L = 65 nm 
and W = 10 μm
Drain Bias
ION @VGS = 1V
IOFF@VGS = 0V
S
m
VDS = 50 mV
1.56 mA
6.52 nA
94 mV/decade
1.596
VDS = 1 V
7.74 mA
18.4 nA
95.3 mV/decade
1.618
VDS = 1 V
VBS = –1 V (VT = 0.637 V)
VBS = –0.5 V (VT = 0.558 V)
VBS = 0 V (VT = 0.465 V)
30
25
20
15
10
5
–10
0.2
0.0
0.4
0.6
VGS (V)
gm/ID (s/A)
0.8
1.0
FIGURE 7.23
Variation of transconductance generation efficiency with gate bias for high drain bias and 
different substrate biases.

312
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
and from simulation results, this is 24.41 V–1 at VBS = 0 V. The effect of sub­
strate bias on the transconductance generation efficiency is also observed. 
As the substrate bias increases (i.e., as the substrate becomes more reverse 
biased), the depletion depth increases. Therefore, the depletion capacitance 
reduces and hence the subthreshold swing factor also reduces. Thus the 
ratio g
I
(
/
)
m
DS  increases.
The intrinsic voltage gain of a MOS transistor is defined as g R
m
0 , where 
R0 is the output resistance. The variation of output resistance and transcon­
ductance with applied gate bias is recalled in Figure 7.24(a). It is observed 
that at low VGS, when the transistor operates in weak inversion, the trans­
conductance is low, but the output resistance is very high. The variation 
of the intrinsic gain with the applied gate bias is shown in Figure 7.24(b). 
Consequently, the intrinsic gain is high at the weak inversion region. As 
the gate bias is increased, so that the transistor starts to operate in the 
strong inversion region, the output resistance falls. Thus although the 
transconductance increases, the intrinsic gain falls. The effect of output 
resistance plays a significant role in determining the intrinsic gain of a 
MOS transistor.
Non-linearity of a device is manifested by the presence of higher-order 
harmonics at the output signal. The linearity of a MOS transistor is quanti­
fied in this work through the parameter VIP3. This is the extrapolated gate 
voltage amplitude, at which the third harmonics of the drain current become 
equal to the fundamental tone of the drain current [14]. This is mathemati­
cally defined as
	
=
VIP
g
g
3
24|
|
m
m3
Here
	
= ∂
∂
g
I
V
m
DS
GS
3
3
3
The variation of gm3 with applied gate bias is shown in Figure 7.25(a). The 
VIP3 peak shown in Figure 7.25(b) is due to the second-order interaction 
effect and can be explained as a cancellation of the third non-linearity 
coefficient (i.e., gm3) (see Figure 7.25a) by device internal feedback around 
a second-order non-linearity [14]. It is observed that the linearity of the 
device is poor when it operates in a weak inversion region. Therefore, for 
better linearity performance, the device must work in a strong inversion 
region.

313
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
Ro
gm
VBS = 0 V
VDS = 0.8 V
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0.2
0.0
0.4
0.6
VGS (V)
Ro (kΩ)
0.8
1.0
–2
gm(mS)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
(a)
VDS = 0.8 V
VBS = 0 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = –1 V
28
26
24
22
20
16
18
14
12
0.2
0.4
0.6
VGS (V)
gm*(Ro)
0.8
1.0
(b)
FIGURE 7.24
(a) Variation of transconductance and output resistance with gate bias. (b) Variation of intrinsic 
gain with applied gate bias for different substrate biases.

314
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
VBS = –1 V (VT = 0.637 V)
VBS = –0.5 V (VT = 0.558 V)
VBS = 0 V (VT = 0.465 V)
VDS = 1 V
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
0.0
0.2
0.4
VGS (V)
0.6
0.8
1.0
d2gm/dvgs
2 (s/v2)
(a)
VDS = 1 V
VBS = –1 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = 0 V
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
0.0
0.2
0.4
VGS (V)
VIP3 (V)
0.6
0.8
(b)
FIGURE 7.25
(a) Variation of second derivative of transconductance with applied gate bias. (b) Variation of 
linearity parameter with applied gate bias.

315
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
The variation of the cutoff frequency with the applied gate bias is shown 
in Figure 7.26. The cutoff frequency is also referred to as the unity current 
gain frequency. This frequency determines the bandwidth of the circuit. It 
is observed that the value of the cutoff frequency is very small when the 
device operates in a weak inversion region, and it increases as the gate bias 
increases so that it operates in a strong inversion region. It may be noted that 
in a weak inversion region, the intrinsic gain of a MOS transistor is high but 
the bandwidth is low. Therefore, operation in a moderate inversion region is 
often preferred for low-power, high-performance analog applications.
7.4.11.4  Variation of Drain Current and Output Resistance with Drain Bias
Variations of the drain current and output resistance with applied drain 
bias for three different gate biases are shown in Figure 7.27 and Figure 7.28, 
respectively. It is observed from the graphs that in the subthreshold region, 
the drain current is small so that the output resistance is high. On the other 
hand, in the strong inversion region, the amount of drain current is high so 
that the output resistance is low. For the weak inversion case, with the increase 
of drain bias, the drain current increases due to various second-order effects 
such as channel length modulation, DIBL effect, etc. Therefore, the output 
200.0
180.0
160.0
140.0
120.0
100.0
80.0
60.0
40.0
20.0
0.0
–20.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
VGS (V)
fT (GHz)
0.6
0.8
1.0
VBS = 0 V
VBS = –0.5 V
VBS = –1 V
VDS = 1 V
VT = 0.432 V
VT = 0.526 V
VT = 0.604 V
FIGURE 7.26
Variation of cutoff frequency parameter with applied gate bias.

316
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
4.0 m
3.0 m
2.0 m
1.0 m
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
VDS (V)
Vgs = 0.4
Vgs = 0.6
Vgs = 0.8
IDS (A)
0.6
0.8
1.0
5.0 m
FIGURE 7.27
Variation of drain current with applied drain bias for three different gate biases.
16.0 k
14.0 k
12.0 k
10.0 k
8.0 k
6.0 k
4.0 k
2.0 k
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
VDS (V)
Vgs = 0.4
Vgs = 0.6
Vgs = 0.8
Ro (Ω)
0.6
0.8
1.0
18.0 k
FIGURE 7.28
Variation of output resistance with applied drain bias.

317
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
resistance value falls. However, for strong inversion, the increase of drain 
current with the increase of drain bias due to the above effects is counterbal­
anced somewhat due to better gate control at high gate bias. Therefore, the 
resultant rate of increase of drain current is small. Consequently, the output 
resistance remains nearly constant.
7.5  Hot Carrier Effects Due to Impact Ionization
If the drain voltage (and hence the lateral electric field ξy) is sufficiently high, 
the carrier velocity near the drain saturates. The length of the high field 
region is a function of channel length, oxide thickness, and gate and drain 
bias. Even by considering the scaling of supply voltage, the electric field in 
the high field region is strong enough (
V cm
10
/
4
). Consequently, the electrons 
gain enough energy and collide with the bound electrons in the valence band 
to create impact ionization of silicon lattice atoms in scaled MOS transistors. 
These highly energetic electrons are referred to as hot electrons because if their 
kinetic energy is expressed as kTe, then Te becomes as high as 1000 K, which is 
much higher than the lattice temperature. As a result of the impact ionization 
process, electron-hole pairs are generated. Among these pairs, the electrons 
are collected by the drain which increases the drain current. On the other 
hand, the holes are pushed toward the source, which in turn are directed 
toward the substrate due to the action of the vertical electric field. This results 
in an impact ionization induced substrate current as illustrated schematically 
in Figure 7.29.
+VGS
+VDS
n+D
n+S
tox
G
B
Depletion layer boundary
Substrate current
FIGURE 7.29
Substrate current due to impact ionization.

318
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
The empirical relationship describing the impact ionization rate is given as [5]
	
α
=
−
ξ




y
A
B
( )
exp
i
i
i
y
	
(7.82)
In (7.82), αi(y) is the number of ionization events per unit length, and Ai and 
Bi are ionization constants. Thus the substrate current is given by
	
∫
∫
( )
=
α
=
−
ξ
I
I
y dy
A I
e
dy
sub
DS
i
L
i DS
B
L
0
0
i
y
	
(7.83)
The velocity saturation region is bounded by y = 0(saturation point) to y = 
ΔL(drain). Also along the surface, the quasi-Fermi level V(y) increases from 
VDSat at y = 0 to VDS at y = ΔL. From pseudo-two-dimensional analysis, an 
exponential relationship between the lateral field ξ y and the lateral channel 
distance can be derived [5], which is given below
	
ξ
= ξ




y
y
l
( )
cosh
y
sat
t
	
(7.84)
In (7.84), ξsat  is the critical field for velocity saturation, and lt is the character­
istic length of the exponentially rising electric field and is given as [5]
	
=
ε
ε
≈
l
t X
t X
3
t
Si
ox
ox
j
ox
j 	
(7.85)
The peak electric field is reached at the drain [5], where
	
ξ
= ξ
=
=
−



+ ξ
y
L
V
V
l
(
)
y
DS
DSsat
t
sat
max
2
2
	
(7.86)
In the saturation region, generally ξ
>> ξsat
max
, so that ξmax  can be approxi­
mated as
	
ξ
=
−
V
V
l
DS
DSsat
t
max
	
(7.87)
This field can be as high as mid-105 to 106 V/cm and leads to impact ioniza­
tion and other hot carrier effects. From (7.84), we find after using necessary 
trigonometric identity,
	
ξ
=
ξ
−ξ
d
y
dy
l
y
( )
1
( )
y
t
y
sat
2
2
	
(7.88)

319
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
Substituting (7.88) in (7.83), with appropriate change of limits, we get
	
∫
=
ξ −ξ
ξ =
ξ
−ξ




ξ
ξ
−
ξ
I
A l I
e
d
A l I
B
B
exp
sub
i t DS
y
sat
y
i t DS
i
i
2
2
max
max
Bi
y
sat
max
	
(7.89)
From (7.87) and (7.89), we get
	
(
)
=
−
−
−




I
A
B
V
V
B l
V
V
I
exp
sub
i
i
DS
DSsat
i t
DS
DSsat
DS 	
(7.90)
This is used to calculate the substrate current in MOS transistors. It may 
be noted that Isub strongly depends on the effective channel length because 
the drain saturation current strongly depends on the effective channel 
length. In addition, the drain current IDS depends on the source-drain series 
resistance.
The substrate current causes an ohmic potential drop in the substrate. This 
leads to substrate bias that causes the threshold voltage to drop. This triggers 
a positive feedback effect that further enhances the drain current. The sub­
strate current induced body bias effect (SCBE) results in a current increase 
that is much larger than Isub.
7.5.1  Hot Carrier Injection (HCI)
For high enough electric field, some of the electrons or holes gain sufficient 
energy from the electric field to cross the interface barrier and enter the 
SiO2 layer. The electrons thus trapped in the oxide change the threshold 
voltage, typically the threshold voltage for NMOS transistors increases and 
that for the PMOS transistor decreases. The probability of carrier injec­
tion is more for hot electrons compared to hot holes. This is because of the 
smaller effective mass of electrons and because the Si-SiO2 interface energy 
barrier is larger for holes (~4–6 eV) than for electrons (~3.1 eV). This hot 
carrier injection phenomenon leads to a long-term reliability problem, or 
aging problem, where a circuit might degrade or fail after being in use for 
some time.
Present-day CMOS technologies use specially engineered lightly doped 
drain and source regions which introduces additional series resistance and 
reduces the peak electric field in the transistor. This prevents carriers from 
reaching the critical values necessary to become hot. However, drain current 
and thus device performances are traded off as a result. Therefore, an impor­
tant design consideration is to operate the circuit at a voltage far enough 
below the breakdown condition.

320
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
7.6  Characterization of Gate Dielectric
The thickness of the gate dielectric (SiO2 is the preferred gate insulator in the 
semiconductor industry because of the excellent compatibility of SiO2 with 
silicon and established performance record) is reduced from 300 nm for the 
10 µm technology to 1.2 nm for the 65 nm technology. Scaling down of SiO2 
thickness is essential for two reasons. First, with the scaling down of the 
oxide thickness, the gate capacitance Cox increases. This increases the transis­
tor ON-current which leads to an increase of the circuit speed. The second 
reason is short channel effect immunity, as discussed earlier.
However, if the oxide becomes too thin, the electric field in the oxide 
becomes so high that it may cause dielectric breakdown. For oxide thick­
ness less than 1.5 nm, tunneling leakage current becomes the most serious 
limiting factor that prevents the use of such thin film. The reduction of gate 
oxide thickness (has reached only a few atomic layers) results in an increase 
in field across the oxide. The high electric field leads to tunneling of elec­
trons from the strongly inverted surface to gate and also from gate to the 
inverted surface through the gate oxide, resulting in gate oxide tunneling. 
When the electrons tunnel into the conduction band of the oxide layer, the 
resulting tunneling is referred to as Fowler-Nordheim tunneling [5]. On the 
other hand, if the electrons tunnel directly through the forbidden energy gap 
of the SiO2 layer, the resulting tunneling is referred to as direct tunneling.
In order to avoid the tunneling problem, there is an intense search of alter­
native dielectrics with high-κ (permittivity) which has properties very close 
to SiO2 but offers the opportunity to use a higher thickness for the gate insu­
lator. The gate capacitance of a MOS transistor using an arbitrary dielectric 
material with thickness Td is given by
	
= ε κ
C
A
T
G
d
d
0
	
(7.91)
In (7.92), ε0  is the permittivity of free space, κd  is the relative permittivity 
of dielectric material, A is the area of the conducting plates, and Td  is the 
gate dielectric thickness. The thickness of the high-κ dielectric insulator is 
derived from the relation
	
=
κ
κ
T
T
Effective oxide thickness (EOT) =
ox
SiO
d
d
2
	
(7.92)
HfO2 has a relative permittivity (κ) of ~24, six times larger than that of 
SiO2 κ
(
~ 3.9)
SiO2
. Therefore, a 6-nm HfO2 film has effective oxide thickness 
(EOT) of 1 nm, in the sense both films produce the same oxide capacitance. 
However, the HfO2 film is physically much thicker compared to SiO2 film. 
Therefore the leakage current in the HfO2 film is several orders of magnitude 

321
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
smaller than that through SiO2. Some other popular high-κ dielectric insula­
tor materials are ZrO2 and Al2O3. However, the uses of high-κ dielectric insu­
lator materials pose several problems in IC manufacturing. These include 
chemical reactions between these materials and the silicon substrate, lower 
surface mobility, and more oxide trapped charges. In order to reduce these 
problems to some extent, a thin SiO2 interfacial layer is inserted between the 
silicon substrate and the high-κ dielectric insulator.
In SPICE simulation, high-κ gate dielectric can be modeled as SiO2 with 
an equivalent oxide thickness. Alternatively, the value of the gate dielectric 
constant parameter (EPSROX) can be specified.
7.7  Capacitance Characterization
A VLSI circuit operates both under DC conditions (when the terminal volt­
ages do not change with time) and time-varying conditions. The time-varying 
operation of the circuit is largely influenced by the various capacitors present 
in a MOS transistor. Therefore, proper characterization of the various capaci­
tances of a MOS transistor is an essential task for IC designers. The capaci­
tance model is based on the quasi-static approximation, which implies that 
the potential and charge density at any given point in the channel of the tran­
sistor follow the time-varying terminal voltages immediately without any 
delay. In other words, under quasi-static approximation, it is assumed that the 
time-varying terminal voltages do not change appreciably within the “transit 
time” duration of the device. The various intrinsic and extrinsic capacitors 
present within a MOS transistor are identified in the following sub-section.
7.7.1  Capacitance Components in a MOS Transistor
The various capacitors present within an n-channel MOS transistor are iden­
tified in Figure  7.30. For characterizing the various capacitances, the MOS 
transistor capacitors are divided into two types: intrinsic and extrinsic. The 
intrinsic region is identified as the region between the metallurgical source 
and the drain junction where the gate to S/D region is at flat band voltage. 
The capacitances involved within the intrinsic region are referred to as the 
intrinsic capacitances. The extrinsic capacitances that are basically the para­
sitic capacitances are further divided into five components: (1) the outer fring­
ing capacitances between the poly-silicon gate and the S/D region: CFO; (2) the 
inner fringing capacitances between the poly-silicon gate and the S/D region: 
CFI; (3) the overlap capacitances between the gate and the heavily doped S/D 
regions (as well as the bulk region), CGSO, CGDO (CGBO); (4) the overlap capaci­
tances between the gate and the lightly doped S/D regions CGSOL, CGDOL; and (5) 
the source/drain junction capacitances CJS and CJD. The intrinsic capacitances 

322
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
are shown bold in Figure 7.29. These are gate-to-source capacitance CGSI, gate-
to-bulk capacitance CGBI, and gate-to-drain capacitance CGDI.
7.7.2  Characterization of Intrinsic Capacitances (Meyer’s Approach)
The simplest approach for characterizing the gate capacitances was devel­
oped by Meyer [15,16]. The simplified intrinsic capacitance model treats the 
intrinsic MOS capacitances as three lumped capacitances, gate-to-source 
capacitance CGS, gate-to-drain capacitance CGD, and gate-to-bulk capacitance 
CGB. The gate capacitances are attributed entirely to the changes in the gate 
charge, which is written in the following compact formulation:
	
= ∂
∂
C
Q
V
GZ
G
GZ
	
(7.93)
In (7.93), CGZ  represents the capacitance between the gate and the terminal 
Z (S/D), while VGZ  represents the corresponding voltage difference. It is also 
assumed that all capacitances are reciprocal (e.g., 
=
C
C
GD
DG). From charge 
neutrality condition, we have
	
= −
+
Q
Q
Q
(
)
G
inv
B 	
(7.94)
Here Qinv  is the inversion charge density, and QB  is the bulk charge density. 
In strong inversion, the channel charge density along the channel is given by 
(7.26) which is repeated here for convenience:
	
= −
−
−
Q
C
V
V
V
y
(
( ))
inv
ox
GS
T
CS
	
(7.95)
Gate G
CFI
CFO
CGSI
CGBI
CGDI
CFI
CFO
Xjd
CJD
n+
D
B
p-substrate
CGDO
CGDOL
CGSOL
CGSO
CJS
CGBC
S
n+
FIGURE 7.30
Identification of intrinsic and extrinsic capacitors present in an n-channel MOS transistor.

323
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
Here m is taken to be unity for simplicity. The drain-to-source current is 
given by (7.24) which is repeated here for convenience:
	
∫
(
)
= µ
−
I
W
L
Q
V
dV
[
]
DS
s
inv
CS
V
CS
0
DS
	
(7.96)
The drain-to-source current IDS is obtained by integration (7.96) and is writ­
ten as
	
= µ
−
−




I
WC
L
V
V
V
V
1
2
DS
s
ox
GS
T
DS
DS 	
(7.97)
Using 
=
−
V
V
V
GD
GS
DS, (7.97) is transformed to
	
= µ
−
−
−
I
WC
L
V
V
V
V
2
[(
)
(
) ]
DS
s
ox
GS
T
GD
T
2
2 	
(7.98)
Considering the variation of the charges along the channel length, (7.94) is 
transformed to
	
∫
∫
∫
( )
( )
( )
= −
−
= −
−
Q
W
Q
y dy
W
Q
y dy
W
Q
y dy
Q
G
inv
L
b
L
inv
L
B
0
0
0
	
(7.99)
Using (7.96), (7.97), and (7.99) and performing the integration, we get
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
=
−
−
−
−
−
−








−
Q
WLC
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
Q
2
3
G
ox
GD
T
GS
T
GD
T
GS
T
B
3
3
2
2
	
(7.100)
7.7.2.1  Intrinsic Capacitances in the Linear Region
The intrinsic capacitances CGS, CGD, and CGB in the linear region are deter­
mined by using the following relationships:
	
= ∂
∂
C
Q
V
GS
G
GS V
V
GD
GB
,
	
(7.101)
	
= ∂
∂
C
Q
V
GD
G
GD V
V
GS
GB
,
	
(7.102)
	
= ∂
∂
C
Q
V
GB
G
GB V
V
GS
GD
,
	
(7.103)

324
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Therefore, by differentiating (7.100) as per the relationships (7.101) through 
(7.103), the various gate capacitances are determined as follows:
	
(
)
(
)
=
−
−
−
+








C
WLC
V
V
V
V
V
2
3
1
2
GS
ox
GD
T
GS
T
GD
2
2
	
(7.104)
	
(
)
(
)
=
−
−
−
+








C
WLC
V
V
V
V
V
2
3
1
2
GD
ox
GS
T
GS
T
GD
2
2
	
(7.105)
	
=
C
0
GB
	
(7.106)
The fact that the capacitance CGB is zero at the strong inversion region may be 
explained by the fact that the inversion layer in the channel from the source 
to the drain screens the silicon bulk from the gate charge.
7.7.2.2  Intrinsic Capacitances in the Saturation Region
In the saturation region, the drain voltage is VDSsat, which is given by 
=
−
V
V
V
DSsat
GS
T, assuming long channel MOS transistor. Thus the gate-to-
drain voltage becomes
	
=
−
=
V
V
V
V
GD
GS
DSsat
T 	
(7.107)
Substituting (7.108) in (7.101), we get
	
=
−
−
Q
WLC
V
V
Q
2
3
(
)
G
ox
GS
T
B 	
(7.108)
Therefore, the various intrinsic gate capacitances in the saturation region are 
obtained as follows:
	
=
C
WLC
2
3
GS
ox 	
(7.109)
	
=
C
0
GD
	
(7.110)
	
=
C
0
GB
	
(7.111)
The physical explanation for (7.111) is the same as that provided for (7.106). 
The physical explanation for (7.110) is that in the saturation region the chan­
nel is pinched off, thereby the channel is electrically isolated from the drain. 
The gate charge is not influenced by the change in drain voltage, and thus 
the capacitance CGD vanishes.
7.7.2.3  Intrinsic Capacitances in the Subthreshold Region
In the subthreshold region, the inversion charge is negligible compared to 
the bulk depletion charge, so that the charge neutrality condition is given by
	
= −
=
γ
ψ
Q
Q
C
G
B
ox
sa 	
(7.112)

325
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
In (7.112), ψsa is the surface potential in the subthreshold region, which is 
given as [7]
	
ψ
= −γ +
γ
+
−




V
V
2
4
sa
GB
FB
2
2
	
(7.113)
Substituting (7.113) in (7.112) and performing an integration as done in (7.100), 
the total gate charge in the subthreshold region is given by
	
(
)
= −
γ
−
+ γ
−






Q
WLC
V
V
1
2
1
1
4
G
ox
GB
FB
2
2
	
(7.114)
Therefore, by differentiating (7.114) as per the relationships (7.101) through 
(7.103), the various gate capacitances are determined as follows:
	
=
C
0
GS
	
(7.115)
	
=
C
0
GD
	
(7.116)
	
=
+
−
γ
C
WLC
V
V
1
(
)
GB
ox
GB
FB
4
2
	
(7.117)
7.7.2.4  Intrinsic Capacitances in the Accumulation Region
In the accumulation region, 
<
V
V
GS
FB, the MOS structure behaves like a sim­
ple parallel plate capacitor and the capacitances are as follows:
	
=
C
0
GS
	
(7.118)
	
=
C
0
GD
	
(7.119)
	
=
C
C
GB
ox 	
(7.120)
7.7.2.5  Charge-Based Approach
It may be noted that Meyer’s approach for characterizing the intrin­
sic capacitances of a MOS transistor is simple and is widely used by the 
IC designers for first-hand estimation of the various MOS capacitances. 
However, this approach for characterization does not provide good results 
for some circuits such as MOS charge pump, static RAM, and switched 
capacitor circuits. Therefore, an alternative approach is used for character­
izing the MOS capacitances in today’s compact models. This is the charge-
based approach for capacitance characterization. In this approach, the 

326
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
emphasis is put on the accurate characterization of charges of each termi­
nals Q
Q Q
Q
(
,
,
,
)
D
S
G
B  of the MOS transistor. The calculation of total inver­
sion charge in the channel is fairly easy. However, it is difficult to precisely 
characterize the charges on the source and the drain terminals. The inver­
sion charge must be partitioned to the source and drain in a suitable man­
ner. Several charge partitioning approaches have been suggested for the 
saturation region. They are 50/50, 40/60, and 0/100 and are distinguished 
in the compact models through a model parameter 
=
X
Q
Q
/
PART
D
S as the 
charge partitioning ratio. The simplest way is to partition the channel 
charge and assign 50% of the inversion charge to the source and the rest 
to the drain, which corresponds to 
=
X
(
0.5)
PART
, which can be written as 
=
=
Q
Q
Q
0.5
S
D
inv. When 
>
X
0.5
PART
, the 0/100 charge partitioning scheme 
is chosen which implies that 
=
=
Q
Q
Q
,
0
S
inv
D
. When 
<
X
0.5
PART
, the 40/60 
charge partitioning scheme is chosen. The 40/60 partition scheme, also 
known as the Ward Dutton partitioning scheme [17], is physically correct 
as demonstrated through 2D device simulation results and experiments.
7.7.2.6  Effect of Poly-Silicon Gate Depletion Effect and 
Finite Inversion Charge Layer Thickness
The poly-silicon gate depletion effect as discussed earlier needs to be consid­
ered while characterizing the intrinsic capacitances. This is implemented by 
replacing VGS in all model equations by VGS eff
_  as defined in (7.74). The effect 
of finite inversion charge thickness can be characterized by a capacitance in 
series with the gate oxide capacitance Cox. This results in reduced effective 
gate oxide capacitance:
	
=
+
C
C C
C
C
ox eff
ox
C
ox
C
_
	
(7.121)
In (7.121), CC  is the correction term added due to the inversion layer of thick­
ness tinv.
7.7.3  Characterization of Extrinsic Capacitances
The extrinsic components of MOS transistor capacitances are categorized 
broadly into three types: (1) gate overlap capacitances in source/drain and 
bulk region (CGSO/CGDO, CGSOL/CGDOL, CGBO); (2) inner and outer fringing 
capacitances (CFI and CFO); and (3) source/drain junction capacitances (CJS 
and CJD). These capacitances at a given operating bias condition are required 
to be characterized.
7.7.3.1  Characterization of Fringing and Overlap Capacitances
Characterization of overlap capacitance in a MOS transistor device is espe­
cially important when the amount of overlap becomes significant compared 

327
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
to the electrical channel length. As a crude estimate, the overlap capacitance 
is determined as follows [3]:
	
= ε
C
d
t
OV
ox
ox
	
(7.122)
Here d is the amount of gate-to-drain/source overlap. However, when d is 
small, the fringing effect is significant. Let us consider the approximate 
structure, shown in Figure 7.31 for precise characterization of the overlap 
and fringing capacitances [18].
The overlap capacitance consists of the following three components: (1) 
outer fringing capacitance CFO  between the gate and the source/drain, (2) 
direct overlap capacitance COV  between the gate and the source/drain, and 
(3) inner fringing capacitance CFI  on the channel side between the gate and 
the side wall of the source/drain junction. These capacitances are calculated 
using conformal technique with appropriate boundary conditions [18]. These 
capacitances for unit width of the device are given as follows:
	
= ε
θ
+




C
W
t
ln 1
FO
ox
p
ox
	
(7.123)
	
= ε
β
+
β




C
X
t
ln 1
sin
FI
ox
j
ox
	
(7.124)
	
= ε
+
C
d
t
(
)
OV
ox
ox
	
(7.125)
In (7.123), θ is the slope angle for the poly-silicon gate. For the vertical edge of 
the poly-silicon gate, θ = π/2. In (7.124), β is given by
	
β = πε
ε
2
ox
Si 	
(7.126)
G
D
CFI
tox
d
WP
COV
CFO
S
Xj
FIGURE 7.31
Overlap and fringing capacitances.

328
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
In (7.125), Δ is a correction factor to account for some higher-order effects and 
is given as follows:
	
=
−
θ
θ
+
−
β
β




t
2
1
cos
sin
1
cos
sin
ox
	
(7.127)
The total overlap capacitance per unit width of the device is thus given by the 
sum of (7.123), (7.124), and (7.125).
In addition to the above overlap capacitances, there is another overlap 
capacitance in the channel width direction, which results in an overlap 
capacitance between the gate and the substrate. This is given as
	
=
′
⋅
C
C
L
CGBO
CBO
	
(7.128)
Here in (7.128), 
′
CGBO  is the gate-to-bulk overlap capacitance per unit length.
7.7.3.2  Characterization of Junction Capacitances
The junction capacitances arise from the depletion charge between the source 
or drain and the substrate. These are usually reverse-biased. Therefore, with 
the variation of source or drain voltages, the depletion charge increases or 
decreases accordingly. The depletion capacitance per unit area of an abrupt 
p-n junction is [5]
	
(
)
(
)
= ε
=
ε
+
=
ε
+






C
W
qN
V
V
qN
V
V
2
2
j
Si
dj
Si
A
bi
R
Si
A
bi
R
m
	
(7.129)
In (7.129), Wdj  is the depletion layer width, NA  is the impurity concentration 
of the lightly doped side, ψbi  is the built-in potential, and VR  is the reverse 
bias voltage across the junction. In (7.129), m is the grading coefficient and its 
value is ½ for abrupt p-n junction. For zero bias, Cj0  is defined as
	
=
ε




C
q
N
V
2
j
Si
A
bi
m
0
	
(7.130)
With this, (7.129) can be algebraically manipulated as [3]
	
=
+




−
C
C
V
V
1
j
j
R
bi
m
0
	
(7.131)

329
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
The junction capacitance has two components: bottom component and side­
wall/perimeter component. The total junction capacitance is thus written as [3]
	
=
+
C
C A
C
P
j
jb
jsw
	
(7.132)
In (7.132), Cjb is the bottom component of the junction capacitance per unit 
area, A is the total junction area, Cjsw  is the sidewall component of the junction 
capacitance per unit length, and P is the total junction perimeter. Using (7.131), 
the bottom component and perimeter component are defined as follows:
	
=
+




−
C
C
V
V
1
jb
j b
R
bi
m
0
b
	
(7.133)
	
=
+




−
C
C
V
V
1
jsw
j sw
R
bisw
m
0
sw
	
(7.134)
In (7.133), Cj b
0  is the zero-bias sidewall capacitance per unit area, and mb  is 
the grading coefficient for the bottom component. In (7.134), Cj sw
0
 is the zero-
bias sidewall capacitance per unit length, and msw  is the grading coefficient 
for the sidewall.
7.7.4  Simulation Results and Discussion
The channel length is taken to be 65 nm and channel width is 10 μm. The 
oxide capacitance per unit area is 0.0197 F/m2. The simulation results include 
all sorts of extrinsic capacitances and intrinsic capacitances, which are cal­
culated as per the charge-based approach. The charge partitioning ratio is 
taken to be 0, which means that 40/60 charge partitioning scheme has been 
considered. Here, we present an intuitive understanding of the graphs. This 
is important for VLSI designers.
The variations of gate-to-source capacitor CGS  with VDS  for three different 
values of VGS  are shown in Figure 7.32. It is observed that in the subthreshold 
region, the gate-to-source capacitance value is very low. This can be explained 
by the fact that in the subthreshold region, the inversion charge is negligibly 
small. According to Meyer’s approach, 
=
C
0
GS
 in the subthreshold region. 
However, there will be extrinsic components that contribute to this capaci­
tance. In the linear region, with small VDS, as VGS  increases, the inversion 
charge increases. Therefore, the capacitance value increases. In the satura­
tion region, because of the pinch-off phenomenon, the inversion charge is 
solely due to the gate-source voltage and the capacitance value is maximum. 
This behavior is followed by the simulation results.
The variations of gate-to-drain capacitor CGD  with VDS  for three differ­
ent values of VGS  are shown in Figure 7.33. In the subthreshold region, the 
inversion charge is negligibly small so that CGD  is ideally zero. In the satura­
tion region, due to the pinch-off phenomenon, there is no capacitive coupling 

330
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
VGS = 0 V
VGS = 0.4 V
VGS = 1 V
VBS = 0 V
VT (VDS = 50 mV)= 432.36 mV
VT (VDS = 1 V)= 465.13 mV
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
VDS (V)
CGS (fF)
0.8
1.0
FIGURE 7.32
Variation of gate-to-source capacitance with applied drain bias for three different gate biases.
VGS = 0 V
VGS = 0.4 V
VGS = 1 V
VBS = 0 V
VT (VDS = 50 mV)= 432.36 mV
VT (VDS = 1 V)= 465.13 mV
10
9
8
7
6
4
5
3
2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
VDS (V)
CGD (fF)
0.8
1.0
FIGURE 7.33
Variation of gate-to-drain capacitance with applied drain bias for three different gate biases.

331
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
between the drain and the gate so that CGD  is very small. In the linear region, 
as VDS  reduces, the inversion charge increases so that the CGD  increases. 
This behavior is followed by the simulation results.
The variations of the gate-to-bulk capacitance CGB  with gate bias for three 
different drain biases are shown in Figure 7.34. This capacitance has a non-
zero value only in the subthreshold region. This is because in this region, the 
inversion charge is very small. The capacitance is determined by the series 
combination of oxide capacitance and the depletion capacitance. In the accu­
mulation region, the intrinsic gate-to-bulk capacitance is determined solely 
by oxide capacitance.
Therefore, Meyer’s approach [15] of characterizing the intrinsic capacitance 
qualitatively explains the variations of the capacitances with bias conditions.
7.8  Noise Characterization
Noise in a MOS transistor is caused by small random fluctuations in sig­
nals (currents and voltages), caused due to phenomena generated within the 
device. Proper characterization of noise in a MOS transistor is essential for 
VDS = 0 V
VDS = 0.4 V
VDS = 1 V
VBS = 0 V
VT (VDS = 50 mV) = 432.36 mV
VT (VDS = 1 V) = 465.13 mV
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
–3
–2
–1
0
VGS (V)
CGB (fF)
1
2
3
FIGURE 7.34
Variation of gate-to-body capacitance with applied gate bias for three different drain biases.

332
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
analog and RF IC design. The two most important noise components of a 
MOS transistor are thermal noise and flicker noise. The following subsec­
tions deal with each of them individually.
7.8.1  Characterization of Thermal Noise in MOS Transistor
In conventional resistors, the thermal noise is generated due to the random 
thermal motion of the electrons. This motion does not depend upon the pres­
ence or absence of direct current, because the drift velocities of electrons in 
a conductor are much less than the thermal velocities of the electrons. In a 
resistor R, the thermal noise is represented by a series voltage generator or a 
shunt current generator to a noiseless ideal resistor. The noise spectral density 
is given by [3,5]
	
=
v
kTR f
4
n
2
	
(7.135)
	
=
i
kT R
f
4
1
n
2
	
(7.136)
In (7.135) and (7.136), k represents Boltzmann’s constant. From (7.135) and 
(7.136), it is observed that the noise spectral density is independent of fre­
quency f. This characteristic is called white noise.
The intrinsic thermal noise of a MOS transistor originates from the chan­
nel resistance due to random thermal motion of the carriers. The channel 
of a MOS transistor may be considered to be divided into several resistive 
segments, and each of these segments contributes to thermal noise. The 
corresponding noise spectral density thus follows (7.135). The resistor R is 
replaced by 
g
(2/3)
m, in a saturation region where gm is the gate transconduc­
tance of the device. It follows, therefore, from (7.135) that
	
=
v
kT g
f
8
3
n
m
2
	
(7.137)
However, (7.137) is inadequate, especially in the linear region 
≈
V
0
DS
 where 
the transconductance is zero, so that the calculated noise spectral density 
becomes zero, which however is not true in practice. Thus (7.137) is modified 
as follows:
	
=
+
+
v
kT g
g
g
f
8
3 (
)
n
m
ds
mb
2
	
(7.138)
In (7.138), gds and gmb are output conductance and body transconductance, 
respectively. However, a more rigorous approach for characterizing thermal 
noise is given below which is widely used in SPICE compact models [3,6,7].

333
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
Consider an infinitesimally small section of the noiseless channel of a MOS 
transistor of length dy. Let the resistance of this small section be dR and the 
channel voltage produced by this resistance is dVCS. For a channel current 
IDS, these are related as
	
=
= −
µ
dV
I
dR
W
Q
dV
dy dR
CS
DS
s
inv
CS
	
(7.139)
From (7.139) it follows that
	
= −
µ
dR
dy
W
Q
s
inv
	
(7.140)
The noise spectral density due to the thermal noise generated by this small 
resistance dR is given by
	
=
= −
µ
v
kTdR f
kT
dy
W
Q
f
4
4
n
s
inv
2
	
(7.141)
The power spectral density for the elemental noise voltage is from (7.141)
	
=
= −
µ
dS
kTdR
kT
dy
W
Q
4
4
V
s
inv
C
	
(7.142)
From this elemental noise voltage, the elemental noise current power spec­
tral density is
	
=
dS
g dS
I
C
V
2
D
C 	
(7.143)
The conductance for the elemental channel segment is determined as follows:
	
∫
(
)
=
= −
µ








= −µ
g
dI
dV
d
dV
W
L
Q
V
dV
W
L Q
C
DS
CS
CS
s
inv
CS
CS
V
s
inv
0
DS
	
(7.144)
Substituting gc from (7.144) and dSVC  from (7.142) into (7.143), we get
	
= −−µ




µ
= −
µ
dS
W
L Q
kT
dy
WQ
kT L WQ
dy
4
4
I
s
inv
s
inv
s
inv
2
2
D
	
(7.145)

334
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
Integrating over the entire channel length, the total noise current power 
spectral density is given by
	
∫
= −
µ
= −
µ
S
kT L
Q
W dy
kT L Q
4
4
I
s
inv
L
s
INV
2
0
2
D
	
(7.146)
In (7.146), 
=
Q
Q
WL
INV
inv
 represents the total inversion charge under the 
gate. The thermal noise power spectral density is often expressed in the 
following manner, referred to as the Klaassen-Prins equation for thermal 
noise [19]:
	
∫
=
S
kT
L I
g V
dV
4
(
)
I
DS
CS
CS
2
2
D
	
(7.147)
It is to be noted that (7.146) is used in a BSIM compact model with appropriate 
substitution of QINV.
7.8.2  Characterization of Flicker Noise in MOS Transistor
The flicker noise in the drain current or gate voltage of a MOS transistor is 
important to characterize precisely because it deteriorates the signal-to-noise 
ratio of several analog circuits. It also increases the phase noise of oscillators 
in RF applications. For proper characterization of flicker noise, the under­
lying physical mechanism of the flicker noise must be understood. This is 
briefly discussed below.
7.8.2.1  Physical Mechanisms of Flicker Noise
The conductivity of a conductor due to drift motion of the carriers is given by
	
σ = qnμ	
(7.148)
In (7.148), n represents the carrier concentration, and μ represents the carrier 
mobility. It appears from (7.148) that any fluctuation in the carrier density 
or mobility leads to fluctuation of the current flowing through the conduc­
tor. There are several different theories for explaining the physical cause of 
flicker noise. These are broadly classified into three different categories [20]: 
(1) carrier density fluctuation model, (2) mobility fluctuation model, and (3) 
correlated carrier and mobility fluctuation model.
According to the carrier density fluctuation model [20], the flicker noise is 
caused by random trapping and de-trapping of mobile carriers by the inter­
face traps at the Si-SiO2 interface. The interface traps dynamically exchange 

335
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
carriers with the channel causing fluctuation in the surface potentials, giving 
rise to fluctuation in the inversion charge density. The carrier density fluc­
tuation model is observed to successfully explain the flicker noise spectrum 
in n-channel MOS transistors. According to the mobility fluctuation model 
[20], on the other hand, the flicker noise is caused due to fluctuation in the 
carrier mobility, caused due to phonon scattering. The mobility fluctuation 
model successfully explains the flicker noise spectrum in p-channel MOS 
transistor. According to the correlated carrier and mobility fluctuation model 
[21,22], also referred to as the unified flicker noise model, when an interface 
trap captures an electron from the inversion layer, it becomes charged and 
reduces the carrier mobility due to Coulombic scattering. Thus according to 
this model, both the carrier number and the carrier mobility fluctuate due to 
trapping and de-trapping of the carriers by the interface traps. The unified 
model shows good matching with experimental results.
7.8.2.2  Empirical Approach for Characterization of Flicker Noise
The power spectral density of the flicker noise spectrum is given by [21]
	
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
S
KF I
f C
WL
I
DS
AF
ox
D
	
(7.149)
In (7.149), KF is the flicker noise coefficient, and AF is the flicker noise expo­
nent. The value of the parameter AF lies in the range of 0.5 to 2. The constant 
KF is proportional to the interface trap density, which is technology-specific. 
The lack of systematic approach in determining the empirical parameters 
limits the use of this model. However, two significant observations are made. 
First, the flicker noise is dominant at low frequency. Because of its depen­
dence on frequency as (1/f), flicker noise is sometimes referred to as the (1/f) 
noise. At frequencies above 100 MHz, the flicker noise spectrum becomes 
negligible compared to that of the thermal noise. Second, the flicker noise 
spectrum reduces as the gate area is increased. Third, for PMOS transistors, 
it has been found that the value of the flicker noise coefficient is smaller com­
pared to NMOS transistors; therefore, PMOS transistors are used in design­
ing low noise circuits, at least at the first stage.
7.8.2.3  Characterization of Flicker Noise through Physics-Based Model
Consider a section of the channel with width W and length Δy. The drain 
current is given by
	
=
µ
ξ
I
W
qN
DS
s
y	
(7.150)

336
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
In (7.150), μs is the carrier mobility, q is the electron charge, N is the number of 
channel carriers per unit area, and ξy  is the lateral channel field. Fluctuation 
of local drain current is given by [21,22]
	
δ
= −
δ
δ
± µ
δµ
δ



δ
I
I
N
N
N
N
N
1
1
DS
DS
t
s
s
t
t 	
(7.151)
In (7.151), ΔN = NWΔy, 
=
N
N W y
t
t
, where Nt  is the number of occupied 
traps per unit area, and N is the inversion carrier density. The ± sign in 
the mobility term of (7.151) denotes whether the trap is neutral or charged 
when filled.
Let us first evaluate the first term on the right-hand side of Equation (7.151). 
The ratio of fluctuations in carrier number to fluctuations in occupied trap 
number 
= δ
δ
R
N
N
/
t  is close to unity in strong inversion but assumes a 
smaller value in other bias conditions. A general expression of R is therefore 
written as follows:
	
= δ
δ
= −
+
+
+
R
N
N
C
C
C
C
C
t
inv
ox
inv
dm
it
	
(7.152a)
In (7.152a), Cinv , Cdm , and Cit  are inversion layer, depletion layer, and inter­
face trap capacitances, respectively. A more concise form of R is as follows:
	
= −
+
R
N
N
N * 	
(7.152b)
In (7.152b), 
=
+
+
N
kT q
C
C
C
*
(
/
)(
)
ox
dm
it
2
 and the typical value of this quantity 
is 1–5E10/cm–2.
Let us now evaluate the first term on the right-hand side of Equation (7.151). 
The carrier mobility is related to the oxide trap density as follows:
	
µ = µ
+ µ
+ µ
+ µ
= µ + α N
1
1
1
1
1
1
s
B
SR
Ph
Cit
n
sc
t 	
(7.153)
In (7.153), µ
=
α N
1/
Cit
sc
t  is the mobility limited by Coulombic scattering of the 
mobile carriers at trapped charges near the Si-SiO2 interface, and µ
µ
µ
,
,
B
SR
Ph 
represents the mobility limited by ionized impurity scattering, surface 
roughness scattering, and phonon scattering, respectively. The scattering 
coefficient αsc  is a function of the local carrier density due to the screening 
effect as well as the distance of the trap from the interface. From experimental 

337
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
results, it has been found that μCit increases with the inversion carrier density 
due to the screening effect. The relationship is given as follows [23]:
	
µ
= µ
N
N
Cit
CO
t
	
(7.154a)
	
α
= µ
N
1
sc
CO
	
(7.154b)
However, in the original unified mobility model [21,22], the scattering 
parameter is considered to be independent of the inversion carrier density. 
The reduction of αsc  with an increase of N is understood as follows. As the 
inversion carrier density increases, the screening length and the scattering 
cross section due to the screening by minority carriers reduce and hence the 
scattering parameter increases. In a weak inversion region, screening due to 
minority carriers becomes less significant compared to that by majority car­
riers. Because the majority carrier concentration does not change much in the 
weak inversion region, the scattering cross section remains almost constant 
with inversion carrier density. Consequently, in the weak inversion region, 
αsc  saturates to a particular value and (7.153b) is no longer valid [23]. By dif­
ferentiating (7.153) and substituting in (7.151), we arrive at
	
δ
= −
± α µ




δ
I
I
R
N
N
W y
DS
DS
sc
s
t 	
(7.155a)
This can be written as
	
δ
= −
± α µ




δ
I
R
N
I
W y
N
DS
sc
s
DS
t 	
(7.155b)
The power spectrum density of the local current fluctuation is obtained from 
(7.155b) as follows:
	
= 



± α µ




S
y f
I
W y
R
N
S
y f
( , )
( , )
I
DS
sc
s
N
2
2
DS
t
	
(7.156)
In (7.156), S
y f
( , )
Nt
 is the power spectrum density of the fluctuations in the 
number of occupied traps over the area WΔy and is given by
	
=
γ
S
y f
N E
kTW y
f
( , )
(
)
N
t
fn
t
	
(7.157)

338
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
In (7.157), Efn is the electron quasi-Fermi level, and γ is the attenuation coeffi­
cient of the electron wave function in the oxide. Substituting (7.157) in (7.156), 
we get
	
= 



± α µ




γ
S
y f
I
W y
R
N
N E
kTW y
f
( , )
(
)
I
DS
sc
s
t
fn
2
2
DS
	
(7.158)
The total drain current noise power spectral density is given as
	
∫
=
S
f
L
S
y f
ydy
( )
1
( , )
I
I
L
2
0
DS
DS
	
(7.159)
Substituting (7.158) in (7.159) and changing the variables of integration by 
using (7.150), we write
	
∫
(
)
=
µ
γ
± α µ




S
f
qkTI
fL
N
E
N
R
R
N dV
( )
1
I
DS
s
t
fn
sc
s
V
2
2
2
0
DS
DS
	
(7.160a)
This can be written in a compact way as follows:
	
∫
(
)
=
µ
γ
S
f
qkTI
fL
N
E
R
N dV
( )
I
DS
s
t
fn
V
2
*
2
0
DS
DS
	
(7.160b)
In (7.160b), N E
(
)
t
fn
*
 is the equivalent oxide trap density that produces the 
same noise power in absence of mobility fluctuations and is given as
	
=
± α µ




N E
N E
N
R
(
)
(
) 1
t
fn
t
fn
sc
s
*
2
	
(7.160c)
In BSIM implementation of the unified noise model, three additional 
parameters are introduced to fit the noise measurement results:
	
=
+
+
N E
A
BN
CN
(
)
t
fn
*
2 	
(7.161)
In (7.161), A, B, and C are technology-dependent model parameters. In (7.160b), 
the integration variable is changed as follows:
	
∫
=
µ
γ
S
f
q kTI
fL C
N E
R
N dN
( )
(
)
I
DS
s
ox
t
fn
N
N
2
2
*
2
DS
S
D
	
(7.162)

339
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
In (7.162), NS and ND represent the inversion charge density at the source end 
and drain end, respectively. These can easily be computed from the inversion 
charge densities formulae discussed earlier for linear, saturation, and sub-
threshold regions. Without going into the detailed mathematical derivations 
(lengthy but elementary), the drain current noise power at the three regions 
of operations are written as follows [6]:
Linear Region
	
(
)
( )
(
)
=
µ
γ
+
+



+
−
+
−






S
f
q kTI
m fL C
A
N
N
N
N
B N
N
C N
N
ln
1
2
I
DS
s
ox
S
D
S
D
S
D
2
2
*
*
2
2
DS
	 (7.163a)
Saturation Region
(
)
=
µ
γ
+
+



+
−
+
−






+
γ
+
+
+
S
f
q kTI
m fL C
A
N
N
N
N
B N
N
C N
N
L kTI
f WL
A
BN
CN
N
N
( )
ln
1
2
(
)
(
)
I
DS
s
ox
S
D
S
D
S
D
DS
D
D
D
2
2
*
*
2
2
2
2
2
* 2
DS
	
(7.163b)
In (7.163a) and (7.163b), NS and ND  are evaluated as follows:
	
=
−
qN
C
V
V
(
)
S
ox
GS
T 	
(7.163c)
	
=
−
−
qN
C
V
V
mV
(
)
D
ox
GS
T
DSsat 	
(7.163d)
In (7.163b), the second term in the flicker noise power spectrum density esti­
mates the noise arising in the velocity saturation region. In the subthreshold 
region, it is reasonable to assume that 
≪
N
N*  and 
=
+
+
≈
N E
A
BN
CN
A
(
)
.
t
fn
*
2
 
Thus the flicker noise power in the subthreshold region is simplified to [6]
	
=
γ
S
f
AkTI
WL fN
( )
I
DS
2
*2
DS
	
(7.163e)
7.8.3  Simulation Results and Discussion
This section presents simulation results of drain current noise spectra and 
input referred noise voltage of n-channel MOS transistors and p-channel 
MOS transistors using HSPICE, utilizing 65-nm PTM technology. The 

340
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
channel length and width of the transistor in all cases are taken to be 65 nm 
and 10 µm, respectively. The model selector flags are fnoimod = 1 and 
tnoimod = 1. Figure 7.35 shows a typical drain current noise spectrum mea­
sured in three different regions of operations for an n-channel MOS tran­
sistor. It is observed that noise spectrum shows 1/fk dependency with the 
exponential factor k close to unity. This is consistent with the assumption 
regarding the uniform spatial distribution of the oxide traps near the inter­
face. It is observed that in the weak inversion region, the drain current noise 
of the transistor is lower compared to that in the strong inversion region. This 
is explained by the fact that noise power spectrum is directly proportional 
to the drain current, and in the weak inversion region the drain current is 
very small. The measured drain current noise power at 100 Hz is plotted as a 
function of gate bias for three different drain biases in Figure 7.36(a). The bias 
dependence of the input referred noise power is plotted in Figure 7.36(b). 
At the measured frequency, the thermal noise is negligible compared with 
the flicker noise. It is observed that the dependence of input referred noise 
power on the bias point is not significant in both linear and saturation 
regions. The short channel behavior and DIBL effects are also reflected in the 
noise power spectrum. The corresponding simulation results for a p-channel 
MOS transistor are shown in Figures 7.37 and 7.38(a),(b). It is observed that 
the p-channel transistor has a noise level lower than the n-channel MOS 
10–12
10–25
1
10
100
1 k
10 k
Frequency (Hz)
Drain Current Noise (A2/Hz)
VDS = 0.4 V, VGS = 0.2 V, VT = 0.453 V
VDS = 50 mV, VGS = 0.6 V, VT = 0.465 V
VDS = 0.8 V, VGS = 0.6 V, VT = 0.439 V
100 k
1 M
10 M 100 M
1 G
10–24
10–23
10–22
10–21
10–20
10–19
10–18
10–17
10–16
10–15
10–14
10–13
FIGURE 7.35
Drain current noise power spectrum of an n-channel MOS transistor, operating at three differ­
ent regions of operations.

341
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
10–12
10–13
10–14
10–15
10–16
10–17
10–18
10–19
10–20
10–21
10–22
10–23
10–24
10–25
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
VGS (V)
VDS = 0.8 V, VT = 0.439 V
VDS = 0.4 V, VT = 0.453 V
VDS = 50 mV, VT = 0.465 V
Frequency = 100 Hz
Drain Current Noise (A2/Hz)
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
(a)
10–8
10–9
10–10
10–11
10–12
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
VGS (V)
VDS = 0.8 V, VT = 0.439 V
VDS = 0.4 V, VT = 0.453 V
VDS = 50 mV, VT = 0.465 V
Frequency = 100 Hz
Input Referred Noise (V2/Hz)
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
(b)
FIGURE 7.36
(a) Bias dependence of drain current noise power of an n-channel MOS transistor. (b) Bias 
dependence of input referred noise power of an n-channel MOS transistor.

342
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
1
10
100
1 k
10 k
Frequency (Hz)
100 k
1 M
10 M
100 M
1 G
10–25
10–26
10–27
Drain Current Noise (A2/Hz)
VSD = 0.4 V, VSG = 0.2 V, |VT| = 0.395 V
VSD = 50 mV, VSG = 0.6 V, |VT| = 0.410 V
VSD = 0.8 V, VSG = 0.6 V, |VT| = 0.379 V
10–24
10–23
10–22
10–21
10–20
10–19
10–18
10–17
10–16
10–15
10–14
FIGURE 7.37
Drain current noise power spectrum of a p-channel MOS transistor, operating at three differ­
ent regions of operations.
0.0
VSD = 0.8 V, |VT| = 0.379 V
VSD = 0.4 V, |VT| = 0.395 V
VSD = 50 mV, |VT| = 0.410 V
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
Frequency = 100 Hz
–0.4
–0.5
VGS (V)
–0.6
–0.7
–0.8
Drain Current Noise (A2/Hz)
–0.9
–1.0
–1.1
10–27
10–26
10–25
10–24
10–23
10–22
10–21
10–20
10–19
10–18
10–17
10–16
10–15
10–14
10–13
10–12
(a)
FIGURE 7.38
(a) Bias dependence of drain current noise power of a p-channel MOS transistor. (b) Variation of 
input referred noise spectrum for PMOS transistor operating in the subthreshold region. (continued)

343
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
transistor by one or two orders of magnitude. This is because of different 
oxide trap density near the conduction and valence band edges, different 
tunneling barriers for the electrons and holes, and different electron and 
hole mobilities resulting in different degrees of mobility fluctuations.
7.9  Statistical Characterization
With the scaling of MOS transistors to sub-90 nm regime, the effects of sta­
tistical variations of process parameters on the performances of VLSI circuits 
have become critical. The increasing impacts of the within-die variabil­
ity on the performances of VLSI circuits have posed significant challenges 
to the conventional VLSI design methodologies. The commercially avail­
able computer aided design tools are used to determine the nominal design 
parameters of a circuit, such that the nominal response of the circuit meets 
the desired performance specifications. However, after fabrication, the actual 
circuit response always shows deviations from the nominal value due to pro­
cess variations. Therefore, a paradigm shift to the conventional deterministic 
VSD = 0.8 V, |VT| = 0.379 V
VSD = 0.4 V, |VT| = 0.395 V
VSD = 50 mV, |VT| = 0.410 V
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
–0.5
VGS (V)
Input Referred Noise (V2/Hz)
–0.6
–0.7
–0.8
–0.9
–1.0
–1.1
10–14
10–13
10–12
10–11
10–10
10–9
Frequency = 100 Hz
10–8
(b)
FIGURE 7.38
(continued) (a) Bias dependence of drain current noise power of a p-channel MOS transistor. (b) 
Variation of input referred noise spectrum for PMOS transistor operating in the subthreshold region.

344
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
design methodology is required. Statistical design methodology has become 
indispensable for the present VLSI circuits. Precise characterization of pro­
cess variability is essential for variability-aware statistical circuit design.
7.9.1  Classification of Process Variability
From a circuit design perspective, the process variations are classified into 
two types: intra-die and inter-die variations. The intra-die variations are 
defined as the parametric changes of identical MOS transistors across a short 
distance, while the inter-die variations refer to such changes for identical 
MOS transistors separated by longer distance or fabricated at different times 
[24]. Thus intra-die variations are deviations occurring within a die. On the 
other hand, the inter-die variations are deviations occurring from die-to-die, 
wafer-to-wafer, and lot-to-lot. The wafer-to-wafer variations are caused usu­
ally by some change in machine conditions along time of manufacturing 
apparatus. The die-level variations typically originate from lithography steps, 
because pattern exposure is performed die-to-die. Imperfections in reticles or 
non-uniformity in the lens system sometimes causes die-level variations. The 
intra-die variations are significant in sub-90 nm technology and are of critical 
concern to the IC designers. The intra-die variations have two components: 
systematic and random. The systematic variations include the variations 
caused due to optical proximity corrections, phase-sifting mask and layout-
induced strain, and well proximity effect [24]. On the other hand, the ran­
dom variations include variations due to random discrete dopant (RDD), line 
edge roughness (LER), line width roughness (LWR), oxide thickness variation 
(OTV), poly-silicon gate/metal gate granularity, and interface roughness. In 
this chapter, we restricted ourselves to the local component of intra-die pro­
cess variations, which is of serious concern in the nanoscale regime.
7.9.2  Sources of Random Intra-Die Process Variations and Their Effects
In this subsection, the major sources of process variations are identified and 
their effects on the device performances are discussed.
7.9.2.1  Random Discrete Dopant (RDD)
With the scaling of the transistor in sub-90 nm technology, it has been found 
that the number of dopant atoms within the channel of a transistor becomes 
discrete and is a statistical quantity. In 1 μm technology, the number of 
dopant atoms in the channel is near about 5000, whereas that in a 32-nm 
technology node is less than 100. The random fluctuations of the number 
and position of the dopant atoms in the channel of a MOS transistor cause 
device-to-device variations of electrical performances which is referred to as 
the random discrete dopant effect [25].
RDD is considered to be the major contributor to performance mismatch 
of identical MOS transistors placed very close to each other. Considering 

345
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
uniform channel doping, the effect of RDD on threshold voltage fluctuation 
for a large geometry MOS transistor is given by [25]
	
σ
= q
C
N W
LW
3
V
ox
A
dm
T RDD
,
	
(7.164)
In (7.164), Wdm  is the depletion depth. For non-uniform doping, NA  in (7.164) 
is to be replaced by NEFF, which is calculated as follows [26]:
	
∫
=
−




N
N x
x
W
dx
W
3
( ) 1
EFF
W
dm
dm
0
2
dm
	
(7.165)
In (7.165), N x
( ) is the charge density along depth. It is observed from (7.164) 
that with the scaling of CMOS technology, the device area LW decreases, so 
that the threshold voltage variability caused due to RDD increases. However, 
RDD decreases with scaling of oxide thickness. It is found that RDD is a 
major contributor, over 60%, to the threshold voltage mismatch.
7.9.2.2  Line Edge Roughness (LER)
Line edge roughness is the second most important source of process variabil­
ity. The cause of this phenomenon is statistical variation in the incident photon 
count during lithographic exposure and the absorption rate and molecular 
composition of the photo resist [27]. As a result, roughness occurs along the 
gate of the MOS transistor, causing variations in gate length along the width 
of the transistor. This is schematically shown in Figure 7.39. Experimentally it 
has been demonstrated that the LER is of the order of 4 nm and does not scale 
down with device scaling. This is because of the fact that the lithographic gap, 
defined as the difference between the wavelength of the light used for pat­
terning and the minimum feature size is increasing until extreme ultraviolet 
technology is available [28]. LER is considered to be a dominant source of 
process variability for short channel length devices beyond 45 nm technology 
node, where the amount of LER becomes a significant fraction compared to the 
channel length. Because the LER affects the channel length of the transistor, it 
leads to threshold voltage variations and variations of all other performances 
that depend on the channel length. Moreover, LER and RDD are statistically 
independent. The threshold voltage mismatch due to LER depends on the 
variations of the width of MOS transistors and is given by [28,29]
	
σ
∝
< σ
W
V
1
V
T RDD
,
T LER
,
	
(7.166)
	
σ
=
σ
+ σ
(
)
(
)
V
V
V
2
2
T total
T RDD
T LER
,
,
,
	
(7.167)

346
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
7.9.2.3  Oxide Thickness Variation (OTV)
Another important source of random intra-die process variability is atomic-
scale oxide thickness variation. With the downscaling of the physical gate 
oxide thickness up to 1 nm, it becomes equivalent to approximately five inter-
atom spacing. Through experimentation, it has been observed that the oxide 
thickness roughly varies by one or two atomic spacing [30]. The oxide thick­
ness variation occurs primarily due to interface roughness. The oxide thick­
ness variations also lead to variations of all performances related to oxide 
thickness either implicitly or explicitly. The threshold voltage variations due 
to oxide thickness are also statistically independent of RDD and LER, so that 
(7.167) is transformed to
	
σ
=
σ
+ σ
+ σ
(
)
(
)
(
)
V
V
V
V
2
2
2
T total
T RDD
T LER
T OTV
,
,
,
,
	
(7.168)
7.9.3  Characterization of Process Variability
Accurate characterization of process variability is a challenging task. The 
present subsection highlights the conventional approach and briefly dis­
cusses the new approaches. The development of an accurate characterization 
procedure is an important research topic.
7.9.3.1  Design Corner Approach
From an IC designer’s point of view, the collective effects of process variations 
are lumped into their effects on the performances of a circuit. These define the 
Deﬁnition of LWR
Deﬁnition of LER
FIGURE 7.39
Microscopic view of channel length along width illustrating LER and LWR.

347
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
design or process corners. The term corner refers to an imaginary box that sur­
rounds the guaranteed performance of the circuits, as shown in Figure 7.40. The 
corners for analog applications are slow NMOS and slow PMOS (SS) to charac­
terize the worst-case speed and fast NMOS and fast PMOS (FF) to characterize 
the worst-case power. The corners for digital applications are fast NMOS and 
slow PMOS (FS) to characterize the worst-case logic 1 and slow NMOS and 
fast PMOS (SF) to characterize the worst-case logic 0. The typical (TT) case 
characterizes the nominal design of the transistors. The corner parameters are 
generated by deviating the selected process-sensitive SPICE model parameters 
by a fixed number n of standard deviation σ. For example, an arbitrary SPICE 
parameter si of the typical model file is represented through
	
=
± σ
s
s
n
i
i
0
	
(7.169)
In (7.169), n is selected to set the fixed lower and upper limits of the worst-
case models. The direction of the deviation from the mean/typical value 
si
0  depends on whether increasing or decreasing the parameter makes the 
performance worse. This is usually determined by the sensitivity analysis, 
by computing the derivative of the performance with respect to the chosen 
SPICE parameter, and by considering the sign of the derivative.
The advantage of this design corner approach is that the corner models are 
supplied to the designers so that the circuit can be simulated at each of the 
process corners for statistical characterization of the effects of process vari­
abilities on circuit performances. However, this approach has two serious 
limitations. First, it has the significant risk of over- or underestimation of the 
process variations and their impact on the design. Overestimation makes 
the task of designing the circuits difficult such that the performances meet 
NMOS
SS
FS
FF
SF
TT
PMOS
Slow
Slow
Fast
Fast
FIGURE 7.40
Design corners.

348
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
the specifications at all the corners. On the other hand, underestimation may 
lead to manufacturability problems and eventual loss in yield. The second 
problem is that while generating the corner parameters, the correlations 
between the device parameters are ignored. This approach therefore does 
not provide adequate information about the robustness of the design.
7.9.3.2  Monte Carlo Simulation Approach
The Monte Carlo simulation technique is a stochastic technique widely used 
for statistical characterization of the performance parameter variations due 
to process variability. The Monte Carlo approach allows direct estimation 
of the yield of a VLSI circuit. In this technique, the crucial SPICE param­
eters are sampled from a pre-defined statistical distribution conforming 
to the process specification. This forms a large database of process-related 
SPICE parameters, and for each sample of the database, the performance 
parameters of the circuit are simulated through SPICE simulation. The sta­
tistical distributions of the performance parameters corresponding to each 
sample of the process database are estimated by determining the mean and 
the standard deviation. The method is very general and accurate for statisti­
cal characterization. The problem with the Monte Carlo-based approach is 
that hundreds of simulation runs have to be performed and depending upon 
the complexity of the circuit, the entire procedure may take several hours. 
However, some strategies are available to reduce the sample size, such as 
variance reduction techniques, stratified sampling, etc.
7.9.3.3  Statistical Corner Approach
The basic idea of the statistical corner model approach is to make the design 
corner approach more realistic by adding a realistic value of the standard 
deviation of the corresponding model parameter to its nominal value fol­
lowing (7.158). The value of each σ is obtained from the distribution of a 
large set of production data. The production data are actual measurement 
data collected over multiple dies, wafers, and lots. In the absence of actual 
measurement data, which are fairly common for new process technology, 
the production data may consist of calibrated TCAD simulation results. 
The electrical test data, whatever the collection procedure, are mapped to 
the appropriate SPICE parameters either directly or through some extrac­
tion procedure [31]. A statistical corner-based approach is thus more realistic 
compared to the conventional design corner approach discussed earlier and 
is faster compared to the Monte Carlo approach.
7.9.4  Simulation Results and Discussion
This section presents SPICE simulation results for statistical characterization 
of three important performance parameters of an n-channel MOS transistor. 

349
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
These are (1) threshold voltage VT, (2) OFF current IOFF , and (3) subthreshold 
slope S. The intra-die variations studied are random discrete dopants, line 
edge roughness, and oxide thickness variations. The Monte Carlo simulation 
technique has been utilized using 45-nm PTM model file.
7.9.4.1  Statistical Characterization of RDD
The effects of RDD on device performances are studied through SPICE 
simulation by varying the threshold voltage SPICE parameter VTHO. The 
reason behind such a selection is that with the variation of dopant number 
and hence the doping concentration within the channel, the long channel 
threshold voltage is primarily affected. In order to characterize the amount 
of variation of this parameter, there are two approaches. The first is to extract 
from TCAD simulation results, and the second is to calculate it from (7.164). 
Because the present work attempts to provide only the philosophy of the 
characterization procedure, the latter approach is performed, although the 
first one is preferred for accurate characterization.
The effective channel length and width of the chosen MOS transistor are 
37.5 nm and 120 nm, respectively. The substrate doping concentration is 
3.24E10/cm3, and the electrical oxide thickness is 1.75 nm. Substituting the 
necessary values, σVT RDD
,
 is calculated from (7.158) and is found to be 17.71 mV. 
The same amount of variation is taken for the SPICE parameter VTHO. For 
Monte Carlo simulation, a set of 1000 samples has been chosen. The dis­
tribution of the SPICE parameter VTHO is considered to be Gaussian. The 
simulation is performed both at low drain bias and high drain bias—that is, 
=
V
mV
50
DS
 and 
=
V
V
1
DS
.
The variations of the gate characteristics of the transistor due to RDD at low 
and high drain bias are shown in Figures 7.41(a) and 7.41(b), respectively. The 
performance samples are characterized by four measures: mean, standard 
deviation, skew factor, and kurtosis. These are summarized in Tables 7.4 and 
7.5 for low drain bias and high drain bias, respectively. The distributions of 
the samples for the high drain bias case are shown in Figures 7.42(a) through 
7.42(c). The distribution of threshold voltage is Gaussian, whereas that for 
IOFF  and S are log-normal.
7.9.4.2  Statistical Characterization of Line Edge Roughness (LER)
Line edge roughness is the distortion of the gate edge. In order to charac­
terize the distortion of the gate edge, a simplified model of a rough line as 
shown in Figure 7.43 is considered. The roughness in the gate edge is char­
acterized by high-frequency roughness and low-frequency roughness. The 
gate is divided into segments with characteristic width WC, which character­
izes the change at which the low frequency part changes the gate length. 
Within this portion, only high-frequency roughness is present. Assuming 

350
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
1.0
0.8
L = 65 nm
W = 130 nm
VDS = 0.05 V
0.6
IDS (A) in Log Scale
VGS
0.4
0.2
0.0
1E–11
1E–10
1E–9
1E–8
1E–7
1E–6
1E–5
(a)
1.0
0.8
L = 65 nm
W = 130 nm
VDS = 1 V
0.6
IDS (A) in Log Scale
VGS
0.4
0.2
0.0
1E–9
1E–8
1E–7
1E–6
1E–5
1E–4
(b)
FIGURE 7.41
(a) Effect of RDD process variations on the gate characteristics of the MOS transistor at VDS = 
50 mV. (b) Effect of RDD process variations on the gate characteristics of the MOS transistor at 
VDS  = 1 V.

351
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
TABLE 7.4
Summary of RDD, LER, and OTV on Subthreshold Slope, OFF Current, and Threshold Voltage at VDS = 50 mV
Statistical 
Parameters
RDD
LER
OTV
All
S
IOFF
VT
S
IOFF 
VT
S
IOFF 
VT
S
IOFF 
VT
STDEV (σ)
0.568 mV/
decade
38.8 pA
18.45 
mV
4.992e-3 
mV/
decade
1.89 pA
1.42 mV
0.749 
mV/
decade
4.888 
pA
0.743 mV
0.932 mV/
decade
39.11 pA
18.52 mV
MEAN (m)
96.45 mV/
decade
84.7 pA
0.464 V
96.424 
mV/
decade
78.40 
pA
0.463 V
96.39 
mV/
decade
78.35 
pA
0.463 V
96.45 mV/
decade
84.97 pA
0.462 V
SKEW
0.546578
1.255
–0.009
0.246
0.135
–0.026
–0.029
0.107
–0.045
0.918
1.060
–0.012
KURT
0.225871
2.004
–0.177
–1.879
–0.296
–0.302
–0.166
–0.135
–0.182
0.802
1.464
–0.142

352
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
0.50
VDS = 1 V
0.48
0.46
0.44
VT (V)
0.42
0.40
0.38
0
20
40
60
80
100
VT variation due to RDD
120
140
Count
(a)
1.2 n
VDS = 1 V
1.0 n
Ioﬀ (A)
800.0 p
600.0 p
400.0 p
0
40
80
120
Ioﬀ variation due to RDD
160
Count
(b)
FIGURE 7.42
(a) Statistical distributions of threshold voltage variations occurring due to RDD at high drain 
bias. (b) Statistical distributions of IOFF variations occurring due to RDD at high drain bias. (c) 
Statistical distributions of S variations occurring due to RDD at high drain bias. (continued)

353
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
fluctuations of two gate edges are uncorrelated, random variation of channel 
length due to LER is calculated as follows [29]:
	
σ =
+
σ
L
W W
2
1
/
C
LER 	
(7.170)
The edge locations of two different segments are uncorrelated and have a stan­
dard deviation σLER. In the present work, effective channel width W = 120 nm, 
L
Transistor Width W
Wc
FIGURE 7.43
Simplified model for estimating LER of the gate.
108.0 m
106.0 m
104.0 m
S (V/decade)
102.0 m
0
50
100
150
Count
250
200
300
350
400
450
500
S variation due to RDD
VDS = 1 V
(c)
FIGURE 7.42
(continued) (a) Statistical distributions of threshold voltage variations occurring due to RDD 
at high drain bias. (b) Statistical distributions of IOFF variations occurring due to RDD at high 
drain bias. (c) Statistical distributions of S variations occurring due to RDD at high drain bias.

354
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
=
W
nm
30
C
, and σ
=
nm
3
4
LER
. Substituting these, in (7.170), σ =
nm
0.843
L
. In 
BSIM, the effective channel length is defined in simple form as
	
=
+
−
L
L
XL
LINT
2
eff
drawn
	
(7.171)
In (7.171), XL is the channel length offset due to mask/etch effect, and LINT 
is the channel length offset parameter. In the present work, XL = −20 nm and 
LINT = 3.75 nm. The effects of LER on device performance are simulated in 
HSPICE Monte Carlo analysis by varying the value of the parameter XL. For 
Monte Carlo simulation, a set of 1000 samples has been chosen. The distribu­
tion of the SPICE parameter XL is considered to be Gaussian. The simulation 
is performed both at low drain bias and high drain bias (i.e., 
=
V
mV
50
DS
 
and 
=
V
V
1
DS
). The effects of LER on the chosen device performances are 
summarized in Tables 7.4 and 7.5, respectively. The effect of LER on sub-
threshold slope is not significant due to lack of any direct functional rela­
tionship between the two. However, at high drain bias, the depletion width 
changes due to DIBL effect so that fluctuations in subthreshold slope are 
observed. The distributions of the samples for the high drain bias case are 
shown in Figures 7.44(a) through 7.44(c).
7.9.4.3  Statistical Characterization of OTV
The oxide thickness variation is induced by atom-level interface rough­
ness between silicon and gate dielectric. The minimum magnitude of oxide 
thickness variation is the height of one silicon atom layer, which is 2.71 A0. 
The effects of OTV on the chosen device performances are summarized in 
Tables 7.4 and 7.5, respectively. The distributions of the samples for the high 
drain bias case are shown in Figures 7.45(a) through 7.45(c).
7.9.4.4  Statistical Characterization of Simultaneous Variations
In real devices, the various sources of process variations simultaneously 
affect the device and circuit performances. This can also be simulated in 
HSPICE. The cumulative effects of RDD, LER, and OTV on the chosen 
device performances are summarized in Tables 7.4 and 7.5. It is observed 
from the simulation results that (7.168) is valid. The relative contribu­
tions of the different process variations on the device performances are 
shown in Figures 7.46(a) and 7.46(b). It is observed that in all cases, RDD 
is a dominant source of process variations. Therefore, mitigation of RDD 
is an important challenge for the device designers for advancement of 
nanoscale VLSI circuits. In addition, proper characterization of the 
amount of process variability (RDD, LER, OTV) is also extremely impor­
tant, which is not an easy task. An elegant approach for this is to use 
backward propagation of the variance method through which these are 

355
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
TABLE 7.5
Summary of RDD, LER, and OTV on Subthreshold Slope, OFF Current, and Threshold Voltage at VDS = 1 V
Statistical 
Parameters
RDD
LER
OTV
All
S
IOFF
VT
S
IOFF
VT
S
VT
VT
S
IOFF
VT
STDEV σ
1.122 
mV/
decade
109.2 
pA
18.27 
mV
0.165 
mV/
decade
14.1 pA
2.904 
mV
0.68 
mV/
decade
125.2 
pA
0.061 
mV
1.45 mV/
decade
167.58 pA
18.48 mV
MEAN m
101.9 
mV/
decade
676.1 
pA
0.434 
V
101.434 
mV/
decade
659 pA
0.433 V
101.7 
mV/
decade
684.6 
pA
0.433 
V
101.48 
mV/
decade
702.30 pA
0.432 V
SKEW
2.123
1.249
–0.010
0.116
0.298
–0.111
1.998
0.992
–0.197
0.888
0.932
–0.004
KURT
5.339
1.979
–0.176
–0.341
–0.198
–0.215
4.846
1.152
0.243
0.978
1.098
–0.117

356
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
0.445
0.440
0.435
VT (V)
VT variation due to LER
VDS = 1 V
0.430
0.425
0.420
0
20
40
60
80
Count
100
120
140
160
(a)
720.0 p
700.0 p
680.0 p
660.0 p
Ioﬀ (A)
Ioﬀ variation due to LER
VDS = 1 V
640.0 p
620.0 p
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Count
(b)
FIGURE 7.44
(a) Statistical distributions of threshold voltage variations occurring due to LER at high drain 
bias. (b) Statistical distributions of IOFF variations occurring due to LER at high drain bias. (c) 
Statistical distributions of S variations occurring due to LER at high drain bias. (continued)

357
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
102.0 m
101.6 m
S (V/decade)
VDS = 1 V
101.2 m
100.8 m
0
50
100
150
200
250
S variation due to LER
Count
(c)
FIGURE 7.44
(continued) (a) Statistical distributions of threshold voltage variations occurring due to LER 
at high drain bias. (b) Statistical distributions of IOFF variations occurring due to LER at high 
drain bias. (c) Statistical distributions of S variations occurring due to LER at high drain bias.
0.4333
0.4332
0.4331
VT (V)
Count
VDS = 1 V
VT variation due to OTV
0.4330
0.4329
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
(a)
FIGURE 7.45
(a) Statistical distributions of threshold voltage variations occurring due to OTV at high drain 
bias. (b) Statistical distributions of IOFF variations occurring due to OTV at high drain bias. (c) 
Statistical distributions of S variations occurring due to OTV at high drain bias. (continued)

358
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
1.2n
VDS = 1 V
1.0n
Ioﬀ (A)
800.0p
600.0p
0
50
100
150
Ioﬀ variation due to OTV
200
Count
(b)
VDS = 1 V
S variation due to OTV
104.0 m
105.0 m
103.0 m
S (V/decade)
Count
102.0 m
101.0 m
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
(c)
FIGURE 7.45
(continued) (a) Statistical distributions of threshold voltage variations occurring due to OTV 
at high drain bias. (b) Statistical distributions of IOFF variations occurring due to OTV at high 
drain bias. (c) Statistical distributions of S variations occurring due to OTV at high drain bias.

359
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
VT
VDS = 50 mV
ALL
OTV
LER
RDD
S
Ioﬀ
Performance Parameters
0
10
20
30
40
(σ/m)*100
(a)
VT
ALL
OTV
LER
RDD
S
Ioﬀ
Performance Parameters
0
4
8
12
16
24
20
(σ/m)*100
(b)
FIGURE 7.46
(a) Contributions of different sources of process variabilities on the performance parameters at 
VDS = 50 mV. (b) Contributions of different sources of process variabilities on the performance 
parameters at VDS = 1 V.

360
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
estimated from the effects of these process variabilities on circuit perfor­
mances [32].
7.10  Summary and Conclusion
This chapter presents a comprehensive overview about characterizing a 
MOS transistor to be used in VLSI circuit simulation. The issues discussed 
along with the approaches mentioned are considered by the compact models 
used in commercial circuit simulation packages. However, the objective is 
to make the designers aware of the various issues related to the present-day 
VLSI MOS transistors, such that these are taken care of by the IC design­
ers while designing and optimizing any VLSI circuit. Moreover, with bet­
ter control over the physics of the circuit operations, the design procedure 
becomes more perfect and the design effort and time reduce drastically. In the 
sub-90 nm design domain, several challenges related to circuit performances 
can be solved at the device design level. This offers an additional flexibil­
ity to the designers for designing an optimal circuit without adding any 
extra circuit components, thus making the circuit area and power efficient. 
Technology-aware circuit design and device-circuit co-design are important 
areas of research in nanoscale VLSI circuit design, as presented here in a 
comprehensive manner.
References
	
1.	 K.S. Kundert, The Designer’s Guide to SPICE and SPECTRE®, Kluwer Academic, 
Dordrecht, 2003.
	
2.	 R. Rohrer, Growing SPICE, IEEE Solid State Circuit Mag., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 30–35, 
June 2011.
	
3.	 A.B. Bhattacharya, Compact MOSFET Models for VLSI Design, IEEE Press, 
Wiley, Singapore, 2009.
	
4.	 W. Zhao and Y. Cao, New generation of predictive technology model for sub-
45 nm early design exploration, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 
2816–2823, November 2006.
	
5.	 Y. Taur and T.H. Ning, Fundamentals of Modern VLSI Devices, Cambridge 
University Press, United Kingdom, 2008.
	
6.	 Y. Cheng and C. Hu, MOSFET Modeling and BSIM3 User’s Guide, Kluwer 
Academic, Dordrecht, 2002.
	
7.	 Y. Tsividis, Operation and Modeling of the MOS Transistor, 2nd ed., Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, 1999.

361
MOSFET Characterization for VLSI Circuit Simulation
	
8.	 M.V. Dunga, X. Xi, J. He, W. Liu, K.M. Cao, X. Jin, J.J. Ou, M. Chan, A.M. Niknejad, 
and C. Hu, BSIM4.6.0 MOSFET model, 2006. Available at http://www-device.
eecs.berkeley.edu/bsim/Files/BSIM4/BSIM460/doc/BSIM460_Manual.pdf.
	
9.	 Z.H. Liu, C. Hu, J.H. Huang, T.Y. Chan, M.C. Jeng, P.K. Ko, and Y.C. Cheng, 
Threshold voltage model for deep-submicrometer MOSFETs, IEEE Trans. 
Electron Devices, vol. 40, pp. 86–95, January 1993.
	 10.	 J.R. Brews, W. Fichtner, E.H. Nicollian, and S.M. Sze, Generalized guide for 
MOSFET miniaturization, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. EDL-1, no. 1, pp. 2–4, 
January 1980.
	 11.	 A. Ortiz-Conde, F.J.G. Sanchez, J.J. Liou, A. Cerdeira, M. Estrada, and Y. Yue, A 
review of recent MOSFET threshold voltage extraction methods, Microelectron. 
Reliability, vol. 42, pp. 583–596, 2002.
	 12.	 R.M. Swanson and J.D. Meindl, Ion implanted complementary MOS transistors 
in low voltage circuits, IEEE J. Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-7, no. 2, pp. 146–193, 
April 1972.
	 13.	 Y.C. Yeo, Q. Lu, P. Ranade, H. Takeuchi, K.J. Yang, I. Polishchuk, T.-J. King, C. 
Hu, S.C. Song, H.F. Luan, and D.-L. Kwong, Dual-metal gate CMOS technology 
with ultrathin silicon nitride gate dielectric, IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 22, 
no. 4, pp. 227–229, May 2001.
	 14.	 P.H. Woerlee, M.J. Knitel, R. Langevelde, D.B.M. Klaassen, L.F. Tiemeijer, A.J. 
Scholten, and A.T.A. Zegers-van Duijnhoven, RF-CMOS performance trends, 
IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 1776–1782, August 2001.
	 15.	 J. E. Meyer, MOS models and circuit simulation, RCA Rev., vol. 32, pp. 42–63, 1971.
	 16.	 M.A. Cirit, The Meyer model revisited: Why is charge not conserved?, IEEE 
Tran. Computer Aided Design, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 1033–1037, October 1989.
	 17.	 D.E. Ward and R.W. Dutton, A charge-oriented model for MOS transistor capac­
itances, IEEE J. Solid State Circuits, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 703–708, October 1978.
	 18.	 R. Shrivastava and K. Fitzpatrick, A simple model for the overlap capacitance 
of a VLSI MOS device, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. ED-29, no. 12, pp. 1870–
1875, December 1982.
	 19.	 F.M. Klassen and J. Prins, Thermal noise of MOS transistors, Phillips Research 
Report, vol. 22, pp. 505–514, 1967.
	 20.	 M. Haartman and M. Ostling, Low Frequency Noise in Advanced MOS Devices, 
Springer, New York, 2007.
	 21.	 K.K. Hung, P.K. Ko, C. Hu, and Y.C. Cheng, A unified model for the flicker 
noise in metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistors, IEEE Trans. Electron 
Devices, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 654–665, March 1990.
	 22.	 K.K. Hung, P.K. Ko, C. Hu, and Y.C. Cheng, A physics based MOSFET noise 
model for circuit simulators, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1323–
1333, May 1990.
	 23.	 E.P. Vandamme and L.K.J. Vandamme, Critical discussion on unified 1/f noise 
models for MOSFETs, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 2146–2152, 
November 2000.
	 24.	 S.K. Saha, Modeling process variability in scaled CMOS technology, IEEE Design 
and Test of Computers, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 8–16, March–April 2010.
	 25.	 P.A. Stolk, F.P. Widdershoven, and D.B.M. Klassen, Modeling statistical dopant 
fluctuations in MOS transistors, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 
1960–1971, September 1998.

362
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
	 26.	 K. Takeuchi, T. Fukai, T. Tsunomura, A.T. Putra, A. Nishida, S. Kamohara, and T. 
Hiramoto, Understanding random threshold voltage fluctuation by comparing 
multiple fabs and technologies, Proc. IEDM 2007, Technical Digest IEEE Electron 
Device Meeting, pp. 467–470.
	 27.	 K. Bernstein, D.J. Frank, A.E. Gattiker, W. Haensch, B.L. Ji, S.R. Nassif, E.J. Nowak, 
D.J. Pearson, and N.J. Rohrer, High performance CMOS variability in the 65-nm 
regime and beyond, IBM J. Res. Dev., vol. 50, no. 4/5, July/September 2006.
	 28.	 C. Millar, S. Roy, and A. Asenov, Understanding LER-induced MOSFET VT vari­
ability—Part I: Three-dimensional simulation of large statistical samples, IEEE 
Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 2801–2807, November 2010.
	 29.	 J.A. Croon, G. Storms, S. Winkelmeier, et al., Line edge roughness: Characterization, 
modeling and impact on device behavior, Proceedings of IEDM 2002, Technical 
Digest IEEE Electron Device Meeting, pp. 307–310.
	 30.	 A. Asenov, S. Kaya, and J.H. Davies, Intrinsic threshold voltage fluctuations in 
decanano MOSFETs due to local oxide thickness variations, IEEE Transactions on 
Electron Devices, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 112–119, January 2002.
	 31.	 J.C. Chen, C. Hu, C.-P. Wan, P. Bendix, and A. Kapoor, E-T based statistical mod­
eling and compact statistical circuit simulation methodologies, Proceedings of 
IEDM, Technical Digest IEEE Electron Device Meeting, 1996.
	 32.	 C.C. McAndrew, I. Stevanovic, X. Li, and G. Gildenblat, Extensions to back­
ward propagation of variance for statistical modeling, IEEE Design and Test of 
Computers, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 36–43, March–April 2010.

363
8
Process Simulation of a MOSFET 
Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
Atanu Kundu
CONTENTS
8.1	
Introduction.................................................................................................364
8.2	
Why Silicon?................................................................................................365
8.3	
Initial Meshing of the Wafer.....................................................................366
8.4	
Start Material Initialization.......................................................................367
8.5	
Defining the Initial Mesh...........................................................................368
8.6	
N-Buried Layer............................................................................................368
8.7	
Oxidation and Growth of the Initial Oxide............................................368
8.8	
Wafer Masking for Buried Layer Implantation......................................369
8.9	
Screen Oxidation.........................................................................................371
8.10	 Buried Layer Implantation........................................................................371
8.11	 Buried Layer Drive-In................................................................................372
8.12	 P-Type Epitaxial Growth............................................................................373
8.13	 Pad Oxide Formation................................................................................. 374
8.14	 Gate Under Channel Doping....................................................................375
8.15	 Gate Oxide Formation................................................................................ 376
8.16	 Gate-Poly Deposition..................................................................................377
8.17	 Polysilicon Gate Doping.............................................................................377
8.18	 Gate-Poly Mask...........................................................................................378
8.19	 Creation of n+ Source and Drain Regions...............................................379
8.20	 Creation of p+ Region................................................................................380
8.21	 Borophosphosilicate Glass (BPSG) Deposition.......................................382
8.22	 BPSG Anneal...............................................................................................383
8.23	 Contact Mask Formation...........................................................................384
8.24	 First Layer of Metal (metal-1) Deposition................................................386
8.25	 Metal-1 Mask...............................................................................................386
8.26	 Inter-Metal Dielectric (IMD) Deposition.................................................387
8.27	 Second Layer of Metal (metal-2) Mask.....................................................388
8.28	 Second Layer of Metal (metal-2) Deposition...........................................389
8.29	 Metal-2 Final Mask.....................................................................................389
8.30	 MOSFET.inp.................................................................................................392
8.31	 Mask File Named t.tl1................................................................................397

364
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
8.1  Introduction
The objective of this chapter is to fabricate a 5 μm 2D n-MOSFET (n-type 
metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor) using process simulator 
TSUPREM-4 [1] and device simulator Medici [2]. SUPREM is the acronym of 
Stanford University Process Engineering Modeling. Taurus TSUPREM-4 is for 
the version IV, which is a 2D simulation program. TSUPREM-4 is a computer 
program for the simulation of the fabrication steps required for the manufacture 
of silicon integrated circuits and for other integrated circuits (ICs). TSUPREM-4 
simulates the changes in semiconductor structure which take place after various 
processing steps used during the actual fabrication procedure.
As the device dimensions have been reduced to micro or nano level, the 
specialization and application of technology computer aided design (TCAD) 
tools in new device creation for future technology generations are indis­
pensable to harness the ever-increasing complexity and challenges of the 
“ever-shrinking transistors.” One of the main advantages of TCAD tools is 
visualization. For deep sub-micron devices, it is possible to visualize the evo­
lution of the actual cross-sections of the structure during various process 
simulation steps in order to obtain better insight into the IC processing steps. 
TSUPREM-4, a popular commercial TCAD process simulator tool, allows 
verifying the entire structure after every realistic silicon wafer processing 
step via hands-on simulation, without the need for high-cost IC processing 
facilities. Moreover, these TCAD tools after calibration exhibit impressive 
predictive power with required accuracy, which can be utilized to speed up 
the technology integration and transfer to volume manufacturing. Therefore 
it is possible to experiment and explore the impact of process flow modifica­
tions at virtually no cost. This results in the possibility of manufacturing 
high-yield profitable product with short product development life cycles, 
which is absolutely necessary given the huge costs of nanoscale integrated 
circuit fabrication lines.
8.32	 What Is Medici............................................................................................398
8.33	 Execution of Command.............................................................................398
8.34	 Interfacing between TSUPREM-4 and Medici.......................................398
8.35	 Rename Electrodes from TSUPREM-4 to Standard Names.................399
8.36	 Major Physical Models...............................................................................400
8.37	 Initial Guess/Convergence and Solution Methods................................401
8.38	 Nonlinear System Solutions and Current-Voltage Analysis.................402
8.39	 Post-Processing and Parameter Extraction.............................................402
8.40	 Drain Current versus Drain Voltage Simulation....................................403
8.41	 Drain Current versus Gate Voltage Simulation......................................405
8.42	 Conclusion...................................................................................................407
References..............................................................................................................408

365
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
8.2  Why Silicon?
• Silicon can be easily oxidized to form high-quality silicon-dioxide 
(SiO2) insulator, which is used as a masking or barrier material for 
selective doping steps required for IC fabrication.
• The SiO2 layer is essential in metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) 
device structure, and high-quality Si-SiO2 interface formation is pos­
sible to form the gate of MOSFET.
• Silicon also has wider band-gap than germanium, which means that 
silicon devices can operate at higher temperatures than their germa­
nium counterparts.
• Silicon is available abundantly in nature as its primary constituent 
is ordinary sand. So, silicon provides a very low cost source of semi­
conductor device or IC fabrication material.
Actual industrial device fabrication consists of several steps that have been 
followed in fabrication procedure. The process starts with initializing a 
<100> silicon wafer of 5 μm, and it requires proper meshing of the device.
During the selective doping procedure, several portions of the wafer need 
to be masked or covered during various steps of the fabrication. By conven­
tion, the extension .tl1 is used for the mask layout files used by TSUPREM-4. 
This mask file named ‘t.tl1’ has been used here as an input file for the entire 
device fabrication where nine different mask names have been assigned for 
different fabrication steps.
To run any program in TSUPREM-4, the linux environment is required 
and one has to type ‘TSUPREM4’ followed by the filename having .inp exten­
sion in the terminal. The file in which the script is written is named MOSFET.
inp. To run this script file, the command would be ‘TSUPREM4 MOSFET.inp’. 
With this script file another file is essential to execute the program: the mask 
file. The mask file is of extension .tl1. Here the mask file name is t.tl1, which 
contains the name of the masks with their length. Mask file has to be linked 
with the MOSFET.inp file as an input file in the beginning of its script file by 
the command MASK IN.FILE = t.tl1. Now it is possible to call any of its mask 
names when required. Here masks used in the t.tl1 file are of names gateoxet, 
nbl, Nplus, contact, metal1, metal2, metal3, and gateunderdoping. All lengths are 
by default in micrometers. The first statement of the mask file 1e3 or 1000 
signifies the length mentioned here divided by 1e3 to convert it into microm­
eters. For example, in the mask named gateoxet, only one length is mentioned 
here from (1600–4100); that is why ‘1’ is mentioned after the mask name, like 
gateoxet 1. (1600–4100) μm signifies that it is the length 1.6 to 4.1 μm of the 0 to 
5 μm device as it is divided by 1e3. Similarly for mask name contact, there are 
three lengths, so 3 is mentioned after the mask name contact, like contact 3, 
and different lengths are (300–1100), (2550–2850), and (4400–4850).

366
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
8.3  Initial Meshing of the Wafer
TSUPREM-4 is used to simulate 2D structures [2]. In the TSUPREM-4 coor­
dinate system, the distance from the surface of the wafer into the silicon is 
positive (y-axis). The x-axis values are numbered from left to right. The device 
performance is mainly dependent on vertical grid-spacing, and grid spacing 
is crucial for predictive technology simulation [3,4]. The ‘mesh’ statement gen­
erates and controls the automatic simulation grids for TSUPREM-4. Meshing 
refinement is chosen in such a way that meshing density is very high on the 
top side of the wafer as the device structure will be grown there, so that car­
rier flow and any other changes occurring due to the terminal voltages will be 
found out accurately. The plot shown in Figure 8.1 shows the mesh generation 
of the 5μm wafer, where the MASK IN.FILE = t.tl1 statement signifies the input 
file name is t and extension is tl1. The output figure will be plotted with name 
‘Field,Poly,Contact’. From Figure 8.1, it can be seen that a denser grid is chosen 
in the areas where a lot of activity and precision of information are important.
The ‘grid.fac’ parameter multiplies all grid spacing specifications in the 
horizontal and vertical directions. By default this is set to 1 which produces 
fine grid required for accurate simulations. To increase simulation speed this 
value can be increased, but for more accurate simulation ‘grid.fac’ should be 
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
8.00
4.00
0.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.1
Initial mesh used for entire device fabrication. Plotted by PLOT.2D GRID statement.

367
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
reduced as required. The dx.min, dx.max, dy.surf, dy.activ, and dy.bot param­
eters on the mesh statement are multiplied by grid.fac.
Placement of the grid line in the x direction is controlled by the parameters 
‘dx.min,’ dx.max’ in the ‘mesh’ statement. The depth of the surface region in 
the vertical grid is controlled by the ‘ly.surf’ parameter. The grid spacing 
between horizontal grid lines in the y direction in the surface region is con­
trolled by ‘dy.surf’ parameter. This spacing is used between y = 0 and y = 
‘dy.surf’, and the spacing is multiplied by ‘grid.fac’ when it is used. The depth 
of the bottom of the active region is controlled by ‘ly.activ’ parameter, and 
the grid spacing between horizontal lines at the bottom of the active region 
in the y direction of the active region is controlled by ‘dy.activ’ parameter. 
The grid spacing varies geometrically between dy.surf at ly.surf and dy.activ 
at ly.activ. This spacing is multiplied by grid.fac when it is used. The depth 
of the bottom of the structure in the default vertical grid is controlled by 
the parameter ‘ly.bot’, and the grid spacing y direction at the bottom of the 
structure is controlled by the ‘dy.bot’ parameter. Spacing will be multiplied 
by ‘grid.fac’ when it is used.
mesh grid.fac=1.0 dx.min=0.002 dx.max=0.1 ly.surf=0.06 
dy.surf=0.001 +
ly.activ=0.5 dy.activ=0.02 ly.bot=10 dy.bot=1
MASK IN.FILE=t.tl1 PRINT GRID=“Field,Poly,Contact”
8.4  Start Material Initialization
Initial material of length 5 μm of <100> Si wafer with initial dose of boron 
1e15 cm–3 has been taken to create the device on the initial material. Usually 
<100> silicon material is used due to the fact that at the time of fabrica­
tion processing, <100> silicon wafer produces the lowest charges at the 
oxide-silicon interface [5–7]. There is a strong dependence on the built-in 
charge on the orientation of the silicon crystal. In the case of MOSFET, sur­
face charge is directly related to the sign and magnitude of the threshold 
voltage. In case of <100> silicon material, the value of the built-in surface 
charge is lowest [3,8]. It also gives higher mobility in the fabricated device. 
The ‘initialize’ statement will set up the initial structure including back­
ground doping level, crystal orientation, and resistivity of the wafer for 
a simulation. A structure must be initialized after meshing is done and 
before any processing steps.
initialize ratio=1.4 <100> rot.sub=0 boron=1e+15 width=5.0

368
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
8.5  Defining the Initial Mesh
SELECT TITLE=“Initial Mesh”
PLOT.2D GRID C.GRID=8
It is clear from Figure 8.1 that meshing density is very high on the top por­
tion of the wafer as the device structure will be grown there, so carrier flow 
and any other changes due to the terminal voltages will take place there.
8.6  N-Buried Layer
An N-buried layer (NBL) is implanted on this wafer which allows source 
voltage to be raised above the substrate voltage and to avoid leakage current 
toward the base which could be avoided by silicon-on-insulator (SOI) type 
devices. SOI structures become very unstable in high voltages as a reverse-
biased drain-bulk p-n junction generates a huge amount of heat that cannot 
be dissipated with an insulator, and self heating becomes a serious concern 
in terms of device reliability issues [9–10]. Therefore, antimony of dose 1e15 
cm–3 (which equals 1 × 1015 cm–3) has been implanted followed by drive in volt­
age to place the NBL layer at the proper position on the wafer. This N-layer in 
P-type wafer will create a p-n junction that will stop high bottom leakage cur­
rent flow due to high supply voltage at the drain end. As both initial wafer and 
buried layer are doped by boron and antimony of dose 1e15 cm–3, respectively, 
a p-n junction of equal depletion depth in both sides will be formed. For the 
actual structure an epitaxial layer of 14 μm is grown on this wafer where device 
parameter optimization is possible due to this epitaxial layer.
8.7  Oxidation and Growth of the Initial Oxide
The step required for creating an oxide layer on a semiconductor is called 
oxidation. For oxidation of silicon, oxygen is made to react with silicon at 800 
to 1200°C. For wet oxidation the presence of H2O in the reaction is essential. 
Though the dry oxidation rate is slow, the quality of oxide grown in this 
procedure is very good. Usually, dry oxidation is done in the presence of 
inert gas that acts as a carrier to control oxygen. Inert gas will also ensure 
that any other gas cannot take part in this reaction. In TSUPREM-4 the dif­
fusion statement is used for this purpose. For fabrication of desired device 
structure, several steps may be used for the oxidation. The first line of the 

369
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
statement of the program below signifies that the initial temperature of the 
furnace is 800°C which will rise and reach the final temperature 1000°C for 
20 minutes. Similar steps will be followed by changing conditions.
This layer is basically grown on the wafer for masking purposes which is 
required for the dopant implementation for NBL layer formation. As there is 
no mask assigned on it before the diffusion step, the entire SiO2 layer will be 
formed on top of the whole wafer.
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 T.FINAL=1000 TIME=20 F.O2=0.5 F.N2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=65 F.O2=0.5 F.N2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=5 F.O2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=190 F.O2=5.975 F.H2=10.4 F.HCL=0.475
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=1 F.O2=5.5 F.N2=5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=10 F.N2=10
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 T.FINAL=800 TIME=50 F.N2=10
print layers
8.8  Wafer Masking for Buried Layer Implantation
As the middle portion of wafer material has been chosen for the dopant 
implantation for NBL layer formation, so the rest of the wafer top needs to be 
covered by masking material, as a negative photoresist is being used here on 
the wafer of thickness 1 μm. The mask used here from the mask file (t.tl1) is 
nbl. It will be developed and be a selective part of the photoresist, and oxide 
will be etched out simultaneously due to the nature of the photoresist mate­
rial and the etchant.
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST NEGATIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=nbl
DEVELOP
etch oxide
The above sets of commands are used to display the device structure at any 
fabrication step as in Figure 8.2. These sets of commands can be used after 
every step of fabrication to have a look at the device structure formed at that 
point of time. Plot.2D will plot the characteristics, boundaries, junctions, and 
depletion edges of the two-dimensional simulated structure. The title of the 
paragraph will be printed along with the simulated output as mentioned 
here: “Deposition of negative photoresist.” Different colors have been assigned 
for different materials to display at the output. Different doping contour is 
being plotted by assigning different colors by FOREACH command. This 
procedure has been repeated for different dopants such as boron, phosphor, 

370
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
arsenic, and antimony. These dopants are commonly used for any semicon­
ductor fabrication procedure and also used for this device fabrication. After 
every step of fabrication, a created structure has been generated and is now 
being shown in the figure.
SELECT Z=LOG10(BORON) TITLE=“ Deposition of negative photoresist “
PLOT.2D
COLOR	
SILICON	 COLOR=7
COLOR	
OXIDE	
COLOR=5
COLOR	
NITRIDE	COLOR=3
COLOR	
PHOTORESIST	
COLOR=2
COLOR	
polysili	 COLOR=1
COLOR	
aluminum	 COLOR=3
FOREACH X	(14 TO 21 STEP 1)
COLOR MIN.V=X MAX.V=(X + 1) COLOR=(X - 1)
END
SELECT	
Z=LOG10(phosphor)
FOREACH X (14 TO 21 STEP 1)
COLOR MIN.V=X MAX.V=(X + 1) COLOR=(X - 3)
END
SELECT	
Z=LOG10(arsenic)
FOREACH X (19 TO 21 STEP 1)
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
7.50
2.50
–2.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.2 (See color insert)
Deposition of negative photoresist of thickness 1 μm on grown oxide; a portion (2 to 3 μm) of the 
photoresist is being etched out by using mask NBL.

371
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
COLOR MIN.V=X MAX.V=(X + 1) COLOR=(X - 5)
END
SELECT	
Z=LOG10(antimony)
FOREACH X (14 TO 21 STEP 1)
COLOR MIN.V=X MAX.V=(X + 1) COLOR=(X - 7)
END
COLOR	
OXIDE	
COLOR=10
COLOR	
NITRIDE	
COLOR=3
COLOR	
PHOTORESIST	
COLOR=2
COLOR	
polysili	 COLOR=1
COLOR	
aluminum	 COLOR=3
8.9  Screen Oxidation
A layer of thin oxide is required to form on the wafer at the time of dopant 
implantation. This layer of oxide is called screen oxide and it protects the 
wafer when dopant bombardment takes place during the ion implanta­
tion procedure. Again, few oxidation steps are required in various con­
trolled conditions.
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 T.FINAL=900 TIME=10 F.O2=0.5 F.N2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=15 F.O2=0.5 F.N2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=5 F.O2=9.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=5 F.O2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=28 F.O2=9.0 F.HCL=0.19
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=5 F.O2=9.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=30 F.N2=10.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 T.FINAL=800 TIME=37.5 F.N2=10
print layers
8.10  Buried Layer Implantation
Due to nbl mask, which is defined as 2000 to 3000 in mask file, which effec­
tively will be 2 to 3 μm as the rule defined in the mask file, there will be 
an opening of 2 to 3 μm on the wafer. The statement implant antimony will 
implant through it. As few other conditions like dopant angle of dopant 
implantation, dose and energy of implanted dopant by which it will be 
implanted into the wafer, and the tilt at which it will be implanted need to be 

372
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
mentioned as stated by the line here. It defines tilt as 7° and dopant dose is 
1.0 e15 cm–3, and energy of the implanted ion is 100 KeV. After implantation of 
the layer of screen oxide and the rest of the oxide layer on which photoresist 
was placed, what was used before this step is being removed by the state­
ment ‘etch oxide all’. The photoresist was placed on oxide, so etching of oxide 
will automatically remove photoresist.
implant antimony pearson tilt=7 dose=1.0e15 energy=100
etch oxide all
8.11  Buried Layer Drive-In
As shown in Figure 8.3, a buried layer is implanted very close to the surface 
of the wafer in the region where it is bombarded. When it is needed to be 
placed deep inside the wafer, a drive-in voltage is required to drive these 
dopants through the wafer toward the positive Y axis, as shown in Figure 8.4.
Dopant drive-in operation is performed by high temperature. Due to ther­
mal agitation, the dopants will move in the downward direction of the wafer. 
So again diffusion statement is required, and at the end of the process a layer 
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
4.00
2.00
0.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.3 (See color insert)
Implantation of antimony of pearson tilt = 7, dose = 1.0 e15, and energy = 100, which will be 
used as NBL.

373
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
of SiO2 will be formed automatically by nature, which is needed to be etched 
out by the etch oxide all statement.
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 T.FINAL=1200 TIME=100 F.O2=0.5 F.N2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1200 TIME=600 F.O2=0.5 F.N2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1200 T.FINAL=1000 TIME=67 F.O2=9
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=20 F.O2=10
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=67 F.O2=5.5 F.H2=10.4
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=1 F.O2=5.5 F.N2=5.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 T.FINAL=800 TIME=67 F.N2=10
etch oxide all
print layers
8.12  P-Type Epitaxial Growth
Drive-in voltage will place the NBL layer in proper place in the wafer. This 
N-layer in a P-type wafer will create a p-n junction that will stop high bot­
tom leakage current flow due to high supply voltage at the drain end. To 
ensure this, both the initial wafer and buried layer are doped by boron and 
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
8.00
4.00
0.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.4 (See color insert)
Placement of antimony dopant in the wafer after the application of drive-in voltage on it.

374
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
antimony of dose 1e15 cm–3, respectively. A p-n junction of the same deple­
tion depth on both sides will be formed. For the actual structure an epitaxial 
layer of 14 μm is grown on this wafer, as device parameter optimization is 
possible in this epitaxial layer. It is always required to grow an epitaxial layer 
on the initial wafer, as shown in Figure 8.5, to avoid crystal defects in the 
initial wafer and parameter optimization is convenient in this epitaxial layer.
The statement epitaxy will create an epitaxial layer of 14 μm which will 
grow on this initial wafer [9–12], as stated below.
EPITAXY TIME=14 TEMPERAT=1150 THICKNES=14 dx =.001 ydy=0.0 
SPACES=100 +
RESISTIV BORON=45
print layers
8.13  Pad Oxide Formation
During the masking process, as shown in Figure 8.6, the masking materials, 
nitride, and photoresist are not deposited directly on the wafer, as strain 
would be created on the wafer when the photoresist hardens due to ultravio­
let (UV) light. This strain on the silicon material may change the property 
of the silicon material. So whenever this layer for masking is deposited, it is 
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
5.00
–5.00
–15.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.5 (See color insert)
Placement of NBL and epitaxial growth on the initial wafer.

375
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
always essential to grow a layer of oxide on the wafer to avoid strain. Hence, 
a layer of 500 A0 SiO2 has been grown here using the following statements.
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 T.FINAL=900 TIME=10 F.O2=9.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=15 F.O2=9.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=18 F.O2=5.5 F.H2=10.4
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=1 F.O2=5.5 F.N2=5.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=10 F.N2=10
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 T.FINAL=800 TIME=25 F.N2=10
print layers
8.14  Gate Under Channel Doping
Gate under substrate region is doped in this portion by boron of dose 
2.0 e11cm–3. The mask chosen has been named ‘gateunderdoping’. Threshold 
voltage modification can be done by this doping. The statements needed to 
perform this doping procedure are given below. With the dose 2.0 e11cm–3, 
threshold voltage achieved is 0.65 V.
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST NEGATIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=gateunderdoping
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–13.00
–13.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.6 (See color insert)
Pad oxide on the wafer is shown; here the y-axis has been chosen up to −12 μm.

376
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
DEVELOP
etch nitride
etch oxide thickness=0.02
implant boron pearson tilt=7 dose=2.0e11 energy=100
etch nitride all
8.15  Gate Oxide Formation
For a MOS structure, gate oxide has to be formed. As gate length has been 
chosen 1.6 to 4.1 μm or effectively 2.5 μm, so the rest of the wafer has to be 
covered by mask, as shown in Figure 8.7. A mask has been assigned a length 
of 1600 to 4100 named gateoxet in mask file. As photoresist used here in most 
of the cases is the negative type, part of the length mentioned in the mask 
file will be dissolved when it is developed. Now the oxidation steps have 
been executed to form the gate oxide at the end of the oxidation steps. The 
entire photoresist and nitride will be removed from the remaining part of 
the wafer.
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 T.FINAL=900 TIME=10 F.O2=0.25 F.N2=10
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=5 F.O2=0.25 F.N2=10
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=3 F.O2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=47.5 F.O2=9.5 F.HCL=0.19
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–13.00
–13.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.7 (See color insert)
Structure of the wafer after formation of the gate oxide.

377
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=3 F.O2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=15 F.N2=10.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 T.FINAL=800 TIME=37.5 F.N2=10
print layers
etch Photoresist
etch nitride all
8.16  Gate-Poly Deposition
MOS gate material may be polysilicon or metals [13]. As a gate metal, molybde­
num or aluminum can be used. Polysilicon is polycrystalline silicon, a material 
consisting of small silicon crystals. Though polysilicon gate has severe disad­
vantages, such as low conductivity which can cause occurrence of delay in 
circuits as well as unwanted variation of threshold voltage of the MOSFET 
due to polysilicon depletion effect, polysilicon has several advantages over 
the metal gate. Polysilicon behaves like a perfect conductor once a poly-layer 
is doped properly, and it will reduce the delay in channel formation [14–17]. 
Typically doping concentrations are of the order of 1020 atoms cm–3. The main 
reason for use of the polysilicon gate is that fabrication processes require very 
high temperature annealing after the initial doping to passivate the radiation 
damage caused to the silicon crystal structure by the ion implantation [18–
19]. Metal gate would melt under such conditions, whereas polysilicon will 
not. Polysilicon needs a single-step process of etching, whereas a metal gate 
requires multiple steps. Threshold voltage of the MOSFET is corrected with 
the work function difference between the gate and the channel.
The statement below will deposit polysilicon on the entire wafer in the 
ambient temperature 625°C and pressure of 1.0 atmosphere. This statement 
also mentions the thickness of the deposited polysilicon material which is 
mentioned here as 0.4 μm. This polysilicon material will be used as polysili­
con gate material of the MOSFET, as shown in Figure 8.8.
deposition polysili temperature=625 pressure=1.0 thickness=0.4 
concentr
8.17  Polysilicon Gate Doping
Polysilicon doping is done by the following expression which is essential to 
increase the conductivity of the gate material.
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=950 TIME=20 INERT

378
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
8.18  Gate-Poly Mask
The polysilicon material is deposited on the entire wafer as shown in 
Figure 8.9. It is necessary to remove the unnecessary extra portion of poly­
silicon and oxide from the wafer. Here polysilicon is deposited on the total 
length of the gate oxide. So the same mask gateoxet has been called again, and 
the photoresist used here is a positive type so that from length 1600 to 4100 
of the photoresist will remain on it and will use it as a mask for that portion. 
The remaining part of the photoresist will be dissolved when it is devel­
oped. This part nitride and polysilicon will be etched out by etch nitride and 
etch polysili statements. After the selective polysilicon etching, the remaining 
nitride will be removed using the etch nitride all statement. Figure 8.10 shows 
2.5 μm polysilicon gate formation on the gate oxide.
DEPOSITION NITRIDE THICKNES=0.10 CONCENTR
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST POSITIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=gateoxet
DEVELOP
etch nitride
etch polysili
etch nitride all
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–13.00
–14.00
–13.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.8 (See color insert)
Polysilicon material deposition on the grown gate oxide material.

379
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
8.19  Creation of n+ Source and Drain Regions
The next step of fabrication is to create source and drain regions for the 
n-MOSFET, as shown in Figure  8.10. For n-type doping, arsenic dopant is 
used. The mask name used to mask the rest of the wafer is Nplus. Two lengths 
assigned in the Nplus mask are of lengths 900 to 1500 and 4200 to 4900. To 
cover the rest of the wafer top, it must be masked. So a negative photoresist has 
been deposited and mask name Nplus has been called, followed by the mask 
develop stage. From 0.9 to 1.5 μm and 4.2 to 4.9 μm there will not be any pho­
toresist as the mask deposited was negative-type photoresist. Now the nitride 
and oxide materials from these portions will also be removed to implant 
arsenic in these regions for source/drain formation in the above-mentioned 
regions. Here arsenic of dose 6.0 e15 cm–3 with energy 100 keV has been doped 
in equal and opposite tilt 7° and –7° to get a source drain shape. After comple­
tion, source drain doping, photoresist, and nitride are removed from the entire 
wafer which was used as a mask at the time of source/drain doping.
DEPOSITION NITRIDE THICKNES=0.15 CONCENTR
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST NEGATIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=Nplus
DEVELOP
etch nitride
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–13.00
–14.00
–13.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.9 (See color insert)
Polysilicon gate formation on the gate oxide after selective polysilicon material by etching from 
the wafer; polysilicon gate length is 2.5 μm.

380
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
etch oxide
implant arsenic pearson tilt=7 dose=6.0e15 energy=100
implant arsenic pearson tilt=-7 dose=6.0e15 energy=100
etch PHOTORESIST
etch nitride all
8.20  Creation of p+ Region
The next step is to create a p region that will remain connected to the sub­
strate material and finally work as a bulk material. This p region mask length 
is chosen as 100 to 700, which means 0.1 to 0.7 μm, and the mask is named 
pplus. Figure 8.11 shows the formation of the p region that will be used as 
bulk material.
DEPOSITION NITRIDE THICKNES=0.15 CONCENTR
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST NEGATIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=pplus
DEVELOP
etch nitride
etch oxide
IMPLANT BORON PEARSON RP.EFF DOSE=1.0e15 ENERGY=30
Photoresist and nitride from the remaining part will be removed by etch pho­
toresist and etch nitride all statements. Figure 8.12 shows the structure achieved 
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–13.00
–14.00
–13.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.10 (See color insert)
Device structure after source and drain formation.

381
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–13.00
–12.00
–15.00
–14.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.11 (See color insert)
Formation of the p region in the wafer of length 0.1 to 0.7 μm.
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–13.00
–14.00
–13.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.12 (See color insert)
The structure achieved by executions of etch photoresist and etch nitride all statements.

382
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
by executions of etch photoresist and etch nitride all statements. In this structure 
it is evident that bulk, source, and drain regions are formed by doping the 
wafer. Gate oxide and polysilicon deposition on the gate oxide are also being 
formed. The next step is to create metal contacts for the different regions for 
its terminals to connect the device with the outer world. To perform this next 
step, borophosphosilicate glass (BPSG) deposition and anneal are required. 
The diffusion statement causes annealing to occur. If the anneal occurs in an 
oxidizing ambient, then silicon oxidation will occur on the exposed silicon 
material surface. It is common to specify multiple anneal steps in sequence in 
order to accurately model a specific furnace process. Semiconductor material 
needs annealing after every ion implantation step. It will repair the damages 
caused in the lattice during ion bombardment by the collisions with doping 
ions. It also allows doping impurities to diffuse further into the bulk.
etch PHOTORESIST
etch nitride all
8.21  Borophosphosilicate Glass (BPSG) Deposition
Borophosphosilicate glass (BPSG), shown in Figure 8.13, is important in the 
fabrication of silicon-based lightweight devices and integrated circuits [20]. It 
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–11.00
–15.00
–13.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.13 (See color insert)
Borophosphosilicate glass deposition before the first layer of metal contact to the device.

383
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
consists of the final silica glass films. BPSG can be fabricated by several meth­
ods like CVD (chemical vapor deposition), sol-gel, and FHD (flame hydroly­
sis deposition). Usually the CVD procedure is used to form BPSG films 
[3, 21, 23]. BPSG provides void free fill of 0.2 to 0.8 μm wide spaces between 
succeeding higher metals or conducting layers. BPSG basically works as an 
insulating layer for inter-metal layers.
deposition oxide thickness=0.7 concentr
8.22  BPSG Anneal
Deposited borophosphosilicate glass needs annealing, as shown in 
Figure 8.14, which will be performed by the following steps:
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 TIME=20 F.N2=10.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 TIME=15 F.O2=9.5
The BPSG layer deposited on it is not smooth due to uneven device struc­
ture. It needs chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP) [3, 24, 25]. A nitride layer of 
thickness 0.15 µm is deposited on it to determine the minimum y coordinate and 
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–11.00
–15.00
–13.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.14 (See color insert)
Structure of the device after application of annealing step for BPSG.

384
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
is named CMP1. During polishing, the oxide above that minimum y coordinate 
is etched out to make the surface smooth. Thus four points are defined using 
the minimum y coordinate for two points, and the uneven portion is removed 
by etch operations. After the removal of this oxide a smooth surface can be 
achieved, and this can be seen from Figure 8.15. Statements below will perform 
this CMP task.
DEPOSITION NITRIDE THICKNES=0.15 CONCENTR
extract nitride/oxide y.extract minimum name=CMP1
etch nitride all
ETCH OXIDE START X=0.0 Y=-14.6
ETCH CONTINUE X=5 Y=-14.6
ETCH CONTINUE X=5.0 Y=@CMP1
ETCH DONE X=0.0 Y=@CMP1
8.23  Contact Mask Formation
For metal contacts of different terminals like bulk, source, gate, and drain, 
metallization is required. Aluminum is used most of the time for metal­
lization in integrated circuits, because aluminum and its alloys have low 
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–10.00
–8.00
–14.00
–12.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.15 (See color insert)
Polishing of the device top surface by removal of excess oxide.

385
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
resistivity (2.7 μΩ for aluminum). Aluminum adheres well to silicon diox­
ide, though use of aluminum in shallow junctions may create problems like 
spiking and electromigration. A mask named contact has been assigned in 
the mask file having three lengths assigned to it: one to create source-bulk 
contact, one for gate, and one for drain contact. Three lengths assigned 
to the mask contacts are 300 to 1100, 2550 to 2850, and 4400 to 4850, or 
effectively 0.3 to 1.1 μm, 2.55 to 2.85, and 4.4 to 4.85 μm. The first mask is 
chosen in such a way that both bulk and source region contact formation 
are possible, as for an n-MOSFET bulk and source normally remain in the 
same potential most of the time. The second region from 2.5 to 2.85 μm is 
chosen for gate contact, and the last region from 4.4 to 4.85 μm is for drain 
contact. Figure 8.16 shows the structure where selective etching has been 
performed, after which aluminum is deposited through those regions for 
the contacts.
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST NEGATIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=contact
DEVELOP
etch oxide
etch PHOTORESIST
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–14.00
–13.50
–13.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.16 (See color insert)
Selective etching has been performed to deposit aluminum through it for the first layer of 
metal contacts.

386
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
8.24  First Layer of Metal (metal-1) Deposition
The statement below will deposit aluminum of thickness 0.3 µm on the entire 
material.
deposition aluminum thickness=0.3 concentr
8.25  Metal-1 Mask
As the metal will be deposited on the entire wafer, the undesired part of 
the metal must be removed from the entire material. So another mask is 
assigned in the mask file and called here. The mask name is metal1, which 
has three regions assigned in it. The regions are 150 to 1200, 2400 to 3000, and 
4300 to 4950, meaning 0.15 to 1.2 μm, 2.4 to 3.0 μm, and 4.3 to 4.95 μm. Only on 
these regions will the aluminum remain on the wafer, as the contact material 
and rest of the aluminum will be removed by an etch statement. Figure 8.17 
shows the final structure formed after deposition on metal.
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST POSITIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=metal1
DEVELOP
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–14.00
–14.50
–13.50
–13.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.17 (See color insert)
First layer of metal deposition through the opening of BPSG for the direct contacts from the device.

387
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
etch aluminum
etch PHOTORESIST
8.26  Inter-Metal Dielectric (IMD) Deposition
For final outer world connection to the device another layer of metallization 
is required [3]. Another layer of oxide which is called inter-metal dielectric 
(IMD) is deposited here by the statement below of thickness 0.5 μm which 
is shown in Figure 8.18. From the figure it is obvious that the top surface 
requires chemical-mechanical polishing again.
deposition oxide thickness=0.5 concentr
To polish the top surface, a layer of nitride of thickness 0.15 µm is depos­
ited on it to determine minimum y coordinates at which nitride and oxide 
meet. Until that point, oxide is etched to get a smooth oxide on the top. 
Figure 8.19 shows the structure in which the top surface is smoothened by 
CMP operation.
DEPOSITION NITRIDE THICKNES=0.15 CONCENTR
extract nitride/oxide y.extract minimum name=CMP2
etch nitride all
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–13.00
–12.00
–15.00
–14.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.18 (See color insert)
Deposition of IMD after formation of the first layer of metal contacts.

388
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
ETCH OXIDE START X=0.0 Y=-15.2
ETCH CONTINUE X=5 Y=-15.2
ETCH CONTINUE X=5.0 Y=@CMP2
ETCH DONE X=0.0 Y=@CMP2
8.27  Second Layer of Metal (metal-2) Mask
For the final layer of metallization, another mask is required and through its 
opening another layer of metal is deposited on it. The mask assigned here 
is named metal-2 and three regions assigned here are 200 to 1100, 2000 to 
3100, and 4200 to 4900 to connect this layer to the previous layer of metal. 
Figure 8.20 shows the opening regions through which the next layer of metal 
will be deposited.
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST NEGATIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=metal2
DEVELOP
etch oxide
etch PHOTORESIST
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–14.00
–14.50
–13.50
–13.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.19 (See color insert)
Structure achieved by smoothening the top surface by the polishing operation again.

389
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
8.28  Second Layer of Metal (metal-2) Deposition
Now the aluminum of thickness 0.2 μm will be deposited on it, as shown in 
Figure 8.21 for the next layer of metallization.
deposition aluminum thickness=0.2 concentr
etch PHOTORESIST
8.29  Metal-2 Final Mask
Figure 8.22 shows a layer of aluminum is deposited on the top, in which a part 
of metal is essential and the remaining part has to be removed from the top 
portion. The following statements will remove the undesired metal from it, 
lengths assigned in the mask file named metal3 are 200 to 1100, 2200 to 3100, 
and 4200 to 4900, or effectively 0.2 to 1.1 μm, 2.2 to 3.1 μm, and 4.2 to 4.9 μm. 
Figure 8.23 shows the final device structure.
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST positive THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=metal3
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–14.00
–14.50
–13.50
–13.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.20 (See color insert)
Opening region has been created by etching through which the second layer of metal will be 
deposited.

390
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–13.00
–12.00
–15.00
–14.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.22 (See color insert)
Final device structure, y coordinate is taken up to –12.0 µm.
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–13.00
–12.00
–15.00
–14.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.21 (See color insert)
Second layer of metal is being deposited and connected to the first layer of the metal through 
the openings.

391
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
DEVELOP
etch aluminum
etch PHOTORESIST
SELECT Z=LOG10(BORON)
PLOT.2D	
GRID C.GRID=3
COLOR	
SILICON COLOR=7
COLOR	
OXIDE COLOR=5
COLOR	
NITRIDE COLOR=3
COLOR	
PHOTORESIST COLOR=2
COLOR	
polysili COLOR=1
COLOR	
aluminum COLOR=3
FOREACH X (14 TO 21 STEP 1)
COLOR MIN.V=X MAX.V=(X + 1) COLOR=(X - 1)
END
SELECT	
Z=LOG10(phosphor)
FOREACH X (14 TO 21 STEP 1)
COLOR MIN.V=X MAX.V=(X + 1) COLOR=(X - 3)
END
SELECT	
Z=LOG10(arsenic)
FOREACH X (19 TO 21 STEP 1)
COLOR MIN.V=X MAX.V=(X + 1) COLOR=(X - 5)
END
SELECT 	
Z=LOG10(antimony)
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
5.00
–15.00
–5.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
FIGURE 8.23 (See color insert)
Final simulated structure of the 5 µm MOSFET.

392
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
FOREACH X (14 TO 21 STEP 1)
COLOR MIN.V=X MAX.V=(X + 1) COLOR=(X - 7)
END
COLOR	
OXIDE COLOR=10
COLOR	
NITRIDE COLOR=3
COLOR	
PHOTORESIST COLOR=2
COLOR	
polysili COLOR=1
COLOR	
aluminum COLOR=3
savefile medici out.file=LDNBL.str
coordinat
8.30  MOSFET.inp
The complete program is given below, and a final full view of the structure 
is shown in Figure 8.23.
$nitial mesh
mesh grid.fac=1.0 dx.min=0.002 dx.max=0.1 ly.surf=0.06 
dy.surf=0.001 +
 ly.activ=0.5 dy.activ=0.02 ly.bot=10 dy.bot=1
MASK IN.FILE=t.tl1 PRINT GRID=“Field,Poly,Contact”
$start material
initialize ratio=1.4 <100> rot.sub=0 boron=1e+15 width=5.0
$ Plot initial mesh
SELECT TITLE=“Initial Mesh”
PLOT.2D GRID C.GRID=8
$ Grow the initial ox... E2010
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 T.FINAL=1000 TIME=20 F.O2=0.5 F.N2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=65 F.O2=0.5 F.N2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=5 F.O2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=190 F.O2=5.975 F.H2=10.4 F.HCL=0.475
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=1 F.O2=5.5 F.N2=5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=10 F.N2=10
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 T.FINAL=800 TIME=50 F.N2=10
print layers
$ NBL mask
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST NEGATIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=nbl

393
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
DEVELOP
etch oxide
$ Screen oxidation... E8020
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 T.FINAL=900 TIME=10 F.O2=0.5 F.N2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=15 F.O2=0.5 F.N2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=5 F.O2=9.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=5 F.O2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=28 F.O2=9.0 F.HCL=0.19
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=5 F.O2=9.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=30 F.N2=10.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 T.FINAL=800 TIME=37.5 F.N2=10
print layers
$ Buried layer implant
implant antimony pearson tilt=7 dose=1.0e15 energy=100
etch oxide all
$ Buried layer drive-in... E0381
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 T.FINAL=1200 TIME=100 F.O2=0.5 F.N2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1200 TIME=600 F.O2=0.5 F.N2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1200 T.FINAL=1000 TIME=67 F.O2=9
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=20 F.O2=10
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=67 F.O2=5.5 F.H2=10.4
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 TIME=1 F.O2=5.5 F.N2=5.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=1000 T.FINAL=800 TIME=67 F.N2=10
etch oxide all
print layers
$ Epi growth, P-type, 30-60 ohm-cm, 14 um
EPITAXY TIME=14 TEMPERAT=1150 THICKNES=14 dx =.001 ydy=0.0 
SPACES=100 +
 RESISTIV BORON=45
$ Pad oxide, tox=500A
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 T.FINAL=900 TIME=10 F.O2=9.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=15 F.O2=9.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=18 F.O2=5.5 F.H2=10.4
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=1 F.O2=5.5 F.N2=5.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=10 F.N2=10
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 T.FINAL=800 TIME=25 F.N2=10
print layers
$ N-tub mask
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST NEGATIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=gateunderdoping

394
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
DEVELOP
etch nitride
etch oxide thickness=0.02
implant boron pearson tilt=7 dose=2.0e11 energy=100
etch nitride all
$ Gate oxide-2 200A
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST NEGATIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=gateoxet
DEVELOP
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 T.FINAL=900 TIME=10 F.O2=0.25 F.N2=10
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=5 F.O2=0.25 F.N2=10
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=3 F.O2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=47.5 F.O2=9.5 F.HCL=0.19
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=3 F.O2=9.5
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 TIME=15 F.N2=10.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=900 T.FINAL=800 TIME=37.5 F.N2=10
print layers
etch Photoresist
etch nitride all
$ Gate-poly deposition - 4000A
deposition polysili temperature=625 pressure=1.0 thickness=0.4 
concentr
$ Poly doping
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=950 TIME=20 INERT
$ Gate-poly mask
DEPOSITION NITRIDE THICKNES=0.10 CONCENTR
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST POSITIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=gateoxet
DEVELOP
etch nitride
etch polysili
etch nitride all
$ N+ mask and implant
DEPOSITION NITRIDE THICKNES=0.15 CONCENTR
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST NEGATIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=Nplus
DEVELOP
etch nitride
etch oxide
implant arsenic pearson tilt=7 dose=6.0e15 energy=100
implant arsenic pearson tilt=-7 dose=6.0e15 energy=100
etch PHOTORESIST
etch nitride all

395
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
$ P+ mask and implant
DEPOSITION NITRIDE THICKNES=0.15 CONCENTR
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST NEGATIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=pplus
DEVELOP
etch nitride
etch oxide
IMPLANT BORON PEARSON RP.EFF DOSE=1.0e15 ENERGY=30
etch PHOTORESIST
etch nitride all
$ BPSG deposition
deposition oxide thickness=0.7 concentr
$ BPSG anneal
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 TIME=20 F.N2=10.0
DIFFUSION TEMPERAT=800 TIME=15 F.O2=9.5
DEPOSITION NITRIDE THICKNES=0.15 CONCENTR
extract nitride/oxide y.extract minimum name=CMP1
etch nitride all
ETCH OXIDE START X=0.0 Y=-14.6
ETCH CONTINUE X=5 Y=-14.6
ETCH CONTINUE X=5.0 Y=@CMP1
ETCH DONE X=0.0 Y=@CMP1
$ Contact mask
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST NEGATIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=contact
DEVELOP
etch oxide
etch PHOTORESIST
$ Metal-1 Deposition
deposition aluminum thickness=0.3 concentr
$ Metal-1 mask
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST positive THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=metal1
DEVELOP
etch aluminum
etch PHOTORESIST
$ IMD dep
deposition oxide thickness=0.5 concentr
DEPOSITION NITRIDE THICKNES=0.15 CONCENTR
extract nitride/oxide y.extract minimum name=CMP2

396
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
etch nitride all
ETCH OXIDE START X=0.0 Y=-15.2
ETCH CONTINUE X=5 Y=-15.2
ETCH CONTINUE X=5.0 Y=@CMP2
ETCH DONE X=0.0 Y=@CMP2
$ metal2 mask
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST NEGATIVE THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=metal2
DEVELOP
etch oxide
etch PHOTORESIST
$ Metal-2 Deposition
deposition aluminum thickness=0.2 concentr
etch PHOTORESIST
$ Metal-2 final mask
DEPOSIT PHOTORESIST positive THICKNESS=1
EXPOSE MASK=metal3
DEVELOP
etch aluminum
etch PHOTORESIST
SELECT Z=LOG10(BORON)
PLOT.2D	
GRID C.GRID=3
COLOR	
SILICON COLOR=7
COLOR	
OXIDE COLOR=5
COLOR	
NITRIDE COLOR=3
COLOR	
PHOTORESIST COLOR=2
COLOR	
polysili COLOR=1
COLOR	
aluminum COLOR=3
FOREACH X (14 TO 21 STEP 1)
COLOR MIN.V=X MAX.V=(X + 1) COLOR=(X - 1)
END
SELECT	
Z=LOG10(phosphor)
FOREACH X (14 TO 21 STEP 1)
COLOR MIN.V=X MAX.V=(X + 1) COLOR=(X - 3)
END
SELECT	
Z=LOG10(arsenic)
FOREACH X (19 TO 21 STEP 1)
COLOR MIN.V=X MAX.V=(X + 1) COLOR=(X - 5)
END
SELECT	
Z=LOG10(antimony)
FOREACH X (14 TO 21 STEP 1)
COLOR MIN.V=X MAX.V=(X + 1) COLOR=(X - 7)

397
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
END
COLOR	
OXIDE COLOR=10
COLOR	
NITRIDE COLOR=3
COLOR	
PHOTORESIST COLOR=2
COLOR	
polysili COLOR=1
COLOR	
aluminum COLOR=3
savefile medici out.file=LDNBL.str
8.31  Mask File Named t.tl1
The mask file named t.tl1 is given here because it was used during the fabri­
cation of the device. This mask file should be kept in the same folder where 
the files are kept, especially the actual device fabrication file MOSFET.inp. 
The first line identifies the file format that contains the character ‘TL1’ fol­
lowed by a space and a four-digit binary number. The version of Taurus-
Layout that created the file is represented by the binary number. The 
current version of the Taurus-Layout specifies values from 0000 to 0100. 
Nine masks are being used in this file named gateoxet, nbl, Nplus, pplus, 
contact, metal1, metal2, metal3, and gateunderdoping, and that is why nine is 
mentioned in the fourth line of this mask file. This information must be 
provided before the mask names and their dimensions. Total length of the 
wafer must also be provided, as it is mentioned here 0 to 5000 or 5 μm by 
the rule assigned here.
TL1 0100
1e3
  0 5000
9
gateoxet 1
  1600 4100
nbl 1
  2000 3000
Nplus 2
  900 1500
  4200 4900
pplus 1
  100 700
contact 3
  300 1100
  2550 2850
  4400 4850
metal1 3
  150 1200

398
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
  2400 3000
  4300 4950
metal2 3
  500 900
  2600 2800
  4500 4750
metal3 3
  200 1100
  2200 3100
  4200 4900
gateunderdoping 1
  1600 3700
8.32  What Is Medici
Taurus Medici is a 2D device simulator that can model the electrical, ther­
mal, and optical characteristics of any semiconductor device like MOSFETs, 
bipolar junction transistors (BJTs), heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs), 
power devices, insulated-gate bipolar transistors (IGBTs), high electron 
mobility transistors (HEMTs), charge-coupled devices (CCDs), and photode­
tectors [2]. It also can be used for design and optimization of a device to meet 
performance goals without having to manufacture the actual device, thereby 
reducing the need for costly experiments. Once the device structure is fab­
ricated using TSUPREM-4, it is saved in the (LDNBL.str) file where detailed 
description about it is saved in the file named LDNBL whose extension is str, 
or structure. Here the Medici simulator has been used to analyze the fabri­
cated MOSFET electrical characteristics. To do that an interface is necessary 
between TSUPREM-4 and Medici.
8.33  Execution of Command
Execution of Medici is initiated with the following command, medici or medici 
<filename>. The Medici file name given here is BVNBL.inp, so at the time of 
execution of this Medici script file, the command would be medici BVNBL.inp.
8.34  Interfacing between TSUPREM-4 and Medici
A meaningful simulated device fabrication is possible if it is based on a real 
fabrication procedure. It is also essential to analyze the fabricated device perfor­
mance, especially electrical characteristics, for realistic device structure. For this 

399
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
purpose it is necessary to create an interface between TSUPREM-4 and Medici. 
The output structure (having extension .str) file is saved during TSUPREM-4 
simulation in such a way that it can be used in the Medici script file. It is done 
by the expression ‘savefile medici out.file = LDNBL.str’ of the last line of the 
TSUPREM-4 script. This file ‘LDNBL.str’ is basically created to incorporate the 
device structure in Medici for its output characteristics analysis. The same file is 
called to read the simulation meshing information by the following statement.
MESH IN.FILE=LDNBL.str TSUPREM4 ELEC.BOT POLY.ELEC Y.MAX=10
8.35  Rename Electrodes from TSUPREM-4 to Standard Names
Three metal contacts of the simulated device will be named as 1, 2, and 3 
by default at the end of the TSUPREM-4 simulation. After the simulation 
the program numbered the left-most metal contact (Source and Bulk in this 
case) as 1. In accordance with this numbering scheme, Table 8.1 represents 
the electrode names and their coordinate positions.
The minimum and maximum x and y positions of different electrodes will 
be automatically created at the end of the TSUPREM-4 simulation.
The electrode name 1 will be renamed Source by the expression ‘RENAME 
ELECTR OLDNAME = 1 NEWNAME = Source’ in Medici. Similarly, elec­
trodes 2 and 3 will be renamed as Gate and Drain. After renaming the elec­
trodes to the actual standard device name, the mesh file has been saved with 
the new electrode name by the expression ‘SAVE MESH OUT.FILE = BVNBL’ 
in the ext line. The following commands will plot the device structure in the 
screen with proper labeling as mentioned in the expressions.
RENAME ELECTR OLDNAME=1 NEWNAME=Source
RENAME ELECTR OLDNAME=2 NEWNAME=Gate
RENAME ELECTR OLDNAME=3 NEWNAME=Drain
SAVE MESH OUT.FILE=BVNBL
PLOT.2D GRID FILL TITLE=“Structure from TSUPREM-4”
PLOT.1D DOPING LOG X.START=0 X.END=0 Y.START=0 Y.END=2
+    POINTS BOT=1E14 TOP=1E21 TITLE=“S/D Profile”
PLOT.1D DOPING LOG X.START=1.8 X.END=1.8 Y.START=0 Y.END=2
TABLE 8.1
Electrode Names and Their Coordinate Positions
Electrode 
Name
Number of 
Nodes
X-min 
(microns)
X-max 
(microns)
Y-min 
(microns)
Y-max 
(microns)
1
50
0.1500
1.1500
−14.5918
−13.3914
2
21
2.2000
3.1000
−14.5918
−13.7969
3
32
4.2000
4.9500
−14.5918
−13.3868

400
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
+    POINTS BOT=1E14 TOP=1E19 TITLE=“Channel Profile”
PLOT.2D BOUND FILL L.ELEC=-1 TITLE=“Impurity Contours”
CONTOUR DOPING LOG MIN=14 MAX=20 DEL=1 COLOR=2
CONTOUR DOPING LOG MIN=-20 MAX=-14 DEL=1 COLOR=1 LINE=2
8.36  Major Physical Models
For accurate simulations, a number of physical models are incorporated 
into the program. Depending on the type of device structure and the 
device type models like recombination, mobility, band-gap narrowing, 
band-to-band tunneling, photogeneration, impact ionization, and lifetime 
can be incorporated.
• Medici also includes semiconductor statistics like Boltzmann 
and Fermi-Dirac statistics including the incomplete ionization of 
impurities.
• Different recombination models like SRH, Auger, direct, surface 
recombinations, and concentration-dependent lifetimes can be 
incor­pora­ted.
• Carrier mobility and scattering are very important phenomena in 
the mechanism of electrical transport of the device. Mobility models 
can be divided into two major categories:
• Low and high field mobility
• Surface scattering and electron hole scattering
Low field mobility models are
	
1.	 Constant mobility that can be specified with the MUN0 and 
MUP0 parameters for electron and hole.
	
2.	 Concentration dependent mobility can be incorporated with the 
CONMOB parameter.
	
3.	 Either of the two analytic mobility models can be incorporated 
with the ANALYTIC or ARORA parameters.
	
4.	 Carrier-carrier scattering mobility can be incorporated with the 
CCSMOB parameter.
	
5.	 Philips unified mobility can be incorporated with the 
PHUMOB parameter.
High field mobility models are
	
1.	 Field-dependent mobility that can be incorporated with the 
FLDMOB parameter.

401
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
	
2.	 Caughey-Thomas mobility can be incorporated with the 
FLDMOB = 1 parameter.
	
3.	 Gallium arsenide–like mobility can be incorporated with the 
FLDMOB = 2 parameter.
	
4.	 Hewlett-Packard mobility can be incorporated with the 
HPMOB parameter.
Surface scattering mobility models are
	
1.	 Surface mobility model can be incorporated with the SRFMOB 
parameter.
	
2.	 Enhanced surface mobility model can be incorporated with the 
SRFMOB2 parameter.
	
3.	 Perpendicular field dependent mobility model can be incorpo­
rated with the PRPMOB parameter.
	
4.	 Lombardi surface mobility model can be incorporated with the 
LSMMOB parameter.
	
5.	 A number of MOS inversion layer models are available through 
the parameters UNIMOB, LSMMOB, GMCMOB, SHIRAMOB, 
and TFLDMOB.
One or more models to be included in a Medici simulation can be specified in 
models statement. For this device simulation models such as lsmmob, fldmob, 
auger, bgn, btbt, fermi, incomplete, energy.l and high.dop have been incorpo­
rated by the ‘models lsmmob fldmob auger bgn btbt fermi incomplete energy.l high.
dop’ statement below.
models lsmmob fldmob auger bgn btbt fermi incomplete energy.l 
high.dop
8.37  Initial Guess/Convergence and Solution Methods
Depending on the device structure and the range of its operation, one solu­
tion method may not be optimal in all cases. Several possibilities can arise 
for different cases, like at zero bias a Poisson alone is sufficient. For MOSFET, 
as the device is a unipolar type, only one carrier needs to be solved for its 
I-V characteristics, though in bipolar and MOSFET breakdown simulations, 
both carriers are needed. For small geometry devices where the electric field 
changes rapidly, carrier energy balance may be added to see hot-carrier 
effect. Solving the lattice heat equation is essential when the device heating 
effect is important.
The equation that needs to be solved is specified on the SYMBOLIC or 
SYMB statement.

402
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
8.38  Nonlinear System Solutions and Current-Voltage Analysis
For nonlinear system, the solutions are performed by two widely used itera­
tion methods. The methods are de-coupled solutions (Gummel’s method) 
and coupled solutions (Newton’s method). Newton’s method with Gaussian 
elimination of the Jacobian is by far the most stable method of solution. For 
low current solutions, Gummel’s method offers an attractive alternative to 
inverting the full Jacobian.
Either approach involves solving several large linear systems of equations. 
The total number of equations in each system is on the order of one to four 
times the number of grid points, depending on the number of device equa­
tions being solved for.
Several ideas are common to all methods of solving the equations. They 
are convergence rate, error norms, convergence criteria, error norms selec­
tion, linear solution options, and initial guess.
The nonlinear iteration converges usually at a linear rate or at a quadratic rate. 
At a linear rate, the error decreases by about the same factor at each iteration.
The convergence is rapid in the quadratic method, as the error is approxi­
mately squared at each iteration. Hence Gummel’s method, which is linear in 
most cases, is less accurate than Newton’s method, which is quadratic.
Medici uses six types of initial guesses named initial, previous, local, proj­
ect, p.local, and post-regrid initial.
For tracing the I-V curves, bias step and number of steps are specified on 
the SOLVE statement by VSTEP and NSTEP for a corresponding electrode.
SYMB GUMMEL CARR=1 ELECTRON
METHOD ICCG DAMPED itlimit=40 stack=10 cont.stk
SOLVE initial V(Source)=0.0 V(Gate)=0.0 V(Drain)=0.005
SYMB NEWTON CARR=1 ELECTRON
METHOD AUTONR N.DAMP N.DVLIM=0.5
SOLVE PREVIOUS V(Source)=0.0 V(Gate)=2 V(Drain)=0.0
LOG OUT.FILE=BVNBLlog
SOLVE V(Drain)=0.0 ELEC=Drain VSTEP=0.2 NSTEP=50
8.39  Post-Processing and Parameter Extraction
After the fabrication of the device, fabricated and simulated device results 
are necessary, which is possible by the post-processing of the data by the 
following commands:
Print: The command print will print specific quantities at points within 
a defined area.

403
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
Plot.1D: Plot.1D will plot specific quantity along a line segment through 
the device.
Plot.2D: Plot.2D command will plot characteristics, boundaries, junc­
tions, and depletion edges.
Contour: It will plot the contours of a physical quantity on a 2D area.
E.line: It will plot potential gradient paths and calculate the ioniza­
tion integrals.
Label: This command will plot character strings, symbols, and lines as 
part of a 1D or 2D plot.
PLOT.1D X.AXIS=V(Drain) Y.AXIS=I(Drain)
+  TITLE=“Ids vs. Vgs” COLOR=2 POINTS OUTFILE=Id_Vd.DAT
LABEL LABEL=“Vds=2 V” COLOR=2
EXTRACT MOS.PARA DRAIN=Drain GATE=Gate IN.FILE=BVNBLlog 
I.Drain=9e-10
8.40  Drain Current versus Drain Voltage Simulation
The complete Medici simulation program, explained step by step, is given 
below. By executing this program in Medici, drain current has been plotted 
with respect to drain voltage, shown in Figure 8.24. The gate voltage is fixed 
at 5 V. From the graph it is evident that initially current is increasing with 
the increase of drain voltage. Then the current reaches the saturation value, 
and then it increases slowly with the drain voltage due to channel length 
modulation.
COMMENT MEDICI Input File
MESH IN.FILE=LDNBL.str TSUPREM4 ELEC.BOT POLY.ELEC Y.MAX=10
RENAME ELECTR OLDNAME=1 NEWNAME=Source
RENAME ELECTR OLDNAME=2 NEWNAME=Gate
RENAME ELECTR OLDNAME=3 NEWNAME=Drain
SAVE MESH OUT.FILE=BVNBL
PLOT.2D GRID FILL TITLE=“Structure from TSUPREM-4”
PLOT.1D DOPING LOG X.START=0 X.END=0 Y.START=0 Y.END=2
+	
POINTS BOT=1E14 TOP=1E21 TITLE=“S/D Profile”
PLOT.1D DOPING LOG X.START=1.8 X.END=1.8 Y.START=0 Y.END=2
+	
POINTS BOT=1E14 TOP=1E19 TITLE=“Channel Profile”
PLOT.2D BOUND FILL L.ELEC=-1 TITLE=“Impurity Contours”

404
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
CONTOUR DOPING LOG MIN=14 MAX=20 DEL=1 COLOR=2
CONTOUR DOPING LOG MIN=-20 MAX=-14 DEL=1 COLOR=1 LINE=2
models lsmmob fldmob auger bgn btbt fermi incomplete 
energy.l high.dop
SYMB GUMMEL CARR=1 ELECTRON
METHOD ICCG DAMPED itlimit=40 stack=10 cont.stk
SOLVE initial V(Source)=0.0 V(Gate)=0.0005 V(Drain)=0.0
SYMB NEWTON CARR=1 ELECTRON
METHOD AUTONR N.DAMP N.DVLIM=0.5
SOLVE PREVIOUS V(Source)=0.0 V(Gate)=5.0 V(Drain)=0.0
LOG OUT.FILE=BVNBLlog
SOLVE V(Drain)=0.0 ELEC=Drain VSTEP=0.1 NSTEP=100
PLOT.1D X.AXIS=V(Gate) Y.AXIS=I(Drain) Y.LOGARITH
PLOT.1D X.AXIS=V(Drain) Y.AXIS=I(Drain)
+ TITLE=“Ids vs. Vds” COLOR=2 POINTS OUTFILE=Id_Vd_vg_5V.DAT
LABEL LABEL=“Vgs=5.0 Volts” COLOR=2
EXTRACT MOS.PARA DRAIN=Drain GATE=Gate IN.FILE=BVNBLlog 
I.Drain=9e-10
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
Vgs = 5.0 Volts
V(Drain) (Volts)
I(Drain) (Amps/µm) *10t–4
FIGURE 8.24
Id versus Vds at gate voltage = 5V, device length is 5 μm.

405
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
8.41  Drain Current versus Gate Voltage Simulation
In the Medici program, drain current versus drain voltage simulation has 
been performed. The drain voltage is fixed at 0.1 V. Drain current in logarithm 
scale versus gate voltage and drain current in versus gate voltage has been 
plotted in Figures 8.25 and 8.26, respectively. Threshold voltage is extracted 
from this curve, which is equal to 0.65 V. On resistance (ron) can be calculated 
from these data. Different ron can be achieved for different gate voltage. It 
can be seen that on resistance is decreasing with Vgs increase, as higher Vgs 
increase I and ron = Vds/I, so automatically ron will decrease at higher Vgs, as 
Vds is fixed at 0.1 V. At the time of on resistance (ron) calculations, Vds should 
be fixed at 0.1 V.
COMMENT MEDICI Input File
MESH IN.FILE=LDNBL.str TSUPREM4 ELEC.BOT POLY.ELEC Y.MAX=10
RENAME ELECTR OLDNAME=1 NEWNAME=Source
RENAME ELECTR OLDNAME=2 NEWNAME=Gate
RENAME ELECTR OLDNAME=3 NEWNAME=Drain
SAVE MESH OUT.FILE=BVNBL
PLOT.2D GRID FILL TITLE=“Structure from TSUPREM-4”
PLOT.1D DOPING LOG X.START=0 X.END=0 Y.START=0 Y.END=2
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–5
–6
–7
–8
–9
–10
–11
–12
–13
–14
–15
Vds = 0.1 Volts
V(Gate) (Volts)
Log(I(Drain) (Amps/um))
FIGURE 8.25
log (Id) versus Vgs at drain voltage = 0.1 V, device length is 5 μm.

406
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
+	
POINTS BOT=1E14 TOP=1E21 TITLE=“S/D Profile”
PLOT.1D DOPING LOG X.START=1.8 X.END=1.8 Y.START=0 Y.END=2
+	
POINTS BOT=1E14 TOP=1E19 TITLE=“Channel Profile”
PLOT.2D BOUND FILL L.ELEC=-1 TITLE=“Impurity Contours”
CONTOUR DOPING LOG MIN=14 MAX=20 DEL=1 COLOR=2
CONTOUR DOPING LOG MIN=-20 MAX=-14 DEL=1 COLOR=1 LINE=2
models lsmmob fldmob auger bgn btbt fermi incomplete energy.l 
high.dop
SYMB GUMMEL CARR=1 ELECTRON
METHOD ICCG DAMPED itlimit=40 stack=10 cont.stk
SOLVE initial V(Source)=0.0 V(Drain)=0.0005 V(Gate)=0.0
SYMB NEWTON CARR=1 ELECTRON
METHOD AUTONR N.DAMP N.DVLIM=0.5
SOLVE PREVIOUS V(Source)=0.0 V(Drain)=0.1 V(Gate)=0.0
LOG OUT.FILE=BVNBLlog
SOLVE V(Gate)=0.0 ELEC=Gate VSTEP=0.1 NSTEP=50
COMMENT Plot results
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
Vds = 0.1 Volts
V(Gate) (Volts)
I(Drain) (Amps/um) *10t–6
FIGURE 8.26
Id versus Vgs at drain voltage = 0.1 V, device length is 5 μm.

407
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
PLOT.1D X.AXIS=V(Gate) Y.AXIS=I(Drain) Y.LOGARITH
+    TITLE=“Ids vs. Vgs” COLOR=2 POINTS OUTFILE=Id_Vg_vd_pt1V.DAT
LABEL LABEL=“Vds=0.1 Volts” COLOR=2
PLOT.1D X.AXIS=V(Gate) Y.AXIS=I(Drain)
+    TITLE=“Ids vs. Vgs” COLOR=2 POINTS OUTFILE=Id_Vg_vd_pt1V.DAT
LABEL LABEL=“Vds=0.1 Volts” COLOR=2
EXTRACT MOS.PARA DRAIN=Drain GATE=Gate IN.FILE=BVNBLlog 
I.Drain=9e-10
8.42  Conclusion
Device fabrication technology is a complex process that involves develop­
ing process-dependent patterns at each step using different masks. For 
this it is required to define the mask lengths that require accurate calcu­
lations of junction depths and pattern areas that vary with process steps. 
For scaled devices, the temperature, time, and ion implantation dose needs 
to be predefined by accurate estimation to obtain desired specification with 
minimum variation. Complete fabrication procedure needs many oxidation 
steps and annealing steps for eliminating the lattice defects arising because 
of ion bombardment at a different stage of fabrication, which tends to induce 
device parameter and specification variation. Usually, a thin layer of protec­
tive oxide, also known as padding oxide, is grown on the wafer surface for 
protection before the ion implantation steps. While fabricating a device, all of 
the process dependent variations need to be accounted for with extreme care, 
or acquired results will deviate from the desired results. Thus a simulation 
of the entire fabrication process helps us optimize the mask lengths, temper­
ature, implantation dose, etc., before proceeding toward the actual process, 
thereby helping reduce production cost and time.
The threshold voltage of the device presented here is 0.65 V, which can be fur­
ther modified by varying the gate oxide thickness and under-the-gate substrate 
doping. Higher meshing densities in appropriate regions are considered for 
more accurate simulation results. Meshing is chosen in such a way that meshing 
density is higher near the surface of the wafer, as most of the phenomena occur 
near the surface and boundary regions. The operation of the device fabricated 
by TSUPREM-4 can be analyzed in a TCAD Medici device simulator by incor­
porating a different physical model and appropriate biasing conditions in the 
simulator program of the device. Medici simulations are very fast, widely used, 
and well accepted in industry. Before commencing analysis of a device, the 
TCAD Medici simulator must be calibrated with standard experimental data.

408
Technology Computer Aided Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET
References
	
1.	 Taurus TSUPREM-4 User Guide, Version D-2010.03, March 2010.
	
2.	 Taurus Medici User Guide, Version F-2011.09, September 2011.
	
3.	 Gary S. May and Simon M. Sze, Fundamentals of Semiconductor Fabrication, Wiley, 
New York.
	
4.	 Samar Saha, MOSFET test structures for two-dimensional device simulation, 
Solid-State Electronics, 38(1), 69–73 (1995).
	
5.	 E.H. Nicollian and J.R. Brews, MOS Physics and Technology, Wiley, New York, 1982.
	
6.	 J.D. Meindl et al., Silicon epitaxy and oxidation, in F. Van de Wiele, W.L. Engl, 
and P.O. Jesper, Eds., Process and Device Modeling Integrated Circuits Design, 
Noorhoff, Leyden, 1977.
	
7.	 B.E. Deal, Standardization terminology for oxide charge associated with ther­
mally oxidized silicon, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, ED-27, 606 (1980).
	
8.	 S.K. Gandhi, VLSI Fabrication Principles, Wiley, New York, 1983.
	
9.	 Kalyan Koley, Binit Syamal, Atanu Kundu, N. Mohankumar, and C.K. Sarkar, 
Subthreshold analog/RF performance of underlap DG FETs with symmetric 
and asymmetric source/drain extensions, Microelectronics Reliability, 52(11), 
2572–2578 (2012).
	 10.	 Atanu Kundu, Binit Syamal, Kalyan Koley, N. Mohankumar, and C.K. Sarkar, 
RF parameter extraction of bulk FinFET: A non quasi static approach, IEEE 
International Conference on Electron Devices and Solid-State Circuits (EDSSC’10) in 
Hong Kong, China, December 15–17 (2010).
	 11.	 C.W. Pearce, Crystal growth and wafer preparation and epitaxy, in S.M. Sze, 
Ed., VLSI Technology, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983.
	 12.	 W.F. Beadle, J.C.C. Tsai, and R.D. Plumber, Eds., Quick Reference Manual for 
Engineers, Wiley, New York, 1985.
	 13.	 Sung-Mo Kang and Yusuf Leblebici, CMOS Digital Integrated Circuits: Analysis 
and Design, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2003.
	 14.	 J.C. Bean, The growth of noble silicon material, Physics Today, 39(10), 36 (1986).
	 15.	 T. Yamamoto et al., An advanced 2.5 nm oxidized nitride gate dielectric for highly 
reliable 0.25 µm MOSFETs, Symp. VLSI Technol. Dig. Tech. Pap., p. 45 (1997).
	 16.	 H.N. Yu et al., 1 µm MOSFET VLSI technology. Part I—An overview, IEEE Trans. 
Electron Devices, ED-26, 318 (1979).
	 17.	 D. Pramanik and A.N. Saxena, VLSI metallization using aluminum and its alloy, 
Solid State Tech., 26(1), 127 (1983); 26(3), 131 (1983).
	 18.	 K.A. Pickar, Ion implantation in silicon, in R. Wolfe, Ed., Applied Solid State 
Science, vol. 5, Academic Press, New York, 1975.
	 19.	 W.G. Oldham, The fabrication of microelectronic circuit, in Microelectronics, 
237(3), pp. 111–114. Freeman, San Francisco, 1977.
	 20.	 Behzad Razavi, Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits, McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 2002.
	 21.	 M.C. King, Principles of optical lithography, in N.G. Einspruch, Ed., VLSI 
Electronics, Vol. 1, pp. 73–81, Academic, New York, 1981.

409
Process Simulation of a MOSFET Using TSUPREM-4 and Medici
	 22.	 J.H. Bruning, A tutorial on optical lithography, in D.A. Doane, et al., Eds., 
Semiconductor Technology, p. 119, Electrochemical Society, Penningstone, 1982.
	 23.	 W.L. Brown, T. Venkatesan, and A. Wagner, Ion beam lithography, Solid State 
Technol., 24, 8, 60 (1981).
	 24.	 J.P. Joly, Metallic contamination of silicon wafers, Microelectron. Eng., 40, 285 (1998).
	 25.	 J.C. Irvin, Evaluation of diffused layers in silicon, Bell Syst. Tech. J., 41, 2 (1962).


COLOR FIGURE 4.13
Tecplot_sv showing electrostatic potential across the device at VGS = 2.0 V, VDS = 2.0 V.
COLOR FIGURE 4.14
Tecplot_sv showing conduction band energy (eV) across the device at VGS = 2.0 V, VDS = 2.0 V.

Polysilicon gate
Spacer
Gate oxide
Doping Concentration [cm–3]
1.0E+22
4.8E+18
2.3E+15
8.6E+11
–4.8E+14
–1.0E+18
SDE
Depletion Contour
p-sub
–0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
–0.1
–0.05
0
0.05
X[um]
Y[um]
0.1
0.15
0.2
DSD
COLOR FIGURE 6.3
Bulk MOSFET structure created using TCAD.
0
0.05
0.1
–0.1
–0.05
0
0.05
X[um]
Y[um]
0.1
COLOR FIGURE 6.4
A zoomed-in view of the active region of the meshed structure.

Electrostatic Potential [V]
1.6E+00
1.2E+00
7.8E–01
3.7E–01
–3.6E–02
–4.5E–01
0
0.5
1
–1
–0.5
0
X[um]
Y[um]
0.5
1
(a)
–0.05
0
0.05
0.1
–0.1
–0.05
0
X[um]
0.05
0.1
Y[um]
Electrostatic Potential [V]
1.6E+00
1.2E+00
7.8E–01
3.7E–01
–3.6E–02
–4.5E–02
(b)
COLOR FIGURE 6.6
Electrostatic potential contours in (a) long channel 
=
µ
L
m
1
eff
 and (b) short channel 
=
L
nm
65
eff
=
=
V
V V
V
(
1.0 ,
0.05 )
gs
ds
.

0.05
0
–0.05
–0.1
–0.0.5
0
Polysilicon gate
Depletion Width Contour
p-sub
STI oxide
Gate oxide (SiO2)
Electrostatic Potential [V]
5.3E–01
3.4E–01
1.4E–01
–5.5E–02
–2.5E–01
–4.5E–01
Width (um)
Depth (um)
0.05
0.1
0.15
COLOR FIGURE 6.17
Cross-section along the width of a trench-isolated MOSFET.
Front gate
Front oxide
Back oxide
Back gate
Drain
Source
0
0.02
0.04
–0.04
–0.02
0
X[um]
Y[um]
0.02
0.04
COLOR FIGURE 6.26
A typical DG-MOSFET structure as simulated in TCAD.

5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
7.50
2.50
–2.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.2
Deposition of negative photoresist of thickness 1 μm on grown oxide; a portion (2 to 3 μm) of the 
photoresist is being etched out by using mask NBL.
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
4.00
2.00
0.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.3
Implantation of antimony of pearson tilt = 7, dose = 1.0 e15, and energy = 100, which will be 
used as NBL.

5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
8.00
4.00
0.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.4
Placement of antimony dopant in the wafer after the application of drive-in voltage on it.
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
5.00
–5.00
–15.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.5
Placement of NBL and epitaxial growth on the initial wafer.

5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–13.00
–13.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.6
Pad oxide on the wafer is shown; here the y-axis has been chosen up to −12 μm.
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–13.00
–13.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.7
Structure of the wafer after formation of the gate oxide.

5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–13.00
–14.00
–13.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.8
Polysilicon material deposition on the grown gate oxide material.
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–13.00
–14.00
–13.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.9
Polysilicon gate formation on the gate oxide after selective polysilicon material by etching from 
the wafer; polysilicon gate length is 2.5 μm.

5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–13.00
–14.00
–13.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.10
Device structure after source and drain formation.
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–13.00
–12.00
–15.00
–14.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.11
Formation of the p region in the wafer of length 0.1 to 0.7 μm.

5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–13.00
–14.00
–13.50
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.12
The structure achieved by executions of etch photoresist and etch nitride all statements.
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–11.00
–15.00
–13.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.13
Borophosphosilicate glass deposition before the first layer of metal contact to the device.

5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–11.00
–15.00
–13.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.14
Structure of the device after application of annealing step for BPSG.
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–10.00
–8.00
–14.00
–12.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.15
Polishing of the device top surface by removal of excess oxide.

5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–14.00
–13.50
–13.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.16
Selective etching has been performed to deposit aluminum through it for the first layer of 
metal contacts.
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–14.00
–14.50
–13.50
–13.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.17
First layer of metal deposition through the opening of BPSG for the direct contacts from the device.

5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–13.00
–12.00
–15.00
–14.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.18
Deposition of IMD after formation of the first layer of metal contacts.
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–14.00
–14.50
–13.50
–13.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.19
Structure achieved by smoothening the top surface by the polishing operation again.

5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–12.50
–12.00
–14.00
–14.50
–13.50
–13.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.20
Opening region has been created by etching through which the second layer of metal will be 
deposited.
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–13.00
–12.00
–15.00
–14.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.21
Second layer of metal is being deposited and connected to the first layer of the metal through 
the openings.

5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
–13.00
–12.00
–15.00
–14.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.22
Final device structure, y coordinate is taken up to –12.0 µm.
5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
5.00
–15.00
–5.00
Distance (microns)
Distance (microns)
COLOR FIGURE 8.23
Final simulated structure of the 5 µm MOSFET.


ElEctrical EnginEEring
Responding to recent developments and a growing market for 
integrated circuit manufacturing, Technology Computer Aided 
Design: Simulation for VLSI MOSFET examines advanced MOSFET 
processes and devices through TCAD numerical simulations. The 
book provides a balanced summary of TCAD and MOSFET basic 
concepts, equations, physics, and new technologies related to TCAD 
and MOSFET. A firm grasp of these concepts allows for the design 
of better models, thus streamlining the design process, saving time  
and money. This book places emphasis on the importance of  
modeling and simulations of VLSI MOS transistors and TCAD software. 
Providing background concepts involved in the TCAD simulation 
of MOSFET devices, it presents concepts in a simplified manner, 
frequently using comparisons to everyday-life experiences. The book 
then explains concepts in depth, with required mathematics and 
program code.
This book also details the classical semiconductor physics for 
understanding the principle of operations for VLSI MOS transistors, 
illustrates recent developments in this area, and analyzes the  
evolution of the role of modeling and simulation of MOSFET. The  
book also provides exposure to the two most commercially popular 
TCAD simulation tools: Silvaco and Sentaurus. R&D cost and  
time for electronic product development is drastically reduced by  
taking advantage of TCAD tools, making TCAD tools indispensable 
for modern VLSI device technologies. VLSI device technologies 
provide a means to characterize the MOS transistors and  
improve the VLSI circuit simulation procedure. The comprehensive 
information and systematic approach to design, characterization, 
fabrication, and computation of VLSI MOS transistor through TCAD 
tools presented in this book provide a thorough foundation for 
the development of models that simplify the design verification 
process and make it cost effective.
ISBN: 978-1-4665-1265-8
9 781466 512658
9 0 0 0 0
K14929

