I D E A S  A N D  T O O L S  F O R  E D  T E C H  L E A D E R S    I    F E B R U A R Y  2 0 1 8      I    $ 6
VOLUME 38 / NUMBER 6
TECHLEARNING.COM
PUT TO THE TEST
MYON NEWS, POWERED 
BY NEWS-O-MATIC 
See page 16 for more.
WHAT MAKES THE 
PERFECT LMS
SEVEN DISTRICTS SHARE 
THEIR IDEAS 
See page 26 for more.
PAGE 30
HOW TO TEACH IN A 
POST-TRUTH WORLD
To see more  
Tech & Learning  
scan the code
or visit us online  
at: www.techlearning.
com/FEB18

At the heart of education
is a girl connecting with her hero.
Welcome to itslearning, the only K-12 LMS
that comes from the very heart of education.
itslearning is the only teaching and learning platform designed by 
educators speciﬁ cally for the way today’s K-12 students learn and 
connect. Which means teachers can meet kids where they learn, 
and personalize lessons to their unique needs.
Of course, other key connections must be made. Districts need to 
be united. Data silos integrated. Curricula aligned with standards. 
And everything else brought together in unison to raise education to 
a new high. Because when we elevate education, we elevate us all.
Let’s connect at itslearning.com.
I T  C O N N E C T S  U S  A L L

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  3
FEATURES
26 	 FINDING THE RIGHT LMS FOR YOUR DISTRICT
By Tara Smith
Find out what these educators have to say about why they 
chose their LMS and how it’s working in their context.
30 	 HELPING STUDENTS FIND THE TRUTH IN A FAKE NEWS 
WORLD 
By Paul Sanfrancesco
Our responsibility, as educators, is to lead students to discern 
truth. So what can a teacher do who wishes to guide students in 
seeking truth in electronic media?  Here are ideas that can be 
tweaked to meet the needs of a variety of students.
34 	 T&L PHOENIX LEADERSHIP SUMMIT: CURRICULUM & 
TECH: CAN THIS MARRIAGE BE SAVED?
By Lisa Nielsen
The theme of Tech & Learning’s December leadership event 
was “Curriculum & Tech: Can This Marriage Be Saved?” Over 
two days in Phoenix, Arizona, school leaders from around the 
country discussed how both sides can better understand each 
other’s challenges, improve collaboration, and support their 
district’s instructional goals through powerful uses of technology. 
PRODUCTS
16 	 PUT TO THE TEST: T&L EDITORS TAKE SOME NEW 
PRODUCTS FOR A TEST DRIVE.
16 	
MyOn News
17 	
Reading Horizons
18 	
Typetastic
19 	
High Sierra
20 	 PebbleGo
21 	
ABCMouse
22 	 STEMscopes NGSS
23 	 Bloomz
38 	 STEM GUIDE
42 	 WHAT’S NEW: NEW 
TOOLS FOR SCHOOLS
DEPARTMENTS & 
COLUMNS
4	
EDITOR’S NOTE: DATA DUTIES
6 	 TRENDING
13 	 BIG IDEAS
26
34
Tech & Learning (ISSN-1053-6728) (USPS 695-590) is published monthly (except July and 
December) by NewBay Media, LLC 28 East 28th Street, 12th Floor, New York, NY 10016
POSTMASTER: Send address changes to Tech & Learning, PO Box 8746, Lowell, MA 01853
Periodicals Postage Paid at New York, NY, and additional mailing offices.
Copyright ©2018   NewBay Media, LLC All Rights Reserved. 
18
20
Scan here to access 
the digital edition, 
which includes 
additional resources.
F
E
B
R
U
A
R
Y
 
2
0
1
8
 
 
 
 
|
 
 
V
O
L
.
 
3
8
 
N
O
.
6
CONTENTS

4   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
EDITOR’S note
F E B R U A R Y  2 0 1 8     |   V O L .  3 8  N O .  6
DATA DUTIES
“T
hat’s not going to happen with MY teachers,” 
declared the woman to my right. The scene was an 
edtech futurist event 10 years ago in Washington 
D.C. The presenter, Tech & Learning advisor and 
legend David Warlick, was introducing the idea 
of using a new app called Twitter in class and how 
teachers would communicate with students after school during 
homework hours or even on the weekend. “My teachers are done at 
2:48PM and are back on duty at 7:18AM,” proclaimed the Luddite, 
who also happened to be the teachers’ union president of a mid-
Atlantic state (rhymes with mercy.)
Thankfully, we all know how that turned out. Faculty are more connected to students than 
ever. But with those new abilities come greater responsibilities. While Twitter is now considered 
“old school” by students, they still find ways to use it incorrectly. Likewise, while the access to 
information has never been better, the 
ability to process what information is 
“real” has never been so compromised. 
This month, another Tech & Learning 
advisor, Paul Sanfrancesco, director of 
technology at Owen J. Roberts School 
District in Pennsylvania, breaks down 
some immediate, real-world best practices 
to help train children to become savvy 
digital citizens (page 30.) These tactics 
aren’t just for students either. Judging by 
my social media feeds, there are plenty 
of parents who need to be schooled on 
these practices too. I would argue that 
there may be no more important duty 
for today’s educators than to guide us all 
through this brave new world.
FACULTY ARE MORE 
CONNECTED TO STUDENTS 
THAN EVER. BUT WITH 
THOSE NEW ABILITIES COME 
GREATER RESPONSIBILITIES. 
WHILE TWITTER IS NOW 
CONSIDERED “OLD 
SCHOOL” BY STUDENTS, 
THEY STILL FIND WAYS TO 
USE IT INCORRECTLY.
— Kevin Hogan  
      Content Director
      khogan@nbmedia.com
Publisher: Allison Knapp  aknapp@nbmedia.com;  
(650) 238-0318; Fax: (650) 238-0263
EDITORIAL
Content Director: Kevin Hogan  khogan@nbmedia.com
Executive Editor, Content:  
Christine Weiser  cweiser@nbmedia.com
Senior Art Director: Nicole Cobban  ncobban@nbmedia.com
Associate Art Director: Walter Makarucha, Jr.
Contributing Editors: Judy Salpeter, Gwen Solomon
Tech&Learning Leader Editor: Annie Galvin Teich
Editorial Interns: Diana Restifo and Dom Saunders
ADVISORS
Carl Hooker, Andrew Wallace, Marianthe Williams,  
Steve Baule, Leo Brehm, Jean Tower, Hank Thiele,  
Jenith Mishne, Frank Pileiro, Patricia Brown, Phil Hintz,  
Ken Wallace, Rick Cave, Chris Aviles, Diane Doersh,  
Mike Jamerson, Rico D’Amore, Todd Dugan, Grace Magley, 
Andrew Marcinek, John Marcus, Laura Chesson,  
Jon Castelhano, Karen Fuller
ADVERTISING SALES
Account Manager: Joanne Melton  jmelton@nbmedia.com
MARKETING AND EVENTS
Marketing Manager: Stephanie Rubin  srubin@nbmedia.com
Production Manager: Fred Vega  fvega@nbmedia.com
AUDIENCE DEVELOPMENT
Vice President/Corporate Director, Audience Development:  
Meg Estevez  mestevez@nbmedia.com
LIST RENTAL
MeritDirect: (914) 368-1024; jganis@meritdirect.com
REPRINTS AND PERMISSIONS
Wright’s Media: newbay@wrightsmedia.com; (877) 652-5295
EDITORIAL AND ADVERTISING OFFICES
28 East 28th Street, 12th Floor, New York, NY 10016 
Phone: (212) 378-0400; Fax: (650) 238-0263
For general editorial correspondence:  
techlearning_editors@nbmedia.com
NEWBAY—CORPORATE
President & CEO: Steve Palm
Chief Financial Officer: Paul Mastronardi
Chief Revenue Officer: Tom Rousseau
Chief Content Officer: Joe Territo
EVP, Content and Business Operations: Carmel King
Vice President, Content Creation: Anthony Savona 
Vice President, Digital Strategy & Operations: Robert Aames
Vice President, Information Technology: Anthony Verbanac
NEWBAY K-12 EDUCATION GROUP
Executive Vice President/Group Publisher: Adam Goldstein 
Publisher: Allison Knapp 
Editorial Director: Kevin Hogan 
Online Production Manager: Rob Granger 
Web Director: Ragan Whiteside
SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION 
One-year $29.95 (US); $39.95 (Canada and Mexico); $69.95 
(all other countries). Two years $50 (US); $60 (Canada and 
Mexico); $90 (all other countries).
To subscribe: (888) 266-5828 or www.techlearning.com 
www.techlearning.com

FindMyChromebooks is a set of tools that helps
administrators of Chromebook™ fleets locate and
recover lost or stolen devices.
FindMyChromebooks?
What is
FREE 14 DAY TRIAL
FREE 14 DAY TRIAL
Lock with custom message
Real-time
Chromebooks
location 
Capture screens 
and IP addresses
FindMyChromebooks is a product of TabPilot Learning Systems, Inc. and is not affiliated with Google. Chromebook™ is a trademark of Google Inc.
$200 minimum

6   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
NEWSANDTRENDS
THE LATEST NEWS & STATS AFFECTING THE K-12 EDTECH COMMUNITY
TRENDING 
THE LATEST NEWS & STATS AFFECTING THE K-12 EDTECH COMMUNITY
BLOG BITS 
“I’ve said it before and I will say it 
again, gamification is the best idea 
I have brought into my classroom 
in my nine years of teaching.” 
—Rachel Cheafsky
“When we set limits on our 
thinking and imagining by 
requiring that it be ‘practical,’ 
‘relevant,’ or ‘data-based,’ 
we destroy the playfulness of 
possibility.” 
—J. Robinson
“Educators need to spend even 
more focus on educating students 
how to critically evaluate 
information sources.” 
—Steve Baule
@DavidGeurin: Why should we want 
to restore curiosity, creativity, 
and hope in each learner? They 
came to us with these qualities, so 
shouldn’t they leave us with them 
also?
@jeffhiseredu: Regardless of our 
roles as educators or the age 
groups in which we serve, all 
students deserve leaders who 
approach each day with empathy 
& enthusiasm!
@web20classroom: Want to fight 
“fake news” and help students be 
better researchers and curators? 
Talk to your Media Coordinator 
or School Librarian. They are a 
valuable resource in schools.
TOP 
TWEETS
1
	 Don’t Keep Holiday Photos 
Trapped in Your Phone: Create 
Home Movies on iOS or Android 
Download these user-friendly apps 
and make great videos quickly.
2
	 When Will We Get Serious 
about Teacher Stress? 
Ignoring the crisis of teacher 
well-being is going to come at a 
great cost to districts, schools, 
teachers, and students.
3
	 New Infographic: Empowered 
Digital Citizens Guide for 
Educators 
Help convince your district to 
stop banning and blocking and 
start teaching and preparing 
students for the real world.
4
	 Metropolitan School District 
Introduces Data-Driven 
Program 
This research-based program 
is improving academic growth 
and graduation rates.
5
	 Mix & Match Makerspace 
Challenges 
Flippity and SCAMPER will 
help you create mix-and-match 
grids and more, to inspire your 
students to want to make.
6
	 8 Tips for Making Movies 
with Google Photos 
Here’s all you need to get 
started—from the opening 
shot to editing and sharing 
your creation on social media.
7
	 Useful Writing Tools for 
Teachers 
These tools will help you save 
time without compromising 
on the quality of your output.
8
	 17 Web Tools and Apps to 
Create Interactive Video 
Lessons and Quizzes 
Create video quizzes, 
assessments, interactive 
lessons, and lesson boards, 
access lesson plans, and more.
9
	 8 Web Tools for Creating 
Digital Magazines 
Create a class ezine with 
these free educational 
Web tools.
10
	 Reading, Writing, & 
Thinking: Cross-Curricular 
Literacy Initiatives 
See how schools and districts 
are using edtech tools to 
integrate literacy skills 
across the curriculum.
top10
WEB STORIES
From techlearning.com
FIND LINKS AT WWW.TECHLEARNING.COM/FEB18

Introducing Collections by Destiny
®.
Collections provides a new, collaborative 
way for librarians, teachers and students 
to access, organize and share free or 
purchased resources throughout the district, 
school and with other users.
Need 
an 
EAS
Y WAY
 TO
   or
gan
ize
 and sh
are
      
  RE
SOU
RCES
  acr
oss
 th
e scho
ol?
See how it works at
follettlearning.com/collections
Librarians
Curate resources and share 
with instructional partners.
Teachers
Pair content with instructional 
goals and provide personalized 
learning for students.
Students
Learn about credible sources 
when reviewing and selecting 
resources for projects.
“Our district ﬁ nally has a curation tool that’s 
easy to use, easy to revise and easy to share 
with anyone who needs access to the resources.”
JIM MONTI
Director of Educational Reform, Compliance & Technology
West Warwick Public Schools

8   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
TRENDING 
TUTORING
It’s estimated that education tutoring could be wiped out 
by AI in the next five years. Intelligent tutoring systems 
(ITS) will simulate one-to-one human tutoring.
ASSESSMENT
AI will help build more efficient, personalized, 
contextualized support for students.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Smart recommendation systems or machine-assisted 
systems will show student mastery, repeat necessary 
lessons, and suggest personalized learning plans.
HIRING AND 
DEVELOPMENT
Upskilling and continuous development will be required 
for teachers and administrators to keep pace. We’ll also 
see new models of boot camps and EDX-like offerings 
from universities to serve as gap-fillers for skills.
SCHEDULING
Algorithms will make it easier to maximize learning 
environments and schedules.
TRANSPORTATION
Some believe that by 2025, ride-sharing fleets and 
autonomous vehicles will be transporting students to 
schools.
SIGNIFICANT 2017 E-RATE STATS 
Findings from a survey of more than 1,096 E-Rate applicants by Funds for Learning:
 23,000 schools and libraries submitted requests for $4.6 
billion in E-Rate services.
 More than 50% of applicants wanted to expand bandwidth 
with requests of $2.5 billion in E-Rate data and Internet 
services.
 55% of applicants want voice services to remain E-Rate 
eligible.
 The average school now spends $32,576 on wifi equipment 
and services.
 48% said E-Rate’s “self-provisioning” (or building their 
own networks) option lowers bandwidth costs.
 44% of respondents still don’t like the E-Rate process.
SOURCE: FUNDS FOR LEARNING
THINKSTOCK/INGRAM PUBLISHING
READ MORE AT WWW.TECHLEARNING.COM/FEB18
SOURCE: GETTING SMART
HOW WILL ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
CHANGE EDUCATION?
THINKSTOCK/PHONLAMAIPHOTO

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  9
TRENDING 
APPS OF THE 
DAY FROM 
TECHLEARNING.COM
App of the Day picks are selected from the 
top edtech tools reviewed by Common 
Sense Education.
TOP 5 SITES & APPS EVERY 
TEACHER SHOULD TRY IN 2018
Are you looking to integrate better technology into 
your teaching this year? David Kapuler commends 
these outstanding tools to every teacher:
BoomWriter4is a group writing site and Google 
for Education Partner that lets students write, share, 
and assess original fiction and nonfiction content in a 
highly engaging, collaborative environment. Teachers 
can provide guidance to reinforce curriculum as well 
as personalized feedback to individual students.
Buncee gives students and educators a fantastic digital canvas to create presentations, digital 
stories, announcements, and much more. Its educational portal allows teachers to manage 
students. Buncee also provides a wide variety of educational resources and templates.
3EDpuzzle is being used by educators around the world 
to “flip” their classrooms and lessons. EDpuzzle’s fantastic 
online curriculum and tools for adding questions or voice 
to any video make it easy for educators to find resources 
to meet their needs.
Storyboard is a great website and learning tool that 
educators are using for project-based learning, graphic 
organizers, digital storytelling, writing prompts, and more. 
It also offers lots of lesson plans, assignments, and templates.
ThinkFluency is an innovative new iOS app that enables teachers to assess and score 
students’ reading fluency in real time. Detailed reports help teachers create individualized 
instruction plans for students.
DISCOVERY EDUCATION AND 3M RECRUIT 
AMERICA’S NEXT TOP YOUNG SCIENTISTS
Through the Young Scientist Challenge, middle-school students 
have the unique opportunity to work with a 3M scientist mentor, be 
named America’s Top Young Scientist, and take home a $25,000 
prize. To enter, students should submit one- to two-minute video 
entries explaining the science behind their idea and how it can 
improve lives by solving an everyday problem. Ten finalists will 
participate in a summer mentorship program with 3M scientists 
and compete for the title of America’s Top Young Scientist, 
including an October 2018 trip to 3M’s corporate headquarters in 
St. Paul, Minnesota. Deadline: April 19, 2018
For more information: youngscientistlab.com/challenge
Puzzle Maker Helps Kids Think 
Like Designers and Engineers
With Portal 2 Puzzle Maker, teachers can 
cover introductory concepts, from testing 
the effects of friction on falling objects to 
calculating acceleration.
Multimedia Resources and Educator 
Guides Paired in Top Bio Tool
Biointeractive’s interactive materials and 
activities highlight actual research and 
help kids explore biology through real-
world examples.
Integrate Art Easily into Curriculum 
with Google Arts & Culture
This app makes it easy to search for 
and find a vast amount of art related to 
historical events, sites, movements, and 
media.
FOR MORE GO TO WWW.TECHLEARNING.COM/FEB18
Winner Gitanjali Rao

10   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
TRENDING 
CLASS TECH TIPS
15 Current Events Websites for Students
It’s now easier than ever to connect 
students with up-to-date, high-interest, and 
relevant articles to promote discussion.
Podcast for Kids—Wow in the World, Student-
Friendly Podcast
This podcast from NPR provides dozens 
of short, engaging episodes on a range of 
topics exploring our amazing world.
FOR MORE OF MONICA BURNS’ CLASS TECH TIPS, VISIT TECHLEARNING.COM
4 
WAYS CHARTER SCHOOLS CAN 
IMPROVE LITERACY OUTCOMES
When Michelle Riojas and fellow teachers at 
Somerset Academy Miramar (FL) implemented 
a new literacy solution, these four strategies 
helped ensure improved literacy and reading 
outcomes:
1 
Know a Student’s Deficiency. Knowing where 
a student stands and the areas where he or she is 
deficient is a crucial first step. By zeroing in on the 
specific problem (or problems), instructors can teach 
to the specific need. 
2  
Leverage Outcomes Monitoring. Pulling 
reports according to grade level enables teachers 
to pinpoint quickly which students need more help and which ones are making progress. 
3 
Use Collaboration and Teamwork. Parents, students, teachers, reading coaches, and 
administrators all play a role in those positive outcomes. Technology is a great enabler, but it 
doesn’t replace the human factor. 
4 
Set Reasonable-but-Lofty Expectations. At a webinar a year ago, the person who was 
helping Riojas with the implementation plan asked her, “What percentage of your kids do you 
anticipate will be using the reading program on a daily basis or a weekly basis for completing their 
assignments?” “100 percent,” she said. “She questioned that goal, but I stood behind it,” Riojas says. 
“We’re now very close to that number. I tell our teachers all the time that there’s really no excuse for 
not having 100 percent participation. Achieving this goal takes hard work on the part of the teacher 
and the reading coach. We’re all very involved in our students’ literacy success.”
DIGITAL 
LEARNING 
DAY:  
FEBRUARY 22
Digital Learning Day, the 
nationwide celebration of edtech 
hosted by the Alliance for 
Excellence in Education, will be 
held on February 22. How will 
your school celebrate? Add your 
#DLDay 2018 event to the official 
DLDay map and tag  
@OfficialDLDay to have your 
celebration highlighted on Twitter. 
Find other events by following 
the #DLDay hashtag on Twitter to 
see events like yours, meet other 
educators participating in DLDay, 
and build your professional 
learning network.
FOR MORE GO TO GO TO WWW.TECHLEARNING.COM/FEB18
ISTOCK/THINKSTOCK
Google Street Views for Your Classroom
There are over three thousand Google street 
view experiences to choose from on this 
special section of their website.

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  11
TRENDING 
W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  11
1 
Managing the Security Risks of Virtual Reality in K-12 Schools
As VR technology becomes more advanced, affordable, and 
available, it will play an increasingly prominent role in schools. 
Unfortunately, VR devices have become targets for cyber-criminals. 
In the rush to bring headsets and software to the market ahead of 
competitors, many tech companies have released VR products with 
serious security flaws. Currently, VR technology does not consist of 
new systems; it merely offers users new ways to interface with existing 
hardware through new input and display devices. Keeping current on 
what information is gathered by software is important; in mid-2016, 
Oculus Rift was accused of collecting information about users, including 
their location and physical movements. Student data must be protected, 
and while information collected by VR platforms is usually intended to 
improve the user experience, it can be shared with practically anyone 
— not just advertisers. Acceptable VR tech should not put student 
information at risk.
2 
Network Segmentation Boosts Wifi Performance Security for 
K‑12 Schools
According to Donna Williamson, IT leader for Mountain Brook 
Schools in Birmingham, Alabama, VLANs are useful in K-12 schools 
because, “they allow IT departments with limited staff and funds to 
segment traffic on the network.” VLANs can boost performance of 
connected devices and assure security—big wins for schools. Because 
a VLAN structure reduces the amount of “chatter” on a network, 
Mountain Brook’s connected devices are only competing with those 
on that network segment. For example, the Mountain Brook Schools 
foreign language lab has its own VLAN so that students can access 
video and audio resources without dragging down the entire network. 
The VLAN also allows Mountain Brook to specify permissions for 
each segmented network, which means their guest network keeps 
unauthorized users from internal resources. VLAN segmentation 
can also help stop the spread of a virus with additions such as threat 
detection between networks.
3 
Edtech Allows Students to Report Bullying with Greater 
Anonymity
The vast majority of students never report bullying because of fear 
or embarrassment. With the growing use of online reporting methods and 
reporting apps, the process of reporting and documenting of incidences 
should be easier than ever. These programs should also allow schools to 
track repeated instances of bullying by a particular student so that steps 
can be taken to deal with the situation. This means that schools need to 
have clear policies in place that include how to address cyberbullying. If 
school districts or states are implementing online anti-bullying programs, 
these issues will also need to be addressed in updated policies. Bullying 
not only affects students’ emotional wellbeing, it is a school security issue. 
It also affects graduation rates and can be a major factor in students’ 
decisions to leave public schools for another option.
4 
Educators: We Need More from Edtech
Some educators are lamenting a disconnect between the products 
entrepreneurs are offering and what schools actually need – a 
rare criticism of an industry often lauded as vital to maximizing student 
learning potential. Eva Moskowitz, founder of New York-based Success 
Academy Charter Schools, said in December at NYEdTech Week, 
regarding the role of technology in the classroom: “I do not believe you can 
get to equality through edtech.” Education technology is pitched as a cure-
all for the many problems plaguing K-12 education, though rarely do new 
technologies move the needle in any significant way – and they often come 
at a steep price. One of the key areas of focus for education technology has 
been its response to a push among school districts to adopt what’s known 
in the education space as “personalized learning” – creating learning 
environments tailored to each student’s specific needs. “Don’t build what 
you think we need,” Susan Enfield, superintendent of Highline Public 
Schools in Burien, Washington, just south of Seattle, said during a panel 
at NYEdTech. “Have conversations with us about what we need. So many 
things don’t meet a need we have. Don’t assume you know what our needs 
are.” In her speech, Moskowitz said, “I have found the education space 
just way behind every other sector in terms of how do we do things faster, 
better, more efficiently.” She continued, “There is enormous inefficiency 
there, and we certainly could use a lot of products to improve the home-
office situation.”
5 
Rural Administrators Say Bandwidth Access and Funding 
Remain Top Challenges
Rural school district CTOs and superintendents shared their 
thoughts on educational technology challenges and opportunities with 
CoSN, according to EdTech: Focus on K-12. The top four challenges 
for rural districts include insufficient access to reliable broadband, 
lower levels of funding resulting from a smaller tax base, difficulty 
recruiting staff with the expertise and experience needed, and a larger 
gap in understanding the “why” of educational technology among their 
communities. The positive aspects of rural schools are that their smaller 
size allows them to be more flexible and give administrators more 
ownership in what happens in schools, they have greater community 
involvement, and they have greater success at retaining educators who 
embrace the small-town lifestyle.
EXECUTIVE BRIEFING

12   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
TRENDING 
5 
TRENDS THAT WILL SHAPE 
K–12 EDUCATION IN 2018
1
Schools will prefer integrated and interdisciplinary 
resources: There is growing trend for schools to 
prefer integrated solutions where textbooks, digital 
resources and assessments are all aligned to enable a 
superior and easier teaching-learning experience.
2
Portable learning: Learning no longer needs to be 
confined to a place or time; anytime and anyplace 
that suits the student is a good time to learn.
3
Data-driven instruction: Teachers are increasingly 
able to access far deeper information about 
students than was ever possible even 3 years ago. This 
will give rise to smarter, more effective instruction in 
the future.
4
Parent unions: Parents are mobilizing like unions 
and questioning everything that a school does 
from choice of uniforms and textbooks, fees and fee 
increases, extra-curricular activities, and instruction 
strategies, etc.
5
Increased focus on health and safety: With increased 
school violence, parents are far more demanding of 
proper security protocols and policies.
SOURCE: BW BUSINESSWORLD
THINKSTOCK/JANE_KELLY
UPCOMING T&L LEADERSHIP SUMMITS
}	March 2-3: Redwood City, CA 
}	June 22-23: Chicago, IL
}	October: Denver, CO
}	December: Phoenix, AZ
Attendance at a summit is complimentary for those 
invited by Tech & Learning. To be considered, please 
complete this short survey:  
www.surveymonkey.com/r/2018_Summit_Signup

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  13
BIG IDEAS
TK
TIPS FOR SCHOOL 
LEADERS IN A POST-NET 
NEUTRALITY WORLD
Marie Bjerede, principal for CoSN’s Leadership 
for Mobile Learning (LML) and Smart Education 
Networks, shares her thoughts on how districts 
should prepare. Go to (bit.ly/2DnN8iW) for the 
original post.
O
n December 14, 2017, the FCC 
voted to rescind the fairly young 
Net Neutrality protections put into 
place two years ago. The purpose 
of these rules was to prevent 
Internet Service Providers from 
giving preferential treatment to some parts of the 
Internet over others with regard to blocking or 
slowing the delivery of content. 
Although ISPs have indicated that they 
are not planning to degrade service to schools 
and districts, some educators are viewing 
these assurances with some skepticism, noting 
that things can change quickly. As Douglas 
Casey, executive director of the Connecticut 
Commission for Educational Technology points 
out, there are two probable cases. “We should 
consider the likely charges (Scenario A) to 
end users (e.g., a district paying a premium for 
G Suite access from its ISP) as well as (Scenario 
B) to content providers (that same ISP charging 
Google for fast delivery to districts). Both types 
of charges can and likely will take place.”
There is more that districts can do to 
address Scenario A. Ron Reyer, director of 
technology services at Bethel Park School 
District in Pennsylvania shares this language that 
his district has used in RFPs with ISPs in order to 
get Net Neutrality provisions in their contract:
SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENT - RWAN 
TRANSPORT SERVICE, DEDICATED INTERNET 
ACCESS SERVICE AND INTERNET2 TRANSPORT
Does the vendor have Service Level 
Agreement terms and conditions? If so, what 
are they? What are the proposed metrics and 
measurement intervals? What mechanisms are 
used to monitor service (both historical and real-
time) to evaluate whether the SLA provisions 
have been met or not been met?  For commodity 
Internet access service, does the SLA cover the 
entire complement of Internet traffic, including 
all protocols, regardless of whether traversing 
IPv4 or IPv6? 
QUALITY OF SERVICE - DEDICATED 
INTERNET ACCESS SERVICE AND INTERNET2 
TRANSPORT
Is the vendor willing to provide 
written assurance that there will be no 
preferential treatment for or against any 
specific type of traffic based on port, protocol, 
site origination, site destination, or time of 
day? 
For the districts that are fortunate enough 
to have access to a statewide Research 
and Education Network (REN), they can 
gain the advantages of their bargaining 
power. RENs, with their large size, are in a 
much better position to negotiate with their 
ISPs for net-neutral treatment.
The Quilt, a national coalition of Research 
and Education Networks, made the following 
statement: “RENs are committed to making 
all of the Internet available to all users, and 
use a number of techniques to ensure the 
Internet performs well for users and does 
not limit access to services and content they 
desire.“ With RENs and ISPs that sign up to 
service level agreements, there are still issues 
of what happens to traffic once it leaves that 
ISP’s network - at that point, they are no 
longer capable of making guarantees.
Douglas Casey’s Scenario B also remains 
problematic. Small or new or innovative 
education technology companies that depend 
on the Internet may not be able to afford to 
compete with the incumbents if ISPs charge 
them a premium to avoid having traffic 
throttled. This could limit access for districts 
to new offerings and have a chilling effect on 
innovation. For now, district leaders see the 
loss of Net Neutrality as potentially troubling, 
but only time will tell how the impact will 
evolve for our education system.
ALTHOUGH ISPS HAVE 
INDICATED THAT THEY 
ARE NOT PLANNING TO 
DEGRADE SERVICE TO 
SCHOOLS AND DISTRICTS, 
SOME EDUCATORS ARE 
VIEWING THESE ASSURANCES 
WITH SOME SKEPTICISM, 
NOTING THAT THINGS 
CAN CHANGE QUICKLY.
ISTOCK/THINKSTOCK

14   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
BIG IDEAS
By Carl Hooker
I 
don’t make resolutions; I make 
predictions. They’re not always that likely 
to come true, but they may not be that 
far-fetched when it comes to technology 
and our classrooms. Here are this year’s 
predictions:
AR WILL HELP US “SEE” STUDENTS’ LEVEL OF 
ENGAGEMENT
I predict there will be a future where the 
teacher can hold up their phone or a tablet 
and instantly see what the level of student 
engagement is in their class. 
DIGITAL BADGING WILL REPLACE COLLEGE 
DEGREES
In an unpredictable workforce where 
you need to be adaptable, being badged as an 
expert in several different areas could be highly 
marketable. Rather than spending four years 
working on one field of study, why not spend a 
few weeks or months getting credentialed as an 
HTML5 coder or a social media guru? 
A SCHOOL WILL FULLY IMPLEMENT AI TO HELP 
WITH LEARNING DISABILITIES
With artificial intelligence and enough data 
points, we could get to a future where schools 
can immediately learn a student’s behaviors 
and preferences that help them learn. The 
role of the teacher would be more that of 
project manager and instructional designer 
for each student as they use the data to create 
experiences that help their students expand 
their future-ready skills both as individuals and 
as team members.
A PRESIDENTIAL PARDON WILL HAPPEN VIA 
TWITTER
Really? Is this that hard to envision in today’s 
political climate?
“4D” TECHNOLOGY WILL HELP KIDS 
EXPERIENCE HISTORY
With improving VR technologies and 
high-end resolution, it’s only a matter of time 
before that experience is combined with some 
sort of haptic suit so students can experience 
an event in history. Imagine being in the theater 
when President Lincoln was assassinated, or 
on the ground when the troops stormed the 
Normandy beaches.
#EDTECHPOETRYSLAM BECOMES A THING
This isn’t that bold of a prediction as I 
know there will be a version of this at Tech & 
Learning Live in Chicago (May 11) and also 
at a soon-to-be announced after-hours event 
during this year’s ISTE. 
A RIDE-SHARING APP FOR PARENTS WILL BE 
INVENTED
This app would allow parents in a 
community to coordinate driving kids to 
similar activities, thus cutting back on traffic 
and helping connect people with similar 
interests. Of course, the old-fashioned way to 
do this would be to go talk to another parent 
about this, but who does that these days?
OPRAH WILL RUN FOR PRESIDENT
Just making sure you were still paying 
attention, but she did deliver a powerful 
Golden Globes speech!
DRONES IN EDUCATION COULD BE A THING
While the rules and regulations around 
drones seem to be ever-changing, these 
devices will play a part in our future. What do 
we need to teach kids about them? How can 
we use this technology to give us a different 
view on learning? 
THE LEARNFEST LAUNCHES WITH SOME 
UNEXPECTED TWISTS
The rebranding of iPadpalooza to 
“LearnFest” has been a long time coming, with 
a smaller prototype version of the event this 
year. (LearnFest launches to the public in June 
2019.) We’ll be trying a few ideas that have 
never been done at a conference. Follow @
TheLearnFest.
MY NEW CHILDREN’S BOOK GETS A 
PUBLISHER AND IS ACTUALLY PUBLISHED!
This is less a prediction and more of a 
call for help. Maybe I should launch it on 
Kickstarter….
A BOBA FETT MOVIE WILL BE ANNOUNCED
Just making sure you read until the 
end. It’s been rumored but this is the year it 
becomes official! 
www.techlearning.com/tl-advisor-blog/
bold-predictions-2018-hooker
BOLD PREDICTIONS 
SURE TO GO 
WRONG IN 2018

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  15
BIG IDEAS
TOP TEN MAKERSPACE 
FAVORITES OF 2017
By Laura Fleming
T
his year’s New Media Consortium/
COSN’s 2017 K–12 Horizon Report 
deemed makerspaces the future of 
edtech and predicted full adoption in 
K–12 in one year or less. Think “out 
of the box” this year as you choose 
products to support your makerspace themes. 
Following is a list of some of my favorites. 
POWERUP 3.0 
The POWERUP 3.0 smartphone controlled 
paper airplane features a durable, crash-proof 
design that transforms ordinary paper planes 
into app-controlled machines. With a free app, 
these planes are controlled directly from a 
smartphone. 
PODPI
PodPi is a comic book series that teaches 
kids about electronics and JavaScript coding 
through engaging, immersive lessons. They start 
with building simple circuits and end with wifi-
enabled devices powering the Internet of Things 
(IoT). 
BUILDR TAPE
Buildr TAPE is flexible, reusable adhesive 
tape that instantly transforms virtually any 
surface into a base for building new amazing 
creations with your traditional toy building 
blocks. Compatible with LEGO. 
THINKPAK: A BRAINSTORMING CARD DECK
Stretch and flex your mental muscles with 
Thinkpak, a creative thinking tool designed by 
Michael Michalko, author of the groundbreaking 
book Thinkertoys. Shuffle, mix, and match this 
deck of illustrated cards to spark fresh insights, 
then use the critical evaluation techniques to 
test, shape, and refine your original ideas into 
realistic creations. Thinkpak provides plenty 
of thought-provoking questions and examples 
to fire up the imagination. 
MOCKUPS
These cards are a great tool for getting 
students to think creatively. Pick three cards, 
one of each color. So, for example, the group 
of people might be “construction workers,” 
the need might be “a way to save water,” 
and the challenge might be that it has to 
“work on the moon.” Players come up with 
creative ideas to solve the problem. Mockups 
are great as a warm-up for both ideation 
and prototyping, as well as for rapid design 
cycles. 
I CAN MAKE … BOOKS BY KRISTINA 
HOLZWEISS
The I Can Make … books by Kristina 
Holzweiss and Amy Barth guide students 
through the process of making and creating. 
They allow for a much more empowering and 
authentic experience—rather than the project 
ideas coming from an adult. 
THE EMPATHY TOY
Many school makerspaces integrate the 
design thinking process. Empathy is the first 
step in design thinking, and it’s a critical skill 
to nurture in makerspaces. The Empathy Toy 
is a blindfolded puzzle game that can only be 
solved when players learn to understand each 
other. 
MACKINMAKER LEGO COMPATIBLE WALL
With MackinMaker’s LEGO Compatible 
Wall service, schools can now create walls 
and tables that reflect specific themes unique 
to their school community—such as space, 
transportation, or landforms. They also offer 
custom-made designs.
EDISON TABLE
The Edison Table offers many possibilities 
for school makerspaces, including integrated 
cleanup, magnetic stool storage, built-in 
storage, and integrated power and USB. The 
table, available in two heights, maximizes 
creative time while minimizing logistical 
preparation and cleanup.
“KIDS INVENT STUFF” YOUTUBE CHANNEL
Check out the free “Kids Invent Stuff” 
YouTube channel, where kids can have their 
invention ideas built by real engineers.
POWERUP 3.0 

16   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
FOR MORE OF THE LATEST PRODUCT RELEASES, VISIT US ONLINE AT TECHLEARNING.COM.
PRODUCTREVIEWS
TECH & LEARNING EDITORS TAKE SOME NEW PRODUCTS FOR A TEST DRIVE
By Sheri McNair
M
yON News, powered by News-O-Matic, 
is the newest add-on to the myON digital 
literacy platform, although myON 
News can be purchased as a standalone 
product. Geared towards K–8 students, 
myON News delivers daily articles to 
students, Monday through Friday, on a variety of 
current event topics. 
Quality and Effectiveness: Each weekday, 
there are five myON News articles. These 
articles are chosen from eight categories: 
sports, news (US and world), discovery 
(science and technology), arts, animals, 
wacky news, and kids in the news. Every 
article features a selection of built-in 
multimedia components. Components might 
include a map feature, a short video clip, an 
image slideshow, fun facts about the topic, a short 
author bio, or “acts,” which offers an extended learning opportunity. 
Students can explore these components before and after reading the 
article.
Ease of Use: The easy-to-use myON News interface retains its exact 
layout every day on the front page and within each article, which 
makes navigating around the site an easy routine for students to learn. 
Additionally, each of the eight news categories has a designated color 
code, so students learn to recognize article “genres” by color. Since it’s 
browser-based, there’s no need to download software. While myON 
News does require both teacher and student login, Clever instant login 
is available. 
Creative Use of Technology: myON News uses the digital world to 
its advantage. Each article includes built-in multimedia components 
and other helpful features as well. Every article has exceptional voice-
over recordings in English, Spanish, and French, a dictionary with 
audio pronunciation, and text size adjustment. Additionally, 
each article is paired with topic-related fiction and nonfiction 
ebooks, which students can read to expand their knowledge 
on a topic. Users who purchase myON News as a standalone 
product have access to fifty ebooks and teacher-created projects. 
However, myON subscribers have access to over 13,000 ebooks. 
Paired ebooks are matched by topic, not by Lexile level. Every ebook 
includes many helpful features, such as recorded audio and annotation 
features. Users can also save ebooks to a myList digital bookshelf.
Suitability for Use in a School Environment: myON News is 
COPPA-compliant and is designed to complement and support an 
existing curriculum; it is not a curriculum. Teachers can integrate 
myON News into the curriculum seamlessly at any time throughout 
the day (either in school or at home). Teachers also have real-time 
monitoring capability to 
view stats on each article. 
Students can view stats 
on likes and dislikes for 
the article after they rate 
the article. For those who 
purchase myON News as a 
standalone product, news 
articles are available in the 
different Lexile levels based 
on the grade level of the class.
MYON NEWS
about.myon.com/myon-news n Retail Price: Contact sales@myon.com. Unlimited access licenses priced by building or district. Small-school pricing also available.
TOP FEATURES
•	The interface is browser-based and 
user-friendly.
•	Pairs articles with related ebook(s) for 
further exploration of a topic.
•	Offers an abundance of helpful, built-
in features, supports, and resources 
for individualized learning.
OVERALL RATING:  
The abundance of 
unique, built-in features 
and multimedia supports, 
along with its easy access and 
interface, make myON News 
a great choice for teachers 
to use to engage students 
in current news events. 

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  17
PRODUCT REVIEWS
By Joan Gal Peck
Quality and Effectiveness: The value, cost, 
and scheduling of professional development 
are often subjects of debate. Teachers have 
many demands on their time and energy, 
and PD offerings are often general and not 
targeted. The Reading Horizons Online PD 
Course allows teachers to be responsible for 
their own PD and offers training specific to 
the program they’re using in the classroom. 
Teachers can do the training when it’s 
convenient for them and revisit 
content when needed. This 
PD course supports teachers 
with training modules that 
are all in the same format 
and are appropriate for 
both new and experienced 
teachers. While teachers 
can set their own goals and 
plan their schedules, they’re 
still directed to finish modules 
before teaching and to review content 
to refresh their teaching. Teachers learn how to teach the program 
before they use it, and have resources available as they continue. 
Teachers are still accountable, but on their own terms. It’s easy 
to revisit content, and tutorial videos are linked to lessons that 
they will present—making authentic and helpful 
connections between the PD and practice. There 
are tutorials for setting up and customizing an 
account, lesson planning, lessons and resources, 
and community tutorials.
Ease of Use: The Reading Horizons PD course 
is easy to use and takes specialized PD one step 
further, giving teachers 24/7 access to course-
specific PD. Video support is always available, 
especially for modeling, and there are downloadable 
print resources for assessment and lesson planning. Modules are 
self-paced and offer opportunities for practice and reflection. 
Users navigate the program and access all resources from a single 
dashboard. Teachers can also be part of the learning community by 
subscribing to community forums, starting discussions, or replying to 
posts from other teachers. This training model is effective, ongoing, 
and program-specific, with clear outcomes. 
Creative Use of Technology: The course offers 24/7 access and 
integrated communication so that teachers can learn to use Reading 
Horizons more effectively. Modules are linked specifically to all the 
lessons they will teach. Teachers and administrators have immediate 
access to materials as well as to online manuals so that the PD can 
have the greatest impact on their teaching.
Suitability for Use in a School Environment: 
Because this PD is online, teachers don’t have to 
go to other places after a long day of teaching to 
participate in PD. This PD, specific to the software 
that they’re currently using, is available anytime, 
anywhere. Teachers can access training and 
fresh materials before they’re ready to teach the 
next lesson and also be part of a larger learning 
community.
READING HORIZONS ONLINE 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT COURSE 
rhaccelerate.com n Price and licensing: $100 per teacher, $2,500 for site license
TOP FEATURES
•	Online professional development 
connected to the Reading Horizons 
program.
•	Materials, with videos and downloads, are 
instantly available.
•	It’s easy to be part of the online learning 
community.
OVERALL RATING:  
This excellent PD 
course provides specific 
training for the different 
Reading Horizons modules, 
and teachers can easily 
call up superior lessons 
and support materials 
anytime.

18   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
By Sheri McNair
Product Description: TypeTastic! is an interactive, game-based 
program designed to help K–5 students build typing proficiency, 
one fun-filled game at a time. 
Quality and Effectiveness: TypeTastic! uses leveled gameplay 
to engage students in learning how to use a mouse or touchscreen 
and progressing to letter placement recognition and using keys 
on a QWERTY keyboard. Designed for students in grades K–5, 
TypeTastic! offers more than thirty different games and ten skill 
levels. During each game, students can recognize and correct 
any errors in order to complete the task. For the more 
basic levels (Let’s Build a Keyboard and Hop onto 
the Keys), there are no time limits on game play. 
This eliminates anxiety and enables students to 
learn at their own pace. After completing each 
game, students progress to a new game and 
build on skills learned previously. TypeTastic! 
helps students build skills in the following areas 
(depending on their grade and typing skill level): 
placement of keys on a keyboard, hand dexterity, 
typing from muscle memory, letter recognition, 
color recognition, punctuation recognition, reading 
comprehension, ordering, and problem solving. 
Ease of Use: Because TypeTastic! is browser-based, it doesn’t require 
preloading of software onto computers or devices. The TypeTastic! 
interface is organized, colorful, kid-friendly, and easy to navigate. 
Teachers have the choice of utilizing TypeTastic! or signing up for the 
ad-free version. Teachers who sign up for the ad-free 
version will receive an access code that students 
can use to log in. Each game level is clearly 
numbered, and a game begins with one click 
of the play button. Short, easy-to-understand 
written instructions are followed by a graphic 
interpretation of the instructions and modeling 
of the game. The scaffolded instructions allow 
all students, emergent and fluent readers alike, to 
understand the game task at hand. Bright colors, fun 
characters, catchy melodies, and sound effects all add to 
the overall appeal of this website. Where necessary, students 
have the option to mute the audio and play silently.
Creative Use of Technology: Learning key recognition through game 
play allows students to be engaged in the learning process. As they play 
these fun and interactive games at each level, students gain not only 
keyboarding skills but also self-assessment skills, as they recognize 
typing mistakes, correct them, and move on. Because students are 
learning at their own pace in a risk-free environment, they remain 
motivated and learn valuable problem-solving skills as well.
Suitability for Use in a School Environment: TypeTastic! is 
browser-based, so users can start to play immediately and seamlessly 
in a school or homeschool setting. The version with ads features only 
COPPA-compliant ads. Teachers and homeschool instructors can sign 
up for a free, ad-free version of the same program. 
PRODUCT REVIEWS
TYPETASTIC!
typetastic.com/ (COPPA-compliant ads) n edu.typetastic.com/ (ad-free, teacher sign-up required) n Retail Price: Both versions are free. 
TOP FEATURES
•	Free, browser-based website with the option to sign up for a free, ad-free 
version.
•	Game-based learning environment, so students are building keyboarding skills 
in a fun and engaging way.
•	Multiple levels allow students to build and master each stage before moving 
on. Likewise, the ability to freely move to any level of play allows teachers to 
start individual students at their own skill levels.
OVERALL RATING:  
The game-based 
approach to learning the 
keyboard, including the 
colorful, user-friendly graphics 
and interface, makes this program 
a great choice for teachers and 
homeschool instructors. Add 
to that the fact that it’s also 
browser-based and ad-free, 
and you have a winning 
combination.  

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  19
By Carol S. Holzberg
H
igh Sierra, Apple’s free operating system upgrade, offers 
several exciting improvements—from systemic changes 
to overall design and user experience enhancements. 
This review covers improvements of interest to K–12. 
Quality and Effectiveness: New features for 
improved workflows, enhanced security, and optimized 
performance include a 64-bit Apple File System (APFS) to 
accommodate much larger files and a new H.265 video standard 
called HEVC, or High Efficiency Video Coding, offering improved 
compression for 4K video files. 
Ease of Use: The free macOS upgrade can be installed on new and 
older computers, including iMacs and MacBooks released in 2009 
and MacBook Pro, MacBook Air, Mac mini and Mac Pro models from 
mid-2010 (support.apple.com/en-us/HT201475). 
Creative Use of Technology: Because APFS, Apple’s new file system 
architecture, can address 64 bits of data at one time, it manages data 
significantly faster. While High Sierra still runs most older 32-bit 
apps, this will be the last macOS to do so.
Suitability for Use in a School Environment: Safari users will 
appreciate several new features, including Stop Media with Sound, 
which makes it possible to mute pop-up videos and advertisements. 
The Reader setting removes 
extraneous advertisements and 
other visual distractions and will 
help students who have a hard 
time staying focused when reading 
a Web page. Safari users also now 
have the option of preventing cross-site 
tracking, thus limiting content providers 
from using information to personalize users’ 
Web pages with targeted advertisements.
Other notable improvements include changes to favorite apps like 
FaceTime, Photos, and Apple Notes. With FaceTime 4.0 in macOS 
10.13, users can take a picture as a live photo during a video call. Live 
photos can be useful, for example, when students are talking with an 
expert who’s demonstrating something noteworthy. Apple’s Photos 
app boasts new color and light adjustment tools for improved image 
editing and also allows users to call up a third-party photo editor 
like Photoshop from within Photos. The new version of Apple 
Notes does tables and allows users to Pin and Lock important 
notes. 
In addition, information in High Sierra is synced across devices 
using end-to-end encryption, making transmissions more secure. 
New search options in Apple Mail help users find information 
in older messages more quickly. And those with computers that 
support 4K video will be able to watch them and also stream 
videos more smoothly with the new H.265 (High Efficiency 
Video Coding) compression scheme. Several Adobe CC 2017 
apps are incompatible with the new APFS, and other apps with 
compatibility problems include AutoCAD for Mac 2015 and 
Microsoft Office 2011.
PRODUCT REVIEWS
MACOS HIGH SIERRA 10.13
apple.com/ n Retail Price: Updating to High Sierra is free.
TOP FEATURES
•	The new 64-bit Apple File System (APFS) architecture, optimized for 
flash technology, replaces the older file system, and the new H.265 video 
compression scheme offers improved streaming and files take up less space. 
•	Improvements and new features in many core Apple applications, including 
Safari, Photos, Mail, Notes, and FaceTime.
•	Faster boot times, improved security, and 
limited tracking.
OVERALL 
RATING:  Overall, 
with its enhanced 
personalization and useful 
new features, High Sierra 
is a free upgrade that won’t 
disappoint—unless users 
have 32-bit applications 
they can neither upgrade 
nor do without. 

20   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
By Joan Gal Peck
Quality and Effectiveness: PebbleGo is a simple, 
quality program from the Capstone Community 
for grades K–2. It provides multimedia databases, 
all in one place, for students in primary grades to 
do simple research. Many teachers in the primary 
grades spend a lot of time trying to find resources 
for research. They have difficulty finding a variety of 
resources at appropriate reading levels that will enable 
students to do authentic research and keep them safe from general 
search engines With PebbleGo, K–2 students can find the resources 
they need to research topics in five different areas: animals (also in 
Spanish), science, biographies, social studies, and dinosaurs. All of 
these resources are leveled for beginning readers.
Ease of Use: PebbleGo is Web-based and users point and click 
to navigate. Students choose their topics and drill down to the 
subtopic they choose. All have passages that can be read to them with 
highlighted texts. Highlighted glossary definitions automatically pop 
up. Users can search for specific information or use a pinwheel to spin 
and go to random topics. At the bottom of the screen students find 
additional options, including buttons for printing and citing sources 
(which is very important but not often addressed), as well as relevant 
articles and activities that open in ready-to-print PDF files. 
Creative Use of Technology: PebbleGo allows children to research 
safely, with age-appropriate databases that are geared to their 
abilities. The multimedia approach means that students aren’t limited 
to text alone. They also have access to audio, pictures, videos, and 
PDF files that support the topic they’re researching. File tabs across 
the page help students stay on topic as they move from one subtopic 
to the next within their main topic. After teachers show students 
how to use the program on their laptops or iPads, students can work 
individually using these special databases. They can work online 
using one computer, in small groups, or even in large groups using a 
whiteboard to learn about many curriculum topics.
Suitability for Use in a School Environment: PebbleGo gives primary 
students the ability to search six interactive tabbed databases, easily and 
safely, to find grade-appropriate information. Teachers can print PDFs 
of each database and can see what topics are available to guide students 
to a topic choice. With the “share what you know” sheet that students 
can download as a PDF, they have a built-in, ready-to-use, and topic-
appropriate sheet for inputting their research. Students can also play 
games on their selected topic in addition to sharing their opinions on a 
“question of the day.” The program meets curriculum standards in such 
subjects as science, where topics are correlated to Next Generation 
Science Standards and STEM requirements. 
PRODUCT REVIEWS
PEBBLEGO
pebblego.com/ n Licenses and Price: See website for pricing details per database.
TOP FEATURES
•	 All-inclusive databases are ready for primary students to use for focused 
research.
•	Database on animals is also available in Spanish.
•	Each topic has a printable article list, so teachers know what topics are 
available for each database.
OVERALL RATING:  
PebbleGo is an 
excellent resource 
that integrates content 
curriculum, early literacy 
skills, and information 
literacy skills for 
primary students.

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  21
PRODUCT REVIEWS
By Joan Gal Peck
Quality and Effectiveness: ABCmouse is an excellent program that 
enables students through second grade (ages 2–8) to learn at their 
own pace. ABCmouse has many features of more expensive programs, 
but the basic and very comprehensive program is free to all teachers. 
Lessons can be whole class, small group, or one to one. Students 
have their own dashboards and learning paths, and teachers can use 
their dashboards to individualize student lessons, assign lessons, and 
present videos. Both students and teachers can monitor progress at 
their dashboards. 
ABCmouse covers curriculum topics in: reading, with phonics and 
sight words; math; social studies; science; music and sounds; and arts 
and color. The program contains books as well as puzzles, quizzes, 
games, and printables supporting each student. 
Ease of Use: ABCmouse is designed to be both student- and teacher-
friendly. Students use their dashboards 
to move onto the next lessons, choose 
themes, visit special areas, and set up and 
customize their avatars and decorate their 
spaces. Teachers use their dashboards to 
do everything from planning and selecting 
lessons to changing settings for groups or 
individuals and printing out companion work. 
Creative Use of Technology: ABCmouse 
has ten levels and 850+ lessons with more 
than 9,000 individual learning activities, including videos, puzzles, 
quizzes, and printables. Student levels can be changed easily at any 
time. Over 800 grade-level-appropriate books are available online 
and are easily accessed with the click of a mouse. Books include 
glossaries with audio, pictures, towards things like definitions, and 
examples. As students progress, they earn reward tickets that can be 
used for avatar clothes, pets, virtual classroom decorations, and other 
items to personalize their profiles.
Suitability for Use in a School Environment: Teachers can customize 
student paths, build lessons, and track student progress easily. Text 
is highlighted when read and can be stopped and started as needed. 
Students use the same free login for class/library and home. Users can 
also switch between English and Spanish with the click of a mouse. 
Parent communication can also be in both English and Spanish. 
Teachers can use ABCmouse for guided learning and lesson building, 
independent learning, sequence learning, customizing student paths, and 
coordinating work with existing assessments.
The paid enterprise version, ABCmouse 
for Schools, allows access to the full site, with 
additional reporting features, implementation 
support, and full home access for students. 
It complements curriculum offerings with 
features including: student management 
(ongoing usage reports for districts or 
schools); professional development; 
curriculum alignment; progress reporting 
tools; and full home and school access.
ABCMOUSE
ABCmouse.com n Retail Price: The basic ABCmouse program is free to teachers who sign up for the program. A paid, enterprise version, with access to additional features and 
onsite or virtual training, is also available. Family (home) subscriptions available for $9.95 per month. n Products available: ABCmouse for Teachers (free program); ABCmouse 
for Schools (paid full access)
TOP FEATURES
•	Students can access all lessons and activities through an 
easy-to-navigate dashboard.
•	The program keeps track of all books read and the total 
number of lessons and activities students have completed.
•	The teacher dashboard makes it easy to set up student 
profiles and create or choose lessons for students’ paths 
through the program.
OVERALL RATING:  
ABCmouse is an 
excellent tool that’s 
easy for both teachers 
and students to use and 
enables Pre-K–2 students 
to engage in learning at 
their own pace.

22   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
By Carol S. Holzberg
S
nagit 2018 is an exciting upgrade 
to TechSmith’s flagship screen 
capture, recording, and image 
editing application. Snagit 
2018’s new features of interest 
to educational users include built-in Optical 
Character Recognition (OCR), which enables users to edit 
or extract text from images, and Smart Move options that 
identify and define objects within a capture for repositioning 
or removal.  
Quality and Effectiveness: Snagit 2018 offers much more 
than rudimentary capture. Users can easily modify captures 
with attention-grabbing arrows, buttons, numbers, speech 
bubbles, framed borders, and more. Special editing tools 
also make it easy to tag, resize, trim, flip, or rotate an image, 
change the canvas color, or apply special effects. In addition 
to OCR and Smart Move, Snagit 2018 also creates videos of screen 
movements and webcam captures for output as MP4 movies. 
Ease of Use: The program is easy to install, and it’s also simple to 
personalize default settings. The Snagit website offers easy-to-follow 
tutorials, how-to videos, and operational tips.
Creative Use of Technology: Snagit 2018 offers many flexible 
capture settings and special tools to improve the appearance of static 
screen or video captures. Two tools—Grab Text and Smart Move—are 
new to this version. Grab Text enables users to extract text from a 
capture for pasting in another application such as Google Docs or 
Microsoft Word. This feature comes in handy for using text in an 
assignment, sharing the text of an error message, extracting text 
from a Flash-based webpage, and more. Smart Move enables users 
to find and move, copy, or delete objects or text in a captured image. 
Snagit 2018 retains favorite features from previous versions, like 
Panoramic Scrolling Capture and Time Delay. Users can record 
screen videos with or without the cursor, system audio, voiced 
narration, or the computer’s built-in webcam. After the captured 
video opens, users can trim away unwanted portions or create 
animated GIFs. Sharing options enable users to save, send, or share 
captures directly to a printer, PDF, YouTube, Google Drive, email, 
Dropbox, or FTP. Windows users can download additional sharing 
profiles preconfigured to send an image or video capture directly to 
third-party websites and applications such as Facebook, Microsoft 
PowerPoint, and Twitter.
Suitability for Use in a School Environment: Snagit 2018 gives 
users more control over captured images and recorded screen video 
and also offers sophisticated editing tools, special effects, and stamps. 
Stamp collections such as Algebra, Charts and Graphs, Emojis, 
Geometry, Map, and Math are available primarily for Windows (with 
some for Macintosh). The Snagit Toolbar can also be customized and 
the TechSmith also offers a host of tip-rich blogs.
PRODUCT REVIEWS
SNAGIT 2018
techsmith.com  n Retail Price: $49.95 for one license; $24.95 upgrade. Volume pricing available.
TOP FEATURES
•	Built-in OCR allows users to extract text from a captured screen for use in 
other applications.
•	Pre-configured capture-sharing profiles simplify output directly to third-party 
applications.
•	Robust editing tools make it easy to personalize images.
OVERALL RATING:  
Snagit 2018 gives 
users creative control 
over their captures. Features 
such as Grab Text, Smart 
Move, scrolling capture, 
special stamps, and video 
screencasting make this 
software well worth its 
purchase price.

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  23
PRODUCT REVIEWS
By Frank Pileiro
S
TEMscopes from Accelerate Learning 
offers an online, comprehensive, hands-on 
pre-K–12 STEM curriculum for schools. The 
STEMscopes platform features extensive 
content, teacher support materials, hands-on 
activities, lesson planning tools, professional 
development, and more.
Quality and Effectiveness: The “scopes” in STEMscopes 
are lessons, and the various  topics are aligned with the 
Common Core State Standards and Next Generation 
Science Standards (CCSS and NGSS). They’re organized 
by grade level or topic, and there’s a handy search function 
for exploration. The detailed lesson plans include 
directions for implementation. They can be customized for 
long- and short-term units of instruction, so teachers can 
go as far and deep as they like.
Ease of Use: When users select a scope, they’re taken 
to a page with a lesson overview. From there, users 
can easily access a huge number of customizable 
resources for that lesson. STEMscopes breaks 
down lessons using the 5E+I/A framework 
(engage, explore, explain, elaborate, 
evaluate, intervention, acceleration). 
There are links to resources and classroom 
activities for each part of the framework. 
Creating a lesson plan is as easy as dragging 
and dropping, and lesson “Essentials” make 
sure teachers don’t miss anything. Essentials 
tell users what specific standards the lesson covers and 
include a graphic organizer and background materials. 
Creative Use of Technology: A comprehensive 
resource for both teachers and students, 
STEMscopes is a multimedia environment 
where both students and teachers can learn 
more about lesson and activity content. In 
addition, a link at the top of the page labeled 
STEM Coach takes teachers to an area 
with PD resources and videos to help them 
successfully implement their scopes. This is a 
great asset that’s not always included with other 
platforms. 
Suitability for Use in a School Environment: 
STEMscopes is a great for all pre-K–12 schools. It’s flexible, aligned 
with curricular standards, and provides educators with the tools they 
need to build engaging lessons. Each scope is designed using a cross-
curricular, constructivist, hands-on approach that drives student 
inquiry. The design teaches the ability to differentiate—whether it be 
with a simulation, Lexile-matched reading, or a hands-on lab.
STEMSCOPES NGSS
stemscopes.com/ n Retail Price: From $4.75 per student
TOP FEATURES
•	Inquiry-based, cross-curricular content that’s aligned to NGSS and CCSS.
•	Full set of support features for teachers to build custom lessons, complete with 
PD for successful implementation.
•	 Comprehensive, regularly updated, and accessible, STEMscopes can be used 
as a textbook replacement.
OVERALL RATING:  
STEMscopes is a 
comprehensive pre-K–12 STEM 
curriculum based on solid research 
that was designed for teachers, by 
teachers. STEMscopes is a great 
solution for schools that want an online 
learning platform that can replace 
textbooks. The content is regularly 
updated to ensure that everything 
is current, hands-on, engaging, 
and authentic. 

24   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
By Joan Gal Peck
Quality and Effectiveness: Bloomz is an app that enables teachers 
to connect, coordinate, and communicate with parents, other 
teachers, and administrators. It’s secure, simple, and can replace 
other, time-consuming communication tools. With Bloomz teachers 
can share updates, maintain calendars, arrange sign-ups, post media, 
and manage contacts. They can schedule conferences online, for 
example, and exchange communication with individual parents 
beforehand if needed. Bloomz enables teachers to share photos of 
field trips and class events and add student work to timelines and 
portfolios as well. They can also invite administrators to the class. 
Users can communicate via a post (e.g., what’s happening today), 
an announcement (e.g., who won the award), or alerts (e.g., school 
is getting out early) that can be pinned to the top of the page to 
draw parents’ attention to such important items. Teachers can also 
coordinate with parents on events (e.g., a class picnic), either as a 
group or individually.
Ease of Use: After downloading Bloomz from Google Play or the App 
Store, or by using the desktop site, teachers can create an account 
easily and form a class. Teachers can invite parents to the class 
manually or create a class 
access code. Even parents 
who aren’t enrolled 
with an account receive 
updates through email. 
There’s a complete guide to getting started, with a 36-minute video 
walk-through, as well as quick in-app tutorials, teacher resources, and 
a comprehensive support site as well. Users can also follow Bloomz 
on Twitter and Facebook to keep up with updates, news, events, and 
resources.
Bloomz makes it simple for teachers to:
 allow a room parent to take over tasks, giving them limited 
access to part of the program 
 communicate behavior management information to parents on 
individual students (for negative and positive reasons)
 publish school and class calendars
 manage events like school trips, class projects, and holiday 
parties
 quickly manage and schedule meetings or conferences, with 
parent feedback
 set reminders for deadlines.
Creative Use of Technology: Bloomz combines and integrates 
the functions of many different tools in one effective, easy-to-use 
app. From updating a profile picture to maintaining an interactive 
calendar, teachers can use Bloomz to streamline often difficult, time-
consuming communication with parents. 
Suitability for Use in a School Environment: Bloomz allows 
teachers to have two-way communication with parents, as they 
can chat online. Teachers can also give parents access to chat with 
other parents to set up carpools or playdates. Organizing classroom 
activities like conferences helps teachers save time and involves 
parents in the process, so the communication can be ongoing. Bloomz 
also allows teachers to combine lots of simple but important tasks 
such as sending out posts, announcements, or alerts.
PRODUCT REVIEWS
BLOOMZ
bloomz.com n Retail Price: Free for parents, teachers, and administrators. Upgrades available to unlock premium functionality.
TOP FEATURES
•	Simple, downloadable app that’s easy 
to set up.
•	Saves teachers time by combining many 
tasks in one place.
•	Increases comprehensive communication 
with parents.
OVERALL RATING:  This 
outstanding, easy-to-
use app enables teachers 
to communicate many 
pieces of classroom 
information to parents, 
easily and effectively.

Thank you to Frisco I.S.D. for  
hosting Tech & Learning Live!
From Adam Phyall’s keynote to our first EdTech Poetry Slam,  
T&L Live Texas was a great day of learning and networking!
Join us for T&L Live in Boston, April 27, and Chicago, May 11. 
Learn more at  www.techlearning.com/events

26   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
LMS: ITSLEARNING
DISTRICT: THE EVANSVILLE (IN) VANDERBURGH SCHOOL 
CORPORATION (37 SCHOOLS, 1,600 EDUCATORS, AND 
23,000 STUDENTS)
What they love about their LMS: Tim Wilhelmus, 
innovation, curriculum, and technology specialist, 
says itslearning serves as a centralized hub and digital 
playground for teachers and students. The platform 
offers Google integration and its flexible architecture 
allows teachers to bring in “outside” Web tools and other 
functionalities, thus expanding the LMS and letting it “live 
outside of the itslearning space.” Wilhelmus particularly 
likes itslearning’s planner and pages features. The fact that 
it can be used with primary grades is also important for 
this K–12 district. 
FINDING THE RIGHT LMS 
FOR YOUR DISTRICT
By Tara Smith
A learning management system (LMS) should support every aspect of your district’s 
digital infrastructure. How do you choose an LMS that will best fit the unique needs of 
your school or district? Find out what these educators have to say about why they chose 
their LMS and how it’s working in their context.
Students at Evansville Vanderburgh School Corporation on their iPads.
A student at Evansville Vanderburgh School Corporation.
Students at Evansville Vanderburgh School Corporation on their devices.

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  27
LMS: D2L
DISTRICT: THE DISTRICT SCHOOL BOARD OF NIAGARA IN ONTARIO, CANADA (109 SCHOOLS, 3,000 
EDUCATORS, 36,000 STUDENTS)
What they love about their LMS: Robert Dunlop, blended learning resource teacher, says, “we love that we 
have a platform that can grow along with the students and their needs,” documenting student learning with 
D2L Portfolio from kindergarten through grade 12. Primary teachers can keep parents informed and extend 
learning at home, while middle-school teachers love that D2L provides assessment tools and houses learning 
materials that are accessible to students on any device. “In high school,” Dunlop says, “we use D2L for both 
blended learning and e-learning. With a district-wide voluntary adoption rate over 80 percent and improved 
workflow, Dunlop says, “D2L has changed the way that teachers teach … and many could not imagine not 
using D2L now.”
LMS: CANVAS
DISTRICT: SPRINGFIELD (MO) PUBLIC SCHOOLS (54 BUILDINGS, 2,500 EDUCATORS, 25,000 STUDENTS)
What they love about their LMS: In a pilot, Springfield students unanimously chose Canvas for its clean 
design, mobile device capability, and user interface. “Canvas is so easy, even our teachers can use it!” one 
student quipped. The district uses Canvas for everything from their online school, Launch, to credit recovery, 
curriculum, digital libraries, professional development, and student courses. “Canvas is one simple package 
with all the tools and resources that a teacher needs. It’s an all-in-one, out-of-the-box solution,” says director 
for blended learning Dr. Nichole Lemmon.
A kindergarten 
classroom at 
DSBN incorporates 
Brightspace from D2L 
into their classroom 
activities.
An elementary student at Greater Essex County 
District School Board engages in a number-
learning activity.
LMS: EDSBY
DISTRICT: THE GREATER ESSEX COUNTY 
DISTRICT SCHOOL BOARD IN WINDSOR, 
ONTARIO, CANADA (70 SCHOOLS, 36,000 
STUDENTS, 4,700 EMPLOYEES)
What they love about their LMS: John 
Howitt, superintendent of education, says 
Edsby is a K–12 solution “with menus and 
workflows simple enough for kindergarten 
but robust enough for senior students.” 
Integration with their existing SIS was a key 
factor. One key to success, Howitt says, has 
been to “limit the expectations of use.” While 
everyone uses Edsby for attendance and group 
communication, teachers in this district with a 
robust infrastructure to support BYOD use the 
many other available features at their discretion. 
This “authentic implementation model” means 
that the use of Edsby in each classroom and 
school will look different. “As the user(s) become 
more comfortable with Edsby,” Howitt says, 
“they grow into other uses.” 
This Springfield 
Public Schools 
high-school student 
dropped out earlier 
this year, but he’s on 
track to graduate in 
May—thanks in part 
to weekly meetings 
with blended learning 
specialist Jeremy 
Sullivan.

28   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
LMS: POWERSCHOOL
DISTRICT: COMMUNITY (IL) SCHOOL DISTRICT 300 (27 SCHOOLS, OVER 
20,000 STUDENTS, OVER 1,200 EDUCATORS)
What they love about their LMS: “By creating 
an onboarding curriculum to orient students to the 
Chromebook and Google apps as well as systems 
for obtaining support, we were able to have students 
fully engaged in PowerSchool learning activities 
such as discussions, polls, and formative assessments 
during the second week of school,” says director of 
digital literacy and innovation Anne Pasco. Since 
they began the rollout in 2016, they’ve seen “an 
increase in teacher-to-student feedback, differentiated 
learning activities, student ownership of learning, 
and collaborative teacher innovation.” Pasco also 
appreciates PowerSchool’s intuitive interface, ease of use for learning 
analytics, and focus on K–12 environments.
LMS: BLACKBOARD
DISTRICT: ALPENA (MI) PUBLIC SCHOOLS (9 SCHOOLS, 3,800 
STUDENTS, AND 195 EDUCATORS SERVING OVER A 600-SQUARE-
MILE AREA)
What they love about their LMS: “This is our first year using 
Blackboard Classroom,” says superintendent Dr. John R. 
VanWagoner II. “Our staff looked at multiple LMSs and found 
Blackboard Classroom to be easy to navigate, yet comprehensive 
enough to do what we want. This includes the ability to adapt 
it to a competency-based education platform. Our junior-high 
and high-school students take over 900 online classes per year 
and Blackboard Classroom will allow us to be less dependent 
on vendors and empower our own teachers to blend their 
classrooms or offer 100 percent online courses.”
LMS: OTUS
DISTRICT: NORTH SHORE (IL) SCHOOL DISTRICT 112 (12 SCHOOLS, 
339 EDUCATORS, 4,076 STUDENTS)
What they love about their LMS: Eighth-
grade science teacher Ida Fiore says, “After 
reviewing many different products, I felt Otus 
was the best tool to successfully integrate and 
incorporate all my instructional materials and 
resources into one location for my students.” 
Otus, with its graphically pleasing and intuitive 
interface, is “essentially the Apple version of 
LMSs.” Fiore says her students have become more 
organized learners with Otus. “Their executive 
functioning skills have improved significantly. 
Otus encourages students to be creative and 
active learners by allowing them focused access 
to instructional resources. As a result, they are also better researchers, 
who work to critically evaluate the quality of various content. The 
Otus system has also increased learning accountability as my students are required to independently manage their own learning activities.”
Science students 
at Elm Place 
School in North 
Shore School 
District 112 
conduct an 
investigation.
A student at 
Community School 
District 300 
engaged in digital 
learning.
Students at Thunder Bay Junior High School in Alpena Public Schools benefit from online classes 
through Blackboard Classroom.
LMS


30   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
By Paul Sanfrancesco, Director of 
Technology at Owen J. Roberts School 
District (PA)
“I’m afraid that in slipping from truth where one 
least ought to slip, I’ll not only fall myself but 
also drag my friends down with me.” – Plato, The 
Republic, 451a
T
hese words, written more than 2400 
years ago, are as relevant today as 
when they were first stated. Given the 
current concern about “fake news,” 
perhaps more than ever, truth can be 
difficult to ascertain for educators 
and even more challenging for students. Our 
responsibility, as educators, is to lead students to 
discern truth.
So what can a teacher do who wishes to guide 
students in seeking truth in electronic media?  
Here are ideas that can be tweaked to meet the 
needs of a variety of students:
Article or Editorial: Check to see if the selection 
is supposedly written as a factual article or as an 
opinion. If it is an article, it contains facts that 
can be verified. If it is an opinion, it is what the 
writer thinks personally. There is no need to 
argue over opinions; everyone has one or more 
of those. 
Many Minds: Facts can be verified by multiple 
sources. Therefore, if a selection purports to 
report facts, the same information should be 
available through multiple sources. In how 
many other sources can you find the same 
information?
K-W-L: After reading a selection, create a 
K-W-L chart. List facts in column 1 – what you 
know to be true because the facts can be verified 
elsewhere. List questions in column 2 – because 
you want to learn more about them. List look-
fors in column 3 – because you doubt their 
veracity and need to look for more information 
to determine fact vs. opinion.  
Take Me to Your Source: What is the source of 
HELPING STUDENTS 
FIND THE TRUTH IN A 
FAKE NEWS WORLD 
Owen J. Roberts Middle School students filming the news
West Vincent students presenting social media awareness to other students

Proud 
Winner of
An app that has changed 
my life as a teacher
That's Because no other app 
offers everything Bloomz does: 
        Quick class updates 
        2-way messaging 
        Volunteer & conference 
        signups 
        Calendar & RSVP's 
        Student portfolios 
        Behavior management 
        Automatic translation 
        & much more!
- Kim, 5th grade teacher
Sign up for free at 
www.bloomz.com

32   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
the selection? If it’s from Wikipedia, the credibility of the source 
may be different than if it’s from another source. 
At the Owen J. Roberts School in Pottstown, Pennsylvania, 
students follow stories as “journalists” to see how the process works, 
and report their findings using hashtags they create. Other students 
can use the hashtags to add their perceptions to these news stories. 
Our superintendent, Dr. Susan Lloyd @ojrsd_supt, also models 
accurate reporting and encourages everyone, including students, to 
follow her on Twitter for the real updates on the district. She also 
sends out a weekly blog to control rumors and fake news, as well as 
to promote positive stories about the district. 
Here are a few other ideas your school can use to help students 
learn how to better tell fact from fiction online: 
■
■Have students create a social media profile for a historical 
figure. What would they be snapping? What hashtags would 
they use? What would be on their YouTube channel? 
■
■Host a parent education series on many technology topics, 
including fake news and social media. Have students lead the 
training. 
■
■Create a private online group chat that includes principals, 
directors of technology, and teachers, and have the 
participants share their ideas and best practices in using 
social media. 
Educators are in the unique position to help their students 
become more savvy consumers of online information. Through 
classroom lessons and conversations, students can learn to 
distinguish fact from fiction, to weed through the vast amount of 
data on any given subject to find the most accurate truth possible, to 
recognize the subjectivity and prejudice that exists in much of this 
information, and eventually to arrive at their own opinions on that 
subject. This is a life-long skill that is a crucial foundation to any 
college or career path they might choose.  
T E A C H I N G  I N  A  “ P O S T - T R U T H ”  W O R L D
By Steven Baule, Superintendent at Muncie Community Schools, Indiana
As it appears that we still live in a “post-truth world,” according to a 
recent Forbes article, we need to learn that expertise and authoritative 
sources no longer always hold sway. Educators need to place even more 
focus on educating students about how to critically evaluate informa-
tion sources. Some good resources include: Kathy Schlock’s Guide to 
Everything, which includes critical evaluation resources; this recent NY 
Times guide for evaluating news sources for teachers; this 2015 Fake vs. 
Real News post; and this TEDEd lesson. ISTE’s Standards for Students 
includes the critical evaluation of materials in several places.
We are often frustrated when others cannot understand our perspec-
tive, but as our world becomes more interconnected, it becomes even 
more essential to learn to critically understand the perceptions and 
biases of others and try to make decisions based upon facts. Take, for 
example, one really simple “fact,” which can be interpreted in multiple 
ways: Shortly, we will embark on the year 2018, according to my Google 
Calendar. However, many people around the world would argue that 2018 
is the wrong date. The Japanese are currently in Heisei 29, based upon 
the reign of the current emperor. The Korean calendar is in year 4350, 
and the Islamic calendar is in year 1439. The Buddhist calendar currently 
shows 2561. That is without even considering the issues surrounding the 
use of Anno Domini (AD) vs. Common Era (CE).
As Mrs. Cooper (Sheldon’s mom) on “The Big Bang Theory” once 
declared, in response to Sheldon’s statement that evolution was a fact, 
“AND THAT IS YOUR OPINION!” As facts are becoming harder to mea-
sure and articulate, let’s do our best as educators to ensure that our 
students have all of the critical tools they need.
T H E  K I N D N E S S  R O C K  A C T I V I T Y 
Kindness can often get lost in social media debates. Often, 
opinions are planted firmly in black/white terms and the 
nuances of in-person debates can be lost. To remind students 
that behind every opinion there is a real person with real feel-
ings and varied opinions, students at French Creek Elementary 
(PA) launched the “Kindness Rock” project. Students paint 
rocks and write kind and inspiring phrases on them. Each 
completed rock is then passed along to someone else, left 
somewhere for someone to find, or kept for themselves. The 
project includes: 
* A mini QR code and/or website link painted on the back 
of each rock. The QR code and website will link to an 
Instagram account that students create and populate with 
new content. 
* An anonymous Instagram account where people can post 
photos of Kindness Rocks that people find in and around 
the community. 
French Creek Elementary (PA) students participate in the “Kindness Rock” project
FAKE NEWS

K-12 GRANTS CENTRAL
Educators resource 
for grants writing
Presented by:
Sponsored by:
From the Editor:  
Christine Weiser
To ensure serious 
consideration of your 
grant proposal, applicants 
should not only try to 
match the grant criteria as 
closely as possible, but it 
is common for funders to 
request prerequisite steps 
such as submitting either a 
Letter of Intent or a Letter of Interest. There is a difference 
between these documents. 
 
According to The Grantsmanship Center, many 
government grant programs require the Letter of Intent 
in order to gauge the number of proposals to expect 
and to organize for that review process, though that 
letter is seldom responded to and should not delay 
the development of your grant proposal. On the other 
hand, many private funders such as foundations and 
corporations, request a Letter of Inquiry (LOI), which 
is used as a preliminary screening tool or like a mini 
proposal. The funder will specify the exact information 
required in the LOI, or if they are interested in reviewing a 
full proposal, they will invite the applicant to submit one. 
 
If a funding organization issues a request for proposal 
(RFP), it generally indicates an open invitation to submit 
grant proposals without the interim step of filing either a 
letter of intent or a letter of inquiry. Experts recommend 
doing the research to better understand the projects the 
organization has funded in the past and use it to inform 
your grant proposal.
Check out new grants added on a 
full interactive calendar available 
online that users can download to 
their individual Outlook or Gmail 
calendars.
https://www.techlearning.com/resources/
k12-grants-central 
 
TIP OF THE MONTH  
 
Criteria 
Ensure that the grant you submit 
aligns with the criteria listed in 
the award posting and that your 
project matches the mission/
purpose of the grant.  
 
TOP 3 ONGOING LIST  
 
• NSTA Shell Teaching Award  
 
• Vernier Engineering Contest  
 
•  American Honda Foundation 
Grants 
 
Want more successful strategies 
and best practice tips on 
improving the odds of winning 
education and technology grants 
for your district? 
 
Download this guide How to Win 
K-12 Technology Grants: Strategies 
for Success 
https://www.techlearning.com/resources/
k12-grants-central 
ADVERTISEMENT

34   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
By Lisa Nielsen
T
he theme of Tech & Learning’s 
December leadership event was 
“Curriculum & Tech: Can This 
Marriage Be Saved?” Each of the 
sessions at the Summit explored ideas 
for ensuring that the organizational 
structure, communication channels, and other 
elements are in place to make the marriage 
between technology and learning a successful 
one. Over two days in Phoenix, Arizona, school 
leaders from around the country engaged in 
working groups, a panel, and a school visit, 
with a focus on how to help both sides better 
understand each other’s challenges, improve 
collaboration, and support their district’s 
instructional goals through powerful uses of 
technology. 
SCHOOL VISIT: PHOENIX 
CODING ACADEMY
To kick off the conference, attendees visited the 
Phoenix Coding Academy (phxhs.k12.az.us/
coding), the state’s only public high school that 
integrates technology into each content area. 
Principal Seth Beute gave attendees an overview 
of the school, highlighting the importance of 
partnering with businesses to ensure students 
are prepared to enter a job market in which 
technology skills are a basic requirement. This 
is critically important because employment 
opportunities in technology-related careers are 
growing at a faster rate than other industries. 
Some of the ways the school partners with 
businesses include providing students with: 
■
■Job-shadowing opportunities
■
■Mentorships
■
■Internships (for seniors)
■
■Guest instructors
■
■Field trips
■
■The chance to serve on advisory councils 
and provide input on the curriculum and 
ways it can be aligned to the skills needed 
to work in technology fields.
These businesses realize the need to develop 
more talent from underrepresented groups, and 
Phoenix Coding Academy addresses that need. 
Summit attendees heard from students during a 
school tour and panel. During the panel, students 
suggested three strategies for targeting groups 
that lack representation in STEM fields: 
■
■Go where these populations are and show 
them what is available.
■
■Show female students that tech careers 
are within reach for them.
■
■Connect students to a learning network 
of others who look like them and who are 
successful in this industry.
During the school tour, Summit attendees 
saw the school’s student-centered academic 
approach. This starts with ensuring that 
everyone in the school is familiar with the 
strengths of the students and staff. The 
school does this by posting the students’ 
strength profiles prominently, using a tool 
called Indigo (similar to Thrively). These are 
constant reminders of the collective talent and 
intelligence that surround and support students 
and staff. Educators and students can use 
these profiles to customize their schoolwork to 
ensure that what they do best matches the needs 
T&L PHOENIX 
LEADERSHIP SUMMIT
Curriculum & Tech: Can This Marriage Be Saved?

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  35
indicated in their learning profiles.
Students also shared that the geek factor 
that brought them together often led to bullying 
in their middle-school settings. However, 
this common interest has helped to build a 
community of like-minded individuals at 
Phoenix Coding Academy who support and 
collaborate with one another. As a result, 
bullying is not a big problem at this school. 
Students explained the value of attending a 
school that helps them get an early start on the 
career they’ll pursue after high school or college. 
They said the school places them far ahead of 
the game because they don’t have to waste time 
taking classes that don’t align to their future 
goals. 
PANEL: CURRICULUM & TECH: 
CAN THIS MARRIAGE BE 
SAVED?
Day two kicked off with a panel discussion 
moderated by Sheryl Abshire, chief technology 
officer of Calcasieu Parish (LA) Public Schools. 
The panel included administrators from several 
districts sharing stories about how technology 
and curriculum leaders are working together 
to ensure that technology purchases and uses 
support their instructional goals and educational 
vision. 
Panel members discussed the positive role 
high-stakes assessment has had in driving 
schools to adopt technology. In part because 
of the focus on testing, however, many schools 
still lag behind when it comes to integrating 
technology into the curriculum. Successful 
adoption of technology into the curriculum 
requires a happy marriage between curriculum 
and technology. There are four key components 
that can lead to a successful marriage: active 
engagement, group participation, frequent 
interaction and feedback, and connection to 
real-world experts.
The key to staying out of divorce court is 
remembering that it’s not about technology. It’s 
about learning. These are not tech programs. 
They are learning programs. We don’t want tech 
committees. We want learning committees.
This learning requires teachers to receive 
training and support so they know the right 
tech tools to use and how to use them. It’s 
important to think about what teacher support 
looks like and also to have a teacher evaluation 
plan that accounts for effective integration of 
technology into the classroom. Superintendent 
Hank Thiele and technology and information 
services director Rod Russeau of Community 
High School District 99 (IL) shared that they’ve 
changed their teacher evaluation plan to be more 
like a checkup. They go in once a year to see how 
they are. This gives time for teachers and leaders 
to grow.
Dwight Goodwin, director of instructional 
technology, and Mike Mattingly, assistant 
superintendent of curriculum, from Denton 
(TX) Independent School District reminded 
leaders of the importance of starting with 
thinking about the “why.” All stakeholders 
should understand clearly the reasons the 
school or district is integrating technology. It’s 
also important to survey stakeholders to see 
what they want. Like other districts across the 
country, Denton adopted Chromebooks for its 
1:1 because of the feedback district leadership 
received. Students shared the importance of 
having a touchscreen, keyboard, instant on, 
and long battery life. Making this collaboration 
transparent is key for adoption. 
Asbury Park (NJ) School District 
superintendent Lamont Repollet and assistant 
superintendent Sancha Gray shared that their 
marriage of curriculum and tech didn’t start 
out well. When they joined the district in 2014 
they inherited baggage in the form of a bad 
reputation in the media and therefore in the 
community. Repollet focused on the importance 
of telling a new story—a story about building a 
brighter future and embracing creativity and 
innovation. They encouraged everyone to get on 
Twitter and Facebook and use those platforms 
to change the story and show people that the 
district is working. As Repollet explained, “Being 
a digital leader is about building a positive brand 
for our schools and extending our audience. 
Social media has allowed us to reach beyond the 
parents of our students and engage the greater 
community. Now when we celebrate student 
success, the community celebrates student 
success.” 
The approach has been a success. There has 
been a 24 percent increase in graduation rates 
since 2014, and 68 percent of students exceeded 
one-year growth targets through their hip-hop 
literacy intervention program. You can follow 
the magic on Twitter by visiting twitter.com/
Asbury_ParkSD.
DIGGING DEEPER: KEYS TO 
MAKING THE MARRIAGE WORK
Following the panel, attendees worked in 
small groups to share challenges and solutions 
concerning the marriage of curriculum and 
technology. Key takeaways included the 
importance of beginning with the “why.” The 
why should be aligned to student learning and 
instructional goals. The district should have a 
unifying vision explaining the why. To do this, 
the technology partner in the marriage cannot be 
separate. Districts must create a culture in which 

36   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
a technology-infused curriculum is a priority. 
They must also stay away from technology 
initiatives (e.g., 1:1 iPads) and move toward 
learning initiatives. 
To ensure success, there must be time and 
structures for communication. There must be 
a safe place where discussions can include the 
good, the bad, and the ugly. Ideally, methods 
for communication move beyond meetings 
and email and into online communities (e.g., 
Facebook, Workplace, Teams) where instant 
sharing, collaboration, group messaging, and 
video are embedded. 
Table groups also discussed the importance 
of keeping students at the center and viewing 
them as the main focus of this work. Ways 
to accomplish that include ensuring that all 
professional learning opportunities are student-
centered and encouraging district employees to 
stay connected by visiting classrooms. 
When making decisions, always include 
student voice and choice—whether those 
decisions involve purchasing or learning 
programs. For example, in Asbury Park, the 
literacy intervention program they implemented 
as part of their STEAM initiative incorporated 
the students’ love of hip hop. The hip-hop 
literacy camp contributed to students exceeding 
growth targets. At Denton ISD, they surveyed, 
observed, and recorded video interviews of 
students discussing preferred devices. Students 
knew they were a part of the decision, which 
helped them own and have agency in their 
learning.  
The final key takeaway was that there must 
be a strategic plan to educate and support both 
teachers and leaders in understanding the why 
and implementing the vision. 
WORKING GROUPS
Through a series of working groups, Summit 
attendees had the opportunity to discuss topics 
of interest such as data privacy and security, 
digital citizenship, blended learning today, 
interdepartmental relationships and getting 
everyone on the same page, and the techie part 
of STEM. 
Session highlights included: 
MEASURING ROI AND THE IMPACT OF 
PROGRAMS 
Participants in this session came away with 
seven takeaways to consider when measuring the 
return on investment of technology programs:
■
■Know the why
■
■Focus on digital inclusion 
■
■No screen-time limits
■
■Technology provides an infrastructure
■
■Profiling graduates makes the ROI clear
■
■Showcase students, not test scores
■
■Package the work in portfolios.
CHANGING PEDAGOGY: SUPPORTING TEACHERS 
TO TEACH IN NEW WAYS 
In this session, Michael Marassa, director 
of technology, and Renee Zoladz, associate 
superintendent for Grayslake Community (IL) 
High School District 127, shared resources 
from EdLeader21(edleader21.com) that they’re 
using to integrate the 4Cs (critical thinking, 
communication, collaboration, and creativity) 
into education. 
JoJo Farrell and I, who head digital 
engagement and learning at the New York City 
Department of Education, also highlighted 
how we use our #NYCSchoolsTech group to 
connect educators with one another as well 
as with vendors—both online, via our award-
winning Facebook group, and face-to-face, 
via professional learning opportunities and 
meet-ups.
REDESIGNING CLASSROOMS AND OTHER 
LEARNING SPACES 
JoJo Farrell explained how New York City is 
rethinking professional learning spaces with an 
emphasis on learning centers. This approach has 
resulted in positive learning gains for educators. 
For example, in our partnership with Google 
for developing Google Certified Teachers, 
only about 15 percent of teachers received 
certification before using the learning station 
approach. Today, more than 80 percent of our 
educators become certified. 
Other districts discussed the importance 
of flexible learning spaces that are nimble and 
agile. Consider “Ikea-izing” the classroom or 
making it more like a coffee shop. Working 
group participants discussed how modern 
learning spaces do not need to be designed with 
technology and furniture built to last. Instead, 
they should be inexpensive and created with the 
idea that upgrades and iteration every couple of 
years keep learning environments current. 
Two book recommendations were The Power 
of Place and The Third Teacher.
LESSONS LEARNED: KEY 
TAKEAWAYS
The closing session provided an opportunity 
for Summit participants to meet in “job-alike” 
groups to identify specific takeaways they could 
put into place in their districts. Here are some 
of the big ideas that were common across all 
groups.
HAVE A COMMON “WHY”
Throughout the two days it became clear that it’s 
important to ensure that all stakeholders know 
and understand the “why”—and that it drives 
the vision. Simon Sinek provides a tool to think 
about the “why.” It’s called the Golden Circle, 
and it has the “why” in the center, with “how” 
and “what” in surrounding rings. The “what” 
T&L PHOENIX LEADERSHIP SUMMIT

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  37
ring represents the school’s products or services. 
The “how” is an explanation of what the school 
does. The “why” is about what a school believes 
in. Sinek uses the example of Apple. The why is: 
They think differently, thereby challenging the 
status quo. The how is: By informing potential 
buyers that their eye-catching designs are easy 
to use. Finally, they arrive at the what question: 
They make computers. 
MEASURING SUCCESS
It’s important to have a common understanding 
of what success looks like and what drives the 
different measurements of success. Districts 
need a common definition and measurements 
of success. Grayslake Community High School 
District 127 is using EdLeader21 rubrics to 
address this need. 
PERMISSION TO THINK AND OPERATE 
DIFFERENTLY
Welcome the concept of strategic abandonment, 
or the permission to stop doing things. It doesn’t 
matter if you’ve invested millions of dollars and 
tons of time. If it’s not serving children, let go. 
Also consider what you might want to start 
doing. Reassess where students and teachers are 
and see if you can meet them there. Sometimes 
simple solutions can make a big difference, such 
as the success of the Facebook group for New 
York City educators. Don’t be afraid to think or 
operate differently.  
STRATEGIC PLAN FOR PROFESSIONAL 
LEARNING OPPORTUNITIES
Educators and leaders need strategic learning 
opportunities aligned to their personal needs. 
There should be a way for teachers and leaders 
to assess their success using a resource such 
as the ISTE teacher standards. Teacher and 
leader learning and work should be recognized 
(perhaps via badging or micro-credentials) 
and celebrated. There should be a place for 
ongoing communication and collaboration so 
that learning is not a one-time deal (e.g., online 
communities, personal learning communities, 
meet-ups, Twitter chats). This will not work 
without leaders modeling this work. When they 
do, capturing and sharing what they model will 
help bring the work to scale across a school and 
district. 
STUDENTS AT THE CENTER
Regardless of the approach or strategy, we 
must always keep students at the center. When 
implementing blended or personalized learning, 
it’s important to remember that the relationship 
between teacher and student is still key for 
success. However, it goes beyond that. Today, 
the teacher should no longer be at the center 
of instruction. Instead, the teacher should be 
guiding and empowering digital learners who 
are at the center of their own learning networks 
aligned with their passions, interests, and abilities. 
Book recommendations to learn more are The 
Educator’s Guide to Creating Connections and 
Supporting Student Personal Learning Networks.
Not only should students be at the center, but 
students can be empowered to have leadership 
roles as well. For example, students can lead 
digital citizenship initiatives and there can be 
student tech support teams. 
In fact, students should be involved in all 
aspects of their education: curriculum design, 
room space, IT, purchasing. It’s essential that we 
communicate with the people who ultimately 
will be impacted and give them a platform for 
input. Bring everyone to the table and discuss 
issues and come up with solutions. Develop a 
clear plan, implement, and execute, creating 
a pathway that leads and feeds into other 
schools. You may want to consider abandoning 
a technology plan and creating a learning plan 
with pathways to innovation.
PLAN FOR THE SHORT TERM AND ITERATE
Gone are the days of long-term plans, purchases, 
and infrastructure. The speed of change should 
cause us to rethink how frequently we’re 
assessing and updating our resources. Schools 
and districts must be agile and adapt. This 
applies to equipment purchases. Technology 
changes every two to three years—not every five 
years. It applies to filtering policies. Research 
shows that social tools, music, and video have 
educational value. Are we inadvertently blocking 
resources that can encourage tolerance and 
acceptance of communities such as LGBTQ? 
Policies should be decided at the school level and 
should be easy to adjust. Software application 
licenses should be purchased for the short term. 
Short-term contracts help put pressure on 
companies to stay current.
The same is true for furniture and other 
elements of the learning environment. With 
flexible design and low-cost items, schools are 
less locked into an investment. Beanbag chairs. 
Bouncy balls. Pillows. Rugs. High-top tables 
for conversation and working while standing 
up. Mobile, convertible furniture that meets 
learning needs. One school is using $30 pop-
up tents as green screens for students. Some 
participants talked of “Ikea-izing” their schools 
and classrooms. There are easy ways to create 
flexible learning environments without breaking 
the bank.
Lisa Nielsen is author of The Innovative 
Educator blog and director of digital engagement 
and learning at the New York City Department of 
Education. 

38   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
The capture and analysis of data has always been 
important. The ability to process that data has never been 
so powerful or easy. From weather stations to microscopes 
to drones, these devices are taking science class to the next 
level.
ACURITE 01024 PRO WEATHER STATION
AcuRite’s proven 5-in-1 Weather Sensor tracks wind speed and wind direction, offers a rain gauge, and 
measures temperature and humidity. The Lightning Detector Sensor tracks lightning strikes up to 25 miles 
away, and provides a visual and audible warning.
The HD Display features built-in sensors that measure barometric pressure, and indoor temperature and 
humidity. It also offers clear graphics and the ability to toggle between outdoor weather, indoor comfort, plus daily 
and monthly records dashboards. In addition, the weather station display offers a lightning strike counter that 
displays a running total of lightning strikes detected, estimated distance, plus weekly and monthly totals. 
(Est. price—$200)
RASPBERRY PI 3 MODEL B WEATHER STATION
The Weather Station kit is a HAT for the Raspberry Pi which allows it to 
collect weather data using a variety of sensors. It is designed to be used 
in schools to enable students to create their own weather station, and 
has a range of resources to support its use. As well as logging data locally, 
schools that received a free Weather Station can log their data in a central 
Oracle database, so they can share information and collaborate with 
schools around the world.
Kit includes:
■
■1 x Raspberry Pi 3 Model B
■
■1 x 16GB microSD card 
■
■1 x 5.25VDC 2.4A USB Power Supply
■
■1 x Quick Start Guide with downloadable manuals
■
■1 x 1yr subscription to the Initial State Cloud Platform
■
■1 x 2x20 Pass-Through Header
■
■1 x HAT Standoff Kit
■
■1 x Raspberry Pi Sense HAT (AstroPi)Not only is the Raspberry 
Pi 3 Model B the fastest Raspberry Pi to date, it’s the first one with 
built-in wifi (802.11B)
(Est. price—$200)
THE VERNIER USB DIGITAL MICROSCOPE
This device gives you a live image that is very similar to what you would see with a traditional 
dissection microscope. This 5 megapixel camera connects to a computer or Chromebook via 
USB. It features a 10–150 mm lens with manual focus and an adjustable LED light source. In 
addition to capturing still images, you can also record short videos and time lapse sequences.
An adjustable stand with manual focus is also included. This allows you to change the plane 
of view you are looking at on the screen. With a fast response time and high resolution, you can 
get very clear images that are easy to display, save, and place directly into lab reports. This tool 
offers a world of possibilities for you and your students to explore.
(Est. price—$120) 
COLLECTOR ITEMS
When it comes to analyzing STEM data, these products measure up

Empower your students and unleash their curiosity for science and discovery. With Vernier Go Direct 
sensors, students can easily collect data on a computer, Chromebook,™ or mobile device via 
Bluetooth® or USB—no interface needed. That’s boundless opportunity.  
Discover Our Growing Line of Over 30 Go Direct
® Sensors
Unleash your curiosity at www.vernier.com/unbound
OVER 30  
 Sensors
FREE  
Graphical Analysis™ 4 App
Electronic Versions  
of Lab Books
All Backed by Our  
Stellar Service
Teaching with
LEARNING
UNBOUND

40   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
USB BORESCOPE DEPSTECH SEMI-RIGID 
ENDOSCOPE INSPECTION CAMERA
Armed with a bendable semi-rigid cable that can bend and hold its shape to 
access a wide variety of confined places, such as curved holes or pipes. The 
Super Hi-Vision 2MP CMOS sensor camera captures clear snapshot images 
and quality videos at a close range with resolution up to 1600 x 1200. Unique 
Blue LED technology helps improve image brightness and clarity even in dark 
or low-light conditions. The waterproof camera probe makes it easy to explore 
hard-to-reach or hard-to-see areas such as underwater pipe, car engine, vent 
pipe, etc. 
(Est. price—$20)
DJI - PHANTOM 4 ADVANCED 
QUADCOPTER
Get a sky-high 
view with 
this DJI 
Phantom 4 quadcopter 
drone. The 20-megapixel 
CMOS sensor captures crisp, clear images and 
video, even at high speeds, and the autonomous 
flight system smoothly maneuvers this drone 
around obstacles during flight. Connecting to 
the DJI app lets you easily change 
the settings for this DJI Phantom 
4 quadcopter drone from your 
smartphone.
(Est. price—$1,200)
SYMA X5SW-1 FPV HD CAMERA DRONE
The X5SW is equipped with a camera to take photos and videos while flying! 
Bring a new perspective to your photos and videos from the air.
It enables students to view photos & video while it is flying. It supports any 
IOS and Android phones. The cell phone holder keeps the phone secure. 
The Deluxe package contains 3 sets of blade guards, 3 sets of landing skids, 
and 2 extra sets of blades.
(Est. price—$60)
T H E  B I G  G U I D E  T O  S T E M
To help educators harness the promise of this discipline and find the resources they need, Boxlight has published “The Big Guide to 
STEM.” Available at no charge at news.mimio.boxlight.com/stem-guide, the 30-page PDF explains why STEM is critical for today’s stu-
dents and shares several ways to incorporate STEM learning into the classroom. Links throughout the guide give readers easy access 
to resources and supplementary information. Additionally, the guide includes an at-a-glance infographic on the current state of STEM 
professions and a collection of top 10 STEM lists:
• Top 10 STEM apps
• Top 10 STEM tech products
• Top 10 STEM websites
• Top 10 STEM events
• Top 10 STEM blogs and online communities
• Top 10 STEM software solutions
• Top 10 resources for STEM funding
• Top 10 STEM resources for girls
COLLECTOR ITEMS

Helping you create the STEM classroom your schools, teachers, and students want. 
STEM is of critical importance to students—it enables them to build the essential skills they need to be successful. Students learn 
most effectively when teaching reflects the real world. With our Labdisc™ portable lab, it’s easy to incorporate inquiry-based science 
into daily learning. The Labdisc device is integrated with our hardware and software to provide an extraordinarily rich STEM teaching 
environment. What’s more, this wireless, compact data logger covers a variety of science domains, with up to 15 built-in sensors, 
and fits in the palm of a student’s hand.
Take all the wonder of interactive lessons and activities and launch it even further by adding high definition (HD) pictures or live HD 
video with the MimioView™ document camera. Detailed images of the intricacies of a flower or math manipulatives are all easily seen 
by the entire class on the front-of-the-room display. Lessons and learning come to life with Boxlight.
Experience what the STEM classroom can be.  
Visit boxlight.com/STEM or text “STEM” to 51555. 
What STEM Can Be.
Hands-On 
Fun 
Real-World 
Empowering 
Uncomplicated
WHOLE-CLASS
STEM
COLLABORATIVE
ASSESSMENT

InFocus Corporation 
(www.infocus.com) 
announces the IN3140 
Series projectors, featuring 
exceptional resolution, brightness, and flexible 
connectivity options to suit classrooms and meeting 
spaces. At less than seven pounds each, the IN3140 Series projectors 
are lightweight, compact, and easy-to-install on a desk, meeting table, 
or mounted to the ceiling in an office or classroom. The projectors 
provide an excellent image in any light conditions, featuring 5,000 
lumens in Normal Mode, or 4,000 lumens in Eco Mode. 
42   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
FOR MORE OF THE LATEST PRODUCT RELEASES, VISIT US ONLINE AT TECHLEARNING.COM.
WHAT’SNEW
TECH & LEARNING ROUNDS UP A SUMMARY OF NEW TOOLS FOR SCHOOLS
Acer (www.acer.com) announced the release of their new Chromebook 11. 
It features a spill-and-tamper resistant keyboard, an Intel Core i5 processor, 8GB 
RAM, a 14-hour battery, and an MIL-STD-810G spec that gives it military-grade 
durability. The Chromebook is built to withstand the rigors of student life and it is 
suitable for high-end students that could be doing coding in apps and more. 
Califone International announces 
the release of the DM-39 
Dynamic Microphone 
for use with several of Califone’s 
(www.califone.com) portable PA 
Systems. The DM-39 microphone 
has high sensitivity response and 
is designed with durability in 
mind. The microphone comes with 
a one-year warranty for school use 
and is available in both quarter-
inch and XLR connector versions, 
making it ideal for use in schools 
as well as businesses, government 
and religious facilities.
KinderLab KIBO (kinderlabrobotics.com/kibo/) is a robot kit designed 
for young children aged 4–7 years old. The KIBO robot kit comes with a 
buildable robot; 14 programing blocks; three sensor modules (light, sound, 
and distance); a lightbulb and an art stage. In addition, KIBO also has a 
Marker Extension Set, enabling the KIBO robot to draw while moving. 
Children using KIBO can use code to create art, geometric shapes, and 
more without requiring screen-time of any kind.

Keyboarding Has Come to Life!
Student Centered Design
K-12 Aligned
Robust Reporting
Teacher Friendly
Engaging, Interactive, Safe
.....
2.0
 TECH   LEARNING
“A Real Student Motivator”
8
.
.
.
The
Ultimate
Keyboarding
Experience
 
 
Google SSO 
 
 
SIS Integration
®
keyboarding reinvented

Squirrels LLC (www.airsquirrels.com/reflector/
teacher) launched Reflector Teacher, an 
education-streamlined version of the Reflector software 
that’s used to wirelessly display iPads, Chromebooks 
and other devices in 100,000 classrooms worldwide. 
Classroom-focused features include the ability to 
quickly capture a screenshot of connected student 
devices, preconfigured preferences ideal for classrooms 
and compatibility with other Squirrels education-
oriented apps: Reflector Student and Reflector Director. Reflector Teacher makes 
device connections faster and more reliable than ever before.
NEC Display Solutions (www.necdisplay.com) announced the release of two new projector 
models, the 30,000 Center (26,000 ANSI) lumen PH2601QL and the 40,000 Center (35,000 
ANSI) lumen PH3501QL. Both projectors are well-suited for auditoriums, theaters, lecture 
halls, museums, sanctuaries and other large venues. Both projectors have a native 4K resolution for 
unsurpassed image details for graphics design, CAD drawings and Digital Cinema Quality Video.
Epson (www.epson.com) is shipping the BrightLink 
Pro 1470Ui, and BrightLink 710Ui laser 
interactive display solutions, and the PowerLite 
700U ultra short-throw 3LCD laser display. The 
BrightLink 710Ui and BrightLink Pro 1470Ui feature 
4,000 lumens of color brightness and 4,000 lumens of white 
brightness in full HD for brilliant images and impactful 
presentations. The PowerLite 700U features 4,000 lumens of 
white brightness and 4,000 lumens of color brightness.  
44   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
WHAT’S NEW hardware
CatchBox (getcatchbox.
com) announced the 
release of its eponymous 
product, a throwable 
microphone that 
makes public discussions 
more lively and colorful by 
encouraging participation 
among students and 
attendees. It doesn’t require 
elaborate explanations, 
downloads, or manuals 
to understand; It’s just 
like a normal wireless 
microphone but users throw 
it. Electronics automatically 
mute the audio when the 
device is in the air or being 
dropped. All audience 
members need to do is talk 
into the box.
Boxlight Corporation previewed several new additions to its whole-class and 
collaborative instruction solutions at BETT, including a solution that 
turns a conventional whiteboard into a touch board in less than five minutes. Boxlight 
also launched two new touch board models; customers can choose between a 78-inch 
model with a 4:3 aspect ratio and an 87-inch model with a 16:10 aspect ratio. Boxlight 
also debuted the ProColor interactive touch table with a larger screen size of 49 
inches to better facilitate collaborative work. Like its predecessor, the new touch table 
accommodates up to 12 single-point touch users or six dual-touch users. 

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  45
FOR MORE OF THE LATEST PRODUCT RELEASES, VISIT US ONLINE AT TECHLEARNING.COM.
WHAT’S NEW
software & online
ALMA TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
(www.getalma.com)
Alma 
Technologies 
has announced 
it is allowing 
any SQL-based business intelligence tool, 
such as Tableau and Jaspersoft, to access 
data from its modern, student information 
system and learning management system. 
In addition, Alma will continue to provide 
its own set of robust reporting tools to 
meet many needs and budgets. This follows 
the company’s recent integrations with 
Canvas and Schoology and its OneRoster 
alignment. 
BLACKBOARD ALLY
(www.blackboard.com)
Blackboard 
announced that 
Blackboard 
Ally is now 
available for 
multiple 
learning management systems used by 
K-12 school districts. Blackboard Ally 
is an accessibility solution that helps 
make digital class content in a learning 
management system (LMS) more 
accessible for all learners. Ally is designed 
to integrate with a school district’s 
existing LMS and automatically runs class 
materials through an accessibility checklist 
that looks for common accessibility issues. 
CDI COMPUTER DEALERS 
CHROMEBOOK TRADE-IN 
PROGRAM
(cdicomputers.com)
CDI Computer 
Dealers has 
launched a 
Chromebook 
Trade-In Program that provides a 
hassle-free, environmentally-friendly 
way for schools to dispose of their aging 
Chromebooks and obtain a free two-year 
premium extended warranty on the new 
ones purchased from CDI. 
The Chromebook Trade-In Program offers 
individuals a website where they can fill 
out a brief online form providing details 
about the devices they want to trade in and 
what type of Chromebook they’d like to 
purchase.
CENTRALREACH PK-12 
(www.centralreach.com/industry/pk-12-
education)
CentralReach 
launches 
CentralReach 
PK-12, a 
collaborative 
and data-
driven software 
for special 
education. The software helps schools 
foster communication and coordination of 
instruction and care for students in special 
education programs. CentralReach PK-12 
empowers individualized educational 
program (IEP) teams to record data and 
access information about students in 
real-time, creating data-driven insights 
to inform instruction, aids educators with 
IDEA compliance, and helps create reports 
and customizable graphs to visualize 
student progress and guide discussions 
with parents. 
CODESPARK ACADEMY & 
PEANUTS WORLDWIDE 
SNOOPY SNOW BRAWL
(thefoos.com) & (www.peanuts.com)
codeSpark 
Academy is 
teaming up 
with Peanuts to 
release Snoopy 
Snow Brawl, a 
free-to-play game that introduces little 
learners to fundamental computer science 
and coding concepts.
Snoopy Snow Brawl is a multi-player 
coding game that encourages kids to use 
problem solving, strategy and algorithms 
in a snowball fight between Woodstock 
and his bird friends that Snoopy referees. 
Other features and functionality include 
interactive puzzles,  word-free block based 
programming, different stages for all 
learners, and more.
CURRICULUM ASSOCIATES 
AQUIRES MOTION MATH
(www.curriculumassociates.com) & 
(motionmathgames.com)
Curriculum 
Associates 
has acquired 
Motion 
Math to 
further help elementary students improve 
their math fluency and number sense in 
key conceptual areas. Both Curriculum 
Associates’ i-Ready program and Motion 
Math’s games are designed with a focus 
on nurturing healthy growth mindsets, 
and the alignment of these two offerings 
will enrich student experience in critical 
math skill development. As a result of this 
partnership, Motion Math’s games will be 
available as a supplement to i-Ready. 
CURRICULUM PATHWAYS 
AND CLASSLINK
(www.classlink.com/curriculum_
pathways/)
ClassLink has 
announced 
a strategic 
relationship 
with 
Curriculum Pathways, enabling easy, single 
sign-on to Curriculum Pathways tools, 
apps, lessons, data sets and primary sources 
that engage higher-order thinking skills 
for students in K-12 and beyond. With new 
sign-on methods, ClassLink users can now 

46   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
WHAT’S NEW software & online
use QR code-enabled QuickCards, facial 
recognition, or remote login. ClassLink 
Roster Server easily and securely delivers 
class rosters to any publisher using open 
technology standards.
CYPHER LEARNING NEO 
LMS
(www.cypherlearning.com)
CYPHER 
LEARNING 
announced 
the launch of 
the Windows 
app for its 
product NEO 
LMS.  The NEO mobile app for Windows 
allows users to access the full feature set 
within the platform including creating 
and delivering online classes, assessing 
students, sharing resources, tracking 
student achievement, and collaborating 
on projects. Users can also use the NEO 
advanced features such as automation, 
gamification, learning paths, and 
competency-based learning directly from 
the Windows App. 
DISCOVERY EDUCATION 
SCIENCE TEXTBOOK 
(www.discoveryeducation.ca/)
Discovery 
Education 
announced 
the launch 
of a new 
edition of the 
Discovery 
Education Science Techbook for K-9 
students aligned to British Columbia’s 
New Curriculum. Embracing the New 
Curriculum’s “Know-Do-Understand” 
model to support a concept-based 
competency-driven approach to learning, 
the New Curriculum-aligned Science 
Techbook includes rich, standards-
aligned content such as video, audio, text, 
interactives with hands-on activities, and 
virtual labs that help educators personalize 
instruction and provide a rich and engaging 
learning experience for students.
EDMODO AND CLEVER
(www.edmodo.com/integrations) & (www.
clever.com)
Edmodo 
announced 
a new 
partnership 
with Clever to give teachers, students and 
parents immediate access to fully rostered 
digital classrooms. Together, Edmodo and 
Clever make it easier for teachers to access 
Edmodo’s resources, save time planning 
lessons, and help students master concepts 
even faster. Through Clever, a district can 
provide all their teachers pre-rostered 
classrooms in Edmodo and can then use 
Edmodo to discover the best resources and 
deliver them to their classes.
CISCO’S NEW NETWORK
(www.cisco.com)
Cisco has announced the release of The 
Network, its new intuitive network that 
provides a way for schools to manage all the 
devices and applications that run on their 
networks. It is self-learning, self-repairing, 
and features issue correction without 
programming, detection, adjustment and 
network improvement ad-hoc, a dashboard 
monitoring the network’s health – on 
campus, via WAN or in the cloud, as well 
as “fingerprint” threat identification and 
privacy protection.
EVOTEXT AND 
INSTRUCTURE
(evotext.com) & (partners.instructure.com)
EvoText has partnered with Canvas 
by Instructure to integrate Ogment’s 
curriculum creation and management 
system with Instructure’s learning 
platform. This new partnership will 
let Canvas users gain a streamlined 
process for curriculum mapping, course 
building, content collection, and progress 
monitoring. Ogment collects alignment, 
usage and performance data allowing 
educators to analyze course coverage, 
usage, and performance against the 
curriculum map at any level of granularity 
throughout the year. 
FOLLETT AND LEGO 
EDUCATION
(www.follettlearning.com) & (education.
lego.com)
Follett 
announced 
it will sell a 
selection of LEGO Education solutions. 
These solutions will be offered to school 
librarians in the U.S. who are interested in 
establishing a makerspace in their libraries. 
Five bundles will be available for purchase: 
one each at the preschool, elementary 
school, middle and high school levels with 
grade-appropriate curricula and resources, 
and two with building blocks and related 
non-digital materials.
FUEL EDUCATION
(www.fueleducation.com)
Fuel Education has expanded its suite of 
digital learning solutions for schools and 

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  47
WHAT’S NEW
software & online
districts 
with the 
addition of 
Big Universe, a literacy solutions provider 
of over 11,000 leveled eBooks for K–12 
students. Big Universe is now available 
in the U.S. exclusively through FuelEd. 
The platform supports balanced literacy 
programs with integrated tools such 
as embedded assessments, a student 
recommendation engine, analytics to 
demonstrate reading growth, and engaging 
reading practice opportunities. 
HERO K12, BV INVESTMENT 
PARTNERS AND 
SCHOOLMINT
(herok12.com) & (www.bvlp.com) & (www.
schoolmint.com)
Hero K12 and BV 
Investment Partners 
announced SchoolMint 
will be joining their 
EdTech Platform. The 
combined companies now 
extend from enrollment to graduation in 
districts that include traditional public, 
charter, and independent schools across 
the country. Customers who work with 
SchoolMint and Hero K12 will benefit 
from the integrated platform and a 
broader strategy to share data across their 
applications.
HOONUIT’S NEW COURSES
(www.hoonuit.com)
Hoonuit 
announces 
the launch of 
accredited professional learning courses. 
The courses will be provided through 
Pathways, a new enhancement to Hoonuit’s 
online professional development solution, 
which groups similar modules together to 
provide a well-rounded study of a topic. Each 
pathway has required modules, and several 
elective modules to enable personalization. 
Each module and pathway is aligned to state 
and national professional development 
standards, falling into categories such as 
Assessment and Evaluation, Instructional 
Strategies, and more. 
HOUGHTON MIFFLIN 
HARCOURT AND 
ABC’S SHARK TANK 
COLLABORATION
(www.hmhco.com) and (abc.go.com/shows/
shark-tank/)
Houghton 
Mifflin 
Harcourt 
released “Math@Work: Math Meets 
Entrepreneurship,” the fourth webisode 
in its free online series. In the webisode, 
two teams of student entrepreneurs pitch 
their business ideas to the expert “Sharks” 
of ABC’s reality series Shark Tank. For 
this episode, the students field a series of 
questions from the panel and must use 
their skills to analyze their business plans 
and convince the “Sharks” to bite and offer 
real-world feedback on their ideas.
ID TECH & ROBLOX 
(iDTech.com) & (corp.roblox.com)
Roblox collaborated with iD Tech for 
a course titled Roblox Entrepreneur: 
Create, Code, Publish Games for kids 
ages 10-12. Registration for the course 
began November 1, 2017. This course uses 
Roblox’s built-in editor to create 3D worlds 
and then uses LUA to code game mechanics. 
Students will be able to publish, share, and 
play games with friends on any platform 
from console to mobile, study games that 
have been runaway hits, and more.
IMPERO SOFTWARE ANTI-
SEXTING AND BULLYING 
VIDEO
(www.imperosoftware.com)
Impero 
Software has 
released a new 
video showing the dangers of sexting and 
online bullying, and the important role 
online monitoring software plays in schools 
to keep students safe. The video is part 
of Impero’s work to support schools in 
keeping students safe online and promoting 
good digital citizenship. The company has 
partnered with advocacy organizations to 
produce white papers at the 2017 and 2016 
Digital Citizenship Summits and provides 
online monitoring software to schools. 
INFOBASE’S WORLD 
ALMANAC FOR KIDS 
ELEMENTARY
(www.infobase.com)
Infobase announced 
the launch of The 
World Almanac for 
Kids Elementary, a 
new resource especially 
for elementary school 
students and educators. 
A complement to its 
award-winning The World Almanac for 
Kids, this new database provides a wealth 
of elementary-level content—including 
illustrated articles, videos, interactives, 
Fun Facts, and more—in a colorful, kid-
friendly format. In addition to its resources 
for homework, reports, and projects, the 
database provides support material for 
teachers--printable handouts, classroom 
management forms, and more.
IO EDUCATION PRODUCT 
ENHANCEMENTS
(ioeducation.com)
IO Education announced three product 
enhancements, including the integration 

48   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
WHAT’S NEW software & online
of Virtual 
Data Wall 
into IO Education’s assessment offering, 
expanded reporting and dashboarding 
capabilities, and improved parent-teacher 
communication through integrated, bi-
directional SMS messaging capabilities. 
Educators can use IO Education’s bi-
directional SMS messaging platform to 
communicate directly with parents and 
students. The platform also provides two-
way translation technology to send and 
receive messages in the native language.
ITSLEARNING AND 
KNOVATION
(itslearning.com) & (www.
knovationlearning.com)
Itslearning 
will give school 
districts using 
Knovation easy 
and full access to the Knovation Content 
Collection within the robust itslearning 
platform. Key areas of recent focus include 
unique integrations to content providers 
like Knovation and cloud apps like 
G-suite and Microsoft Office, streamlined 
workflows for common daily tasks such 
as creating assignments and assessments, 
providing feedback to students, grading, 
rich messaging and fully mobile apps.
LEGENDS OF LEARNING 
(legendsoflearning.com)
Legends of Learning announced it will 
develop over 300 curriculum-based 
education games for elementary science 
curricula to be available Winter 2018. 
The games will complement Legends of 
Learning’s existing middle school suite of 
over 800 games and simulations, bringing 
the depth and breadth of content on the site 
to over 1,300 games spanning grades 3-8. 
The platform is easy to use and educator 
friendly thanks to input from the Legends 
of Learning teaching community.
LEGO EDUCATION STEAM 
PARK
(education.lego.com/en-us)
LEGO 
Education 
announced 
its new Early 
Learning 
solution, 
STEAM Park 
designed to spark preschoolers’ curiosity 
in science, technology, engineering, arts, 
and math (STEAM). Children work in 
groups of six with LEGO DUPLO bricks 
to build an amusement park with rides 
and attractions designed to help them 
discover gears and ramps, experiment, and 
learn through trial and error. The new set 
is accompanied by the LEGO Education 
STEAM Park Teacher Guide, which 
features eight STEAM-centric lessons.
LETTERS ALIVE PLUS
(AliveStudiosco.com)
Letters alive Plus is a 
supplemental reading kit 
that incorporates 
evidence-based 
best practices and 
science to teach 
early literacy skills 
to pre-K through 3rd-grade students. 
The kit includes a full-year supplemental 
curriculum with 26 alphabet cards, 97 sight-
word cards, and 84 word-family cards that 
use 3D augmented reality to engage early 
learners. This approach appeals to a variety 
of learning styles and abilities, and increases 
long-term retention, especially among ELL, 
at-risk, and special needs students.
LEXPLORE DYSLEXIA EARLY 
DETECTION AI 
(www.lexplore.com)
Lexplore has 
developed a system 
that analyzes eye 
movements during 
reading, and can 
identify students 
in the risk zone for 
dyslexia with a very 
high degree of accuracy. Using an eye-
tracker, two short texts, and a statistical 
computer model, a student completes 
their test within a few minutes and through 
Microsoft Azure and a web portal, the 
results are secured and sent to authorized 
people to help them determine if a student 
needs supplementary help.
MCGRAW-HILL EDUCATION 
AND PROCTORU
(mheducation.com) & (www.proctoru.com)
McGraw-Hill 
Education 
and ProctorU 
announced 
a new 
partnership that will enable higher 
education institutions to deliver digital 
ALEKS Placement, Preparation and 
Learning (ALEKS PPL) exams with 
ProctorU’s secure remote proctoring 
system. ALEKS PPL is an adaptive 
placement solution that assesses what 
students already know, what they are ready 
to learn next, and provides students with 
the opportunity to improve their placement 
scores through an individualized, adaptive 
learning path in the ALEKS Prep and 
Learning Module. 
MYON UPGRADES
(www.myon.com)
myON announced enhanced reporting 
capabilities to include opportunities for 
goal-setting, reporting, and text coding, 

W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  49
WHAT’S NEW
software & online
all aimed 
at inspiring 
growth and 
engagement in 
student reading. The real-time, actionable 
data allows teachers time to respond to 
the data and aid students in their progress 
with the proper guidance. Original 
reporting features (time spent reading, 
books read, etc.) are still available, along 
with additional reports to measure reading 
habits, word count, project involvement, 
news article consumption, and more.
NEARPOD AND PHET 
(nearpod.com & phet.colorado.edu)
Nearpod 
announces 
the launch of 
50 new lessons in partnership with PhET 
Interactive Simulations. These lessons 
add PhET’s simulations, developed by 
the University of Colorado Boulder, to 
Nearpod’s digital platform that is filled with 
features such as virtual reality and in-class 
evaluation. The new science lessons span 
6th-12th grade and will run on all devices 
including iPads.The simulations allow 
students to engage in physics, chemistry, 
earth science and biology concepts.
OVERDRIVE 
(company.overdrive.com)
OverDrive welcomes four new publishers 
in time for the 2017-18 school year. 
Rosen Publishing (social justice-oriented 
materials), Gareth Stevens (Hi-Lo titles, 
informational texts and fiction titles ), 
Cavendish Square (circulating reference 
and nonfiction titles) and Enslow 
Publishing (biography, contemporary 
issues, history, health, etc.) serve grades 
Pre-K -12 with high interest, curriculum-
correlated materials. They are making 
hundreds of titles available digitally to 
libraries and schools for the first time, with 
more planned for 2018.
PANOPTO 
(www.panopto.com)
Panopto 
announced the 
latest update to 
its enterprise 
video platform. 
The release continues Panopto’s focus 
on delivering immersive video learning 
experiences through support for 360-degree 
and virtual reality (VR) video. Also 
included in the release is a major upgrade to 
Panopto’s inside-video search technology, 
Smart Search, which now supports speech 
recognition in 9 languages and integrates 
with captioning providers Rev.com and 
Verbit.ai. Among the new updates includes 
Blackboard Gradebook integration.
PRESENCELEARNING
(www.presencelearning.com)
Presence­
Learning 
recently 
launched online 
early childhood 
services to expand the ability of schools 
and districts to deliver early childhood 
interventions and services to children 
ages 0-5. With PresenceLearning, school 
systems and education organizations can 
access a nationwide network of hundreds 
of highly qualified clinicians – including 
speech-language pathologists, occupational 
therapists, and behavioral and mental 
health professionals – to help deliver these 
timely services to young learners and to 
consult with their families and caregivers.
REMIND, PBS, & QUIZLET 
PARTNERSHIP
(www.remind.com) & (www.
pbslearningmedia.org) & (www.quizlet.com)
Remind announced a partnership with 
PBS, Quizlet and other leading education 
companies. The new partnership feature, 
Share on Remind, is an effort geared toward 
connecting educators 
and students with 
the resources that 
help them teach and 
learn. Now, with the 
Share on Remind feature, educators can 
share resources from PBS LearningMedia, 
Quizlet and more with students and parents 
with a single click of a button.
RENAISSANCE AND 
EDUCATION.COM
(www.renaissance.com) and (www.
education.com)
Renaissance announces Education.com 
as the latest member of the Renaissance 
Growth Alliance. The collaboration will 
provide educators with more instructional 
options and a seamless journey to 
personalized learning for every student. 
The partnership will include Education.
com’s digital resources, tools, and learning 
materials for teachers to easily view and 
assign to students using Renaissance 
Flow 360—a new solution that supports 
personalized learning by connecting 
assessment, planning, instruction, and 
practice in one place, and more. 
STUDYSYNC 
(www.studysync.com)
StudySync now 
offers over 100 
Spanish titles in 
its digital library. In addition to 40 Spanish 
versions of English titles, the Spanish 
collection includes over 60 authentic 
Spanish-language texts representing Latin 
American, Latino and Peninsular literature, 
with authors from over 20 countries. ELA 
instructors can use Spanish versions of 
English library items as scaffolds for EL 
students, use Spanish and English library 
items to supplement their curriculum and 
recommend Spanish texts to their students. 

50   |  FEBRUARY 2018    |  W W W . T E C H L E A R N I N G . C O M
software & online
TURNITIN REVISION 
ASSISTANT HISTORICAL 
ANALYSIS PROMPTS
(turnitin.com/en_us/what-we-offer/
revision-assistant)
New historical 
analysis writing 
prompts for 
Turnitin Revision Assistant support 
writing instruction in content areas beyond 
English/Language Arts. A new historical 
analysis genre and new historical analysis 
prompts will be available in December 
2017 and more will be released in 2018. 
Historical analysis prompts in Revision 
Assistant align with disciplinary literacy 
state standards including the Common 
Core, as well as the College, Career, and 
Civic Life Framework for Social Studies.
TCI BRING SCIENCE ALIVE! 
FOR GRADES K-5
(www.teachtci.com)
TCI unveiled the 
first components 
of Bring Science 
Alive! for middle school. Each unit in 
Bring Science Alive! for middle school has 
students engage in the engineering process 
to think like an engineer as they solve real-
world problems related to the phenomena 
addressed in each unit. In addition, 
each lesson includes an assessment that 
addresses all three dimensions, uses diverse 
stimuli and allows students to express 
understanding in multiple formats.
TEAMDYNAMIX V10
(www.teamdynamix.com)
TeamDynamix has recently announced 
V10 this October. This release focuses on 
data protection for sensitive information 
housed in the service management 
platform. V10 addresses IT security 
requirements often required for service 
requests in IT, human resources, 
healthcare, security risk management, and 
helps reduce 
HIPAA violation 
risk without 
significant cost 
by ensuring that ePHI is only visible to 
authorized personnel and ePHI access 
activity can be thoroughly audited.
WEST SCHOOLMESSENGER 
CHRONIC ABSENTEEISM 
INTERVENTION PROGRAM
(www.schoolmessenger.com)
West’s SchoolMessenger 
solutions launched its 
Chronic Absenteeism 
Intervention Program 
(CAIP). CAIP 
combines elements of SchoolMessenger 
Communicate and SafeArrival with a set of 
professional services that support schools 
as they plan and implement a program to 
reduce chronic absenteeism. West also 
partnered with nonprofit Attendance 
Works to host a webinar in September on 
“Preventing and Reducing Chronic Student 
Absences,” to educate school districts 
about the new ESSA accountability 
guidance and share resources to help 
reduce absenteeism. 
ZSPACE ADDENUM TO 
UNITY EDUCATOR TOOLKIT
(www.zSpace.com)
zSpace has 
released the 
Addendum to the 
Unity Educator Toolkit, which supplements 
the Unity Curricular Framework. In 
the zSpace supplement, learners will 
be introduced to zSpace components, 
terminology and core concepts. Learners 
will also study zSpace interactions, including 
how a user can manipulate objects in 
stereoscopic 3D. They will discover the 
factors involved with rendering objects in 
stereoscopic 3D and how to present the 
stylus pointer and beam in an application.
ON DEMAND
Check out the following resources from 
our partner sites:
WEBINARS
Back to School: Putting Lessons 
Learned from ISTE Into Practice
Sponsored by: itslearning
 
The Journey to Data Interoperability: 
How Lawrence Public Schools 
Simplified and Centralized Data to 
Inspire District Success
Sponsored by: BrightBytes
 
IT Infrastructure & the 21st Century 
Classroom: Ensuring Technology 
Availability
Sponsored by: Schneider Electric
 
Empower Teachers with Quick and Easy 
Assessments
Sponsored by: GradeCam
 
Create Conditions that Inspire 
Brilliance: Optimizing Adaptive 
Learning
Sponsored by: Voyager Sopris Learning
Check techlearning.com for updates
AD INDEX
COMPANY	
PAGE
Boxlight	
41
Dell/EMC	
33
Follett Corporation	
7
itslearning	
2
PowerGistics	
52
QwertyTown	
43
Tab Pilot	
5
Tech & Learning Leader	
31
Tech & Learning Live	
25
Vernier	
39
Voyager Sopris Learning	
25

Velocity® is a revolutionary K-5 English Language Arts 
solution that extends the teacher’s reach and guides  
students along individualized learning paths. Register for a  
FREE 60-DAY TRIAL by May 15, 2018 and you’ll be  
ENTERED TO WIN one of three great prizes. 
Calling all 
innovators! 
Are you ready to accelerate  
& innovate your classroom?
Join an elite group of educators who accelerate
learning in their classrooms with true innovation.
FREE 60-DAY TRIAL.
3 PRIZES
TO WIN.
1. Trip to ISTE 2018 Conference  
including registration, flight & hotel
2. One Year of Velocity for your 
Classroom, a $500 value!
3. Chromebook™
Why are you waiting? Become a Velocity Innovator today. 
 go.voyagersopris.com/velocityinnovator
Open to Administrators, Principals and Teachers

BE THE HERO.
BE THE HERO.
Device Management TEACHERS LOVE.
RESULTS ADMINISTRATION NOTICE.
EDUCATION STUDENTS DESERVE.
CALL 877-709-4435
powergistic.com/TL
Get Started today on a modern deployment Strategy
You’re gonna deserve a raise.

