
This is a stone.

Digital
Mindﬁeld
When choosing MINDFIELD DIGITAL™ and our DBMD™ 
Program for your development services, you can be sure 
you will receive an app that will save you money and 
resources using the most advanced design and interface 
concepts.
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
step is carried out to maximum perfection. Our application 
developers are experienced and knowledgeable, and are 
skilled at delivering top high tech Apps. 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
order to improve our quality, broaden our experience and 
create a global range of Apps with the most impressive 
conceptual designs, 3D Graphics and Sound FX.
This is a stone.


APPLE TO RESPOND TO US PROBES INTO SLOWDOWN OF OLD iPHONES  06
FACEBOOK’S ‘FIXES’- MEANINGFUL OR JUST SKIN DEEP?  08
STRIKING AMAZON ‘SPHERES’ LANDMARK OPENS IN DOWNTOWN SEATTLE  18
CHILD EXPERTS: JUST SAY ‘NO’ TO FACEBOOK’S KIDS APP  20
DNA-GATHERING VACUUM, 3-D LASER SCANNER AMONG OMAHA POLICE’S TOOLS AS...  28
MEDICAL MARVELS  38
AMAZON, BUFFETT AND JPMORGAN JOIN FORCES ON HEALTH CARE  48
EMERGENCY ALERTS TO BE SENT LESS WIDELY TO MAKE THEM USEFUL  60
WORTH A COOK: MAKING AND ORDERING FOOD WITH APPLE DEVICES  62
ROBOTS COULD DESCEND INTO OLD MINES TO PREVENT TOXIC SPILLS  82
MICROSOFT AND LINKEDIN: IS THEIR MARRIAGE WORKING?  92
WHY ARE CRYPTO EXCHANGES VULNERABLE TO HACKS?  98
COURT REJECTS LAWSUIT AGAINST TWITTER OVER IS ATTACK  106
REPORTED PLAN FOR GOVERNMENT WIRELESS NETWORK GETS PANNED  110
iTUNES REVIEW  114
BOX OFFICE TOP 20: ‘MAZE RUNNER’ RACES TO NO. 1 WITH $24.2M  130
MARIO AND MINIONS? ILLUMINATION TO CO-PRODUCE NINTENDO FILM  140
‘BLACK PANTHER’ RECEIVES HIGH PRAISE AFTER FIRST SCREENINGS  146
FOX GETS THURSDAY NIGHT FOOTBALL FOR 5 YEARS, $3B  162
AI IN THE COURT: WHEN ALGORITHMS RULE ON JAIL TIME  168
WISCONSIN DNR SETS HEARING ON FOXCONN WATER DIVERSION  180
PUBLICLY-FUNDED NEW MEXICO SPACEPORT SEEKS CONFIDENTIALITY  184
NASA, RCBI BRING ROBOTICS COMPETITION TO AREA STUDENTS  188
AUGMENTED REALITY APP GETS A TEST AT SCIENCE MUSEUM OKLAHOMA  194
CALIFORNIA GOVERNOR PUSHES FOR 5 MILLION ZERO-EMISSION CARS  202
UAE CYBER FIRM DARKMATTER SLOWLY STEPS OUT OF THE SHADOWS  208
AUSSIE MILITARY SAYS TRACKING APP DOESN’T BREACH SECURITY  218
‘HALAL’ INTERNET MEANS MORE CONTROL IN IRAN AFTER UNREST  224

Apple is cooperating with U.S. government 
inquiries into its secret slowdown of older 
iPhones, further complicating its efforts to 
move past an issue that irked customers whose 
devices bogged down.
The company acknowledged the probes after 
both The Wall Street Journal and Bloomberg 
had reported the U.S. Justice Department and 
Securities and Exchange Commission were 
investigating how investors have been affected 
by Apple’s handling of the situation.
A software update released in 2016 began to 
slow down older iPhones when their batteries 
weakened to prevent them from abruptly 
turning off, but Apple didn’t fully disclose what it 
was doing until December.
Apple has since apologized for not being more 
forthcoming and is replacing batteries on older 
iPhones for $29, a $50 discount.
APPLE TO 
RESPOND TO US 
PROBES INTO 
SLOWDOWN OF 
OLD iPHONES
6

Image: Nazra Zahri
7

8

To Mark Zuckerberg, fixing Facebook means 
many things — protecting users from abuse, 
preventing elections meddling from malicious 
actors, weeding out fake news and “making sure 
time spent on Facebook is well spent.”
To critics, it’s all that and then some. But many 
of the steps Facebook has taken so far strike 
them as insufficient, and in some cases aimed 
as much at keeping people glued to the service 
down the line as at really addressing Facebook’s 
underlying problems.
Zuckerberg, who publicly sets himself a 
“personal challenge” every year, is this year 
focused on “fixing Facebook.”
But fixing Facebook, critics say, should also 
involve making it less addictive and its business 
model less dependent on as many people 
logging in as often and for as long as possible. 
FACEBOOK’S ‘FIXES’- 
MEANINGFUL OR 
JUST SKIN DEEP?
9

10

And it’s definitely not about creating new 
products for younger kids who can’t use its 
flagship platform, particularly amid all the 
worries about Facebook’s effects on the health 
of adults and teens.
The company has already announced a slew of 
new “fixes.” It’s just far from clear if these tweaks 
will produce lasting change, or if they’re merely 
cosmetic adjustments designed to generate 
goodwill while also keeping Facebook’s 
business strong.
Earlier this month, for instance, Facebook said 
that it would show users more posts from 
friends and family that it deems “meaningful,” 
while deemphasizing posts from publishers 
and businesses. The move did not affect 
paid advertising on the site, and it follows 
Zuckerberg’s declaration last year that Facebook 
would focus on helping users find “meaningful” 
online groups.
Much of that, said eMarketer analyst Debra 
Aho Williamson, is about “making Facebook a 
happier place for users.” Even though Facebook 
warned that its changes might results in 
people spending less time with it, she suspects 
the company really hopes users will stick 
around longer.
While Facebook enjoyed strong revenue, profit 
and all-time stock highs in 2017, there are signs 
that users — for whatever reason — may be 
pulling back from the service. According to 
comScore, Facebook visitor spent an average of 
910 minutes on the platform in December 2017. 
That’s down from 974 minutes in December 
2016 and from 1050 minutes in the same month 
in 2015.
11

12

At least some of this pullback might be 
by design, and it might be temporary. On 
Wednesday, Zuckerberg said the company’s 
work to encourage “meaningful connections” 
has already reduced total time spent on 
Facebook by “roughly 50 million hours every 
day.” Divided across Facebook’s 1.4 billion daily 
active users, that’s about two minutes a day.
He added that the changes will make Facebook’s 
community — and business — “stronger over 
the long term.” Zuckerberg has previously said 
that it may take “months” for Facebook’s changes 
to make their way to users. Facebook had no 
immediate response to broader criticism of 
its strategy.
In the fourth quarter, the company said net 
income rose 20 percent on revenue that jumped 
47 percent to $13 billion. Facebook saw a 14 
percent increase in monthly users, to 2.13 billion; 
daily users also grew by 14 percent.
Facebook’s other recent fixes amount to 
somewhat murky efforts to boost the visibility of 
“trusted” news sources — as determined by two-
13

question user surveys and Facebook’s vast trove 
of data on user behavior — and of local news.
Such changes are “not meaningful,” Marc 
Rotenberg, president of the nonprofit Electronic 
Privacy Information Center and longtime 
Facebook critic, said in an email. “Mark 
Zuckerberg will not solve the problems of 
Facebook by changing a few settings.”
Rotenberg would prefer Facebook to give users 
more control how their data is collected and to 
back efforts in Congress aimed at preventing 
foreign governments from influencing 
U.S. elections.
Like other social media companies, Facebook 
has said it will try to prevent election meddling 
and will require disclosure on political ads — but 
it’s been silent about proposed legislation that 
would require it to do so.
Some of its other steps are also half-measures. 
For instance, while it set up a page to let people 
see if they followed or “liked” Russia propaganda 
accounts, it is not notifying anyone proactively 
via email, the way Twitter is.
“Facebook’s recent changes do not address 
the threats to elections or public health,” said 
Roger McNamee, a venture capitalist and early 
Facebook investor who is now among the 
company’s most vocal critics, in an email.
“If the news feed changes had been made in 
2015, they might have had the perverse effect 
of magnifying election interference,” McNamee 
said. “And you cannot cure addiction by doing 
more of the thing that got you addicted in the 
first place, which is what Zuck recommends,” 
he wrote.
14

Image: Bloomberg
15



18

Amazon.com boss Jeff Bezos has inaugurated 
his striking rainforest conservatory built of glass 
and white steel in downtown Seattle.
“The Spheres” domed structure that opened 
Monday is the newest headquarters building for 
the online retail behemoth.
Bezos and his wife were on hand to celebrate 
Amazon’s Amazon-esque rainforest 
conservatory that is home to more than 40,000 
plants from 50 countries on five continents.
The status of the new Seattle landmark is being 
compared to the city’s iconic Space Needle, though 
tourists shouldn’t expect unfettered access.
It’s first and foremost a corporate workspace.
Even employees for now must make 
reservations to get into the selfie-worthy spot.
The four-story structure from the outside looks 
like three connected glass orbs planted into the 
ground resembling a caterpillar shape.
STRIKING 
AMAZON 
‘SPHERES’ 
LANDMARK OPENS 
IN DOWNTOWN 
SEATTLE
19

20

Child development experts and advocates are 
urging Facebook to pull the plug on its new 
messaging app aimed at kids.
A group letter sent Tuesday to CEO Mark 
Zuckerberg argues that younger children —  
the app is intended for those under 13 — aren’t 
ready to have social media accounts, navigate 
the complexities of online relationships or 
protect their own privacy.
CHILD EXPERTS:
 JUST SAY ‘NO’
TO FACEBOOK’S 
KIDS APP
21

Facebook launched the free Messenger Kids app 
in December, pitching it as a way for children to 
chat with family members and friends approved 
by parents. It doesn’t give kids separate 
Facebook or Messenger accounts. Rather, the 
app works as an extension of a parent’s account, 
and parents get controls such as the ability to 
decide who their kids can chat with.
The social media giant has said it fills “a need 
for a messaging app that lets kids connect 
with people they love but also has the level of 
control parents want.” But critics see the move 
as a way for Facebook to lure in a younger 
audience before they could move on to a rival 
service such as Snapchat.
“TARGETING YOUNGER CHILDREN”
A group of 100 experts, advocates and parenting 
organizations is contesting Facebook’s claims of 
filling a need. Led by the Boston-based Campaign 
for a Commercial-Free Childhood, the group 
includes psychiatrists, pediatricians, educators 
and the children’s music singer Raffi Cavoukian.
“Messenger Kids is not responding to a need — 
it is creating one,” the letter states. “It appeals 
primarily to children who otherwise would not 
have their own social media accounts.” Another 
passage criticized Facebook for “targeting 
younger children with a new product.”
In a statement, Facebook said on Monday that 
the app “helps parents and children to chat in 
a safer way,” and emphasized that parents are 
“always in control” of their kids’ activity. The 
social media giant added that it consulted with 
parenting experts and families, and said “there is 
no advertising in Messenger Kids.”
22

23

KIDS AND FACEBOOK
A variety of experts and technology 
insiders have begun questioning the effects 
smartphones and social media apps are  
having on people’s health and mental well-
being — whether kids, teens or adults. Sean 
Parker, Facebook’s first president, said late  
last year that the social media platform  
exploits “vulnerability in human psychology” 
 to addict users. A chorus of other early 
employees and investors piled on with  
similar criticisms.
Many preteens have already found their way 
onto Facebook and more youth-oriented 
social media platforms such as Snapchat and 
Facebook’s own Instagram, despite internal 
rules that require users to be at least 13 years 
old. Those rules are based in part on federal 
law, which prohibits internet companies from 
collecting personal information on children 
without their parents’ permission and imposes 
restrictions on advertising to them.
Some companies have offered parental 
controls as a way of curbing unauthorized 
preteen use of their platforms. But Facebook’s 
new kid-focused app, which features 
animations and emojis, seems to cater  
to a younger audience, said Josh Golin, 
executive director of Campaign for a 
Commercial-Free Childhood.
“It looks like something that would appeal to a 
6-year-old or 7-year-old,” he said.
He said the app gets those younger ones 
used to Facebook’s platform “and then they 
transition to the mature version of Facebook.”
24

25

UNCERTAIN IMPACT
Facebook wouldn’t answer questions about 
how popular the messaging app has been. 
But App Annie, an app analytics firm, said 
Messenger Kids has been downloaded about 
80,000 times on Apple’s iOS devices — iPhones, 
iPads and the iPod Touch — since it launched 
on Dec. 4. It’s been in the top 40 most popular 
kids’ apps since then. That sounds like a 
lukewarm reception at best.
University of Michigan developmental 
behavioral pediatrician Jenny Radesky, who  
co-signed the letter, said she’s never met a 
parent who was clamoring to get their  
children onto social media at an earlier age.
“One can only assume that Facebook introduced 
it to engage users younger and younger,” 
Radesky said.
That’s troubling, she said, because younger 
children haven’t yet developed the cognitive 
skills that enable them to think about and 
regulate their thoughts and actions and “allow 
them to realize when persuasive technology 
design might be manipulating them.”
At the time it launched Messenger Kids, 
Facebook said it won’t show ads or collect data 
for marketing to kids. And it stressed that it 
won’t automatically move users to the regular 
Messenger or Facebook when they get old 
enough — though it might give them the 
option to move contacts to Messenger down 
the line.
Child experts letter to Facebook
26

27

28

DNA-GATHERING VACUUM, 
3-D LASER SCANNER AMONG 
OMAHA POLICE’S TOOLS AS 
DETECTIVE WORK GETS EVEN 
MORE HIGH-TECH
29

Gone are the days of strictly old-school 
detective work.
Omaha police can now collect more DNA from 
cold-case evidence and analyze data from smart 
watches, homes and vehicles.
The department also may acquire software 
allowing detectives to walk through a 
crime scene in virtual reality so they can 
examine angles, search for clues and see a 
witness’s viewpoint.
While detectives have been able to search 
cellphones and swab for DNA for years, 
technology for both electronic and physical 
forensics has advanced even further — securing 
solid evidence that can aid law enforcement in 
solving crimes.
“It helps us identify potential suspects, and 
then once they’re identified, it helps us build a 
concrete case against them,” said Omaha Police 
Officer Nick Herfordt, who analyzes electronics.
Herfordt went through the cellphones that 
investigators found in a 2015 double homicide. 
A witness had told police that a “nerdy white 
guy” fatally shot two men.
Herfordt noticed that one victim recently 
had taken multiple pictures of himself in a 
hotel bathroom.
Who was in the corner of one of the photos? A 
nerdy-looking white guy.
Herfordt looked up the GPS information 
embedded in the photo. Investigators then 
called the hotel in Indiana and got the name of 
the man who rented the room — Michael Nolt. 
Herfordt then tracked Nolt’s cellphone, which 
led investigators to Arizona, where Nolt was 
30

31

32

arrested. Last year, Nolt was sentenced to life 
in prison for the murders of Arelius Hassell and 
Malquan King.
Last spring, the department paid about $28,000 
for a special sterile wet vacuum that can grab 
five to 200 times more DNA than normal cotton-
swab collection.
The device, known as the M-Vac, works 
especially well on such porous surfaces as 
stone, brick and rock, or years-old clothing 
that contains a scant amount of DNA. 
Extracting DNA from such items used to be 
nearly impossible.
So far, the M-Vac has been used on evidence 
in three unsolved homicides, said Detective 
Dave Schneider. Results from those items 
are pending.
The Nebraska State Patrol purchased an M-Vac 
in the fall using money from a grant, but the 
agency has yet to use the device. More than 
30 agencies nationwide have the device, a 
company spokesperson said.
Because it’s so powerful, the M-Vac can collect 
a mixture of different DNA profiles, and lab 
technicians must determine which person is the 
primary contributor. That’s why investigators 
limit the machine’s use.
“We’re trying to narrow it to those scenarios 
where it’s difficult DNA extraction or when prior 
methods of normal DNA collection have not 
been successful,” said William Henningsen, the 
acting forensic manager of the department’s 
forensic investigations section. “This is not a tool 
that solves every case for us, but it’s another tool 
in our kit that gives us more options.”
33

34

Forensic technicians already can scan crime 
scenes using a three-dimensional laser scanner 
that can map a room in 90 seconds, Henningsen 
said. The forensics investigations unit soon may 
get a drone to map larger areas.
Officers and crime lab technicians will attend 
a virtual reality demonstration in February in 
the hopes of dedicating a room for the virtual 
technology by the end of this year.
Investigators wearing a virtual reality headset 
could step into a recreated crime scene and 
walk around, making notes and seeing what 
other detectives may or may not have noticed 
years earlier.
“That type of information is going to be amazing 
to have, where I’m not looking at a Polaroid 
or something,” said Schneider, who works in 
the cold case squad in the homicide unit. “It’s 
incredible where it walks you through the scene 
and you can get an eyewitness perspective of 
what the area looked like.”
As the Michael Nolt case showed, detectives 
already can get insight into victims’ and 
suspects’ lives by looking at their photos and 
scrolling through their digital devices. That 
will only continue as technology advances 
and the number of devices that can be 
mined increases.
Downloading cellphone data became the new 
normal in 2013, when smartphones became 
cheaper and more accessible.
“It’s rare that there’s any major case which 
doesn’t come through our office in some 
capacity,” Herfordt said. “Everybody has a 
cellphone, and they always have it with them. 
35

And even though you’re not using it, it still likely 
is probably doing something in the background.”
Herfordt is one of two digital forensic officers 
who work cases for homicide, assault, robbery 
and traffic units at Omaha Police Headquarters. 
Another officer works at Project Harmony, 
focusing on child victims and sex-assault 
cases. Information from apps, text messages, 
phone calls and Internet searches are up 
for grabs.
Increasingly, the unit is analyzing records 
collected from newer vehicles equipped with 
GPS technology that can track where a car 
has been. Vehicle data can show which doors 
were opened during a trip, something that 
could tell investigators how many people were 
in the car.
Herfordt said officers analyze vehicle data about 
once a month, but he wants detectives to collect 
more of that data for cases and to see record 
collection as a viable investigative resource.
“We’re trying to push our investigators to use 
that more,” he said. “Something like that could 
be beneficial.”
Fitness watches, personal assistants such as the 
Amazon Echo, home security systems and smart 
refrigerators all can be analyzed, Herfordt said. 
The unit hasn’t analyzed any smartwatches or 
Echos for a case yet, he said. But the advantage 
of data, Herfordt said, is that it can open doors to 
new leads. Most importantly, it’s concrete.
“That evidence helps you get additional 
evidence,” Herfordt said. “These are facts right 
here. It’s harder to refute them.”
36

37

38

Technological advancements are in every part 
of our lives, including the medical field. X-rays 
once made on film now are digital and can be 
transmitted anywhere in seconds. The amount 
of oxygen in one’s blood can be measured by 
sliding a soft, thimble-like device onto the end 
of a finger. A pill-size video camera/transmitter 
can be swallowed to give a doctor an inside look 
at the digestive system. Inflatable plastic bags 
serve as splints for broken bones.
The advancements in medical technology 
keep coming...
REMOTE MONITORING
A company called Eko has created a device that 
attaches to a regular stethoscope and creates 
digital displays and recordings for physicians. 
The information can be transmitted to others for 
study. Eko also has developed a small monitor 
about the size of an open flip-phone that can 
be used in an exam room or sent home with a 
patient to monitor heart and lung information 
that can be transmitted elsewhere later.
MEDICAL MARVELS
39

GLUCOSE DETECTIVE
Echo Therapeutics (not to be confused with 
Eko above) is working to develop a patch that 
detects glucose levels in a patient’s blood 
without having to poke a needle into the 
patient. The information is sent wirelessly to a 
remote unit that collects long-term data and 
sets off alarms if glucose levels go out of bounds.
ELECTRONIC ASPIRIN
Autonomic Technologies of California is waiting 
for approval of its electronic aspirin, which it says 
will help relieve the pain of migraine and cluster 
headaches. A nerve stimulator is surgically 
inserted in the mouth, and when the patient 
feels a killer headache coming on, the touch of 
a remote control causes the stimulator to send 
electrical impulses to a set of nerves, countering 
the headache. Tests of electronic aspirin on 
severe headaches have shown about a two-
thirds success rate.
DISAPPEARING STENTS
New, biodegradable stents are being developed 
that will retain their form for two years, then be 
absorbed into the body, much like dissolvable 
sutures. The biodegradability is designed to 
prevent problems caused by traditional stents 
— the thin tubes inserted into clogged blood 
vessels that are then inflated to widen arteries 
and veins — which remain in blood vessels. 
Clots that form on traditional stents can re-block 
blood vessels.
40

41

TISSUE ANALYSIS
For years, surgeons have cauterized areas they 
cut to stem blood loss. The iKnife, developed 
in London, analyzes particles in smoke created 
during by cauterization and provides near-
instant feedback on whether the tissue is 
malignant or benign. The rapid feedback 
shortens the time a patient must be kept 
sedated while doctors wait for a tissue analysis.
BODY SCANS
For those who have watched “Star Trek” 
physician Dr. Leonard McCoy use his medical 
tricorder to diagnose conditions, that time is 
nearly here. Viatom is working on CheckMe, a 
device that will monitor blood pressure, blood 
oxygenation, body temperature, pulse and 
blood pressure, plus act as a pedometer and 
serve as a sleep monitor.
Smaller than a smartphone, CheckMe will be 
able to transmit information to a patient’s 
physician or family.
TELEHEALTH
In 2004, Dr. Tom Magnuson, who specializes in 
geriatric psychiatry at UNMC, and others noticed 
that the state’s telenetwork was being used 
primarily for service and educational purposes. 
He wondered about using it to connect patients 
in faraway places with Omaha specialists.
“This allows me to see someone who’s in Mullen 
or at a nursing home somewhere else, just 
like I do here in the clinic,” Magnuson said. For 
privacy, the system is encrypted on both ends of 
the connection.
42

43

44

It allows patients to connect with 
endocrinologists — specialist physicians who 
treat conditions of glands such as the thyroid 
and adrenal and pituitary glands.
Dr. Leslie Eiland, an endocrinologist, runs a 
telehealth program that brings such medical 
care to rural Nebraska and parts of western Iowa, 
where endocrinologists are in short supply.
From her UNMC office, Eiland visits with about 
200 patients a month via the telehealth network, 
which connects her to community hospitals in 
Columbus, Scottsbluff, Alliance and Hastings 
in Nebraska and Red Oak, Onawa and Denison 
in Iowa.
“There’s always a point person on the local side 
who collects vitals and other information. The 
patient is in a room with a large screen, and we 
can see each other,” said Eiland, who faces two 
screens in her office. One shows the patient, 
and the other displays the patient’s medical 
information.
She prefers to work with patients referred to 
her by their primary care physicians, instead 
of self-referrals.
“I do try to require that all patients I see are 
under the care of local primary care physicians 
so someone can lay their hands on them,” 
Eiland said.
45

46

3-D PROSTHETICS
UNO researcher Jorge Zuniga wants to improve 
the beast.
The assistant professor of biomechanics 
envisions an electronically driven hand that will 
be more expensive but more effective than his 
current $50 mechanical hand.
“We have big, big plans,” he said.
Conventional prosthetic hands can cost 
thousands of dollars. And as children grow, the 
cost of replacing the devices can be prohibitive 
for many families, Zuniga said.
Zuniga wrote a manual for how to make his 3-D 
hand, called the Cyborg Beast, and put it online 
three years ago, free for anyone to use. The 
device can be built with 3-D printing technology 
for about $50 in materials.
The improved, electronically driven hand 
will cost about $200. Zuniga wants to have a 
prototype built within a year. Several scientists 
from across the NU system will work with him.
Zuniga estimated that 3,000 children used the 
Cyborg Beast last year. That includes children in 
Zuniga’s native Chile.
The device can match a child’s skin color or be 
loud and colorful like the hand of a superhero.
47

48

Three of corporate America’s heaviest hitters — 
Amazon, Warren Buffett and JPMorgan Chase 
— sent a shudder through the health industry 
Tuesday when they announced plans to jointly 
create a company to provide their employees 
with high-quality, affordable care.
The announcement was short on details about 
precisely what the independent company 
will do. But given the three players’ outsize 
influence — and Amazon’s ability to transform 
just about everything it touches — the alliance 
has the potential to shake up how Americans 
shop for health care, and the stocks of insurance 
companies, drug distributors and others 
slumped in reaction.
“One of the messages they are sending is they’ve 
given up on traditional ways in which employers 
have tried to reduce costs or manage costs 
better,” said Paul Fronstin, an economist with the 
nonprofit Employee Benefits Research Institute.
AMAZON, BUFFETT 
AND JPMORGAN 
JOIN FORCES ON 
HEALTH CARE
49

50

Benefits experts speculated that this new 
company could create a virtual marketplace 
that makes shopping for health care as easy 
as buying a shirt on Amazon. Or it could move 
directly into buying prescription drugs. Or it 
could be a system that bypasses insurance 
companies altogether and contracts directly 
with doctors and hospitals for better deals.
Employers are up for trying almost anything to 
control rising health care costs, which have been 
consuming bigger portions of their budgets for 
years and burdening their employees.
“The sky’s the limit on where they could possibly 
go with this,” said Brian Marcotte, CEO of the 
National Business Group on Health, another 
nonprofit that represents large employers. 
“We’re always supportive of disruptive 
innovation, and health care certainly is in 
need of it.”
The venture was announced by Amazon 
founder Jeff Bezos; JP Morgan Chase CEO Jamie 
Dimon; and Buffett, the investment wizard of 
Berkshire Hathaway. The three companies have 
an estimated 1 million employees in the U.S.
The three businesses said their new venture will 
be independent and “free from profit-making 
incentives and constraints.” It will have an initial 
focus on technology that provides “simplified, 
high-quality and transparent” care.
Those involved said the idea is still in the early 
planning stages. It was not clear whether the 
ultimate intention is to move beyond the three 
companies. But Dimon said: “Our goal is to 
create solutions that benefit our U.S. employees, 
their families and, potentially, all Americans.”
51

Image: Bloomberg
52

Employer-sponsored health insurance covers 
about 157 million people in the U.S., constituting 
the biggest piece of the nation’s patchwork 
health care market, and neither companies nor 
their employees are happy with the system.
Health care costs — branded by Buffett “a 
hungry tapeworm on the American economy” 
— routinely rise faster than inflation. Employers 
have been reacting by asking their workers to 
pay more of the bill and to shop around for 
better deals, something many people find hard 
to do.
Insurers and other companies already offer 
applications or programs that help people wade 
through the health care system’s often baffling 
mix of prices for procedures or prescriptions. 
But Amazon appears well-positioned to create a 
more user-friendly way to shop, Marcotte said.
“They have customer trust, they are already 
in people’s homes, and they’re already part 
of many people’s routines in how they shop,” 
he said.
The potential disruption from three renowned 
innovators in technology and finance sent a 
shock wave through the health care sector on 
Wall Street, erasing billions in value in seconds.
Several of the biggest losers on a down day 
for the market Tuesday were health care 
companies. They included the insurers Anthem 
and Cigna and the pharmacy benefits manager 
Express Scripts.
The new venture gives Amazon another industry 
to shake up. The company, which mostly sold 
books when it was founded more than 20 years 
ago, has transformed how many people buy 
53

54

diapers, toys and paper towels. And it has been 
blamed for the decline of department stores, toy 
stores and bookstores.
Last year it pushed its way into the supermarket 
industry when it bought Whole Foods for nearly 
$14 billion.
BUSINESS TITANS FACE COMPLEX 
SYSTEM IN US HEALTH CARE PUSH
The leaders announced the ambitious goal 
of improving health care coverage all of their 
employees. They say they are forming a new 
company that will be “free from profit-making 
incentives and constraints” and hint its results 
might be applied on a broader scale. But the 
campaign is in its early planning stages.
Here is some of what we know, and don’t know, 
about the plan and about the health care crisis 
in the United States.
WHERE TO BEGIN
When Jeff Bezos, Warren Buffett and JPMorgan’s 
Jamie Dimon say they want to improve health 
care for potentially millions in the U.S., among 
the first questions will be: Where to start? Lower 
the cost of research? Increase transparency about 
pricing? Create a large pool of customers to 
increase negotiation power? Cut out middleman, 
such as pharmacy benefits managers, to lower 
costs? Lobby for new legislation to overhaul the 
industry? All of the above?
Image: Bloomberg
55

WHEN AND HOW FAR
All that we know is that the company is in 
the “early planning stages.” The crisis facing 
Americans is here and now. In the past five years, 
premiums for family insurance plans arranged 
by employers are up 19 percent, according to 
a recent study by the Kaiser Family Foundation 
and the Health Research & Education Trust.
EMPLOYEES
The initial goal is to improve health care 
at Amazon.com, Berkshire Hathaway, and 
JPMorgan Chase & Co. The companies 
have an estimated 1 million workers in the 
U.S., combined. It is not known how many 
dependents rely on the companies for health 
care coverage. JPMorgan said previously that it 
spent $1.25 billion on medical benefits in 2017 
for 300,000 U.S. employees and family members.
56

57

U.S. COMPANIES, LARGE AND SMALL, 
FACE A CRISIS IN COSTS
U.S. health care spending grew 4.3 percent in 2016, 
according to the Department of Health. That’s $3.3 
trillion, or $10,348 per person. Spending on health 
care accounts for a staggering 17.9 percent of the 
nation’s gross domestic product.
Spending on health care is expected to outpace 
GDP growth for at least the next decade. There 
are no longer-range forecast that would suggest 
that trend will reverse itself.
AN INDUSTRY RIPE FOR DISRUPTION
The announcement by Amazon, Berkshire 
Hathaway and JP Morgan erased billions in 
stock market capitalization from companies in 
the health care industry in seconds, potentially 
a knee-jerk reaction on Wall Street to the 
arrival three known innovators in finance and 
technology: Berkshire’s Buffett, Amazon co-
founder Bezos, and Dimon of JPMorgan.
Shares in health insurance giant UnitedHealth 
Group Inc. fell more than 4 percent Tuesday. 
Other insurers, including MetLife Inc., 
Anthem Inc., Cigna Inc., and Aetna Inc. also 
posted declines.
58

59

60

Regulators want to make emergency alerts on 
cellphones more useful by requiring wireless 
carriers to distribute them less widely.
The Federal Communications Commission says 
carriers must transmit the alerts to more specific 
locations, rather than broadly. That could help 
make alerts more relevant. The fear is that 
consumers will disregard alerts if they come too 
often or don’t address an emergency in their 
immediate area.
These messages appear on phones like texts 
with a loud buzzing and noise. Except for 
messages from the president, phone users can 
choose to stop receiving them.
The more precise geo-targeting was approved 
this week and will go into effect in November 
2019. By May 2019, wireless providers also have 
to support alerts in Spanish and longer alerts — 
up to 360 characters, from 90.
EMERGENCY 
ALERTS TO BE SENT 
LESS WIDELY 
TO MAKE 
THEM USEFUL
61

62

63

Many of our readers likely fondly remember 
when, in early 2016, Apple debuted an iPhone 
6s screen commercial in which that Sesame 
Street favorite, Cookie Monster, used the device 
in his attempt to bake a batch of succulent 
cookies. Particularly highlighted was the ability 
to activate Siri in a hands-free manner simply by 
uttering “Hey Siri”, with Cookie Monster using 
this feature to set a timer. Still, this is hardly even 
a hint of the true extent to which Apple devices 
can help us in our culinary efforts. 
64

65

YUM’S THE WORD WITH THESE 
RECIPE APPS
Much of the valuable functionality of an iPhone 
for chefs - novice and veteran alike - is, of course, 
in its apps. The mobile app revolution certainly 
hasn’t left the kitchen untouched; download the 
right apps and you could be delighted to see 
how easily your iPhone can replace that musty-
looking print cookbook you probably routinely 
pull off the shelf whenever you want to make 
something special. Apps can not only provide 
a huge selection of recipes but also help you 
choose between them.  
An especially good case in point is Oh She 
Glows. This app provides over 95 recipes for 
people who favor plant-based cuisine. In fact, 
the meal options here can be as good for your 
health as they are on your eyes; gazpacho, 
cheesy lentil bolognese casserole and butternut 
squash “mac ‘n cheeze” are just some of the 
options. If you are still inexperienced with 
cooking, you can narrow them down with the 
“Quick + Easy” search filter; meanwhile, the “Kid 
Friendly” filter could be very useful for families.
Still, the choice of recipes here is significantly 
dwarfed by that of BigOven, an app which has 
over 350,000 in its repository. It’s the kind of 
staggering choice that could leave you wrecked 
with indecisiveness; however, if you have friends 
and family who could give you some pearls 
of wisdom, invite them to use BigOven’s social 
feature. This will enable you to readily see what 
those people are cooking up, turning BigOven 
into something closer to a Pinterest for foodies.  
All of that’s great, but what if you would simply 
prefer a sophisticated search engine - rather 
Image: Matt Haas
66

67

68

Oh She Glows
By Glo Bakery Corporation
Category: Food & Drink
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, 
and iPod touch.
BigOven 350,000+ Recipes
By Lakefront Software, Inc.
Category: Food & Drink
Requires iOS 10.1 or later. Compatible with iPhone, 
iPad, and iPod touch.
69

like Google, except that it focuses on recipes 
and lets you quickly find the ones best-suited 
to specific occasions? You can get something 
a lot like this with Yummly. Want a burger that 
remains relatively diet-friendly? Worry that you 
could inadvertently select a recipe for a meal 
that would flare up an allergy? Yummly lets you 
search hundreds of recipes while accounting for 
such needs.
DON’T TAKE THE CAKE - TAKE THE 
COOKIE INSTEAD
In recent years, Apple has been pushing its 
virtual personal assistant, Siri, more and more 
as an integral part of Apple devices. This begs 
the question: Why don’t we take a leaf out of 
Cookie Monster’s cookbook, so to say, and ask 
70

Siri for help? Indeed, it’s heartening that, when 
making food, we can call Siri into action in ways 
that don’t even require us to touch our device’s 
screen. This is especially straightforward with 
recent devices, but can still work with older 
ones as well. 
Firstly, make sure that “Hey Siri” functionality is 
enabled on your iPhone or iPad. You just need to 
go into Settings and then the Siri section, where 
you will find the relevant switch. If your device 
has at least an A9 processor, you now only have 
to say “Hey Siri” within your device’s hearing 
range to get Siri’s attention. This is also possible 
with iPhones or iPads that have an A8 processor 
or older; however, the device must be charging 
for the “Hey Siri” feature to work.
Yummly Recipes & Recipe Box
By Yummly, Inc
Category: Food & Drink
Requires iOS 10.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, 
and iPod touch. Apple TV…
71

72

The hands-free functionality can prove 
incredibly useful once you have got really stuck 
in, but water, cookie dough or another food 
mixture on your hands prevents you quickly 
using your phone in the more conventional way. 
Following Cookie Monster’s example of setting 
a timer, for example, is easy; just say “Hey Siri, 
set timer for 10 minutes” - or whatever other 
amount of time you favor. You can even have 
more than one timer running at once if you have 
multiple devices in the kitchen.
Siri can welcome an array of cooking-related 
queries, too. Can’t remember the number 
of tablespoons in a quart? Unsure what 
temperature would be safe for your turkey? 
Need to substitute buttermilk in a particular 
recipe? Siri is capable of helping you on all 
of these issues, says Boomer Web School. 
When asked, Siri can also easily read out a recipe, 
provided that you have placed the relevant text - 
try to omit unnecessary introductory text - into a 
note in the Notes app. 
73

Apple HomePod First Look
74

HOMEPOD IS WHERE MORE COOKING 
POTENTIAL IS  
Of course, all of this functionality will also be 
possible with the HomePod, which is set for 
retail release on February 9. Connected to your 
iPhone, the HomePod will be able to not only 
create notes but also set reminders - hey, 
maybe there’s a particular ingredient that 
you could too easily forget to buy otherwise 
- and send messages. The last of those could 
be especially useful if someone is trying to get 
through to you, but you can’t practically pick up 
your phone straight away.
Another reason why you might want to place 
a HomePod in your kitchen is the smart 
speaker’s integration with HomeKit. This home 
automation framework lets its users activate 
“scenes”, some of which could be particularly 
time-effective during a cookery session. Perhaps 
you would like to, with the issuing of just one 
voice command, switch on your kitchen lights 
and coffee maker simultaneously? This is a very 
real possibility with HomePod and the right 
HomeKit accessories. 
Apple HomePod Special Event in 8 minutes
75

HOME, A DRONE: FOOD DELIVERY’S 
PRESENT AND FUTURE
There might still be times when your cookery 
efforts veer so far off course that you are led to 
ask: “Hey Siri, where can I have food delivered?” 
You might already habitually use apps to 
order food that will be delivered to your home 
address, effectively making the well-worn 
phrase “going out for dinner” only half necessary. 
Even the ride-sharing firm Uber has entered the 
market; with the company’s Uber Eats app, you 
can order from a nearby restaurant and expect 
delivery in minutes. 
However, while the Uber Eats service is available 
in many of the United States’ major population 
centers, you might prefer to use Grubhub if you 
live somewhere more remote. Its availability 
extends to over 1,200 US cities and, like Uber 
Eats, this service lets you search for local 
restaurants. You can even search by food type; 
put “tacos”, for example, into that search field 
to see what comes up. The app also integrates 
Apple Pay at the checkout stage, making even 
paying for orders speedy.  
Food deliveries could become even more 
convenient for customers in a not-too-distant 
future. Ford has recently launched a research 
project with Domino’s Pizza to investigate 
how food could be effectively delivered by self-
driving vehicles. Having your food dispatched 
by a drone doesn’t have to seem too outlandish, 
either; in November 2016, Domino’s and Flirtey 
collaborated in sending a drone to drop off a 
pizza delivery order at a New Zealand home.
76

77

78

Uber Eats: Food Delivery
By Uber Technologies, Inc.
Category: Food & Drink
Requires iOS 9.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, 
and iPod touch.
Grubhub – Order Food Delivery
By GrubHub Inc
Category: Food & Drink
Requires iOS 8.0 or later. Compatible with iPhone, iPad, 
and iPod touch. Apple TV.
79

80

Meanwhile, that same year, Amazon tested 
drone deliveries for the first time, albeit with 
only two customers in the United Kingdom. In 
the US, drone delivery tests have been restricted 
by the Federal Aviation Administration’s rule 
requiring pilots to stay capable of seeing 
drones when flying them. Hence, it has been 
impossible for businesses to test long-distance 
drone deliveries. However, drones could save 
on shipping costs and, thus, prices - giving this 
emerging trend a promising future. 
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
81

82

Crumbling mine tunnels awash with polluted 
waters perforate the Colorado mountains, and 
scientists may one day send robots creeping 
through the pitch-black passages to study the 
mysterious currents that sometimes burst to the 
surface with devastating effects.
One such disaster happened at the inactive Gold 
King Mine in southwestern Colorado in 2015, 
when the Environmental Protection Agency 
accidentally triggered the release of 3 million 
gallons (11 million liters) of mustard-colored 
water laden with arsenic, lead and other toxins. 
The spill tainted rivers in three states.
Now the EPA is considering using robots and 
other sophisticated technology to help prevent 
these types of “blowouts” or clean them up if 
they happen. But first the agency has to find out 
what’s inside the mines, some of which date to 
Colorado’s gold rush in the 1860s.
ROBOTS COULD 
DESCEND INTO 
OLD MINES  
TO PREVENT  
TOXIC SPILLS
83

Wastewater laden with toxic heavy metals 
has been spewing from hundreds of inactive 
mines nationwide for decades, the product of 
complicated and sometimes poorly understood 
subterranean flows.
Mining creates tainted water in steps: Blasting 
out tunnels and processing ore exposes long-
buried, sulfur-bearing rocks to oxygen. The sulfur 
and oxygen mix with natural underground water 
flows to create sulfuric acid. The acidic water then 
leaches heavy metals out of the rocks.
To manage and treat the wastewater, the  
EPA needs a clear idea of what’s inside the 
mines, some of which penetrate thousands of 
feet into the mountains. But many old mines 
are poorly documented.
Investigating with robots would be cheaper, 
faster and safer than humans.
“You can send a robot into an area that doesn’t 
have good air quality. You can send a robot into 
an area that doesn’t have much space,” said 
Rebecca Thomas, project manager for the EPA’s 
newly created Gold King Superfund site, officially 
known as the Bonita Peak Mining District.
Instruments on the robots could map the mines 
and analyze pollutants in the water.
They would look more like golf carts than the 
personable robots from “Star Wars” movies. 
Hao Zhang, an assistant professor of computer 
science at the Colorado School of Mines, 
envisions a battery-powered robot about 5 feet 
(1.5 meters) long with wheels or tracks to get 
through collapsing, rubble-strewn tunnels.
Zhang and a team of students demonstrated a 
smaller robot in a mine west of Denver recently. 
84

85

Image: Brent Lewis
Scientists are developing robots that might someday be able 
to creep through the pitch-black mines to help prevent spills. A 
2015 spill from Colorado’s Gold King Mine unleashed 3 million 
gallons of water that fouled rivers in three states with toxins.
86

87

88

It purred smoothly along flat tunnel floors  
but toppled over trying to negotiate a  
cluttered passage.
“The terrain is pretty rough,” Zhang said.  
“It’s hard for even humans to navigate in  
that environment.”
A commercial robot modified to explore 
abandoned mines — including those  
swamped with acidic wastewater — could cost 
about $90,000 and take three to four years to 
develop, Zhang said.
Significant obstacles remain, including  
finding a way to operate remotely while  
deep inside a mine, beyond the reach of  
radio signals. One option is dropping signal-
relay devices along the way so the robot  
stays in touch with operators. Another is 
designing an autonomous robot that could 
find its own way.
Researchers are also developing sophisticated 
computerized maps showing mines in three 
dimensions. The maps illustrate where the shafts 
intersect with natural faults and provide clues 
about how water courses through the mountains.
“It really helps us understand where we have 
certainty and where we have a lot of uncertainty 
about what we think’s happening in the 
subsurface,” said Ian Bowen, an EPA hydrologist. 
“So it’s a wonderful, wonderful tool.”
The EPA also plans to drill into mines from the 
surface and lower instruments into the bore 
holes, measuring the depth, pressure and 
direction of underground water currents.
Tracing the currents is a challenge because they 
flow through multiple mines and surface debris. 
89

90

Many tunnels and faults are connected, so 
blocking one might send water out another.
“You put your finger in the dike here, where’s the 
water going to come out?” Thomas said.
Once the EPA finishes investigating, it will look at 
technologies for cleansing the wastewater.
Options range from traditional lime 
neutralization — which causes the heavy metals 
dissolved in the water to form particles and drop 
out — to more unusual techniques that involve 
introducing microbes.
The choice has consequences for taxpayers. If 
no company is found financially responsible, 
the EPA pays the bill for about 10 years and then 
turns it over to the state. Colorado currently pays 
about $1 million a year to operate a treatment 
plant at one Superfund mine. By 2028, it will pay 
about $5.7 million annually to operate plants 
at three mines, not including anything at the 
Bonita Peak site.
The EPA views the Colorado project as a  
chance for the government and entrepreneurs 
to take risks and try technology that might be 
useful elsewhere.
But the agency — already dealing with a 
distrustful public and critical politicians after 
triggering the Gold King spill — said any 
technology deployed in Colorado will be 
tested first, and the public will have a chance to 
comment before decisions are made.
“We’re certainly not going to be in the position 
of making things worse,” Thomas said. “So when I 
say we want to take risks, we do, but we want to 
take calculated, educated risks and not worsen 
water quality.”
91

92

It’s been just over a year since Microsoft 
swallowed the career networking site LinkedIn. 
That’s long enough to start asking: Was the $27 
billion deal worth it?
Critics warned at the time of the deal that Microsoft 
was overpaying for a declining business. Others 
argued that Microsoft’s largest-ever acquisition fit 
into a strategy of building up the company’s Office 
suite of workplace productivity products and its 
cloud-computing business.
“I don’t think we’ll know for a couple years 
if this will really pay off, but the signs thus 
far are positive,” said Jillian Ryan, an analyst 
for eMarketer.
Most people who use LinkedIn to connect with 
colleagues or search for career opportunities 
could be forgiven if they haven’t noticed 
many changes since the acquisition closed in 
December 2016.
MICROSOFT 
AND LINKEDIN: 
IS THEIR MARRIAGE 
WORKING?
Image: Richard Drew
93

LinkedIn’s longtime CEO Jeff Weiner continues to 
hold that title. Its co-founder, Reid Hoffman, now 
sits on Microsoft’s board. The LinkedIn brand 
is operating with a “great level of autonomy,” 
Ryan said.
“Microsoft hasn’t really intervened that much, 
considering the vast scope and price tag of this 
integration,” she said.
Microsoft on Wednesday posted second-
quarter revenue of $28.92 billion, a 12 percent 
increase over the same quarter a year earlier. The 
company also reported a loss of $6.3 billion, tied 
to a $13.8 billion tax charge related to the new 
federal tax law signed in December.
LinkedIn’s contribution to quarterly revenue 
was $1.3 billion, the highest it’s been since the 
acquisition closed in December 2016, though it’s 
still too early to compare year-over-year growth.
Still, Microsoft Chief Financial Officer Amy Hood 
and CEO Satya Nadella were effusive about the 
network’s performance in a conference call with 
investors Wednesday.
Hood said the acquisition is “performing better 
than we expected, and I think today we would 
even say it’s a more strategic asset than we even 
maybe thought a year ago.” She referred to its 
power to add to the company’s understanding 
of its customers and their connections with 
one another.
LinkedIn boasts of more than 530 million users 
on its professional network, most of whom 
use it for free. But the service also contributes 
to Microsoft’s bottom line through its three 
business divisions. The biggest, dubbed “talent 
solutions,” helps recruiters attract and find 
94

Image: Stephen Lam
95

jobs for workers. It also makes money from 
advertisements on its platform and offers paid 
subscriptions for online courses and premium 
access on its network.
Among those buying into the platform are sales 
representatives using it as a tool for “social selling,” 
or targeting prospective customers through their 
trusted social networks and connections.
Another of LinkedIn’s co-founders and its first 
chief technology officer, Eric Ly, said in an 
interview Wednesday that this is “really just 
the beginning” of what LinkedIn could offer as 
Microsoft taps into the professional network’s 
database of work histories and other detailed 
information that users share about themselves.
“There was a lot of value in the data alone,” 
said Ly, who now runs a new company called 
Hub. “Microsoft’s going to be able to recoup its 
investments and get a lot more back.”
Nadella also says the integration fits into a larger 
strategy. In an autobiography published last 
year , he wrote that he has a “bias” for driving 
investment toward advancing services such as 
LinkedIn and Office that help people create and 
“become more productive rather than software 
that is simply entertaining — memes for 
conspicuous consumption.”
96

97

98

Blockchain technology can make transactions 
safe and secure, but crypto-currency exchanges 
that trade bitcoins and other virtual currencies 
that are based on this technology have been 
hacked because they are not working on secure 
networks, experts say. Late last week, the Tokyo-
based Coincheck exchange reported a 58 
billion yen ($530 million) loss of crypto currency 
due to hacking. The Coincheck exchange has 
halted trading of the stolen currency, NEM 
and restricted dealings in most other crypto 
currencies. It was the second major hacking 
assault on a Japanese crypto exchange after 
the Mt. Gox debacle in 2014. Here’s a look at the 
security concerns surrounding crypto currencies.
WHY ARE CRYPTO 
EXCHANGES 
VULNERABLE  
TO HACKS?
99

WHAT IS BLOCKCHAIN?
As its name implies, blockchain is a chain 
of digital “blocks” that contain records of 
transactions, says Curtis Miles at IBM Blockchain. 
Each such block is connected to those before 
and behind it, making it difficult to tamper 
with because a hacker would need to change 
the block containing that record and all those 
linked to it to avoid detection. The records on a 
blockchain are secured through cryptography 
and network participants have their own private 
keys that are assigned to the transactions they 
make and act as personal digital signatures. Any 
alteration will make those signatures invalid 
and alert others in the network to the changes. 
Blockchains are kept in so-called “peer-to-peer” 
networks that are continually updated and 
kept in synchronization. It would require huge 
amounts of computing power to access every 
instance of a certain blockchain and alter all its 
blocks at the same time.
POOR SECURITY
While a blockchain can be secure, the exchanges 
that play a crucial role in increasing the amount 
of crypto trading, enabling bitcoin and other 
such currencies go mainstream, do not use the 
same technology, says Simon Choi, a director 
at anti-virus software company Hauri Inc. South 
Korean exchanges reportedly get poor reviews 
for cyber security, and officials have said those 
that fail to beef up such precautions will face 
fines. “If security on the exchanges’ is not secure, 
their currencies can be stolen,” Choi said. “If the 
exchanges are to play their intermediary role, 
they should be as safe as banks and strengthen 
their security.”
100

101

RISING HACKS
According to crypto currency research firm 
Chainalysis, losses of bitcoin, including stealing 
individuals’ holdings through scams, malicious 
computer software known as ransom ware and 
hacks, increased at least 30 times to $95 million 
in 2016 from at least $3 million in 2013.
The attack on Coincheck, which did not  
affect its holdings of bitcoin, was the second 
major hacking assault on a Japanese crypto 
exchange after Mt. Gox, the world’s largest 
bitcoin trading exchange before its collapse, lost 
hundreds of thousands of bitcoins likely stolen 
through hacking.
Coincheck has apologized and promised to 
reimburse customers for their NEM losses.  
It has pledged to comply with a Financial 
Services Agency’s order to determine why the 
losses happened, and improve its security to 
prevent a recurrence.
Details of how the losses happened or who 
might be behind them are still unclear.
The Mt. Gox case put many Japanese investors 
off bitcoin, at least for a time, and prompted 
authorities to impose more regulations. 
Chainalysis estimates that the bitcoins lost at 
Mt. Gox were worth $7.5 million at the time the 
coins were stolen but now worth nearly $10 
billion as of January.
102

103

104

IDENTIFYING HACKERS
It’s possible to trace blockchain transactions but 
not to identify the owners of the “wallets” where 
the crypto currencies are kept, says Choi.
“It’s the biggest weakness,” said Choi. “You can 
track the blocks based on the records in the 
blocks but you cannot tell whose wallet it is.  
They went to hackers’ wallet but if we don’t know 
who the hackers are we cannot catch them.”
The rising hacks have prompted the cryp to 
community to seek ways to halt the bad guys.
South Korea’s government is trying to make 
crypto transactions traceable by implementing 
a system that links crypto accounts to existing 
bank accounts that have been vetted by 
financial institutions. Such efforts however will 
not help identify hackers if they send crypto 
currencies to exchanges outside Korea that do 
not identify their users.
105

106

A federal appeals court this week rejected a 
lawsuit that sought to hold Twitter liable for the 
deaths of two U.S. contractors in Jordan three 
years ago in an attack for which the Islamic State 
group claimed responsibility.
The lawsuit failed to establish Twitter accounts 
used by IS directly caused the men’s deaths, 
the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals said. The 
unanimous decision by a three-judge panel 
upheld a lower court ruling.
Lloyd Fields and James Creach were shot and 
killed in Jordan in 2015 by a Jordanian police 
captain while training law enforcement officers.
Their families argued that IS Twitter accounts 
were a substantial factor in the men’s deaths 
and that the company should have anticipated 
attacks. They said Twitter knew about the 
accounts and that the accounts helped IS to 
recruit, raise money and spread its message.
COURT REJECTS 
LAWSUIT AGAINST 
TWITTER OVER 
IS ATTACK
107

The group “used Twitter accounts to amass the 
resources needed for carrying out numerous 
terrorist attacks, including the November 9, 2015 
shooting in Amman, Jordan in which Mr. Fields 
and Mr. Creach were killed,” Joshua Arisohn, an 
attorney for the families, said in a statement. He 
said he was considering an appeal.
An email to Twitter seeking comment was not 
immediately returned. The company said in 
court documents its service was available to 
anyone, and there was no allegation it provided 
any specialized platform to IS.
The 9th Circuit said the families had to show 
the Twitter accounts were a direct factor in the 
men’s deaths, not just one that was forseeable.
The court cited a lower court judge’s finding that 
the lawsuit showed no connection between the 
man who shot Fields and Creach and Twitter, or 
that the attack was impacted, helped or resulted 
in any way from IS’s presence on the social 
media site.
108

Image: Bloomberg
109

110

Telecommunications regulators and industry 
groups voiced opposition this week to a 
government-built wireless network that the 
Trump administration is reportedly considering.
The news website Axios reported that national 
security officials may want a government-built 
next-generation “5G” mobile network because 
of concerns about China and cybersecurity. 
REPORTED PLAN 
FOR GOVERNMENT 
WIRELESS NETWORK 
GETS PANNED
111

112

A White House spokesman referred inquiries 
to the National Security Council, which did not 
immediately respond to questions.
The telecom industry, which is powerful in 
Washington, is already working on 5G, which 
heralds better internet on smartphones as well 
as potential applications for self-driving cars 
and other new technology. The new standard 
is already being tested and could be widely 
available by 2020. AT&T has said that it expects 
to launch a mobile 5G service in 12 U.S. locations 
later this year.
Federal Communications Commission Chairman 
Ajit Pai, a Republican, said in a statement that 
the federal government should not build 
and operate a nationwide 5G network. The 
agency’s four other voting commissioners, both 
Democrats and Republicans, also criticized and 
expressed skepticism about such a proposal. The 
FCC regulates the nation’s airwaves and auctions 
them off to phone, cable and broadcasting 
companies for use in networks.
The industry group USTelecom panned 
the idea as well.
“There is nothing that would slam the breaks 
more quickly on our hard-won momentum 
to be the leader in the global race for 5G 
network deployment more quickly than the 
federal government stepping in to build those 
networks,” said its president, Jonathan Spalter, in 
an emailed statement.
The wireless trade group CTIA said 
the government should stick to “free 
market policies.”
113

Movies
TV Shows
&
Movies
TV Shows
&
Trailer
114

Rotten Tomatoes
63%
by Martin Campbell
Genre: Action & Adventure
Released: 2017
Price: $14.99
182 Ratings
The Foreigner  
Quan, a businessman with a buried past, 
seeks justice when his daughter is killed in 
an act of terrorism. A cat and mouse conflict 
ensues with a government official, whose 
past might lead to clues to the identities of 
the killers. 
FIVE FACTS:
1. Jackie Chan sings “A Common Man”, the 
song in the closing credits. 
2. The movie is based on the 1992 book The 
Chinaman by Stephen Leather. However, 
despite the change from the novel’s title, Quan 
is still referred to as this six times in the movie. 
3. This is the first movie directed by Martin 
Campbell in six years, his last being Green 
Lantern in 2011. 
4. Nick Cassavetes was offered to direct. 
5. This is Jackie Chan’s second appearance 
in a movie with a former James Bond actor, 
the first being Cannonball Run in which he 
starred alongside Roger Moore. 
115

116

Who Killed My Daughter?
117

Geostorm
When the network of satellites designed 
to control the Earth’s global climate begins 
to attack, it’s a race against the clock for its 
creator to uncover the real threat before a 
worldwide Geostorm wipes out everything 
and everyone in its path. 
FIVE FACTS:
1. Some of the NASA scenes were filmed at 
the NASA facility in New Orleans, Louisiana. 
2. The movie is a possible reboot of The 
Noah’s Ark Principle (1984), a science fiction 
movie about a weather-manipulating 
satellite directed by Roland Emmerich. 
3. Sticky Studios released a game under the 
same name, which Apple featured. 
4. This is the second movie featuring Jim 
Sturgess and Ed Harris, the first one being 
The Way Back (2010). 
5. Several cast and crew noted that Gerard 
Butler kept forgetting his lines.
 
by Dean Devlin
Genre: Action & Adventure
Released: 2017
Price: $19.99
162 Ratings
Rotten Tomatoes
13%
118

Trailer
119

Getaway
120

121

Music
Genre: Alternative
Released: Jan 26, 2018
19 Songs
Price: $9.99
33 Ratings
122

“Despoiler Of Cadaver” 
Freedom’s Goblin
Ty Segall 
From the very first track to the very last, Segall 
and his band seize upon a swath of classic 
rock inputs and turn them into a kaleidoscopic 
journey that includes gargantuan riffs, fuzzy 
atmospheres and guitar heroics.
FIVE FACTS:
1. Segall is a member of the bands Fuzz, 
Broken Bat and GØGGS. 
2. He has his own record label imprint on 
Drag City called GOD? Records. 
3. Notable glam rockers David Bowie and 
Marc Bolan heavily influenced Segall’s early 
career as well as heavy rock and punk bands 
such as Black Sabbath, Kiss, The Stooges, 
and Black Flag.
4. He began his recording career as a part-
time musician in various underground 
bands in Orange County and San Francisco. 
5. During live performances, he is currently 
backed by The Freedom Band.
123

124

“Break A Guitar”  
125

Common Ground
Above & Beyond  
After years of touring, the London trio have 
gathered ideas and influences that have 
allowed them to craft this dance odyssey. The 
album skips from cinematic melodies such as 
“My Own Hymn” to heady dance tracks like 
“Northern Soul” and euphoric electronic in 
“Tightrope”. This is undoubtedly their most 
diverse album yet with their closing track 
“Common Ground” standing as a tribute to 
the enthusiasm for electronic music.
FIVE FACTS:
1. The trio has been consistently ranked 
among DJ Magazine’s Top 100 DJs Poll, 
placing at #27 in 2017. 
2. Above & Beyond produce a weekly show 
called Group Therapy and have produced 
several radio shows since 2004, including 
Anjunabeats Worldwide. 
3. They have appeared numerous times on 
BBC Radio 1’s Essential Mix and in 2014 were 
inducted into Pete Tong’s Hall of Fame. 
4. The trio also established the vocal trance 
group OceanLab with Justine Suissa. 
5. They are the only artist to have ever won 
the Essential Mix of the Year twice.
Genre: Dance
Released: Mar 18, 2017
13 Songs
Price: $9.99
126 Ratings
126

“Always”
127

Group Therapy Best Of 2017 pt.1 
with Above & Beyond
128

129

130

“Maze Runner: The Death Cure,” the third 
installment in the young adult dystopian series, 
raced to the top of the box office in its opening 
weekend in theaters with $24.2 million 20th 
Century Fox said Monday.
It bumped “Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle” into 
second place after its $16.1 million weekend. 
The Dwayne Johnson pic had been resting easy 
at No. 1 for three straight weeks and has earned 
$337.8 million to date.
The Christian Bale-led Western “Hostiles” 
expanded to more theaters this weekend and 
took the third-place spot with $10.1 million. “The 
Greatest Showman” sung its way to fourth place 
with $9.6 million, and the Pentagon Papers drama 
“The Post” nabbed fifth place with $9.1 million.
BOX OFFICE TOP 20:
‘MAZE RUNNER’
RACES TO NO. 1
WITH $24.2M
131

The top 20 movies at U.S. and Canadian theaters 
Friday through Sunday, followed by distribution 
studio, gross, number of theater locations, 
average receipts per location, total gross and 
number of weeks in release, as compiled 
Monday by comScore:
1. 
“Maze Runner: The Death Cure,”  
20th Century Fox, $24,167,011,  
3,787 locations, $6,382 average, 
$24,167,011, 1 Week.
2. 
“Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle,” Sony, 
$16,144,874, 3,553 locations,  
$4,544 average, $337,802,077, 6 Weeks.
3. 
“Hostiles,” Entertainment Studios Motion 
Pictures, $10,110,739, 2,816 locations, 
$3,590 average, $11,958,534, 6 Weeks.
4. 
“The Greatest Showman,” 20th Century 
Fox, $9,550,367, 2,663 locations, 
$3,586 average, $126,525,599, 6 Weeks.
5. 
“The Post,” 20th Century Fox, 
$9,107,141, 2,640 locations,  
$3,450 average, $58,793,064, 6 Weeks.
132

133

6. 
“12 Strong,” Warner Bros., $8,686,066, 
3,018 locations, $2,878 average, 
$29,810,676, 2 Weeks.
7. 
“Den of Thieves,” STX Entertainment, 
$8,632,808, 2,432 locations,  
$3,550 average, $28,775,253, 2 Weeks.
8. 
“The Shape of Water,” Fox Searchlight, 
$5,922,553, 1,854 locations,  
$3,194 average, $37,901,298, 9 Weeks.
9. 
“Paddington 2,” Warner Bros., 
$5,668,433, 2,792 locations,  
$2,030 average, $32,118,849, 3 Weeks.
10. 
“Padmaavat,” Viva Entertainment, 
$4,430,255, 326 locations,  
$13,590 average, $4,937,521, 1 Week.
134

135

11. 
“Star Wars: The Last Jedi,” Disney, 
$4,254,001, 1,745 locations,  
$2,438 average, $610,795,822, 7 Weeks.
12. 
“Three Billboards Outside Ebbing 
Missouri,” Fox Searchlight, 
$3,840,684, 1,457 locations, $2,636 average, 
$37,251,635, 12 Weeks.
13. 
“Forever My Girl,” Roadside 
Attractions, $3,567,978,  
1,424 locations, $2,506 average,  
$9,127,137, 2 Weeks.
14. 
“The Commuter,” Lionsgate, 
$3,412,694, 1,811 locations,  
$1,884 average, $31,389,883, 3 Weeks.
15. 
“Insidious: The Last Key,” Universal, 
$3,189,055, 1,901 locations,  
$1,678 average, $63,449,355, 4 Weeks.
136

137

16. 
“I, Tonya,” Neon Rated, $3,028,658, 
960 locations, $3,155 average, 
$18,903,403, 8 Weeks.
17. 
“Phantom Thread,” Focus Features, 
$2,981,885, 1,021 locations,  
$2,921 average, $10,713,694, 5 Weeks.
18. 
“Darkest Hour,” Focus Features, 
$2,886,835, 1,333 locations,  
$2,166 average, $45,199,242, 10 Weeks.
19. 
“MET Opera: Tosca (2018),” Fathom 
Events, $2,000,000, 900 locations, 
$2,222 average, $2,000,000, 1 Week.
20. 
“Lady Bird,” A24, $1,887,226, 
1,172 locations, $1,610 average, 
$41,610,318, 13 Weeks.
Universal and Focus are owned by NBC Universal, a unit of Comcast 
Corp.; Sony, Columbia, Sony Screen Gems and Sony Pictures Classics 
are units of Sony Corp.; Paramount is owned by Viacom Inc.; Disney, 
Pixar and Marvel are owned by The Walt Disney Co.; Miramax is owned 
by Filmyard Holdings LLC; 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight are 
owned by 21st Century Fox; Warner Bros. and New Line are units 
of Time Warner Inc.; MGM is owned by a group of former creditors 
including Highland Capital, Anchorage Advisors and Carl Icahn; 
Lionsgate is owned by Lions Gate Entertainment Corp.; IFC is owned by 
AMC Networks Inc.; Rogue is owned by Relativity Media LLC.
138

139

140

Mario is getting together with the Minions.
Japanese video-game company Nintendo Co. 
says a movie starring the plumber in the Super 
Mario franchise is in the works, co-produced 
with Chris Meledandri, the chief executive of 
Illumination Entertainment, the U.S. animation 
studio behind the popular “Despicable Me” series.
Nintendo’s star game designer Shigeru 
Miyamoto told reporters Thursday the script 
is mostly finished. He’s promising a “fun” 
movie, since Meledandri shares his thinking on 
creative projects.
MARIO AND 
MINIONS? 
ILLUMINATION 
TO CO-PRODUCE 
NINTENDO FILM
141

The movie, two years in the making after a 
meeting between Meledandri and Miyamoto, 
is set for global distribution through Universal, 
which co-owns Illumination, according to the 
Kyoto-based maker of Pokemon games and the 
popular Switch machine.
They did not give other details, including the 
release date.
Miyamoto said some people mistakenly think 
that making games is similar to making movies.
“Creating in an interactive medium is totally 
different from doing that in a passive medium,” 
he said, saying he’d wanted to make such a film 
for years.
Meledandri and he hit it right off: “We want to 
make something great,” he said.
142

143

144

Nintendo reported Wednesday an October-
December profit of 83.66 billion yen ($768 
million), up 29 percent from the previous fiscal 
third quarter.
Quarterly sales ballooned to nearly 483 billion 
yen, up from 174 billion yen the previous year, 
on the success of its Switch, a hybrid game 
machine that can be played both as a home 
console as well as a handheld.
Nintendo now expects to sell 15 million Switch 
consoles in this fiscal year, which ends in March. 
That’s up from its initial projection to sell 10 
million Switch machines, which was raised last 
year to 14 million.
Nintendo brought the world the FamiCom 
game machine in the 1980s and has had its 
up and downs as people’s entertainment 
tastes changed.
In recent years, Nintendo did an about-face to 
its past policy of shunning smartphone games, 
and has scored success in that sector as well. 
It has brought back a revamped version of the 
FamiCom, which proved so popular it will go on 
sale again later this year.
Nintendo executives also expressed hopes for 
its upcoming Nintendo Labo , whose trailer 
shows the Switch being played with cardboard 
concoctions, resembling a piano, fishing rod, 
robot and other items.
Nintendo Labo, set to go on sale April 20, is 
based on the idea that the Switch, which is a 
controller packed with sensors, can be used 
with different attachments for many kinds of 
play. Executives joked that they initially thought 
cardboard would be cheap but it turned out to 
be more expensive than they thought.
145

146

“Incredible” and “kinetic” are just a few of the 
loving words that people are using to describe 
and praise Marvel’s “Black Panther.”
The film from director Ryan Coogler had its first 
screenings Monday night and a premiere in  
Los Angeles. Official reviews won’t go out until 
Feb. 6, but audiences at the select screenings 
were able to share non-spoiler reactions on 
social media.
Los Angeles Times writer Jen Yamato wrote that 
it is the first Marvel movie about something real.
‘BLACK PANTHER’
 RECEIVES HIGH
 PRAISE AFTER FIRST 
SCREENINGS
147

148

“‘Black Panther’ is incredible, kinetic, 
purposeful,” Yamato wrote. “A superhero movie 
about why representation & identity matters, 
and how tragic it is when those things are 
denied to people.”
The film features a largely black cast including 
Chadwick Boseman, Michael B. Jordan and 
Lupita Nyong’o. It follows T’Challa (Boseman) 
after the death of his father, the king of the 
fictional African nation of Wakanda, and his 
ascension to the throne.
“I never wanted this movie to end, and as soon 
as it did I wanted to go back,” tweeted Mashable 
critic Angie Han. “Solid action, smart story, tons 
of personality.”
Han and Vulture editor Kyle Buchanan both 
singled out Letitia Wright for her character Shuri, 
T’Challa’s inventor sister. Many spoke highly 
of Jordan’s Erik Killmonger, a villain, and Danai 
Gurira’s warrior character Okoye too.
A few called it Marvel’s most political film to date.
Others were more tempered like writer Dave 
Schilling who says, “‘Black Panther’ is not the best 
Marvel movie. It’s not the worst Marvel movie. 
It’s an entertaining movie.” IndieWire critic David 
Ehrlich wrote that it’s, “Like a Marvel movie but 
better. The action is predictably awful, but this 
is the first MCU film that has an actual sense of 
identity & history & musicality.”
149

150

Stars from Marvel’s highly-anticipated “Black Panther” 
pounced on Los Angeles Monday night for its world premiere. 
Chadwick Boseman and the cast explain why the movie  
is part of a powerful cultural movement.
151

COATES HOPES ‘BLACK PANTHER’  
HYPE TRANSFERS TO COMIC BOOK
As people gear up for the “Black Panther” 
movie, Ta-Nehisi Coates wants them to check 
out the original source, Marvel’s Black Panther 
comic book, where he’s booting up a massive 
outer space adventure for the king of Wakanda.
The award-winning author and journalist, in an 
interview with The Associated Press, predicted 
that the Black Panther movie would “be the 
best Marvel film so far.”
“(But) if people want something that they 
can be deeply involved in, if people want 
something that raises questions that extend 
out of the comic book and into the real world, 
if people want to see some amazing high-tech 
(stuff), this is a good jumping on point,” said 
Coates, now in his second year writing the 
adventures one of the first comic books heroes 
of color for Marvel.
The Black Panther is the alter-ego of T’Challa, 
the leader of Wakanda, a technologically-
advanced (but make-believe) African country. 
A longtime ally and one-time member of both 
the Avengers and the Fantastic Four, T’Challa 
uses his wealth, inventions, and country’s 
resources to battle against evil from both inside 
and outside his country’s borders while serving 
as the head of the government.
The character got a boost as a supporting 
character in 2016’s “Captain America: Civil  
War.” The much-hyped movie “Black Panther,” 
starring Chadwick Boseman as the  
eponymous superhero, opens on February  
16, picking up the adventures of the African 
king and superhero.
152

153

154

155

156

Coates said he’s seen parts of next month’s 
movie helmed by “Fruitvale Station” and 
“Creed” director Ryan Coogler, and calls the 
director a “superior filmmaker” and a “once-in-
a-generation talent.”
“Black people have not really had avatars out 
there like that they can identify with, and 
Panther is the biggest one right now,” Coates 
said. “I think what Ryan is going to do in terms  
of how this is going to look is going to blow 
people away ... It feels like thematically a  
natural tie.”
Coates wrote his first Black Panther comic  
book in 2016 but the series is getting a new 
start in April with a story line called “The 
Intergalactic Empire of Wakanda,” where 
T’Challa discovers some of his Wakandan 
subjects have colonized alien planets in his 
name and created a civilization where he’s 
almost worshipped as a god.
“This is not even just about T’Challa being  
in space or the idea of Wakanda in space.  
There have been core questions about  
kings, responsibly and morality that have 
extended throughout the book,” he said.  
“There have been core questions especially  
this year about the nature of divinity and  
gods and this Intergalactic Empire is an 
extension of that.”
Coates is best known for his political and social 
commentary. He won the National Book Award 
last year for “Between the World and Me,” an 
anguished meditation on police violence  
against blacks. He also released “We Were  
Eight Years in Power,” which collects his  
writings about Obama, last year.
157

158

159

160

Earlier this month, Coates deleted his widely 
followed Twitter accounted; it followed after 
criticism from activist Cornel West became a hot 
and much debated topic on social media.
Coates said he feels his departure from  
Twitter is akin to getting out of a  
dysfunctional relationship.
“I miss it, but Twitter is that bad girlfriend I had 
to catch in bed with two dudes in order to leave, 
that I knew was a bad girlfriend before that, that 
I knew I should have left, so I did and I’m gone 
and I’m glad she’s out of my life,” he said.
Coates is also not interested in talking  
about West.
“I wish Cornel the best. It’s the 25th anniversary 
of his book, ‘Race Matters’ and I don’t really want 
to do anything that would overshadow the work 
that he’s doing. I also don’t want to do anything 
to overshadow the work I’m doing,” he said.
“Black Panther” hits the multiplex on Feb. 16.
161

162

Fox and the NFL have agreed to a five-year deal 
for Thursday night football games.
Those games previously were televised by CBS 
and NBC, two of the league’s other network 
partners. Fox announced Wednesday that it will 
televise 11 games between Weeks 4 and 15, with 
simulcasts on NFL Network and Fox Deportes.
Fox, which has the Sunday afternoon NFC 
package, will produce all of the games under the 
deal, which is worth a little more than $3 billion, 
according to a person with direct knowledge 
of the terms of the deal who spoke to The 
Associated Press on condition of anonymity 
because the league didn’t announce its value.
“This is a single partner deal, we are not splitting 
the package,” NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell 
said in a conference call. “We had tremendous 
amount of interest from all the broadcast 
FOX GETS 
THURSDAY NIGHT 
FOOTBALL FOR 
5 YEARS, $3B
163

partners, all of whom wanted it exclusively. We 
felt this was the best opportunity for the NFL to 
grow the Thursday night package.”
Goodell added that the league is exploring 
partnerships with digital outlets, also in 
conjunction with Fox.
The NFL has broadcast deals “five years out” with 
its other partners — ESPN has the Monday night 
package — so five years on this agreement 
made sense.
“Fundamentally, Fox was built on football,” 
said Peter Rice, president of 21st Century Fox, 
nothing that 25 years ago, the NFC package 
“helped launch a fledgling network into what it 
is today.”
“These opportunities come along very, very 
infrequently,” he added. “You either have the 
rights to the most-watched content in media or 
you don’t. If you don’t take the opportunity, this 
won’t come up again for five years. We believe in 
buying the very best rights, and the best rights 
are the NFL.”
CBS and NBC each paid $450 million for the 
previous two-year package.
“We explored a responsible bid for Thursday 
Night Football but in the end are very pleased 
to return to entertainment programming 
on television’s biggest night,” CBS said in a 
statement. “At the same time, we look forward 
to continuing our terrific long-term partnership 
with the NFL on Sunday afternoons, with more 
than 100 games per season including next year’s 
Super Bowl 53.”
Fox could have a conflict if weather causes a World 
Series game to be postponed from Wednesday to 
164

165

Thursday. In recent years, Series Game 2 and 6 have 
been scheduled for Wednesday.
“In that hypothetical kind of a scenario, the 
World Series game would stay on Fox and our 
Thursday night game would become an FS1/
NFL Network simulcast,” Fox spokesman Eddie 
Motl said.
Goodell noted that the Thursday night games 
are a place for innovation.
“One of the things we’ve taken into consideration 
with Thursday night in general is to evolve this 
package, to use it as an opportunity to learn, to 
understand where these various platforms are 
going, and what we can do to make it a more 
attractive experience for our fans,” he said. “We 
will look at that in that context, and the term will 
be consistent with what it will take to make sure 
that we continue to evolve that platform as well 
as the experience for our fans.”
That means streaming outlets, of course.
“We have accepted bids for digital partners,” 
Goodell said. “We have very healthy competition. 
In fact, I would say it’s unprecedented 
competition from a number of digital partners.
“As I say, we put our focus on the broadcast 
package first. ... We are not required to go 
coterminous with the broadcasts. We can do any 
length of deal that we get to an agreement on with 
that digital partner. As I mentioned earlier, we will 
be doing this in cooperation with our Fox partners.”
For more NFL coverage: 
http://www.pro32.ap.org 
and http://www.twitter.com/AP_NFL
166

167

168

The centuries-old process of releasing 
defendants on bail, long the province of judicial 
discretion, is getting a major assist ... courtesy of 
artificial intelligence.
In late August, Hercules Shepherd Jr. walked up to 
the stand in a Cleveland courtroom, dressed in an 
orange jumpsuit. Two nights earlier, an officer had 
arrested him at a traffic stop with a small bag of 
cocaine, and he was about to be arraigned.
Judge Jimmy Jackson Jr. looked at Shepherd, 
then down at a computer-generated score 
on the front of the 18-year-old’s case file. Two 
out of six for likelihood of committing another 
crime. One out of six for likelihood of skipping 
court. The scores marked Shepherd as a prime 
candidate for pretrial release with low bail.
“We ask the court to take that all into 
consideration,” said Shepherd’s public defender, 
David Magee.
AI IN THE 
COURT: WHEN 
ALGORITHMS RULE 
ON JAIL TIME
169

170

Not long ago, Jackson would have decided 
Shepherd’s near-term future based on a reading 
of court files and his own intuition. But in 
Cleveland and a growing number of other local 
and state courts, judges are now guided by 
computer algorithms before ruling whether 
criminal defendants can return to everyday life, 
or remain locked up awaiting trial.
Experts say the use of these risk assessments 
may be the biggest shift in courtroom decision-
making since American judges began accepting 
social science and other expert evidence more 
than a century ago. Christopher Griffin, a 
research director at Harvard Law School’s Access 
to Justice Lab, calls the new digital tools “the 
next step in that revolution.”
Critics, however, worry that such algorithms 
might end up supplanting judges’ own 
judgment, and possibly even perpetuate biases 
in ostensibly neutral form.
AI gets a lot of attention for the jobs it 
eradicates. That’s not happening to judges, 
at least not yet. But as in many other white-
collar careers that require advanced degrees 
or other specialized education, AI is reshaping, 
if not eliminating, some of judges’ most basic 
tasks — many of which can still have enormous 
consequences for the people involved.
Cash bail, which is designed to ensure that 
people charged of crimes turn up for trial, has 
been part of the U.S. court system since its 
beginning. But forcing defendants to pony up 
large sums has drawn fire in recent years for 
keeping poorer defendants in jail while letting 
the wealthier go free. Studies have also shown it 
widens racial disparities in pretrial incarceration.
171

A bipartisan bail reform movement looking for 
alternatives to cash bail has found it in statistics 
and computer science: AI algorithms that can 
scour through large sets of courthouse data 
to search for associations and predict how 
individual defendants might behave.
States such as Arizona, Kentucky and Alaska 
have adopted these tools, which aim to identify 
people most likely to flee or commit another 
crime. Defendants who receive low scores are 
recommended for release under court supervision.
A year ago, New Jersey took an even bigger leap 
into algorithmic assessments by overhauling 
its entire state court system for pretrial 
proceedings. The state’s judges now rely on 
what’s called the Public Safety Assessment score, 
developed by the Houston-based Laura and 
John Arnold Foundation.
That tool is part of a larger package of bail 
reforms that took effect in January 2017, 
effectively wiping out the bail-bond industry, 
emptying many jail cells and modernizing the 
computer systems that handle court cases. 
“We’re trying to go paperless, fully automated,” 
said Judge Ernest Caposela, who helped usher 
in the changes at the busy Passaic County 
courthouse in Paterson, New Jersey.
New Jersey’s assessments begin as soon as 
a suspect is fingerprinted by police. That 
information flows to an entirely new office 
division, called “Pretrial Services,” where cubicle 
workers oversee how defendants are processed 
through the computerized system.
The first hearing happens quickly, and from 
the jailhouse — defendants appear by 
videoconference as their risk score is presented 
172

173

to the judge. If released, they get text alerts to 
remind them of court appearances. Caposela 
compares the automation to “the same way you 
buy something from Amazon. Once you’re in the 
system, they’ve got everything they need on you.”
All of that gives more time for judges to carefully 
deliberate based on the best information 
available, Caposela said, while also keeping 
people out of jail when they’re not a safety threat.
Among other things, the algorithm aims to 
reduce biased rulings that could be influenced 
by a defendant’s race, gender or clothing — or 
maybe just how cranky a judge might be feeling 
after missing breakfast. The nine risk factors 
used to evaluate a defendant include age and 
past criminal convictions. But they exclude 
race, gender, employment history and where 
a person lives. They also exclude a history of 
arrests, which can stack up against people more 
likely to encounter police — even if they’re not 
found to have done anything wrong.
The Arnold Foundation takes pains to 
distinguish the Public Safety Assessment from 
other efforts to automate judicial decisions 
— in particular, a proprietary commercial 
system called Compas that’s been used to 
help determine prison sentences for convicted 
criminals. An investigative report by ProPublica 
found that Compas was falsely flagging black 
defendants as likely future criminals at almost 
twice the rate as white defendants.
Other experts have questioned those findings, 
and the U.S. Supreme Court last year declined to 
take up a case of an incarcerated Wisconsin man 
who argued the use of gender as a factor in the 
Compas assessment violated his rights.
174

175

176

Arnold notes that its algorithm is straightforward 
and open to inspection by anyone — although 
the underlying data it relies on is not. “There’s 
no mystery as to how a risk score is arrived at 
for a given defendant,” said Matt Alsdorf, who 
directed the foundation’s risk-assessment efforts 
until late last year.
Advocates of the new approach are quick to 
note that the people in robes are still in charge.
“This is not something where you put in a ticket, 
push a button and it tells you what bail to give 
somebody,” said Judge Ronald Adrine, who 
presides over the Cleveland Municipal Court. 
Instead, he says, the algorithmic score is just one 
among several factors for judges to consider.
But other experts worry the algorithms will 
make judging more automatic and rote over 
time — and that, instead of eliminating bias, 
could perpetuate it under the mask of data-
driven objectivity. Research has shown that when 
people receive specific advisory guidelines, 
they tend to follow them in lieu of their own 
judgment, said Bernard Harcourt, a law and 
political science professor at Columbia.
“Those forms of expertise have a real gravitational 
pull on decision-makers,” he said. “It’s naive to 
think people are simply going to not rely on them.”
And if that happens, judges — like all people 
— may find it easy to drop their critical thinking 
skills when presented with what seems like 
an easy answer, said Kristian Hammond, a 
Northwestern University computer scientist who 
has co-founded his own AI company.
The solution is to “refuse to build boxes that 
give you answers,” he says.” What judges really 
177

178

need are “boxes that give you answers and 
explanations and ask you if there’s anything you 
want to change.”
Before his arrest on Aug. 29, Hercules Shepherd 
had no criminal record.
Coaches were interested in recruiting the 
star high school basketball player for their 
college teams. Recruitment would mean a big 
scholarship that could help Shepherd realize 
his dreams of becoming an engineer. But by 
sitting in jail, Shepherd was missing two days 
of classes. If he missed two more, he could get 
kicked out of school.
Judge Jackson looked up. “Doing OK today, Mr. 
Shepherd?” he asked. Shepherd nodded.
“If he sits in jail for another month, and gets 
expelled from school, it has wider ramifications,” 
Magee said.
“Duly noted. Mr. Shepherd? I’m giving you 
personal bond,” Jackson said. “Your opportunity 
to turn that around starts right now. Do so, and 
you’ve got the whole world right in front of 
you.” (Jackson subsequently lost an election in 
November and is no longer a judge; his winning 
opponent, however, also supports use of the 
pretrial algorithm.)
Smiling, Shepherd walked out of the courtroom. 
That night, he was led out of the Cuyahoga 
County Jail; the next day, he was in class. 
Shepherd says he wouldn’t have been able to 
afford bail. Shepherd’s mother is in prison, and 
his aging father is on Social Security.
His public defender said that Shepherd’s low 
score helped him. If he isn’t arrested again within 
a year, his record will be wiped clean.
179

Image: Mark Hoffman
180

The public will get a chance to sound off in March 
about Racine officials’ request to pull 7 million 
gallons of water per day from Lake Michigan to 
serve a massive Foxconn Technology plant.
The state Department of Natural Resources 
announced Wednesday that they’ve scheduled 
a public hearing on the request for March 7 
in Sturtevant. The agency also will take public 
comments on the request through March 21.
The Taiwanese electronics company wants to 
build a massive flat-screen facility in Mount 
Pleasant, which is about 30 miles south of 
Milwaukee and 60 miles north of Chicago. 
Racine has asked the DNR for permission to 
divert water from the lake to serve the facility.
Under the Great Lakes Compact, all water 
diverted from Lake Michigan must be returned 
minus what’s lost to evaporation or what’s used 
for Foxconn’s manufacturing process. The city’s 
application estimates about 2.7 million gallons 
per day will be consumed and wouldn’t return 
to the lake. All wastewater would return to the 
WISCONSIN DNR 
SETS HEARING 
ON FOXCONN 
WATER DIVERSION
181

Racine wastewater treatment plan and then 
the lake. Foxconn has struggled with pollution 
problems in China.
For a sense of scale, Waukesha, a city of about 
72,000 people, won approval in 2016 to 
withdraw 8.2 million gallons per day from Lake 
Michigan. Racine withdrew an average of 16.9 
million gallons per day in 2016 to serve the city 
as well as Sturtevant, Mount Pleasant, Elmwood 
Park, North Bay, Wind Point and Caledonia.
According to the DNR, the total surface water all 
states withdrew from Lake Michigan per day in 
2016 was about 9.6 billion gallons. The Racine 
withdrawal for Foxconn would amount to 0.07 
percent of that figure.
The lake contains about 1,180 cubic miles 
of water.
182

183

184

Operators of a taxpayer-funded spacecraft 
launch facility in southern New Mexico are 
seeking greater confidentiality for tenants 
that include aspiring commercial spaceflight 
company Virgin Galactic.
Top officials with the New Mexico Spaceport 
Authority that runs Spaceport America are 
scheduled to visit the state Capitol this week 
as they seek an increase in state funding. 
Spaceport America operators also want 
the Legislature to restrict public access to 
information about technology, security and 
customers at the facility.
PUBLICLY-FUNDED 
NEW MEXICO 
SPACEPORT SEEKS 
CONFIDENTIALITY
185

186

A bill backed by GOP Gov. Susana Martinez and 
Democratic Senate President Mary Kay Papen 
would exempt a variety of spaceport records 
from the state’s Inspection of Public Records Act.
New Mexico Foundation for Open Government 
Executive Director Peter St. Cyr says the bill 
could interfere with appropriate public scrutiny 
of spaceport management and operations.
187

188

They might just look like robots stacking cones, 
but they are really part of a government ploy — 
to encourage kids to pursue careers in science, 
technology, engineering and math.
NASA’s Independent Verification and Validation 
(IV&V) Program and the Robert C. Byrd Institute 
brought the international VEX Robotics 
Competition to Marshall University on Saturday 
with a qualifying round, giving kids in the area 
the chance to get scholarships and to compete 
in a state championship March 3 in Fairmont, 
West Virginia.
In the competition each year, students in high 
school and middle school must use kits to 
design and build robots that can accomplish 
certain tasks. Teams this year were challenged 
to mimic an essential function of NASA’s rover 
missions on Mars — to build a robot capable of 
quickly picking things up and putting them in a 
precise location.
NASA, RCBI BRING 
ROBOTICS COMPETITION 
TO AREA STUDENTS
189

“West Virginia really rocks it,” said Pam 
Casto, NASA education specialist at IV&V’s 
Educator Resource Center. “West Virginians  
are really innovative thinkers and builders  
and problem-solvers.”
The Robert C. Byrd Institute started hosting 
the competition two years ago as an additional 
qualifier for the state championship.
Before getting involved in the VEX competition, 
the Robert C. Byrd Institute hosted FIRST LEGO 
League competitions, which have a similar 
robotics component that helps kids think like 
engineers and scientists.
Spokesman Mike Friel said the institute supports 
advanced manufacturing and helping people 
innovate with technology.
“The skill level required in manufacturing is 
much higher than it used to be,” Friel said, noting 
companies need more skilled workers to fill 
advanced manufacturing jobs.
190

191

192

“We want to introduce students at an early  
age to the STEM fields ... in hopes that it will 
spark an interest.”
Huntington and Cabell Midland high 
schools didn’t qualify Saturday for the state 
championship, but both will have one last 
chance Feb. 3 during another qualifying  
round in Fairmont.
Having the ability to compete in more than 
one regional qualifying round gives teams the 
chance to see what other teams are doing and 
make adjustments to their robots.
The competition is tough — Casto said teams 
from West Virginia have won all three of  
NASA’s national robotics competitions in the 
past three years, as well as 14 international  
and world championships.
“Hopefully we’ll have a more qualified bot,” 
said Alex Prichard, a 17-year-old senior on the 
robotics team at Huntington High School. 
 “We’ll be putting in a lot of hours this week.”
Prichard became interested in robotics when he 
learned his school had a team in ninth grade. He 
didn’t get to do much work on the robot in his 
first year, so he made his own.
Although he’s interested in pursuing a career 
in computer science, Prichard is open to the 
possibility of working with robotics. The chance 
to do some programming was what originally 
attracted him to the team in the first place, and 
the past few years have been fun enough to 
keep going.
“One of the VEX rules is no destroying the other 
robot, sadly,” Prichard said. “Otherwise, we would 
definitely (win) that.”
193

194

Science Museum Oklahoma patrons got to try 
new technology thanks to a pop-up exhibit.
ReLiveIt’s augmented reality application lets 
people see animations around an object, such as 
the full body of a rabbit around a rabbit’s skull.
ReLiveIt was one of four businesses to come out 
of summer 2017’s Sooner Launch Pad program. 
In the last several months, the company has 
been able to raise an additional $13,000. CEO 
Ben Campbell told The Journal Record that he 
and Chief Operating Officer Michael Thomas 
used that money to buy artifacts and then build 
out the pop-up exhibit at the science museum.
AUGMENTED 
REALITY APP 
GETS A TEST AT 
SCIENCE MUSEUM 
OKLAHOMA
195

With the app, every artifact the company 
owns has content that goes with it, such as a 
launching rocket, or a flying plane next to  
an aviation suit. They set up their items in  
the science museum, and then people were 
given an iPad, which interacted with the icon 
next to the item. The interaction created an 
image on the screen, but it seemed like it  
was actually happening.
Campbell said about 2,000 people came 
through and used three iPads that were fitted 
with the app. Another nearly 700 people 
downloaded the program themselves.
People who used the app were given a  
survey afterward. The reviews were positive 
across the board and even better after the  
app was updated.
“What was most encouraging was having kids 
say this was the coolest thing they had ever 
seen,” said Campbell. “We had multiple people 
come back to try it, such as parents who wanted 
to use it without their kids, or grandparents who 
brought back a different set of grandchildren.”
Science Museum Oklahoma Communications 
Director Lindsay Thomas said ReLiveIt’s app 
served a dual purpose: It made the museum 
experience better and used science to do it.
“Coding is such a big deal for kids,” she said. 
“Being able to present a child with this kind of 
technology was a special opportunity for us. You 
never know what will get them started on their 
career path.”
On ReLiveIt’s survey, more than 60 percent of 
people said they have not used augmented 
reality technology previously.
196

197

198

199

200

Image: Chris Ratcliffe
ReLiveIt set up the pop-up museum from Dec. 
18 to Jan. 15. During the winter people often 
visit the science museum because it’s too cold 
to go outside, Thomas said. But it isn’t cost-
efficient for the museum to constantly update 
its exhibits. Thomas said the museum was in 
between renovations of two areas, with one 
being completed and another one in progress.
“Having this come in between those two 
updates was unique for our guests,” she said. 
“This is a different way to interact with an artifact 
or object that meets the needs of our guests.”
For ReLiveIt, the pop-up museum gave them 
their first data point for how interested people 
are in using the technology. On the survey, 
Michael Thomas said people were asked how 
much they would pay for the app, and the 
average price was $5.53.
Thomas said he and Campbell have heard from 
other entities interested in using the technology, 
including the Lobeck Taylor Family Foundation, 
which would like to use it along Route 66.
“We’re interested in staying in the museum 
industry, but we’re also looking at other 
avenues, such as sports tickets,” he said.
201

202

Gov. Jerry Brown outlined a $2.5 billion plan 
to help Californians buy electric vehicles and 
expand a network of charging stations as part of 
a goal of getting 5 million zero-emission cars on 
the road by 2030.
The ambitious proposal to transform California’s 
car culture comes as Brown begins his final 
year in office and works to set the stage for 
his environmental legacy to continue under 
his successor. The Democratic governor has 
positioned California as a global leader in 
fighting climate change amid President Donald 
Trump’s decision to pull the U.S. out of the Paris 
climate accord.
CALIFORNIA 
GOVERNOR 
PUSHES FOR
5 MILLION ZERO-
EMISSION CARS
203

The number of zero-emission cars is a significant 
expansion of Brown’s goal of selling 1.5 million 
such vehicles by 2025. It’s a nearly 15-fold 
increase over the 350,000 zero-emission vehicles 
already on California’s roads. The $2.5 billion in 
spending still needs legislative approval.
Reaching the goal will require that 40 percent of 
vehicles sold in 2030 be clean, said Mary Nichols, 
chairwoman of the California Air Resources 
Board, up from about 5 percent now.
“We think that’s a very reasonable proposal,” 
Nichols said. “It’s not a stretch.”
Brown’s plan would extend subsidies to help 
people buy emission-free vehicles. It seeks to 
have 250,000 electric-vehicle charging stations 
and 200 hydrogen fueling stations, an increase 
from about 14,000 charging stations and 31 
hydrogen stations.
California offers subsidies of up to $7,000 for 
the purchase or lease of a new electric, fuel-
cell or plug-in hybrid vehicle, though most 
subsidies are smaller.
Brown’s proposal would offer $200 million worth 
of subsidies in each of the next eight years.
California will need to radically reduce 
pollution from the transportation sector 
to reach its goal of reducing greenhouse 
gases 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2030. 
Pollution from cars, trucks and other modes of 
transportation account for the largest portion 
of greenhouse gas emissions.
The state has successfully reduced emissions 
from power plants thanks to the widespread 
adoption of wind, solar and hydroelectricity, but 
pollution from transportation has inched up.
204

205

206

Brown proposes using money from a mixture 
of existing programs at the California Energy 
Commission and the state’s cap-and-trade 
program, which caps pollution levels and 
auctions off permits to pollute.
The plan faces a number of obstacles. Consumers 
have been slow to warm to electric cars, 
preferring pickup trucks and sport-utility vehicles. 
And while the number of electric options is 
growing, automakers and dealers have not 
aggressively marketed them to consumers, in 
part because they’re not profitable.
Brown administration officials believe demand 
will increase as the cars become more visible on 
roadways and people learn more about them.
Democratic Assemblyman Phil Ting of San 
Francisco also is pushing legislation that would 
require all new vehicles sold in California to be 
emission-free by 2040 — a goal that automakers 
say is unrealistic.
207

208

DarkMatter, a growing cybersecurity company 
in the United Arab Emirates that’s recruited 
Western intelligence analysts, is stepping out of 
the shadows amid concerns by activists about its 
power and potential targets.
The company’s founder and CEO, Faisal al-
Bannai, says DarkMatter takes part in no 
hacking, although he acknowledges the firm’s 
close business ties to the Emirati government, 
as well as its hiring of former CIA and National 
Security Agency analysts.
Activists warn such expertise could be used 
to target human rights campaigners, some of 
whom already have been jailed in the UAE, a 
major U.S. ally in the Mideast.
Al-Bannai told The Associated Press his company 
carefully chooses its clients, while leaving the 
ethical decisions about privacy and surveillance 
in wielding its powerful technology to its 
governmental customers, which include the 
Dubai police.
UAE CYBER FIRM 
DARKMATTER 
SLOWLY STEPS 
OUT OF THE 
SHADOWS
209

“Ignoring that use, in my view, would be silly,” he 
said. “I think tackling that issue and saying, ‘What 
is the right balance,’ is the right question and the 
one I think everyone is trying to figure out.”
Surveillance is prolific across the UAE, a 
federation of seven sheikhdoms on the Arabian 
Peninsula. Flashing cameras capture license 
plates of vehicles pulling into gas stations. At 
Dubai’s Mall of the Emirates, home to an indoor 
ski slope, shoppers can use a kiosk to find their 
cars via the mall’s surveillance system.
Authorities say surveillance keeps the UAE safe. 
Surveillance footage helped authorities quickly 
identify the woman who stabbed an American 
school teacher to death at an Abu Dhabi 
mall in 2014.
It also aided Dubai police in identifying 
members of what it described as an Israeli 
hit squad that killed an operative with the 
Palestinian militant Hamas group in 2010, an 
attack never acknowledged by Israel.
For al-Bannai, whose father is a retired major 
general with the Dubai police, cybersecurity 
seemed like a good bet after he found success 
with his mobile phone reselling firm Axiom 
Telecom. He formed DarkMatter in 2015 and 
today, he said the company has some 650 
employees. Most work out of its headquarters 
in the disc-shaped Aldar building along a major 
highway connecting Dubai and Abu Dhabi. The 
firm also has research-and-development centers 
in China, Finland and Toronto, he said.
“The only country in the region that’s strong in 
cybersecurity is Israel,” al-Bannai told foreign 
journalists who visited DarkMatter on Tuesday. 
“Other than that, it’s blank.”
210

211

212

He described DarkMatter as entirely privately 
held, with a customer base that is 80 percent 
government agencies and 20 percent 
commercial. He declined to name specific 
clients, but many suspect they include the 
Signals Intelligence Agency, the Emirati version 
of the NSA. The agency is also registered as 
having offices in the Aldar building.
“Frankly, it’s an alignment of the stars,” al-Bannai 
said of DarkMatter’s government contracts. “It is 
a pure commercial transaction with them.”
Since its inception, rumors have swirled 
around DarkMatter.
Some hackers described receiving aggressive, 
repeated job offers by the firm. An Italian 
hacker wrote a blog post in 2016 alleging that 
DarkMatter tried to hire him through a third-
party recruiter who described the company as 
setting up a vast domestic spying infrastructure, 
something denied by al-Bannai.
However, human rights activists and others 
have been targeted by hacks suspected 
to be directed, if not carried out, by the 
Emirati government.
Emirati activist Ahmed Mansoor became famous 
in August 2016 when he worked with security 
experts to reveal three previously undisclosed 
weaknesses in Apple’s mobile operating system 
after he was allegedly targeted with a phishing 
text message he didn’t open.
Mansoor and others believed the United Arab 
Emirates was behind the attack, as it involved 
so-called “zero day” exploits — flaws in 
programming that hackers can use to potentially 
install spyware or gain control of a system — 
213

214

that can be worth over a million dollars each. 
Mansoor was arrested by UAE authorities last 
March for his online posts. Authorities later said 
he was being held at Abu Dhabi’s central prison 
and had “the freedom to hire a lawyer” and 
receive family visits.
Another hacking campaign targeting Mansoor 
and others, dubbed “Stealth Falcon,” also 
appeared to be coordinated by the government, 
said Bill Marczak, a research fellow at Citizen 
Lab. DarkMatter’s close work with the Emirati 
government, and the experience of its staff, 
raised flags about the company, Marczak said.
“When you’re talking about human rights 
activists like Ahmed Mansoor ... there’s nothing 
he can do and the government gets access to 
him and his contacts and then can take further 
actions against his contacts,” he said. “It’s one 
thing to use them against people you may think 
are committing terrorist acts or criminal acts, but 
215

216

using them against someone who is just kind 
of sitting around their living room tweeting, it 
seems kind of disproportionate.”
Al-Bannai said DarkMatter had no depository 
of “zero day” exploits, nor did it take part in 
so-called “offensive hacking.” He pointed to 
one of the company’s signature products, a 
secure mobile phone called “Katim,” or “silence” 
in Arabic, as showing the firm’s interest in 
defensive technology.
He added that DarkMatter hired CIA, NSA and 
other ex-government employees for their 
experience.
“If you think an NSA guy is a spooky guy, the 
NSA guy is the one protecting you in the U.S.,” al-
Bannai said. “These are not the bad guys.”
He did, however, acknowledge that questions 
remain about how much information authorities 
should have and be able to use.
Pegasus, a DarkMatter subsidiary, now has a “big 
data” contract with Dubai police. An example 
offered by al-Bannai suggested police could be 
able to pool hours of surveillance video to track 
anyone in the emirate.
“My team knows what they’re building,” he said. 
“If they thought they were building funny stuff, 
they wouldn’t be here.”
217

218

Australia’s military said that a fitness tracking 
application did not breach security despite 
revelations that an interactive, online map  
using its data can show troop locations  
around the world.
The Pentagon announced this week that it was 
doing a broad review of how the U.S. military 
forces use exercise trackers and other wearable 
electronic devices after the revelations about 
GPS tracking company Strava’s application. 
Strava’s online Global Heat Map shows the 
locations of its users.
AUSSIE MILITARY 
SAYS TRACKING 
APP DOESN’T 
BREACH SECURITY
219

Image: Lukas Coch
Australian Defense Industry Minister Christopher 
Pyne said the Defense Department was 
preparing a report for the government on the 
matter. A department statement said it was 
aware of the possible risks of the collection 
of location data through personal electronic 
devices and apps.
“The circumstances of this application do not 
constitute a security breach,” the statement said.
The issue was first publicized last weekend 
when Nathan Ruser, a 20-year-old student 
who is studying international security with 
a double major in Middle Eastern studies at 
Australian National University in Canberra, 
tweeted that “U.S. bases are clearly identifiable 
and mappable.” It was later reported by The 
Washington Post.
The map uses satellite information to show 
the locations of subscribers to Strava’s fitness 
service. The map shows activity from 2015 
through September 2017.
Heavily populated areas are well lit, but 
warzones such as Iraq and Syria show scattered 
pockets of activity that could be caused by 
military or government personnel using fitness 
trackers as they move around. Those electronic 
signals could potentially identify military bases 
or other secure locations.
“Who knows if someone from any of the 
intelligence services noticed it before, but as far 
as I know, I’m the first person in public to put 
two and two together,” Ruser told from Thailand, 
where he is visiting family.
He said more people were interested in the issue 
than he expected.
220

221

“I expected it to hang around pretty quietly 
in some of the open-source analyst circles, 
intelligence wonks would look at it and then for 
the government or the company to quietly fix 
the security vulnerabilities, but it’s got pretty 
big,” he added.
He called the map a “wakeup call.”
“I wouldn’t say it provides an acute security risk 
to any personnel because a lot of those bases 
are known and even though this map gives 
you a huge advantage if you were to prioritize 
targeting the base, none of America’s current 
adversaries like ISIS can walk up to one of those 
bases and bomb it,” he said.
Ruser said he had not been contacted by  
Strava or any security agency since his tweet 
attracted attention.
222

223

224

Guns drawn, Iranian intelligence agents rushed 
into the apartment of a Washington Post 
reporter and his journalist wife in Tehran.
Threatening to kill Jason Rezaian in front of his 
wife, Yeganeh, the 20 agents in the July 2014 raid 
tore through their belongings and rifled through 
drawers, clothes and valuables for an hour.
But perhaps their most eagerly sought target 
wasn’t exactly inside the house: They forced 
the couple to hand over the passwords to their 
email and social media profiles.
‘HALAL’ INTERNET 
MEANS MORE 
CONTROL IN IRAN 
AFTER UNREST
225

226

That raid demonstrated how much of a threat 
Iran’s theocratic government sees in the internet. 
It has long sought to strictly control cyberspace 
and social media — and, thereby, the flow of 
information to the public.
But the Islamic Republic’s relationship with the 
world wide web is far more complicated than 
simple repression. Over the past four years, 
authorities have encouraged wider use of the 
internet among Iranians, hoping to generate the 
benefits of a more modern economy. As a result, 
nearly half the population has in its pockets a 
tool that the state is struggling to constrain: 
smartphones, with cameras and internet links 
that let anyone broadcast to the world.
Those smartphones helped spread the startling 
burst of protests across Iran that opened 2018. 
The government succeeded in suffocating the 
flare-up in part by shutting off key social media 
and messaging apps, but the lesson was clear: 
The same oxygen that can resuscitate commerce 
can also give breath to potential revolt.
Authorities’ solution has been to create a so-
called “halal net,” Iran’s own locally controlled 
version of the internet aimed at restricting what 
the public can see.
As Iran approaches the 40th anniversary of the 
revolution that brought its cleric-led rule to 
power, how it handles the power of cyberspace 
will be crucial to its future, determining whether 
it moves to greater openness or seals itself off 
from the world.
“The Islamic Republic is not black and white. 
It shows a myriad of contradictions and its 
internet policy I think is one of the great 
examples of those contradictions,” said Sanam 
227

Vakil, an associate fellow at Chatham House 
who studies Iran. “The government has taken 
the internet and effectively used it for its own 
purposes and also has realized the dangers  
of it as well.”
Since the 1979 Islamic Revolution, how 
information spreads across mass media has 
been tightly controlled.
All television and radio broadcasts within Iran 
are from state-run stations. Satellite dishes 
remain ostensibly illegal, though they are 
plentiful, drawing occasional attacks from bat-
wielding government enforcers. Journalists face 
restrictions in what they can cover and where 
they can travel across a country of 80 million 
people that’s nearly two-and-a-half times the 
size of Texas.
The internet helped collapse that distance. 
During Iran’s 2009 protests surrounding  
the disputed re-election of hard-line  
President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, still  
nascent social media spread word of the  
events among Iranians and brought videos  
of the shooting death of 26-year-old Neda 
Agha Soltan to the world.
Iran’s government, overseen by Supreme  
Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, violently 
suppressed the demonstrations. The crackdown 
killed dozens and saw thousands imprisoned, 
with some tortured by their jailers.
Even before the 2009 protests, Iran blocked 
access to YouTube. Twitter and Facebook 
followed amid the unrest, as did many other 
sites later. Some in Iran began using virtual 
private networks, or VPNs, which allow users to 
bypass government censorship.
228

229

230

The chief difference between then and the 
protests that rocked the country coming 
into 2018 was the massive proliferation of 
smartphones. As recently as 2014, only  
an estimated 2 million Iranians possessed  
one. Today, estimates suggest Iranians own  
48 million.
That explosive growth was spurred by the 
administration of President Hasan Rouhani, a 
cleric who is a relative moderate within Iran’s 
system. His officials allowed more mobile 
phone service providers to offer 3G and 4G 
internet, suddenly making sharing photos and 
images possible. Home internet connections 
became faster. The encrypted messaging 
platform Telegram spread like wildfire. Over 
40 million Iranians are estimated to use it, 
for everything from benign conversations to 
commerce and political campaigning.
In the recent unrest, protesters used  
Telegram’s mass-messaging channels to  
share information and videos across 75 cities 
and towns where demonstrations erupted. 
Some showed people openly in the streets 
shouting, “Death to Khamenei!” It shocked 
many, especially as such cries could bring a 
death sentence.
When the government temporarily blocked 
Telegram as well as Instagram, it helped 
smother the protests within days. Notably, 
however, Telegram’s silencing quickly brought 
complaints from businesspeople who use its 
channels to promote and sell their goods.
Even after the unrest, Rouhani argued it was 
futile trying to shut off an indispensable tool  
of modern life.
231

232

“If you want cyberspace to be useful to the 
community, come forward with a solution 
using it to promote the culture instead of 
blocking it,” he said, noting that past Iranian 
government tried to stop people from listening 
to the radio “but this prevention was useless.”
The danger — and potential — of the internet 
as a weapon came into focus for Iran when it 
faced the world’s first cyberweapon almost a 
decade ago.
At the height of tensions between Tehran  
and the West over its nuclear program, 
thousands of centrifuges enriching uranium 
at Iran’s underground Natanz facility suddenly 
began spinning themselves to death. They  
had been hit by the Stuxnet computer  
virus, widely believed to be an American  
and Israeli creation.
Material leaked by Edward Snowden, the 
former National Security Agency contractor 
who exposed U.S. government surveillance 
programs in 2013, suggested Iran at the 
time was the country where American spies 
collected the most electronic data.
Beginning in 2011, Iran worked to strike back.
Among the most spectacular cyberattacks 
attributed to Iran is Shamoon, a virus that hit 
the state-run giant Saudi Arabian Oil Co. and 
Qatari natural gas producer RasGas, deleting 
hard drives and displaying a picture of a 
burning American flag on computer screens. 
Saudi Aramco ultimately shut down its network 
and destroyed over 30,000 computers. A later 
iteration of Shamoon in late 2016 caused even 
more damage.
233

234

The U.S. blames Iranian hackers for a denial-
of-service attack that overwhelmed six major 
American banks in 2012. U.S. prosecutors in 
2016 accused hackers believed to be backed by 
Iran of attacking dozens of banks and a small 
dam near New York City. They also have been 
suspected of targeting the email and social media 
accounts of Obama administration officials.
Analysts and security experts believe many of 
these hackers likely receive backing from Iran’s 
Revolutionary Guard, a powerful paramilitary 
and economic force in the country answerable 
only to Khamenei himself.
The Guard employs more direct means as  
well, like its wresting away of the passwords  
of Rezaian and his wife, recounted in a lawsuit 
he filed against the Guard and Iran in U.S. 
federal court.
Similarly, it seized control of the Facebook 
and email accounts of Iranian-American dual 
national Siamak Namazi, who remains detained 
in Iran along with his octogenarian father 
Baquer. The Guard then pretended to be Namazi 
in correspondence with U.S. government 
officials and others, like New Yorker journalist 
Robin Wright, tricking them into opening a file 
that gave the hackers access to their computers.
Cyberespionage is even used in Iran’s internal 
rivalries, with attacks on members of the 
government, particularly officials in Rouhani’s 
Foreign Ministry, including Zarif, according to a 
recent report by the Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace.
“The targeting of members of government 
— individuals that have already been vetted 
by the regime — reflects the importance of 
235

Image: Ben Curtis
cybersurveillance as a tool of the hard-line 
security establishment to monitor potential 
rivals for power,” the report said.
Then Iran moved to target the internet itself.
The idea of Iran setting up its own “halal,” or 
“permissible,” internet first came in 2011 in the 
wake of the 2009 protests. It’s evolved into what’s 
known as the National Information Network.
It is essentially a net neutrality supporter’s 
nightmare: The network has some 500 
government-approved national websites 
that stream content far faster than those 
based abroad, which are intentionally slowed, 
according to a recent report by the Campaign 
for Human Rights in Iran. Service providers offer 
cheaper packages to customers accessing only 
the NIN websites. Search results also are gamed 
within the network, allowing the government to 
censor what users find.
One of the principal designers of the network 
is the Iran Telecommunications Co., owned by 
proxies of the Guard.
It resembles in a way China’s “Great Firewall,” 
which blocks access to thousands of websites, 
from Facebook to Twitter to some news outlets. 
Chinese internet users also find access to 
websites outside of the country slower.
“Iran’s National Information Network may lack 
the name cachet of the ‘Great Firewall,’ but its 
performance in strangling access to opposition 
content during the most recent protests 
proved that Iran is hard on China’s heels in 
terms of controlling the flow of information,” 
the private U.S. intelligence firm Stratfor wrote 
in a Jan. 17 analysis.
236

237

Firuzeh Mahmoudi, the executive director of 
the San Francisco-based group United for Iran, 
said authorities have had success in getting 
businesses to operate on the NIN. The more they 
do so, he warned, “the easier it will be for them 
to shut down or throttle the real internet when 
they want to.”
Hard-liners have suggested removing Iran entirely 
from the internet and creating its own at home.
“Cyberspace was the kindling in the fire of the 
battle,” hard-line cleric Ayatollah Ahmad Khatami 
recently told worshippers at Friday prayers in 
Tehran. “When cyberspace was closed down, 
the sedition was stopped. The nation does not 
support a social network that has its key in the 
hands of the United States.”
238

239

240

Amid the protests, the Trump administration 
said it wanted to help Iranians access the 
internet. The U.S. Treasury sanctioned the 
Guard, Iran’s Supreme Council of Cyberspace 
and other officials for “engaging in censorship.”
Top Trump administration officials have met 
with Google, Facebook, Twitter and other 
leading tech companies to ask what more 
they can do to help people in Iran and other 
authoritarian-run countries communicate 
freely, according to U.S. officials briefed  
on the meetings.
But fear of crossing U.S. sanctions has made 
companies skittish. Some firms don’t allow 
their services to be used in Iran. That prevents 
Iranians from accessing many encrypted 
communication apps or VPNs.
Even when the Trump administration has 
floated the possibility of easing some  
sanctions or offering carve-outs, some tech 
companies have been reluctant to offer more 
services in Iran, said the officials, who weren’t 
authorized to discuss the conversations and 
demanded anonymity.
So it remains in question whether Iranians will 
have access to an open internet if anger over 
the economy boils over into protests again, as 
many predict it will.
“We believe that the U.S. government could do 
more to enable the free flow of information in 
Iran and establish a thriving entrepreneurial 
civil society independent of the regime,” said 
Morad Ghorban of the Washington-based 
Public Affairs Alliance of Iranian Americans. 
“This movement has continued despite 
persecution by hard-line elements.”
241

ads@techlifenews.com
Digital
Mindﬁeld

TechLife News is an independent publication and has not been authorized, sponsored, or otherwise approved by Apple Inc.
TECHLIFE NEWS© Copyright 2016-2012. All Rights Reserved.
No part of the document may be circulated, quoted, or reproduced for distribution without prior written approval. Proper Trademark 
Notice and Attribution iPad™, iPhone™, iPod™, Mac™, iMac™, Macbook™, iOS™, OS X™ are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the 
U.S. and other countries. Please contact support for additional trademark ownership rights information. The following is a list of 
Apple’s trademarks and service marks http://www.apple.com/legal/ trademark/appletmlist.html. All other trademarks are the 
properties of their owners.
WRIWRITERS
 
Precise English Inc.
 
Benjamin Kerry  (UK)
 
Gavin Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Craig Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Elena Lusk  (US)
COLUMNS
COLUMNS
 
iTUNES REVIEW
 
Benjamin Kerry
 
FINANCE NEWS
 
Associated Press / Bloomberg
REVISION
 
Gavin Lenaghan
  
Elena Lusk
PRODUCTION SUPPORT / COLLABORATORS
 
Rui da Costa
 
Segolene Vincent
 
Lise Berda
 
James Jarvis
 
Richard Sawyer
  
Lauren Brown
 
Matthew Coburn
 
Jeﬀrey Milks
 
Gustavo Leite
 
Susan Kiesling
 
Raquel Serrano
 
Robert Fluellen
  
Lisa Swiniarski
 
Roger Gayalkar
 
Gustavo Labanca
 
Held Souza
PRIVACY POLICY
 
techlifenews.com/privacy-policy/
TERMS OF USE
 
techlifenews.com/terms-of-use/
SOCIAL NETWORKS
 
 
Twitter
 
 
@TechLife_News
 
 
twitter.com/#!/TechLife_News
 
 
Facebook
 
 
facebook.com/TechLifeNews
SUBSCRIPTIONS
SUBSCRIPTIONS
 
TechLife News Website
 
techlifenews.com
 
iTunes App Store™ / Newsstand
 
itunes.apple.com/app/techlife-news/id529054466?mt=8
CONTACTS
 
Executive Director - ceo@techlifenews.com
  
Relationship Management - crm@techlifenews.com 
 
Editor - editor@techlifenews.com 
 
Advertise - ads@techlifenews.com 
 
Social Network - network@techlifenews.com
 
Promotions - promo@techlifenews.com 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
 
Ivan Castilho
  
Chief Executive Oﬃcer / Design Conception
MINDFIELD DIGITAL ART & GRAPHIC DESIGN
 
Glauco Ribeiro
 
Chief Design Oﬃcer / Art & Graphic Design Director
 
Michael Danglen
 
Art & Graphic Design Producer
 
Anderson Oliveira
  
Art & Graphic Design Producer
OFFICIAL WEBSITE
 
Yogh Inc.
 
WordPress Production & Website Support
 
Lucas Carvalho
 
Production Director
 
Fellipe Giesel
 
Web Designer / Producer
 
Filipe Siems
 
Web Designer / Programmer
TECHLIFE NEWS INTERNATIONAL
TechLifeNews.comMASTHEAD

TechlifeNews.com

