Jack Wiles, (PPS, IAM, IEM) is a Security Professional with over 30 years experience 
in security related fields. This includes computer security, disaster recovery and physi-
cal security. He is a professional member of the National Speakers Association and 
has trained federal agents, corporate attorneys and internal auditors on a number of 
computer crime related topics. He is a pioneer in presenting on a number of subjects 
that are now being labeled ‘Homeland Security’ topics. Well over 10,000 people have 
attended one or more of his presentations since 1988. Jack is also a co-founder and 
President of TheTrainingCo., producers of the Annual Techno Security Conferences 
and the popular Techno Forensics conferences. He is in frequent contact with mem-
bers of many state and local law enforcement agencies as well as Special Agents with 
the U.S. Secret Service, FBI, U.S. Customs, Department of Justice, The Department of 
Defense and numerous members of High-Tech Crime units. He was also appointed as 
the first President of the North Carolina InfraGard chapter that is now one of the larg-
est chapters in the country. He is also a founding member and ‘official’ MC of the US 
Secret Service South Carolina Electronic Crimes Task Force.
Jack is also a Vietnam veteran who served with the 101st Airborne Division in 
Vietnam in 1967–68. He recently retired from the U.S. Army Reserves as a lieutenant 
colonel and was assigned directly to the Pentagon for the final seven years of his career. 
In his spare time, he has been a senior contributing editor for several local, national and 
international magazines.
This is the fifth book published by Syngress that we have been a part of in the last 
18 months. I’m in our friend Johnny Long’s camp in acknowledging that I can do 
nothing without the help of my Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. I dedicate my small part 
of this book to Him, my wonderful wife of 30 years (long years for her) Valerie, and my 
son Tyler as he heads off to college. I’m very proud of you son. My partner Don Withers 
is like a brother to me in every way. For ten years now, we have been fortunate to 
produce our Techno Security and our popular Techno Forensics conferences, which have 
had attendees register from over 45 countries around the world. I wish that I had space 
to thank all of the other authors of this book. I know them all well, and have known 
some of them for more than two decades. These are some of the most respected and 
talented security minds in the world, and I am honored to have my work in the same 
Lead Author
v

book as theirs. And last, but certainly not least, I’d like to thank the thousands of friends 
who have become Techno groupies at our annual events. Many of them have traveled 
from half the world away to spend a few days with us each year. THANK YOU! - Jack
Jack wrote Chapter 1, “Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest 
Vulnerability.”
vi

vii
Ted Claypoole is a Member of the law firm Womble Carlyle ­Sandridge 
and Rice, in Charlotte, North Carolina, in the Intellectual Property 
Transaction group, and a senior member of its Privacy and Data Manage-
ment Team. He has long concentrated on the business and legal impli-
cations of information security and computer crime, first as in-house 
corporate counsel for ­CompuServe, Inc. and as assistant general counsel 
for Bank of America. He now advises business clients and information 
security companies on contracting for data protection, allocating risk in 
digital certificate infrastructures and reacting to ­electronic threats. He has 
served on a U.S. Justice Department computer crimes task force and the 
Information Protection Committee for the Banking Industry Technology 
Secretariat. He has presented talks at the RSA Security Conferences in 
2007 and 2008, including a talk on the ethics of pervasive biometrics.
Ted wrote Chapter 8, “Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security.”
Phil Drake is Communications Manager for the Charlotte Observer 
in Charlotte, N. C. The Observer is a daily newspaper that serves readers 
throughout North and South Carolina. In addition to the newspaper, the 
Charlotte Observer produces specialty magazines, voice information, and 
Internet services.
Phil is responsible for all aspects of communications at Observer 
­operations in both Carolinas, including telephone and data communi-
cations, wireless systems, conventional and trunked two-way radio, and 
satellite systems. He is also responsible for business continuity and disaster 
response planning and related budgeting. He is responsible for provid-
ing emergency communications facilities for reporters and photographers 
­covering breaking news stories.
His background includes photojournalism, mainframe computer support, 
network management, telecommunications planning and ­management, and 
business continuity planning. Phil is a former chairman of the Contingency 
Planning Association of the Carolinas and currently serves as a Board Advisor 
Contributors

viii
of the organization. He is a Certified Business Continuity Professional with 
the Disaster Recovery Institute International.
Phil speaks to public and private sector groups and has been ­interviewed 
by and written for a number of national publications on a wide range 
of emergency communication issues, and business/homeland defense 
­planning. He leads business continuity training seminars for both the public 
and ­private sectors, and he has provided project management in business 
­continuity. He has advised major national clients in emergency planning, 
workforce protection, threat assessment, and incident response for  
a number of large national corporations.
He enjoys backpacking and spending time in the outdoors. He also 
has taught outdoor living skills to youth group leaders. He was appointed 
by the North Carolina Secretary of the Department of Environment and 
Natural Resources as a voting member of the NC Geological Survey 
­Advisory Committee.
Phil wrote the Appendix, “Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness.”
Paul A. Henry, (MCP+I, MCSE, CCSA, CCSE, CFSA, CFSO,  
CISSP, ISSAP, CISM, CISA, CIFI) is the Vice President of  Technology 
Evangelism at Secure Computing®.
Paul is one of the world’s foremost global information security experts, 
with more than 20 years experience managing security initiatives for  
Global 2000 enterprises and government organizations worldwide.
At Secure Computing, Paul plays a key strategic role in launching new 
products and re-tooling existing product lines. In his role as Vice President 
Technology Evangelism, Paul also advises and consults on some of the 
world’s most challenging and high-risk information security projects, includ-
ing the National Banking System in Saudi Arabia, Department of Defense’s 
Satellite Data Project, USA, and both Government as well as Telecommuni-
cations projects throughout Japan.
Paul is frequently cited by major and trade print publications as an expert 
on both technical security topics and general security trends, and serves as an 
expert commentator for network broadcast outlets such as NBC and CNBC. 
In addition, Paul regularly authors thought leadership articles on technical 
security issues, and his expertise and insight help shape the editorial direction 

ix
of key security publications such as the Information Security Management 
Handbook, where he is a consistent contributor.
Paul serves as a featured and keynote speaker at network security 
­seminars and conferences worldwide, delivering presentations on diverse 
topics ­including network access control, Cyber crime, DDoS attack risk 
mitigation, firewall architectures, computer and network forensics, Enter-
prise security architectures and managed security services.
Paul wrote Chapter 2, “Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition.”
Lester J. “Chip” Johnson Jr. is employed by the SCANA Corporation,  
a $ 9 ­Billion, Fortune 500, energy–based holding company, headquartered 
in Columbia, South Carolina. Mr. Johnson serves in the Corporate Security 
and Claims Department as a Manager with responsibility for Investiga-
tions and Crisis Management. Mr. Johnson leads a staff of professional 
investigators who conduct investigations of  internal corporate compliance 
issues, criminal violations against the corporation’s property and person-
nel, ­executive protection, background investigations and risk reduction 
efforts on behalf of the Corporation. The Crisis Management Department 
is responsible for the development and continual assessment of security risk 
management and reduction plans for the critical infrastructure operated 
by the Corporation. These risk management and reduction plans include 
the assurance of ­compliance with the various governmental agencies with 
oversight responsibilities for the critical infrastructure. Business continu-
ity and emergency procedure planning are also a major component of the 
crisis management group. 
Mr. Johnson is a retired Deputy to the Assistant Director of Investiga-
tive Services for the South Carolina Law Enforcement Division.  He was 
responsible for the delivery of all investigative services, which included 
general investigations, bomb and arson, tactical, computer crimes, special 
victims, executive protection, behavioral science, public corruption, and 
insurance fraud. 
During his twenty–eight year career Mr. Johnson received numerous 
awards and commendations, including the Strom Thurmond Award of  
Excellence in 2004. Mr. Johnson is a graduate of the FBI National Acad-
emy and has served as an adjunct instructor for numerous organizations. 


Mr. Johnson is married to the former Laura Whelchel of Cordele, 
Georgia and resides in Lexington, South Carolina with his two children.
Lester wrote Chapter 5, “Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA  
Incidents.”
Sean Lowther is the President and Founder of Stealth Awareness, Inc., 
www.stealthawareness.com.
Sean is an independent consultant who brings years of experience 
­designing and implementing information security awareness programs at 
the highest level. He founded Stealth Awareness, Inc. in 2007.
Sean worked at Bank of America for over seven years, managing the 
enterprise information security awareness program. The program received 
the highest rating from its regulators and was consistently rated “world 
class” by industry peer groups.
Sean has worked with BITS, the Financial Services Roundtable Task 
Force on Privacy, prior to the enactment of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. 
He produced the video “It’s Not If, But When” for the Financial Services 
Sector Coordinating Council in partnership with the U.S. Treasury  
Department with the goal to improve critical Infrastructure protection  
and Homeland Security. Sean was recognized by senior government  
officials and business executives for his “work to defend our nation’s critical 
infrastructure.”
Sean is a sought after speaker for a variety of events and meetings.  
Most recently he spoke at the Computer Security Institute’s annual 2007 
conference in Washington, D.C., the Contingency Planning Association of 
the Carolinas, and the 2008 Charlotte ISSA annual conference.
Sean lives in the Charlotte, North Carolina area.
Sean wrote Chapter 4, “Developing an Effective Security Awareness  
Program.”
Greg Miles, (Ph.D., CISSP#24431, CISM#0300338, IAM, IEM)  
co-author of Security Assessment: Case Studies for implementing the  
NSA IAM (Syngress Publishing, ISBN 1-932266-96-8), Network  
Security Evaluation: Using the NSA IEM (Syngress Publishing, ISBN:  
1-597490-35-0), and Security Interviews Exposed: Secrets to Landing your 
Next Information Security Job (Wiley Publishing,  ISBN-10: 0471779873) 

xi
is the President, and Chief Financial Officer of Security Horizon, Inc. 
­Security Horizon is a Global, Veteran-Owned Small Business headquar-
tered in Colorado Springs, Colorado. Security Horizon provides global 
information security professional services, training, and publishes  The 
­Security Journal, a quarterly online publication. Greg is a U.S. Air Force 
Veteran and has been supporting the technology and security commu-
nity for the last 22+ years. Greg’s background includes work with NSA, 
NASA, and DISA. Greg has supported efforts covering security assessments, 
­evaluations, policy, penetration testing, incident response, and computer 
forensics.
Greg holds a Ph.D. in Engineering Management from Kennedy  
Western University, a master’s degree in Management Administration from 
Central Michigan University, and a bachelor’s degree in Electrical Engineer-
ing (with a concentration in Control Systems and Power Systems) from 
the University of Cincinnati. Greg is a member of the Information System 
Security Association (ISSA) and the Information System Audit and  
Control Association (ISACA). He is also Adjunct Faculty for the University 
of ­Advancing Technology (www.uat.edu).
Greg would like to thank his family and friends for the incredible 
support provided to him. Greg has two incredible, loving children, Kirstin 
and Justin, that provide a great deal of enjoyment. Also at home is another 
­incredible kid that just adds to the fun, Brennon. He would also like to 
thank his soul mate, Tania, for teaching him what it means to love once 
again.
Greg wrote Chapter 3, “SCADA Security Assessment Methodology.”
Marc Weber Tobias is an investigative attorney and security specialist ­living 
in Sioux Falls, South Dakota. As part of his practice, he represents and consults 
with lock manufacturers, government agencies and corporations in the U.S. 
and overseas regarding the design and bypass of locks and security systems.  
He has authored six police textbooks, including Locks, Safes, and Security, 
(ISBN 978-0398070793), which is recognized as the primary reference for 
law enforcement and security professionals worldwide. The second edition,  
a 1400 page two-volume work, is utilized by criminal investigators, crime 
labs, locksmiths and those responsible for physical security. A fourteen-volume 

xii
multimedia edition of his book is also available online. His website is  
security.org.
As a former prosecutor and Chief of the Organized Crime Unit for the 
Office of Attorney General, state of South Dakota, Marc supervised many 
major investigations and prosecutions. He continues to work investigations 
for government and private clients, mainly involving technical fraud issues.
Marc is a member of a number of professional security organizations, 
including the American Society of Industrial Security (ASIS), Association 
of Firearms and Tool Marks Examiners (AFTE), American Polygraph  
Association (APA) and American Association of Police Polygraphists 
(AAPP).
Marc has lectured extensively in the United States and Europe on 
physical security and certain aspects of criminal investigations and  
interrogation techniques. He holds several patents involving the bypass of 
locks and ­security systems. Marc contributes a column to engadget.com 
and has been featured in many publications as well as radio and television 
stories around the world.
Marc wrote Chapter 6, “Locked but Not Secure: An Overview of Conventional 
and High Security Locks.”
James H. Windle is employed as a Police Sergeant in Charlotte, North 
Carolina, where he serves as a certified bomb technician and is assigned as 
the Bomb Squad Commander and Arson Supervisor. He is certified as a 
North Carolina Law Enforcement Instructor and has advanced instructor 
training in Specialized Police Driving, Firearms and Hazardous ­Materials.  
He is an instructor of the United States National Domestic Terrorism Prepar-
edness Program and delivered terrorism training to ­numerous ­governmental 
agencies both police and military as well as private security.
Jim began his experience in explosives from his service as a ­member 
of the United States Marine Corps providing training in mines and booby 
traps domestically and with NATO forces overseas. As a ­police bomb 
technician he graduated from the F.B.I.’s Hazardous Devices School at 
Redstone Arsenal and ATF’s Advanced Explosives Destruction Techniques, 
Advanced Post Blast Investigation and Home Land Security Live Agent 
WMD School. He is also crossed trained as a Hazardous ­Materials Techni-
cian. He has worked site security and threat assessment in conjunction with 
the U.S. Secret Service and U.S. State Department for domestic and foreign 

dignitary protection missions. He was sent to Israel to train with Israeli 
bomb technicians on countermeasures for suicide bombers and vehicle 
bombs and this year was sent to England to work with London Met Police 
and Royal Navy EOD squads.
He is an active member of the International Association of Bomb 
Technicians and Investigators (IABTI) and also a member of the High 
Technology Crime Investigation Association (HTCIA). Both groups are 
highly respected international organizations whose primary mission is to 
share information, train, and help in the prevention and prosecution of high 
technology and terrorist crimes.
Jim wrote Chapter 7, “Bombs, Bad Guys and your Business.”
xiii

Amit Yoran is the Chairman and CEO of NetWitness Corporation, the 
leading provider of next generation network security monitoring solu-
tions. Prior to serving at NetWitness Corporation, Mr. Yoran acted as the 
Director of the National Cyber Security Division of Homeland Security, 
and as CEO and advisor to In-Q-Tel, the venture capital arm of the CIA. 
Mr. Yoran was the co-founder of Riptech, the market leading managed 
security services company, and served as its CEO until the company was 
acquired by Symantec in 2002. He served as an officer in the United 
States Air Force in the Department of Defense’s Computer Emergency 
Response Team.
Mr. Yoran has served as an independent Director on the boards of several 
­innovative security technology companies such as: Guardium, Trust Digital, 
Digital Sandbox, and Guidance Software (GUID). He previously served on 
the board of Cyota, until the company’s acquisition by RSA in 2006, and as 
an advisor to Intruvert Networks, until the company’s acquisition by McAfee 
in 2003.
Mr. Yoran received a Master of Science degree from the George 
­Washington University and a Bachelor of Science degree from the United 
States Military Academy at West Point.
Foreword Contributor
xiv

Foreword
The safeguarding of supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems is a 
paramount cause for concern for the national security of our country and for its secu-
rity professionals. SCADA systems control power, water, oil, gas, chemical, telecommu-
nications and several other different critical and sensitive operational infrastructures that 
are absolutely vital to the machinery of our nation and the conduct of our day to day 
lives. If these essential systems were compromised and became inoperable for even a 
short time, the results could be costly, both in terms of financial repercussions, and the 
impact upon our quality and way of life.
Similar to all computer systems over the last four decades, SCADA systems have 
evolved. In the 1960’s, there was a time when most of these control systems were ­­ 
stand-alone, at a point when the network protocols and the control applications used in 
SCADA systems were considered to be proprietary. During those early days, a so-called 
“security by obscurity” aided in providing a palpable layer of cyber security defense and 
a general feeling of immunity from the kinds of nascent network security problems that 
began to emerge in the mid-1980’s, beginning with the notorious Morris Worm.
However, with the global standardization of government and corporate networks 
on the TCP/IP communications protocol, and during the last 20 years, with the 
migration of stand-alone proprietary SCADA systems to interconnected grid net-
works, the security risks have increased geometrically. Security managers can no 
longer rely on the isolated nature of these systems to provide protection. It still may 
be tempting to imagine that proprietary software applications provide a layer of 
secure abstraction, but these mission-critical applications may have unknown and 
xxiii

xxiv Foreword
untested security weaknesses. If the organization is not running home-grown/propri-
etary applications, in many cases, they already may have well-known and well- 
publicized vulnerabilities resulting from the use of off-the-shelf commercial software.
Unfortunately, the security of SCADA systems has not kept pace with advances in 
computer technology and the technical capabilities and intentions of adversaries. 
According to a 2003 report by Sandia National Laboratories, security for SCADA is 
typically five to ten years behind typical information technology systems. From a threat 
perspective, the adversarial pool has widened to include not only domestic and foreign 
terrorists, but nation-state actors, disgruntled insiders, organized crime, and even inter-
national competitors. This volatile convergence of globally pervasive computer network-
ing, and the critical weaknesses in operating system and application software, is well 
understood by the adversaries. While a catastrophic failure is unlikely, unchecked, these 
risks could be highly problematic and cause disruptions in essential services and billions 
of dollars of losses. The SCADA world is very complex, however. No one can simply 
say, “Charge forward and by next year, fix all security problems and you’ll be protected!”
All is not gloom and doom, however. Some key public and private sectors have 
had to step up to face these seemingly daunting challenges and threats before.  
For example, the financial services industry moves billions of dollars each day over 
the public Internet, with relatively few losses or disruptions in service. Online retail 
organizations such as Amazon.com, eBay, and many others facilitate a steadily grow-
ing percentage of all retail transactions in a multi-trillion dollar a year industry.  
Many federal, state, and local governments provide rich transaction-based services to 
their citizens securely over the Internet. Within this framework of a set of strong 
business requirements to provide valuable networked services, and the backdrop of  
a challenging threat environment, informed security managers develop processes for 
assessing risk, create strategies and plans, and implement the right security control 
structures. This same lifecycle approach applies to the protection of SCADA systems 
and the work facing SCADA security managers.
I am pleased to provide this foreword to “Techno Security’s Guide to Securing 
SCADA,” because I believe that this book takes important steps forward in arming 
today’s SCADA security manager with the tools and information needed to achieve  
a higher level of information assurance within these critical and essential control 
systems. While there is no silver bullet technology or security plan that can anticipate 
all threats or situations, I urge you to take to heart the strategic and tactical ideas in 
this volume, and adapt them to your own environment.
—Amit Yoran
Chairman and CEO of NetWitness Corporation

1
Chapter 1
Physical Security: 
SCADA and the Critical 
Infrastructure’s 
Biggest Vulnerability
Jack Wiles, (PPS, IAM, IEM) is a Security Professional with over 30 years experience 
in security related fields. This includes computer security, disaster recovery and 
physical security. He is a professional member of the National Speakers Association 
and has trained federal agents, corporate attorneys and internal auditors on a 
number of computer crime related topics. He is a pioneer in presenting on  
a number of subjects that are now being labeled ‘Homeland Security’ topics. Well 
over 10,000 people have attended one or more of his presentations since 1988. 
Jack is also a co-founder and President of TheTrainingCo., producers of the 
Annual Techno Security Conferences and the popular Techno Forensics confer-
ences. He is in frequent contact with members of many state and local law 
enforcement agencies as well as Special Agents with the U.S. Secret Service, FBI, 
U.S. Customs, Department of Justice, The Department of Defense and numerous 
members of High-Tech Crime units. He was also appointed as the first President 
of the North Carolina InfraGard chapter that is now one of the largest chapters 
in the country. He is also a founding member and ‘official’ MC of the US Secret 
Service South Carolina Electronic Crimes Task Force.
Jack is also a Vietnam veteran who served with the 101st Airborne Division in 
Vietnam in 1967–68. He recently retired from the U.S. Army Reserves as a lieu-
tenant colonel and was assigned directly to the Pentagon for the final seven 
years of his career. In his spare time, he has been a senior contributing editor 
for several local, national and international magazines.

www.syngress.com
2 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
Introduction
Please don’t let my opening chapter’s title make you think that I’m starting this book 
off in a negative light. Believe me, I’m not. There are many positive things we can all 
do to help secure our most critical applications and resources. Some of the things  
I will discuss in this chapter have been on my mind since the mid ‘70s. I believe it’s 
time that I put them in writing, and present my thoughts on what I believe could  
be the biggest potential hole in any security plan: Physical Security!
This chapter (as well as the rest of the book) isn’t meant to be read as a complete 
story from beginning to end. I’m writing it as a collection of experiences and 
learned lessons from 30-plus years of working in the fields of physical and technical 
security. Some of the subject matter in this chapter is partially covered in chapters of 
mine in our other Techno Security’s Guide series of books. I do believe that the readers 
of this book will most likely come from a different group of specialists than the 
readers of our other books. Throughout the book, you will also notice that several 
of our authors will address similar topics from their perspective and experience level. 
A good example of this will be the discussion of locks, keys, and bypass methods. 
I first became a locksmith in 1970 and worked in a locksmith shop for several years 
learning the trade. I’ll share a lot of my thoughts on this critical subject throughout 
my chapter. Unlike the technical world where most things sitting on your desk are 
already obsolete, many of the locks used in our buildings (and in our homes) haven’t 
changed at all in many, many years. Most of what I learned in the early ‘70s is still 
very applicable today when it comes to the common locks found on about 95 percent 
of the doors on the planet.
The reason that I rambled a little about locks at the beginning of my chapter is to 
let you know that some of the other authors in this book will have their own opinions 
and suggestions regarding these critical pieces of hardware. Marc Weber Tobias wrote 
one of our chapters, where he goes into great detail on High Security Locks and their 
possible vulnerabilities. Without question, Marc is considered one of the most gifted 
experts in the world today in understanding and researching the security offered by 
many types of locks. We are honored to have his work in this book. Be sure to read his 
chapter carefully, because some of the locks you’re relying on to protect critical infor-
mation and equipment might not be as secure as you think.
I’ll be addressing a number of risks, threats, and countermeasures (there’s that risk 
management talk again) throughout this chapter. Let’s go ahead and get my thoughts 
on locks out there as my first in-depth topic on physical security.

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
3
Key Control
The types of keys used in most buildings have remained virtually unchanged since 
Linus Yale invented them in 1861. Just about all of our homes and most businesses still 
use his pin tumbler locks for their primary physical defense. I have no way of knowing 
how often the master, grand master, and possibly great-grand-master key systems in 
buildings are changed. I do suspect that it’s not very often. This can be an expensive 
process. Recently, I walked into a public rest room in a large office building and saw a 
full set of keys, including the building master key, hanging from the paper towel dis-
penser. I suspect that the janitor had just filled the towel rack and left his keys hanging 
there. Should they fall into the wrong hands, the person could own the building.
While using our social engineering skills during each penetration test, our team 
always tried to make friends with the cleaning crew. Sooner or later, we would need 
to ask a favor and borrow their keys for a few minutes. (Typically, their keys would 
open all of the doors on that floor and sometimes the entire building.) That was all  
it took for us to make a copy with the portable key machine we brought with us in  
a small bag. Very few people have any idea how keys (and the locks that they open) 
work. This is another area of physical security that has changed greatly during the past 
few decades. I became a bonded locksmith back in the ‘70s and found it fascinating. 
Back then, I couldn’t even purchase lock picks or key blanks until I graduated from a 
credited locksmithing school and had proper identification. Now, about 30 years later, 
we have much more at risk in general, and anyone can purchase lock picks at several 
local hardware stores or from Internet-based stores, with no questions asked.
Regarding the use of lock picks to get into buildings and rooms, I don’t suspect 
that many “casual” social engineers use them. They require a lot of that “practice, 
practice, and more practice” stuff that’s required for any social engineering skill.  
The availability of these devices for anyone to purchase is something that corporate 
security specialists must consider as they plan their countermeasures.
Tip
Attempt to set up some form of key control if you don’t already have a system 
in place. It is very important to know who has the keys to your kingdom as 
well as how many doors can be opened by each. It is very seldom a good idea 
to have one key that opens everything in the building. It may be convenient 
for certain things, but it creates the security concern of controlling who has 
those keys and how easily they can be duplicated.

www.syngress.com
4 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
Check All Locks for Proper Operation
On every one of our penetration tests, we found at least one lock (either interior or 
exterior) in the building that wasn’t functioning properly. This provided us with easy 
access to buildings and rooms that we shouldn’t have been able to get through so 
easily. If employees are trained for just a few minutes on how to check to see if the 
locks on the doors that they use every day are working properly, this vulnerability 
can be all but eliminated. Building maintenance teams should also take a close look 
at all locks at least twice each year. Slightly misaligned strikes on the doorframes are 
the most common problem that we find. This is a serious problem, in that it defeats 
Master keys are an additional concern if you rent space in a large building 
or office park. You might have a very strict policy of your own for your 
company, but if the management company that handles the building rentals 
isn’t as careful with their master keys, the entire building is at risk. Unless the 
keys are of a high-security design like the Medico line, they can be duplicated 
anywhere. Even if the disgruntled building maintenance person turns in his 
keys upon being fired, there is no way to be sure he didn’t have copies made. 
You should ask the building manager about his/her policy regarding the 
security of the master keys. It will let them know you are aware that there 
are keys to your office that are not under your control.
Install special locks on critical doors. Highly pick-resistant Medeco locks 
are some of the most effective. In addition to providing additional security, 
they add another level of due diligence should you need to document your 
attempts to prevent intrusions.
Conduct special employee awareness training for everyone who works the 
evening and night shifts. That’s when I took our team into their buildings most 
of the time. We used our social engineering skills to befriend these people and 
to the best of my knowledge, we were never reported by any of them.
Another prime target during our evening and night visits was the janitorial 
team. The main reason we always tried to befriend the people on the janitorial 
team is that they usually had those important keys that we were trying to get 
our hands on. These are some of the most important people in your company 
when it comes to protecting your buildings when most people are gone. They 
spend some time in just about every room in the building each week. If you 
train no one else in your company, these people must be well trained on how 
they can help. They should be made aware of your security policies and what 
they can do if they see anything suspicious. This would include strangers, suspi-
cious packages, doors that are opened which should be locked, and so on. They 
are one of your most valuable resources. Tell them that and teach them how 
they can help.

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
5
the purpose of the dead bolt feature of the lock. It takes me less than a second with 
my trusty finger nail file to see if a particular lock has this problem. If it does, I’ll 
know (and have the door opened) instantly. 
A Little More about Locks and Lock Picking
Locks have fascinated me for almost 40 years now. In many ways, they are the hardware 
versions of the passwords and authentication devices that we use to gain access to our 
computers. They are also what I like to call the low-hanging-fruit of your perimeter 
security. Unfortunately, many times, they are the place where we spend the least 
amount of money. I’m going to try to convince you to spend a little more for a whole 
lot more protection when selecting locks for your office or home.
Tip
Don’t forget to check those locks and doors at home. We also recommend 
that the lock combinations (keys) be changed immediately after occupying a 
new home, or after moving into a home that was owned by someone else. 
Keys are easy to duplicate, and you have no way of knowing how many 
copies are already out there, even in a brand new home. I’d also recommend 
changing the codes to your garage door openers as well. This is a very easy 
thing to do for most modern openers.
Warning
If you have a garage door opener installed, do not leave it set to the default 
code (frequently 000000 or something very generic). This could make you 
vulnerable to another form of war driving where the bad guys simply drive 
around neighborhoods with generic openers trying to see if any doors begin 
to open as they drive past. This gives them a very nice potential future target 
for a break-in later. Also, many houses that have whole house alarms do not 
have the garage door alarmed. The keypad for turning the alarm on or off 
for the house is frequently located in the garage.
If you ever find your garage door opened and you didn’t open it, I’d 
recommend immediately changing the door opener (and receiver) code.

www.syngress.com
6 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
In preparation for this part of my chapter, I visited several chain stores just as 
school opened to watch people. Johnny and I both do a lot of people watching while 
we are out and about. It’s fascinating. As I was looking around at the locks available 
in different stores, I watched as several people came over to the area and quickly 
picked up a lock or two for school. Most of them chose a Master brand combination 
lock that has been a standard for decades. That didn’t surprise me. I also watched as 
several people purchased padlocks with keys. What every one of them did wasn’t a 
surprise either: They purchased the CHEAPEST lock they could find. I watched this 
over and over again. Little do they realize that they got what they paid for.
Most of them picked up either a warded padlock, or a cheap pin tumbler padlock, 
none of which costs more than $5. These locks looked as strong as the better locks on 
the outside, but anyone who knows even a little about locks knows that these cheap 
locks aren’t even going to keep the honest people honest. How about a quick lock 
awareness war story to give you an example of how easily the wrong type of lock can 
be bypassed:
Case Study
A Lock Awareness War Story
Our penetration team had been inside their building for about four hours 
when we came across a row of filing cabinets that must have contained some 
important documents. About ten tall filing cabinets stood in a row, and each 
of them had a vertical bar attached to the cabinet with a padlock securing the 
bar to the cabinet. This was more security than we normally saw on these 
kinds of cabinets.
When we were working on the inside of a building, we tried to look at 
everything we thought could be a vulnerability. I took the time to quickly 
examine every lock on these filing cabinets. It wasn’t surprising to me to find 
one that looked the same as the others on the outside, but that was drastically 
different on the inside. Someone had replaced one of the pin tumbler pad-
locks with a warded padlock. In less than ten seconds, I opened the lock, taped 
my business card on the INSIDE of the filing cabinet to prove we had been 
there, and closed the lock again. The bad guys could have accessed the entire 
contents of that file cabinet just as quickly.
Continued

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
7
Let’s look at a few types of locks to help you learn which ones are better than 
others:
Figure 1.1 shows a pin tumbler Master brand padlock. It’s the exact kind of lock 
we saw on most of the filing cabinets. Pin tumbler locks are also the most common 
type of lock we see on doors in homes and office buildings. These locks can be 
picked, but I’ve never been very successful with such endeavors.
The warded padlock (shown in Figure 1.2) that we found on one of the filing 
cabinets looked about the same, but it had a different keyway.
Why was this one lock different from the rest? I suspect that someone 
either lost the key to the original (more secure) lock, or lost the lock itself.  
If that happened, they could have simple gone to the hardware section of their 
local store and purchased a lock that looked like the rest of the locks on those 
file cabinets. If they went with the mindset of most people that I watched  
purchase locks, they would have purchased the least expensive lock they could 
get, as long as it looked as strong as the original lock.
Figure 1.1 A Pin Tumbler Master Brand Padlock

www.syngress.com
8 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
I was able to open this one in less than 10 seconds, and you could, too. Opening 
locks like this isn’t even lock picking in my opinion. The pick sets for these are more 
like master keys.
In Figure 1.3, the key on the left is the key to the pin tumbler lock. The one on 
the right is to the warded lock. This is really basic information for anyone familiar 
with locks. My experience has been that most people aren’t even a little familiar with 
what makes a lock reasonably secure (or very insecure). If they were, they wouldn’t 
be out there buying the cheapest locks they could find as long as it looks strong.
Figure 1.2 A Warded Padlock

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
9
So, are there any padlocks that are reasonably secure and not terribly expensive? 
My favorite has always been a lock that looks a little different, but has a lot of leave-
me-alone features (see Figure 1.4). This lock, the Abus Diskus No. 24, is made in 
Germany and is quite secure for its $25 price tag. It’s a pin tumbler lock with all five 
of its pins being mushroom-type bottom pins. There are people out there who can 
pick it, but I’ve never successfully picked a lock with any mushroom pins, much less 
one with all five pins being mushroom pins.
Figure 1.3 A Few Keys

www.syngress.com
10 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
If we want to talk about the grand-daddy of all high security padlocks (in my 
humble opinion, and I’m not alone), we need to take a look at a lock that has been 
at the top of the list for several decades. My winner here would be my favorite  
(I have five of them myself) combination lock, the Sargent & Greenleaf 8077AD.  
It’s a 1.5-pound fortress in so many ways. From the outside, it doesn’t look all that 
impressive, but it is! Just enter the name S&G 8077 in Google, and countless articles 
will pop up about their strength and reliability. Just like anything else in life, you get 
what you pay for. These are not your $5 combination locks, however. The non-
government model is still available in many places on the Internet, at prices ranging 
from $165 to $325 (or more). I do see them frequently on eBay at great prices and 
they’re worth every penny. Figure 1.5 shows one of mine.
Figure 1.4 The Abus Diskus No. 24 Lock

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
11
Now, let’s talk about due diligence a minute. This was something I explained to 
all the groups that hired us to perform penetration tests during our exit interviews. 
Regarding locks, there’s no way to keep a determined and knowledgeable “bad guy” 
from getting past whatever security measures you place in their way. Even the best 
burglar-resistant safes are rated according to how many minutes it would take an 
educated thief to open it. Your task is to show you did whatever you could to make 
it as difficult as possible for someone to get to your valuables. A simple example of 
improved due diligence would be to replace the locks (even the pin tumbler locks) 
on most of the filing cabinets in the earlier war story, with locks like the Abus, or the 
S&G 8077 combination lock. The difference in cost for the entire row of ten filing 
cabinets would be less than $200 TOTAL for the Abus locks and about $3,500 max 
for the S&G locks. These locks will be protecting some pretty important stuff, so isn’t 
Figure 1.5 The Sargent & Greenleaf 8077AD

www.syngress.com
12 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
it worth an extra $200 to $3,500 to gain some considerable security while at the same 
time increasing your due diligence efforts? I don’t think for a second that an additional 
$200 (or even $3,500) would make a difference as far as expense goes. Most of the 
firms I was involved with during these penetration tests wished to prevent millions of 
dollars in possible espionage losses. They simply didn’t know that this small change 
could make such a big difference for their company. It may have prevented the event 
that had us in there in the first place. That’s why books like this one are so valuable. 
One or two “techno-tidbits” as I like to call them can make a huge difference in your 
overall security posture. While this book is titled Techno Security’s Guide to SCADA 
Security, in my mind, its real value is in explaining how to prevent a lot of bad things 
from happening to anything that is important to you even if it doesn’t impact our 
nation’s critical infrastructure.
The Elephant Burial Ground
I’ve been making a simple statement at presentations for the past ten years. “A new 
computer is a wonderful thing, but as soon as you buy it, it’s already obsolete.” 
Technology continues to change at a rate that few of us even notice. My statement 
isn’t meant to be negative in any way. It’s just that the computer is doing exactly 
what those new calculators did 35 years ago. They simply get faster, better, and 
cheaper as soon as you walk out of the store with your brand new one. I’m not 
suggesting that you don’t buy a new (soon-to-be-old) computer, you just need to 
realize that you’re going to most likely need a new one in about two years.
What happens when that “elephant” you purchased a few years back finally dies 
or becomes too old to do any work for you? I’ll bet it gets moved to your elephant 
burial ground with the rest of the electronic equipment that still looks new and 
valuable, but isn’t fast enough to keep up anymore. You can’t simply put it out for the 
trash man to pick up, so there it sits, sometimes for years.
This burial ground was a prime target for our penetration teams as we conducted 
our vulnerability tests from inside our clients’ buildings. We frequently used our social 
engineering skills to find out where the old computers were stored. If it was in a 
locked room, we would find a way to either get someone to open the door for us,  
or we would use our lock picks or pick gun to open the door.

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
13
Figure 1.6 offers some examples I found on the Internet, showing a set of picks 
very similar to the set I’ve owned the last 30 years. LockPickShop.com is the company 
where we buy our locksmith supplies for our training classes. Their outstanding 
response and customer service, and their quality products, have kept us coming back 
for years. Figure 1.7 shows a pick gun that’s also similar to mine. Pick guns don’t take 
a lot of practice to learn how to use. If you are thinking about running out and 
buying some of these tools, please be sure to read the warning I have included with 
the pictures. I don’t want to have to include you in a future war story about what not 
to do with lock-picking equipment.
Figure 1.6 The LockPickShop.com Web Site

www.syngress.com
14 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
Once we found a room that obviously contained some outdated equipment, we 
knew we were going to leave with some very valuable intellectual property. All we 
did was open a few computer cases, remove the hard drives, and neatly close the cases 
Figure 1.7 A Lock Pick Gun at LockPickShop.com
Warning
Possessing lock-picking equipment is not legal in some states. If you intend to 
pursue lock picking as a hobby, or as part of conducting your own “official” 
penetration test, you still need to be sure you’re not breaking the law in any 
way by making or using these tools.
As with almost any subject today, a wealth of information on the legal 
issues associated with lock-picking is available on Google by entering “are 
lock picking tools legal to own,” or something similar.
The “bad guys” that I collectively refer to throughout this chapter likely 
won’t care if they are legal or not, but you should!

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
15
back up. How valuable was the information on that drive, and how soon would you 
know that the drive itself was now missing from the elephant burial ground?
Most likely, you will never know that the disk drives are gone. Our experience 
has been that these older computers are seldom powered on again by the organiza-
tion that owned them. They may get powered on by whoever eventually winds up 
with them at some junk auction or thrift store where they were donated. If they sit 
in some onsite location for any length of time, the chances of anyone ever knowing 
that the entire computer is missing, much less the hard drive itself, are very slim. It’s 
likely the crime could go completely undetected.
How valuable was the information on the old drive? Our experience has been 
that about 80 percent of the information on the old drive may still be of value to the 
“bad guys.” If you think through the process of how that computer wound up in the 
burial ground, you will see what I mean. If the data on the old drive were properly 
backed up as a part of your disaster recovery plan, then it would most likely be 
restored to the new computer prior to retiring the old one. As soon as everything 
looked fine on the new computer, the old one may never be powered up again.
Technical issues are associated with each of the processes I just described, of which 
I didn’t go into detail here. Nevertheless, here’s the bottom line from my experience 
with these old drives: If they weren’t properly wiped clean, and if the drive itself was 
operational, we were able to get to the data on them without any problem. 
Tip
Old disk drives will be an area of concern for years to come. Terabyte drives 
will soon be available at stores like Office Depot for anyone to purchase. Less 
than ten years ago, I was thrilled to be able to purchase a 200MB disk drive 
for $200. I was the first person in my circle to own a drive this size for a mere 
$1 per megabyte. Now, I’m seeing 200GB disk drives on sale for around $50 
(after rebates). That’s about 25 cents per gigabyte, which means that the 
same $1 per megabyte I paid (actually worth less today) would buy me 4 
gigabytes or 4,000 times as much storage space for the same dollar spent.
The advice here is to be careful with those old disk drives. This applies to 
the computers at home as well as at the office. There is much valuable data 
on them, and the risk grows as the storage capacity of every drive rapidly 
climbs each year. Let me share some of the most effective tools I have seen 
for really being sure that your valuable proprietary information is gone when 
you dispose of a broken or outdated hard drive.

www.syngress.com
16 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
Figure 1.8 Digital Shredder from DestructData
The first of these is a device called Digital Shredder sold by DestructData 
(www.DestructData.com), which insures that your valuable information is 
gone from the drive before it is reused or destroyed (Figure 1.8). Once Digital 
Shredder has done its job, the disks can be reused (knowing for sure that all 
data has been removed) or they can be completely destroyed using a device 
that I found most interesting for complete drive destruction.
The second device will render the drive completely unusable by punching 
a large hole thru the middle of it. Figures 1.9 and 1.10 show a destroyed disk 
drive and the machine that destroyed it. And here’s the URL to the Web site 
of the only company I’m aware of that offers the complete destruction of 
obsolete hard drives: www.edrsolutions.com.

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
17
Figure 1.9 A Destroyed Disk Drive

www.syngress.com
18 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
Dumpster Diving Still Works
“Dumpster diving” is one of the easiest ways to find out information about a com-
pany or its customers. This is sometimes referred to as “trashing,” and there have been 
a number of articles discussing what worked and what didn’t for some experienced 
Figure 1.10 EDR’s Disk Destroyer

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
19
“trashers.” One article discussed “advanced trashing” and ways to talk yourself out of 
a confrontation if you get caught. I’d be willing to bet that a very small percentage of 
“dumpster divers” ever get caught. As simple as this problem seems, it isn’t one that is 
given much attention by most companies.
What kinds of things can you find in a company’s dumpster? You would probably 
be shocked if you started to look through your own dumpster occasionally. (I highly 
encourage you to do just that.) There may be old company phone directories (still 
quite accurate and very valuable for use in “social engineering”), pieces of scrap paper 
with phone numbers and possibly passwords written on them, last month’s customer 
lists that were discarded when the new list was printed this month, employee lists with 
home addresses and Social Security numbers listed on them, and so on, and so on.
It doesn’t take much imagination to think of all the potential problems that could 
have their beginnings right there in your trashcan. Someone who is trying to pretend 
they work for your company can use the old company directories. Most names in the 
directory, their work locations, and their titles remain the same from update to update. 
These discarded directories are some of the most prized finds of the “dumpster divers” 
looking to get information about your company. The discarded scraps of paper with 
the passwords on them are also prized finds. Many times, they are discarded just 
because they were no longer sticky enough to stay on the terminal they were attached 
to, so a new one was written and the old one thrown in the trash. Last month’s cus-
tomer list will probably wind up in the hands of your competitor if the wrong person 
gets his hands on it. The employee list with the home addresses and Social Security 
numbers on it will cause different problems if it winds up in the wrong place.
What can you do about this problem? For one thing, we can all be a little more 
careful about what we throw in the trashcan. Management commitment to correct 
this problem and employee awareness of the problem will help correct it. The com-
mitment usually involves the shredding or burning of all-important documents. If a 
company is going to invest in their own shredder, I always recommend a crosscut 
shredder over a strip cut shredder. Strip cutting is better than nothing, but crosscut-
ting is much more secure. It turns the documents into confetti instead of long strips. 
I guess it’s theoretically possible to reassemble a crosscut shredded document, but if it 
falls into a bin with a large number of other crosscut shredded documents, it will 
create the world’s most difficult jigsaw puzzle.
Old habits die hard, and this one will probably be no exception. As a country,  
we have been throwing away just about everything since the end of World War II. 
During the war, security was on everybody’s mind, and each person encouraged their 

www.syngress.com
20 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
friends and neighbors to be careful about what they said and what they threw away. 
(I wasn’t around during World War II, but I was the product of a happy home after 
the war.) As individuals and companies, we need to bring back just a little bit of that 
thinking. We need to become aware of this problem and encourage each other to be 
more careful with assets by being more careful with our trash.
Employee Badges
I know employee badges can be faked, but I still think it’s much better to have some 
form of visible identification worn by every employee at all times. Most of the 
companies that hired us did not have a policy requiring employees to wear their 
corporate ID badges all the time. This made our social engineering attempts much 
easier. Once we were inside the buildings, it was as if everyone just took it for 
granted that we belonged there. Not only were we inside their buildings, but we 
were also inside their firewalls and intrusion detection systems.
Employees can be somewhat trained to even detect fake ID badges. I was working 
for a large company that did require employees to always wear their ID badges when 
they were on company property. This was back in the days when color printers were 
just starting to show up in homes and offices. I created a fake ID that was intention-
ally made without any thought of quality control. The first time I wore it into the 
building instead of my real ID, I suspected I would immediately be stopped and 
questioned about it. This was a security project, so I was prepared to explain myself. 
To my initial amazement, I never had to explain anything because it was never ques-
tioned. For the next three months, I wore it everywhere and not one person noticed 
Tip
Many of the topics presented for thought in this chapter, and throughout the 
entire book, are just as appropriate in our homes as they are in our offices. 
This is especially true of our home office computers, networks, and trash!
Most of us are inundated with snail mail at home as well as at work. I have 
a policy in our home that nothing stays in our trashcan that clearly has any 
family member’s name on it. This requires a little extra effort to destroy a 
single page of a credit card offer each time I receive one. If it has a name and 
address on it (obviously everything that arrives at my home does), I destroy 
that part of the document. Every little thing I can do to protect my family 
from things like identity theft and credit card fraud helps me sleep at night.

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
21
it was fake. During one of our security meetings, I told everyone in our group about 
my little experiment and most were quite surprised it was never detected.
Part two of my experiment offered the most interesting results to me. I created a 
picture showing my two IDs side by side. The fake one was quite obvious when seen 
next to the real article. We began to teach people how to take a slightly closer look at 
the IDs people were wearing as they walked through our buildings. From that time 
forward, I only wore my fake ID when I was conducting security awareness training 
for a group of employees. I was amazed at the number of my friends, who after a 
training session, spotted the fake ID as I passed them in the hall. Some would see it 
from ten feet away. These were the same people who, before the training, hadn’t even 
noticed it while sitting three feet from me in my office. AWARENESS TRAINING 
WORKS!
Warning
Tailgating, frequently called piggybacking, is simply following someone into 
a building after they open the door with an access card or by entering a door 
code. The “bad guy” will often pretend to be searching for his or her access 
card while waiting for someone to enter with a legitimate card. If there is no 
guard at the entrance, the “bad guy” will probably go unchallenged and 
unnoticed. You really need to think about this one before you decide how 
you want to solve it. You can’t place a legitimate employee in the position of 
having to challenge the “bad guy” to ask for identification.
The legitimate employee probably didn’t come to work for you to be a 
security guard. On the other hand, you don’t want “bad guys” just walking 
into your building. This problem is as old as dirt, but the solutions just keep 
getting more complex and expensive. Some companies employ cameras that 
photograph everyone who enters the building. Others are now employing 
biometrics scanners and other high-tech devices. As with everything else in 
the security field, you need a system that is appropriate in cost to what you 
are trying to protect.
At a minimum, you can make your employees aware of this threat and 
have them notify their immediate superior that someone followed them in 
and note the time and date of the incident. This same employee awareness 
session should instruct all employees to display an ID so fellow employees, 
who may not know them, don’t think they are “tailgating” as they walk in 
behind them.

www.syngress.com
22 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
Shredder Technology Has Changed
As with everything else these past few high-tech years, shredder technology has 
changed considerably. Our team had gotten very good at putting strip cut papers back 
together again. We used to take bags of it back to our office during the test. Frequently, 
it was sitting outside in or near a dumpster where we simply picked it up and put it in 
our vehicle. Most of the time, documents that are strip cut shredded all fall neatly into 
place in the bag or box where they are stored, waiting to be disposed of. Our team was 
able to reassemble many of these documents within a few minutes. We would even 
take a document and paste the strips on a piece of cardboard in the shape of a 
Christmas tree, spreading the strips out as they were glued to the cardboard. Even with 
up to an inch between strips, the documents were still easily readable once reassembled. 
We never even attempted to reconstruct a document that had been sent through a 
crosscut shredder. 
Tip
If you have too much invested in your strip cut shredders to replace them,  
at least consider purchasing some of the small crosscut shredders and place 
them directly in the offices of people who have especially sensitive docu-
ments that should be destroyed. These small crosscut shredders are very 
inexpensive and durable if you keep them oiled with the special oil available 
for shredders. I have a small one that cost $39 and it creates a very small 
particle that would be next to impossible to reassemble. I have tried to wear 
it out for about six months and it just keeps on working. I’d also recommend 
encouraging all employees to get one for home use. Once you start doing 
this, it will become second nature and you’ll never have to worry about 
anyone seeing your personal information once it leaves your home. Especially 
since identity theft is on the rise as well.
Outdated but still sensitive documents should also be disposed of securely. 
When I worked at the Pentagon during the final seven years of my military 
career, we were required to place certain sensitive (not classified, simply 
sensitive) documents into a safe containing a burn bag. Burning them would 
then destroy these items. To this day, I still use a burn bag at home for docu-
ments that I need to destroy that are too bulky for my shredder. It’s a great 
way to clean out the barbeque grill on a cold sunny day. I feel good every 
time I destroy sensitive personal documents rather than simply throwing 
them in a trashcan. Left unshredded or unburned, they become possible fuel 
for the most rapidly growing white-collar crime in the country: identity theft!

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
23
Keep an Eye on Corporate or Agency Phonebooks
When conducting a test, the first thing we went for were corporate and agency 
phonebooks. Once we got our hands on a corporate directory, the social engineering 
began. Most corporate phone books are laid out in a way that conveniently shows the 
entire corporate structure as well as the chain of command, building addresses, and 
department titles. That kind of information also lets us know the order in which to 
try entering the various buildings, if there were several. Wherever the Human 
Resources department was located was usually where we went last. Here’s why.  
As we tried to enter all of the other buildings by simply walking in the door like  
we belonged there, we were frequently challenged by a receptionist and asked where  
we were going. Our social engineering answer was always the same. “We were told that 
this is where Human Resources is located and we’re here to fill out a job application.” 
In every case, the receptionist simply sent us in the right direction. We thanked her or 
him and walked out the door and directly into the building next door to try the same 
con. The phonebook even gave us the Human Resources manager’s name to drop if 
we needed to be a little more convincing that we belonged there but were simply lost. 
It also gave us the names and titles of the rest of the important people in the organi-
zation whose names we could drop if we were challenged further. In addition to the 
names in the directories, most contained the physical location and chain of command 
ranking for the most important person in each department. It was often their offices, 
filing cabinets, and trashcans that we spent the most time in during our nightly visits.
Employee awareness of how important a corporate directory is will help greatly 
with this one. Old directories are still quite accurate, especially regarding buildings 
and department locations. They should be burned or shredded rather than simply 
thrown into the dumpster (we might even get hit if you throw them in while we’re 
there looking for goodies).
If paper directories can be eliminated altogether, that would make our job a little 
tougher. Everything you do to make it a little harder for the bad guys will make you 
a less likely target since they’re looking for an easy mark. Online directories are better 
only if you don’t let the social engineers get into your building. Once we were inside, 
we began looking for a monitor with the infamous sticky note on the side with the 
person’s login ID and password scribbled on it. Once we logged onto the network as 
them, we could usually get to an online company directory if there was one.
Let me address one additional countermeasure while I’m on the subject of sticky 
notes with login IDs and passwords. Maybe this doesn’t happen where you work, but 

www.syngress.com
24 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
we found at least one person who had done this on every job we were hired to do. 
There is another reason we like to use someone else’s login ID and password to get 
onto their networks. If we are able to do that, not only are we on their network on 
the inside of any firewall, but everything that we do will show up in some log as 
being done by the person who let us log in as them. Many larger companies now use 
at least some form of two-part authentication that employs either biometrics or a 
handheld authenticating device of some type to attain two-part authentication. 
Fortunately, some forms of biometric access control are becoming very reasonable in 
price. So, everything you do in the way of authentication will greatly reduce your 
vulnerability to this form of instant identity theft.
Tailgating
Tailgating was one of our most successful entry techniques, regardless of a building’s 
security procedures. For some reason, people in the outside smoking areas never 
questioned our being there or walking in behind them as they returned to work.  
We found that many corporations had good security at their main entrance points, 
but were lacking at other entry and exit points, allowing us to gain access on several 
occasions through parking deck or garage entry points that required card access.  
We would simply follow someone who was headed to the door and walk in behind 
them as we pretended to search for our imaginary access cards. 
Tip
Here again, companywide awareness training and a strong security policy 
can go a long way in preventing this type of entry. These outside break, 
lunch, and smoking areas are frequently places where there are no security 
guards or receptionists to ask for proper ID as someone passes through the 
door. As mentioned earlier, having every employee wear an ID badge would 
make this type of entry a little more difficult should someone try to walk in 
without an ID.

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
25
Building Operations—Cleaning Crew Awareness
I can’t emphasize enough the need to train all of your second- and third-shift 
employees, and especially your janitorial services people, about the threats of social 
engineering. Obviously, pre-employment screening and possibly bonding is essential 
for any outside firm you allow inside your buildings at any time. This is especially 
true for building access outside the normal 8 to 5 Monday thru Friday standard work 
schedule. Frequently, these people have access to the master keys for a large section of 
the building and sometimes the entire building. They need awareness training to 
better prevent them from becoming victims of bad-guy social engineers who would 
like to borrow their keys for a minute or get them to open a certain room.
This team should also immediately know whom to contact if they see anything 
suspicious that should be reported. If there is no immediate supervisor on duty 
during the evening or night shifts, everyone on that shift should know how to 
quickly contact their security forces. It can be very dangerous for them to approach  
a stranger themselves in an attempt to get them to leave.
This suggestion may not seem to fit in the context of this book, but let me men-
tion it anyway. There is another very good reason to train your janitorial team (at least 
the team supervisors) to be extra watchful during the evening and night shift work 
hours. I have been teaching bomb recognition classes for the past ten years. These same 
social engineering skills and physical building penetration methods could apply in any 
situation where the collective “bad guys” are trying to get into your building. The eyes 
and ears of the people who work in your building every day are critical when it 
comes to detecting anything, or anyone, unusual in the vicinity of the building. Bomb 
recognition training for key individuals and having an effective bomb incident plan are 
another countermeasure that can be employed with considerable effect.
Warning
The countermeasures for this vulnerability really aren’t as simple as we might 
think. Most employees who enter a building aren’t security people. They are 
simply trying to return to work. Even though someone trying to enter a 
building using the tailgating or piggyback method should be challenged, 
challenging them is an uncomfortable situation for most people. Unless there 
is a strong corporate policy requiring all employees to challenge anyone they 
can’t identify, this is a difficult problem to deal with. At an absolute mini-
mum, employees should be trained on when and how to notify security if 
they suspect an unauthorized person has followed them in.

www.syngress.com
26 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
Case Study
Bomb Threats in Chicago
This is a good time for a little side story that will let you see how the many 
risks, threats, vulnerabilities, and countermeasures overlay in the worlds of 
physical and technical security.
Several years ago, I received a call from a friend in the Chicago area ask-
ing for help. He said his company had office locations in several cities through-
out the country and one office outside it. A series of bomb threats called into 
their corporate headquarters was causing them to lose a little sleep. They just 
wanted our team’s suggestions about what they should do. This meant a trip 
to Chicago for us in February. (Being the warm-blooded person from the sunny 
South that I am, this was a bit like a trip to Iceland in mid-winter. We went 
anyway.)
Prior to going, I decided to look on the Internet to see if I could find any-
thing out about his company. It could also provide a possible hint as to why 
someone would call in these bomb threats that fortunately were only threats, 
so far!
The company flew in their senior managers from around the country and 
we suggested that their corporate attorneys and risk managers attend the 
training as well. They were going to learn everything they wanted to know 
but were afraid to ask about bombs and bomb threats.
We arrived a day early, and we asked if they would like for us to take a 
look around their corporate headquarters building to see if we saw any glar-
ing physical vulnerabilities that could allow someone to easily place a bomb in 
or just outside their building. The outside perimeter was about as close to 
perfect as I had ever seen in a building of that size. As we were looking at the 
various locations from the inside, my eyes kept being drawn to their newly 
installed access control system. Each employee had been issued an ID card that 
would allow him or her to enter certain doors at specific times of the day. The 
system also kept track of the times they entered and left the building. It was 
impressive.
When I stated that a simple metal coat hanger might be able to compro-
mise the entire system, my fellow team member gave me a strange, “you’ve 
done it now” kind of look. I was about to be put to the test as we approached 
Continued

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
27
the next set of outside access doors in that part of the building. The person 
that had hired us was standing there with a metal coat hanger and handed it 
to me.
Keep in mind, we were walking around inside the nicely heated building 
without our coats. On the other side of the doors that I had been asked to 
break in through, it was still like Iceland in February. I politely said that I would 
go outside (without my coat!) and try for a few minutes to gain entry. All that 
I asked was that If I started to turn blue, to please please please “open the 
door from the inside and let me back in.”
In the end, it was an unnecessary request. I was back inside in less than 30 
seconds as everyone looked on with that patented deer-in-the-headlights look, 
after I’d calmly breached a quarter-of-a-million-dollar security system with no 
indication that I’d ever touched it. This was not the first time I’d seen this issue 
with an improperly adjusted access control system. The system was one that, 
detecting motion from the inside, automatically unlocked the door as some-
one approached it to exit. I had noticed that it detected us walking past the 
door from a considerable distance away. It was just too sensitive. I also noticed 
that the locking mechanism opened only one of a pair of double doors and 
that the motion sensor was mounted dead center between the double doors. 
The only thing protecting the opening between the double doors was a thin 
piece of weather stripping. While I was standing outside briefly freezing to 
death, it was a simple matter of taking my thin metal coat hanger and sliding 
it between the two doors while rapidly moving it up and down. Within sec-
onds, I heard the familiar “click” I was hoping for. The security system thought 
I was inside because that’s where it saw the motion of my coat hanger.
For another insight into this vulnerability, be sure to read Johnny Long’s 
chapter as well.
All of the senior managers, attorneys, risk managers and security team 
members were in a training room the following morning for their day of 
Bomb Threat Training. I opened the meeting by letting them know that this 
was most likely a low probability threat, but that they were smart to decide 
ahead of time to learn as mach as they could about what they should do con-
cerning these threats. We were going to spend the rest of the day learning 
about bombs, bomb threats, bombs in buildings, bombs outside of buildings, 
and all kinds of other scary things. It was going to be a fun day.
As I was finishing up my introduction, I walked around the room and 
placed a small packet consisting of one to three pages in front of four of their 
most important people. As the four targeted people started to look through the 
papers placed in front of them, I simply stated that this was your their probability 
threat and something they needed to address immediately in our opinion. 
Continued

www.syngress.com
28 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
Spot-Checking Those Drop Ceilings
On several occasions, we used our social engineering skills to get into buildings and 
then install a sniffer in the telecommunications hub for that floor. I recommend that 
all companies have their building maintenance teams perform a spot check above all 
suspended ceilings at least twice each year. We have been amazed at some of the 
things we found up there while we were conducting the penetration test. You may 
even stumble into a security vulnerability you weren’t even aware of.
This suggestion would also be one I’d make if considering places to hide things 
like bombs. We walk under drop ceilings day after day and normally have no reason 
to think about what might be up there. Usually, there is at least a foot of clearance 
between the grid work holding the drop ceiling in place and the ceiling itself. I have 
seen as much as three feet of clearance. You would may be amazed at what you find 
hidden up there (hopefully it’s not ticking!).
Checking for Key Stroke Readers
Some of our favorite tools are the software and newer hardware versions of keystroke 
readers. These can make a good social engineer’s job a lot easier. If we wanted to find 
out what a certain individual in the company was doing on their computer during a 
certain time frame, we would install a keystroke reader on their workstation during 
one visit and retrieve the results on a second visit.
By far, the most effective keystroke loggers we have used are the Key Ghost 
hardware loggers being sold as security devices (www.keyghost.com). When these are 
installed between the keyboard of a workstation and the keyboard socket on the back 
The papers contained just about everything we would ever need to know about 
these people. Where they lived, how they most likely traveled to work, in some 
cases where they went to college, where their children went to school, and 
much more. All of it was gained from a few social engineering phone calls and 
about an hour of searching the Internet for information about them. Much of 
the information about these people (and possibly about you) was out on the 
Internet. It’s not easy to find, but every consumer search engine has an opt-out 
capability, letting you remove your name and contact information from their 
databases. Just type the words “people search engines” into Google for the 
most recent list of these services. You should put your name in some of them to 
see what information is out there about you. You will most likely be surprised 
at how many places your name pops up.

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
29
of the computer, they look like they belong there to the casual observer. The one we 
used looked like the induction coils we used to see on some of the older parallel 
printer cables. It just doesn’t look like anything you need to worry about.
If you didn’t put it there, you better worry, because it’s logging every single 
keystroke you type in!
The version we used could hold about 500,000 characters or a half a megabyte. 
That might not sound like much, until you consider that the Word document that 
eventually became this entire chapter took up only about 20,000 characters (16,000 
characters for the text and about 4,000 backspace key strokes to correct all my typing 
errors). That would only be about 4 percent of its capability. By the way, those back-
space keys would show up as ASCII characters (control H for you techies) as would 
any other nonprinting character entered as part of a password or whatever. It only 
records keystrokes, so it holds a lot more information than you might think. We have 
left them connected to target computers for up to three weeks and still the user’s 
activity only filled up about 80 percent of their capacity.
Here’s something else to consider if you feel safer entering information into  
your Web browser over a secure socket connection (https). The encryption happens 
between your browser and the server that is receiving your sensitive information over 
the Internet. That’s a good thing if you’re entering your credit card number or bank 
account access information. But here’s the problem with that warm fuzzy: The key-
stroke reader is reading your keystrokes before they get to your browser, meaning 
everything will be in the clear when someone (hopefully only you) looks at the data 
that your keystroke reader collected.
How do you know if you have one connected to your workstation or home 
computer? You don’t, unless you physically look back in the rat’s nest that lives 
behind most computers and see if anything looks strange. Unless you have been 
made aware of what they look like, it probably won’t look strange to you even if you 
do see one. I pass one around for people to see at every one of my security training 
classes. Statistically, I’ve read that people are 27 times more likely to remember some-
thing if they can see and touch it. I usually ask my attendees for a show of hands by 
those who have never seen one. Almost every time, more than half of the hands go 
up. How can you defend yourself against something you don’t even know exists? 
(Another subtle hint for more awareness training.)
Here’s a quick awareness training class using one of my workstations as the target 
computer. Figure 1.11 shows the workstation in a minimum configuration with only 
a monitor, mouse, power cord, and keyboard connected to the motherboard. Take a 

www.syngress.com
30 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
look at that little bulge about three inches from the end of the cable that goes into 
the monitor. It’s the only cable that has a bulge of the four that you see. That’s an 
induction coil and you may see one or more of these on cables found behind most 
workstations.
Let’s take a look at this same workstation after I have installed my keystroke 
reader between the keyboard and the motherboard socket where the keyboard was 
connected (see Figure 1.12). Of the two cables in the center next to each other, the 
keyboard cable is the one on the right.
Figure 1.11 The Back of a Normal Workstation

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
31
Now what do we see when we look back there? The keystroke reader looks like 
a second induction coil and would be very hard to detect if you didn’t know what 
one looked like. I didn’t try very hard to hide it, and normally, there are more wires 
back there than this. There is no way that the computer would know it’s there. It uses 
virtually no power, and doesn’t require any software to be installed to make it work. 
When I finally remove it and take it back to check out the internal log, the com-
puter (and you) would never know it was gone again.
This device can be used as an excellent security instrument if you suspect some-
one is using your computer when you are not there. It is sold primarily for that 
purpose. This is a good thing, as long as you know it’s there.
Checking Those Phone Closets
If your building is in a rented space, or in a multi-tenant building, it’s a good idea to 
have someone perform a thorough check of your hard wiring for the phone lines. 
You don’t know who was in there before you were, and old wiring is sometimes not 
removed when new tenants move in. On more than one occasion, our teams found 
old phone cable wiring still in place and being used in an inappropriate manner by 
Figure 1.12 With a Keystroke Reader Added In

www.syngress.com
32 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
inside employees. While we are on the subject, techno security also comes into play 
when considering the corporate PBX. This is the Private Branch Exchange, which is 
the internal phone company for larger corporations. It may still have a modem for 
remote maintenance needs, and the phone number for that modem may be written 
on the wall right near the modem. We found many PBXs that we “visited” in the 
evenings to be very social-engineer friendly.
Removing a Few Door Signs
It always amazes us to see rooms that have a sign over them saying Computer Room or 
Phone Closet. Obviously, the people who work there know where it is, and there’s no 
reason for anyone else to know what’s inside. It’s all right for the room to have a 
number on the door that building maintenance would understand, but there’s little 
reason to make it so easy for the bad guys to know where their best target is on that 
floor. This may sound like I’m getting a little too picky, but I’m not. The more 
difficult you make it for people who don’t have a need to know about these critical 
rooms, the more secure you will be. 
Review Video Security Logs
Normally, after we have completed our mission and have taken all of the “evidence 
that we have been there” out to our vehicle, we would re-enter the building and try 
to be seen by the building security cameras that we knew were there. Hopefully, 
there were some we didn’t know about. We would even jump up and down waving 
our arms just to see if anyone would eventually report us. As far as we know, we were 
never reported as being seen on the tapes recorded by those cameras, so one of three 
things must have happened. Either the cameras weren’t working (unlikely), or the 
people looking at the playback of the video missed seeing us on the tape (probably 
unlikely), or they were simply never looked at (most likely). I’d recommend that 
someone in the company periodically test this process. If there were internal auditors 
in the company, this would be a good audit step. That entire expensive surveillance 
Tip
If you are going to have high security locks on any doors in your building, 
dedicated computer rooms, and phone closets would be high on my list of 
rooms needing the most secure locking mechanisms.

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
33
system is worthless if whatever is captured on tape isn’t ever seen by a human who 
can do something about it.
This is another area where I believe that the people responsible for the techno 
security of the systems need to talk to the people responsible for physical security. 
Cameras and lights have always been countermeasures that I like to see in and around 
buildings and personal homes. They can scream “Go find an easier target!” to the bad 
guys of the world. There may be areas where additional cameras could be recom-
mended to help improve the security of critical areas or rooms. The team responsible 
for overall physical security might not know about these areas unless you tell them. 
They may already be monitoring areas you aren’t aware of, which could help you if 
you have an incident.
The reason I mentioned personal homes several times throughout this chapter is 
that this can be another area of vulnerability for physical penetrations or social engi-
neering attempts to gain specific information. Many people now do much of their 
work from home on workstations connected to the Internet at high speed. I employ 
as much physical security at my home office as I have at every other office where 
I’ve worked. The technology associated with home security products has increased 
significantly while the prices for that security have dropped, along with the cost of 
the latest computers.
I recently installed a number of digitally controlled security cameras around the 
perimeter of my home as well as motion-activated security lights in all approach 
areas. This may sound a little paranoid, but I know that I am much more protected 
than most of my neighbors and my family feels very safe knowing that it would be 
difficult to attempt anything around our home without someone knowing about it. 
The security cameras are also motion-activated, so the only thing I see is recorded 
activity where movement was detected by the software. With the rapid advances in 
technology, these kinds of sophisticated security systems are very affordable and 
powerful.
Motion-Sensing Lights
Most of our social-engineering-based inside penetration tests would have been much 
less successful if the companies that hired us had motion-sensing light controls 
installed in every office in their buildings. These are not the same kinds of light 
controls that I installed around my home. Those would help on the outside of any 
building. What I am talking about here are the motion sensors that turn on the lights 
inside an office or room when someone walks in. These same sensors turn the lights 
off after a pre-set time once the final person leaves the room.

www.syngress.com
34 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
Every penetration test that we were hired to conduct had several buildings of 
opportunity for us to attempt to enter, and every one of them had at least a few 
lights on all night long. While we were conducting our initial surveillance of the 
buildings, that was one of the first things that we noted. Are there lights left on at 
night, and if so, were they the same lights every night. In most cases, with a building 
having about 15 floors, there would be six or eight lights left on. Our assumption 
was that whoever was assigned to that office was either still there, or they forgot to 
turn the light off when they left. Either way, it created a good situation for us. If a 
random number of lights were left on each night, the security forces would not have 
any easy way to decide if everything was “normal” at any given time.
As they patrolled from the outside (we were watching them do this from the 
outside and from the inside once we got into the building), they really had no refer-
ence for what would be a normal building profile. As we became bolder towards the 
end of a penetration test, we would even turn certain lights on just to see if security 
would become suspicious of this activity. No one ever did.
Several of the buildings we penetrated didn’t have anyone working in them at 
night. If motion-sensing lights had been used throughout these buildings, we would 
have looked for softer targets. If we had entered a room in a completely dark build-
ing, the light coming on would have been very abnormal for any security team 
member who saw it.
There is another good reason to install these sensors. Over time, the energy saved 
by having the lights automatically turn off when there was no human around need-
ing light could eventually pay for the additional cost of the sensor.
Let’s Go to Lunch
This little problem remains high on my list of things we should all be considering 
every time we go out for a meal in a public place. Many of our office buildings have 
public restaurants either in the building itself, or close-by within walking distance. 
Here’s what I think happens all too often. We’re at work discussing something impor-
tant, and someone realizes that it’s time for lunch. Out we go to the local fast-food 
restaurant of choice that day. There’s no reason to let lunch slow down our train-of-
thought for the project we’re working on. The in-depth conversation about that new 
marketing scheme or the great new product we’re about to announce continues as if 
we were still back at the office.
You would be shocked at how many of these kinds of conversations I’ve heard over 
the years in public places. Things were discussed in the open, among total strangers, 

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
35
that should never have left the corporate boardroom. It just seems like we are all too 
busy to stop and think about security, and controlling who has access to our propri-
etary information. I occasionally get a chuckle from my friends when I remind them 
of a time when the national security message was “loose lips sink ships.” (That was 
during World War II, which was just a little before my time, and I do mean just before.) 
Judging by the conversations I have had with some of the people who were alive 
during that time, pretty much everybody took security seriously. Why has that changed 
so drastically in our high-tech world just 60 years later? We certainly don’t have less at 
risk than they did then. If anything, we have much more at risk, especially in the world 
of technology. People were careful and concerned that there could be spies anywhere. 
Has that threat gone away? I don’t think so.
There couldn’t be a better example of No Tech Hacking than simply sitting in a 
crowded restaurant on a typical day, in a typical city, and listening. The technology 
that exists today for helping people hear things a little better didn’t even exist in the 
“loose lips sink ships” days. These are legitimate devices that can help anyone with a 
hearing problem hear MUCH better. I’m not talking about hearing aids; I’m talking 
about amplified listening devices that are available just about anywhere. A couple of 
them are shown in Figures 1.13 and 1.14.
Figure 1.13 An Amplified Listening Device

www.syngress.com
36 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
This is the smallest sound amplification device that I found at my local Radio 
Shack. This picture was taken with the device sitting on the anvil (back) portion of 
my portable vice. I’ve left a key in the device (visible at the bottom of the picture) to 
give you a reference as to the size of the device. It’s pretty small. The sound amplifi-
cation is amazing considering that this device only costs around $10. Let’s take a look 
at a higher-end version of the same component.
The one in Figure 1.14 is a little more expensive and uses a single AAA battery 
that is easily replaced. The quality seemed to be about the same as the smaller, less 
expensive model. It cost about $25. With so many people today using MP3 players 
and other small devices with earphones, you need to be aware that these devices 
might not be noticed in a crowded public or private meeting space. My purpose in 
describing these kinds of devices is to make you aware of how available they have 
become at a very low cost. They have plenty of valuable and legal uses. You just need 
to be aware that some people could use them for other purposes. Have a nice 
lunch….
Figure 1.14 A RadioShack Amplified Listener

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
37
Fun in Manholes
This is certainly not a new topic, but it is one that I suspect most people don’t ever 
think about. Those of us who work in major cities, and even in small cities, walk over 
manholes every day. That’s certainly nothing to be concerned about, but do we ever 
consider what’s under those small circles of metal? While most companies don’t own 
the manhole covers (and what’s under them) surrounding your building, it’s still a 
good idea to check on their security. The extent of the infrastructure that exists 
below the streets of most cities is incredible. Figure 1.15 a boring picture of a boring 
manhole on a boring street. Pretty neat, huh?
Things get more interesting when we take a brief look at what’s under some of 
them (see Figure 1.16).
Figure 1.15 A Boring Manhole Cover

www.syngress.com
38 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
Figure 1.16 A Ladder to Trouble

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
39
Figure 1.16 shows a ladder on the underside of a manhole and it’s about 10 feet 
long from top to bottom. I wouldn’t want to fall into that one if someone removed 
the cover on a dark quiet night. If you enter the words “manhole security” in 
Google, you’ll find a few interesting articles about how manholes can now be pro-
tected, as well as a few stories that discuss the problem in some cities with manhole 
cover theft.
One of my fondest memories of a manhole in the movies was seeing Mother 
(Dan Aykroyd) working away in a nearby manhole at the beginning of the movie 
Sneakers in 1992. His penetration team was hired to test the security of a bank. The 
story was pure fiction, but the vulnerability of what could be accessed from within 
certain manholes was real. Figure 1.17 shows a manhole cable vault that Mother 
would have been proud to work in. This picture was taken from the base of the 
ladder shown in Figure 1.16.
Figure 1.17 A Manhole Cable Vault

www.syngress.com
40 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
Most manholes like this have long since been secured, especially since 9/11.  
That doesn’t mean you shouldn’t become aware of any manhole that could be used 
to access your building. This is even truer for multi-tenant (that’s most of them) 
buildings in large cities.
Internal Auditors Are Your Friends
Just about everything I have mentioned in this chapter would make a good spot 
check audit point for an internal auditor. Someone on the good-guy side of the 
fence needs to check for these possible vulnerabilities and insure that the proper 
countermeasures are employed before they are exploited and become security 
incidents.
My experience with auditors over the years has been that things usually happen 
once they have made a suggestion for improvements in a certain area. Many of the 
larger corporations have information system auditors, who have the primary respon-
sibility of looking after the technical world within a corporation. That’s a lot to keep 
up with.
Most mid-sized corporations have internal auditors who are responsible for IS in 
addition to their usual audit tasks.
Always Be Slightly Suspicious
The number one countermeasure for the threat of social engineering is to be just a 
little more suspicious than we normally are as good friendly trusting Americans. This 
holds true for social engineering attempts that come by way of a phone call, or a visit 
from a friendly salesman. The same principle will help all of us be more aware of 
possible terrorist planning activities as well. We all need to be just a little bit more 
aware of what is going on around us and who is possibly trying to pretend to be 
other than who they really are as they use that age-old skill of social engineering to 
try and breach our security.
Unfortunately, this is a difficult countermeasure to continue to implement. We 
simply just stop being concerned about things that happened only a few years ago.  
I suspect this has something to do with our wonderful freedom from most of the 
things that people live with every day in other parts of the world. We can never 
afford to become complacent again. If we do, it will make life much easier for future 
bad guys, social engineers, and even terrorists. This and most of the countermeasures 
suggested in this chapter help to mitigate all of these threats.

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
41
Getting Every Employee Involved
I’ve been saying this over and over for close to two decades now. I don’t care what 
kinds of sophisticated security devices are employed for physical access control or 
network access control with intrusion detection, firewalls, incident response, and so 
on, there will always be a large hole in a security plan if it doesn’t get all of its 
employees involved with the overall protection process. I know that I’m not the only 
one who has ever mentioned this.

www.syngress.com
42 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
Summary
I’ve thrown a lot at you in this combination of risks, threats, vulnerabilities, and 
countermeasures associated with SCADA security concerns. What I have tried to 
address in this extended chapter are what I consider the low-hanging fruit that the 
bad guys of the world are very aware of. Most of the vulnerabilities mentioned are 
fairly easy to fix once you know about them. Most of you who read this book won’t 
even be responsible for correcting many of the vulnerabilities, but you might be able 
to get this book to someone in your organization that can correct them.
Security will always be a long-term team effort. This is true for every size com-
pany as well as every size family at home. If you have a computer in your home and 
you access the Internet to pay your bills or check your bank statement, you need to 
consider security every time you do so. Even though we are in a very technical world 
that will do nothing but get technically more complex, we should never forget about 
physical security at home and at work. If you become a victim of identity theft, you 
will spend about two years getting your financial life back in order. Prevention is your 
absolute best countermeasure for most, if not all, of these possible threats.
Solutions Fast Track
How Easy Is Social Engineering?
Social Engineering is something that anyone could easily fall victim to.
˛
˛
Knowledge of the threat and employee awareness are the major 
˛
˛
countermeasures.
Unfortunately, it is still way too easy to con someone out of proprietary 
˛
˛
information regarding physical access.
Human Nature—Human Weakness
The threat of social engineering is a risk management issue.
˛
˛
Most people are way too trusting of friendly strangers.
˛
˛
Always be just a little bit suspicious until you know for sure whom you are 
˛
˛
interacting with in person, or on the phone.

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
43
Physical Security and  
Social Engineering Countermeasures
Employee awareness training explaining social engineering and how to 
˛
˛
become a less likely victim.
Role play (it can be fun) to show examples of social engineering.
˛
˛
Conduct little internal social engineering tiger team attacks and share the 
˛
˛
lessons learned (or not learned the first time through) with employees.
Dumpster Diving Still Works
It’s amazing what we still find in dumpsters. Much of it should have been 
˛
˛
shredded.
Crosscut shredders are now very inexpensive and effective at home and at work.
˛
˛
Consider crosscut shredders at every desk where important papers could 
˛
˛
accidentally be thrown in the trash.
Shred EVERYTHING that comes into your home with anyone’s name on 
˛
˛
it. You don’t need to shred the entire document or magazine, just the pages 
where a name or address appears.
Beware of Tailgating
Most of us kindly hold the door open for someone walking in behind us.
˛
˛
Security policies should be clear as to what employees should do if they 
˛
˛
suspect that someone who doesn’t belong in the company has followed  
them into their building.
Avoid potential workplace violence incidents by following your security policy.
˛
˛
Check for Keystroke Readers
Hardware keystroke readers are very hard to detect.
˛
˛
News reports indicate that these are now being found in public access 
˛
˛
workstations.
This threat is another employee awareness issue to be covered with all 
˛
˛
employees.

www.syngress.com
44 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
Check All Locks for Proper Operation
Check all locks at home and at work. Report malfunctioning locks.
˛
˛
Don’t prop doors open and report any that you find propped open.
˛
˛
Change the lock combinations (have them re-keyed) when you move into a 
˛
˛
new or used home. You never know who has that extra key.
Let’s Go to Lunch
Be extra careful what you talk about in a public restaurant.
˛
˛
Be aware of the people around you or sitting close by.
˛
˛
Also be careful what you talk about on elevators. You never know who is 
˛
˛
listening and why.
Fun in Manholes
Be sure that someone in your company knows just what’s under your 
˛
˛
building.
If you spot a potential building entry point, report it to your security group.
˛
˛
Every major city has a considerable infrastructure underground with access 
˛
˛
through manholes.

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
45
Frequently Asked Questions  
(and Special Interviews)
Writing chapters in books isn’t easy. This is the fifth book in the Syngress/Elsevier 
library that I have had a hand in the past 18 months. Even writing a single chapter is 
really time-consuming hard work. Many internationally known experts are long-time 
personal friends and acquaintances of ours, and most of them have a lot of experi-
ence to share with us on some critical subjects. Unfortunately, most don’t have the 
time available to write a complete chapter in one of our books, but I still wanted 
them to share something with us. The solution to this dilemma was to include some 
of their knowledge as a special section in this opening chapter, substituting (in a way) 
for our books’ usual end section of frequently asked questions. Here, I will conduct a 
series of interviews, and ask the questions, prodding the experts about their respective 
areas of skill. So, let’s dive into the interviews!
Critical Infrastructure  
Emergency Communications 
Special Interview with Phil Drake,  
Telecommunications Manager, The Charlotte  
Observer, Charlotte, North Carolina
Jack: The ability to continue to communicate is certainly critical to keeping our 
entire critical infrastructure secure. Share with us some of your thoughts on ways to 
continue to communicate in emergency situations.
Phil: The first step is to have a plan to be able to communicate in any situation. 
Having the most modern equipment and the best responders are of no value unless 
you can deploy them when and where needed. If you can’t communicate with your 
assets, you are part of the problem, not part of the solution. Have an emergency 
communication plan, test it routinely, and be certain that everyone understands it.
Jack: If a department or agency does not have a plan specifically addressing what to 
do when their communications links fail, where do they begin the planning process?
Phil: Plan to communicate under any circumstances. Approach planning with a 
“what if” attitude and expect the worst. If one system fails, for whatever reason, have 
another system or plan ready to take its place. If the primary system fails, what’s your 
backup? If the backup fails, what’s next? I know of a number of agencies who have 

www.syngress.com
46 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
well-designed plans and multiple layers of communications links but in testing they 
still can’t communicate with some of their key assets. The reason? The people in the 
field didn’t remember what to do or were never told. Have a plan, document it, test 
it, and be sure everyone understands it.
Jack: In emergency communications, what’s the number one concern?
Phil: People. That’s not the answer you expected, but it’s the most important. 
Every company and government agency must ensure that its people (work force) have 
the necessary plans, training, and equipment so they can respond to an emergency 
when needed. This includes the day-to-day “onsite emergencies” and it’s especially true 
for a natural disaster or other event that affects the employee’s home life. A major part 
of this readiness is personal and family disaster preparedness. If an employee’s family is 
safe, he or she will return to work much quicker and can focus on their job. My 
employers feel that this level of preparedness is not their concern; it’s a serious mistake.
Following workforce preparedness, electrical power is the major concern and 
dependency. Commercial electrical power may be unavailable for days or possibly 
longer periods following a disaster. We have some of the greatest communications 
technology imaginable, but it still is totally dependent on “old fashioned” electricity. 
You’ve got to power your equipment, and whatever communications infrastructure 
you depend on must have power to support your communications needs. The major-
ity of large agencies and businesses have backup generators powering uninterruptible 
power supplies (UPSs) for fixed and wireless communications equipment. Smaller 
businesses tend to avoid the expense of this protection and “take their chances.” It’s 
important to understand the impact of a power outage on the operation and its 
ability to continue to provide the products and/or services that are expected.
The majority of cellular carriers provide backup power at many (but not all)  
cell sites. Public safety and most business radio systems have emergency power. Our 
dependency on wireless keeps growing, so talk with your service providers about 
their backup power plans. Here are a few questions to ask:
Is the entire system protected by backup power?
■
■
Will the system “footprint” or coverage area be decreased in a power outage?
■
■
Is the emergency power provided by a generator, batteries only, or a UPS 
■
■
(uninterruptible power supply)?
What’s the “run time” on emergency power before the batteries need 
■
■
recharging or the generator needs refueling?

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
47
While operating on emergency power, will the system support normal traffic 
■
■
levels? (In an emergency, communications systems will carry more traffic 
than during normal conditions.)
Backup power is so important that the FCC has mandated that every telephone 
central office, commercial two-way radio system provider, and cell site have eight 
hours of backup power by early 2009. The “land line” phone companies have oper-
ated on battery power backup up with generators since the start of the industry. 
That’s not the case for the wireless or land mobile industry. There are over 210,000 
cell sites in the U.S., plus all those other operations just mentioned. So while it’s a 
great idea, it’s not going to happen anytime soon. The cost, space requirements for 
battery banks and generators, plus the wireless industry attorneys will slow the 
­implementation down to something more realistic.
Now let’s switch to the “end users”—the responders or field personnel depending 
on the communications system to save lives and/or serve their customers. In a pro-
tracted emergency, can the users charge their handheld radios and cellular phones 
without commercial power? Is a supply of alkaline (non-rechargeable) batteries 
available for two-way radios? Does every cellular phone and laptop PC have a 12-volt 
cigarette lighter adaptor cable?
Twelve-volt inverters are another excellent investment that will provide emer-
gency power from your vehicle’s battery. These small boxes plug into the cigarette 
lighter outlet (now called the 12-volt power outlet) and provide 110-volt AC power. 
They come in various sizes and technologies, so shop around and get a model that 
will supply your needs. Large inverters connect directly to the vehicles’ battery, 
smaller ones plug into the 12-volt outlet. A decent one will power a laptop, a TV,  
or charge radio and cellular batteries.
Other 12-volt or low voltage D.C. solutions include an increasing number of 
products hitting the market with “hand crank” power supplies. A minute or two of 
cranking supplies enough power to operate an AM/FM radio, lantern, or even charge 
cellular batteries.
Small inverter generators are also an option. These generators produce DC volt-
age first, and then convert it to 110 volts AC. The conversion process produces very 
clean voltage that is well suited for communications and computer use. These tend to 
be more expensive than the normal gasoline-powered generator, but are worth the 
extra cost. Buying a brand name will provide a much quieter generator and that’s an 
important consideration in any communications operation. While power may be our 

www.syngress.com
48 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
number-one communications concern, safety is always our ultimate concern when 
operating any mechanical or electrical equipment. Read and follow all instructions. 
Gasoline is dangerous in normal conditions, and especially so when conditions aren’t 
normal. So be careful.
Jack: You’ve used solar power in the past to power some of your emergency 
equipment. Are you still doing that?
Phil: Absolutely. The technology has advanced dramatically in the past few years. 
We now have fold-up solar panels that can charge and power radios and satellite 
phones. These panels are formed onto high-density flexible material that’s very tough 
and waterproof. A 25-watt, 1.5-amp panel measuring 8 × 11 × 1.5 inches unfolds to a 
little less than 2 × 4 feet and weighs less than a pound. Currently, they are a bit pricey 
but worth the money as they are non-polluting and very compact and totally quiet.
Jack: You once told me that you used two telephone companies for critical 
locations. Why?
Phil: Using two “local telephone companies,” the incumbent telephone company 
(for example, a Bell company) and a “CLEC” or “competitive local exchange carrier” 
eliminates a single point of failure and allows you to take advantage of some new 
creative pricing arrangements offered by the competitive companies.
This is not a complicated process. Your company or agency can simply use one 
phone company for outbound calls and another company for inbound calls. You  
may want to split your range of telephone numbers and let one company provide 
inbound services on half of the numbers and another carrier to carry the other half. 
Lowering the costs of communications and doubling the diversity will make every-
one happy.
You may ask: Why bother? Well, we live in interesting times and the communica-
tions infrastructure is a target of those who would do us harm. The big telephone 
companies are big targets in this new arena of terrorism. They take extraordinary 
steps to protect their facilities and services. Your workplace or agency should take 
protective steps too, to improve your chances of surviving a service interruption.
Jack: I know you used satellite links extensively during Hurricane Katrina. 
What’s new in that technology?
Phil: Portable/mobile satellite phones and service are almost common now for 
any organization tasked with disaster communications. Hurricane Katrina certainly 
proved the value of satellite service for any company or agency that was there and had 
to stay operational. Mobile, stationary, and handheld units have dropped in size and 
price. One newer entry is BGAN (Broadband Global Access Network), which is  

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
49
IP-based and allows users to connect to the Internet and conduct voice calls simulta-
neously. These units are also available in small (about the size of a laptop computer) 
and smaller (about half the size of a laptop). Higher bandwidth is available and comes 
with larger antennas, power requirements, radio equipment, and, of course, larger 
prices.
Satellite links for SCADA installations are becoming much more common and 
affordable. Security of the data, higher link speeds, and reliability are major justifica-
tions for considering replacing traditional communications links with satellite where 
appropriate.
“Ham” radio operators have a saying: “When all else fails, amateur radio works.” 
I have yet to find an EOC (Emergency Operations Center) that does not have an 
amateur radio station onsite or access to one nearby. Emergency management agen-
cies, the American Red Cross, and the Salvation Army partner with amateur radio 
clubs to ensure reliable communications when disaster strikes. The private sector too 
can benefit from knowing which of their employees have “ham” licenses as they can 
provide emergency communications to provide health and welfare reports between 
employees and their families when the need arises. A private sector enterprise, for 
example, may provide products and services that would help the recovery process in 
a disaster. Having trained radio operators capable of communicating with emergency 
management officials will benefit the enterprise and the community.
There are a number of organizations within the ranks of amateur radio that train 
ham operators in emergency operations and traffic handling. These skilled volunteers 
spend many hours training in sometimes-primitive conditions to duplicate disaster 
situations.
Annual “Field Day” exercises allow “ham” operators to test their emergency skills 
under simulated disaster conditions. It’s also a great opportunity for the public to see 
first-hand what critical services this “hobby” provides. These unpaid volunteers have a 
long history of providing critical communications when the need arises.
Jack: Most offices have a centralized telephone system. Are there any “prepared-
ness points” for companies or agencies to check?
Phil: Is the system protected by a UPS and is the UPS backed up by a generator? 
If so, is the generator routinely tested and serviced? Are the UPS batteries replaced 
when recommended by the manufacturer?
As mentioned earlier, having carrier and central office (where your local commu-
nications circuits originate) diversity is very important. If one carrier or central office 
suffers an outage, the other will most likely be unaffected.

www.syngress.com
50 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
If the phone system (PBX for Private Branch Exchange) stops working for 
whatever reason, is there a plan in place to provide communications in the most 
critical areas? Most phone systems are installed with a “power fail transfer” switch. 
This small device senses if power to the PBX and related equipment fails and then 
bypasses the affected equipment by using a limited number of “outside” lines. 
These lines are automatically connected (on a one-for-one basis) to extensions 
(telephones, fax machines, or modems) in the facility. These extensions should be 
marked as “emergency phones” and their use explained.
Another preparedness method is to have a number of outside lines ready for use 
that can be manually switched to nonfunctioning extensions in a PBX failure. A ­ 
two-position toggle switch can be used to switch the extension between the PBX  
for normal operation, and the outside lines during a service interruption.
If your “PBX” is now a server in a VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol) installation, 
there are additional concerns if the LAN (local area network) fails. In these systems, 
the voice communications are carried over the LAN, not telephone wiring as in the 
traditional PBX system. Most system designers and vendors provide a number of 
“failsafe” phones (these are generally analog or “POTS” telephone sets) that are hard-
wired the old-fashioned way to protect them from a network failure. Again, it is 
important to clearly mark these extensions and [make sure] everyone knows their 
locations.
Jack: Is cellular an infrastructure or “tool” that you recommend for  
emergency use?
Phil: Yes, but with some reservations. Public safety and service operations, industry, 
and the general population so depend on cellular technology today that during an 
emergency, there simply isn’t enough cellular capacity to go around. Businesses 
particularly need to keep this in mind if their “emergency communications plans” 
depend entirely on cellular phones—which many do unfortunately.
When we mention cellular, we immediately think of the standard flip phone, but 
one very good cellular “tool” to consider is fixed cellular. These special cellular devices 
are excellent backup for critical landlines that might experience an interruption in 
service, or for use in a remote location where phone service for alarms or monitoring 
are unavailable. These cellular transceivers operate on 110-volt power and use an 
antenna, which is usually mounted outside the facility. These units have the ability to 
sense a telephone line failure and automatically provide a cellular “dial tone” to the 
telephone set or other device until service is restored.

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
51
Public safety and government, who are huge cellular users, faced the same problem 
of “system overload” during emergencies and needed a solution. Enter the National 
Communications Service (a federal government agency) and their WPS (Wireless 
Prioritization Service). This service allows certain key leaders (local, state, and federal) 
plus others who are authorized, to have cellular access at a higher priority than general 
users. A W.P.S. user will be able to make and receive calls while others will get fast 
busy signals. Anyone with key leadership or emergency response duties should 
­investigate this service.
Cellular providers not only provide cellular telephone and “walkie-talkie” voice 
services, they have some very robust data services that anyone who needs to stay 
connected should investigate. This cellular-based Internet access is generally delivered 
via a PCMCIA card, “ExpressCard,” or a USB modem. Simply plug the card or 
modem into your laptop, or if it’s built in, just click on the icon, and in less than a 
minute, you have broadband Internet access almost anywhere. In an emergency when 
voice channels are overloaded, the data services continue to carry traffic at near 
normal levels. This is due in large measure to engineering and the fact that there are 
still more voice users competing for finite resources.
BlackBerries and other PDAs are the largest users of cellular data services. These 
devices provide access to e-mail, the Internet, and a host of applications that make 
the mobile user very productive regardless of location. In addition to the traditional 
communications methods (e-mail, voice, and text messaging), BlackBerries have the 
ability to text message unit to unit, bypassing the organization’s exchange server, 
BlackBerry Enterprise Server, or the Internet, which may be inoperable during 
disasters or other more localized emergencies. Using only the unit PIN (personal 
identification number—each BlackBerry device has its own) and the cellular data 
network, this BlackBerry-to-BlackBerry communication can provide a critical link 
to key personnel during a crisis.
Jack: You just mentioned WPS, which is a federal program to help communica-
tions keep flowing during an emergency. Are there other programs that may help our 
readers?
Phil: Here are two others that may be considered:
GETS (Government Emergency Telephone System). This telephone communica-
tions network is managed by the NCS (National Communications System) and is a 
workaround for a congested or damaged public switched network. Government 
employees, emergency responders, and certain private sector businesses can qualify for 
GETS. Users are issued access cards, which contain an access telephone number and a 

www.syngress.com
52 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
personal identification number. Dialing the access number and entering the PIN 
allows the user to place a telephone call over a highly protected telephone network.
TSP (Telecommunications Service Prioritization) is a registration system for listing 
critical telephone and other communications circuits. In a disaster or other emergency 
situation, these registered agencies or companies will receive priority repair and 
restoration service from the local telephone companies and long distance carriers.  
Any company, agency, or organization that provides critical support for the public 
or government will probably qualify. This program also falls under the National 
Communications System.
One of the most reliable and cost-effective communications methods for emer-
gencies or any other time is conventional or trunked two-way radio. A private radio 
system or simply a number of two-way radios on commercial frequencies provides a 
quick and simple method of directing resources. If a private system is financially out 
of reach, there are numerous radio system providers in most metropolitan areas who 
provide the system infrastructure and radio equipment for a monthly fee.
Trunked radio systems are multi-frequency computer-controlled radio networks 
that provide voice, data, and telephone service to hundreds or thousands of radio 
units on a single system. These systems use “repeaters” (receiver/transmitter radios) 
mounted on high towers, buildings, or mountains that receive a radio signal and 
retransmit it automatically. This allows a low power radio signal to travel many miles. 
The majority of public service agencies around the world use this technology. 
“Trunking” allows the creation of virtual channels so that one group of users cannot 
hear or interfere with other system users even though they share the same frequen-
cies and may be talking at the same time.
Conventional (radio-to-radio communications without computer control) radio 
users share the same channel or frequency even if using “select tones” or other 
techniques that afford users the ability to silence the radio when the information 
does not directly affect them. Any users can bypass the select tone and listen to all 
conversations much like a conference call. Conventional radio systems may also use 
“repeaters” to extend the range of coverage, but many do not.
A caution about two-way radio. Anything you say “over the air” can be heard by 
someone else. Thousands of “short-wave listeners” monitor scanners—short-wave 
radios—that can receive any radio frequency. Government and some public safety 
systems use digital signaling, encryption, and frequency hopping technology to avoid 
being overheard. That technology, as you might guess, is very expensive and out of 
reach for the majority of radio users.

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
53
Jack: Do you have any low-tech low-cost emergency communications tips to 
share?
Phil: I’m glad you mentioned “low-tech” because when a major disaster or 
incident takes away our “high-tech” infrastructure or systems, we are forced to get 
back to basics. Those simple low-tech tools can help us recover. Here are some tips 
that I share with both public and private audiences.
S.A.M.E. Alert Radio  (Specific Area Message Encoding) Having an alert radio is 
as important as having a smoke detector in your home or office. These radios sit 
quietly on a shelf until dangerous weather or other local emergencies cause officials 
to issue public warnings. They can be programmed for “specific” counties or even 
smaller geographic areas to alert when conditions warrant. These radios have battery 
backup so if the power is off, the radio still keeps watch. Frankly I wish there was a 
law that every home, office, school and public building was required to have a S.
A.M.E. radio. We would all be much safer.
Pagers  One and two-way alphanumeric pagers are often overlooked but are still 
solid communications tools in an emergency. The infrastructure supporting these 
devices has gained capacity as customers have moved to cellular and PCS. Pagers don’t 
depend on the Internet or e-mail to deliver messages unit to unit and the power is 
generally a single AA battery. So for low-tech low-power requirement communications, 
these are hard to beat.
Payphones  Public pay telephones are harder to find these days, everyone has a 
cellular phone, and so the “payphone” industry has almost disappeared. While the 
(almost) bulletproof case may be larger and the inner workings more complex, these 
are still simple old “POTS” lines that operate on phone line power. If there are 
payphones in or around your facility, record their numbers and make them part of 
your emergency communication plan.
Over-the-Counter Radios  These multi-channel FRS (Family Radio Service) 
radios are intended for family recreation but provide excellent communications over 
short distances of a quarter to half mile. Using these to stay in touch with family or 
neighbors in a community in an emergency situation can be very helpful. They are 
available in electronics, discount, and home supply stores. Most FRS radios do not use 
rechargeable batteries, instead using easily obtainable AA batteries.
GMRS (General Mobile Radio Service)  These radios are intended for personal 
use, but require a license purchased from the Federal Communications Commission 
and are more expensive than FRS radios. However, they have higher power and are 
manufactured to higher-quality standards than FRS radios. A number of GMRS 

www.syngress.com
54 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
radios use rechargeable batteries, which of course require electrical power to 
recharge. Check to see if the model you may be interested in can use AA batteries 
as well.
A number of commercial radios are also available “over the counter” in many 
electronics stores and, of course, through the Internet. These also require a license 
purchased from the FCC and operate on commercial frequencies with less chatter. 
Commercial radios generally use rechargeable batteries only, so keep some extra 
charged batteries on hand.
Pre-Paid Long Distance Cards  With a prepaid LD card and a payphone, you can 
stay in touch with local or long distance contacts.
Citizens Band Radio  It’s still alive and doing well—in fact, it’s better now that 
several million users have left CBs to truckers and some hard-core hobbyists. This 
license-free group of radio channels can provide mobile and base station communica-
tions over distances of roughly ten miles, but this can be increased if the mobile or base 
is higher than the average terrain (hill or mountain for instance).
POTS Line (Plain Old Telephone Service) and Phone  Few things can beat the 
reliability of a single telephone line and a wired telephone (an old-fashioned plug-in 
phone set with a corded handset). Power to operate the phone is provided by the 
telephone company central office. Employees need to be reminded that all those 
cordless phones at home stop working in a power failure (some do have battery 
backup, but they are rare and the batteries drain quickly).
Special Interview with  
J. Michael Gibbons, Principal, Deloitte
J. Michael (Mike) Gibbons is a Principal in the Enterprise Risk Services organization 
of Deloitte & Touche LLP, where he oversees security services to both commercial 
and government agencies nationally.
Following a 15-year career with the FBI and seven years leading security practices 
for another “Big 4” consulting firm and an international systems integrations company, 
Mike joined Deloitte in 2006. During his tenure with the FBI, he was chief of com-
puter crime investigations and established the National Infrastructure Protection Center. 
He was an investigating special agent in the “Hannover Hackers” case detailed in the 
best-seller, The Cuckoo’s Egg, and was involved in the first Internet worm case in the 
late-1980s.
Jack: What is the criticality of SCADA/Industrial Control Systems (ICS) compared 
to other important IT systems?

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
55
Mike: Even before 9/11 the government was concerned about SCADA as the 
world was becoming more available. Using wireless, Internet connections, and riding 
other network backbones, SCADA became available for inspection, interception, and 
subterfuge. Not all SCADA were affected, and those that managed risk according to 
government standards and industry best practices kept ahead of outsiders attempting 
to take control of them. In some cases—for example, where wireless or remote access 
was introduced—there were more attacks due to this new way to access the systems. 
Closed-end systems were inherently secure, but they actually had to be in a proven 
closed-loop. Outside access was the new vulnerability, in many cases introduced 
without the knowledge that it introduced new vulnerabilities.
Jack: Have we seen an increase in attacks on SCADA? If so, why?
Mike: If not an increase, we have seen enough to make us worry both in the 
public and private sector.
Insecurity of SCADA/ICS is not a theory. Several popular recent attacks on 
SCADA/ICS systems demonstrate the “powder keg” state of SCADA/ICS insecurity, 
a few being listed next:
In 1992, a former Chevron employee disabled its emergency alert system in 
■
■
22 states, which wasn’t discovered until an emergency happened that needed 
alerting.
A cyber-security breach occurred at the Salt River Project, a major water 
■
■
and electricity provider in Tempe, Arizona in 1994.
In 2000, in Maroochy Shire, Queensland, Vitek Boden released millions of 
■
■
liters of untreated sewage using a wireless laptop, apparently taking revenge 
against former employers.
In 2000, the Russian government announced that hackers succeeded in 
■
■
gaining control of the world’s largest natural gas pipeline network (owned  
by Gazprom).
In 2002, hackers disabled PLC components during a national unrest and 
■
■
general workers strike, crippling the country’s main port in Venezuela.
In 2003, cyber-attacks penetrated the Israel Energy Corporation using DoS 
■
■
attacks but failed to shut down the power grid.
In Ohio, the Davis-Besse Nuclear Power Plant safety monitoring system was 
■
■
offline for five hours due to the slammer Worm in January 2003.

www.syngress.com
56 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
In January 2003, a Romanian pair hacked into the computers at the 
■
■
Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station that controlled the life support for 
the 50 scientists there. The attackers demanded money.
In 2003, the east coast of America experienced a blackout, while not the 
■
■
cause, many of the related systems were infected by the Blaster worm, causing 
damages of US$50 billion.
In 2005, 13 U.S. Daimler-Chrysler manufacturing plants were shut down 
■
■
due to multiple internet worm infections.
A malware-infected HMI system disabled the emergency stop of equipment 
■
■
under heavy weather conditions at an international energy company in 2005.
In 2005, ARP spoofing attacks shut down a port signaling system at a 
■
■
Middle East sea port.
Extremist propaganda was found together with text files containing user-
■
■
names and passwords of control systems at an international petrochemical 
company in 2006.
Given the preceding list of recent attacks, coupled with the sensitivity of informa-
tion being used for communication, it is clear that attacks on SCADA/ICS systems 
have grown. The personal and political motivations for the attacks vary widely. In the 
future, the free availability of data and the weaknesses in the SCADA/ICS infrastruc-
ture could be exploited by cyber terrorists and the damage due to such attacks could 
be beyond our current ability to predict.
Jack: How critical are interdependencies between SCADA, and are they 
connected?
Mike: In the same way that critical infrastructures are interdependent, the control 
systems have the same vulnerabilities. Many are not yet known, as the interconnections 
are exceptionally complex. The evolution of SCADA to their third generation today 
has continued to open attack vectors still protected by obscurity alone.
The data that flows on a third-generation (WAN-based) SCADA/ICS network 
includes sensitive information not limited to: 
Data from remote field devices
■
■
Activity data
■
■
Financial data
■
■

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
57
Real-time monitoring data
■
■
Access control data
■
■
Logs of access (logical and physical)
■
■
Backup data
■
■
Report data for various regulatory compliance
■
■
Data used in business projections
■
■
Human resource data
■
■
Configuration data
■
■
Equipment maintenance data
■
■
Archived data (real-time data is archived)
■
■
Historical data
■
■
Graphs and pie charts
■
■
User manuals
■
■
The combination of complex systems, sensitive data, and known vulnerabilities 
cry out for scientific exploit. Only by establishing a broad framework of protection 
and controls can the controls themselves be safe.
Special Interview with Kevin  
Manson, the Original Cyber Cop, Extranet Secure Portal
Jack: The ability to share information over the Internet securely is always a hot topic. 
Tell us a little about the robust security afforded by the Cyber-Cop portal. And is it 
just for cybercops?
Kevin: First, a bit of context or background. I have long considered myself an 
online community builder or “architect.” When the Internet was little more than 
a text medium (BB – Before Browsers), I was running a BBS on my personal computer 
for the Treasury Department (Federal Law Enforcement Training Center), which was 
connected to my home phone line, and I was “tossing” mail off USENET. This was 
what came to be known as the Cybercop BBS. The term “cybercop” is one which  
I coined in the late 80s. The mission of the Cybercop BBS was to create an online 
community where law enforcement could share primarily open-source information 

www.syngress.com
58 
Chapter 1 • Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability
without regard to traditional “stove pipes” or jurisdictional boundaries that had long 
hampered information sharing in law enforcement.
Law enforcement has traditionally kept its networked communications in a closed 
environment because of the sensitive information that police and investigators handle. 
Sensitive shared or networked communications are obviously not unique to law 
enforcement. 9/11 brought the critical interdependencies of industry and law 
enforcement to the forefront, especially what we now call “critical infrastructures,” 
such as the power grid, telecommunications, transportation, water, and so on.
Jack: How did this series of events lead to secure collaboration over the Internet?
Kevin: Presidential Decision Directive 63 had a large impact on my world view 
and I was determined to help build a secure online community where law enforce-
ment, industry, the DoD community and academia could collaborate in a secure 
fashion. It was a great stroke of luck that I ran into a DARPA security professional, 
Bob Dowling, who introduced me to a DARPA manager, Matt Donlon, and a techno 
code writing wizard, George Johnson (with a background at the Software Engineering 
Institute at Carnegie-Mellon). These folks had built a secure online community proto-
type for industry security professionals called the Extranet for Security Professionals.
At that time, I was also serving as a moderator for the National Cybercrime 
Training Partnership on the FBI secure online system called LEO (Law Enforcement 
Online), created by a friend, Gary Gardner. LEO was successfully serving law 
enforcement, and the XSP was likewise serving industry security professionals. 
Recognizing the tremendous benefits that each of these systems brought to their 
users, I approached Matt Donlon and asked if he would be willing to help build a 
synergistic collaborative system for both law enforcement AND industry. Over a 
handshake, the Cybercop Secure Portal was built. Eight years and 11,000 users later, 
Cybercop is now fulfilling the dream of securely linking law enforcement and industry 
in pursuit of homeland security.
www.cybercopportal.com
Shortly following 9/11, I was approached by a friend and colleague who asked if the 
Cybercop Portal could help disseminate information to the WatchList community of 
more that 150 industry groups and businesses. Within 48 hours, all of those commu-
nities were enabled with their own secure compartment in the larger Cybercop 
Portal community.
Jack: How does a secure online system like the Cybercop Portal serve to 
enhance our nation’s security?

www.syngress.com
 
Physical Security: SCADA and the Critical Infrastructure’s Biggest Vulnerability • Chapter 1 
59
Kevin: As former National Security Advisor Richard Clarke has observed, 
“Security is community.” Retired FBI Profiler, Bill Tafoya, and I filled in at the last 
minute for Richard Clarke for the keynote address at the Blackhat conference two 
months before the 9/11 tragedy. During that keynote, we invited the industry-heavy 
audience to join with law enforcement in protecting our nation’s infrastructure. 
We emphasized that the “elite” are not those who attack and wreak havoc on the 
Internet, rather it is those who protect and defend the Net.
Conferences like TechnoSecurity (www.TechnoSecurity.com) bring a strong 
security-oriented community together for a week or so each year. The Cybercop 
Portal extends the collaboration reach of security professionals far beyond the fixed 
and rigid bounds of time and location. It’s effectively a 24/7 security community 
with a memory, and the ability to create secure compartments within the larger 
community within a matter of minutes.

61
Chapter 2
Supervisory Control 
and Data Acquisition
Paul A. Henry, (MCP+I, MCSE, CCSA, CCSE, CFSA, CFSO, CISSP, -ISSAP, CISM, CISA, 
CIFI) is the Vice President of Technology Evangelism at Secure Computing®
Paul is one of the world’s foremost global information security experts, with 
more than 20 years experience managing security initiatives for Global 2000 
enterprises and government organizations worldwide.
At Secure Computing, Paul plays a key strategic role in launching new products 
and re-tooling existing product lines. In his role as Vice President Technology 
Evangelism, Paul also advises and consults on some of the world’s most challeng-
ing and high-risk information security projects, including the National Banking 
System in Saudi Arabia, Department of Defense’s Satellite Data Project, USA, and 
both Government as well as Telecommunications projects throughout Japan.
Paul is frequently cited by major and trade print publications as an expert on 
both technical security topics and general security trends, and serves as an 
expert commentator for network broadcast outlets such as NBC and CNBC.  
In addition, Paul regularly authors thought leadership articles on technical  
security issues, and his expertise and insight help shape the editorial direction  
of key security publications such as the Information Security Management 
Handbook, where he is a consistent contributor.
Paul serves as a featured and keynote speaker at network security seminars 
and conferences worldwide, delivering presentations on diverse topics includ-
ing network access control, Cyber crime, DDoS attack risk mitigation, firewall  
architectures, computer and network forensics, Enterprise security architectures 
and managed security services.

www.syngress.com
62	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
Introduction
Within the time span of the author’s career, process controls have evolved from 
pneumatic systems to analog, and then again from analog to digital. Today’s digital 
controls are predominately referred to as Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition 
(SCADA) systems.
Early pneumatic and analog control systems were isolated from organizations’ 
business systems. Simply putting the integration of process control data into the busi-
ness decision-making process was a labor-intensive task. Control system data loggers 
and variable recorder chart data were typically read by an operator or supervisor and 
then manually entered into business systems.
Current-technology SCADA systems integrate directly with organizations’ business 
systems. Control system data are immediately available to specialized business systems 
that can optimize SCADA system set points and parameters to better meet the imme-
diate business needs of the organization. It is the integration of SCADA systems and 
the organizations business systems that pose the greatest risk in SCADA security today.
Just What Is SCADA?
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems provide for the supervi-
sory control, management, and monitoring of process control and manufacturing 
automation systems through the collection and analysis of real-time data. The preva-
lence of SCADA systems has grown to the point that our national infrastructure 
today depends, to a large degree, on SCADA systems.
Today SCADA systems play important roles in several industries (Table 2.1):
Table 2.1 Industries Where SCADA Plays an Important Role
Aluminum
Boilers
Automotive
Chemical
Electric Power
Nuclear Power
Chemical
Oil and Gas Transportation
Flight Simulation
Paper Manufacturing
Food Processing
Specialized Petrochemical
Fossil Fuel Production
Rubber Manufacturing
Glass Production
Steel Manufacturing

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
63
SCADA system capabilities have evolved from that of simply replacing lights and 
push buttons to handling very complex process control and critical safety shutdown 
systems. The intelligence of SCADA systems has advanced to the point where their 
automated operation requires fewer operators: less human supervision than previous 
control system methodologies. Today, common applications for SCADA systems 
include, but are not limited to, those shown in Table 2.2.
Continued
Table 2.2 Common Applications for SCADA Systems
AC efficiency test standards
Batch process controls
Bearing temperature monitor
Boiler and turbine controls
Boiler controls
Burner management systems
Boiler data acquisition
Sequence of Events (S.O.E.)
Boiler water treatment controls
Brick kiln controls
Bulk resin dispensing
Carburetor test standards
Clay manufacturing controls
Continuous polymer manufacturing
Continuous welding SPC monitoring
Desulphurization and acid processing
Dynamometer controls
Electric power T&D monitoring
Extruder controls
F16 and F117 flight simulation
Fiber optics filter manufacturing
Floating dry dock controls
Food preservation
Fore hearth controls
Fuel injector test standard
Fuel oil handling system
Fuel pump test standards
Furnace controls
Gas processing
Glass furnace controls
H2O chemistry controls
Hazardous chemical waste controls
High-flux research reactor controls
Hydroelectric load management
Incinerator controls
Material handling and finishing
Meteorological monitoring
Military data acquisition
Nuclear plant DAS
Nuclear plant full-scope simulators
Nuclear simulators
Offshore platform oil/gas separation
Paper mill wet end process controls
Petroleum pilot plants
Plant energy management
Plant monitoring
Power distribution monitoring
Process controls

www.syngress.com
64	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
Process simulators
Product distribution monitor
Radwaste monitoring
Reactor and plant monitoring
Reactor core temperature monitoring
Reactor monitoring / reactor plant DAS
Refrigerator efficiency test standards
Resin mixing
Rod drop monitoring systems
Rolling mill controls
Rotating equipment monitoring
Safety parameter display systems
Ship controls development systems
Shipboard LNG controls
Solder manufacturing controls
Spool-winder temperature monitoring 
and controls
Steam control systems
Submarine diving simulators
Tank controls
Target ranges
Textile finishing range controls
TG monitoring
Tritium processing
Turbine controls
Turbine generator fuel test cells
Turbine monitoring
Utility monitoring
Virtual annunciator panels
Waste tank controls
Waste water monitoring
Water chemistry monitoring
Weapons release simulators
Whole body calorie monitoring
Compressor surge controls
Wind tunnel controls
Table 2.2 Continued. Common Applications for SCADA Systems
Tools & Traps…
Greatest Benefit—Causes the Greatest Risk
The greatest benefit of current technology SCADA is its ability to integrate 
directly with back-end business systems. No longer are SCADA systems an 
island unto themselves. It is the integration of SCADA into the business system 
that causes the greatest concern. By integrating the SCADA system into the 
business systems of the enterprise, you are inadvertently increasing the risks 
within the SCADA system by adding those of the enterprise network and often 
those of the public Internet as well.

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
65
SCADA Systems and Components
While exceptions exist, such as self-contained and stand-alone SCADA systems that 
are purpose built for a given application, most SCADA systems are comprised of 
several components that communicate across a network.
Remote Terminal Units (RTUs)
An RTU (Remote Terminal Unit) provides intelligent I/O collection and processing, 
such as reading inputs from switches, sensors, and transmitters and then arranging the 
representative data into a format that the SCADA system can understand. The RTU 
also converts output values provided by the SCADA system from their digital form 
into that which can be understood by field-controllable devices such as discrete 
(relay) and analog outputs (current or voltage).
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC)
The PLC can be regarded as the “brain” of the SCADA system. The actual control 
program for a given process or its control systems is executed within the PLC. A PLC 
can either work with local physically connected inputs and outputs or with remote 
inputs and outputs provided by an RTU. Typical PLCs can provide for two different 
types of control: discrete and continuous.
Discrete Control
In discrete control applications, the PLC works with inputs and outputs that have 
defined states (on/off ) and can perform actions based on time, events, or a particular 
sequence (for example, turn on an output at a given time, turn off an output after the 
input from a field device, such as a limit switch closes; turn on a series of outputs in  
a given sequential order).
Continuous Control
In continuous control applications, the PLC typically works with analog input and 
output devices and uses special algorithms to maintain a steady operating state. For 
instance, the PLC has a set point that is provided by the SCADA system for the 
desired temperature of a given process. It receives an analog input value of 0 to 100 
percent, representing the process temperature. The PLC uses specialized algorithms 
(such as PID algorithms) to generate an analog output value of 0 to 100 percent that 
is then used to position a valve or to control the speed of a motor in an effort to 
continuously keep the temperature at the desired set point.

www.syngress.com
66	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
Combinations of both discrete and continuous control are often used in what is 
referred to as batch control. In batch control applications, both discrete control and 
continuous control are used together. In the simplest of terms, discrete operations 
could be used to mix the given ingredients of a recipe and place the batter in a pan 
in the oven, while continuous control would be used to maintain the oven at a 
specific temperature to create the finished product—the cake.
Human Machine Interface (HMI)
The HMI (Human Machine Interface) is the means by which the user (operator) 
interacts with the SCADA system. Simply put, the HMI provides a clear and easy-to-
understand computer representation of what is, in fact, being controlled or monitored 
by the SCADA system. Further, it provides for interaction, either in the form of a 
touch screen, a specialized keyboard, or both.
Current-generation SCADA HMIs are not just a replacement for push buttons 
and pilot lights of the past. In fact, they provide a simpler user interface for even the 
most complex SCADA systems. The “usability” of the HMI is the measure by which 
a user can effectively interact with the SCADA system. HMI implementations that 
offer high levels of usability provide SCADA systems that are intuitive, efficient, and 
effective. A good and effective SCADA HMI design makes the interaction with the 
SCADA through the HMI seem natural to the operator—in other words, clear and 
easy to understand, with no need for explanation.
The International Engineering Consortium (IEC) has defined a standard ISO 9241 
that provides a definition for the quality of use for an HMI. The ISO 9241 standard 
defines three components of quality of use applicable to the design of an HMI:
1.	 Effectiveness—Does the product do what the users require? Does it do the 
right thing?
2.	 Efficiency—Can the users learn the HMI quickly? Can they carry out their 
tasks with minimum expended effort, including a minimum of errors? Does 
it improve the productivity/effort ratio? Does it do things right?
3.	 Satisfaction—Do users express satisfaction with the product? Does the new 
product reduce stress? Do end users now have a more satisfying job?
Distributed Control Systems (DCS)
Historically, the term DCS could best be defined as a dedicated control system that 
did not rely upon a single central computer to control a given process, was comprised 

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
67
of multiple computers, did not require operator intervention, and afforded for inter-
action between those computer systems to provide for the total control of a given 
manufacturing or process control system.
The distinction between DCS and SCADA systems has become difficult since 
SCADA systems have evolved to become more powerful and capable with many 
SCADA solutions today offering DCS-like capabilities. In fact, vendors of SCADA 
systems today would argue that the current-generation SCADA system gives the 
distributed control capability of a large DCS system, while still affording the ease of 
use found in a SCADA system. At the same time, of course, DCS vendors are today 
claiming that their DCS systems are able to handle much more complex processes 
with the ability for operator interaction through an HMI that rivals the ease of use 
found in a SCADA system.
Looking toward the future, it is not hard to imagine that SCADA systems will 
continue to become more powerful and capable and, in fact, may one day replace  
the traditional DCS, at least in the form that we know them today.
Hybrid Controllers
Hybrid controllers are specialized devices that provide for capabilities not found in 
standard discrete and continuous control modules for PLC systems. Capabilities such 
as adaptive control, artificial intelligence, and fuzzy logic are afforded by typical 
hybrid controllers.
The capability of hybrid controllers is one of the primary mechanisms that is 
blurring the line between SCADA and DCS systems. Benefiting from Moore’s Law 
(computing power nearly doubles every 18 months), the most complex control 
algorithms and intricate mathematical capabilities previously reserved only for 
powerful DCS systems are quickly finding their way into today’s increasingly more 
powerful hybrid controllers for SCADA systems.
A SCADA system may utilize multiple hybrid controllers distributed as needed  
to perform the tasks at hand across a given process while still operating under the 
supervisory control of the SCADA system.
Event Loggers
Event loggers provide for the capturing of events as they happen within a SCADA 
system and provide time/date stamping, which affords a complete audit trail of the 
events that have occurred in the SCADA system. Typically, time within a SCADA 
system event logger provides for usable resolution down to 1/10 of a second.  

www.syngress.com
68	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
While this is more than fast enough for many typical applications, it is not suitable 
for applications where multiple events can happen only milliseconds apart, such as  
in the switch gear for power distribution systems and safety shutdown systems for 
critical processes. In these applications, specialized event loggers that can capture 
events occurring perhaps just milliseconds apart are typically required.
In SCADA systems that utilize the integrated event logging capability of multiple 
individual components, it is critical that the time across the SCADA system be  
synchronized. Hence, it is not uncommon today for a SCADA system to use a single 
time reference such as that found in a Global Positioning System (GPS) satellite 
receiver as a time-synchronizing source to assure that all real-time and historical data 
timestamps are accurate across all HMIs, PLCs , hybrid controllers, and other devices 
within the SCADA system.
Common SCADA Architectures
Early SCADA systems used proprietary event–driven operating systems and some 
form of rudimentary/proprietary serial communications typically based on R232/
RS422/RS485. One could perhaps argue that early SCADA systems benefited from 
the “Security by obscurity” that was afforded by their specialized operating systems 
and communications.
Today, SCADA system components utilize purpose built event-driven operating 
systems, commercial operating systems (for example, Windows/Linux as well as 
Tools & Traps…
SCADA Is Often Deployed in Distributed Environments
The processing power of SCADA has increased dramatically. They are more 
capable of complex tasks than ever before and have closely followed the over-
all trends in computer architectures. Current technology SCADA systems like 
current technology computer networks are most often architected in a distrib-
uted model. While individual components perform complex tasks, data are 
shared between components in order to optimize the overall process that is 
under SCADA control.

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
69
hybrids), and commercial operating systems with real-time extensions. While SCADA 
systems for critical processes are available with fault-tolerant networking, most have 
evolved to take advantage of UDP/TCP over Ethernet communications.
In a SCADA network (Figure 2.1), field devices are typically connected to the 
PLCs across an independent network using specialized protocols such as Fieldbus, 
HART, or MODBUS.
The PLCs are on a separate network and Communicate to the system’s HMIs, 
hybrid controllers, and event loggers using protocols such as InfiNET.
Figure 2.1 A SCADA Network

www.syngress.com
70	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
If the preceding example were the extent of connectivity to the SCADA system, 
they would be relatively secure. However, it is common today (Figure 2.2) for the 
corporate IT network to typically connect to the InfiNET network with a bridge to 
allow for the collection of production data, and SCADA vendors are typically allowed 
to connect to PLCs or hybrid controllers in order to facilitate vendor support of the 
SCADA system.
SCADA Communications Protocols
In the early years of SCADA systems, few if any communications standards existed, 
hence individual SCADA equipment vendors each created their own exclusive 
proprietary protocols. It has been estimated that at one point there were between  
Figure 2.2 A Typical Network Bridge

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
71
150 to 200 different proprietary SCADA protocols in use. The high number of 
protocols in use along with their proprietary nature actually afforded a degree of 
security through “security by obscurity.”
As the SCADA industry matured and vendors began to adopt open standards, the 
total number of SCADA protocols commonly in use was reduced to a small number 
of popular protocols that were being promoted by industry professional organizations, 
which included, but were not limited to, the following:
MODBUS
Ethernet/IP
PROFIBUS
ControlNet
InfiNET
HART
UCA
Fieldbus
Distributed Network Protocol (DNP)
Utility Communications Architecture (UCA)
Inter-Control Center Communications Protocol (ICCP)
Telecontrol Application Service Element (TASE)
How Serious Are the Security Issues of SCADA?
Data within the British Columbia Institute of Technology (BCIT) report titled “The 
Myths and Facts behind Cyber Security Risks for Industrial Control Systems” issued 
in 2004 indicates that there has been a ten-fold increase in SCADA incidents since 
2000. Of those organizations surveyed within the report that placed a dollar value on 
the losses associated with a SCADA attack, 50 percent reported financial losses of 
$1,000,000 or more.
The BCIT report includes 100 or so recent SCADA incidents, but unfortunately 
this only uncovers the tip of the iceberg. The problem is in the reporting (or lack 
thereof ) of SCADA incidents. Out of the 200 Fortune 500 companies that are consid-
ered to be part of our critical infrastructure, only 14 currently report anything on 
SCADA issues to authorities. Simply put, if the incident is not reported to authorities, 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
72	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
then it is not included within the Industrial Security Incident Database (ISID). The 
next issue in reporting SCADA issues is that those 14 organizations that do report to 
ISID are considered to be the leading edge, hence they are using more current tech-
nology perhaps than a typical SCADA operator and would perhaps naturally see lower 
incident numbers. Security companies have published white papers that suggest a 
more probable number of annual SCADA incidents is actually 2,000 to 3,000.
At a recent SANS security seminar, featured speaker CIA Analyst Tom Donahue 
noted that recently declassified information had revealed that cyber criminals had in 
fact disrupted electrical power in several regions outside of the US and further noted 
that the goal of the attacks was extortion.
Early digital SCADA systems were designed for performance, and little if any 
regard was given to the proper error handling normally associated with network 
protocols. Hence, many times only a portion of the given protocol was ever properly 
implemented. Simply put, saving a few bytes of code was considered more important 
than properly handling protocol errors. After all, SCADA was a closed system and the 
normal errors associated with network protocols would be nonexistent. Hence, most 
of the current installed base of SCADA systems in use today utilize protocols that are 
either inherently insecure by design or that by-and-of themselves are not necessarily 
insecure but are poorly implemented by the SCADA product vendor, which results 
in SCADA insecurities. It should come as no surprise that a simple port scan of a 
SCADA network could in fact cause the entire network to crash because of the lack 
of proper error handling.
Tools & Traps…
Are SCADA Issues Under-reported?
The most relied upon database of SCADA vulnerabilities, BCIT includes only 
100 or so reported incidents. Only 14 of the 200 Fortune 500 companies that 
are recognized as part of our national infrastructure actively report SCADA 
incidents. Security companies dismiss the 100 or so incidents noted in the BCIT 
database as inaccurate and estimate that the actual number of incidents is 
closer to 2,000 to 3,000 incidents per year.

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
73
Unfortunately, in order to reap the full financial benefits of a SCADA system, 
interconnection to the enterprise network is necessary to provide real-time process 
data to enterprise back-end systems. It is this interconnection of SCADA systems and 
the enterprise network that is the weakest link in SCADA system security.
The first step in understanding the risks associated with SCADA while operating 
in today’s digital world is to accept that SCADA systems have always been designed 
to operate in closed environments. While most organizations claim that their SCADA 
system is not connected to their enterprise network it has been estimated that, in 
reality, 80 to 90 percent of SCADA systems are in fact connected to the enterprise 
network. It is that connection to the enterprise network that opens the door for 
Internet hackers to attack SCADA systems. 
Are You Owned?
TCP/IP Error Handling Absent in Early SCADA Systems
Imagine living in a world where a common cold could easily kill you—Welcome 
to the world of SCADA. A simple Port-Scan as typically run within most enter-
prise networks to determine what ports are open on a SCADA component  
has the potential of causing the SCADA system to crash due to the improper 
support of TCP/IP error handling.
Are You Owned?
Interconnection of SCADA and  
Business Systems Are a Weak Link in SCADA Security
Many believe that it is the interconnection of SCADA and business systems 
across the enterprise network that poses the greatest risk to SCADA. In other 
words, SCADA systems were not initially intended to operate within the enter-
prise environment. At issue is the inability within SCADA components to deal 
with the exposure to viruses, worms, and malware that are commonplace today 
within the enterprise network.

www.syngress.com
74	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
Basically, SCADA systems have no inherent ability to cope with the issues com-
monly found plaguing today’s enterprise networks. Connecting the SCADA system 
to a corporate network dramatically increases risks poised by traditional malware.
A common denominator among most SCADA protocols is that they were nearly 
always based on a given vendor’s proprietary standard and were almost always 
designed to pass data accurately and quickly between devices with little if any direct 
regard to security.
Further in some implementations only a portion of a given protocol was imple-
mented in the SCADA device in order to save development time, and perhaps memory 
and CPU cycles. Unfortunately, it is not uncommon for a SCADA system protocol 
implementation to have improperly implemented error handling within the given 
protocol. Hence most of the current installed base of SCADA systems in use today 
utilize protocols that are either inherently insecure by design or that by-and-of them-
selves are not necessarily insecure but are poorly implemented by the SCADA product 
vendor, which results in SCADA insecurities.
Typical high-level weaknesses found in SCADA systems today include:
Does not require any authentication.
Does not require any authorization.
Does not use encryption.
Does not properly handle errors and exceptions.
These high-level weaknesses open several potential attack vectors:
Data interception
Data manipulation
Denial of service
Address spoofing
Unsolicited responses
Session hijacking
Protocol / packet fuzzing
Modification of log data
Unauthorized control
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
75
These attack vectors can lead to potentially disastrous results, such as:
Altering or otherwise affecting the HMI display screen, which may cause the 
SCADA operator to take incorrect corrective actions.
Permitting an unauthorized person to assume control of the SCADA system.
Disrupting the process that is under the control of the SCADA system.
Determining the Risks in Your SCADA System
First, a word of caution: Determining the risks within your SCADA system is not as 
easy as it may first seem. The traditional methods used in determining if vulnerabili-
ties exist within an IT network can wreak havoc within a SCADA network. The 
simple task of port scanning can bring down a SCADA system if the network error 
handling was not properly implemented by the manufacturer. Further, care must be 
taken not to overwhelm the SCADA network with traffic in testing since many 
SCADA controllers rely upon data passed across the network to continue safe opera-
tion. In fact, many SCADA controllers are designed to failover to a safe manual value 
if they do not receive a set point or other controller variables within a predetermined 
time period. Hence, it is critical that only technicians that are knowledgeable of the 
shortcomings inherent to SCADA systems be used for any vulnerability assessment.
Active scanning considerations:
Use a lab environment first, not a production network, to determine the 
impact of scanning.
Be sure the scanning software that is utilized simulates vulnerabilities by testing 
version levels and so on, rather than simply executing known vulnerabilities.
■
■
■
■
■
Tools & Traps…
Typical SCADA High-Level Weaknesses
The lack of authentication, authorization, encryption, and error handling are 
regarded as the typical high-level weaknesses in SCADA.

www.syngress.com
76	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
Any devices more than five years old should not be targets of any  
vulnerability scan.
Be sure that any back-up devices are operational and ready for failover 
should a primary controller fail during scanning.
Be sure control system operators are fully informed of the potential for 
SCADA system failures before any scanning begins.
Passive scanning considerations:
Passive scanning does not generate any network traffic within the network 
being tested and is considered a safer alternative to active scanning.
The rate of passive network discovery is determined by the amount of 
network traffic and the number of SCADA nodes that are talking.
Passive scanning can discover hosts, services, and versions that can then be 
mapped to potential vulnerabilities.
Risk Mitigation for SCADA
While most enterprises have a security policy to deal with the operation of the enter-
prise network, few have policies that address the SCADA environment specifically. With 
SCADA systems operating today within the inherently insecure world of TCP/IP and 
often interconnected to the enterprise network and public Internet, a SCADA security 
policy is a crucial first step in securing the system.
■
■
■
■
■
■
Tools & Traps…
Active Scanning of SCADA Can Itself Pose Serious Risks
The lack of proper and/or complete TCP/IP error handling in early SCADA com-
ponents can cause disastrous results when the SCADA component is actively 
scanned. Simply put, if your SCADA system is over 5 years old, active scanning 
should first be tried in a closed lab environment to determine the risks imposed 
by such a scan.

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
77
A SCADA security policy should (at the least):
1.	 Require the development and maintenance of a list of all SCADA components 
and version levels.
2.	 Require the development and maintenance of diagrams for data flows within 
the SCADA network and just as importantly between the SCADA network 
and the enterprise network.
3.	 Require use of the latest stable software release for all SCADA components.
4.	 Disable all unnecessary servers and services on SCADA components.
5.	 Establish a password policy, eliminate the use of shared passwords, and utilize 
one-time passwords wherever possible.
6.	 Require the development and maintenance of a policy for a Rule of Least 
Privilege across the entire SCADA system.
7.	 Require the use of all available auditing capabilities across the SCADA 
system.
8.	 Regularly test all SCADA components for vulnerabilities.
9.	 Approach security and the hardening of all SCADA workstations and  
database servers as if they were connected directly to the public Internet.
10.	 Utilize firewalls to both separate the SCADA network from the enterprise 
network and segment the SCADA network.
11.	 Encrypt all communication between enterprise applications and the SCADA 
system.
Tools & Traps…
The First Step in Risk Mitigation  
Is the development of a SCADA Security Policy
Once policies are in place, they must be continuously updated and monitored 
to account for changes in the SCADA network, SCADA component software 
updates, and (as with any enterprise network) the addition and subtraction of 
users (operators).

www.syngress.com
78	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
With a SCADA security policy in place, the next step in risk mitigation would be 
the incorporation of technical safeguards to enforce the security policy.
Firewall Considerations for SCADA
A firewall by-and-of-itself is not the Holy Grail, and simply installing one to isolate 
the SCADA network from the enterprise network and walking away does not fix 
all the problems. The firewall is a tool where vigilance is required. Risks do not 
magically go away when you flip the switch on your firewall. While a good firewall 
offers some security and functionality out of the box, the administrator must take 
security to an even higher level. The firewall is, in effect, a necessary tool that is 
part of an overarching approach and philosophy of security. It is a gateway tool for 
implementing an all-encompassing security policy that defines your entire 
­network’s level of access and services when connecting with other networks like 
the Internet. The following three items are important in making your firewall work 
for you:
1.	 Create an appropriate set of perimeter access and content inspection policies.
2.	 Implement the right type of firewall that is capable of most effectively 
automating the enforcement of your perimeter security policies.
3.	 Properly configure the firewall.
Given the right approach and a good understanding of firewall fundamentals, you 
can stop attacks from crossing into and impacting your SCADA network.
Tools & Traps…
Security Considerations for SCADA Servers
When considering the security requirements for servers within the SCADA net-
work, they should be approached as if they were facing the very same risks as 
that of a server within the enterprise network being directly connected to the 
public Internet.

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
79
Negative and Positive Security Models in Firewalls
Even before the Internet and Web 2.0 ushered in our current era of threats, network-
based systems were still a target, and firewalls evolved very quickly to mitigate the 
risks. The concept was simple: create a device that prevents undesirable elements from 
entering the network, while still allowing legitimate access. As such, the firewall’s 
basic task is to control traffic that flows between computer networks. The firewall has 
evolved considerably, and today there are usually multiple zones of trust, each one 
with different levels of access. Most early firewalls, and some that are still being 
offered, work on a “negative” security model that identifies undesirable traffic and 
prevents it from entering. It’s very much like having a list at a country’s port of entry, 
which identifies known criminals. When people travel into the country, their pass-
ports are checked against this list, and if they are not on it, they are allowed in. This 
design is effective to the degree that it catches known criminals, but what about 
those who have not yet committed any acts of terror, or have not yet been caught for 
their crimes, or who should also be considered a risk because of their associations or 
reputation? In fact, it is not always possible to determine whether somebody, or in 
the case of the network, a particular packet of traffic, is undesirable based on known 
parameters. The most effective security policy revolves around one statement: “Trust 
no one.” That’s why the best firewalls operate on a “positive” security model, which 
denies all access unless it is explicitly allowed.
Multi-Network Connectivity
At its most basic, think of a firewall as a “control point” computer with two inter-
faces (typically Ethernet) that is located between two separate networks. A cable 
connects the first network to the firewall, and a second cable connects the firewall to 
the second network. All traffic is then blocked, and is not allowed to pass to the other 
network unless the firewall computer decides, based on its preconfigured rules and 
policies, that it should be allowed.
Because the firewall has two or more physically separate network interfaces, it is a 
multi-homed device. This is why firewalls are unlike most other networked devices. 
Other networked devices, such as servers, workstations, and printers, are connected to 
networks with only one physical connection (or wireless port), which passes all 
needed traffic coming and going in both directions, simultaneously. Some vendors and 
industry observers claim that it is possible to build a network firewall with only one 
physical interface, but that architecture would have serious limitations and has never 

www.syngress.com
80	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
been accepted by the market, and it would not be recommended by any serious 
security practitioners as a primary firewall device.
A firewall should “know,” by way of configured policies and rules, which networks 
to trust more than others. The Internet, for example, is not under the control of the 
company deploying the firewall, and the content is completely unknown. As such, the 
Internet is a zone that should be attributed no trust at all, and the firewall that is con-
nected to the Internet should have the highest level of defenses established. But firewalls 
do far more than just protect internal networks from the perils of the Internet, and the 
firewall must still be used even to separate traffic flowing between internal networks, 
even if they are not connected by the Internet. Not all attacks are Internet-based, and 
internal attacks are unfortunately quite prevalent. As a result, large enterprises usually 
deploy multiple firewalls, with one for each department, division, or branch. Not only 
does the firewall protect the company’s Internet server from the external Internet, it 
also protects each departmental sub-network from any risks that may already be inside.
However, an internal departmental network is under control and its content is 
well known, so it should be a zone with a higher level of trust. The ultimate goal is 
to provide high-speed, reliable, and tightly controlled connections between networks 
of differing trust levels, while enforcing a “deny all unless explicitly allowed” security 
policy.
While some firewalls are more intuitive than others, they still require proper 
configuration and skill to maintain. Some administrators get a false sense of security 
because they have a firewall and mistakenly believe it can be plugged in, powered on, 
and forgotten. In fact, an improperly configured or neglected firewall is more danger-
ous than having none at all. The firewall is a key component when implementing 
policy. As such, the firewall itself should be useful in designing that policy, but it is the 
policy itself that guides how the firewall is used and how effective it becomes.
Reactive and Proactive Solutions
Within the framework of the firewall, and in the case of a Unified Threat 
Management environment (all of the associated protections such as anti-virus, anti-
spam, URL filtering, SSL scanning, and IPS/IDS), the firewall appliance must take 
both a reactive and proactive approach. In many of the first- and second-generation 
firewalls, it became obvious that being limited to reactive security provided some, but 
not enough, protection. An example of reactive security is signature-based anti-virus 
databases, which keep track of known virus signatures to prevent them from entering 
the network. Similarly, URL filters that rely exclusively on categorized lists prevent 
users from accessing Web sites that are known to be harmful.

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
81
Proactive security comes from several different angles. First and foremost, proac-
tive security comes from the “deny everything that is not explicitly allowed” philoso-
phy. This approach to proactive security is exemplified in the Sidewinder firewall’s 
deeply aware and deeply configurable application-specific security proxies. Proxy-
based Web and mail security gateways from numerous companies have recently 
emerged into the market as well to (basically) plug the holes in traditional firewalls 
protecting most corporate networks today. Deeply configurable application-specific 
proxies will eliminate most attacks that have not yet been detected and defined by 
simply sloughing them off as superfluous to the use of the company’s applications (in 
other words, not needed) or because they violate the fundamental use of the applica-
tions when checked against the Internet RFCs. An extra layer of proactive security 
comes from the inclusion of a reputation-based system, which acts as a sort of virtual 
credit agency to determine a precise reputation score for every sender.
Reactive signature-based systems are quite good at catching malware attacks that 
have already been detected and included in signature databases, and these sorts of 
systems play an important role in unified threat management. However, there is a 
growing body of malware that has not yet been detected, and in such cases, signature-
based reactive solutions must themselves be secured within a more comprehensive 
and proactive security software environment. Attacks that have not yet been cata-
logued, known as “zero-hour” attacks, are on the increase. Signature engines simply 
cannot keep ahead of large instantaneous malware outbreaks spewing out of zombie 
networks today. Zombie machines (PCs connected to the Internet that can be 
remotely controlled at will from across the Internet by the bad guys) are responsible 
for the majority of spam, viruses, and “for profit” schemes like phishing attacks on 
the Internet today.
Criminal elements lease access to thousands or tens of thousands of zombie PCs 
to create malicious networks of computers called botnets. These botnets are used to 
distribute whatever the criminal or hacker wants them to distribute and pose a 
serious threat to SCADA systems. With hundreds of thousands of computers being 
silently hijacked and turned into zombies on a daily basis, corporate networks suffer a 
constant stream of unwanted and dangerous traffic. To combat this threat, in addition 
to being able to recognize a threat with a signature database, the security system must 
also be able to tell if a remote computer is actually a zombie machine. The next 
generation of proactive security tools is being built with this in mind. These systems 
are called reputation-based systems.

www.syngress.com
82	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
Firewall Inspection Methods
The level of protection that any firewall is able to provide in securing a private network 
when connected to the public Internet is directly related to the architecture(s) chosen 
for the firewall by the respective vendor. Generally speaking, most commercially available 
firewalls utilize one or more of the following firewall architectures:
Static packet filter
Stateful packet filter
Circuit-level gateway
Application-level gateway (proxy)
Intrusion prevention gateway
Deep packet inspection
Unified Threat Management (UTM)
Static Packet Filter
Packet filtering firewalls are among the oldest firewall architectures. The static packet 
filtering firewall operates only at the network layer (layer 3) of the OSI model and does 
not differentiate between application protocols. This type of firewall decides whether  
to accept or deny individual packets, based on examining fields in the packet’s IP and 
protocol headers. The static packet filter does not impact performance to any noticeable 
degree, and its low processing requirements made this an attractive option early on 
when compared to other firewalls that dragged down responsiveness. However, today’s 
higher-level firewalls deliver excellent performance as well. In addition, faster networks 
are more capable of handling the greater processing requirements of a firewall that 
operates at a higher level of the OSI stack.
The packet filtering firewall filters IP packets based on source and destination IP 
address, and source and destination port. The packet filter may lack logging facilities, 
which would make it impractical for an organization that has compliance and report-
ing requirements to which they must adhere. Also, because it examines only the 
packet headers, attackers can bypass the static packet filter with simple spoofing 
techniques, since the filter cannot tell the difference between a true and a forged 
address. Another limitation is that for larger installations, the static packet filter 
becomes unwieldy because packet-filtering rules are examined in sequential order, 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
83
and care must be taken when entering rules into the rule base. Another inherent 
limitation is that the static packet filter does not examine the entire packet, which 
makes it possible for an attacker to hide malicious commands inside unexamined 
headers or within the payload itself. Lastly, the static packet filter is not state-aware,  
so the administrator is required to configure rules for both sides of the conversation. 
Today, this type of firewall is considered very basic and limited, and may even be 
included in operating systems as an “extra.”
The Stateful Packet Filter
The next step in firewall evolution came with the stateful packet filtering firewall  
(or the stateful inspection firewall as it is often referred to). This type of firewall has 
the same limitations as the static packet filtering firewall, with the exception of being 
state-aware. The stateful packet filter still operates at the network layer of the OSI 
model, although some may extend into the transport layer (layer 4) to collect state 
information. Despite the stateful packet filter being application-unaware, it does offer 
limited advantages over the basic static packet filter.
Like the static packet filter, the stateful packet filter examines each packet’s IP and 
protocol headers to determine whether each packet should be allowed or denied. 
Also like the static packet filter, it does not examine the packet payload. The fact that 
it is stateful means that the packet filter is aware of the difference between a new and 
an established connection, which has some advantages regarding efficiency. Once a 
connection has been established, it resides in a table in RAM, and subsequent packets 
are compared to this table. If a packet is part of an existing connection, it is then 
allowed to pass without further inspection. As a result, it is not necessary to parse the 
packet filter rule base for every single packet that enters the firewall.
Although there is some performance gain over the static filter, many stateful 
packet filters operate on a single-threaded process, which cannot take full advantage 
of symmetrical multiprocessing, and which limits the performance gain possible. 
Those stateful filters that do support SMP afford up to a 30-percent increase in 
performance. Nonetheless, the performance advantage gained by packet filtering in 
general is today negligible, due to the existence of faster processors.

www.syngress.com
84	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
The Circuit-Level Gateway
The circuit-level gateway extends the concept of the packet filter by first performing 
the same packet filtering operations as the firewalls mentioned earlier, and then adding 
the extra step of verification of proper handshaking and the legitimacy of the sequence 
of numbers used in establishing the connection. As such, the circuit-level gateway 
operates at the Session layer (layer 5). The circuit-level gateway effectively breaks the 
normal client server model, thereby eliminating a direct connection between the mali-
cious hacker and the protected server and/or SCADA component. The circuit-level 
gateway examines more data than a standard packet filter. In addition to examining the 
source and destination address and source and destination port, it examines and validates 
TCP and user datagram protocol (UDP) sessions before opening a connection. The 
older packet filter bases its decisions about accepting or denying a packet on the source 
and destination address and the source port number and destination port number.  
The circuit-level gateway also adds handshaking and sequence numbers to the equation. 
It therefore has more data to use in deciding whether to admit any given packet.
Tools & Traps…
Stateful Packet Filters Are the  
Next Step in the Evolution of Firewalls
Despite everything we’ve talked about here, the stateful firewall is still vulner-
able to the same limitations and attack scenarios as the static packet filter.
Tools & Traps…
It’s Important to Verify the Three-Way Handshake
Standard guidelines recommend a three-way handshake to establish a connec-
tion at the firewall. Simple packet filters do not enforce this practice, and the 
circuit-level gateway, which does enforce it, therefore gains an advantage.

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
85
The circuit-level gateway has about the same performance metrics as the packet 
filter, and since it operates at a low level of the OSI model, it does not affect network 
performance significantly. The disadvantage is that once the connection has been 
established, any application can run across that connection, because the circuit-level 
gateway filters packets only at the Session and Network layers—not the Application 
layer. Nevertheless, the circuit-level gateway still does not examine the data content 
of the packets being sent.
A hybrid approach for SCADA would be to take advantage of the circuit-level 
gateway’s inherent ability to break the client server model and to then apply signatures 
to inspect the packet before allowing it to pass to the SCADA system (Figure 2.3).
Application-Level Gateway (Proxy)
Operating on the application layer (the highest layer of the OSI model), the applica-
tion-level gateway, like the other filters mentioned here, intercepts and examines packets 
that come into, and go out of, the firewall. In addition, it runs proxies, which prevent 
direct connection between a trusted server or client and an untrusted host. The proxies 
are application-specific, and they examine the entire packet assembly (unlike packet 
filtering and circuit-level gateways that do not assemble packet sessions). Because each 
proxy is application-specific (for example, the HTTP proxy can only copy, forward, and 
filter HTTP traffic), packets may be unable to access services for which there is no 
proxy, depending on the security software that you choose. For example, if an applica-
tion-level gateway only runs FTP and HTTP proxies, only packets generated by these 
services can pass by the firewall, while all other services are blocked.
This type of firewall therefore has a stronger security infrastructure, because:
1.	 It eliminates the need for a direct connection between a trusted client or 
server and an untrusted host.
Figure 2.3 A Hybrid Approach to SCADA
Inbound
Access Controls
Network
Access
Rules
Auth
& Role-
Based
Access
Auth
& Role-
Based
Access
Stops Unknown Threats
Stops Known Threats
IPS
Outbound
Access Controls
Network
Access
Rules
Virus &
Malware
Prevention
Intelligent
Application
Inspection
Reputation
Services

www.syngress.com
86	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
2.	 It examines the entire packet assembly, including the assembled payload in 
context.
3.	 It facilitates the preferred “deny all unless explicitly allowed” policy by 
offering deep configuration options over how a protected application  
can be communicated with.
The proxies are able to filter particular information—on specific individual 
commands in the application protocols, the proxies are designed to copy, forward, 
and filter. For example, an FTP gateway could filter multiple commands to allow a 
high degree of granularity on permission levels for specific users of the protected 
FTP service.
Because it inspects the complete packet, and because it is application-specific 
(applications that do not have proxies installed cannot run), the application gateway is 
one of the most secure firewall architectures available. This type of firewall eliminates 
many different classes of attacks that could otherwise penetrate firewalls that operate 
only on lower levels of the OSI model.
Because it breaks the direct connection to the server behind the firewall, the 
application proxy eliminates the risk of an entire class of covert channel attacks.  
In addition, the application gateway, when run on a symmetric multiprocessing 
appliance, consumes only a negligible amount of processing and has little impact  
on network performance.
Simply described, the path of a packet across a strong application proxy is as follows:
1.	 The new packet arrives at the external interface. Layer 4 data is tested to 
validate that the IP source and destination, as well as the service ports, are 
acceptable to the firewall’s security policy.
2.	 For every “good” packet, a new empty datagram is created on the internal 
side of the firewall. This eliminates the possibility of an attacker hiding 
malicious data in an unused protocol header.
3.	 Protocol anomaly testing is performed on the packet to validate that all 
protocol headers are within defined protocol specifications.
4.	 The application proxy applies command-level controls and validates these 
against the user’s permission levels.
5.	 After the packet has been determined to be protocol-compliant and the 
application-level commands validated against policy, the permitted content  
is copied to the new datagram on the internal side of the firewall.

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
87
Intrusion Prevention Gateway
The best modern firewalls go beyond even the capabilities of the application-level 
proxy firewall with the addition of an integrated intrusion prevention system (IPS). 
This type of firewall not only examines the data contained in the application payload, 
but also interprets the intent of that data. Using a combination of pattern matching, 
heuristics, statistics, behavioral patterns, and reputation analysis, the IPS is able to 
“sense” malicious activity before it penetrates the network.
Most IPS gateways use a library of signatures, which contain signatures of mali-
cious activity and known vulnerabilities, against which packets are compared as they 
cross the gateway. The best operation of signature databases will include an auto-
matic frequent update to minimize “zero-hour” attacks that cross the network 
threshold before the signature has had a chance to make it into the database. 
However, the alarming frequency of new vulnerabilities and malicious attacks means 
that there is still a very high likelihood that something will be missed by the IPS. 
Therefore, an IPS that is strictly based on signatures is limited and exposes the 
network to an unnecessary risk. The IPS should be used as a complement to, and 
not a replacement for, an effective Application-layer proxy firewall defense. 
Furthermore, the IPS should go beyond signature-based defenses to also include 
predictive and reputation-based technologies that evaluate unknown risks and 
prevent “zero-hour” attacks.
Tools & Traps…
Current Application Proxy Limitations in SCADA Security
While the application proxy clearly raises protocol and application awareness 
to the highest level possible, its use in SCADA security is today limited due  
to its lack of SCADA-specific application and protocol support. The use of a 
circuit-level gateway to break the client server model, along with integrated 
IPS to compare the traffic against known attack signatures, may currently be 
a more effective solution.

www.syngress.com
88	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
Deep Packet Inspection
“Deep packet inspection” may sound advanced, but the name is somewhat deceptive. 
This type of firewall still does little more than inspect packets against outdated signa-
tures, and does nothing to detect and prevent unknown attacks. The signature-based 
model has merit and it does afford a rapid response, but relying exclusively on a 
signature-based model is dangerous. A simple way to circumvent a deep packet 
inspection firewall is just to add a little white space in the data before or after a 
command. White space is usually tolerated by most applications, and the addition of a 
blank space or two would cause the signature to fail to match the signature database.
With hundreds of new vulnerabilities being detected every week, developing new 
signatures and adding them to the inspection database is a difficult task. 
The deep packet inspection firewall, like most stateful inspection firewalls, focuses 
on finding, and subsequently denying, bad packets. In fact, the most effective 
approach, as demonstrated in strong application proxy firewalls, is to allow packets 
that are known to be good, and then deny everything else. Since most protocols on 
the Internet are standards-based, the best approach is to create an application proxy 
that is protocol-aware, and use the standards as the basis for deciding whether or not 
to admit a packet. The opposite approach taken by deep packet inspection leaves the 
network vulnerable, because it requires frequent updates whenever any new type of 
attack is unleashed.
Another major limitation of the deep packet inspection is the lack of protocol 
anomaly detection. These firewalls, unlike a strong application-proxy firewall, often 
Tools & Traps…
Deep Packet Inspection Limitations in SCADA Security
With hundreds of new vulnerabilities being detected every week and the 
recent trend in increased attack obfuscation continuing for vendors, develop-
ing new signatures and adding them to the inspection database is a difficult 
if not increasingly impossible task.

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
89
still take the less secure approach of seeking out “bad” packets and dropping them, 
and then allowing everything else in that has not been identified as “bad.”
Unified Threat Management (UTM)
Unified Threat Management is the latest and most innovative development in firewall-
ing. According to IDC, a leading analyst firm, UTM security appliances unify and 
integrate multiple security features onto a single hardware platform, including net-
work firewall capabilities, network intrusion detection and prevention, and gateway 
anti-virus. Some UTM offerings go further, incorporating an anti-spam and URL 
filtering capability on a hardened operating system as well. The UTM segment is the 
fastest growing segment of the firewall market.
Reasons exist even beyond convenience and practicality for integrating multiple 
threat protection applications into the same appliance and under the same interface. 
Many modern attacks today are blended attacks, which do not utilize any one-attack 
vector exclusively. For example, a blended attack may target multiple protocols, such as 
e-mail (SMTP) and the Web (HTTP), and it may do this by first sending out an e-mail, 
(which in itself may not contain any malware) that then tricks the recipient into click-
ing a Web link. The recipient is then taken to an infected site, where the malware is 
downloaded onto the computer. Mitigation of this sort of attack can take place either 
in the e-mail messaging protection (anti-spam) application, which would recognize the 
nature of the attack, or in the second stage, when the user attempts to go to the 
infected Web site, it would be blocked by the URL filter.
The addition of URL filtering is an important part of UTM that is often not 
included by other UTM vendors. URL filtering is often a first line of defense, espe-
cially against zero-hour threats. In addition, spam has also grown into a complicated 
and dangerous threat, and it is imperative to reduce the risk of spam with a best-of-
breed anti-spam capability integrated into the UTM appliance.

www.syngress.com
90	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
Summary
SCADA systems evolved out of isolated pneumatic and analog control systems and are 
simply not equipped to play a part in today’s Internet-connected Web 2.0 world. Even 
traditional network security procedures such as port scanning (to determine the open 
ports on a network-connected device) can wreak havoc within a SCADA network.
The first step in SCADA risk mitigation is establishing a SCADA network secu-
rity policy. Second would be bringing all SCADA component software and firmware 
up to current stable revision levels. Next would be to eliminate the security issue 
with what has been regarded as the weakest link in SCADA—the interconnection to 
the corporate network. Significant risk mitigation can be obtained by installing a 
firewall between the SCADA network and the corporate network. However, care 
must be taken in the selection of the firewall architecture. Put simply, current popular 
solutions are not able to mitigate the risk that the SCADA network is exposed to 
when connected to the corporate network. The most effective firewall architecture at 
this time is a circuit-Level gateway that first breaks the client server model and then 
also applies IPS signatures for known attacks.
Solutions Fast Track
Just What Is SCADA?
SCADA systems evolved out of pneumatic and analog control systems. Once 
using proprietary technologies, SCADA systems now use generally available 
TCP/IP networking and are exposed to the very same risks as any other 
enterprise network.
Common SCADA Components
Remote Terminal Units (RTUs)
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC)
Human Machine Interfaces (HMIs)
Distributed Control Systems (DCSs)
Hybrid controllers
Event loggers
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
91
The Architecture Most Common to SCADA Systems
Most SCADA systems are installed in a distributed architecture.
The First Step in Mitigating  
Risk in a SCADA Environment
The first step In risk mitigation is the development of a SCADA security 
policy. Once policies are in place, they must be continuously updated and 
monitored to account for changes in the SCADA network, SCADA 
component software updates, and (as with any enterprise network) the 
addition and subtraction of users (operators).
Typical High-Level  
Weaknesses Found in SCADA Systems
Typical high-level weaknesses found in SCADA systems in use today  
are that they:
Do not require any authentication
Do not require any authorization
Do not use encryption
Do not properly handle errors and exceptions
The Weakest Link in SCADA Systems
Most agree that the weakest link in SCADA security is the interconnection 
between the SCADA network and the enterprise network. This inter­
connection effectively can connect the SCADA system in some ways to  
the public Internet.
Eliminating Interconnection Risks with a Firewall
A great deal of the associated risk can be mitigated with the selection of the 
correct firewall. However, firewall architecture is critical to the amount of 
risk mitigation that will be gained. Simply put, the most popular firewalls in 
use today cannot afford any meaningful risk mitigation in a SCADA 
environment.
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
92	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
The Firewall Architecture that Affords the  
Highest Risk Mitigation in a SCADA Environment
A circuit-level gateway that first breaks the client server model and then  
also applies IPS signatures for known attacks is the most effective firewall 
architecture since it provides the highest level of risk mitigation.
Resources
With the increased awareness of the need to secure SCADA in an effort to 
protect our critical infrastructure, a growing number of SCADA security 
resources are available on the Internet. The following list offers resources that 
the author has found useful.
The Center For SCADA Security, www.sandia.gov/scada/home.htm
DigitalBond – Securing Critical Infrastructure, www.digitalbond.com/
The Cyber Security Alliance, www.csialliance.org/issues/scada/
21 Steps to Improve the Cyber Security of SCADA Networks, www.oe.netl.
doe.gov/docs/prepare/21stepsbooklet.pdf
SANS – Security for Critical Infrastructure, www.sans.org/reading_room/
whitepapers/warfare/1644.php
Tennable Security – Nessus Plug-Ins for SCADA, http://blog.tenablesecurity.
com/2006/12/nessus_3_scada_.html
IBM – SCADA Security Best Practices, http://www-935.ibm.com/services/
us/index.wss/offering/iss/a1027203
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
	
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition • Chapter 2	
93
Frequently Asked Questions
Q:	Why all the concern about SCADA security today?
A:	SCADA has evolved from proprietary pneumatic to proprietary analog systems 
and now today to digital systems interconnected over TCP/IP. In the shift away 
from the use of proprietary systems to the use of TCP/IP SCADA has lost a 
great deal of its historical Security-by-Obscurity. Further; today’s SCADA systems 
when connected to the enterprise network to share data with back-end systems 
effectively exposes the SCADA to all of the risks associated with the enterprise 
network and if that enterprise is connected to the public Internet then the 
SCADA is also then exposed to all of the risks of the public Internet as well.
Q:	How many SCADA security incidents are reported annually?
A:	The annual reporting to British Columbia Institute of Technology (BCIT) 
SCADA database for the past year was just over 100 verified incidents. However, 
security experts believe the actual number of incidents is between 2,000 and, 
3000 because like network security–related incidents, they are under-reported.
Q:	Why can’t I download one of the open source network vulnerability scanners and 
run it against my SCADA network?
A:	SCADA systems more than five years old were known to have been placed in 
service with incomplete or missing TCP/IP error handling capabilities. A simple 
port scan could crash the SCADA network. So, it is recommended to configure  
a lab environment of “like” components and perform scans to determine if the 
components are vulnerable to error handling issues.
Q:	Why can’t I just install a popular firewall between the enterprise and my SCADA 
network to mitigate my SCADA risks?
A:	Today’s most popular firewalls are, in fact, popular because of their ease of use, 
and their low cost and low impact on the network—NOT because of the risk 
mitigation they provide.

www.syngress.com
94	
Chapter 2 • Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
Q:	What is the problem with connecting my SCADA system to the corporate 
network so we can use process data in our back-end systems?
A:	Connecting the SCADA system to the enterprise network poses nearly the same 
risks as connecting the SCADA network directly to the public Internet. Worms, 
viruses, and malware are common within the enterprise network and can be a 
major issue within a SCADA network. However, when connected to the enter-
prise network through a properly configured application firewall, these risks are 
minimized.
Q:	What is the first step in reducing my SCADA risks?
A:	As with network security, the first step is a security policy to define the  
ground rules.
Q:	There are so many kinds of firewalls, which one affords the maximum risk  
mitigation in the SCADA environment?
A:	Theoretically, an application-level gateway affords maximum risk mitigation. 
However, they do not currently offer full support for the many proprietary SCADA 
protocols and applications. Hence, a circuit-level gateway that first breaks the client 
server model and then also applies IPS signatures for known attacks is most effective.
Q:	Deep inspection is a popular firewall methodology. Why do you recommend not 
using it for SCADA?
A:	Deep inspection does not break the client server model. Thus, a malicious hacker 
would have a direct connection to the protected SCADA component. Deep 
inspection does not provide for any protocol anomaly detection, and in SCADA, 
due to historically poor TCP/IP error handling, even a poorly formed packet for 
a given protocol can wreak havoc in a SCADA network. Lastly, they rely upon a 
negative security model that can only protect against attacks for which it has a 
specific signature. Any packet that it cannot identify is simply passed along to the 
protected server.

95
Chapter 3
SCADA Security 
Assessment 
Methodology
Greg Miles, (Ph.D., CISSP#24431, CISM#0300338, IAM, IEM) co-author of 
Security Assessment: Case Studies for implementing the NSA IAM (Syngress 
Publishing, ISBN 1-932266-96-8), Network Security Evaluation: Using the  
NSA IEM (Syngress Publishing, ISBN: 1-597490-35-0), and Security Interviews 
Exposed: Secrets to Landing your Next Information Security Job (Wiley 
Publishing, ISBN-10: 0471779873) is the President, and Chief Financial Officer 
of Security Horizon, Inc. Security Horizon is a Global, Veteran-Owned Small 
Business headquartered in Colorado Springs, Colorado. Security Horizon pro-
vides global information security professional services, training, and publishes 
The Security Journal, a quarterly online publication. Greg is a U.S. Air Force 
Veteran and has been supporting the technology and security community for 
the last 22+ years. Greg’s background includes work with NSA, NASA, and 
DISA. Greg has supported efforts covering security assessments, evaluations, 
policy, penetration testing, incident response, and computer forensics.
Greg holds a Ph.D. in Engineering Management from Kennedy Western 
University, a master’s degree in Management Administration from Central 
Michigan University, and a bachelor’s degree in Electrical Engineering (with a 
concentration in Control Systems and Power Systems) from the University of 
Cincinnati. Greg is a member of the Information System Security Association 
(ISSA) and the Information System Audit and Control Association (ISACA).  
He is also Adjunct Faculty for the University of Advancing Technology  
(www.uat.edu).

www.syngress.com
96	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
Introduction
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) Systems have evolved over the 
years. With the growth of technology, the desire to simplify, the desire to remote 
manage, and the need to reduce labor costs, SCADA has moved to be more in line 
with traditional TCP/IP networks. With this evolution, the need for effective, com-
prehensive assessments of SCADA systems has never been greater. Old paradigms 
must change, organizations need to understand the threats they face, and appropriate 
protection measures must be incorporated. This chapter will discuss the need for 
SCADA security assessments and provide a comprehensive approach to conducting 
SCADA security assessments.
Why Do Assessments on SCADA Systems?
Historically, SCADA systems have been separate non-Internet-connected systems that 
provide the “command and control” for critical infrastructure. With the advent of 
technology and the desire to implement this technology to make communications and 
support easier and faster, SCADA systems have evolved into being very much like your 
typical office network. One of the challenges though is that the mentality concerning 
SCADA system security hasn’t always been embraced. Some organizations still don’t 
understand that the threat to SCADA systems has dramatically increased over the last 
several years due to these network-like connections. “Security by obscurity” is no 
longer an option for SCADA security.
Tools & Traps…
Security by Obscurity
“Security by obscurity” is no longer an option for SCADA security. SCADA sys-
tems are a network presence and face significant threats and vulnerabilities. 
This requires a paradigm change for many personnel working in the critical 
infrastructure business.

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
97
Assessments Are the Right Thing to Do
Protecting the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of critical process, operational, 
corporate, and customer information should be enough of a motivator for organizations 
to assure that their SCADA systems are protected. This is the concept of due diligence 
and is generally referenced by considering whether the security protections compare 
sufficiently to what would be considered normal and reasonable in the industry. 
Organizations must want to protect our critical infrastructure from malicious hackers, 
botnets, Denial-of-Service attacks, viruses, corporate espionage, and human error.
Events such as the 2003 Northeast power outage that affected parts of the United 
States and Canada, the 2008 Florida power outage that affected large parts of Florida, 
and the 2007 sponsored hack at the Idaho National Laboratories where a hacker was 
able to blow up a generator should be a pretty serious wake-up call for the industry. 
No longer is SCADA separate and not exposed. It is very much out there as a target, 
with enough serious threats to warrant significant attention to the protection of 
SCADA and the information that is processed, transmitted, and/or stored.
Assessments Are Required
Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD)-7 talks about the protection of 
critical infrastructure. SCADA systems are generally serving a command-and-control 
function within this critical infrastructure and therefore have a direct mandate for 
protection. Other requirements come from the North American Electric Reliability 
Council (NERC). Believe it or not, guidance is available on how to implement and 
protect SCADA.
Information Protection Requirements
United States Federal Government and Department of Defense (DoD) have done a 
great deal of work on information protection and information assurance. The National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has developed an entire series of special 
publications with information on things to do to protect systems. The National 
Security Agency (NSA) has developed and provided two methodologies that you can 
be certified in for assessing organizations and information systems for vulnerabilities. 
The NSA INFOSEC Assessment Methodology (IAM) focuses on an organizational 
view of vulnerabilities, while the NSA INFOSEC Evaluation Methodology (IEM) 
focuses on finding technical vulnerabilities within the information systems that  
process, transmit, and/or store critical information.

www.syngress.com
98	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
This author is a firm believer that if you study the various standards out there for 
any industry, greater than 80 percent of the requirements are the same. These com-
monsense requirements reflect a best practice approach to protecting critical informa-
tion. As we discuss the standards and methodologies in this chapter, you will see some 
of this reflected in the comparisons.
National Institute of  
Standards and Technology (NIST) Guidance
NIST has defined a layered security model that has 17 control families (Table 3.1), 
which covers a tremendous amount of security protection mechanisms. This informa-
tion can be found in NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-53, Recommended Security 
Controls for Federal Information Systems. SCADA systems are not necessarily 
Federal Information Systems; however, NIST’s work lays an excellent foundation for 
security within organizations.
Table 3.1 NIST Control Families
Class
Control Family
Management
Risk Assessment
Management
Planning
Management
System and Services Acquisition
Management
Certification, Accreditation, and Security Assessments
Operational
Personnel Security
Operational
Physical and Environmental Protection
Operational
Contingency Planning
Operational
Configuration Management
Operational
Maintenance
Operational
System and Information Integrity
Operational
Media Protection
Operational
Incident Response
Operational
Awareness and Training
Technical
Identification and Authentication
Technical
Access Control
Technical
Audit and Accountability
Technical
System and Communications Protection

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
99
North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC) 
Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) Standards
NERC (www.nerc.com) works with the U.S. Department of Energy and the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security to coordinate security needs and requirements. 
This collaboration allowed NERC the opportunity to create a series of Critical 
Infrastructure Protection Standards. These standards are: 
CIP-001 – Sabotage Reporting
CIP-002 – Critical Cyber Asset Identification
CIP-003 – Security Management Controls
CIP-004 – Personnel and Training
CIP-005 – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-006 – Physical Security of Critical Cyber Assets
CIP-007 – Systems Security Management
CIP-008 – Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-009 – Recovery Plans for Critical Cyber Assets
Water Infrastructure  
Security Enhancement (WISE)
The American Water Works Association, the American Society of Civil Engineers,  
and the Water Environment Federation have taken a grant from the United States 
Environmental Protection Agency to develop WISE (Water Infrastructure Security 
Enhancement). WISE provides security guidance for water and wastewater/storm water 
utilities. These voluntary (so far) standards are heavily dependent upon physical security 
in the water utilities, but WISE does address an entire process of risk assessment and 
risk management that can easily be transitioned into supporting information security 
needs. It is a good start and may lead to greater guidance on the technical security as 
well. More information on WISE can be found at www.awwa.org/science/wise/.
The Critical Infrastructure  
Information Act of 2002
The Critical Infrastructure Information Act of 2002 and subsequent procedure 
clarifications established how Critical Infrastructure Information (CII) is received, 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
100	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
validated, handled, stored, marked, and used. SCADA Systems have both direct and 
indirect involvement with CII. The United States Department of Homeland Security 
defines CII as information not normally in the public domain (including system, 
facility, and operation security information) that is associated with the security of 
critical infrastructure or protected systems.
An Approach to SCADA  
Information Security Assessments
A methodology for conducting a security assessment is a process that utilizes a 
well-defined framework to identify the potential security vulnerabilities and deter-
mine what corrective measures must be implemented to protect the confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability of SCADA data. Figure 3.1 represents a logical flow 
diagram of the security assessment process. The National Security Agency (NSA) 
INFOSEC Assessment Methodology (IAM) and the INFOSEC Evaluation 
Methodology (IEM) are the cornerstone of the assessment process discussed  
in this chapter.
Figure 3.1 Security Assessment Flow Diagram

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
101
Prior to any project starting, several considerations must be taken into account to 
assure a complete understanding of the requirements. The pre-project activities will 
then lead into the three primary phases of the assessment, which are Pre-Assessment, 
On-Site Assessment, and Post-Assessment. Each phase will be outlined in the follow-
ing sections. Table 3.2 provides a high-level breakdown of the activities that occur 
during the full assessment process.
Table 3.2 The Assessment Process
Pre-Project 
Activities
Pre-Assessment 
Phase
On-Site Phase
Post-Assessment 
Phase
Receive the 
Assessment 
request.
Vet the assessment 
with the customer.
Research the 
organization.
Research appli-
cable regulatory 
and policy 
requirements.
Determine if it is a 
baseline activity or 
a repeat 
assessment.
Make a go/no-go 
decision.
Refine customer 
needs.
Gain an under-
standing of the 
customer mission.
Gain an under-
standing of the 
criticality of the 
customer’s 
information.
Determine cus-
tomer impact if 
confidentiality, 
integrity, and/or 
availability is lost.
Identify systems, 
including system 
boundaries.
Determine cus-
tomer concerns 
and constraints.
Coordinate logis-
tics with the 
customer.
Write the 
Assessment Plan.
Explore and confirm 
the information and 
conclusions made 
during the Pre-
Assessment Phase.
Perform data gath-
ering and validation 
through interviews, 
documentation, and 
system 
demonstrations.
Conduct technical 
scanning to deter-
mine technical 
vulnerabilities.
Provide initial 
analysis and feed-
back to the 
customer.
Finalize analysis.
Develop SVCM and 
OVCM information.
Prepare and coor-
dinate a final 
report.

www.syngress.com
102	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
Pre-Project Activities
Pre-project activities include several steps that assist the assessment providers in 
assuring a basic understanding of the security needs of the customer. Several primary 
actions in the pre-project area are important to prepare the assessors for conducting 
the assessment process. These include:
Vetting the assessment request
Gaining management and technical buy-in for the assessment
Researching the organization
Researching the current regulatory and policy requirements
Determining whether the action is a baseline activity or a  
repeated assessment
Making a go/no-go decision
Vetting the Assessment Request
Vetting, in this case, is simply assuring that the customer is getting both what they 
expect and what they need from the assessment process. Many times, organizations 
will catch hold of a buzzword like “penetration testing,” “assessment,” or “evaluation” 
without having an understanding of what the terms mean. A good approach to 
vetting is to spend quality time with the customer discussing the positive and nega-
tive aspects of each of the processes and explaining what the customer can expect at 
the end of the process, including deliverables.
The vetting process is accomplished by a combination of direct interaction with 
the customer and a small scoping questionnaire. It is then reinforced by educating  
the customer on the standard best practices for an assessment and any supporting 
regulations or policies that are applicable. Without the vetting process, you cannot 
understand or meet customer expectations, which can lead to project failure.
Gaining Buy-In from  
Management and Technical Personnel
Getting buy-in for the assessment from both the management staff and technical 
staff is essential to a successful project. Buy-in helps reinforce the importance of the 
assessment process and brings the organization’s attention to the importance and 
benefits of conducting an assessment within the organization. Without buy-in, 
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
103
official and unofficial roadblocks or constraints may be put on the assessment team, 
which could lead to project failure. Work hard on the front-end of the project to 
assure this buy-in, which will assist in a good experience and a smooth-running 
assessment.
Management Buy-In
Management support for the assessment is absolutely required since management 
does several things that will drive the success or failure of the project. For instance, 
it sets the tone of the organization and the necessity to show how important security 
is to the organization. Management will also enforce the necessity of staff cooperating 
with, and supporting, the assessment team.
To gain management buy-in, include them in the process. Help them feel  
ownership of the information, the determinations, and the responsibility to assure 
security. The use of “Fear-Uncertainty-Doubt” (otherwise known as the FUD factor) 
as a tool for getting management support should only be used as a last resort. A better 
way is to help management understand considerations such as:
Cost Avoidance
Return on Investment (ROI)
Regulatory Compliance
Education
Information Criticality, System Criticality, and Impact
Technical Staff Buy-In
Can you treat the technical staff the same way you treat management? The answer 
is, of course, NO! Technical staff will think of things from a different approach than 
management. Technical staff buy-in is also essential to the success of the project, 
however, so spend some quality time with the technical staff early in the assessment 
process. To gain technical staff buy-in, you must:
Sell the assessment as an educational experience
Show that you are there to help, not hurt, the organization
Involve the technical staff in the process
Demonstrate your knowledge and capabilities without being arrogant
Develop a rapport with the technical staff
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
104	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
Researching the Organization
Another important step in understanding your customer is to research publicly 
available information about the organization. This will help display your interest in 
the customer, plus give you some points of discussion and clarification about the 
organization. Sources of information for this include:
The customer’s Web site  Shows how the organization wants to be seen 
by the public.
The competitors of the customer Web sites  Shows the potential areas 
competitors see as important and may identify some deficiencies, as well as 
additional questions to ask the organization.
Whois  With a “whois” query, you can input a URL and learn what 
IP address is associated with that URL. In this case, it helps you understand 
who a customer’s Internet service provider (ISP) might be and other possible 
interconnections within the customer environment.
Arin.net (American Registry for Internet Numbers)  Utilizes a special 
“whois” query of its database through entering an IP range; it will show 
ownership information of that range of IPs.
10Q/10K Reports  These are required quarterly (Q) and annual (K) 
reports that must be done by public companies to report the status of their 
business. It includes information like locations, employees, and so on, and 
may be useful in determining if there are areas of the business that may have 
been missed for assessment purposes.
Business discussion boards  These are Internet locations or blogs which 
discuss businesses in both a positive and/or negative way. These discussion 
boards can provide some useful information about the culture of the organi-
zation. However, you must be cautious since some of the information is 
more opinion- or emotion-driven than fact-driven.
Internet Search Engines  Any of the Internet search engines can help you 
find useful information beyond the organization’s Web site. You might find 
articles written about the organization; press releases on products, services, 
or partnerships; and information about the corporation or leadership of the 
organization. This will help in better understanding the mission of the 
organization and its political and leadership structure.
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
105
Researching Regulatory  
and Policy Requirements
Most organizations are faced with the reality of falling under some kind of regula-
tory, legislative, or industry requirements. Especially when dealing with SCADA 
systems and other systems that affect critical infrastructure. Homeland Security 
Presidential Directive (HSPD) 7 drives the requirement for protecting critical 
infrastructure.
The pre-project efforts involve identifying the applicable regulations, legislation, 
and industry policies. This will vary between different organizations, and this research 
is essential to assure that you gather the appropriate requirements. You are conducting 
this research prior to the start of the project so you can talk coherently about the 
drivers and impacts within the organization. This does not mean you don’t have to ask 
the organization about what they must follow since there may be some unique aspects 
of their business that must be considered. The following is just a starter list of the 
different regulatory or legislative requirements the organization may be affected by:
HIPAA  Health Information Portability and Accountability Act
SOX  Sarbanes-Oxley
PCI  Payment Card Industry
GLBA  Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
FERPA  Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
NERC  North American Electric Reliability Corporation
FERC  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Tip
Learn as much as possible about the customer before starting the project. 
This will assist in the assessment team’s ability to effectively facilitate the 
assessment process.

www.syngress.com
106	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
Determining if this Is a  
Baseline Assessment or a Repeat Assessment
You are always hopeful this is not the first assessment that is being conducted on the 
SCADA system. However, due to the fact that SCADA security has been largely ignored 
over the years, this may very well be the first security assessment conducted. In that case, 
it is the baseline assessment. The value of it being a repeat assessment would be the 
existing information you can pull from to start the process. But if it is a baseline assess-
ment, you need to expect to spend more time on the front-end of the project to docu-
ment and better understand what is currently in place within the assessed organization.
Making a Go/No-Go Decision
Every project has a go/no-go decision point. In most cases, it will be a “Go”; 
however, if you cannot get management and technical support, or if there are 
severe limitations placed on the assessment team, you may have to make the 
difficult decision of “No-Go.”
Pre-Assessment Activities
The Pre-Assessment process is an essential activity that will provide a great deal of 
information and important mechanisms to assure that the organization gains a level 
of buy-in from both management and technical staff.
The Pre-Assessment process provides the following important identification 
activities:
Organizational mission
Critical information
Impact considerations
Information criticality matrices
Critical systems
Defining of security objectives
Logical and physical boundaries
Rules of engagement, concerns, and constraints
Legal authorization
Writing the Assessment Plan
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
107
Determining the Organizational Mission
Understanding the organization mission assists in the remaining activities of the 
assessment. The mission will provide the final determination of what the security 
objectives and security requirements are for the organization. It will also drive the 
critical information considerations, impacts, and will lead to some of the concerns 
and constraints. To obtain this information, you must talk with the customer and take 
the information from the research completed in the pre-project activities. An example 
of a simplified organization mission might be: “Provide reliable electric power to 
the state of California while operating safely, securely, and within the federal, state, 
and regulatory guidelines.” This will be documented in the Assessment Plan.
Identifying Critical Information
Critical information is simply the information that the organization requires to 
function. There is a tendency for firms to immediately jump to systems without 
thinking about what information is important to the organization. One aspect of 
critical information identification is that it must be done with the customer. In the 
end, it must be accepted by the organization as their information.
In order to get this critical information, a brainstorm session is typically done with 
various senior members of the organization in a brainstorming session. You will ask 
them, “What is the information you must have to make your organization function or 
to meet your mission?” You will then take that information and roll it up into a man-
ageable set of critical information types. Please understand, this is not an easy process. 
You will need to spend a day or two with senior members of the organization to sort 
out this information. Some examples of possible information types might include:
Power Consumption Information
Generator Status Information
Pump Station Information
Personnel Information
Scheduling Information
Customer Information
Billing Information
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
108	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
The lists will vary by organization and according to the industries in which the 
organizations function. You cannot do a “cookie cutter” listing of information types 
even if the organizations are in the same industry. Each organization will have differ-
ent areas of concern, different customers, and different business processes, all of which 
will drive different critical information types.
Example: Information Criticality
The Organization for Optimal Power Supply (OOPS) example will be utilized 
throughout the rest of the chapter—for example, purposes under permission from 
National Security Agency (NSA) INFOSEC Assurance Training and Rating Program 
(IATRP). More information on IATRP can be found at www.iatrp.com.
Business Description
The Organization for Optimal Power Supply (OOPS) provides electricity to 1/20th 
of the United States’ citizens. They constantly monitor power consumption and 
redirect power according to demands. This includes initiating or terminating  
operations of generator stations.
Historically, OOPS has had a difficult time starting up idle generator stations 
when they are needed. Therefore, they have decided to place servers in each station 
to control the generator’s output and status. To activate a generator station, the 
regional office calls into the server and logs onto the machine. After a generator 
station has been activated, it updates its status and output to the regional server using 
hourly dial-up connections.
The control of all the OOPS generators is run through a main control center at 
the corporate headquarters. The control center decides when to activate any genera-
tors and which areas are in need of power. All of the regional offices are connected 
to the main server via frame relay lines, which allow for rapid updates of the current 
situation. All updates are done automatically by the servers, but can be initiated by 
authorized users if necessary.
Mission Statement
The Organization for Optimal Power Supply (OOPS) provides electricity to 1/20th of 
the United States’ citizens. OOPS constantly monitors power consumption and redi-
rects power according to demands. This includes initiating or terminating operations of 
generator stations.

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
109
Critical Information for OOPS
Through a brainstorming session and detailed conversations with the OOPS 
customer, the following critical information types were agreed to between the 
assessment team and OOPS:
Power Consumption Information
Power Forecast Information
Generator Status Information
Customer Information
Corporate Information
Personnel Information
Please remember, this is not system information, but information that is needed 
for the OOPS to continue operations. The loss of confidentiality, integrity, and/or 
availability (CIA) of this critical information may lead to temporary or permanent 
damage to overall business operations or the business mission.
Identifying Impacts
The next step in the process is to identify the impact to the organization if there is a 
loss of CIA of the identified critical information. It is important at this point to 
identify the definitions of CIA.
Confidentiality  The information is only viewable by those with a need 
and an authorization to view it. Others may not view it. Sometimes called 
“need-to-know.”
Integrity  The information is unchanged from its original state.
Availability  The information is there when needed by those with the 
authorization to access or view it.
The organization may choose to add additional impact categories based on the 
business needs. Some of these additional categories may include (but are not limited to):
Non-repudiation
Accountability
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
110	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
Authorization
Accessibility
Identifying the impacts to an organization is absolutely the hardest part of the 
assessment methodology. An important aspect of identification of impact definition is 
that it must be done with the customer since it has to have the customer’s stamp of 
approval when completed. Why is this so difficult? Getting the customer to agree 
with themselves on what it means to lose CIA of their critical information is very 
difficult. It requires them to seriously consider their overall business operations, 
conduct a type of business impact analysis, and actually document and agree to the 
impacts as a whole based on their mission. The impact definitions are generally 
defined as High, Medium, and Low Impact.
Example Continued: OOPS Impact
In real-world situations, definitions will typically be between half a page and one 
page long. For presentation purposes in this chapter, we will keep it simple. However, 
please understand that this is just an example and more detail is needed to get a full 
picture of impact. For our purposes, the identified impacts to OOPS for the loss of 
CIA are the following:
High Impact  Competitive market loss greater than 10 percent; rolling 
blackouts; loss of generator station control greater than one hour.
Medium Impact  Competitive market loss greater than 3 percent but less 
than 10 percent, or a regional blackout; or loss of generator station control 
greater than 15 minutes but less than one hour.
Low Impact  Competitive market loss less than 3 percent or a regional 
brownout; or loss of generator station control less than 15 minutes.
The Information Criticality Matrix
Taking into consideration the critical information types and the impact attributes, 
we can now build an information criticality matrix. The top line is simply the impact 
attributes (CIAs), while the rows are the critical information types identified by the 
organization. Table 3.3 represents the framework for the Organizational Information 
Criticality Matrix (OICM).
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
111
Using the Impact Definitions
The impact definitions previously created are used to fill out the matrix. Be sure to 
create the impact definitions before trying to complete the matrix. The definitions of 
High, Medium, and Low will be utilized to determine what the impact is for the loss 
of any aspect of CIA. Table 3.4 represents what the chart may look like when the 
values are input into the OICM.
Organizational Criticality
The last step with the OICM is to take the highest level in each column to summa-
rize the table and indicate the most critical impact areas for the organization. For our 
sample based on Table 3.5, the Organizational Criticality (sometimes called the “high 
water mark”) would be the following.
Table 3.4  OICM Sample
OICM
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
Critical Info 1
H
H
M
Critical Info 2
H
M
M
Critical Info 3
L
L
M
Critical Info 4, etc…
H
M
L
Table 3.5 An Organizational Criticality Sample
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
Organizational  
Criticality
H
H
M
Table 3.3 OICM Framework
OICM
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
Critical Info 1
Critical Info 2
Critical Info 3
Critical Info 4, etc…

www.syngress.com
112	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
Example Continued: OOPS OICM
Based on the information we obtained from OOPS and through various discussions, 
we can now create the OICM for OOPS. Remember, we are using the definitions 
created earlier to fill out the matrix.
To complete this matrix, start with the first information type and ask yourself, 
“What can happen if I lose the confidentiality of my power consumption informa-
tion?” Loss of the confidentiality of the power consumption information would result 
in a 3 percent or less competitive market loss, which is a Low. You then go to the 
next impact attribute, which is integrity. Again, ask yourself, “What can happen if 
I lose the integrity of my power consumption information?” In this case, inaccurate 
power consumption information could result in the generation of too much, or too 
little power, which could lead to brownouts or blackouts and loss of revenue or 
competitive advantage and would have a High Impact. The loss of availability of your 
power consumption information would have the same impact as loss of integrity.
Let us work through the Generator Status Information type. If you lose the 
confidentiality of the generator status information, you may end up having too much 
information available to the public, allowing someone with ill intent to attempt to 
exploit the information to their advantage. For example, if it is known that a particu-
lar generator is down for maintenance and the backup generator is in use, someone 
could target the backup generator as a weak point in the system with no current 
backup capabilities. Therefore, the loss of confidentiality of the Generator Status 
Information would be at least a Medium. You do the same analysis with integrity and 
availability and find they could lead to High Impacts because they could cause 
brownouts or blackouts and a loss of revenue or competitive advantage. They could 
also lead to serious damage to the equipment.
Use the same concepts to complete the rest of the matrix, as shown in Table 3.6. 
Remember, however, that the matrix must be completed with the customer, and 
ultimately approved by the customer.

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
113
Now we determine the organizational criticality based on the highest level in 
each column and end up with the result displayed in Table 3.7. This shows that 
integrity and availability have a higher importance than confidentiality in relation to 
OOPS. This may be a common organizational criticality you might see within the 
SCADA environment.
Identifying Critical Systems/Networks
Critical systems can be defined as those systems that process, transmit, and/or store 
the critical information that was identified in the information criticality step. For our 
purposes, a system is not a single box but a group of components that work together 
to perform a function. You will identify the systems by communicating with the 
customer, looking at network and system diagrams, and asking many questions.
OOPS Example Continued
Note from Figure 3.2 that there are three (3) primary functional networks: The Main 
Control Center, the Corporate HQ Network, and the Regional Generator Station 
Table 3.7 OOPS Organizational Criticality
OOPS  
Organizational  
Criticality
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
M
H
H
Table 3.6 OOPS OICM
OICM
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
Power Consumption
L
H
H
Power Forecasts
L
M
M
Generator Status 
Information
M
H
H
Customer Information
M
M
M
Corporate Information
M
M
M
Personnel Information
M
M
L

www.syngress.com
114	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
Controller. After the identification of the primary systems/networks, we are going to 
build a system criticality matrix for each. To do this, we utilize the information from 
the information criticality matrix and simply identify which critical information 
types are processed, transmitted, and/or stored on the identified systems/networks.
You will want to confirm with the OOPS personnel, but we can make a fairly 
logical guess that the following information types are processed, transmitted, and/or 
stored on the following:
Main Control Center
Power Consumption
Power Forecasts
Generator Status
Corporate Head Quarters Network
Customer Information
Corporate Information
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Figure 3.2 The Logical Network Diagram for OOPS

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
115
Personnel Information
Regional Generator Station Controller
Generator Status
Power Consumption
Each system criticality matrix is created by simply cutting and pasting the appli-
cable row from the OICM as demonstrated in the following three (3) tables. For each 
of the System Criticality Matrices, we can also do an overall “high water mark,” 
which is demonstrated as well.
■
■
■
■
Table 3.9 Corporate Network System Criticality Matrix
Corporate  
Network
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
Customer  
Information
M
M
M
Corporate  
Information
M
M
M
Personnel  
Information
M
M
L
Overall
M
M
M
Table 3.8 Main Control Center System Criticality Matrix
Main Control  
Center
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
Power Consumption
L
H
H
Power Forecasts
L
M
M
Generator Status  
Information
M
H
H
Overall
M
H
H

www.syngress.com
116	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
Defining Security Objectives
Security Objectives are the targets the customer establishes for their security program. 
Without security objectives, they do not know what they are trying to accomplish 
for security and therefore will not reach any goals. Security Objectives are one of 
those areas requiring the customer’s involvement, and so the assessment team cannot 
make up the information.
Security Objectives come from a combination of inputs, including:
Customer Mission
Regulatory Requirements
Business Objectives
Best Practices
Industry Practices
Security Objectives need to be well-defined and made known throughout the 
organization. Ultimately, the security objectives should be tied to the business objectives 
of the organization.
■
■
■
■
■
Table 3.10 Regional Generator Station Controllers
Regional  
Generator Station  
Controllers
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
Power Consumption
L
H
H
Generator Status 
Information
M
H
H
Overall
M
H
H
Tip
Security Objectives are not where the customer’s security posture is today, 
but where they want it to be in the future. The actual security posture will 
be determined by the assessment process, and the difference between the 
Security Objectives and the Security Posture is the Security Gap.

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
117
Determining Logical and Physical Boundaries
Understanding the logical and physical boundaries for the assessment plays an impor-
tant role in managing the scope of the effort and preventing exceeding the bounds of 
the approved assessment and the scope. Be specific when defining the boundaries to 
assure a clear understanding.
Physical Boundaries
Physical boundaries are boundaries you can generally reach out and touch. These  
would include:
Fences
Doors
Locks
Gate Guards
Others
Logical Boundaries
Logical boundaries are those you cannot necessarily touch, but that are logical  
in nature. These include such things as:
Router ACLs
Firewall Rule Sets
Ownership Differences
Loss of Network Control
Others
Determining the Rules of Engagement,  
Customer Concerns, and Customer Constraints
The rules of engagement, customer concerns, and customer constraints play an 
important role in baselining, scoping, and in better understanding the customer and 
any existing limitations.
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
118	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
The Rules of Engagement
The rules of engagement establish an understanding between the assessment team 
and the customer for those actions that will be part of the assessment. By establishing 
these rules, it allows both the assessment team and the customer to address any 
special needs. Included in the rules of engagement are:
Levels of Invasiveness
Testing Machine Addressing
Timeframes for Scanning and Interviews
Notification Procedures
Scanning Tools and Exclusions
Levels of Invasiveness
The typical technical assessment is not intended to be a penetration test or a red 
team. However, a customer may want additional activities above and beyond the 
standard evaluation to address some of their concerns. Some common additions  
to the standard activities for more invasive testing include:
Denial of Service testing
Distributed Denial of Service testing
War dialing
Social engineering
Dumpster diving
Testing Machine Addressing
Arrange with the customer to obtain a static IP address for the scanning machines 
while conducting on-site activities. If this is not possible, ask the customer to imple-
ment an extended DHCP lease for these scanning machines to assure the IP addresses 
remain unchanged. You desire for the customer to know which scanning is coming 
from the assessment team. This is a cooperative effort and you don’t want someone 
implementing the Incident Response Plan inadvertently.
For external scanning, assure that the customer is aware of the external IP addresses 
the scans will be originating from during the testing. Again, you desire the customer to 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
119
know it is an approved assessment team conducting the scanning and to know when  
it is an unauthorized entity running scans.
Time Frames for Scanning and Interviews
Every organization varies regarding when they are comfortable having scans run on 
their systems and networks. Since it is a cooperative effort, the assessment team will 
need to understand when peak processing times are on the systems and networks, as 
well as the potential impact to some important clients. In some organizations it is okay 
to scan at anytime. Others have limitations related to batch processing, or peak access 
times. These will be taken into account when planning and writing the Assessment Plan.
Conducting assessment interviews will also have an impact on the organization’s 
operations. The interview process should be documented in the Assessment Plan to 
assure there is an understanding of how the interviews are to be conducted and make 
certain that facilities are available to hold the interviews themselves.
Notification Procedures
Notification procedures are a necessity to address emergency situations where a 
system or server may have stopped operating during the testing. It is an objective of 
the NSA Methodologies to impact customers as little as possible. There also needs to 
be an understanding that bad things can happen and you must be prepared for any 
necessary recovery activities. Ask the customer to provide contacts that will be avail-
able to cover the time frames the team will be working with on the assessment effort.
Scanning Tools and Exclusions
NSA does not dictate the tools to be used for the technical scanning as part of the IEM 
process. However, the customer may not want certain tools used in their environment 
due to either a bad experience or things they may have heard from other organizations. 
It is important to honor these exclusions but try to understand why they have them.
Customer Concerns
Customer concerns are anything the customer has expressed as something they are 
particularly interested in or concerned about. This would include concerns about 
how the assessment might impact the customer’s network. They may also express a 
particular interest in one of the 18 Baseline INFOSEC Classes and Categories, which 
is introduced later in this chapter. Be sure to document any customer concerns in the 

www.syngress.com
120	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
Assessment Plan that were mentioned and be prepared to discuss them in the closing 
meeting and final report.
Customer Constraints
Customer constraints are simply anything that may limit the execution of the assess-
ment or limit the recommendations that are made as a result of the assessment.  
Be sure to document any customer constraints in the Assessment Plan that were 
mentioned and be prepared to discuss these in the closing meeting and final report.
Legal Authorization
Since the assessment work includes a technical component that involves connecting 
to the customer’s networks and systems, there is a definite need to address the legal 
concerns. NSA recommends the assessment team have a “Letter of Authorization 
(LOA)” that is signed by the customer, which shows clear approval for the work 
being done. A copy of the LOA should be in the possession of each assessment team 
member while performing this work. I am not a lawyer and my lawyer says I cannot 
give legal advice; therefore, any work on the LOA will need to involve legal counsel 
from both the assessment team and the customer.
Writing the Assessment Plan
The Assessment Plan will encompass all of the considerations to conduct both an 
organizational and technical assessment for the organization. This is the scoping 
document and agreement between the assessment team and the customer to assure 
the full scope is well defined. Everything we have covered in the Pre-Assessment 
Process is to be documented in the Assessment Plan. The Assessment Plan will then 
be signed off on by both sides to assure mutual acceptance.
Components of the Assessment Plan
The following outline for the Assessment Plan takes into consideration the needs for 
understanding both the organizational and technical information necessary to accom-
plish the full assessment effort. These would be minimum essential considerations and 
may require additional business processes built around it to meet your organizational 
needs. This information is a combination of the Assessment Plan and the Technical 
Evaluation Plan that is part of the NSA IAM and IEM frameworks.

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
121
Important Evaluation Points-of-Contact POC name, phone number,  
and e-mail
Methodology Overview Describe the methodology to be used to conduct 
the evaluation and identify the specific evaluation tools to be used during 
the evaluation process.
Criticality Information A representation of the information criticality for 
each organizational system determined by discussion with the customer. 
Should include Organizational Criticality Matrix, System Criticality 
Matrices, Impact Value Definitions, and System Descriptions.
Detailed Network Information Include physical boundaries, identified 
subnets and IP ranges, detailed network diagrams, and contact information 
for system owners and administrators.
Customer Concerns Include organizational and technical customer concerns.
Customer Constraints Include organizational and technical customer 
constraints.
Rules of Engagement:
Network connections and IP addresses, facilities, and so on. Scan windows, 
relevant IP addresses or subnets to access, and immediate administrator 
contact information for the customer.
Internal and External Evaluation Team Requirements.
Internal and External Customer Requirements.
Evaluation team’s scanning of IP addresses, immediate contact information 
for assessment team, notification of personnel on assessment activities, CIRT 
coordination for test purposes.
Coordination Agreements:
Level of Detail for Recommendations How detailed does the customer want 
the recommendations to be? Will the standard low level for the executive 
summary and the mid-level for technical be ok, or is more detail going to be 
required?
List of Deliverables.
Anything not addressable in the other sections.
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
122	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
Letter of Authorization Include the approved Letter of Authorization.
Time-Line of Events A sequence of important events and their associated 
dates. Some events include the following: the date of the receipt of the 
request letter, the date of the proposal or contract, customer coordination 
dates, planned internal and external dates, the report delivery.
On-Site Assessment Activities
The On-Site Assessment is where the majority of the actual vulnerabilities will be 
identified for the organization and systems. This identification will include both 
organizational and technical findings. The way vulnerabilities are identified for the 
organization and the technical areas are different and are discussed next.
Conducting the Organizational Assessment
The organizational vulnerabilities are identified using the following methods:
Documentation Review
Interviews
System Demonstrations
Observation
The organizational portion of the assessment is focused around understanding the 
organizational security support concerning a set of control families or classes and 
categories. NIST identified 17 control families that must be considered as part of the 
controls put into place for federal government systems. These control families were 
identified earlier in Table 3.1.
NSA identifies 18 baseline categories to consider as part of any security imple-
mentation and are arranged by management, technical, and operational controls.  
This list of 18 areas is located in Table 3.11.
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
123
As you can see from the table, these control families and security categories are 
very comprehensive lists, covering a large volume of security considerations that must 
be part of a security review.
Documentation Review
Documentation plays a significant role in establishing the foundation for an organi-
zation’s security program. The organization should use documentation to set the 
organization’s vision and expectations. Documentation serves several purposes, 
including education, enforcement, and continuity. Lack of documentation within an 
organization would be a potential security vulnerability; however, it is unlikely it 
would be your only security finding. Documentation should establish the formal 
way an organization should be implementing their security program.
Interviews
Interviews are a key way to discover how the organization is actually doing things. 
Interview techniques are out of scope for this chapter, but understand that there is a 
psychology to interviews or “discussions.” In order to get the information you need 
from the individuals you are interviewing, you must first gain their trust. Remember 
you are not an auditor or an inspector—you are there to help the organization  
(and individuals) improve their security.
Table 3.11 NSA 18 Baseline INFOSEC Classes and Categories
Management
Technical
Operational
INFOSEC Documentation
INFOSEC Roles and 
Responsibilities
Contingency Planning
Configuration  
Management
Identification and 
Authentication
Account Management
Session Controls
Auditing  
Malicious Code  
Protection
Maintenance
System Assurance
Networking/Connectivity
Communications Security
Media Controls
Labeling
Physical Environment
Personnel Security
Education Training  
and Awareness

www.syngress.com
124	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
System Demonstrations
System demonstrations are an alternative way to get technical information from the 
organization without being required to run scanning tools or access their systems. 
It is simply a “Show-Me” activity. If you need clarification or information about 
something, you can simply say “Show me how you do that.”
Observation
The powers of observation are an inherent capability required of the typical security 
professional. From the very beginning of the assessment, you are watching what the 
organization does, how they treat employees, how they handle visitors, and the kinds 
of information that are freely available within the organization. This will lead you to 
additional questions, system demonstrations, or interviews.
Conducting the Technical Assessment
The technical portion of the assessment focuses on identifying and understanding the 
technical vulnerabilities that may exist within the SCADA environment. The techni-
cal assessment is referred to as an evaluation by NSA. The primary basis for these 
activities is defined in the NSA IEM. The IEM utilizes ten baseline activities that are 
necessary for consideration while conducting the technical portion of the assessment. 
These ten activities are broken out by enumeration and vulnerability identification 
areas, as identified in Table 3.12.
Note
With System Demonstrations, the assessment team does not need to touch 
the customer network. They are basically shoulder surfing the customer 
technical person to see how the action is actually conducted.
Note
Observation is not actually listed as an IAM activity but is an implied part 
of the IAM.

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
125
Enumeration Activities
Enumeration activities are used to determine what kinds of systems, applications, 
processes, and devices are on the customer systems. Enumeration activities are  
basically discovery activities that include:
Port Scanning  The act of connecting to potential services or ports on 
network accessible systems to determine what services and applications may 
be running on the network.
SNMP Scanning  With a known “community string,” active SNMP scan-
ning can show information on user accounts, operating systems, services, and 
shared printers.
Enumeration and Banner Grabbing  Enumeration tries to determine 
information such as users, servers, shared file systems, and other shared resources. 
Banner grabbing is a process of reaching out to an application and seeing if 
there is information about the application that can be pulled or “grabbed.”
Wireless Enumeration  Looks for wireless networks that are part of the 
organization and how they are configured and secured. Also looks for exter-
nal wireless networks that may impact the organization and searches for 
potential rogue wireless networks.
Vulnerability Identification Activities
Vulnerability identification activities are the activities where a majority of the technical 
vulnerabilities will be discovered. The activities for vulnerability identification include:
■
■
■
■
Table 3.12 NSA Evaluation Activities
Enumeration
Vulnerability Identification
Port Scanning
SNMP Scanning
Enumeration and Banner Grabbing
Wireless Enumeration
Vulnerability Scanning
Host Evaluation
Network Device Analysis
Password Compliance Testing
Application-Specific Scanning
Network Sniffing

www.syngress.com
126	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
Vulnerability Scanning  This activity is where the majority of vulnerabili-
ties will be found. Vulnerability scanning runs from the network presence 
and looks for known vulnerabilities in the tools database.
Host Evaluation  Look directly at individual systems to determine if they 
are configured with secure configurations and settings.
Network Device Analysis  Analyze critical network devices to determine 
secure configuration and to evaluate if the device itself is functioning to 
provide security.
Password Compliance Testing  Test passwords to determine if the  
password policies are implemented and effective.
Application Specific Scanning  Review the security of application 
functionality and secure programming techniques.
Network Sniffing  Analyze network traffic to determine what protocols  
are being used and if there is clear-text-sensitive information traversing the 
network.
■
■
■
■
■
■
Are You Owned?
Configuration Issues
The majority of security vulnerabilities found in the technical systems are a 
result of system configuration issues or lack of up-to-date patching. This is sig-
nificant because with SCADA systems, integrity and availability are the highest 
impact attribute concerns. Configuration changes and patching can impact 
system availability and therefore are often ignored. As an example, a client 
was having an assessment conducted on their network. The moment a simple 
port scan started, the network went down and the technical personnel were 
freaking out. Turns out the organization had an older version of the Cisco IOS 
on their routers, which had a known flaw of crashing when port scanned. This 
created only denial of service (an availability issue) but if you remember, avail-
ability was rated as High Impact.

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
127
Tools
The tools used to conduct the ten IEM baseline activities are determined by the team 
conducting the assessment work. NSA does not specifically imply or endorse any spe-
cific technical security tool or brand of tool. You can use freeware, shareware, or licensed 
tools. The IEM specifically requires you to run at least one tool to cover each of the ten 
activities. It is highly recommended you use more than one tool to cover each activity 
due to the limitations of the tools themselves. The tools are only as good as their under-
lying databases and the configuration the security consultants give to the tool. 
Communication
Communication with the customer is required to assist in managing customer expec-
tations. This involves assuring the proper opening meetings, closing meetings, and 
update meetings are conducted during the on-site effort. Good communications will 
reduce the number of potential issues between the customer and the assessment team.
Post Assessment Activities
The Post Assessment process involves taking all the information collected about 
potential vulnerabilities and determining the real risk to the organization. It is 
­essential that the information gained in the Pre-Assessment process be taken into 
consideration during the analysis and reporting portion of the assessment.
Conducting Analysis
Detailed analysis not only involves looking at the scan results, it also involves using 
the skills and talents of the assessment team to determine the impact to the customer 
if a vulnerability is exploited. The assessment team cannot just “cut and paste” from 
the scanning tools, they must apply real analysis skills to the process. Effective analysis 
Warning
One of the most DANGEROUS things you can do while conducting a security 
assessment is to not understand how your scanning tools work and how the 
configurations impact the scan results. Creating mass denial of service to a 
customer because of poor tool configuration is a VERY BAD IDEA and you 
may never regain the trust of your customer again.

www.syngress.com
128	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
may involve bringing in additional expertise or conducting additional research to 
better determine how a particular vulnerability affects a customer.
Final Report Creation
The final report is the record of the activities conducted and the findings discovered 
during the assessment process. The final report needs to be a clear and concise document 
that provides a clear picture of the results. The minimum essential components of the 
final report should include:
Executive Summary  A short and concise description of the assessment 
and the major findings, written so executives can understand the results.
Introduction  This section will include a great deal of information from the 
Assessment Plan since it describes what was done during the assessment, 
which should be what you agreed to in the Assessment Plan.
Analysis  This section identifies what was found during the organization 
and technical assessment processes. This will include a detailed description of 
the finding, the analysis of how the finding affects the customer, and recom-
mendations providing options.
Conclusion  Answer the question for the organization: “What is my 
INFOSEC posture?” Recognize good security practices. Provide a recom-
mended priority and roadmap for improving the organization’s security posture.
Appendices  Include the analysis documents, the Assessment Plan, and a CD 
or other storage device with the raw scan reports on them.
■
■
■
■
■
Note
Complete the final report within a reasonable time frame so the process and 
results are still fresh in the customer’s minds. Taking too long to complete the 
report will make it more difficult for the organization to get started on your 
recommendations.

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
129
Resources
It is always helpful to have recommended resources for your client to get additional 
information on SCADA security or security assessments. I mention only a few 
here, but remember that your Web browser is a tremendous research tool. Some 
Assessment- and SCADA-related sites include:
NSA INFOSEC Assurance Training and Rating Program 
www.iatrp.com
NIST Special Publication 800-82: Guide to Industrial Control 
System Security  www.nist.gov
Digital Bond  www.digitalbond.com
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
130	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
Summary
The evolution of SCADA systems toward standard TCP/IP networking and common 
applications is driving the need to implement and monitor effective security. Historically, 
SCADA systems have been considered separate systems that were not interconnected 
with the corporate network. Now the movement has been toward connecting to the 
internal intranets and even the Internet. This opens the possibility for the exploitation  
of holes in the security of these connected components. Implementing effective security 
and evaluating this security is critical to the continued successful operation of the 
SCADA environment.
An effective security assessment involves utilizing a solid defined framework that 
is repeatable. The NSA IAM and IEM provide a framework to work within for 
purposes of conducting the security assessment process. Four primary activities are 
discussed as part of the IAM and IEM, which support the security assessment process. 
These are:
Pre-Project Activities
Pre-Assessment
On-Site Assessment
Post Assessment
The Pre-Project activities focus on gaining an understanding of what the customer 
is looking for in their security assessment engagement. Helping the customer get the 
service that will best benefit them will assist in establishing and managing the customer’s 
expectations. You will also want to address business processes, such as contracting and 
initiating legal aspects.
The Pre-Assessment process is an essential process for better understanding the 
customer’s needs. A great deal of the Pre-Assessment process involves understanding 
the customer mission and understanding the business information needed to make 
the organization run. This is a business focus, not just a security focus. Business risk 
and security risk are closely associated. An understanding of the impact to the organi-
zation if confidentiality, integrity, and/or availability are lost helps the assessment team 
better recommend improvements to the organization’s environment. Following the 
assessment team’s understanding of the mission, critical information, and impact, we 
go through the process of understanding which systems process, transmit, and/or 
store this critical information. The remaining portion of the Pre-Assessment process 
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
131
involves finalizing the scope of the assessment, establishing rules of engagement, 
defining customer concerns and constraints, and establishing timelines to meet and 
manage customer expectations.
The On-Site Assessment is broken down into two (2) areas: organizational and 
technical. The organizational assessment focuses on understanding what policies and 
procedures are in place in the organization and how the organization actually imple-
ments the security program. The information for the organizational assessment is 
collected based on interviews, documentation review, system demonstrations, and 
observation. The organizational assessment is also conducted based on the NSA IAM 
18 Baseline INFOSEC Classes and Categories, or the NIST 17 Control Families. 
The organizational assessment is flexible enough to pull in the security requirements 
of any organizational need, including SCADA.
The second part of the On-Site Assessment is the technical assessment (or evalua-
tion). The basis for the technical assessment is the NSA IEM 10 Baseline Activities, 
which encompass the majority of the technical scanning and analysis needs for a 
security assessment. The key consideration of using the NSA IEM is that it is not a 
“cut and paste” from the scanning tools, but a true analysis of the data collected to 
determine the technical vulnerabilities.
The Post Assessment process involves conducting the final analysis and putting 
together the final report. This process is important because it outlines the findings 
from the assessment process and gives the recommendations for improvement of the 
organization’s security posture. A critical aspect of the Post Assessment is to give a 
well-defined logical roadmap for security posture improvement.
SCADA systems control the majority of our critical infrastructure to include 
power, water, and sewage. Without the right security implementations and the 
­continuous monitoring and assessment of SCADA system security, there could be a 
significant loss of confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the critical infrastructure.
Solutions Fast Track
The Evolution of SCADA
SCADA systems have historically been treated as isolated entities that are 
relatively safe from security issues.
SCADA has evolved to utilize the same protocols as traditional networks; 
therefore, additional exposure now exists.
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
132	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
SCADA is now being connected to the business network, exposing  
it to potential security issues.
SCADA configurations and security must be tightly controlled.
SCADA Assessment Methodologies
Choose a viable repeatable methodology for doing SCADA security 
assessments.
The NSA IAM and IEM are recognized methodologies to consider.
NIST has created guidance for securing SCADA systems with their  
NIST SP 800-82.
Pre-Project Activities
Vet the assessment request to assure the customer is getting what they  
need/want.
Collect and analyze as much publicly available information as possible.
Implement business processes to gain an agreement to proceed.
Pre-Assessment Activities
Collect mission and business critical information, and impact if 
confidentiality, integrity, and/or availability are lost.
Determine the systems that process, transmit, and/or store the critical 
information.
Fully scope out the effort with the customer to include concerns,  
constraints, and rules of engagement.
Write the Assessment Plan based on the Pre-Assessment activities and  
get a signature from the customer.
On-Site Assessment: Organizational Security
Conduct interviews utilizing the NSA IAM 18 Baseline INFOSEC  
Classes and Categories as a guide or something similar, such as the NIST 17 
Control Families.
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
133
Review organizational security and business documentation.
Utilize system demonstrations to verify information or reduce conflict 
concerning the same.
Use observation to continuously determine how the organization actually 
implements security.
On-Site Assessment: Technical Security
Conducted based on the NSA IEM 10 Evaluation Activities.
Start by enumerating the network and systems.
Conduct activities to collect actual vulnerability information (for example, 
scanning).
Post Assessment Activities
Analyze the data to determine the vulnerabilities.
Complete the final report in a timely manner.
Provide the organization with a roadmap to an improved security posture.
Resources
www.iatrp.com
www.nist.gov
www.digitalbond.com
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
134	
Chapter 3 • SCADA Security Assessment Methodology
Frequently Asked Questions
Q:	I have never needed to worry about SCADA security in the past. Why should 
I now?
A:	SCADA systems have migrated toward common protocols such as TCP/IP 
instead of previously proprietary protocols. SCADA systems are now being inter-
connected on the same network as the business network, allowing for greater 
avenues of attack.
Q:	Why are the NSA IAM and IEM recommended as the methodology to use for 
SCADA assessments?
A:	These are extremely flexible methodologies that provide a clear and comprehen-
sive framework for doing any kind of security assessment. The NSA IAM and 
IEM are not the only methodologies out there and the assessment team can 
choose which methodology to use. Be sure that, no matter which methodology 
you use, it covers a similar or better cross-section of information security topics.
Q:	Why not just give the potential customer exactly what they ask for?
A:	Because what they ask for may not be what they are really looking for. Be sure 
to conduct the Vetting process to give the customer what they need.
Q:	Is understanding critical information and impact important? Don’t we just need 
to know the systems?
A:	Understanding critical information and impact is essential to defining appropriate 
recommendations to improve the security posture. This process answers the 
question of “Why” security needs to be implemented and how much security 
is required.
Q:	Why is the On-Site Assessment work broken out between organizational and 
technical?
A:	The quick answer is because of the skill set. The skill set required for an 
­individual to conduct the technical assessment is significantly different than  
those individuals who are conducting the assessment.

www.syngress.com
	
SCADA Security Assessment Methodology • Chapter 3	
135
Q:	Can’t I just “cut and paste” the results out of the scanning tools?
A:	No. You must conduct an analysis to make it specifically relevant to that particular 
organization.
Q:	Can I get more help when I am conducting an analysis?
A:	Absolutely. Don’t be afraid to seek assistance either by doing additional research 
or bringing in additional expertise.
Q:	Are the NSA IAM and IEM rigid methodologies?
A:	No. The NSA IAM and IEM are very flexible methodologies that are usable 
across a broad section of organizational types.

137
Chapter 4
Developing an 
Effective Security 
Awareness Program
Sean Lowther is the President and Founder of Stealth Awareness, Inc., 
www.stealthawareness.com.
Sean is an independent consultant who brings years of experience designing 
and implementing information security awareness programs at the highest 
level. He founded Stealth Awareness, Inc. in 2007.
Sean worked at Bank of America for over seven years, managing the enter-
prise information security awareness program. The program received the high-
est rating from its regulators and was consistently rated “world class” by 
industry peer groups.
Sean has worked with BITS, the Financial Services Roundtable Task Force on 
Privacy, prior to the enactment of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. He produced 
the video “It’s Not If, But When” for the Financial Services Sector Coordinating 
Council in partnership with the U.S. Treasury Department with the goal to 
improve critical Infrastructure protection and Homeland Security. Sean was 
recognized by senior government officials and business executives for his 
“work to defend our nation’s critical infrastructure.”
Sean is a sought after speaker for a variety of events and meetings. Most 
recently he spoke at the Computer Security Institute’s annual 2007 conference 
in Washington, D.C., the Contingency Planning Association of the Carolinas, 
and the 2008 Charlotte ISSA annual conference.
Sean lives in the Charlotte, North Carolina area.

www.syngress.com
138	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
Introduction
In this chapter, I will talk about how to design and implement an effective informa-
tion security awareness program. One chapter will not cover all you need to know, 
but it can serve as the foundation for starting a program and/or making an existing 
program better.
In today’s world, I don’t like the looks of data breaches, identity theft, and the 
apparent inability of people to safeguard sensitive information properly. If the issue is 
not at pandemic levels, it certainly has reached epidemic proportions. A couple of years 
ago, corporate America was concerned that the flu pandemic was more than a prob-
ability. Disaster recovery experts raced to put in place contingency plans. It was thought 
that as much as 30 percent of a company’s employees would be too sick to work. If the 
flu hit, many would stay home fearing they might become sick. Fortunately, the pan-
demic did not happen. I do not suggest the issue of properly safeguarding sensitive 
information in its electronic and non-electronic forms is an illness that can be cured 
easily. Like in any epidemic, people become more cautious, keep their hands away from 
their face, and practice good hygiene. We communicate, communicate, communicate to 
ensure that people know the risks and what they need to do to avoid becoming 
infected. So why are we not doing this in a consistent every-company-must-do-it 
manner when it comes to the proper safeguarding of sensitive information? This chap-
ter is a call to action, because without one, most companies will not implement the 
resources within their company that ensure all new hires, existing employees, vendors, 
suppliers, and consultants to their company clearly understand and exhibit the correct 
information safeguard behaviors. So, let the chapter begin.
There is an old adage that says: Tell them what you are going to tell them. Tell them, 
and then tell them what you told them. In other words, repetition is the aide to memory. 
Before I tell you what I am going to tell you, I want to raise a major concern. It is 
not a new concern. It’s not a great revelation, and it is no big surprise, but it is prob-
ably the greatest risk we are facing in corporate America, as well as government 
today. It is our inability to safeguard sensitive information properly. Paraphrasing 
Harold Hill in The Music Man, “We’ve got trouble, right here in your town, and it 
starts with ‘T,’ which rhymes with ‘P,’ which stands for People.”
Since 2005, it is conservatively estimated that over 250 million people in America 
have had their personal sensitive information lost or stolen. The cost to manage this 
exodus of information is estimated at over $55 billion, give or take a billion. The 
Ponomen Institute puts the cost at $192.50 for each customer record. These costs, for 

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
139
the most part, are purely administrative and are not related to actual identity theft. 
That means it is wasted money, and brings nothing to the bottom line other than an 
unnecessary expense.
If we were working for the CDC (Center for Disease Control), this problem would 
be way past the epidemic stage. Yet no one is raising the issue to the degree it needs to 
be heard. Thirty-nine states have enacted legislation requiring companies report com-
promised customer data. Penalties can be assessed, which is a way for the states to bring 
in more money, but these laws do not address the real issue. The Federal Trade 
Commission has entered the arena, threatening the penalty of an “audit” on those 
companies that fall under their jurisdiction who fail to safeguard sensitive information 
properly. We have companies, who, on further inspection, were following the latest 
prescribed security practices when an incident occurred. So, can we find them at fault?
The reality is that no one will ever stay ahead of those who are hacking systems, 
or those who are using social engineering to get sensitive information from company 
employees. If we close one hole, the hacker will likely exploit another. Social engineers  
will survive because they are magicians at extracting information from employees 
who have been told that providing quality customer service means everything to the 
company. In a way, company employees are willing to give up sensitive information 
because they want to help and “do the right thing.” Where we are failing (miserably, 
in my opinion), is in addressing the human side of this epidemic.
What we need is an “antibiotic” to eradicate these ills. Or maybe a chip that, 
once embedded into each employee, will ensure that he/she will not make stupid 
mistakes, like leaving sensitive information on the copy machine, or leaving their 
laptop on the table at the coffee shop when they go to the bathroom—only to find 
it gone when they return. Unfortunately, that chip has not been developed yet. In a 
real epidemic, one with viruses, a high temperature, sneezing, and so on, we encour-
age people to wash their hands, cover their nose when sneezing, and stay home from 
work when they are sick so they don’t infect others. If this was a flu pandemic, that’s 
exactly what we’d be doing. The loss in productivity during a pandemic would 
probably be higher, in terms of cost, than what is currently experienced with “data 
breaches,” but not by much.
Welcome to the Information Risk Pandemic. It is time to properly educate 
employees and senior leadership on how to protect their customers, company, and 
stakeholders from this costly plague by concentrating on the people who design 
applications, implement programs, and use the technology given to them to perform 
their function in a safe and secure manner.

www.syngress.com
140	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
When people fail to do the right thing out of ignorance, speed to market, or 
greed, then the short-term reward is soon lost against the long-term consequences of 
their actions. A case in point is SCADAs. How one technology has been allowed to 
be embedded into the fabric of our society with such vulnerabilities to the whole is 
just unfathomable. Who knew? Today, we know that the unintentional loss of sensi-
tive information is at pandemic proportions throughout corporate America and 
government. Nevertheless, we continue to not provide adequate information security 
awareness training to our employees on handling, transmitting, storing, destroying, 
and transporting sensitive information properly.
For companies that do have information security awareness programs in place,  
are they designed and implemented to change the overall security behavior of their 
employees, or are they simply one-time events that make it look like the company is 
taking the issue seriously?
The wake-up call is here and now. Companies need to check their information 
security awareness quotient. In other words, how well do employees know how to 
properly safeguard sensitive information at your company? Unfortunately, you are the 
wrong demographic to be preaching this message to. I would suggest you share this 
chapter with those in your company who are responsible for information security, 
physical security, privacy, auditing, and compliance. Not providing adequate awareness 
training to employees on how to safeguard customer, employee, company intellectual 
property, and other associated risks is simply business suicide in this day and age.  
I recognize you are not the one to lead the charge, but the more people who are 
willing to become the messenger brings us one step closer to effectively managing 
this information risk pandemic.
Why an Information Security  
Awareness Program Is Important
If the opening to this chapter isn’t enough reason to start an information security 
awareness program at your company, then I’m not sure what is.
How many security conferences have you been to where speaker after speaker 
brings up the issue of people as the major risk to safeguarding sensitive information? I’m 
sure you have sat in these conferences and listened and agreed, but because the discus-
sion does not affect you personally, it remains in the conference room. “Yeah, it’s a big 
risk, but I’m more interested in securing the Unix platform, or learning what’s new in 
forensics,” you say. We seem to be absorbed with chasing the next technology and not 

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
141
so concerned about how we are going to safeguard it. We allow our employees to bring 
technology into the workplace, such as iPods and USBs, that have enough memory to 
easily store the company’s crown jewels. Information that can easily walk out the door 
unnoticed. We also give employees equipment to store and access the company’s most 
inner sanctum of sensitive information with little thought or control over their activi-
ties. As Deming, a noted quality guru, said in his day, “if you are going to put all your 
eggs in one basket, then you better watch the basket.”
For example, during the 2008 presidential campaign, three candidates had their 
passport information accessed without a valid need to know. Three separate incidents 
by contractors who had been given access, but apparently little guidance in their 
responsibilities. Was it right? No. Was there any intent to steal information? Probably 
not. It was a stupid mistake that resulted in another example of the government’s 
inability to properly safeguard sensitive information. Unfortunately, this scenario 
replicates itself in corporations millions of times a day across the world. Even worse, 
though a disgruntled employee with authorized access may be displaced, his/her 
access to such information often is not terminated immediately. So, he/she may leave 
behind a “time bomb,” designed to disrupt communications. Or, he/she may decide 
to steal confidential customer information or intellectual property. This scenario 
happens every day in government and private enterprise offices around the world.  
All because an employee’s access was not terminated in a timely manner.
We Fail to Recruit Our Employees  
into the Company’s Security Program
Somehow it is expected that everyone will “do the right thing.” If I asked a room of 100 
people to raise their hands if they thought they would ever be the direct cause of a data 
breach at their company, guess how many hands would go up? Your’re right, none, or at 
least not yours. But the statistics tell us their answer isn’t true. It is pretty safe to say that 
every company and government agency will lose at least one laptop this year, and it is 
pretty safe to say that a very high percentage of those laptops will have sensitive infor-
mation on them. It’s also safe to say that a very high percentage of the laptops do not 
have encryption installed, and that in many cases, the user’s ID and password are taped to 
the bottom of their laptop, thereby making the encryption useless. No one really knows 
what these statistics are. For sure, not everyone is reporting this type of incident, not to 
mention the loss of cell phones, iPods, USBs, and other storage devices. We have made 
information more mobile and far more vulnerable. Because of this, the cost to businesses 

www.syngress.com
142	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
is skyrocketing. As mentioned earlier, the Ponomen Institute suggests in their most 
recent study that the loss of one customer record to a company is $192.50. That covers 
customer notification, customer support, call center resources, and so on. What is the 
actual cost, and what will that reported cost be as more and more companies and indus-
tries come under scrutiny? Just type “data breaches” into your search engine and a 
wealth of opinions and facts will come pouring forth.
We Need to Take the Issue Seriously
On television is an advertisement where two people are inspecting a dam. They 
come upon a small leak and look at each other. One person is chewing gum and 
takes it out of his mouth and sticks it into the leak. They nod in agreement that the 
problem has been fixed. Of course, we all know what is ultimately going to happen. 
The dam will burst, questions will be asked, the news media will report the incident, 
and somewhere along the line the truth will be discovered. Chewing gum is not an 
effective tool when it comes to maintaining a dam. If the dam collapses due to poor 
maintenance or undue stress, the potential loss of life, not to mention the possible 
benefits lost from the power and other factors that could have been gained, could  
be catastrophic. Of the 79,000 dams in America, the American Society of Civil 
Engineers considers 10,000 to have a “high-hazard risk of failure.” Bridges are 
another example. According to federal highway statistics, “nearly 50 percent of all 
rural bridges in America, 20 feet or longer, are structurally or functionally deficient.” 
In some cases, the bridges have simply been closed. In other circumstances, weight 
restrictions have been posted.
Companies need to look at their infrastructures, and how they were built, and 
recognize that the information age has moved their most valuable asset, information, 
outside of the brick-and-mortar establishment and made it easy to access by autho-
rized and unauthorized persons. An information security awareness program will not 
stop the intentional incidents. In an ideal world, we would have a super-system that 
would keep everyone honest. If access was attempted by an unauthorized person, or 
an authorized person was taking information for unauthorized purposes, the super 
system would identify the action immediately by frying the information. Of course, 
some of us might dream that such a scenario could be possible, but the legal and 
ethical ramifications of such a super-system would be beyond our comprehension, 
and frankly beyond our everyday reality.

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
143
How to Design an Effective  
Information Security Awareness Program
I do not necessarily believe in teams creating your information security awareness 
program. Consensus can often hinder the design of a program and, in fact, take 
people down the wrong path. The Aboliene Paradox easily demonstrates my point. 
The paradox says that a group of people can come together and agree on something 
that no one wants to do. I am sure that you have been in meetings where this has 
happened. You walk out of the room thinking the decisions made were nuts, but you 
agree to follow them anyway. Another problem is when a company takes a Vice 
President and asks them to wear the awareness cap, along with all their other hats.  
In small companies, you probably do not have much of an alternative. But, if your 
organization is rather sizable, a full-time employee should be assigned and dedicated 
to implementing your program.
Creating an information security awareness program is not rocket science. It is 
marketing. Because of this you should look for someone in your organization that 
has a flair for marketing. Having a CISSP is not an advantage or disadvantage. When 
I first introduced the concept of marketing information security awareness back in 
the ‘90s, most people in the organization and other companies I talked to thought  
I was crazy. They used the sledgehammer/fear approach. My CISO happened to be 
one of the best marketing minds I’ve ever met, and when I presented my business 
plan to her, she fell in love with the concept.
Today, based on the many articles I’ve read, the marketing of information security 
awareness is universally accepted and applied. Here is what this looks like. If an 
employee does not value the content of the information you are delivering, then why 
would they follow it? It is this value proposition that makes a program work. 
I don’t believe most employees think this way. “It’s everyone’s responsibility,” the 
slogan says, so if everyone else is doing the right thing, I’m covered and need not 
Tip
Awareness is an individual responsibility, and a team effort!

www.syngress.com
144	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
worry about it. No matter what expert you read or listen to, they all seem to agree 
on one thing: “80% of the risks to your company’s sensitive information rests on the 
inside with employees.” And yet most companies continue to look over the castle 
wall, protecting and defending their perimeter. This is why it is so important that 
management clearly understands the bigger picture, and the bigger risks if an effec-
tive information security awareness program is not implemented. It is another reason 
why a sound business plan is important. It gets everyone in the decision-making 
process thinking and agreeing along the same lines. This way, as you implement it, 
there will be no rude awakenings, or at least not with management.
Note
Having a slogan or cartoon character or both is a great way to enhance 
awareness of the messages, materials, and training you use in your program.
Notes from the Underground…
The Awareness Intra-preneur
When I speak to groups about being the “Awareness Intra-preneur,” one of 
the key intra-preneurial behaviors is to never allow an objection to get in the 
way of the success you wish to achieve. Go around it, over it, or through it, what­
ever you need to do as long as it’s ethical. It’s also important to have a win/win 
attitude in your discussions, to ensure that everyone feels they are a winner 
when the final decision is made. An “intrapreneur” is someone who uses the 
skills of an entrepreneur on the inside to move their program forward.

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
145
The best presentation I ever heard was of a salesperson selling a satellite phone  
to an Arab sheik back in the 1980s, as I recall. Rather than try and present facts and 
figures, the salesperson went out and hired a graphic artist. The picture he had drawn 
was of the sheik in his tent in the desert sitting in his comfortable chair speaking on 
his phone to someone who was on another continent. The picture also showed the 
phone communicating with a satellite as well as the price tag for the picture to come 
to life. I think it all came to 3 million dollars then. The presentation lasted less than 
one minute, according to the salesman. The sheik looked at the picture. It was clearly 
what he wanted. He turned the picture over and signed his approval. Deal done! This 
is exactly how I approached presenting my business plan to my CISO. I painted the 
picture, showed how it all connected, and what it would cost. It was the plan that 
would solve her problem. Figuratively speaking, at the end of the presentation, she 
turned the presentation over and gave me her approval to go forward.
Designing and Planning
Business Plan
Create a business plan that shows your vision for the awareness program. Let’s 
talk about creating a business plan. It says on your performance plan that you 
will design and implement an information security awareness program this 
year. Where do you start? What should it include? I’d suggest Everything, 
including the kitchen sink! Well, that might be going a little too far, but the 
point here is to create a five-year plan. Not just one about what you are going 
to do this year. Create a vision of what your program will look like and that 
your program is ongoing. Show how each component supports and ties the 
program together. It took me 90 days to put together the Information Security 
Awareness Business Plan. That, in itself was a major accomplishment. Fortu­
nately, my management was supportive. The presentation ended up being over 
an inch thick. It was spiral bound. It was also very visual. A picture is worth a 
thousand words, so I wanted my CISO to think in pictures of what the campaign 
and components of the program would look like. Of course, my CISO also saw 
the detail I had compiled around the cost to implement. In essence, I wanted 
my CISO and boss to know that I had done my homework, knew what I was 
doing, and that I was capable of implementing and managing the program.

www.syngress.com
146	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
Seven Times, Seven Different Ways
My belief is that an effective plan is one that says the same thing seven times, seven 
different ways. So this challenges you to look at all the possible products and delivery 
channels available to you. This is something you need to constantly look for, to 
constantly seek. For example, I knew that video streaming would ultimately become 
available at the company. What a great channel for delivering information. We were 
the first to use the technology at the company simply because we were constantly 
looking for new channels. I knew it was becoming available, and we were ready to 
take advantage of the opportunity. In fact, we were the first. You could go to our  
Web site and view Video Quick Tips on several topics such as SPAM, Encryption, 
Password Creation, and so on. Not all employees are comfortable with reading  
guidelines. These Video Quick Tips became very popular and provided “just-in-time” 
training for the employee. Again, seven different times, seven different ways. Looking 
for new delivery channels, new ideas allow you to introduce old and new messages 
through other touch points.
Not everyone will think your ideas are good. I remember making a presentation to 
use iPods as a delivery channel for some of our messages. My manager at the time was 
not a proponent of the idea. Listening to your customers is where you will get many of 
your ideas. Surveying your customers will help determine which delivery channels are 
preferred, and help you defend the direction you are taking your program, keeping it 
alive, fresh, and most importantly, in your employees’ minds. Today, iPods are being used 
as a viable delivery channel of awareness messages. 
I cannot impress upon the reader how important this is to the overall success of 
your program. If your program is to ever have a chance of success, the vision must  
be laid out and agreed upon by your CISO. If it is a stopgap solution to a particular 
incident or problem, your program will become exactly (and only) that: “A stopgap 
Tip
The other key to creating your business plan is to make sure it gets everyone 
thinking along the same general lines. As you implement it, you do not want 
any rude awakenings, especially with management.

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
147
solution with no long-term effect.” Management is terrific at implementing knee-
jerk reaction solutions. An effective awareness program needs to be ongoing and 
viewed by management and employees as an important company value. “Wow, that’s 
a tall order to achieve?” you might say, but you MUST protect the information assets 
of your company to reduce exposure to theft. You also MUST reduce the exposure 
of risk to the integrity of the processes in place or of them being developed to 
provide the coveted services of your company. The following are what I believe to  
be the key components of a business plan presentation:
1.	 What is your objective? An overview of your program.
2.	 What products and delivery channels are you recommending? (I am a 
believer, as I mentioned earlier, that if you want to affect change, you must 
package each message into seven different products, seven different ways. 
Over time, this reinforces key messages. With management’s due diligence, 
the company’s culture will reflect a greater understanding and appreciation 
about properly safeguarding sensitive information, as exhibited through each 
employee’s attitude, awareness, and behavior.
3.	 What is your schedule to roll out the program? (Here, you want to make 
sure you have Audit’s input on “what” and “how” you are going to accom-
plish your objective. Build that relationship with Audit. It will make your 
boss happy that they approved of your plan and efforts.)
4.	 Budget. What is it going to cost to implement your program? (Always ask for 
more knowing that you will not get it. I will show you where you can get 
the money to implement your program if it is not readily available to you.)
Warning
An awareness program is not a once-a-year online training program. It is one 
component of many that should be included if you want to affect behavioral 
change within your organization. If you limit yourself to this one component, 
then the mindset becomes one of compliance. Simply checking off a box does 
not an awareness program make. Just the same, it’s better than nothing.

www.syngress.com
148	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
Show Me the Money!
Can you hear Cuba Gooding, Jr. and Tom Cruise screaming, “Show me the 
money!” in the movie Jerry Maguire? It is one of the key questions asked by those 
responsible for implementing an information security awareness program. “I can’t 
get the money budgeted!” they exclaim. Would it surprise you that I did not have 
a budget? Yes, I worked for one of the largest financial institutions in the world, 
and it would be easy to conclude that there were buckets and buckets of dollars at 
my disposal, but this wasn’t true. Like with anything else, when the mind is ready, 
the money is ready. This is why a good incident will get the attention of senior 
leadership or the Audit department. Personally, I never had a large incident that 
opened the money door for me, but then again I never had a problem getting my 
program funded either. The following are some suggestions to help you find the 
money.
1.	 As discussed earlier, I created a good business plan. A plan that laid out  
the entire program, including the budget. There were no surprises for 
management.
2.	 Ask for the money. If you need additional dollars above and beyond what you 
requested in your presentation, or that has been allocated to your program, 
simply ask for it. Present your ideas, why they are important to the overall 
program, and ask for the money to fund it. Do not worry about whether you 
receive the funds or not. The following are other resources you can tap:
3.	 If your company acquires another company, normally transition dollars are 
available. This is good because those dollars do not come out of your budget, 
but rather a special fund (bucket) set up by the company. Often, you can kill 
two birds with one stone by using these additional dollars for the transition 
as well as other items you want to add to your enterprisewide program.
Note
Getting money to implement a program is a little more difficult. “When the 
mind is ready, the money is ready.” The only reason awareness programs are 
not supported is because your CISO has decided not to fund it. It’s not the CEO.

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
149
4.	 Another source is the supply budget. Budgets are normally lost or lowered if 
they are not used. The supply budget, especially at the end of the year, is an 
easy one to pirate.
5.	 Other people’s money. Go back to your alliances, which I will talk about 
shortly, and see where you can partner with them to share the expense of 
your program. Online training is an example where information security  
and privacy can partner and share expense.
6.	 What budget dollars are available in other departments within your division?
7.	 Be creative. You are your own best resource. I never took a concept or idea 
to my manager for approval other than my business plan. I also took what 
appeared to be a finished product. It was more than “how can I paint the 
right picture in words.” Give it to them in such a way that they can see it, 
touch it, and even smell it if need be. Sometimes this requires working with 
alliances you have nurtured.
To get the CEO’s endorsement of your program, simply compose the message 
you would like to see the CEO make. Contact the CEO’s secretary and tell him/her 
why you are sending the message, why it is important, and that you need the CEO’s 
endorsement. I not only got the message back with a few minor edits, but with his 
electronic signature, too.
People were amazed that it was that simple, but it was. There isn’t a CEO alive 
who doesn’t understand the importance of safeguarding sensitive information prop-
erly. He/she trusts that those under him/her are doing the right thing to put in place 
the processes that will secure the information assets of the company.
The first product I released was a Quick Reference Guide for employees. On the 
inside flap of the guide was the message from our CEO explaining the importance of 
safeguarding sensitive information properly at the company, along with his support 
and request to all employees to follow the information security policy and program.  
Note
I am a firm believer that an information security awareness program, in order 
for it to become successful, must come down from the top. Or at least that is 
the perception that should be made.

www.syngress.com
150	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
I never had the question asked again from anyone in the company: “Why do we need 
to do this?”
Two Important Keys to  
Implementing an Effective Program
Implementing an information security awareness program can be done without a 
policy approved by the Board of Directors, but it is a lot easier if you have it. In some 
industries, a policy is mandated by regulation. Whether it is in your industry or not, it 
behooves a company in this day and age to have one, if for no other reason than to 
reduce legal exposure. The key words to look for in the policy are: All employees are 
required to follow the Information Security Program . . . failure to do so can lead to discipline 
up to and including termination. What Board of Directors would not approve an infor-
mation security policy and program for their company? It is the right thing to do. 
You’ll notice that the word “Program” is included. This connects all information 
security guidance and your awareness program to the policy.
Awareness is part of the “Information Security Program.” If you do not have  
an Awareness Standard, compose one. An Awareness Standard says, “Who, what,  
and when will people comply with the information security awareness program 
implemented at your company.” First, who should receive training? Should it be all 
employees regardless of whether they have system access or not? I would say yes.  
This should be required of consultants and vendors, too.
Vendors sometimes challenge this issue. If they are on the premises, I would 
suggest they take your training, unless their company provides training that is equal 
to, or greater than, what your company requires. If an employee or vendor, consul-
tant, and so on is a chauffeur, for example, the argument is that they do not have 
access to company systems, and therefore should not be required to take the training. 
Company chauffeurs probably have more access to sensitive information than you 
might think. They can overhear what’s being said in car conversations and on cell 
phone calls, and may even look through important papers left in the car while the 
senior manager is off at a meeting, if they so choose.
Don’t think it can happen? In 1973, I was working for a company in Osaka, 
Japan. The CEO of the company enjoyed driving to work in his Rolls-Royce. He 
would pick me up every morning on the way to the office to discuss our marketing 
plans and status—a good use of commuting time. As time went by, the CEO decided 
to hire an Assistant to the President (AP). Part of his job was to be the CEO’s chauffeur 

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
151
and traveling secretary. So, now, the CEO and I were being driven by the AP to the 
office. To make a long story short, we discovered that the AP was actually employed 
by one of our competitors, and was a mole in our company. Imagine how upset the 
boss was, and how it affected some of our marketing plans. Having an employee who 
does not have system access take your awareness training will not stop this kind of 
threat, but it does tell someone like the chauffer how important properly safeguarding 
sensitive information is to the company.
To that end, each employee is a sales representative for your company. If you are 
out at a party and someone asks, “What does your company do to safeguard sensitive 
information properly?” What would you say? The final two things you need to 
consider in your Awareness Standard is the “What” and the “When.” “What” are the 
awareness training requirements you have created (attending new hire orientations, 
completing an online training program, and so on). And then comes “When.” What 
are the expectations to complete specific awareness training? Should it be done prior 
to system access, or within 30 days of hire? As I mentioned earlier, write and get your 
Awareness Standard approved. Don’t wait for someone else to write it. You do it. Vet 
it with your manager and your CISO, and then take it through your company’s 
internal approval process.
You may ask, “Why not have your manager discuss the Awareness Standard  
(if you do not report directly) to the CISO?” Your CISO needs to know and respect 
your involvement and responsibility to the program. You are one of the few people  
in your division, other than those who report directly to the CISO, who is representing 
your division throughout the enterprise. Having his/her direct ear is an important 
relationship to develop. 
I certainly know what we would like people to do, but it is not always easy for a 
company, especially a large one, to ensure that all their employees are complying with 
your Information Security Awareness Standard in a timely manner. Be sensible with 
the standard you create to ensure the processes can be followed in a timely manner 
by all. Otherwise, you could create your own nightmare.
Warning
What you put in your Awareness Standard is auditable. You may want to 
mandate certain action, but if you cannot get people to comply, then you 
have an audit issue.

www.syngress.com
152	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
For example: All employees must complete information security awareness training prior to 
system access. I know we would all like to see that, but it’s not going to happen, especially 
in a large organization. Take your proposed Awareness Standard to the Audit department, 
after it has been viewed with your manager and prior to the CISO’s review. This puts 
you in a better position with your CISO if he/she knows Audit is satisfied with the 
Standard. The final decision rests with the CISO. You do not want your program to 
burden the company. You simply want to enhance awareness and validate that all employ-
ees are receiving awareness training on a timely basis and that each employee under-
stands and acknowledges their responsibility to safeguard sensitive information properly.
To Print or Not to Print
One of the first products I produced and released was a Quick Reference Guide. 
Though there is a lot of pressure to utilize the company’s intranet to distribute 
information, I remain a fan of print. There is still nothing like walking into the store 
and touching the merchandise. So, too, there is nothing like receiving a well-designed 
brochure or booklet, especially when it has the opportunity to stay around as a 
reminder. Having said that, there is a lot to be said for an intranet, because it allows 
you to upload updates on-the-fly and make your materials more current. A printed 
guide lasted at least one year, and after the initial print to all employees, we only 
printed enough to support new hire orientations. Of course, in the document was a 
reference to our Web site and to check for updates.
This Quick Reference Guide should do one very important thing. Tell employees 
where to find Information Security (through a URL, e-mail, and/or telephone 
number) when they have a question or concern about securing information properly. 
For awareness, I had my own extension on our 1-800 number. The following are the 
key topics you want to cover in this document:
1.	 What is sensitive information?
2.	 The importance of a clean desk policy.
3.	 How to create a good hard-to-crack password.
4.	 Use of a password-protected screensaver.
5.	 Remote computing safeguarding procedures.
6.	 Safeguarding the transmission of sensitive information.
7.	 The destruction of sensitive information.
8.	 The risk from social engineers.

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
153
9.	 The risk from insider threats.
10.	 How to report an actual or suspected incident.
In keeping with “what is sensitive information,” a classification of data matrix 
should be given to every employee so they clearly understand what security levels 
have been assigned to information in your company. What are the classifications you 
use to designate sensitivity of information. Examples show each level of sensitive 
information (see Figure 4.1), how it should be marked, transmitted electronically or 
non-electronically, stored, and destroyed.
Though all this guidance should be in a standard or other format, putting it in a 
concise, easy-to-read, and easily accessible resource is important to your overall 
awareness program. Many employees posted this matrix in their workspace. As you’ll 
notice, it also included a Web site URL and phone number as an easy reminder of 
how to contact Information Security. Marketing our contact information proved to 
be a significant benefit to the awareness program. When privacy, through the 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act became an important issue at the company I worked for, 
the group that was put together to manage that process proceeded to do conduct 
training. When questions were raised, guess who received the phone calls? Our 
employees did not know the difference between information security and privacy. 
This became the impetus of information security and privacy joining forces to 
implement an online awareness component to our individual programs. Later in the 
chapter, I’ll talk more about how aligning with other departments and divisions 
within your company can greatly benefit your program.
Figure 4.1 Levels of Sensitive Information

www.syngress.com
154	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
Online Training Programs
It’s better to have something rather than nothing. If all you have for your awareness 
training program is an annual online training program, then at least you have some-
thing. The risk is that you rely on this program as your only touch point and channel 
to reinforce principles and correct behavior. Some companies have an online orienta-
tion program. This should not replace the guide. It should merely supplement the 
program. Remember, seven different times, seven different ways. If you do have an 
online training program, it is a good place to get an employee’s acknowledgement 
that they understand their responsibility in properly safeguarding sensitive information 
at the company. This can soften public opinion if and when a data breach occurs. It is 
better to hear that “the company has an ongoing awareness program and as grievous 
as the incident may be, it was not because the company was not paying attention to 
their responsibility to safeguard customers’ sensitive information properly.”
Your In-House Web Site
If you have a company intranet, this is a great place to support information security 
services. If you are a small company, having your policies, standards, procedures, 
baselines, and other guidance housed on your Information Security Web site so those 
with a need to know have easy access and know whom to communicate with for the 
right answers is a good idea.
Figure 4.2 Example of an Information Security Web Site

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
155
List the “Service Tasks” that information security provides, including your 
Awareness Program. This is where you can house an archive of articles you have 
written, as well as other products used in your awareness program, such as your 
Employee Quick Reference Guide, the Manager’s Guide, and even an orientation 
video. If you make your products easily available (communicate, communicate, com-
municate!), you’ll be amazed at how many within your organization will utilize the 
materials you’ve put in place. An example of those materials is shown in Figure 4.3. 
You should also consider placing “quick links” to other Web sites, such as those 
regarding privacy and compliance.
How to Implement an  
Information Security Awareness Program
Send to every employee in the company a card or sticker that includes the Corporate 
Information Security name, the intranet URL for your Web site, and a contact 
number for questions and/or for reporting an incident. 
Figure 4.3 An Example of Posted Security Awareness Materials

www.syngress.com
156	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
Implementing your information security awareness program is not always as easy 
as one may think. I know… just put it out there. It’s policy and it’s what employees 
need to know. However, it is how you implement it that is just as important as what 
you implement. Here’s what I mean. You are about to send a document to every 
employee in the company. How this document will be received is very important, 
because if employees do not read it, then why send it? Each department within your 
company has their own priorities, schedules to keep, and day-to-day processes that 
must be accomplished. If you simply send your document to every employee without 
advance notice to management that it is coming and why it is important for every 
employee to read, then you might as well kick back and watch the trash cans fill up. 
You want management to embrace your program, so communication is really impor-
tant. You need managers, at all levels, to support your program.
Tip
One of the easiest and best things you can do in support of your program is 
to ensure that every employee in the company knows how to contact 
Corporate Information Security (and you) if their question pertains to 
awareness.
Tip
Search out every other Web site on the company’s intranet and have the link 
to your intranet site appear on those sites as well.
Tip
Identify every employee in other departments responsible for training and 
new hire orientation. Include them in your mailing list for updates and touch 
point communications. What are touch point communications? This is when, 
at least once a month, you send an e-mail newsletter out to key individuals 
in your company, sharing information security safety tips and other thoughts 
to keep them engaged in your program.

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
157
What We Have Here Is a Failure to Communicate
In “Cool Hand Luke,” the Captain of Road Prison 36 first used the phrase,  
“What we have here is a failure to communicate.” It is a condition that exists across 
America’s corporate culture and why awareness is so important. Lack of awareness is 
a failure to communicate. Symptoms of this condition are the appearance of silos, 
employees not following policy, standards, or other defined process—doing their own 
thing, rather than the right thing.
Communicate, Communicate, Communicate!
Anyone in a company who works with technology, software applications, and systems 
can negatively impact the security of the company’s information assets. For example: 
An employee’s failure to communicate with information security specialists about an 
application they are developing can result in the exposure of sensitive information. 
Even if an application developer is proficient in secure coding, they should include an 
information security specialist as part of their development team. Undoing months of 
work, because Information Security was not consulted is no excuse for placing the 
company in a vulnerable position and incurring additional costs to have the code 
rewritten. Senior leaders, in my opinion, should mandate this requirement. Conversely, 
when Information Security releases new applications, processes, and due dates to 
follow without communicating these changes to the affected lines of business, ani-
mosity is generated, which can overtly affect what you are trying to accomplish.
Other Touch Points
If you create a Quick Reference Guide for employees, have it included in the compa-
ny’s post-acceptance package. This is the package you received as a new employee that 
includes your benefits and other important information that you need to know on 
your first day at the company. Include the “Classification of Data Matrix” in the 
centerfold of the guide. This gives the employee an easy way to remove the matrix 
and post it in their work area. If you are ever going to get an employee to read what 
is important to the company, it will be during their welcoming process. If your com-
pany does not have a post-acceptance package, then the document should be given to 
the new hire during orientation. If you do not have a formal new hire orientation 
program, then the manager or their designee should sit down with the new employee 
and go through the guide. One of the values a new employee is hoping to see when 
they hire on to a company is that the company is trying to do the right thing. 
Safeguarding sensitive information properly is just such a worthy value to adopt.

www.syngress.com
158	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
Manager’s Quick Reference Guide
Managers, as I have discussed, are a key implementation partner. But how do you  
get them engaged in the process? Every manager in a company should clearly under­
stand their responsibility ensuring that employees (and themselves) are effectively fol-
lowing the company’s information security policy and program. The Manager’s Quick 
Reference Guide should be part of every new hire manager’s post acceptance package. 
This information should be in an Information Security Standard, such as Roles and 
Responsibilities, or other guidance. The Manager’s Quick Reference Guide brings 
the importance of the manager’s responsibilities out of the maze of documented 
procedures and requirements and gives it the importance it deserves. In this guide, 
the following topics should be discussed:
1.	 Information Security is not responsible for safeguarding sensitive information 
properly. It is a team effort.
2.	 Application development and working with IT.
3.	 Know your employees’ safeguarding sensitive information properly behaviors.
4.	 The importance of encryption and the secure transmission of electronic and 
non-electronic information properly.
5.	 The downloading of unlicensed software.
6.	 Being an enabler.
7.	 Consultant/vendor guidelines.
8.	 Updating or deleting an employee’s system access immediately when they 
are transferred or terminated.
9.	 Social engineering risks.
10.	 The risk of insider threats.
Managers should look to include discussion about information security topics in 
their staff meetings. When new materials or directions are released from information 
security, managers should ensure their employees have received the materials or 
guidance and understand the direction. It can be as simple as pointing out a new 
poster that is up and why the topic is important, or that a new standard has been 
released and what it means to both their department and job function. Information 
security awareness is an ongoing process with which everyone in the company 

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
159
should be engaged. Managers can determine whether employees need to see certain 
information. As mentioned earlier, imagine that a new standard is released and that 
employees in your company, who need to know this information, do not receive it!
Let’s Talk about Alliances
If you want your program to be successful, then don’t do it without input from 
others in your company. Embrace other divisions within your firm that can assist  
you in completing your mission. Some of them include the following.
Audit
Yes, Audit personnel are your friends! Any products or programs you create should be 
approved with Audit’s input. This accomplishes a few things. First, it embraces Audit 
as part of the process, part of the team. So, Audit should be easier to work with along 
the way. Secondly, your CISO will most likely ask you whether Audit was consulted 
when you make your presentation, and you don’t want to stand there with a stupid 
look on your face.
Legal
Submitting materials to your Legal department is the right thing to do. Rarely will 
you ever get a “you can’t do this” statement from your legal council. It is managing 
the perception and protecting your program that counts. Obviously, not everything 
needs to be sent to Legal, but, say for example, you were creating an online informa-
tion security awareness program, you would want your legal department’s input for 
obvious reasons, and also to make sure you have not overlooked something, such as 
co-employment issues.
Privacy
I have mentioned the Privacy division as a good partner previously in this chapter.  
To me it is a natural fit. If your company is mandated by federal regulation, such as the 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, to implement an awareness program, then I highly suggest 
you partner with Privacy. As I mentioned earlier, your employees do not know the 
difference between Information Security and Privacy. You want to eliminate confu-
sion. It benefits everyone in the company and also provides an additional shared 
resource to fund your program.

www.syngress.com
160	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
Compliance
Companies are burdened with more and more regulations and requirements than 
ever before. If you can get your program aligned with the Compliance division, 
implementing it becomes a lot easier. For example, if you merge your efforts with 
another division, such as Privacy (suggested earlier), you will find it easier to gain 
Compliance’s support in implementing an annual information security awareness 
training requirement. Depending on processes at your company, you may find that 
Compliance is willing to take over and fund the delivery of your annual online 
training requirement. The greatest benefit to an online training program is its ability 
to track compliance. This is something you do not want on your plate, if at all pos-
sible. Otherwise, your life will become an administrative nightmare, as opposed to 
allowing you to be creative and move your program forward.
Training and Communications
If your company has a Training and/or Communications division, embrace their services. 
In some cases, you will have no alternative. For example, your company has a Learning 
Management System (LMS). To wander away from an established training platform does 
not make sense. In fact, it could possibly get you in trouble. Additionally, you want to 
make sure your materials are written in “corporate speak.” I don’t always agree with this, 
because it can sometimes stifle creativity, but it is still the right thing to do.
Coordinating your division’s internal messages to the enterprise is important, too. 
You are not the only one in your division communicating to the enterprise. You want 
to ensure that conflicting messages are not being sent out, that what is being commu-
nicated is in “people speak,” not “technical speak,” unless that is your audience.
Personnel
These folks are not critical to your program, but if you have materials that you want 
sent out to new hires in their post-acceptance package, these are the people to work 
with. In addition, get to know whom you can rely on to get distribution lists. This 
helps especially when you are sending out a survey (either print or electronic). They 
can slice and dice the distribution profile you want to survey. I mean by that the 
SVPS, VPS, and the corporate officers, by hierarchy, so you have a good representation 
across the enterprise.

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
161
Information Security Consultants
If your company is large enough to have internal consultants working with lines of 
business, then get to know these people. One of the dangers of implementing an 
information security awareness program is releasing a product or requirement that is 
in conflict with another division’s calendar. Your internal Information Security con-
sultants can help you with this issue.
I think one of the worst things an Information Security Department can do is 
alienate the other departments in the company from your services and support. 
Developing the attitude of “enabler” goes a long way toward implementing a success-
ful information security awareness program. There was never a time that I could not 
find a “Win, Win” solution to an internal customer’s need. And that needs to be your 
attitude to get their willingness to buy in to your program.
Some final thoughts around alliances. Do not forget other direct reports in your 
division. When building your information security awareness program, ask those who 
report directly to the CISO to designate someone on their team who you can inter-
act with in the development and/or review of the program you are putting together. 
Everyone in Information Security should be an advocate of the awareness program. 
Many of your co-workers support other employees in the company. Make sure 
everyone knows that information security awareness materials are available, where to 
find standards and other guidance, and how to contact Information Security for 
clarification of questions, concerns, or to report an incident. This can be accom-
plished in staff meetings, brown bag lunches, and e-mail notifications, as well as 
covering the components and materials in your awareness program.
Warning
You are not a cop! A mistake many make in Information Security is having 
the attitude of “Gate Keeper.” The perception in the enterprise is that you’re 
the cop. This attitude will hamper your program as well as other services 
Information Security provides.

www.syngress.com
162	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
How Do You Keep Your  
Program a Successful  
Component of Your Company’s Mindset?
In the beginning of this chapter, I gave you the answer to this question. Repetition is 
the aid to memory. How many different touch points have you created in your pro-
gram? I have discussed print, online training, and Web sites. Certainly using posters, 
Post-It notes, tchotchkes with proper information security behavior reminders, articles, 
and e-mails can help. And with today’s compression and streaming capabilities, video 
has become a viable delivery channel, too. 
This is a great way to get students on your campus involved and to get these 
important messages out. If your company has a video production studio, use their 
resources. What are your creative talents? It might be designing posters. If you have 
an idea, but not the creative ability, who inside your company can help you create 
the product? The Awareness Intra-preneur within you is constantly looking for new 
products, and new channels through which to deliver awareness messages. 
Idea
If you are a university, sponsor a contest for students to create awareness 
posters or short videos that support the information security messages.
Warning
There is a tendency for management to use those who are responsible for 
designing and implementing the company’s information security awareness 
program for other projects. This often can become the death knell of the 
program. That’s why it’s important to have your business plan in place, work-
ing on and implementing the next phase, and measuring your program so 
you can validate the program’s progress and success.

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
163
In small companies, this warning is neither true nor prudent, but in larger com-
panies it can create a significant issue in the programs’ continuity and emphasis. The 
need for an Information Security Awareness Specialist is emerging. This is a person 
who has a good handle on marketing, communications, media, design, project man-
agement, and implementation. This individual doesn’t necessarily need to be a sub-
ject-matter expert, because a lot of what they must know is common sense or 
outlined in the company’s information security policy, standards, and other guidance.
An Information Security Awareness Specialist is also someone who can commu-
nicate effectively with all levels in the company. Often he/she will directly support 
the CISO and other senior leaders in presentation needs supporting the information 
security awareness messages. I suggest this because I have seen employees who do not 
have the presence, drive, and maturity to implement and sustain a program. This is 
not to slight all those who are trying to make a difference. This is to say that the issue 
is a major one that requires major attention and proven leadership ability. It requires a 
risk-taker, an intra-preneur, someone who is willing to use entrepreneurial skills on 
the inside of the company to advance the awareness program.
Now, let’s move on to the final portion of this chapter where I describe the most 
difficult thing you’ll need to do: measure an information security awareness program.
How to Measure Your Program
What gets measured gets done. Historically, it is difficult to measure the effectiveness 
of an information security awareness program. If you can connect your training to 
specific behaviors and have a way of monitoring those behaviors to see if compliance 
has improved, then that is what you are looking for. It validates the training. 
However, I caution that awareness is not training. It is not learning how a widget 
works. It is understanding and exhibiting the correct safeguarding sensitive informa-
tion behaviors. So what can you measure to justify the effectiveness of your program?
First, how many employees have received training, whether through an annual class 
or a new hire orientation? How many employees have received the Quick Reference 
Guide or other key materials you have distributed? How many “Awareness” calls have 
you received and what categories are they in? If you do some marketing on creating 
easy-to-remember yet hard-to-crack passwords, and your password resets go down, this 
is a good indicator that your program is working. You want to capture this before and 
after information to show improvement. It is not always easy to find applications or 
programs that can give you timely and accurate information.

www.syngress.com
164	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
For example, how many sensitive customer documents that include Social 
Security numbers, account numbers, and so on are not truncated and are being  
e-mailed outside the company without encryption? If I had a section on encryption 
in my training, can I document improvement? If you can, great, but in most organi-
zations this is a challenge.
In my experience, I relied heavily on subjective measurements that ultimately 
validated the effectiveness of our program. It showed steady improvement over time. 
It also provided critical objectives to the program so that we complied with the Six 
Sigma quality management process. Here’s how I did it.
I created a paper mailer initially, because at that time we did not have an online 
survey resource. In fact, we didn’t really have anyone who knew how to write survey 
questions. It is a skill. To maximize return of the survey, it was sent out with a way to 
respond anonymously. I actually had two surveys: one for new hires and one for all 
employees. The new-hire survey was done on a monthly basis, while the employee 
survey was done once a year. I needed, on the annual survey, 600 responses to have a 
statistically valid survey. The easiest way to figure this out was to go on the Internet 
and search “sample size calculator.” I can tell you that when I went from a paper to 
an online survey, the number of respondents went up. I can also tell you that offering 
a trinket or other incentive to respond did not make a difference in the number of 
responses. You want a cross section of your organization, so survey all levels of 
employees and all hierarchies or divisions. Your personnel department should be able 
to provide a report that slices and dices this information for you. Obviously, you want 
the employee’s full name, mail code and hierarchy, and position (CEO, SVP VP, 
Officer). If your survey is being delivered via an online channel, then you would 
want the employee’s e-mail address, too. My response ratio was always high.
I asked questions in six basic categories:
Passwords
Viruses
PC Security
Information Security Standards
Data Classification
Other Threats
I also asked questions that pertained to the level of service our division was pro-
viding. I would track all the questions, but for reporting purposes for CTQ (Critical 
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
165
to Quality), we only used ten questions in what we called our “Awareness Quotient,” 
for lack of a better term. It showed over time how the program was working and 
where there was a need for improvement. Over a five-year period of time, we went 
from an “Awareness Quotient” of under 50 percent to over 90 percent. The chart in 
Figure 4.4 reflects one question, but gives you an idea of what improvement looks 
like over time. Could we define one product or component that made the improve-
ments? I believe it is a cumulative effect of your program over time, as long as it 
remains consistent, that will show improvement and a cultural difference in your 
company. I must say that when the company came out of a survey application we 
could use, the administrative nightmare was over, and surveying became a lot easier.
The survey also gave us an indication, by levels in management, of who better 
understood the behaviors and what areas within the company were complying (for 
instance, were new hires receiving the Employee Quick Reference Guide?). When 
our online training program was put into effect, it gave us other collaborating data, 
such as how many employees within a hierarchy were not taking the annual training. 
This allowed us to target a hierarchy or division for follow-up and generated discus-
sion on what we could do to ensure compliance was being met. One thing that can 
help in this arena is support from Compliance and your CEO. The CEO should 
Figure 4.4 How Improvements in Awareness Can Improve over Time

www.syngress.com
166	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
mandate that all of his/her directly reporting officers ensure at least 93 percent or 
above compliance to all mandatory training. Historically, that would include regula-
tory- or industry-required training as well as sexual harassment training, code of 
ethics or conduct, and privacy and information security awareness training.
The graph in Figure 4.5 is a way of showing over time how your program is 
doing and, again, where improvement is needed. Post these graphs in your work area. 
As people visit you, it shows that you have a handle on your program. It also helps if 
you are working with training specialists and people who design training programs. 
They are continually trying to find the widget to measure the before-and-after effect 
of training. Having your own statistics allows you to keep this discussion in a broader 
perspective.
Figure 4.5 A Graph Displaying Your Program’s Progress

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
167
Summary
The subject of implementing an effective information security awareness program is 
something more than what can be included in a single chapter. The Internet affords 
us access to a lot of good information, and companies that can help you design and 
implement your program. Nothing, though, will do this better than your own spirit 
and desire to make such a program “world class.”
Specifically in reference to SCADAs, because that is what this book is primarily 
about, this chapter on awareness would not have been included if the lead author and 
publisher did not feel it was an appropriate and important topic to discuss. Awareness 
is communications. Awareness is understanding risks. Awareness is being proactive to 
those risks with sensible solutions. Each individual can significantly reduce the expo-
sure of sensitive information by following simple behaviors and raising their hand 
with conviction when they see a potential or real risk. No one has all the answers, 
but collectively the risk can be addressed and reduced. Each company in America can 
significantly reduce the loss of sensitive information through an effective employee 
awareness program. There is no question about that. One lost laptop can be a devas-
tating incident that very well may not have occurred if the employee clearly under-
stood both the risk and their responsibility. The cost to implement an information 
security awareness program is incalculably far less than what it could cost you later 
without one.
Today’s information risk pandemic should be treated like any other event that 
requires a disaster recovery plan. Prevention is an important key, and through it we 
just might bring the level of this risk down from pandemic status to that of a cold.
Solutions Fast Track
Why an Information Security  
Awareness Program Is Important
The failure in security systems often is due to lack of human interest or 
involvement.
Corporations need to treat security seriously, and ensure that employees 
think and act securely.
More investment in security infrastructure is needed.
˛
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
168	
Chapter 4 • Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program
How to Design an Effective  
Information Security Awareness Program
Security should have an employee dedicated to creating an implementing a 
program.
Your program should be treated as a maketing campaign and each employee 
should be “touched” repeatedly by marketing messages about being secure.
Create a business plan for your program and make sure you have institutional 
buy-in to ensure its success.
Print a “Quick Reference” gide and eliver the rest of your program online, 
to make updating information easier.
How to Implement an Effective  
Information Security Awareness Program
Communication with employees is the most important factor when 
implementing a security awareness program.
Communicate not only the security policies, but why they are important.
Work with new hires to instill the importance of security in them.
Hold frequent training sessions.
How Do You Keep Your Program  
a Successful Component of Your Company’s Mindset?
Utilize the creative aspects of your company to create videos, web sites, and 
other forms of presentations to engage your audience.
Create a slogan and produce hand-outs like magnets of desk calendars that 
reind people of the importance of security.
Repetition of the security message is key.
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
	
Developing an Effective Security Awareness Program • Chapter 4	
169
How to Measure Your Program
Create and administer surveys to measure the effectiveness of your campaign.
Measure how many new employees have received training.
How many employees have “strong” passwords?
˛
˛
˛

171
Chapter 5
Working with Law 
Enforcement on 
SCADA Incidents
Lester J. Johnson Jr. is employed by the SCANA Corporation, a $ 9 Billion, 
Fortune 500, energy–based holding company, headquartered in Columbia, 
South Carolina. Mr. Johnson serves in the Corporate Security and Claims 
Department as a Manager with responsibility for Investigations and Crisis 
Management. Mr. Johnson leads a staff of professional investigators who 
conduct investigations of  internal corporate compliance issues, criminal 
violations against the corporation’s property and personnel, executive 
protection, background investigations and risk reduction efforts on behalf of 
the Corporation. The Crisis Management Department is responsible for the 
development and continual assessment of security risk management and 
reduction plans for the critical infrastructure operated by the Corporation. 
These risk management and reduction plans include the assurance of compliance 
with the various governmental agencies with oversight responsibilities for the 
critical infrastructure. Business continuity and emergency procedure planning 
are also a major component of the crisis management group. 
Mr. Johnson is a retired Deputy to the Assistant Director of Investigative Services 
for the South Carolina Law Enforcement Division.  He was responsible for the 
delivery of all investigative services, which included general investigations, 
bomb and arson, tactical, computer crimes, special victims, executive protection, 
behavioral science, public corruption, and insurance fraud. 
During his twenty–eight year career Mr. Johnson received numerous awards 
and commendations, including the Strom Thurmond Award of Excellence in 
2004. Mr. Johnson is a graduate of the FBI National Academy and has served 
as an adjunct instructor for numerous organizations. 
Mr. Johnson is married to the former Laura Whelchel of Cordele, Georgia and 
resides in Lexington, South Carolina with his two children.

www.syngress.com
172	
Chapter 5 • Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents
Introduction
Law enforcement agencies are receiving increasing requests for the investigation of high 
technology related criminal activities. The protection of the nation’s critical infrastruc-
ture is among the highest level priorities for ensured continuity of operation for our 
nation. At the core of many of these critical infrastructure operations are systems that 
move data to and from the computerized system that manage and control the opera-
tions of the infrastructure. As you can imagine, should these systems come under attack 
or become compromised and control is assumed by those person(s) intent on creating 
havoc, a disastrous outcome is imminent. The potential exists for great harm to human 
life and the national economy if SCADA systems are breached. For this purpose, it is 
my intent to, in many cases, introduce SCADA systems to law enforcement and discuss 
potential responses to investigating an attempted or actual breech of these systems. 
Additionally, you will find several examples of mitigation that law enforcement can pass 
along in a pro-active attempt to prevent occurrences of system breaches.
The SCADA systems described below are very technical in nature. Law enforce-
ment agencies who lack the personnel with a strong information technology back-
ground will find it very difficult to grasp the concepts associated with SCADA 
systems. Having the knowledge of the system and the associated audit logs are neces-
sary in determining the point of an actual or attempted breach and discovering and 
preserving the evidence necessary to support criminal charges.
SCADA System Overview
SCADA stands for Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition. SCADA refers to a 
system that collects data from various sensors that send data to a central computer, 
which then manages and controls the systems. There are many parts of a working 
Tip
The concept of law enforcement partnering with subject matter experts from 
the private sector in the investigation of SCADA breaches is one that should 
be considered. Caution should be noted if law enforcement is utilizing subject 
matter experts from the organization whose system may have been breached, 
as there is always the distinct possibility that an “insider” may be involved. 
Assistance from Federal Law Enforcement agencies or agencies with experi-
ence in the investigation of high technology crime may also be considered.

www.syngress.com
	
Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents • Chapter 5	
173
SCADA system. These systems usually include signal hardware input and output, 
controllers, networks, human machine interface (HMI), communications equipment, 
and software. The term SCADA refers to the entire control system. The control 
system monitors data from various sensors that may be located in one facility, or they 
could be geographically distributed across a city, state, or even around the globe.
These SCADA systems are core to much of the nation’s critical information 
technology infrastructure, most of which is owned and operated by private industry. 
It is vital that both the system owner and law enforcement be proactive in develop-
ing partnerships, building collaborative capabilities, and defining processes to facilitate 
investigations in the event of an attack.
Let’s spend just a minute to explain the basic components of a SCADA system 
and its functions. This will help law enforcement understand the possible attack 
vectors as we go through the details of each and how to protect them.
One of the key aspects of a SCADA system is its ability to monitor an entire 
system in real time. To accomplish this, SCADA systems incorporate remote terminal 
units, or RTU’s, and programmable logic controllers, or PLC’s. These RTU’s and 
PLCs are the intelligent building blocks of a SCADA system. Usually RTU’s or PLC’s 
run a pre-programmed process, such as turning a switch on or off, opening or closing 
a valve, or sensing temperature changes. Monitoring each of them individually can be 
difficult, because they often are spread out over the system. The human machine 
interface HMI is where the information is displayed or monitored by the operator. 
HMI’s are an easy way to standardize the monitoring of multiple RTU’s or PLC’s. 
Real-time communications to these units is critical to the health of the system. 
Because of the possible link to physical outcomes, the requirement for redundant 
systems is heightened. HMI’s often are connected to databases to facilitate providing 
graphs or trends, logistic information, schematics for a specific sensor or machine, or 
even troubleshooting guides. SCADA systems are considered closed loop systems and 
run with relatively little human intervention.
An attacker who wishes to assume control of a SCADA system is faced with 
three challenges: 
1.	 Gaining access to the control system LAN
2.	 Through discovery, understanding of the process
3.	 Gaining control of the process
Unfortunately there are many methods an intruder can use to get this information. 
Increasingly these systems are well documented on the web and are easily accessible.

www.syngress.com
174	
Chapter 5 • Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents
Understanding the control systems cyber vulnerabilities is key to understanding 
the steps needed to protect these systems. The British Columbia Institute of 
Technology (BCIT) study of 34 incidents shows the SCADA components breached 
and their origins.
The following charts are divided into two groups, 14 internal events and 25 
external. Notice the Virtual Private Networks (VPN); those trusted networks lead to 
8 percent of the breaches. Given these statistics, one can begin to get an idea as to 
where one should prioritize the spending of security money.
Figure 5.1 14 Internal Security Incidents by Entry Point
Figure 5.2 25 External Security Incidents by Entry Point

www.syngress.com
	
Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents • Chapter 5	
175
The BCIT’s report says 70 percent of attacks reported between 2001 and 2003 
came from some external entity. Between 1982 and 2000, just 31 percent of attacks 
came from the outside. This is an older study, but the trends have continued.
The sharp increase of SCADA intrusions beginning in 2001 indicates a sharp 
increase in these kinds of attacks, which may or may not be politically motivated.
Secure Network Management
Securing Wide Area Network Perimeter
A well-segregated network is your first step to controlling your systems. The first 
segregation point is a perimeter security defense using a firewall between the business 
network and the Internet. Utilize an Intrusion Protection Devise (IPS) as well to 
monitor and automatically block unwanted traffic entering from the Internet. Do not 
forget your wireless access points. Treat them the same as an Internet access. Use a 
firewall to segregate your SCADA control LAN from your business network. Use an 
IPS to monitor and block unwanted traffic from your business network to your 
­control LAN.
Tip
Segregation at the perimeter is the first segregation that you should con-
sider. Establishing security zones according to data sensitivity should be a 
standard practice. Develop rules and guidelines for access to and from these 
zones. A basic rule would allow more secure zones to establish connections 
to less secure zones, but never from a less secure zone to higher secure zone. 
For example, a workstation on the SCADA LAN could establish a session with 
Figure 5.3 BCIT report statistics

www.syngress.com
176	
Chapter 5 • Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents
Controlling Access
Access control from a physical perspective is obviously important. Secondly and statisti-
cally more important is network access control. A human actor using network access can 
wreak havoc on an unprotected or poorly managed network. Once access is gained, 
control is just a step away. Using technology such as two-factor authentication is strongly 
recommended. Tokens, swipe cards, and even biometrics in conjunction with a strong 
user id / password policy go a long way to controlling access. Once you know with 
whom you are dealing, then controlling what he or she does is your next challenge.
Performing Network Backup and Recovery
The backup and recovery of a SCADA system has its own unique issues. The all-the-time 
requirements of SCADA systems means that backups must be done on live systems  
and recovery times must be very short. The solution is often a mirrored database that 
can be taken off-line for backup purposes without affecting the production systems. 
Otherwise business production lines would be shut down, possibly resulting in loss of 
money and business reputation. Use as much caution as to who and how access  
is given to these systems as you would the control system itself. The data in these 
databases can be hacked, giving away enough information to fully understand the  
processes needed.
Transmitting Legacy  
Non-Routable Protocol Securely
Many of the SCADA systems have been around long before the advent of the PC  
or Internet, and many of their communication protocols were developed for closed 
a server on the business LAN, but the reverse would not be allowed. 
Following this simple principle will go a long way in keeping your environ-
ment secure. If during an investigation you discover this, further questioning 
and log examination may be in order.
Warning
These systems use a survivor ability model, not a backup and recovery model. 
These systems must be investigated while they are online.

www.syngress.com
	
Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents • Chapter 5	
177
networks. Transmitting these protocols over a routed network was never envisioned. 
The Internet protocol Ethernet is designed to get the message there through what-
ever paths are available and is not a guaranteed delivery protocol. Many of the 
SCADA systems are very time sensitive and must be delivered on time every time,  
so using alternate routes that take more or even less time can cause issues.
Figure 5.4 Controlling Access to the SCADA Control System LAN
Warning
The time sensitive nature of these systems lends itself to a distributed denial 
of service attacks (DDOS)

www.syngress.com
178	
Chapter 5 • Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents
Dial-Up Access to the  
Remote Terminal Units (RTU)
Modems are often used as backup communications if the primary high-speed lines 
are down. The attacker will automatically dial every phone number (known as WAR 
dialing) or every extension in the company looking for modems hung off the corpo-
rate phone system. Most Remote Terminal Units (RTUs) identify themselves and the 
vendor who made them. Most RTUs require no authentication or a password for 
authentication. It is common to find RTUs with the default passwords still enabled 
in the field.
Vendor Support: Dial-Up Modem/ VPN Access
Most control systems come with vendor support agreements. There is a need for 
support during upgrades or when a system is malfunctioning. The most common 
means of vendor support used to be through a dial-up modem and PCAnywhere.  
In recent years, this means of support has transitioned to VPN access to the control 
system LAN. An attacker will attempt to gain access to internal vendor resources or 
field laptops and piggyback on the connection into the control system LAN. Monitor 
and manage this access point closely for possible attacks.
IT Controlled Communication Gear
Often the routers and telephone communications are maintained by the business IT 
staff. A skilled attacker can compromise these devices by gaining access to the field 
communications.
Tip
Where possible, configure modems in the call back mode. This helps with the 
WAR dialing from being successful.
Note
In the BCIT study, 43 percent of the incidents were on the business network, 
and 36 percent came by way of the Internet. The proprietary systems were 

www.syngress.com
	
Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents • Chapter 5	
179
Corporate VPNs
Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) are often set up for access to the control networks 
from the business LAN. An often-used attack vector is the end user’s workstation 
utilizing key-loggers and screen scrappers, which piggyback on the legitimate users  
as they access the control systems through the VPN’s. Extra care should be given to 
every workstation that is allowed to access the control network. Ensure up to date 
anti-virus software, patch the operating system automatically, and make sure that 
host-based firewalls are standard on these workstations. Consider whether to allow 
workstations that access the Internet to connect to the control LAN. Strong cyber 
security user education training should be required. The business LAN is the most 
likely access vehicle attackers will attempt to use to access your control systems. The 
e-mail, web servers, and users browsing the Internet are the most likely entry mecha-
nisms. The latest operating system patches and up-to-date anti-virus software are a 
must. In 2007 there were, on average, 19 new exploits per day, with an average of a 
30-day lead-time between known vulnerability and patch availability. Thus, on any 
given day, there are possibly 570 ways they can get into your systems that you have 
no way of stopping. Security in-depth is your only defense.
Database Links
Databases are often mirrored to the business LAN for disaster recovery or backup 
purposes. They contain the keys to the entire control systems, and include user id’s 
not the most successful targets; it was the support system components that 
were breached successfully. This could be from the sheer number of systems 
and their vulnerabilities on the business LAN, the dangerous Internet behavior  
of the users, or possibly a combination of both.
Note
Google conducted an internal research concerning infected websites. The 
study revealed that 1 out of 10 pages contain malware. That is 450,000 
websites are infected with malware files, most of them trying to exploit the 
user’s computer through the Internet Explorer browser. Usually, the malicious 
files are aiming to install infected files on the user’s computers that will allow 
the attackers to obtain control over the affected system.

www.syngress.com
180	
Chapter 5 • Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents
and passwords, control codes, detailed explanations of how the control systems work, 
and information about the RTU’s and PLS’s that control each component of the 
system. Attackers use specially crafted Sequel Query Language (SQL) statements to 
take over the database server and extract its contents. Every modern day SQL data-
base allows this type of attack if steps are not taken to block these statements.
Poorly Configured Firewalls
Not providing outbound data rules is the most common configuration problem. This 
may allow an attacker who can sneak a payload onto a control system machine to  
call back out of the control system. This is known as phoning home. This is one of 
the most widely used techniques, often taking advantage of vulnerability in a browser 
and subsequently pulling down malware from another website without any user 
interaction.
Business Partner Links
These links have often been thought of as trusted relationships, but what it means is 
that your systems are only as well protected as your weakest link. The business part-
ners are not automatically that weak link, but it does increase you exposure and make 
the process much more complicated to secure. Many times, dictating to a vendor how  
its networks are run can be difficult and verifying that the vendor is following your 
requirements is even harder.
Tip
Protect your organization from threats by monitoring and alerting on any 
hostile and unauthorized activity jeopardizing your critical data. Supply the 
data and audit trails required for threat identification, policy enforcement, 
and regulatory compliance so that you can identify and neutralize threats 
from the perimeter to the core.

www.syngress.com
	
Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents • Chapter 5	
181
Managing Security Events
Utilizing a Security Event Management System is the key to effectively managing 
critical systems in today’s Internet-connected world. Without eyes on target giving 
you situation awareness, you really don’t know what is happening on your network. 
What you don’t know can cause you big problems. Most networks use IDS/IPS 
devices to monitor the front doors and access points to the Internet. There are no 
more perimeters in today’s networks. Devices like PDAs and cell phones with Internet 
access are inside your building and behind your firewalls. Your partners and vendors 
are on a virtual private network connected into your network from half a world away. 
Insider attacks constitute the majority of today’s attacks. The SEMS can be used in a 
post-mortem fashion to assist in lessons learned or during an investigation to deter-
mine how the attack was carried out.
Tip
Turn all of your devices into security devices. Devices such as firewalls, intru-
sion detection systems, virtual private networks, anti-virus software, worksta-
tions, active directories, file servers, print servers, modems, and many SCADA 
control devices could report to the Security Event Management System.
Figure 5.5 A Security Event Management System

www.syngress.com
182	
Chapter 5 • Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents
Once your devices are centrally logging, a correlation engine that brings all the 
events together and visually displays the events in real-time is vital. Filtering through 
thousands of events daily without this capability would be impossible. The objective is 
to get out in front and proactively identify attacks before they are successful. Attackers 
must go through a discovery process or finger printing of your systems prior to 
penetration. The visibility that you have with a SEMS will afford you the knowledge 
needed to stop these attacks prior to their gaining a foothold on your network.
Conduct Routine Assessments
A security assessment shows the system’s security posture with respect to specific 
vulnerabilities. The assessment closely examines the network architecture and  
interprets and compares results against the various business processes to determine 
whether security controls are in place to appropriately address the vulnerabilities.  
The assessment testing methodology must be effective at exposing vulnerabilities on 
complete systems, including networks, applications, operating systems, wireless, secu-
rity devices, and all supporting systems and their many interconnections. There are 
many automated tools that can be used during these assessments. Social engineering 
is also a vital component of an assessment. Remember its people, processes, and 
technology. Technology is never the complete answer, and often the people and 
processes are overlooked in these assessments.
Examples of Common Attack Techniques
Man-In-The-Middle Attacks (MITM)
An MITM attack is when the attacker makes independent connections with the 
victims and relays messages between them, making them believe that they are talking 
directly to each other when in fact the entire conversation is controlled by the 
attacker. The attacker must be able to intercept all messages going between the two 
victims and inject new ones, which is straightforward in many circumstances. For 
example, the owner of a public wireless access point can in principle conduct MITM 
attacks on the users.

www.syngress.com
	
Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents • Chapter 5	
183
Key-Logger Software
A key-logger is a type of surveillance software that records every keystroke you make 
to a log file, usually encrypted. A key-logger can record instant messages, e-mail, and 
any information you type or that is displayed on your monitor. The log file created 
by the key-logger then can be sent to a specified receiver. Some key-logger programs 
will also record any e-mail addresses you use and Web sites you visit.

www.syngress.com
184	
Chapter 5 • Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents
Summary
Given on average 570 exploits a day, no way to patch the operating systems, and 
450,000 infected pages, how can you ever keep your systems protected?
Situational awareness, segregation, security event management, security assessments, 
and security training are the points that should be stressed.
1.	 Know what traffic is on your network. Know it well enough that if your 
traffic goes up or down by 10 percent to 15 percent you know it and you 
can tell exactly why.
2.	 Keep your security zones intact. Never access a higher security zone net-
work or device from a lower level security zone or device.
3.	 Centrally log and correlate all your devices from the core to the perimeter. 
Correlation between known system vulnerability and attempted exploits 
against those systems is your actionable data. Actionable data in a sea of 
otherwise meaningless data is pure gold.
4.	 Trust but verify with routine assessments of your people, processes, and 
technology. Scanning or other automated assessments are very beneficial but 
the people and the processes are where you will either pass or fail on a  
day-to-day security test. Absolutely do your automated testing of operating 
systems, virus-patch levels, databases, applications, and network devices and 
do them often, quarterly or more frequently on the higher value targets.  
At the very least, yearly review your processes, audit your security training 
effectiveness, and perform some social engineering audits.
5.	 Training your IT staff on the possibilities and your users on the impact of 
their actions can have a very positive affect on your security. Statistically, 
well-trained people and properly followed processes are the keys to a suc-
cessful security program, yet we find over and over the lack of training and 
poorly followed processes.

www.syngress.com
	
Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents • Chapter 5	
185
Solutions Fast Track
SCADA System Overview
SCADA systems are core to much of the nation’s critical information 
technology infrastructure.
It is vital that both the system owner and law enforcement be proactive in 
developing partnerships.
One of the key aspects of a SCADA system is its ability to monitor an entire 
system in real time.
Understanding the control systems cyber vulnerabilities is key to under­
standing the steps needed to protect these systems.
Secure Network Management
A well-segregated network is your first step to controlling your systems.
A human actor using network access can wreak havoc on an unprotected or 
poorly managed network.
Backups must be done on live systems and recovery times must be very 
short.
Many of the SCADA systems are very time sensitive and must be delivered 
on time every time, so using alternate routes that take more or even less time 
can cause issues.
Where possible, configure modems in the call back mode. This helps with 
the WAR dialing from being successful.
An attacker will attempt to gain access to internal vendor resources or field 
laptops and piggyback on the connection into the control system LAN. 
Monitor and manage this access point closely for possible attacks.
Often the routers and telephone communications are maintained by the 
business IT staff. A skilled attacker can compromise these devices by gaining 
access to the field communications.
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
186	
Chapter 5 • Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents
Extra care should be given to every workstation that is allowed to access the 
control network.
Your systems are only as well protected as your weakest link.
Managing Security Events
Utilizing a Security Event Management System is the key to effectively 
managing critical systems in today’s Internet-connected world.
Get out in front and proactively identify attacks before they are successful.
A security assessment shows the system’s security posture with respect to 
specific vulnerabilities.
Examples of Common Attack Techniques
An MITM attack is when the attacker makes independent connections  
with the victims and relays messages between them, making them believe that 
they are talking directly to each other when in fact the entire conversation  
is controlled by the attacker.
A key-logger is a type of surveillance software that records every keystroke 
you make to a log file, usually encrypted.
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
	
Working with Law Enforcement on SCADA Incidents • Chapter 5	
187
Frequently Asked Questions
Q:	What are some examples of industry using SCADA systems?
A:	SCADA systems are used in a variety of plants and processes, from optimizing the 
most benefit from production lines to supervising and controlling the production 
of toxic and dangerous chemicals. Some examples are nuclear power generation, 
electric power generation and distribution, and water purification systems.
Q:	What are the key elements to secure a SCADA system?
A:	Situational awareness, segregation, security event management, security assess-
ments, and security training.
Q:	Between public and private entities, which one is the great user of SCADA 
systems?
A:	The private sector is a greater use of SCADA systems.
Q:	What resources are available to law enforcement for assistance in investigating 
breaches of SCADA systems?
A:	Local law enforcement can seek assistance from federal law enforcement, law 
enforcement agencies that have experienced high technology crime investigative 
units, or subject matter experts from the private sector.

189
Chapter 6
Locked but Not Secure:  
An Overview of 
Conventional and High 
Security Locks
Marc Weber Tobias is an investigative attorney and security specialist living in 
Sioux Falls, South Dakota. As part of his practice, he represents and consults 
with lock manufacturers, government agencies and corporations in the U.S. 
and overseas regarding the design and bypass of locks and security systems. 
He has authored six police textbooks, including Locks, Safes, and Security, 
(ISBN 978-0398070793), which is recognized as the primary reference for law 
enforcement and security professionals worldwide. The second edition, a 1400 
page two-volume work, is utilized by criminal investigators, crime labs, lock-
smiths and those responsible for physical security. A fourteen-volume multi-
media edition of his book is also available online. His website is security.org.
As a former prosecutor and Chief of the Organized Crime Unit for the Office 
of Attorney General, state of South Dakota, Marc supervised many major 
investigations and prosecutions. He continues to work investigations for  
government and private clients, mainly involving technical fraud issues.
Marc is a member of a number of professional security organizations, including 
the American Society of Industrial Security (ASIS), Association of Firearms and 
Tool Marks Examiners (AFTE), American Polygraph Association (APA) and 
American Association of Police Polygraphists (AAPP).
Marc has lectured extensively in the United States and Europe on physical 
security and certain aspects of criminal investigations and interrogation tech-
niques. He holds several patents involving the bypass of locks and security  
systems. Marc contributes a column to engadget.com and has been featured 
in many publications as well as radio and television stories around the world.

www.syngress.com
190	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
Figure 6.1 A cutaway pin tumbler lock with all six pins aligned at shear line.  
In this photograph the plug, containing the bottom pins, is free to rotate.
Figure 6.2 A cutaway of a pin tumbler lock in which some of the bottom pins are 
above and some below the shear line. The plug is not free to turn and the cylinder 
remains locked. The arrows indicate (1) bottom pins, (2) plug, (3) bitting of the key 
that raises the individual bottom pins to shear line, and (4) the shell of the lock.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
191
Introduction
In most facilities, mechanical locks are relied upon as the first level of security.  
They protect doors, safes, and barriers from being opened, and they control the 
movement of obstacles to entry. The most popular mechanism, at least in the U.S.,  
is the pin tumbler design although in some parts of the world the lever lock is still 
the first choice. In short, locks are used everywhere, and they are relied upon as the 
first line of defense.
Security officers, risk managers, information protection specialists, and others who 
are responsible for the physical security of a facility often base their selection of locks 
on the representations of the manufacturer in conjunction with security ratings that 
are established by standards organizations. High security-rated cylinders are most 
often specified to protect high value targets or critical infrastructure because it is 
assumed that they have met stringent requirements with regard to anticipated 
­methods of entry during an attack.
Organizations are generally not capable of performing in-house tests to determine 
the suitability of locks for their specific requirements. They rely on the standards 
organizations and testing laboratories to promulgate minimum performance  
benchmarks and then to insure that the locks that are certified to such standards 
actually meet them. Reliance upon either Underwriters Laboratories or the Builders 
Hardware Manufacturers Association (BHMA) to insure a certain level of performance 
or security may not meet either expectation because of significant limitations in how 
these standards are promulgated and the certification testing that results from this.
The undue reliance upon standards as the primary protection criteria can poten-
tially lead to significant breaches of security by knowledgeable attackers. In some 
cases, high security rated locks that were thought to be virtually impregnable can be 
compromised in seconds even by amateurs who are armed with certain information 
about their design deficiencies.
Note
The federal government has defined surreptitious and covert entry with 
regard to locks and security containers.
Surreptitious entry means a method of entry, such as lock manipula-
tion, which would not be detectable during normal use or during 
inspection by a qualified person.
■

www.syngress.com
192	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
Understanding the limitations of locks and the standards by which they are rated 
should create a healthy skepticism about the claims and representations of their 
manufacturers with regard to resistance against forced entry, covert and surreptitious 
entry, and the compromise of key control. If you rely upon locks to provide any 
significant level of protection in terms of complexity to bypass them or time delay 
for an intruder to reach his or her intended target, then you need to explore further. 
What you have heretofore been taught with regard to just what protection the locks 
in your facility are actually providing may surprise you. After reading this chapter  
you might re-examine the way in which you employ locking hardware and the  
“real world” vulnerabilities that might be jeopardized by such reliance.
We shall first provide a survey of conventional pin tumbler locks and their  
attributes so that they can be distinguished from high security cylinders. Within  
the security community everyone knows that the typical pin tumbler mechanism is 
not particularly secure; pointing to their high security counterparts as the solution 
where greater protection against forced and covert entry attacks are required. We  
shall then review the standards that distinguish conventional from high security locks. 
Finally, we examine how conventional locks are compromised as a means to compare 
their attributes to their high security counterpart.
Conventional Pin Tumbler Locks
The generic pin tumbler mechanism comprises perhaps 95 percent of the locks in 
this country. They are produced in all forms and configurations and can provide any 
level of security from low to very high. There are billions of them and virtually all of 
the conventional pin tumbler locks are based upon the original Yale modification of 
the Egyptian concept. Most high security locks are also based upon a modification  
of the basic pin tumbler design.
We define conventional pin tumbler locks as those that do not have any special 
security enhancements. These locks provide the most basic in protection and do  
not have multiple layers of embedded security as encountered in high security 
cylinders.
Covert entry is defined as a method of entry which causes physical 
damage to the door or lock such that the damage can be repaired to 
the point where it would not be detectable by a user during normal 
use. The damage would be detectable during inspection by a  
qualified person.
■

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
193
These mechanisms do not carry “high security” ratings and thus are not produced 
to the same standards as their more expensive and rated counterparts. Conventional 
cylinders are what you find in hardware stores, Home Depot, Lowes, and the local 
lock shop.
As we will note there are no real security controls or any legal protection of their 
mechanical designs or keys. Conventional pin tumbler locks are relatively easy to 
open and generally offer little resistance against many forms of bypass, including 
some methods of forced entry, bumping, picking, impressioning, key duplication, and 
the replication of blanks by impressioning and casting techniques. The tolerances of 
the internal components may be significantly less than for high security locks, but so 
is their cost.
Figure 6.3 A conventional pin tumbler lock showing the three basic parts:  
the plug, the shell, and the keyway slot in the plug.
Note
A pin tumbler lock is comprised of six primary components: plug, shell, 
springs, top pins, bottom pins, and retaining mechanism to keep each pin 
stacked in its respective bore or chamber.
Plug:  The plug rotates within the shell and is used to transmit a 
turning motion through a cam or connecting bar in order to actuate 
the bolt or latch;
Shell:  This is the body of the lock. It contains the springs and top pins;
Springs:  The springs exert a downward force against the top and 
bottom pins to insure that they always block rotation of the plug 
until they are raised to the correct position;
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
194	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
The Origins of the Modern Pin Tumbler Lock
The original design of the pin tumbler lock was conceived more than four 
thousand years ago by the Egyptians. It was soon forgotten and lost in history until 
the mid-nineteenth century when Linus Yale decided it was time to produce a small, 
Top pins:  The top pins enter into the plug to stop rotation until 
they are aligned at shear line;
Bottom pins:  The bottom pins make contact with the bitting of  
the key and are raised to shear line;
Spring retainer:  The spring retainer seals each chamber so that the 
top and bottom pins cannot fall out of the lock.
■
■
■
Figure 6.4 The Egyptian pin tumbler lock was developed 4,000 years ago and 
relied upon a set of pegs to secure a moving bolt.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
195
efficient, and secure lock. Yale’s invention of the double-detainer locking theory in 
combination with a shear line offered an alternative to the lever tumbler, which was 
really the only mechanism that was both practical and secure at the time.
The original Egyptian lock had several pegs (equivalent to pins) that dropped into 
the plug and were required to be lifted so that the movable portion (equivalent to the 
bolt) could be withdrawn. Yale decided that the more prudent approach was to  
incorporate two pegs (split pins) within each bore or chamber so that the key could  
be made very small and also accommodate many differs or different bitting combina-
tions. This was the beginning of the revolutionary development of the modern pin 
tumbler lock.
In the Yale lock the two pins and a spring were forced downward to accomplish 
locking. Several sets of pins (called pin stacks) could be incorporated within one mech-
anism. Each of the bottom pins had to be lifted to a point called a shear line. Only 
when all of the bottom pins were elevated to the correct position could the plug be 
turned by the action of the key. The splitting of pins was the real genius of this inven-
tion because it allowed a very slight difference in their position to allow or prevent the 
key from working. Each bottom pin could have several different depth positions or 
increments and maintain a relatively high tolerance between the plug and shell.
From its inception, lock manufacturers began improving upon the original Yale 
design in order to provide for more differs (key combinations) and greater security. 
There are many variables that can be controlled within the pin tumbler lock to 
provide for different options and security enhancements.
In a perfect world a lock cannot be opened without the correct key or code.  
In the real world there are levels of difficulty or resistance levels to forced and covert 
entry techniques which are dictated by these alterations or modifications to basic 
designs. These include the type of mechanism, the development of secondary locking 
systems, and certain embedded security enhancements.
Note
The pin tumbler lock is based upon the double-detainer locking theory and is 
brilliant in its simplicity The lock is comprised of a series of bores or chambers 
that are drilled through both the fixed body and rotating plug. Each chamber 
has what is called a pin stack, which is comprised of a spring, top pin, and 
bottom pin. When the correct key is inserted into the plug, its bitting (cuts) 
raise each bottom pin so that its top edge is precisely at the same height as 
the diameter of the plug. Each of the bottom pins must be aligned to this 

www.syngress.com
196	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
A Review: The Essentials  
of Pin Tumbler Lock Design
In its simplest form the modern conventional pin tumbler lock consists of six  
primary components, as we noted. Many subsystems and attributes determine  
the security, durability, and option flexibility of the mechanism and include:
Physical characteristics (strength) of the material that is employed for the 
shell, plug and pins;
Manner in which the rotation of the plug is transmitted to the actual  
locking mechanism (bolt, latch, or other fastener);
Number of pins, their shape and length, and available depth increments;
Mechanical and geometric design of the key, including the number of bitting 
positions and bitting height;
Design of the keyway with respect to its size and shape and the number, 
placement, and geometric design of the wards (within the keyway);
Tolerances between each of the components.
The double-detainer concept of security within the Yale pin tumbler lock is  
quite elementary and extremely clever. It can be seen that once a pin occupies space 
in both the shell and plug at the same time the plug is not free to rotate until the 
bottom pin is lifted to a point where blockage does not occur. That point is called 
shear line. It is defined as the place where the lower pin is precisely level with the 
diameter of the plug.
When the lower pin is lifted to shear line there is no longer an obstruction to 
rotation. This is because the top pin is fully contained within the shell and the lower 
pin is completely within the plug; no part of either pin is protruding into the other. 
The upper and lower pins are split at the exact point where a gap occurs between 
plug and shell. Because of the close tolerances achieved in manufacturing, the tumblers 
must be precisely leveled at their shear line. If they protrude or are recessed >±.003”, 
the plug will not turn. The exact tolerance depends upon the quality of the lock.
■
■
■
■
■
■
point, called the shear line. If any of the top pins protrude into the bottom 
chambers, or any of the bottom pins extend into the upper chambers in the 
shell, then the plug is prevented from turning and the lock cannot be opened.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
197
The keyway was added to the modern pin tumbler lock to limit what can enter 
the plug, unlike in the original Egyptian design. Once the key clears the wards 
within the keyway, the bitting can physically raise each of the lower pins to shear line. 
The bitting replaced the pegs in the Egyptian key.
All of the modern modifications to the Yale lock are but refinements of the 
simple principle of blocking rotation of the plug with movable detainers (pins, sliders, 
rotors, or other components). Thus, the rotating tumbler (Medeco®); dimple (Keso®, 
DOM, and Ikon); magnetic rotating tumbler (EVVA, Chubb); axial pin (Chicago 
Lock), and other iterations are all based upon the use of the split tumbler to stop 
rotation of the plug until all pins are lifted to one or more shear lines.
Security Enhancements for Conventional Locks
A conventional cylinder may employ any number of basic security options and 
convenience features but most do not. Kwikset is an excellent example. They are 
perhaps the most popular of the cheap locks that are sold in North America; more 
than twenty million cylinders are produced each year according to the manufacturer. 
They are everywhere and for the most part offer little to no security against forced or 
covert entry. Many of the cylinders contain what the author believes to be defective 
designs from the standpoint of security. Even high quality cylinder manufacturers 
offer little more in the way of security than does Kwikset. For consumer-level protec-
tion the conventional locking mechanisms may be sufficient, especially for residential 
applications. The security of the locks is minimal at best and they are not recom-
mended for any critical facility.
Anti-Bumping Pins
As a result of the media attention to bumping in 2006, some manufacturers have 
implemented additional security measures in their cylinders. These steps have been 
taken to prevent common forms of bypass including bumping. Master Lock now 
integrates a special pin set in all of its locks to prevent bypass by this technique. 
Other manufacturers have designed preventative measures, but conventional pin 
tumbler locks are still inherently insecure. The approach that EVVA (Austria) and 
Master Lock have taken would appear to virtually eliminate the use of bumping as a 
bypass technique. Other manufacturers are expected to follow their lead especially 
because BHMA and UL are likely to add bumping to their testing standards. 

www.syngress.com
198	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
Security Pins
Conventional locks employ security pins to make picking more difficult. The design 
of these specially shaped tumblers can take many forms, including serrated, mush-
room, spool, or a modification of these basic shapes. They do not materially affect the 
ability to bump open most of these locks, nor will they frustrate certain other forms 
of bypass. These pins cannot significantly reduce the basic insecurity of conventional 
locks; they are only a minimally effective enhancement.
Note
Security pins can take many forms but they all are designed to perform the 
same function: to make picking more difficult by creating false indications  
of a pin that is properly positioned at shear line. We refer to this as being set, 
which means that the bottom pin is trapped between the plug and shell. 
Security pins are produced in many different shapes. They are commonly refer-
red to as mushroom, spool, or serrated tumblers. Their geometry causes them 
to be trapped at the shear line when torque is applied to the plug. When this 
occurs, the plug may turn slightly and then be prevented from further rota-
tion, requiring a complete reset of its position to clear the trapped pins.
Figure 6.5 This pin tumbler cylinder graphically illustrates how the mushroom pin 
(top pin) is trapped at the shear line. The plug can be only slightly rotated.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
199
Keyways and Related Designs
Other enhancements can include restricted keyways, paracentric keyways, check-pins 
(such as Schlage Everest®), specially modified check-pins (such as Kaba Peaks®), 
interactive pins (Mul-T-Lock), changeable key systems (Instakey®, U-Change® and 
others), and interchangeable cores. The design of paracentric keyways can in some 
cases frustrate picking to some degree but not all forms of attack. Again, the funda-
mental problem is that the generic pin tumbler mechanism does not offer significant 
protection against many forms of bypass. There are only so many enhancements that 
can be implemented to the basic Yale design; it is still a relatively simple concept.
Bitting Design
The design of the bitting (cuts on the key) can also be modified to enhance the 
overall security of conventional as well as high security locks. Multiple layers of bitting 
may be utilized. These are generally referred to as Laser track locks and often employ 
sliding wafers. Some locks utilize multiple tracks such as the EVVA 3KS, and some are 
indented or stacked. Certain designs, such as the Mul-T-Lock MT5, employ multiple 
bitting systems, which use both dimple pin tumbler and a single track for a secondary 
locking system. Others may use dual bittings (such a BiLock)® or bitting overlays.
Note
A keyway provides the entry into the internal mechanism for a key that was 
produced on the correct blank. A number of obstructions, called wards, are set 
on either side of the opening to form a complex pattern of grooves and ridges 
that must be mirrored on the correct key in order for it to enter the lock.
The keyway is designed to keep all but the correct keys from accessing 
the pin tumblers and is the first security barrier that is provided against 
improper entry. Each manufacturer designs different keyways for its prod-
ucts. This offers added security because a key that does not have the proper 
set of grooves to match the internal wards is supposed to be incapable of 
entering the plug. Unfortunately, this is not always the case because of the 
potential to simulate blanks that will bypass the wards.
A paracentric ward pattern can frustrate picking attempts if the protruding 
obstructions cross the center line of the keyway. When this occurs, a pick is 
more difficult to move up and down, which is required in order to manipulate 
the individual pin tumblers to shear line. Paracentric keyways are required for 
high security locks.

www.syngress.com
200	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
Irregular angles such as found with the DOM Diamant® are also popular and 
can be very difficult to duplicate but not to copy with silicone or other techniques. 
Interactive components and floating pins (Mul-T-Lock and others) have gained in 
popularity. Dimples, holes, protrusions, and embedded magnets have also been 
employed. In fact, perhaps the highest security cylinder in Europe (EVVA MCS) 
embeds four rare-earth magnets to make the replication of keys virtually impossible. 
Design of the Key
Many security enhancements have been employed in an attempt to make keys and 
their corresponding internal locking mechanisms more secure. These solutions 
include side millings to control sliders and other pin sets, protrusions on keys in 
conjunction with internal sliders (Medeco m3 and Bilevel®), interactive elements 
(Mul-T-Lock and others), embedded magnets (Miwa, EVVA), notches in keys,  
rotation of bottom pins (Medeco), special keyways, irregular bitting shapes, single  
and telescoping dimple pins (Mul-T-Lock), holes in the key, embedded floating 
bearings, and transponders. The list of modifications to the basic pin tumbler design  
is endless but at the end of the day nothing can change the fact that it is the same 
insecure design that can be picked, impressioned, decoded, extrapolated for the top 
level master key, and bumped.
Note
The bitting is the material on the key that comes into contact with the  
bottom pins and raises them to shear line. Different manufacturers employ 
variations in bitting thickness and height, but the end result is always the 
same: to raise or otherwise act upon the bottom pins to set them to the 
proper alignment at shear line. Some bitting is complex, especially in high 
security locks. Medeco requires that the bitting of its keys both elevate and 
rotate or twist each pin to set two independent security layers. The bitting in 
the Schlage Primus® also performs two functions: to lift a set of pin tumblers 
to shear line and to act upon a second unique set of finger-pins to both 
elevate and rotate them in order to align a sidebar. The bitting in conven-
tional pin tumbler locks is generally quite simple and often only performs  
the single function of lifting the pins to shear line.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
201
Standards for  
Conventional and High Security Locks
There are three primary standards that address the security of locks in the United 
States: UL 437, BHMA/ANSI 156.50, and 156.30. It is appropriate that the reader 
should understand the differences in specifications within these standards in order to 
clearly differentiate between conventional and high security cylinders.
The UL requirements apply to door locks, locking cylinders, security container 
key locks, and two-key locks. It does not directly refer to high security locking 
mechanisms although UL 437 is referenced in BHMA/ANSI 156.30, described later 
in this chapter. Neither UL 437 nor the BHMA standard addresses what we refers to 
as “real world testing” issues. Certain UL 437 and BHMA/ANSI rated locks can be 
bypassed in times much less than these standards provide for forced and covert entry. 
This issue has come to the forefront since 2006, and the media attention that resulted 
from reports about lock bumping in Europe and the United States.
Consumers, commercial facilities, and government agencies rely upon these stan-
dards because in most cases they do not have the in-house capability to test cylinders 
for bypass capability. It is incumbent upon UL and BHMA to develop performance 
ratings and tests to ensure that not only do the criteria contained within the standards 
reflect real-world techniques that are employed by criminals but also that the locks 
actually meet such testing criteria.
The process to adopt new standards by both UL and BHMA is based upon a 
consensus between manufacturers, security experts, insurers, consumers, trade  
organizations, and other interested groups. The procedure is cumbersome and overly 
restrictive, and it often results in the lowest common denominator in security because 
in many instances the lock manufacturers themselves are driving the process.  
Rather than defining the security of a lock in terms of time and perceived threat,  
the standards attempt to overly define each technique of attack. If the method that is 
Note
UL 437, contrary to popular belief, is not a high security standard but rather 
a higher security standard. The only true standard for a high security lock is 
BHMA/ANSI 156.30, which has three tenets that must be satisfied for a lock 
to be certified. These relate to forced entry, covert entry, and key control.

www.syngress.com
202	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
employed to open a lock by a criminal does not precisely fit this standard, then these 
organizations deny any responsibility, saying that the standard does not address the 
issue and would have to be modified to encompass the particular bypass method.  
This is precisely the problem with bypass techniques for certain high security cylin-
ders; both UL and BHMA have been placed on notice of certain techniques and have 
chosen not to investigative further.
As a result of research conducted by the author and others in both the United 
States and Europe, we can demonstrate that in some cases UL and BHMA are  
certifying locks that may not be secure for the intended purpose. We have advocated 
that UL and BHMA re-examine their testing protocols to ensure that what the 
consumers believe they are installing with regard to security is actually the case.
Transforming a  
Conventional Cylinder to High Security
High security locks are supposed to provide significantly greater resistance against 
many forms of attack that would be expected and commensurate with high value 
targets. These locks are more expensive, are produced to more exacting specifications, 
and have met certain performance criteria that manufacturers tout as their assurance 
that the locks can be relied upon to effectively stop an attacker for a defined period 
of time. The problem is that in some cases what the standards protect against may be 
a myth and can leave a facility vulnerable to forms of attack that may not have been 
contemplated in the standards when they were drafted.
Both UL and BHMA have made it very clear to the author that if the specific 
test protocol is not written into the standard then it does not count. Even worse,  
Note
A high security lock is produced to more exacting standards and incorporates 
special enhancements to increase its resistance to specified forms of attack 
that would be expected when critical or high value facilities are targeted.  
As we explain in this chapter, Underwriters Laboratories (UL) and BHMA, the 
Builders Hardware Manufacturers Association, have developed standards  
that are supposed to offer greater protection against forced, covert, and 
surreptitious entry; they also ensure key control. We have documented  
many instances where this premise is not accurate and certified cylinders  
and associated hardware can be bypassed quickly and easily.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
203
the manufacturer may not be cognizant of security vulnerabilities in their locks. This 
was documented through eighteen months of research by the author with regard to 
the dominant leader in the high security lock market in the United States and is the 
subject of a new book on the subject that has just been released.1
UL 437, BHMA/ANSI 156.50, and 156.30 are the three standards that you need 
to understand in order to distinguish between conventional and high security locks. 
The standards clearly distinguish the two categories of mechanisms. An understanding 
of the basic requirements will provide an insight into the levels of protection these 
locks are supposed to afford, how some of them can be compromised, and why the 
ability to do so can be catastrophic.
Notwithstanding the representations of some in the security industry, UL 437 is 
not a high security standard but rather a higher security standard. The UL standard 
primarily relates to pin tumbler locks; the BHMA standard is also directed at pin 
tumbler designs but does not exclude other locking mechanisms (such as wafer and 
lever tumblers). Many organizations rely upon UL 437 as the benchmark for security 
in their locks. However, what they think they are buying may indeed not be the case.
Tests to determine physical security against methods of forced attack specify the 
use of certain tools, timing, and breaking techniques. The standard defines the use of 
tools to include common hand tools, hand or portable electric drills, saw blades, 
puller mechanisms, pry bars, and picking tools.
Note
The UL standard has been promulgated to define resistance levels against the 
following actions in conjunction with attacks:
Jimmying the door
Picking
Prying
Forcing
Impressioning techniques
Driving the lock cylinder or assembly
Sawing the lock cylinder
Pulling the lock cylinder or plug
Other methods that involve the use of small hand-tools
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
204	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
UL 437 establishes minimum resistance times for different kinds of attacks. Net times 
in minutes are specified for each type of test and the lock upon which the procedure is to 
be performed. The sequence is not relevant, nor is the number of methods to be applied. 
One sample may be tested for several techniques or a new specimen may be utilized for 
each procedure. Door locks must resist picking and impressioning for ten minutes and 
forced entry attacks for five minutes. Unfortunately the standard does not contemplate 
that methods of attack that utilize both forced and covert methods can be applied to 
bypass the security of certain high security cylinders in far less time than is specified.
Deficiencies in the UL 437 Standard
It is submitted that significant deficiencies in the UL 437 standard exist that allow  
high security locks to be rated under the current protocols but will not actually protect 
against certain methods of forced and covert entry. UL is quite cognizant of these  
issues and is concerned about bringing certain standards into line with real world 
attacks. The organization took the first significant step in September 2007, when it 
decided that lock bumping might present a significant security issue and formed a 
bumping task force to examine the issue in detail. We will identify perceived 
­deficiencies in UL 437 and how we believe these issues relate to the security of the 
locks that you may be using to protect your facility.
Failure to Specify Real World Testing
The standard fails to allow for the methods that are employed by criminals who may 
utilize advanced techniques or a combination of methods that may not have been 
contemplated by those who drafted the test protocols and resistance levels.  
By defining specific tests and tools that must be employed, the standard essentially 
Note
We think there are many deficiencies in the UL 437 standard with regard  
to methods of forced and covert entry that are neither contemplated nor 
covered in the language of the standard the way it is currently written. If  
you rely solely upon this standard as your assurance of security of a lock, you 
may find that vulnerabilities exist that may present serious issues that must 
be evaluated in terms of risk management.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
205
excludes all others. Criminals do not follow the rules that are established in the UL 
protocols; they just open locks, containers, vaults, and strong rooms.
This point was graphically demonstrated in a recent bank burglary in New York 
where more than $700,000 was stolen by thieves who compromised a strong room 
that was rated to require a minimum of thirty minutes to make a small hole in the 
wall. During their endeavor the thieves started a fire to which the New York Fire 
Department responded. It took NYFD exactly four minutes to cut a large hole in 
the strong room wall that UL had certified to resist attack for a substantially longer 
period of time. That is what we define as a real world attack.
Pick and Impressioning Resistance
Only picking and impressioning techniques are considered in the UL standard.  
The use of special decoders, picks, electro-mechanical pick guns, borescopes, and 
many other techniques appear to be ignored although Section 11.2.5 of UL 437 
seems to allow for picking tools designed for a specific lock.
The UL standard does not define the term “picking” but states that “any tech-
nique can be used to align the detainers.” It limits such tools to those commercially 
available and provides that an ALOA-certified locksmith of five years must conduct 
the tests. ALOA is the largest professional locksmith association in the United States.
In our view this definition is flawed because it does not contemplate special 
picking tools that may not be commercially available to locksmiths but may in fact 
be purchased by government agents and through unauthorized supply channels. 
Many of the tools that are described in the government version of LSS+ for  
bypassing high security locks are neither commercially available nor known to the 
locksmith community, yet the locks are installed to protect those very same  
government facilities.
This standard appears to apply only to attacks where the intruder may have 
limited sophistication or access to specialized picking tools. Those performing pick 
resistance tests may not even be aware of the existence of specialized tools that are 
available, even those that are sold in the commercial sector. An example is a tool that 
can be purchased to bypass three different generations of Mul-T-Lock UL rated 
cylinders. Many locksmiths are not aware of the availability of this pick that allows 
bypass of UL certified cylinders within a minute or two. If UL knows about this  
tool then they have chosen to exclude it from testing protocols. If those that are 

www.syngress.com
206	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
conducting covert entry resistance tests are not aware of its existence, then they are 
certifying locks that can be bypassed in well under the minimum times specified in 
the standard. In either event there is a serious problem because the UL 437 certifica-
tion tacitly represents to insurers, consumer, and the security community that these 
locks will be essentially impervious or highly resistant to picking for ten minutes. In 
some cases this is simply not true.
Complex Forms of Picking
It is unclear whether the UL standard addresses advanced and complex forms of 
picking even though the language states “any method to manipulate the detainers.”  
To pick a Medeco lock, which is one of the most secure in the United States, the 
attacker must complete certain preliminary steps with regard to the rotation angles of 
the bottom pins. Whether this mode of picking would be included in UL 437 is 
unclear because it can be said to involve advanced forms of picking with code setting 
keys that are specially created for Medeco cylinders. This technique was never contem-
plated by the language of UL 437 because the Medeco attack requires the use of four 
special keys. Whether this constitutes a form of picking is an important issue because 
virtually all Medeco Biaxial and m3 cylinders can be reliably and rapidly picked if the 
correct procedures are followed, even though they carry a UL 437 rating.
The standard does not address the compromise of Interchangeable Core cylinders, 
which are utilized in many commercial facilities. They can be bumped and picked to 
the control shear line and the core removed. If the key code for the control key can 
be decoded the entire system can be easily compromised or be subject to sabotage.
Forced Entry Resistance
The UL standard specifies the type of tools that can be employed to test for forced 
entry resistance. We have developed several forms of forced attack that allow access to 
certain high security cylinders within seconds. These techniques are apparently not 
covered in UL 437 and can result in the complete bypass of all levels of security of 
these locks.
Issues Not Addressed by UL 437
The following issues are not addressed by UL 437 and may leave everyone who relies 
upon their expertise at risk.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
207
Bump Keys
The industry now recognizes that bump keys are a serious threat both to conventional 
and high security locks. Any standard must adequately address different expertise levels 
of attack. A conventional bump key will never open any high security cylinder that 
contains a sidebar or other secondary locking system. If a bumping standard is defined 
only in terms of traditional bump keys, then it will not address the real issue. Any new 
standard must speak to advanced methods of bumping to encompass the types of 
attacks that can open many Medeco, Assa, Mul-T-Lock, and other cylinders within 
seconds.
Figure 6.6 A conventional bump key can open most of the pin tumbler locks in 
the United States quickly and easily.
Note
We introduced the threat from bump keys to America in 2006 when an 
eleven-year-old girl demonstrated opening a Kwikset pin tumbler lock by 
striking a special key a few times with a plastic mallet. Bumping is extremely 
simple to learn, requires essentially no tools or training, and is effective in 
about 95 percent of the pin tumbler locks in this country. See the report on 
http://in.security.org with regard to technical and legal aspects of bumping.

www.syngress.com
208	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
Decoding Attacks
UL 437 is silent with regard to attacks based upon the decoding of internal 
­components and the development of intelligence from the information that is deri-
ved as the result of such techniques. Certain characteristics of a lock can be observed 
without the necessity of disassembly and the information that results can often be 
used to circumvent its security. The BHMA/ANSI 156.30 standard does address this 
issue on a very basic level, but does not go far enough. The UL standard is silent with 
regard to protecting the lock from such attacks.
Key Control
Figure 6.7 Key control is of prime importance in high security locks. In this 
photograph, a simulated key is shown in a Medeco Biaxial cutaway cylinder.  
This blank, fashioned from a safe deposit key, can be cut to open all of the latest 
Medeco cylinders and bypass virtually every keyway, even those that are the  
most proprietary and restricted.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
209
UL 437 is silent with regard to any issues that relate to key control and for this 
reason alone it does not constitute a high security standard. The ability to compro-
mise high security locks by copying, replicating, or simulating patent-protected keys 
is not addressed in UL 437 although it is in BHMA 156.30 to a limited extent. Key 
control is one of three primary criteria that define a high security lock because the 
ability to compromise keys can be critical in certain forms of attack, including 
­bumping, picking, and the extrapolation of the top-level master key. An excellent 
example is the key control provided by the Medeco m3 and some Biaxial high 
security locks. It has been totally compromised by the author and allows for the 
simulation of specially coded keys that facilitate bumping and picking even in the 
most restricted of keyways utilized in government facilities.
Mechanical Bypass of Locking Mechanisms
Neither UL nor BHMA address the problem of mechanical bypass if the attack does 
not directly involve picking or manipulation of pin tumblers. This is a real problem 
because there are certain relatively simple techniques that can be employed to 
­circumvent one or more levels of security on Grade 1 (BHMA 156.50) and high 
security cylinders. The use of wires, shims, magnetic fields, and other techniques 
should be addressed within the standards.
Note
Key control is extremely important in the context of high security locks.  
We actually prefer the more encompassing definition of “key security” to 
denote the physical protection of keys from duplication, replication, and 
simulation. The most effective method to compromise a security system is 
through the use of keys. This is especially true in attacks that target the top 
level master key because that single key can open any lock in the system. For 
that reason, any lock that is selected to protect a high value target or critical 
infrastructure must be secure against attacks on its keys. There are very few 
high security locks that meet this criterion.

www.syngress.com
210	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
BHMA/ANSI Standards: 156.50 and 156.30
The Builders Hardware Manufacturers Association (BHMA) in conjunction with the 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) has developed two primary standards 
that relate to locks: 156.50 (for auxiliary locks and cylinders) and 156.30 (for high 
security locks). Unlike UL, independent laboratories conduct compliance testing for 
the BHMA/ANSI standards.
BHMA/ANSI 156.50
This standard establishes criteria for auxiliary bored and mortise locks, rim locks, 
cylinders, and push button mechanisms. The testing protocols provide for operational, 
finish, dimensional, cylinder requirements, and security testing. BHMA 156.50 estab-
lishes three grade levels: 1, 2 and 3; grade 1 is the most secure. Many of the locks that 
are rated as meeting grade 1 requirements can be rapidly bypassed by both forced 
and covert methods. 156.50 is not meant as a high security standard, but merely to 
provide some benchmark of quality of consumer-level cylinders. The reader should 
never rely on the 156.50 standard for security.
High Security Locks and the BHMA/ANSI Standard
High security locks are designed to provide a greater level of protection against the 
primary methods of attack that are employed by criminals, saboteurs, and spies – both 
outside of a protected area and from within by employees, service personnel, or those 
who may have or gain access to one or more locks. It is expected that a facility that 
is more likely to be a target will probably specify high security rated hardware.  
Note
There are many ways to mechanically bypass locks and locking hardware that 
do not involve traditional methods of forced and covert entry. The most 
important rule to remember is that “the key never unlocks the lock.” Rather, 
the key actuates the mechanism that controls the bolt or latch. If direct 
access can be obtained to that mechanism, then you do not need the key. 
This concept is critical to a broad understanding of bypass techniques 
because many locks are deficient or defective in their design and will allow 
one or more techniques to open them quickly. Neither UL nor BHMA/ANSI 
specifies mechanical forms of bypass in their lock standards.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
211
That is precisely the reason that manufacturers produce locks, deadbolts, access 
­control systems, and other products to defend against more sophisticated forms of 
compromise.
High security locks are significantly more expensive than conventional cylinders. 
They are employed where security officers believe there is a higher risk of entry and 
compromise of infrastructure, assets, systems, and personnel. In many cases, insurers or 
government regulations demand the installation of this type of hardware because of its 
perceived resistance to methods of entry that are likely to be employed in an attack.
The Concept of Security
The term “security” must always be taken in context when considering mechanical 
locks and depends for its definition on a number of factors. In order to assess the 
“level of security” that a lock may provide, several questions must be asked. 
Specifically, “Secure against whom?” “Secure against what forms of attack?” “Secure 
for how long a period of time?” “What is the likely expertise of the attacker in terms 
of skill, training, and tools?” “What is the value of the assets that are to be protected?” 
“What other security measures are in place (defense in depth)?” and “What is the 
physical design of the facility?”
This concept of security is embodied in the 3T2R Rule. It is a shortcut that 
summarizes the requirements of any high security lock standard and relates those 
standards to five critical issues: Time, Tools, Training, Reliability and Repeatability. 
This rating expresses the ability to bypass a lock or locking system and is based upon 
the amount of time that is required, the training of the attacker, and the tools that  
Note
Our 3T2R rule crystallizes the requirements of UL 437 and BHMA/ANSI 156.30 
in terms of resistance to different methods of entry. The rule was developed  
by the author and succinctly summarizes the criteria by which a lock is gauged. 
We consider the amount of time that is required to open a lock, the simplicity 
or complexity of needed tools, and the level of expertise to carry out the 
bypass technique. Bumping is an excellent example. No skill, little training,  
and almost any hand implement can be used to bump open a lock. Simplicity 
in attack methodology means higher risk to those that rely upon a specific lock 
to protect them.

www.syngress.com
212	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
he or she will employ. In order for the method of attack to be credible, it must be 
reliable and repeatable.
For example, previous methods of picking Medeco locks were not reliable because 
they were not completely repeatable. A new procedure has been developed that allows 
virtually all of the current generation m3 and Biaxial mechanisms to be reliably and 
rapidly picked open, and in many cases bumped open. Prior to 2007, such a method 
did not exist and so the criterion that requires that the technique must be both repeat-
able and reliable would not have been met. Thus the UL and BHMA rating for the 
Medeco m3 would have been valid and actually representative of the security of the 
lock prior to 2007.
As defined in BHMA/ANSI 156.30 there are three tenets of high security: protec-
tion against forced entry, protection against surreptitious or covert entry, and key  
control. All three of these criteria must be met in order for a lock to be rated for high 
security implementation. In contrast, a close examination of UL 437 reveals that  
only two of these criteria are present; key control is neither addressed nor required.  
The BHMA/ANSI standard establishes three security levels within its high security 
classifications (Level C, Level B, and the highest, Level A).
BHMA/ANSI 156.30 High Security Standard
This is the civilian high security lock standard in the United States. Although it 
references UL 437 for certain surreptitious entry tests, the BHMA definitions estab-
lish the criteria for high security lock certification. There are three critical sections 
that are enumerated within 156.30:
Section 5, Key control
Section 6: Destructive testing
Section 7: Surreptitious entry resistance tests
According to the BHMA, a standard lock must resist the defined forced entry 
attempts for five minutes and surreptitious attacks for a minimum of ten or fifteen 
minutes (depending upon security level). Consumers, commercial facilities, and 
government agencies rely upon these specifications to guarantee a minimum level of 
security. Unfortunately in certain cases the BHMA requirements, just like UL, do not 
address what we refer to as real world methods of entry.
They specify the types of tests that will be performed, but fail to address methods 
and techniques, as with UL, that will allow many high security rated cylinders and 
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
213
systems to be bypassed rapidly. Manufacturers may be unaware of such bypass  
techniques, may ignore them, may know about them and misrepresent the security 
ramifications to their customers, or they may be unable to make changes in their 
mechanical design that will prevent their bypass. If the standard does not address  
such methods of circumvention, then the public is misled and at risk.
Key Control
Key control relates only to the protection of keys and key blanks from access, dupli-
cation, and replication. The protection must encompass mechanical, legal, and tactical 
considerations. It is a fact of life that almost any mechanical key can be compromised, 
even those for high security locks. Patent protection will not prevent the illegal 
duplication or replication of keys, but may restrict the ability of an unauthorized 
supplier to make such blanks available commercially or otherwise. There are three 
levels of key control specified in the BHMA standard and they speak to the availability 
of blanks, legal protection, and factory control of blanks and cut keys. The require-
ments of 156.30 are intended to prevent or limit the availability of keys or credentials 
to unauthorized individuals.
The requirements under the BHMA/ANSI high security standard are supposed 
to protect keys from unauthorized duplication and generation by code. Unfortunately 
the standard is really directed at casual or non-professional attempts to obtain copies 
of keys and does not address the real world of determined attacks. We believe this  
is a serious flaw in the language of 156.30. There are many ways to create or obtain 
blanks or cut keys in order to circumvent the security of a system.
The requirements of the BHMA standard address only the most obvious aspects 
of key control and rely upon legal and manufacturer-imposed restrictions to limit 
access. In many instances this is quite sufficient, but in our view is inadequate when 
one contemplates attacks on high value or critical targets.
Destructive Testing
Destructive testing for forced entry methods encompass four categories under this 
standard and define three security levels (A, B, C). A is the highest level. Under these 
tests, plugs within cylinders are evaluated for their resistance to pulling, impact, 
torque, and drill resistance. Locks must not yield to these forms of force for a mini-
mum of five minutes. The relevant issue is that some high security locks will not 
meet these requirements and may be subject to compromise by relatively simple 
techniques.

www.syngress.com
214	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
Surreptitious Entry Resistance
There are a total of five test criteria and three security levels for surreptitious entry 
resistance testing in order to receive a high security rating. The individual criteria 
relate to key changes (tolerance between depth increments), mechanical bitting, 
allowable differences between two adjacent depths (MACS), and pick and manipula-
tion resistance. The requirements in this portion of the standard also speak to the 
ability to identify the dimensions of pins by a visual inspection or through the use  
of probes, shims, or other manual measuring tools.
There are two classifications within this section of the protocol: decoding and 
pick resistance. Locks must resist picking and decoding attacks for a minimum of ten 
minutes (as specified in UL 437) for the lower two security levels and fifteen minutes 
in the highest security level (A).
Pick resistance addresses three critical issues: security pins, paracentric keyways 
and balanced or graduated drivers (to prevent the use of comb picks). The standard 
also identifies certain forms of attacks for electronic locks and includes the use of 
electrostatic discharge, over-voltage, magnetic fields, and conductive liquids.
BHMA 156.30 requires that at least two security pins be placed in the lock to 
increase resistance to picking. Paracentric keyways must also be employed to make 
the vertical movement of picks more difficult. Finally, the standard requires that 
each pin stack length (bottom pin, top pin, and spring) be at least one depth incre-
ment longer than the overall length of the chamber. This will prevent comb picking 
which is a process of lifting all of the bottom pins above shear line to create a new 
shear line.
Deficiencies in the 156.30 Standard
There are deficiencies in the BHMA/ANSI 156.30 standard relating to key control, 
forced attacks, and picking that can and have resulted in the certification of cylinders 
that can be bypassed in far less time than is specified.
The limitation to “manual manipulation” or picking tools that are commer-
cially available to locksmiths is not sufficient to test high security cylinders 
against significant threats. The standard certainly would not include the 
government tools that are produced by John Falle nor would it address any 
of the bypass techniques that we document with regard to Medeco and 
other high security mechanisms.
■

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
215
The standard fails to address the simulation of keys. It only speaks about the 
physical protection and control of key blanks, but does not address real world 
attacks. The ability to replicate or simulate restricted keys can be critical to 
advanced bumping and picking attacks and the copying of keys that are 
supposed to be secure.
The standard fails to test for certain methods to mechanically bypass the 
locking mechanism through the use of force. Most design engineers 
employed by lock manufacturers fail to understand or remember the first 
rule in designing a cylinder and related components that we noted earlier: 
The key never unlocks the lock; it merely actuates the mechanism that 
controls the bolt, latch, or other device. Many locks and their sophisticated 
security features can be easily bypassed through mechanical means with or 
without force.
The BHMA standard should not be restricted to commercially available 
picking tools because it fails to consider advanced methods of attack that 
may be limited to a specific high security cylinder.
The BHMA requirement that ALOA-certified locksmiths must be utilized for 
those conducting a test does not ensure their familiarity with advanced techniques  
or competence to bypass certain types of mechanisms. Medeco, Mul-T-Lock, and 
Assa may perhaps provide the best evidence of this premise. Each of these Assa Abloy 
companies have vociferously objected and publicly denied that any of their high 
security rated cylinders could be bumped open, yet all of them can be bypassed in 
this manner.
Security Vulnerabilities of  
Conventional Locks: Why High  
Security Locks Are Supposed to Offer  
More Protection Against Methods of Entry
We now turn our attention to the limited security that is offered in non-high 
security locks and their vulnerability to attacks. These attacks have traditionally 
involved the compromise of the three fundamental criteria that distinguish high 
security locks from their less secure counterpart. We say “traditional” because there 
are other means to open locks that do not involve the standard methods of entry 
and which may be more practical and most often require less time and skill to 
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
216	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
accomplish. Such bypass techniques are often ignored or not even contemplated by 
UL or BHMA/ANSI.
There are other forms of bypass that may require advanced techniques: the use of 
special bump keys, sophisticated decoders, probes, manipulation devices, pin-and-cam 
systems (that combine picking and decoding), impressioning systems, and other 
procedures. They are all within the arsenal of the covert entry specialist and some 
professional burglars.
Most security managers rely upon UL and BHMA to establish the minimum 
requirements to protect their facilities. Mistakenly they believe that these standards 
organizations have developed comprehensive requirements that will effectively stop, 
deter, or resist the three primary methods of entry for a minimum period of time. 
However, there is a problem: the standards do not address certain forms of bypass  
and we believe specifically exclude certain tools, methodology, and expertise.
In short, if you rely upon UL or BHMA standards to protect your locks against 
knowledgeable or determined attackers, our advice would be that you do so at your 
peril. Their standards could be the model for Catch-22; any divergence from the 
defined protocols and the lock is not certified to protect against that risk, even 
though the intent of the specification is violated. To make matters worse, neither  
UL nor BHMA will even consider a report of the compromise of their rated locks 
unless such attack is already defined in the standard.
These special locks are employed in the most secure installations: the White 
House, the Pentagon, nuclear sites, and other critical targets. They are part of the 
security that protects advanced weapons systems, narcotics, huge amounts of cash, 
toxins, biological weapons, critical infrastructure, and most importantly, information 
relating to everything from financial data to top-secret national security issues.  
Yet some of these locks can be compromised in about thirty seconds when they  
were specifically designed to be impenetrable for a minimum of fifteen minutes!  
That precisely is the problem and what this chapter is about.
Conventional Pin Tumbler Locks:  
Security Vulnerabilities and Their Compromise
Virtually all pin tumbler locking mechanisms can be compromised covertly and by 
the application of force. At least fifty forms of bypass are indentified in LSS+ and the 
list is by no means exhaustive because as locks are examined by different experts, 
sports picking enthusiasts, and others that have a need to assess security, new methods 
of compromise are discovered.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
217
Lock Control Procedures
The concept of lock control is often overlooked, but must be considered in the 
context of conventional cylinders and their ability to be compromised by removal 
from the system. Usually the purpose of such activity is to decode the top level 
master key (TMK). Organizations must define lock control policies to ensure the 
integrity of all of the cylinders within the system and to immediately account for 
missing or replaced locks as well as the inventorying or destruction of worn locks  
or those that are taken out of service. Locks are like hard drives from discarded 
computers; they can provide a wealth of information about a system and its  
security if they fall into the wrong hands.
Depending upon the hardware configuration most conventional cylinders can be 
easily and quickly removed even during normal business hours. This is especially true 
with regard to mortise cylinders, programmable locks, and some IC systems. If unau-
thorized access is gained to a cylinder, it can be quickly decoded by shimming or 
disassembled in order to derive all the possible pin combinations. Even easier is the 
ability to extrapolate the TMK without the necessity of taking the lock apart. 
Potentially a greater threat is the derivation of the control key (or, in some cases,  
the master control key in large systems) for interchangeable cores.
Note
There is an order of threat level with regard to the compromise of mechani-
cal locks that begins with the simplest and most obvious modes of attack and 
increase in sophistication. Unfortunately, conventional cylinders are subject 
to all of these methods of bypass:
Unauthorized copy of key that fits the lock
Rights amplification of a key that was not designed to open the 
target lock
Mechanical bypass of the lock
Bumping
Extrapolation of the top level master key
Picking using standard techniques, electro-picks, key jiggling, and a 
combination of decoding and picking with specialized tools
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
218	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
Key Control and Key Security
We have previously noted that UL 437 is silent with regard to key control. In our 
view a lock cannot be considered for high security installations unless its manufacturer 
implements certain safeguards with regard to the availability, duplication, and code 
cutting of keys. In contrast, the BHMA standard does address key control, but does not 
go far enough.
The BHMA/ANSI 156.30 High Security lock standard specifies three different 
levels of key control within its standard. The standard defines key control in terms of 
access to blanks and cut keys, but it fails to directly address perhaps the more relevant 
issue: the ability to replicate keys. Depending upon the security level in 156.30, key 
control under the BHMA standard attempts to ensure the following protection for 
the end-user:
The availability of blanks for specific keyways;
The duplication of cut keys;
The legal protection to control the manufacture of blanks;
Cutting of keys by code.
These three defined levels of key control are meant to prevent someone from 
having a key duplicated at Home Depot, Lowes, a hardware store, or the local lock-
smith unless that locksmith is part of a factory program and has the specific keyways 
assigned to him or her. In the lowest level of key control, designated locksmiths may 
be provided with certain keyways. Some are commercial and non-restricted, meaning 
that anyone can come in and have their keys duplicated.
Patent protection of blanks provides the manufacturer with legal remedies for 
anyone that produces, sells, or duplicates any blank for which a utility patent has been 
granted. Severe civil penalties are set forth in Title 35 of the United States Code for 
infringement. Many high security lock manufacturers have aggressively enforced their 
rights with respect to such infringement. In certain cases such protection may extend 
to the cutting of keys if the blanks have unique and patented characteristics.
Key Security
We define key security to mean the protection of any key, whether blank or bitted, 
from replication or simulation which would allow it to be used in an unauthorized 
manner. The key (and lock) must significantly resist the use of improperly replicated 
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
219
keys as well as altered, simulated, or copied keys. The intent is to prevent someone 
from obtaining access to one or more locks by using such keys to bypass the security 
of the internal mechanism. Methods would include picking, bumping, impressioning, 
simulation of the correct bitting, and other techniques.
The Concept of Key Control As It Applies to Security
The term “key control” may be misleading and identifies only part of the issue that is 
relevant to high security locks and their keys. Those responsible for ensuring that a 
facility and its locks are protected may believe their keys cannot be improperly 
obtained, but such may not be the case. Depending upon the required level of secu-
rity, we believe that keys should be secure from compromise from casual, semi-skilled, 
or professional attackers.
The concept of key control usually relates only to the issue of availability of blanks 
from commercial sources and the implementation of controls for the duplication and 
generation of keys by code. It does not contemplate the illegal or unauthorized acqui-
sition or production of keys to be used in conjunction with bypass techniques that 
rely on the use of such keys as a required precursor to a successful opening. In other 
words, we believe that 156.30 addresses one basic security threat: the acquisition of an 
original or duplicate key that will open the lock in the intended and normal manner. 
That is, the standard speaks only to inserting the correctly bitted key into the keyway, 
properly aligning the pins, and turning the plug. In our view, this is only one aspect of 
the insecurity of a lock that can be exploited by violating key control and key security.
The Importance of Key Control and Key Security
Why are “key control” and “key security” so important? The answer is quite elemen-
tary: the easiest way to compromise a lock is to open it with a key! That may seem 
obvious and overly simplistic, but it is an accurate statement and precisely why 
156.30 addresses the issue of key control as one of its primary tenets. The circumven-
tion of key control (and what should be its inherent key security) can also be used to 
facilitate several different forms of bypass. The compromise of certain high security 
locks relies upon the violation of key security to accomplish bumping, picking, 
master key extrapolation, and some forms of forced entry; it also includes completely 
compromising and circumventing the protection of restricted blanks (traditional key 
control of a facility). Medeco provides the classic example of how the simulation of a 
key can allow multiple levels of attack.

www.syngress.com
220	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
The violation of key security has wider implications and encompasses the  
compromise of keying systems, the simulation of blanks for restricted keyways, the  
circumvention of legal protection of keys, and rights amplification of blanks and cut 
keys. Any discussion of key control and key security should also include the consider-
ation of policies relating to keys that are taken out of service because the bitting 
codes of associated locks have been changed. The failure to track old keys can  
provide an attacker with exactly the needed tools to create bump keys, system  
intelligence, special code setting keys, and the employment of advanced techniques.
Rights Amplification
A key that is subject to rights amplification can result in the compromise of a conven-
tional or even high security cylinder. This term refers to the modification or alteration 
of a blank or cut key to use it in a manner not intended or to obtain rights to gain 
access to unauthorized areas. The concept has its roots in computer and software 
hacking and denotes the manipulation of software to obtain increased access privileges.
Perhaps the greatest threat from rights amplification is the use of a key to 
­extrapolate the top level master key by probing the target lock for the presence of 
master pins. The tactical use of this technique is discussed in depth by the author in 
LSS+. An equal security threat is the modification of a change key into a bump key.
Note
The term “rights amplification” has its roots in the cyber world, but it  
means the same thing with regard to the manipulation and alteration of keys 
to obtain unauthorized access to one or more locks. The concept relies upon 
the ability to modify the physical characteristics of a key to make it do things 
that it is not supposed to do and that are not authorized. For example, the 
bitting of an individual office key might be built-up with solder to raise pin 
tumblers to different positions, which may correspond to the master key 
code. Any alteration of a key’s characteristics to allow it to perform tasks for 
which it was not designed is a violation of key control and can be extremely 
serious. It is very important to examine the real key control and security that 
is offered by the locks that you use in your facility if you are concerned about 
the protection of valuable assets.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
221
Replication, Duplication, and  
Simulation of Keys and Key Blanks
The concept of key control and key security necessarily includes protection against 
the replication, duplication, and simulation of key blanks and cut keys. Conventional 
pin tumbler locks are especially prone to these forms of attack. There are many 
techniques for both the replication and duplication of key blanks.
Replication refers to the ability to generate a blank key that precisely copies the 
warding patterns or approximates them so that the key is able to enter the keyway of 
a target lock. The concept is distinguishable from duplication of keys, which refers to 
the capability of copying the bitting pattern on a target key.
The concept of simulation refers to the ability to completely synthesize the requi-
site critical dimensions of a key blank so that it can be cut or shaped to align the pin 
tumblers to the shear line. A simulated key will generally be quite thin to allow it to 
pass through the center line of the wards within the keyway. Simulated keys are very 
difficult to use in true paracentric keyways because they cannot be properly inserted 
into the plug in vertical alignment to the base of the tumblers.
Gathering Intelligence About a System from Its Keys
Significant intelligence can be obtained with regard to a lock or system by gaining 
access to one or more keys. The process can be elementary for keys that fit 
­conventional locks because usually only depth and spacing data is involved once  
the manufacturer and keyway have been identified. The process can be much more 
complicated for high security cylinders.
Information can be obtained with regard to the following parameters relating to 
conventional locks and keys and thus can present a significant threat to security:
Lock manufacturer;
Keyway;
Number of pin tumblers;
Depth and space information;
Whether the lock is high security rated;
Information regarding sub-master keys and bitting values assigned to  
progressed positions;
Key codes;
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
222	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
Whether odd or even progression has been employed in assigning  
individual codes;
Whether the system is master keyed and possibly the type of  
progression scheme;
Predictability of keying progression;
The use of secondary locking systems;
Use of check pins (such as Schlage Everest)
Limitations on bitting values based upon MACS and the number of  
available depth increments;
Other known manufacturer-imposed rules with regard to bitting;
Whether sectional keyways are employed and their hierarchy;
Master key system design and hierarchy based upon markings on keys  
or cylinders;
Direct-reading codes that are stamped on keys;
Ability to easily and rapidly decode keys either visually or with handheld 
instruments or key micrometers;
Use of commonly available commercial keyways that may be obtained  
at hardware or DIY stores;
Ease of photographing or scanning keys and later reproduction.
Covert Entry Techniques: Manipulation  
of Internal Locking Components
Manipulation of the internal locking components within conventional locks can be 
quite elementary in comparison to high security cylinders. There are many tech-
niques that are available and they all accomplish the same function: simulating the 
action of the correct key by moving all the bottom pins (or a combination of master 
and bottom pins) to shear line. Recognized covert methods of entry include bump-
ing, picking, impressioning, decoding, extrapolation of the top level master key, and 
mechanical bypass.
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
223
Bumping
Virtually all conventional pin tumbler locks can be opened by using traditional bump 
keys. The technique is easily learned, requires little skill, requires no specialized tools, 
and can be quite reliable. It is a serious security threat to all non-high security locks. 
Advanced bumping techniques have been developed to successfully open some cylin-
ders produced by Medeco, Mul-T-Lock, Assa, and others. These procedures require 
the preparation of modified bump keys and the use of special techniques to circum-
vent locks with sidebar technology, but are highly effective against certain locks.
Picking
A distinguishing feature of conventional pin tumbler locks is their susceptibility to the 
manipulation of internal locking components through picking, raking, and key jiggling. 
The use of mechanical and electro-pick tools, pick-decoders, variable key generation 
systems, and other simple tools limits the security of these locks and demonstrate the 
need for higher security cylinders.
Impressioning
Virtually all pin tumbler locks can be impressioned with the result that a key is 
produced that will open the lock. Although some high security locks can also be 
impressioned or decoded and opened with this technique, it becomes much more 
complicated because there are often two or three separate and independent locking 
systems that must be bypassed. Even if a key is produced, it cannot open Medeco, 
Assa, or Primus locks without the simultaneous manipulation of the sidebar and its 
associated pin tumblers or finger pins.
Extrapolation of the TMK
The top level master key for almost all conventional pin tumbler locks can be easily 
extrapolated by probing the pin stack of each chamber with a change key for any 
cylinder within a keying system that is associated with the TMK.
Mechanical Bypass
Many conventional cylinders can be bypassed and opened without the use of the 
correct key because they are not designed to the same security specifications as those 
with high security ratings. Some UL 437 and BHMA 156.30 locks are not immune 

www.syngress.com
224	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
to simple methods of mechanical bypass. In OPEN IN THIRTY SECONDS: 
Cracking One of the Most Secure Locks in America, by the author, several techniques 
to open Medeco deadbolt, rim, and mortise cylinders by mechanically bypassing  
internal locking components are described. These techniques involve the bypass  
of multiple security layers that are supposed to prevent such practices.1
High Security to  
High Insecurity: Real World Attacks
In this chapter we have provided a brief analysis of conventional and high security locks 
and a review of UL 437 and BHMA/ANSI 156.30, the standards that are supposed to 
assure that certified mechanical locks will provide protection against an attacker. So how 
does all of this translate to real world threats and potential security vulnerabilities? If your 
facility employs conventional cylinders, then you have little protection against many 
forms of bypass, regardless of what any manufacturer represents. Conventional pin tum-
bler locks are inherently limited in the amount of security that they can provide. 
Manufacturers will tell you that if greater security against forced and covert methods of 
entry is required, then high security-rated cylinders must be installed.
That statement is in part true because these locks are manufactured to closer 
tolerances and generally employ added safeguards against many threats. But is that 
sufficient? The answer goes back to our discussion of just what constitutes “security” 
in the context of locks. If the concern is to prevent a knowledgeable attacker from 
circumventing the security of a lock, then the answer may be no. It is the last five to 
ten per cent of protection that we are concerned with, where you have to be certain 
that security cannot be easily compromised in critical areas.
If your facility has installed high security locks, it should be clear that they may 
still be at risk from threats that were not contemplated or covered in UL 437 or 
156.30. The following abbreviated summary offers a view into the world of covert 
and forced entry and will hopefully cause those responsible for the security of their 
domains to reassess their locks and associated hardware. Further, if you think you 
have solved security problems inherent in mechanical locks by implementing an 
electronic access control system, you might want to consider that most of these 
systems have a mechanical lock as a backup against the failure of the electronics.  
The reality is that any such system can be compromised by neutralizing the lock and 
completely avoiding any smart card, RFID, magnetic stripe, or similar technology.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
225
Virtually all conventional locks and some high security cylinders and their 
­associated systems can be compromised by employing one or more of the following 
techniques. Caveat emptor!
Picking;
Bumping;
Extrapolation of the top-level master key by probing one cylinder;
Complete violation of key control and key security by the duplication, 
replication, and simulation of restricted keys and blanks;
Rights amplification of cut keys to gain unauthorized access to secure areas 
by modifying the bitting to other values;
Creation of bump keys from discarded keys within a system;
Use of a hybrid attack that involves two or more disciplines (such as forced 
and covert entry) to bypass deadbolt, mortise, and rim cylinders;
Employment of simple methods of mechanical bypass to circumvent sophis-
ticated and multiple layers of embedded security within mechanical locks by 
the use of wires, magnets, vibration, shock, sound, air pressure, and related 
techniques;
Determination of the sidebar code of the top-level master key from one key 
for one lock within a facility;
Ability to externally view the internal components of a lock and derive 
significant intelligence that will allow the generation of keys that will open 
them;
Ability to decode the control key within an interchangeable core system to 
allow access to any lock or to create a lockout condition.
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
226	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
Summary
In this chapter we have presented a brief overview of conventional and high security 
locks. As more and more physical security responsibilities are assigned to information 
technology managers, it is incumbent upon them to understand “lock basics.” This is 
important in order to accurately assess potential threats against their facilities and infra-
structure that may involve the bypass of locks and locking hardware. There is a great 
deal of marketing hyperbole in the security industry with regard to the resistance of 
locks against methods of covert and forced entry. Some manufacturers are unaware of 
certain methods of attack or will seek to minimize or downplay the potential results  
of such attacks. They often rely upon the UL and BHMA standards as their assurance 
that their locks have met those requirements and are thus deemed to be secure.  
If you take away one critical concept from this chapter it is that the standards may not 
adequately protect against certain threats that you may consider potentially serious.
Solutions Fast Track
Standards for Conventional and High Security Locks
Remember that UL 437 is not a high security rating, but a “higher security” 
certification for locks.
Require that a lock meets BHMA/ANSI 156.30 for high security 
installations.
Security Vulnerabilities of Conventional Locks
Be certain that if high security and non-high security cylinders are mixed in 
the same system that the security of all of the locks is not compromised.
Covert Entry Techniques
Select high security locks that offer significant resistance to forced and covert 
methods of entry.
Ensure that keys contain at least one element that cannot be easily replicated. 
Remember that all lock security is about key control.
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
227
High Security to High Insecurity
Conduct independent research before selecting high security cylinders to be 
certain that what they promise is what they actually deliver.
Do not rely solely upon standards when you select a high security solution. 
Consider specific risks that may be encountered in your facility and consult 
with covert entry experts that have conducted independent evaluations of 
the locks you intend to install.
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
228	
Chapter 6 • Locked but Not Secure: An Overview
Frequently Asked Questions
Q:	Are there any high security locks that you consider secure against real world 
attacks?
A:	There are many cylinders that we would consider suitable for use in high security 
installations. It all depends on how you define security and what the threat level 
is perceived to be. Certain locks such as Schlage Primus, Assa Protec, and Medeco 
m3 will all provide a certain level of protection. If absolute security and key 
control is required, then we would recommend two locks that are produced by 
EVVA in Austria: the 3KS and the MCS.
Q:	Why are key control and key security so important?
A:	The compromise of a key is the quickest and easiest way to circumvent the 
security of an individual lock or entire system. For this reason, keys for the most 
secure locks will contain an element that cannot be easily duplicated, replicated, 
or simulated. The EVVA Magnetic Code System is the best example. It is virtu-
ally impossible to replace one of the four rare-earth magnets in these keys, so the 
system cannot be compromised.
Q:	Are there any high security locks that are bump-proof ?
A:	All high security cylinders can be said to be bump-proof against conventional 
forms of bumping. However, many of them can be opened with advanced  
bumping techniques. The answer depends upon your security requirements.  
Some certified cylinders are essentially impervious to bumping and others can  
be relatively easy to bump open if certain preconditions are met.
Q:	Is there any one common exploit that presents the most threat and that a risk 
manager should be most concerned about when selecting a particular lock?
A:	We would look at mechanical bypass, certain forms of forced entry, and the ease 
with which keys can be compromised. This was graphically illustrated in the new 
book about the compromise of Medeco locks (by the author). Two tiny screws 
provided the entire security of the Medeco deadbolt cylinder for the past twenty 
years. A very simple exploit was developed to break these screws and open the 
lock. This is what we would consider a mechanical bypass as well as a forced 
entry attack.

www.syngress.com
	
Locked but Not Secure: An Overview • Chapter 6	
229
Q:	Can master key systems be made secure?
A:	Very few master key systems are truly secure. Most are a compromise between 
convenience and security and for that reason are not recommended unless they 
are necessitated by security and safety requirements. Most master key systems can 
be very easily decoded and the top level master key code extrapolated. Once this 
occurs, every lock within a facility is at risk. There are certain systems that are 
more secure than others.
Q:	Can certain locks on a master key system be made more secure against attack?
A:	There are many techniques for securing individual cylinders within a master key 
system. These techniques often involve keying certain locks with individual keys 
but not on the top level master key. Perimeter doors should never be controlled 
to the TMK, and locks on restrooms and public access doors should likewise not 
be set up on any master key to ensure that they cannot be reverse engineered in 
order to decode the TMK by an intruder.

231
Chapter 7
Bomb Threat 
Planning: Things 
Have Changed
James H. Windle is employed as a Police Sergeant in Charlotte, North Carolina, 
where he serves as a certified bomb technician and is assigned as the Bomb 
Squad Commander and Arson Supervisor. He is certified as a North Carolina 
Law Enforcement Instructor and has advanced instructor training in Specialized 
Police Driving, Firearms and Hazardous Materials. He is an instructor of the 
United States National Domestic Terrorism Preparedness Program and has 
delivered terrorism training to numerous governmental agencies, both police 
and military, as well as to private security.
Jim was a member of the United States Marine Corps, providing training in 
mines and booby traps domestically and with NATO forces abroad. He gradu-
ated from the F.B.I.’s Hazardous Devices School at Redstone Arsenal and the 
ATF’s Advanced Explosives Destruction Techniques, Advanced Post Blast 
Investigation and Home Land Security Live Agent WMD School. He is also 
crossed trained as a Hazardous Materials Technician. He has worked site secu-
rity and threat assessment in conjunction with the U.S. Secret Service and U.S. 
State Department for domestic and foreign dignitary protection missions. He 
was sent to Israel to train with Israeli bomb technicians on countermeasures 
against suicide bombers and vehicle bombs and was recently sent to England 
to work with London Met Police and Royal Navy EOD squads.
Jim is an active member of the International Association of Bomb Technicians 
and Investigators (IABTI) and also a member of the High Technology Crime 
Investigation Association (HTCIA). Both groups are highly-respected interna-
tional organizations whose primary mission is to share information, train and 
help in the prevention and prosecution of high technology and terrorist 
crimes.

www.syngress.com
232	
Chapter 7 • Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed
Introduction
When I look at the history of attacks in the US involving bombings I see a couple  
of common denominators: first, most of the attacks were made on “soft” targets, and 
two, there was no threat plan or threat assessment made prior to the attack. As I write 
this I want you to know that I am coming to you as a practitioner, not as a theorist.  
I am the one who has to answer to the customer and the employees as part of any 
plan. When I give a presentation to people I am standing in front of them, preaching 
the gospel of protection, and the scripture of change. I am selling a difficult product, 
which is behavior change.
I look at where bombings are taking place and analyze what works and what fails. 
Let’s look at Israel, let’s look at London, Ireland, Columbia. … its clearly a numbers 
game. In the Iraq theater of operations, every day provides new challenges to our 
military, but many people don’t realize that ATF and FBI have agents on the ground 
learning new things about the enemy. It has proven to be a valuable avenue of intel-
ligence gathering for bomb technicians. The information also provides great threat 
assessment for us at home.
Iraq is not only a great source of intelligence for us, but it is also a proving 
ground for bombers: in September 2004 there were 2,400 bombings in Iraq alone. 
The US has also seen its share of attacks in recent history. The significant attacks are 
explosive-laden and have caused much loss of life and billions of dollars in property 
damage. At the end of each year I receive intelligence reports from my federal law 
enforcement counterparts, which show plenty of activity in the US involving  
explosives incidents. For example, the ATF reports that in the US as recently as  
2006 there were 3,797 reported bombing incidents, with 135 injured and 14 killed.
Terrorists take on many faces, from Arab–Israeli conflict supporters, to Asian 
radical fundamentalism such as the Aum Shinrikyo attacks in the Tokyo subway, to 
the radical Muslim movement involving 9/11, to domestic terrorists like Ted 
Kaczynski, Timothy McVeigh, and Eric Rudolph. In addition to world-wide extrem-
ism, we do a pretty good job of attacking each other here in the US. We know that 
there are terrorist cells working here in the US, and domestic terrorism is alive and 
well in organized hate groups.
Bomb threat planning and suspicious package mitigation can be daunting for 
managers. Balancing security and productivity is a difficult task but can be done if 
everyone realizes that there is a mutual benefit to business and law enforcement. 
Bomb threats are felonies in most cases, and there must be some mechanism in place 

www.syngress.com
	
Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed • Chapter 7	
233
for property owners to assist law enforcement in bomb threat investigations. There 
also must be the realization that the managers of a business are responsible for the 
safety of their employees. Most businesses that ask me to assist them on bomb plan-
ning are shocked when I criticize their plan (most likely last updated in the 1970’s), 
which in some cases calls for a simple automatic evacuation upon receiving a threat. 
They remember the days of Irish Republican Army, the Red Brigade, and 
Symbionese Liberation Army, which kidnapped Patty Hearst. They remember the call 
that said: in thirty minutes there will be a bomb going off in your building….and in 
thirty minutes it happened. Today, most terrorists take credit after an event happens.  
I find that many managers are not well versed in threat assessment and find them-
selves failing to adequately plan for such events. Taking proactive measures for target 
hardening is good for the company and good for employees.
The Day Our World Changed
It was a beautiful crisp morning. The North Carolina sky was blue, there wasn’t a 
cloud in the sky, and it was a brilliantly clear day, a great day for training with our 
Advanced Local Emergency Response Team (ALERT). The ALERT team is a  
90-member team with members of the Charlotte Fire Department (CFD), FBI, 
Federal Marshals, Mecklenburg County Sheriff’s Department, Emergency Medics, 
and the Charlotte Mecklenburg Police SWAT and Bomb Squad.
As the Bomb Squad Commander, I split my team into two squads, a Render Safe 
Procedure (RSP) team and a Recon team, for this training event. We dressed out in 
Level B, splash protection, with breathing apparatus and headed down range to locate 
the simulated WMD that had been released into the air, killing several and wounding 
hundreds. We partnered with our CFD HazMat Techs, for air monitoring. My FBI 
WMD coordinator partner, Special Agent Dave Martinez and I went over the plans 
as the buzz of the many troops worked tirelessly setting up tents and preparing triage, 
all working in concert to complete the mission of scene stabilization, rescue, and 
rehab. Suddenly Dave received a page on his pager.
Note
According to the FBI, bombings account for 85%–95% of all the acts of 
terrorism. ATF reports that as recent at 2006 there were 3,797 reported 
incidents involving 135 injured and 14 killed in the US alone.

www.syngress.com
234	
Chapter 7 • Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed
He looked surprised and concerned as he read the page. “Is every thing okay?”  
I asked him. He responded, “That’s strange, I just got a page saying that a plane struck 
the World Trade Center in New York. It’s probably a small Piper Cub that got lost  
in the cloud cover,” he said, dismissing it. Minutes later Dave received another page 
and said, “Jim, we just had a second plane hit the other tower in New York and 
something is going on. The office is calling me back. I have to go.”
An hour later that day the word came down that we were under attack. The 
training stopped and the realization hit that this would forever change the way we 
view preparedness. Charlotte is a major banking and medical center, and we are home 
to some of the largest banks in the country. Because physical protection is paramount 
for the banking industry and our tallest skyscrapers are bank headquarters, suddenly 
they are a target. The many days following the attack were met with numerous calls 
about suspicious individuals and items and vehicles. The calls at the Charlotte Police 
Department went though the roof, from 10 calls a month to 15 calls a day.
Insider Information:  
Where Do These Guys Get This Stuff?
Insider information theft is an integral part of terrorism. Intel theft is at an all-time 
high with the increase of technological storage devices such as camera phones, iPods, 
and disguised flash drives. Collecting sensitive information from trash, overheard 
conversations, stolen laptops, and plain old espionage is clearly one of the first steps 
in terrorism planning. We call it “recon”. Leaked, stolen or improperly shared sensi-
tive information used effectively can motivate criminals to commit crime at the 
target location. It can allow a peak at the activities of the business or it can allow  
a criminal to take information and make up half-truths about a target, helping to 
recruit others to assist in the crime. My investigators have seen bad guys use this  
type of information early on in crime planning. 
Warning
According to the Southern Poverty Law Center, the group that monitors  
hate groups, stated that the number of hate groups operating in America 
increased in 2007 to 888, a rise of 48% since 2000. Check your state to see 
the activity by using this link: (http://www.splcenter.org/)

www.syngress.com
	
Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed • Chapter 7	
235
I have worked cases were criminals made access using these strategies and committed 
a variety of crimes that impacted the business. Free access to any part of your building 
by anyone is never a good idea. Unrestricted access under buildings with large vehicles is 
even worse. Clearly, the fact that truck parking without inspection was allowed under a 
building such as the World Trade Center contributed to the plan to bomb it in 1993. 
Whether it’s theft of sensitive electronic info or building plans, or passive security that 
allows free roams of your business, every bit of info that the bad guys can use to formu-
late attack against you should be safeguarded or properly disposed of.
I have investigated thefts of explosives where work crews were storing explosives 
in an onsite work trailer. The work trailer had a single key hidden under the steps so 
many of the engineers could have access to the trailer. This was common knowledge 
to most employees, even at the lowest level. ATF reports that 98,596 pounds of 
explosives were stolen in the United States from 1998 to 2003 alone. Where did it 
go? Did half, some, or any of these explosives wind up in criminal hands? Were they 
smuggled elsewhere for future attacks?
Tip
Stolen information, coupled with a lack of physical security, may allow  
a bomber to focus on a particular area of the target due to its “softness”. 
Some example of softness include staff members sharing electronic pass keys, 
pass codes that allow access to sensitive areas that are never changed, or 
company IDs that have no picture on them, allowing anybody to become 
“Jane in Data Entry”. Not denying entry to sensitive areas, not changing pass 
codes, or using poor housekeeping rules like allowing doors to be propped 
open are a “bad guy’s” dream.
Tip
A bomb threat is a crime. Security officials should ensure that the Bomb 
Threat Check List is near every phone. *57 should be used immediately at the 
conclusion of any bomb threat that is received by phone. This electronically 
flags the last incoming call. It allows law enforcement to identify that call 
when records are subpoenaed.
A copy of the check list can be found at: http://www.state.tn.us/ 
homelandsecurity/bomb_checklist.pdf

www.syngress.com
236	
Chapter 7 • Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed
The Terrorist Profile
Domestic terror targets in the US have followings that are usually either far left wing 
or far right wing extremists. Far right wing extremist entities have deep-rooted beliefs 
that the government is out of control and that they must help the common man 
regain his foothold on a free America. These are the Tim McVeigh’s or Eric Rudolph’s 
of the world. Common political focus points are gun control, white supremacy, and 
anti-government/anti-taxation. These types will focus their attention on federal offices, 
governmental agencies, or businesses that they feel support governmental policies or 
agendas. Tactics for these groups include property damage, arsons and bombings.
One notable recent example of a right wing extremist is Timothy McVeigh.  
In 1995, McVeigh and his Army buddy, Terry Nichols, planned and carried out their 
plan to blow up the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City in mili-
tary fashion. McVeigh delivered his vehicle bomb filled with thirteen 55-gallon 
drums of ammonium nitrate and fuel oil causing a catastrophic collapse of that 
building and damaging an additional 324 surrounding buildings. The blast blew out 
windows and doors as far away as 50 blocks. The explosion caused the death of 168 
people and injured more than 500 others. McVeigh was apprehended less than two 
hours later. He was tried and convicted of federal murder charges and was executed 
June 11, 2001. Terry Nichols was convicted of involuntary manslaughter and federal 
and state bombing charges and is serving a life sentence in a federal prison. He was 
also ordered to pay the government $14 million for the damage caused to the 
Murrah Building. Prosecutors said the bombing was an attempt to avenge the deaths 
of about 80 people in the government siege at the Branch Davidian compound in 
Waco, Texas exactly two years earlier.
Left wing terrorist groups involve revolutionary socialist doctrinaires trying their 
hardest to stop capitalism. They believe they are the protectors against imperialism, 
among other left wing beliefs. Identified under this umbrella are special interest 
groups such as the Animal Liberation Front (ALF) and environmental groups such as 
the Environmental Liberation Front (ELF). Other groups may include anti-abortion 
or abortion-rights groups. These groups target public health facilities, universities, and 
businesses. Tactics include arson, sabotage, and bombings.
International terror groups are foreign-based and oppose the US and its policies. 
Foreign terrorists have attacked US citizens and interests overseas, including the 
bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over Scotland, which killed 189 Americans in 1988, 
the vehicle bomb outside the Khobar Towers in Dharan, Saudi Aribia, which killed 

www.syngress.com
	
Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed • Chapter 7	
237
19 military personnel in 1996, and the bombings of two US embassies in Kenya and 
Tanzania killing 12 in 1998. No attacks by international terrorists were recorded in 
the US between 1984 and 1992. All this changed on February 26, 1993 when, for 
the first time, foreign terrorists bombed the World Trade Center. The FBI has divided 
these groups into three sections: foreign sponsors of international terrorism, formal-
ized terrorist groups, and loosely affiliated international radical extremists.
The State Department has listed five countries as foreign sponsors of international 
terrorism: Syria, Iran, Sudan, North Korea, and Cuba. All of these countries have 
directly supported terrorists and terrorist operations using official state agents. All still 
support terrorism and some now conceal activities by the use of operatives to conduct 
certain operations.
Formalized terror groups like Hezbollah, Hamas, and PIJ have their own business 
infrastructure, financial backing, and training centers. They can plan and operate  
overseas as well as within the US. They are involved in criminal activity in the US 
engaging in identity theft, passport fraud, harboring fugitives, and weapons and  
explosives theft.
Loosely affiliated international radical extremists do not represent a specific nation. 
Loosely affiliated extremists may pose the most urgent threat to the United States at 
this time because they remain relatively unknown to law enforcement. They can travel 
freely, take on a variety of identities, and recruit like-minded sympathizers from 
numerous countries.
Potential Terror Targets
There are four primary classifications for targets: Statement Targets, Infrastructure Targets, 
Commercial Targets, and Transportation Targets.
Statement Targets
Statement Targets include certain governmental buildings, like federal court houses, 
and iconic buildings such as World Trade Center. Local specific targets include  
sensitive religious sites such as Jewish or Muslim compounds in certain jurisdictions. 
Depending on the size of these establishments, rescue plans and alternative entrances 
and exits should be identified. Planning for response and multiple evacuation routes 
and locations should also be considered. Normally, the workforce in these locations 
are sensitive to their respective threat levels, but need direction on how to better 
harden their environment. One clear way is for these organizations to build a  

www.syngress.com
238	
Chapter 7 • Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed
relationship with local law enforcement and response entities. Keeping tabs on local 
threats and fostering two-way communications with local security heads and law 
enforcement is a good way to head off potential threats.
Infrastructure Targets
Terrorists attack infrastructure targets to cause maximum inconvenience to the  
general public to ensure that their cause remains in the forefront of public opinion. 
Targets can include power sub-stations, gas facilities, oil pipelines, water pumping 
stations, the road and rail system, and airports, among others. It would take a consid-
erable amount of any product to contaminate water sources, although an attack of 
small proportions could cause a pumping station to fail. A coordinated attack of this 
nature could leave a region vulnerable when it comes to pumping water for firefight-
ing and decontamination and rescue events. Virtually all major terrorist groups oper-
ating in the world today have attacked infrastructure targets at some point.
Another example of a high-value infrastructure target is communications  
facilities. As an emergency responder, I know the value of a well-balanced and 
functional communication system and the ability to coordinate efforts. Cellular 
communication is a viable means of communication, although somewhat fragile  
in an emergency situation where large groups of people try to call the police or 
fire department. Thousands of cellular calls made at the same time can collapse a  
system, making all cell phones in the area useless. This can be catastrophic if the 
private sector security is relying on communication with arriving response units  
to coordinate via cell phones. Most private security companies do not have radio 
communication with local police and fire departments and rely on other means of 
communication integration. Cellular communication has become a staple of infor-
mal communication and a tool for on-scene coordination. Employees that work 
communication and utility facilities must take ownership of their environment and 
realize that they are a valuable target and have a workable plan to with local 
responders.
Another example of a valuable infrastructure target is a utility facility such as 
power grid switching stations. Many facilities may have few or no employees and 
instead rely on SCADA systems to run the facility and have become a regular 
target for domestic terror. Recently, in south Florida, several power grids went 
down and prevented the use of traffic signals, lights, and alarms throughout several 
counties. Although this may not have been a criminal event, it shows the value of 
the target.

www.syngress.com
	
Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed • Chapter 7	
239
Commercial Targets
Targeting of the commercial heart of a state is an effective means of bringing the 
terrorist message home to one of the places where it hurts the government most – 
the financial wealth of the country. In Charlotte we are the largest banking center  
on the east coast south of New York. We have implemented several buffer zone 
protection strategies throughout the city. Target hardening strategies require increased 
threat knowledge for the workforce in these facilities, who represent the front line  
of defense. The minute that the workforce fails to take ownership of a facility and  
relies solely on its security staff is when it becomes a “soft target”.
Transportation Targets
Transportation security efforts have increased substantially since 911, although there is 
still a lot to be learned. Events like the Madrid Train bombings in 2004, where four 
stations were attacked and 191 killed, and London bus bombings in 2005, where three 
train stations and one bus were attacked and 56 killed, still demonstrate the adage that 
terrorists attack the easiest targets. The terror organization in Madrid was believed to 
have stolen the explosives from a mine in northern Spain along with a stolen van 
used to transport the explosives used to commit the bombing. Once again, intel and 
theft gained the upper hand.
What Should I Be Looking For?
We have talked about groups, motivation, and a little bit about attitude within your 
business as to security. Now I want to brush you up on recognition. You need to 
know what to look for. Often, bits and pieces of evidence to a crime go unnoticed 
because we fail to recognize what we are seeing. Investigators executing a search 
warrant at a safe house in New York in relation to the 1993 bombing of the World 
Trade Center came across several papers written in Arabic that were dismissed as 
religious literature, failing to recognize that this was evidence of the terrorists’ intent 
to start a holy war against the US. It’s this kind of reasoning I use to highlight the 
importance of being able to recognize parts of an IED. Bombers make mistakes and 
get interrupted by security and sometimes flee, leaving behind parts and pieces.  
If you know what to look for as a trained eye you may be able to quickly realize  
the severity of the situation. 

www.syngress.com
240	
Chapter 7 • Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed
There are five components that make up an explosive device: The container, 
power source, switch, initiator and main charge.
The Container
The container can be used to cover a series of obstacles for the bomber. Typically,  
it is made to blend into its surroundings. It aids in transporting the explosive device 
in public and may assist in placing it in a populated location. The container may also 
enhance the effects of the device. The fact that low explosives are contained makes 
them more lethal, by combining a fragmentation effect and increasing blast pressure.
As a security official, I am often concerned with lower-level VIP missions that 
simply use metal detectors as a first line of defense. Containers come in every shape 
and size. There are plenty of non-metallic containers that can house explosive 
charges. Many devices are plastic in construction, for example, PVC pipe. Security 
officials should be aware that some missions require a hand search of bags and  
containers. Other options for searching for devices in secure areas are the use of 
magnetometers and explosive sniffers.
The Power Source
Power sources are another component in an improvised explosive device. Several 
device designs use electrical power, from simple batteries like AAA or 9 volts, to 
watch batteries, mini 12 volts and specialty batteries. Batteries can also be used as  
a way to initiate the device by decay. There could be enough battery power to get 
the device to the target, then, due to a collapsing circuit, the device detonates soon 
thereafter. Since security officials do not know the true count down time on an 
electrically powered device, time to perform an evacuation becomes critical.
Warning
Never handle or touch any item you believe may be an explosive device. 
Some bombs are victim activated and are designed to explode only when  
the item is moved. Let the experts determine if it is a real device or not.  
Call 911 immediately if you feel unsure about a suspicious package.

www.syngress.com
	
Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed • Chapter 7	
241
Switches
Switches are probably the most deadly part of a device. A switch can come in several 
forms. One device may have several firing and/or arming switches. The creative 
bomber can use an arming switch to allow him or her to reach the target location 
safely, and then get away once the device is secreted. Arming switches are normally 
some type of count down timer, such as a clock, watch, 555 timer, etc. To activate a 
count down timer the bomber may calculate the time to get to the target or may use 
another switch to activate the timer. Never assume what a switch may or may not do 
and never touch any switch on a suspected package!
Firing switches could be victim-operated. An example is a mercury switch that 
activates the device when the victim or unsuspecting individual picks up the device 
and the liquid mercury closes the circuit. Other victim-operated switches include 
photo cells, Magnetic reed switches, and pressure/pressure release switches, such as 
clothes pins. I have seen devices that have a series of firing switches in them, all 
victim-activated. Cell phones, pagers and cameras all have switches and have been 
used to construct devices.
Remote control switches are also worth noting, since most law enforcement and 
security officials use hand held and car two way radios. Any time there is a belief that 
a remote control switch may be used, stay away from the use of two way radios within 
150 feet of the threatened area, for fear of radio frequency interference or RF inter-
ference. This is a constant preaching point for me as a trainer of police officers. 
Initiators
Initiators are what cause the explosive charge to detonate, the most common being 
a blasting cap. Blasting caps that are commercially made are the most sensitive of all. 
They are normally a short tube with one end, the business end, closed, and the 
other end open, allowing you to look inside. They may have protruding leg wires 
Warning
Never use two way radios in a known threatened area or within 150 feet  
of a suspicious package. Radio frequency interference could cause the device 
to function if the bomber used remote control switching.

www.syngress.com
242	
Chapter 7 • Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed
or a plastic straw-like attachment. Blasting caps are the first step in a firing chain to 
set off high explosives. High explosives require heat and shock to set them off and 
the blasting cap does just that. They have caused more damage than any one single 
component and are very lethal if mistreated. They are sensitive to heat and shock 
and should never be handled, except by trained personnel. Electric blasting caps are 
easily recognized by the leg wires coming out of one end. The leg wires are nor-
mally single strand wire, coated with an insulator and are different colors. This color 
coding allows commercial blasters to set up chain explosive charges and makes the 
difference between a series circuit and a parallel circuit clear to the blaster. Leg 
wires can range in size from one inch to three or four inches if a delay is built into 
the cap. It’s important to realize that bombers may cut leg wires at the target loca-
tion for last minute assembly of the components. In post-blast investigations leg 
wires can often be found and colored insulation still intact. These can be traced 
back to a manufacturer and sometimes narrow down the purchase or theft location 
of explosives. Blasting caps also come without leg wires and facilitate the use of 
time fuses. These caps are completely open on one end, which allows the time fuse 
to be placed in one end and crimped on to the fuse. Initiators can also be home-
made, which makes them even more dangerous than commercial caps. Homemade 
initiators or improvised initiators can be made from small light bulbs, electric 
matches and squibs.
Main Charge
The main charge can be either high or low explosives. Low explosives are ones that 
explode or detonate at speeds below 3,300 f.p.s. Examples include black powder, 
smokeless powder and double base smokeless powder. All of these can be purchased 
legally at sporting good stores and reloading supply stores. They are a main charge in 
any pipe bomb. Just because they are designated as “low” explosives does not mean 
they are less dangerous than high explosives.
High explosives consist of substances that explode or detonate at speeds greater 
than 3,300 f.p.s. Some military explosives detonate in the 20,000 f.p.s. range. High 
explosives can take many forms. Examples are cast explosives like TNT, which look 
like plaster of Paris, or Dynamite, which is really a liquid explosive poured into an 
inert substance like sawdust and rolled up in waxed paper. They can also take the form 
of rope. Detonating cord is a high explosive. It is sometimes used as a booster to cause 
other explosives to detonate when wrapped. We commonly use Det cord to wrap 

www.syngress.com
	
Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed • Chapter 7	
243
TNT or Dynamite to safely detonate it. Slurries and ditching charges like ANFO are 
common high explosives used in road and land development. Slurries typically look 
like large sausages. They are flexible and have an outer plastic and fabric skin. They are 
designed to be forced down a drilled hole and detonated to break up rock and earth. 
ANFO is an acronym for Ammonium Nitrate and Fuel Oil. When those two ingredi-
ents are mixed at the right percentages they become explosive. The industry standard 
for ANFO is a binary explosive with the proper amounts packaged in separate  
containers. Most manufacturers use a colored fuel oil mixture which is really Nitro 
Methane. This allows the user to recognize when the container of fertilizer has 
become mixed with the fuel and is now an explosive.
Military explosives are normally packaged in OD green with yellow makings and 
letterings. One of the highest military explosives is C4. It is a plastic explosive that is 
white in color and is designed to be molded into any shape. Another type of military 
explosive is the training grenade. They either look like the WWII pineapple grenade 
or the more current version, which resembles a baseball. Both types have fuses on top 
with handles, called spoons, running down their sides. The main body, called the hull, 
has a hole on the bottom to allow spent gases and any fragmentation from the cap 
on the inside to expel out. The primary way to inspect these training grenades is to 
look first at the color of the fuse on top with the spoon. It should be sky blue.  
This indicates training. It does not indicate if it has been shot, however. These are 
easily booby trapped and modified. Law enforcement officers should not handle  
these without trained officers with them.
One other common high explosive worth noting is Data Sheet or Flex–ex. It’s a 
sheet explosive that comes in a variety of colors, most commonly OD green or pale 
white. It has many applications for disposal work for bomb squads and is a favorite 
for letter bombers.
The main charge can also be made from improvised explosives. Peroxide-based 
explosives are very common in the Middle East. They commonly take the shape from 
rock candy to sugar, depending on the skill of the maker. They may also have a 
brown tint to them. They also normally have a strong chemical smell.
When a bomb has all five components it’s called an Improvised Explosive Device 
or IED. It’s imperative to know all you can about the recognition of explosives and 
the parts of an improvised explosive device.

www.syngress.com
244	
Chapter 7 • Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed
Searching: What Am I  
Looking For and Where?
Ok, so now we have looked at organizations, motives, and components… now 
wouldn’t it be nice to know where the bad guys are going to hide the device?  
As bomb technicians, we sometimes feel we are kind of like professional gamblers.  
We are highly trained and have numerous strategies and techniques to assist us. We also 
take into consideration the totality of the circumstances surrounding the event. But on 
that initial approach you’re hoping to have the right cards to win. You must treat every 
threat or package as if it were the real thing. The minute you don’t you will lose.  
We have a saying in bomb disposal: “initial success or total failure”. When we look at 
the history of bombings world wide and in the U.S., we can see that there are some 
statistics that crop up. The facts are that most bombings occur outside. When we look 
at significant events in just our own country the major events have occurred outside: 
Oklahoma, World Trade ‘93, Atlanta abortion clinics, Olympic Park, Atlanta night club 
bombing…all happened outside.
The second most likely place where bombs are hidden in the U. S. is in common 
areas. For businesses, common areas refer to any place the public can go to with out 
being restricted. Lobbies, stairwells, and bathrooms are all common areas. Bad guys 
normally want a soft target, and an unattended lobby is perfect for a bomber to place 
his package and leave. Bathrooms with cabinets that don’t lock or are not secure are 
another great place. You may have gone into your favorite movie rental store or conve-
nience store and noticed that no matter what the clerk is doing, they turn to you and 
welcome you. That is not necessarily because they are polite. This is a target hardening 
strategy or a crime deterrent technique. Bad guys don’t want to get noticed, and 
greeting is equivalent to getting caught in some cases.
The other common denominator is the type of devices. In this country, the most 
popular type of explosive device is the pipe bomb, hands down. Pipe bombs are the 
easiest type of explosive device to construct and there is little tracking of the compo-
nents needed to make the device. Ted Kaczynski and Eric Rudolph were both success-
ful pipe bombers. Almost all the pieces for a pipe bomb can be purchased lawfully and 
over the counter. A pipe bomb can be activated with a variety of switches, from 
electric time delay to victim-activated to the suspect lighting a time fuse and walking 
out of the building. So what does that mean to us? Well several things on the onset. 
One of which is you are now armed with the knowledge of where most common 
location devices are placed, and the second most likely location. So if your plan calls 

www.syngress.com
	
Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed • Chapter 7	
245
for an automatic evacuation on a bomb threat, that means you will take people past 
the common areas and deliver them to the outside, just where the majority of real 
bombings actually take place.
Recommendations for Target Hardening
So what should you do? I can not talk about response with out mentioning preven-
tion. Hoping you won’t be bombed is not an effective plan. This couldn’t be more 
true when it comes to bomb threat mitigation and planning. If most devices are placed 
outside, then we need to insure a couple of things. First is employee culture. Express to 
employees that work has to be a safe place and that it is everyone’s responsibility to 
protect the work location. This means training employees to look for things out of 
place, especially when they are outside their work environment.
Outside
Make sure that outside storage rooms remain locked and that vegetation is kept away 
from the building. You should be able to look down the length of a building and see a 
space between the hedges and the building itself. The bases of trees and hedges should 
be kept clear so as not to provide hiding places for packages in the foliage. Exterior 
flower boxes are another great place for bombers to conceal a device easily and have 
good target value. The window is fragile and produces additional fragmentation. 
Exterior trash cans overflowing with trash are a perfect place to hide a device.  
Think twice about having them along evacuation routes.
Vehicles from visitors should not be allowed to park next to the building.  
It makes sense to have employees with background checks and cars with employee 
stickers to park next to the building as a layer of added protection. A bomb threat 
involving a vehicle could take a bomb squad several hours to remotely search it. 
Extra precautions should be made if your parking is below the building.
Tip
Trash cans have been used as hiding locations for bombs in the past and can 
produce additional fragmentation. Trash cans with black plastic liners make  
it almost impossible to look into. Clear liners are safer.

www.syngress.com
246	
Chapter 7 • Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed
Employee Identification
Security should also have a system to recognize employees; a photo ID is always a 
good thing. Visitors should be escorted, or at least issued temporary badges with the 
date and time on the badge. This allows anyone to examine a badge and check its 
authenticity.
Cameras
Cameras that monitor the outside and common areas are a great tool for security. 
Any camera mounted outside communicates to bad guys that you have taken steps  
to advance your security efforts. After the World Trade Center bombing in 1993, 
security installed cameras that only clicked on when movement was detected. This 
type of system allows security staff to focus on actual activity, and not just constant 
closed-circuit television viewing. Detectives solve many crimes through the use of 
recording cameras. These recordings also allow us to broadcast still pictures with on 
local TV stations, and can be used in criminal trials.
Deliveries
Deliveries are always a concern, and you should not let unexpected deliveries under 
the building. Once the car bomb is close to or, worse yet, under the building, it’s too 
late. In several sensitive targets in Charlotte you will see trucks blocked from entering 
below-ground parking by retractable Ballards while being swept by security. In some 
cases, the business entity will not allow entry of the delivery unless it calls ahead 
using a code stating that they are coming for a delivery.
Interior
When we look to target hardening the interior I must say that the front line of 
defense is the person that greets you at the door. Several high rise buildings in my 
jurisdiction have moved a security desk into the lobby area as a deterrent. Having 
security officials greeting or screening visitors is a great tool.
Security should insure that hallways remain clear of boxes and open storage 
containers. Not only is this a security problem but a safety problem for evacuation. 
The same is true for stairwells. Most jurisdictions prohibit the storage of any 
­containers in stairwells. Remember, stairwells are an evacuation route and should 
always be sterile—even the void under the ground-floor staircase.
Interior doors that house computer switching stations or phone closets or office 
supply closets. First, they should never be marked. You don’t need to direct the 

www.syngress.com
	
Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed • Chapter 7	
247
bomber where to find the least visited room in the building. These rooms should 
always be locked and key control should be required.
Bathrooms with storage closest or storage cabinets under the sink are a great 
place to hide a bomb. These cabinets often contain half empty boxes of paper or 
cleaning supplies and can easily hide an explosive device. These rooms also contain 
chemicals that can cause additional issues if the device malfunctions and only partially 
detonates and causes a chemical spill.
Mail rooms
Mail rooms or delivery drop off points are considered a sensitive area and restricted 
access should be the rule. All employees, not just mail clerks, should be trained in 
package recognition. In the fall of 2001 a series of letters laced with anthrax were 
mailed to news media and congressional staffers. Five people died and twenty two  
fell ill from the attack. Explosive devices delivered by mail or currier will always be  
an easy avenue for a bomber to attack a specific target. Since packages are handled 
roughly, they are not normally activated by movements, and because the time of 
­delivery is not known, they are normally victim-activated, unless delivered by the 
bomber. Ted Kaczynski in 1978 started one of the most famous mail bomb campaigns 
in US history protesting advancements in technology. He eluded the FBI for 18 years 
until his capture. It can be difficult to determine if a package is suspect or not there  
are some indicative signs:
Postage Stamps:  Excessive postage or pre-posted parcels. The bomber 
doesn’t want to get caught and therefore applies more postage required to 
insure the package arrives at its destination point.
The package is heavy for its size and is uneven in weight:  This may 
be indicative of a pipe bomb on one side of the package and its trigger 
mechanism on the other side causing it to be heaver than one would expect 
and lopsided.
Wooden containers or containers in containers.
Rigid envelope:  On a small soft sided package the bomber has put card-
board sides in place to protect the device from rough handling or prevent 
handlers from feeling the components of the device.
Protruding wires or foil:  In the event of a package tear or actual direc-
tions on the outside of the package to Open here or pull to open, the victim 
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
248	
Chapter 7 • Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed
may see protruding wires. Foil is a conductor of electricity and has also been 
used for device construction.
Oily stains or discoloration:  Many high explosives commercially and 
home made exude a chemical residue that may absorb into the paper  
package giving clues as to what may be inside.
Restrictive markings:  If the bomber has a specific target in mind they 
may use “for your eyes only” or Personal and confidential”. I have even see 
just the word “photos” used giving the delivery person or victim the 
urgency of opening the package.
No return address or fictitious address:  One key point worth noting is 
checking the return address to see if it matches the postage stamp location.  
If the return address says Florida but the postage stamp reflects Texas for 
instance, that would be a red flag. The use of an unprofessional or incorrect 
address such as a poorly handwritten address, as if to disguise the penman-
ship, is also worth noting.
Unexpected package:  Unexpected packages are always worth scrutiny. 
Large facilities have x-ray devices to screen packages as a defensive tool.
■
■
■
■
Tools & Traps…
Lessons learned for package profile!
In 1995 in Raleigh North Carolina employees of a business in a large business 
park were trained on the package profile by their local Police bomb squad.  
A short time later one employee received an unexpected package, which was 
delivered to her via the interdepartmental mail clerk. When she received the 
package she said to others that “this package is just like the profile we learned 
about in the bomb class. It’s lopsided, heavier than normal, and unexpected.” 
With that she opened the package and it exploded! Police located a second 
package at the same business park that day. The secondary device was a diver-
sionary device to throw officials off by killing or injuring a second individual 
that had no ties to the first victim and suspect. The suspect simply used a name 
off a marquis to address the package to. Thankfully it was intercepted.

www.syngress.com
	
Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed • Chapter 7	
249
Having learned the profile for suspect packages is a valuable tool … but only if 
you use it. 
Evacuation Plans
If you are faced with a bomb threat you have three options: evacuate, stay and search, 
or a blend of both.
If you decide to evacuate you should have a few elements in place. Evacuation 
elements include assembly locations, routes, accountability of personnel and employee 
knowledge. Plans should not differ between fire, weather or bomb evacuation plan-
ning. The use of fire wardens is recommended for a clear-cut chain of command.  
Fire wardens should be located on every floor of a building and they should report 
to managers, ensuring the plans are carried out in each location. Communication 
among and accountability for employees is paramount, and with a system using fire 
wardens, facilitates scene stability. Fire wardens need to be held accountable for their 
respective physical areas. Evacuating employees also need to understand that account-
ability is very important to responding rescue and law enforcement officials. One way 
of promoting this is a three-person buddy system. Evacuees should report to their 
respective fire warden that their partners are accounted for or missing at the assembly 
location.
Tip
IF YOU BECOME SUSPICIOUS:
1.	 STOP! Put the item down quickly and gently.
2.	 Notify everyone in the area.
3.	 Evacuate the room. Put two or more walls between you and the 
item.
4.	 Notify supervisory personnel.
5.	 Call 911.
DON’T OPEN ANY PACKAGE THAT HAS MADE YOU SUSPICIOUS:
1.	 Be cautious about receiving well packaged, but unsolicited items.
2.	 Be more cautious about packages that are delivered by other-than-
recognized services, such as U.S. Mail, UPS, Interoffice Mail, etc.

www.syngress.com
250	
Chapter 7 • Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed
There should be more than one evacuation location. Locations should include 
protection from the elements and potential blast protection. Evacuation assembly 
locations should be shared with a neighboring building if possible. Partnering for 
emergencies allows evacuees to move to another shelter for protection in inclement 
weather and provides blast protection.
A plan should have the following in place:
Trained management and employees. Training should include where to 
search, based on risk assessments set out by management. Employees should 
be taught how to search and have knowledge about vulnerable locations.
Sterile and completely and rapidly searchable work areas.
A trained workforce.
Secure work areas
Management should lead with security in mind on all levels, including informa-
tion security, physical security and security awareness.
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
Bomb Threat Planning: Things Have Changed • Chapter 7	
251
Summary
My philosophy has always been that the more people that are educated about the 
recognition of explosive devices and the motivation of criminals, the better we can 
safeguard our lives and businesses against such attacks. Clearly, my time working in 
Israel in 2004 was an eye opener. Not only have the Israelis suffered hundreds of 
attacks, but they have prevented thousands. One strategy they have developed is an 
80,000 uniformed volunteer force. This allows the paid national police force to focus 
on true crime leads and the apprehension of criminals and terrorists, while maintain-
ing a connection with the public and their everyday needs. This volunteer force in 
some form or fashion patrols the streets every day. This group is trained in recognition 
of components and IEDs. These volunteers also are members of the local economic 
workforce. They bring these strategies back to their respective place of employment. 
Educating the work force on not allowing tailgating on secure doors, or not propping 
open secure doors, challenging visitors, and keeping the workplace clean and free of 
debris, especially outside, are simple social engineering changes that can have a huge 
impact on target hardening. I am not suggesting that you go to your local law 
enforcement department and head up a volunteer force. What I am suggesting is that 
we take on the posture of watching for things and people that are obviously out of 
place or in violation and reporting them immediately. If you are a manager, fostering 
this type of ideal within the business is paramount to safety and security.

253
Chapter 8
Biometric 
Authentication for 
SCADA Security
Ted Claypoole is a Member of the law firm Womble Carlyle Sandridge and 
Rice, in Charlotte, North Carolina, in the Intellectual Property Transaction 
group, and a senior member of its Privacy and Data Management Team. He 
has long concentrated on the business and legal implications of information 
security and computer crime, first as in-house corporate counsel for 
CompuServe, Inc. and as assistant general counsel for Bank of America. He 
now advises business clients and information security companies on contract-
ing for data protection, allocating risk in digital certificate infrastructures and 
reacting to electronic threats. He has served on a U.S. Justice Department 
computer crimes task force and the Information Protection Committee for the 
Banking Industry Technology Secretariat. He has presented talks at the RSA 
Security Conferences in 2007 and 2008, including a talk on the ethics of perva-
sive biometrics.

www.syngress.com
254	
Chapter 8 • Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security
Introduction
Securing the critical infrastructure in the United States requires authentication of 
people authorized to access the critical systems. These controls can regulate personal 
access to the physical sites housing the power stations, water facilities, or gas lines 
encompassing the critical infrastructure, or they may regulate access to either the 
remote or centralized systems comprising the SCADA networks. Limiting access to 
authorized personal has been a cornerstone of infrastructure security since its inception.
Technology now exists to tie the authentication of authorized individuals (and the 
exclusion of unauthorized people) directly to the physical being of the people seek-
ing access. This is managed through a process called biometric security, which mea-
sures some physical aspect of any person seeking access to a sensitive element and 
reconfirms that physical aspect at the time access is requested. The biometric system 
may measure a person’s fingerprints, finger length and shape, head shape or facial 
features – any one or more of an infinite number of human body features – to con-
firm whether that person is the same one who has previously received authorization 
to enter the sensitive computer system or restricted area.
However, biometric technology is not a panacea for authentication and access 
issues. Like most security solutions, biometrics are appropriate solutions for some 
security problems and inappropriate answers to others. In addition, biometric authen-
tication produces technical, business, social, and legal problems. Companies using 
biometrics must build additional security into their systems to protect the authoriza-
tion databases and understand that such systems can provide strong authentication, 
but not infallibility.
This chapter will analyze biometric systems as they relate to critical infrastructure 
protection and SCADA security and discuss how the functioning and weaknesses of 
biometric systems affects their use to authenticate access to secure systems and loca-
tions. It will review vulnerabilities in biometric authentication and issues in system 
Warning
What is your fall-back authentication method? Biometric systems may deny 
access to authorized technicians. Your company must create a trusted method 
of confirming identity if the biometric system fails to do so.

www.syngress.com
	
Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security • Chapter 8	
255
implementation. Finally, the chapter includes a discussion of the social and legal 
concerns surrounding the use of biometric identifiers for security purposes.
Understanding Biometric Systems and  
How They Are Best Used for SCADA Security
Biometric analysis is growing as a protection tool. Distance measurements of faces and 
voices are regular features of identification and authentication in banks and casinos 
throughout the United States. Law enforcement has used biometric readings for 
decades, but their utility as a tool against criminals is growing as the science of body 
measurement is better understood and the variety of distinct measurements grows.
Footprints to DNA Readings
From the footprint analysis by Scotland Yard more than a century ago to DNA 
capture and comparison in today’s crime labs, biometrics has become increasingly 
more important to the police. A Japanese company has begun selling a urinal to 
businesses that measures chemical levels in the liquid deposits so that those businesses 
can monitor employee drug use. Australia is using biometrics for an e-passport system.
Human Measurements Can Slow Machines
Security architects are finding biometrics useful in identifying and authorizing access 
to networks, computer terminals, and secure facilities. However, biometric technol-
ogy is not a panacea for protecting valuable systems, and its shortcomings are espe-
cially noticeable when used for SCADA security. Most connections, instructions, and 
messages within the operational structure of SCADA systems must be made at nearly 
instantaneous speed, whereas the operational function of biometric comparisons is 
relatively slow. Use of biometrics to trigger operational responses or to provide 
answers within a SCADA system would be too slow to be productive.
Biometric comparisons work best for identifying human users of a system, authen-
ticating the access rights and responsibilities of those users, and providing records of 
access and records for non-repudiation purposes. Therefore, in SCADA systems, 
biometric tools are best utilized to confirm human authentication to access the central 
systems and to permit and record human access to physical facilities, whether those 
facilities hold the central processing capabilities or lie in the most remote outpost of 
the protected system.

www.syngress.com
256	
Chapter 8 • Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security
Biometric System  
Imperfections Are at Odds with Perception
Once biometric systems are installed, they still can be problematic. No system is 
infallible and biometric systems can fail in many directions. Many of these systems 
can be tricked at various points in the collection and comparison process. The system 
itself may be poorly installed or metrics may be chosen badly. The biometric readers 
may fail or the initial collections could be flawed. Temperature, humidity, precipita-
tion, and dirt may affect the accuracy of readers.
Unfortunately, some commentators have assumed that a system that measures 
human features will provide the best possible security for facilities and networks.  
In truth, the complexity at which biometric systems operate can undercut their 
accuracy and utility for many important locations and functions of SCADA security. 
Choose and implement carefully if you plan to use biometrics in your SCADA 
system. Biometric comparisons could be a dream solution to your authentication 
problems, or they could create a nightmare of additional work and security issues.
What is Biometric Authentication?
Personal authentication is necessary to establish that the person operating a network 
or entering a secure facility has authority to do so. Authentication regimes tend to 
rely on the person seeking authentication to provide a token of proof to establish 
identity and permission. These tokens are called identity factors, and the more factors 
that are offered to establish identity, the greater the likelihood that the person claiming 
authorized access is truly the person he or she claims to be.
Tip
Training and education are vital to successful implementation of a biometric 
authentication program within your SCADA security system. Employees, 
contractors, and executives are likely to hold misperceptions about biometric 
capture and analysis and may resist its implementation. Furthermore, people 
seeking access must be trained in the effective methods of offering biometric 
samples and the back-up procedures for when they are unable to be authen-
ticated within the system.

www.syngress.com
	
Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security • Chapter 8	
257
Multiple Factor Authentication
Most current security systems require one or more of the following factors. They will 
require that you demonstrate something you know (like a password), something you 
hold (like an identity card or an encryption token), or something you are (like a 
signature or a comparative picture). Other factors can include time of system entry 
and precise global location. For example, your bank requires two factor identifications 
for you to remove money from your own account at an automatic teller machine; the 
machine requires a card that you are holding and a personal identification number 
that you know. However, inside the bank, you may be required to offer two different 
factors of identity: a thumbprint along with your government-issues identification 
card for cashing certain kinds of checks.
What Parts of You Can Be  
Measured for Security Purposes?
Biometric systems measure “something you are” and compare it against a earlier 
sample of the same measurement. Your written signature is considered to be a bio-
metric measurement because the way you write is a physical feature that is relatively 
unique and can be compared and evaluated to past samples. A state driver’s license 
contains an old-school biometric identifier – a picture of your face. Certain biometric 
samples must be offered voluntarily by the person wishing to gain access into a 
system. Fingerprints, hand geometry, and retinal or iris scans fall into this category 
and are the most likely to be used as part of a security system. Some biometric 
measurements like your face or your voice can be taken from a distance. This type of 
public biometric is used by law enforcement but is generally not part of biometric 
authentication systems.
Common Measurements for  
Current Biometric Authentication
The most common biometric security systems for unlocking computer systems and 
secure facilities compare fingerprints or other hand measurements. These systems 
require a person being measured or identified to press his or her finger against the 
reader. Some of these systems record and measure the veins beneath the skin on fingers 
and hands, either as a primary biometric measurement or as an affirmation of viability, 
so that the systems are less likely to be fooled. Similarly, some of the biometric security 

www.syngress.com
258	
Chapter 8 • Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security
systems that use eye measurements require a close reading of the eyes, either for retinal 
vein patterns or for iris patterns. Sanitation of readers can be a significant issue when 
several people are required to authenticate themselves by pressing against readers.
How Does Biometric Comparison Work?
Biometric authentication tools are complicated systems that require detailed set-up 
and ongoing monitoring. A biometric check is not a simple “yes or no” answer like 
some other methods of security analysis. For example, when an automated teller 
machine requests a personal identification number, you either know the number and 
enter it correctly or you do not. If not, the security function refuses your entry. 
By contrast, in biometric analysis, the system first takes a sample of the biometric 
feature that the system administrator has chosen to measure. For the purposes of this 
example, we will assume that the system is capturing fingerprints.
Rather than an easily identifiable “yes or no” variable like the personal identifica-
tion number, the biometric fingerprint reading system either captures a full picture  
of the fingerprint or it captures points of minutia, which are a number of points of 
detail on the curves and lines on the print. Nearly all biometric systems will request 
several initial samples so that a clean sample can be attained and validated. Later, 
when a person wishes to be authenticated under the biometric regime, he or she 
provides a fingerprint to the reader, which captures the print and compares it to the 
samples captured earlier. If the system finds the authentication sample matches the 
initial sample within acceptable parameters, then the person is authenticated by the 
system and allowed access to the protected network or facility.
Because biometric regimes operate by comparing samples and those samples 
often are provided on different capture devices under different conditions, the admin-
istrator of a biometric system must choose the parameters of comparison between 
the original (or “reference”) sample and the access sample. The fingerprint match 
may be considered complete if the authentication sample demonstrates twenty points 
of similarity with the original sample or maybe only ten points of similarity.
This begs the question of why all biometric systems are not organized and cali-
brated to establish the greatest functional degree of certainty that the person who is 
asking to be authenticated is truly the person who offered the initial sample held in 
the biometric system’s memory. The short answer to this question is that the calibra-
tion of biometric systems tends to mark a compromise between strong authentication 
capabilities and practical considerations. The stronger and more difficult the 
­authentication, the more likely that the system will keep appropriately authorized 

www.syngress.com
	
Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security • Chapter 8	
259
people from accessing secure facilities or equipment, therefore causing difficult and 
sometimes expensive work-arounds and alternative access procedures.
These parameters are often calibrated to minimize false positive matches, in 
which case the parameters are tightly defined so fewer matches can occur, or to 
minimize false negative matches, in which case the parameters allow more leeway in 
matching samples. Biometric systems that authenticate consumers in financial transac-
tions tend to be loosely calibrated, allowing more variation in the authentication 
sample to be considered matches of the reference sample. This is because consumers 
have demonstrated little or no tolerance for false negatives. Consumers will not 
tolerate seeing their real finger prints rejected when matched to reference samples.
Biometric captures and comparisons are not perfect and can be stymied by 
variations in the angle that a finger is offered to the capture device, variations in dirt 
or injury to the finger, or even inherent variations in the capture devices themselves. 
Consumers will rebel against a system that repeatedly holds up the speed of their 
transactions. And if consumers will no longer use their biometric authentication, then 
the company installing the system has lost customers and the significant money it 
takes to purchase, install, and train workers on a biometric identification regime. 
Therefore, companies using biometric systems for lower-level financial transactions 
tend to be willing to allow the risk of more false-positive matches so that they 
minimize the possibility of false-negatives.
By contrast, SCADA systems and other protections of vital infrastructure and 
facilities tend to organize their biometric system so that they minimize false positive 
readings. The risks of allowing intruders are greater in this case than the risks of an 
authorized person being forced to call in the supervisor or system administrator and 
achieve authorization in a more personal and time-and-resource-intensive manner.
It would be a mistake to think of biometric authentication regimes as  
simple toggle systems with no allowance for variation. In fact, these regimes are 
Note
How perfect do you need to be? Biometric capture programs allow a wide 
range of choices in determining the amount of detail measured and the 
amount of similarities in comparative samples before the system declares 
a match.

www.syngress.com
260	
Chapter 8 • Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security
­complicated in their structure and intricate in their application. The SCADA  
manager choosing such biometric authentication must be prepared to spend 
resources not only on equipment and software, but also on protecting the conn-
ectivity between the various parts of the biometric capture and comparison 
­infrastructures, on training the affected employees and contractors to correctly use 
the system, and on regular monitoring and calibration to assure the system works 
efficiently for its chosen purpose.
Where Are Biometrics Used in SCADA Systems?
No matter how advanced our technology, managing security for critical infrastruc-
ture always entails human contact. Whether it involves water systems, power grids, 
pharmaceutical manufacturing, or oil and gas, humans manage, maintain, and repair 
various parts of the system and control the overall network. Wherever humans must 
access the system, there lies an opportunity to use biometric authentication.
There are portions of SCADA security that are generally inappropriate for use of 
biometric readers. For example, any imposition of an additional review or authentica-
tion step within the internal readings and operations of SCADA systems would be 
likely to impede the progress of the automated checking system. Therefore, SCADA 
systems would not insert biometric readers, or any other human authentication step, 
into the automated checking process between the centralized control system and 
outlying objects being measured, monitored, and controlled. Furthermore, equipment 
or valve monitoring and control, or any other system that reads and reviews outlying 
and remote portions of the SCADA architecture, is unlikely to benefit from biometric 
authentication devices.
Instead, the parts of a SCADA system most likely to productively use this technol-
ogy include any and all access points for human intervention in the SCADA world. This 
can include access to facilities or computers in the central SCADA control room where 
the operator of a critical infrastructure must regulate access so that only those people 
with authority to act as system managers can reach the controls. Similarly, the remote 
portions of critical infrastructure, whether pipelines, switching stations, or transformers, 
may have biometric readers placed on them for access control and accurate records. 
System operators are not only interested in stopping unauthorized parties from reaching 
the remote ends of critical systems, but also in recording each time someone reaches the 
system. Biometric readers provide an audit trail that is difficult to refute.

www.syngress.com
	
Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security • Chapter 8	
261
Choosing the Best Form of  
Measurement for Your System
The human body contains thousands of possible measuring points, and many of  
these are already used by companies for identification and authentication purposes. 
This portion of the chapter discusses the various available measuring methods and 
provides a method of analysis to determine the best measurement tool for your system. 
In the end, commercial considerations may ultimately control your choice, as some 
methods of physical analysis are available in a more cost effective format than others.
Another principal consideration may be whether the biometric measurement you 
choose for your system is in use by or familiar to another entity. In other words, indus-
try or the government may reach a consensus that entire hand prints or the geometry 
of three fingers are the standard measurement for confirming the identities of people 
in certain situations. At the moment, no such standards exist. However, your decision to 
use a certain biometric system in your own security architecture may be influenced by 
the choice of industry standards or by the selection of biometric systems used by your 
customers, your regulatory agencies, or other portions of your own company.
Biometric Measurements Trigger Recognition
We have always identified each other from physical characteristics. You know your  
father is on the telephone because you recognize his voice. You hear your boss’s distinc-
tive walk from down the hall and quickly try to look busy. You recognize a friend from 
a distance by the way he stands. A person’s whole face is the most common biometric 
identifier and is the one used for official identification; however, even facial recognition 
Tip
Your company’s auditors can be your best friend in securing funding for 
implementation of biometric authentication equipment and software. 
Biometric systems provide a high level of recordation and auditing certainty 
when your company finds it important to establish who has accessed secure 
facilities at particular times. Ask the auditors for support in demonstrating 
the system’s advantages to senior management.

www.syngress.com
262	
Chapter 8 • Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security
has its limitations. Readings depend on the light and the angle of recording, and changes 
in features like hair loss or facial hair can sometimes trick facial recognition systems.
Famously, the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) used facial 
recognition software to attempt to identify and catch criminals at the Super Bowl 
in Tampa, Florida, but were relatively unsuccessful in their attempts. However, they 
were using the technology in a different manner than your company would be if it 
attempted face recognition as a biometric identifier. The FBI was comparing the 
faces captured at certain access points in the Super Bowl to a broad database of tens 
of thousands of facial records and hoping to find a match.
Your company, by contrast, is likely to have the easier task of comparing a face 
captured in a controlled environment with a database of only a few authorized 
individuals to make a positive match. Your company will have the advantage of taking 
the first face picture in the same light and angle as the comparative sample, making a 
positive match more reliable and a false negative match unlikely.
Biometric Measurements  
Useful in SCADA Security Processes
Clearly the most accurate biometric measurement for truly identifying a person 
would be DNA sampling. However, most of us are queasy about providing this level 
of intimacy and this type of information to anyone. Once recorded for security 
purposes, DNA records could be used to investigate health risk and even propensities 
for alcoholism or other physical traits that relate to behaviors.
In addition, taking an accurate DNA sample can be an onerous process involving 
bodily fluids, skin scraping, or the removal of live hair follicles. The comparison can be 
expensive and time consuming, making DNA analysis impractical for most biometric 
security functions, such as permitting or denying access to secure facilities. Finally, your 
company is unlikely to need the incredibly high level of personal identification and 
authentication accuracy provided by DNA testing.
For the standard reasons that biometric authentication is used with SCADA systems, 
a company will not use a body measurement that is not readily readable when an 
employee is dressed for work. Therefore, it is likely that your company would use a 
biometric measurement that is taken from the hand, face, or voice.
Voice analysis generally involves the repetition of certain words and comparing 
them against the same words recorded earlier by the authorized person. Voice systems 

www.syngress.com
	
Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security • Chapter 8	
263
are not as accurate as some other measurements; some voice systems can be tricked 
by a good recording. But voice samples are easy to provide, are non-invasive, and can 
even allow telephone authentications.
Biometric comparisons have been taken of hand measurements for a century. 
Fingerprints are the most well-known measuring source because of their unique nature 
and the fact that they are easy to harvest from the subject. Fingerprint readers are com-
monly available in consumer situations, and fingerprints are being used by the United 
States Army in Iraq and by the United States Immigration Service at our borders.
Another easy hand biometric measures the geometry of blood vessels in the 
proffered finger. These vessels lie just beneath the skin’s surface and are unique to an 
individual. Capturing the measurements of sub-surface blood flow also provides the 
advantage of viability confirmation.
In other words, a finger severed from its original owner doesn’t lose its skin print 
of swirls and loops, but it does lose its blood flow, so measuring active sub-surface 
blood vessels of the finger confirms that the person seeking to be authenticated is the 
live owner of that finger. Another hand measurement currently in commercial use is 
hand geometry, an analysis of the size of a subject’s hand and the relation of fingers 
and thumb to each other and to the rest of the hand.
Disney theme parks are currently using a hand geometry biometric system to 
confirm the identity of ticket holders for admission to the parks. From palm lines to 
knuckle shapes, the hand provides several measurable, unvarying attributes that can be 
used as a basis for biometric authentication systems.
Similarly, the face offers a number of ready samples of unvarying, measurable 
features to be used in biometric authentication. One of the most common examples 
is the iris scan, which analyzes the colored tissue surrounding the pupil in a person’s 
eye and allows for over 200 points of comparison. Like fingerprints, iris patterns are 
set at birth and will not vary during an individual’s life.
Another option is retinal scans, which take photographic measurements of the 
blood vessel patterns in the back of the subject’s eye. Retinal scan technology requires 
a user to remove glasses, position the eye close to the measuring device, and then 
focus on a specific point. Retinal images are especially difficult to fake because 
anyone trying to fool the system would not find it easy to capture the retinal reading 
of another person. The high cost of proprietary hardware for retinal scans makes this 
an impractical measuring system for many applications. Other biometrics above the 
neck include facial geometry and ear shape analysis.

www.syngress.com
264	
Chapter 8 • Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security
Identify Your System Priorities  
Before Choosing a Biometric Application
Choosing a biometric reader should be a function of your company’s priorities and 
the reader’s function in the SCADA system. Is your company’s most significant 
priority convenience of the biometric capture when a person requests system autho-
rization? Many companies are concerned that the capture of biometric samples will 
slow access to vital facilities for repair and control functions; they therefore wish to 
find a system that, once implemented, can quickly and simply pass people through to 
their authorized destination.
You can imagine that, noting an emergency in the water treatment facility, com-
pany management would not want its authorized employees to waste time in access-
ing the facilities that need immediate repair or analysis. In this case, any biometric 
reading that forces its subjects to hold still for several seconds would be problematic. 
Retinal capture is clearly not the best solution.
In this instance, it may be best for your company to capture the biometric read-
ing from a distance. If so, then fingerprints or iris scans would be impossible and you 
should consider voice recognition or facial geometry software. The biometric sample 
comparison settings in this type of situation would probably allow significant varia-
tion between the original sample and the access sample, so that the system unlikely 
would render false negative readings.
Conversely, your company’s priorities may run toward the highest level of  
security possible for access to controls in a nuclear facility, leading your company  
to choose a biometric authentication process that minimizes the possibility of false 
positive readings. Your business would therefore select a system and sample readers 
that are least likely to be fooled by a terrorist attempting entry to the secure facility, 
and you would be willing to trade speed of access for certainty of authorization.  
In this case, a retinal scanning system may be the best match for access control,  
while distance face readers would not be.
Always remember that the biometric authentication is used as part of a larger, 
more complex system. If your company plans to implement an intense security regime, 
it could always measure different sets of biometrics at different locations. For example, 
they could use voice recognition to enter the facility, while requiring retinal scans at 
the door to the control room or fingerprint readers to access the control computers.

www.syngress.com
	
Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security • Chapter 8	
265
Of course, your company’s priorities in choosing biometric measurements may be 
driven by entirely administrative concerns, such as cost, available equipment, ease of 
implementation, the need for simplicity, or problematic environmental issues.  
No company can brag of limitless resources.
While many organizations aspire to implement the best possible security solutions, 
they may have the resources only for the lower-cost solutions. In addition, an enter-
prise looking to purchase a biometric authorization function for its SCADA security 
regime can choose only from the solutions available at the time from reputable 
­vendors. Creating new hardware and software is likely to be economically impossible, 
therefore restricting choices to those available within a company’s price range.
Often, tried and true methods like fingerprint analysis may be the best solution. 
They can provide a high level of security while using equipment that has been tested 
in other environments.
Biometric technology is often viewed as a cutting edge solution, and people who 
ride the cutting edge are frequently hurt. They may suffer because the technology is 
untested and does not work as well as everyone had hoped. They may suffer because 
the technology is overly complex and does not integrate well into a SCADA security 
system. They may suffer because the technology is not easy to use and the company 
employees are constantly denied the access they need. The most valuable and practical 
decision may involve choosing a system that can demonstrate years of predictable 
behavior and that is understood by all participants.
The company must also consider where and how the biometric readers will be 
used in the overall security system. Important considerations for allowing access to 
SCADA security facility and systems can include how the biometric components 
work within the system. Where are the readers placed and how are they monitored? 
Will the person seeking access be likely to be carrying papers or tools and therefore 
not be able to offer free hands to the system? Then an eye or ear scanner or voice 
recognition system may be the best choice.
If the reader is installed in an outdoor environment, how will the equipment and 
the test subject be affected by the weather? An oil industry technician seeking access to 
a pipeline facility north of the Artic Circle should not be expected to remove his gloves 
and expose his hands when the temperature may be 50 degrees below zero. A power 
company technician attempting to reach a switching station during a hurricane should 
not be expected to hold still long enough for retinal scanners to confirm his identity.

www.syngress.com
266	
Chapter 8 • Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security
Voices can be muffled and overridden in busy sites or by high winds on the open 
plains. The human element is not the only vulnerable variable when reading biometric 
signs outdoors. Biometric readers placed outside and exposed to the elements cannot 
be expected to continually function unaffected by their environment, whether those 
elements are excessive heat, cold, moisture, or corrosion.
When selecting the type of biometric measurement that your company will 
­capture, all of the company’s priorities must be considered and weighed against the 
administrative realities of the SCADA system that your company is protecting and the 
budget that is available to spend. However, whether you decide to measure eyes, ears, 
faces, hands, or voices, the decision should match the objectives of your security 
­system. Map your companies SCADA security priorities to the strengths and weak-
nesses of the many biometric capture options. Biometric security capture devices offer 
several choices to match the human authentication needs of any SCADA infrastructure.
Where are Biometric  
Authentication Regimes Vulnerable?
Biometric authentication systems have several points of vulnerability. This chapter does 
not address vulnerabilities common to any SCADA security system, like brute force 
attacks with a fire ax on the door of a secure facility or attempts to disable a system so 
that its backup methods can be exploited. While these may be common methods of 
attacking a SCADA security regime, this chapter will only examine those vulnerabili-
ties unique to or characteristic of SCADA systems with biometric components. These 
include both physical attacks that attempt to replicate biometric impressions and 
software attacks that require sophistication in computer and database management.
Tricking the Biometric Capture Device
The most commonly considered access point to compromise a biometric system 
would be at the end reader. This is the point most easily accessible to any scammer 
and the closest point to the target. In other words, if the scammer seeking access to a 
secure facility knew a specific person who was authorized to access the facility (and 
whose biometric comparative data was stored for authentication purposes), then the 
scammer could attempt to steal or mimic the biometric reading that would pass 
comparison. If the scammer knew that the system required fingerprint access, he 
could try to recreate the fingerprint of the authorized person and offer it for com-
parison at the capture site.

www.syngress.com
	
Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security • Chapter 8	
267
Using complicated tools and resins to pick up, reverse, and resubmit a person’s 
fingerprint to the biometric reader without the person being present are the science 
fiction methods of Mission Impossible or CSI. Other methods of tricking the reader 
could include removing the finger that is needed for authentication or simply bring-
ing the authorized person to the access point under duress and forcing him to proffer 
his print to be authenticated. A Japanese researcher made headlines when he demon-
strated a method of scamming a certain brand of fingerprint reader using gummi 
bears to capture and offer the authenticating print. 
Clearly, biometric readers that include viability confirmation, like eye scanners that 
shift light ranges and measure for pupil dilation or finger scanners that read for blood 
flow beneath the skin’s surface, are harder to fool by some of these methods. Similarly, 
certain voice capture systems include various tactics designed to thwart scammers 
Notes from the Underground…
How Gummi Bears Defeat Fingerprint Scanners
Japanese cryptographer Tsutomu Matsumoto of Yokohama National University 
published his findings on how fingerprint recognition scanners were fooled 
eighty percent of the time using a molded finger made of gelatine. Matsumoto 
removed latent fingerprints from a glass, enhanced the print with fumes from 
Super Glue, and then photographed the prints with a digital camera. He used 
Photoshop software to further enhance the contrast of the fingerprint image, 
and he printed the enhanced photo onto a transparency sheet with an inject 
printer. To finish the process, Matsumoto used the printed transparency to 
etch the fingerprint into copper and pressed it into a gelatine finger mold. He 
was able to achieve the same effect by pressing a live finger into a mold and 
creating a gelatine finger from the mold.
Security expert Bruce Schneier addressed this revelation in his May 15, 2002, 
Crypto-Gram Newsletter, stating, “ Gummy fingers can even fool sensors being 
watched by guards. Simply form the clear gelatin finger over your own. This lets 
you hide it as you press your own finger onto the sensor. After it lets you in, eat 
the evidence.” Schneier also reminds security administrators to be wary of the 
overblown “ unbreakable security” claims of biometric scan manufacturers.

www.syngress.com
268	
Chapter 8 • Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security
using voice recordings to beat the system. Capture units that read internal measure-
ments, like blood vessel patterns in the eye, hand, or earlobe, are much more difficult 
to beat, because capturing or even perceiving the biometric reading would take more 
than just a bold spirit and a few simple tools. Copying it would be nearly impossible.
Electronic Manipulation  
of the Authentication Process
This leads to the next point of vulnerability in biometric authentication: electronic 
sample or database manipulation. Up to this point, we have been discussing meth-
ods of faking or reproducing biometric samples. However, these security systems  
are ultimately networked computers that compare an electronic sample against a 
database.
Biometric authentication systems are based on comparisons of one electronic file 
(representing an original sample measurement of the person’s physical characteristic) 
with a second electronic file (also representing a measurement of a person’s same 
physical characteristic). A smart criminal with computer experience and access to the 
system could trick the system into fooling itself by suggesting that the files contain-
ing mismatched biometric samples actually match. Thus, rather than attempting to 
copy or spoof a real biometric measurement, a scammer’s best method of tricking 
the system may be to manipulate the electronics so that the computer perceives an 
electronic match when none exists.
This effect could be managed by building a loop inside the database so that the 
system software either compares the authorization sample with an exact duplicate of 
the same file or conversely compares the initial test sample against an exact duplicate 
of itself. The system would register an authorized sample whether or not one existed, 
allowing system or facility access to an unauthorized person.
Another method of tricking the system would be to short circuit the reader so 
that every file looked like a match. A long time might pass before SCADA systems 
administrators would recognize that the remote reader at the door of the secure 
room was never turning away any person who asked for authorization. In most cases, 
only people who are authorized would request to be confirmed by the biometric 
capture device, meaning that it would not be out of the ordinary for the system to 
proceed for days or even weeks without denying access to anyone.
If the system administrator trusted the software, then this hack could allow 
repeated access to the secure facility without system denial. Similarly, the database of 
initial biometric samples could become compromised if a criminal found a way to 

www.syngress.com
	
Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security • Chapter 8	
269
bypass the entire database and send a message of affirmative match every time a 
person offered a biometric sample to the capture devices.
Similarly, the computer-literate scammer wishing to fool a biometric system could 
also electronically plant a file in the database that he knew he could match at the 
biometric scanning device. This method could allow the criminal to insert his own 
fingerprint file or retinal scan so that he would be granted access when he offered his 
body for measurement. Once again, unless the system’s own internal controls were 
strong, the system administrator may never know that the database was compromised, 
and the scammer could come and go as he pleased without being detected.
Finally, data files in the initial sample database could be stolen, examined, and 
copied, so that the criminals would know exactly what to offer the capture device. 
This method of trickery is not entirely internal to the biometric system, but it could 
not be accomplished without compromising data security within the system software.
None of these methods of defrauding biometric systems would be simple, and 
most involve highly specialized knowledge and a manner of accessing the internal 
workings of a biometric system; however, each vulnerability can be exploited unless 
the biometric system and the security regime as a whole contain internal checks to 
confirm the continued integrity of the data and of the operational software.
Identity Theft with  
Biometric Files: Capturing Your Essence
Some exploitations of vulnerabilities within biometric systems are not necessarily 
aimed at compromising the security of the SCADA security structure. In this world 
of increasing identity theft, the capture of another person’s biometric signature profile 
may be the ultimate form of identity theft.
Note
Protecting the internal integrity of your biometric security software and the 
corresponding databases is a crucial element in assuring system effectiveness. 
Insist that your biometric capture system vendor demonstrates how integrity 
is maintained and monitored, and schedule (and document) regular software 
and data integrity reviews when your biometric system is in use.

www.syngress.com
270	
Chapter 8 • Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security
Once biometric signatures become more commonly used for identification in 
financial and governmental transactions, then stealing biometric profiles may become 
an important crime. As governments increasingly demand biometric proof for trans-
border travel and financial services companies require biometric signatures for large 
transactions, identity thieves will need to consider stealing biometric measurements.
Presumptions of Accuracy
Unfortunately, due to the general assumption that biometric systems are always 
accurate, it would be very difficult to prove that you did not participate in a transac-
tion if your biometric signature was used to complete the transaction. When faced 
with the fact that the person receiving a certain loan presented your fingerprint as 
verification of identity, how do you combat the presumption of your presence? This 
possibility is not simply theoretical, as we learned when the FBI detained an Oregon 
man for participating in the Madrid terrorist train bombings based on a similarity of 
fingerprint evidence, when, in fact, the suspect was thousands of miles away at the 
time of the bombing.
How Can We Replace That Finger?
In addition, theft of a biometric signature is even more dangerous than any other  
data theft for both the person it identifies and the company holding and using the 
­biometric file. If other security data is stolen, like a bank-issued personal identification 
number or the customer-chosen password, then both sets of numbers can be changed. 
However, when a photograph of a person’s right index finger print is stolen and used 
to fraudulently authenticate identity, that person cannot be issued a new fingerprint. 
Once the biometric genie leaves the bottle, there may be no chance to force it back.
The consequences are similarly tragic for the company whose biometric database 
has been compromised. If the company has spent hundreds of thousands of dollars 
building an authentication system around fingerprint files and those files are com-
pletely compromised, then the biometric system may no longer be trustworthy, and 
fixing the problem is not likely to be easy. The company may have to scrap the entire 
system because it can no longer be trusted, and it can not be reorganized to accept a 
different form of biometric reading. Even worse is a loss of trust. Once a biometric 
system is compromised, then its users may never trust it again, even if the system can 
be technically rehabilitated.

www.syngress.com
	
Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security • Chapter 8	
271
Measuring Minutia Can Be  
Safer Than Storing a Whole Biometric Photograph
For these reasons, operators of biometric authentication systems must build policies 
and procedures to ensure the integrity of the data within the network, and must 
create special barriers to access of the biometric data files. Choosing a system that 
operates by analyzing various points of minutia from a fingerprint or an iris, rather 
than a full picture of the biological feature makes it more likely that your company 
could survive a loss or theft of biometric data with the system intact.
When your company uses minutia, it could change the number and type of data 
collected to make the compromised data worthless to anyone who might steal it. 
While shifting the system in this manner would entail taking new readings from  
all biometric authentication system participants, it would not necessarily involve 
Tools & Traps…
Avoid the Extensive Database
Building, maintaining, and protecting a database of captured biometric signa-
tures can be expensive and risky. If someone broke into the biometric database, 
the entire security system would be compromised. To avoid the problems associ-
ated with storing and protecting the personal identifiers of thousands of peo-
ple in one place, some biometric technology allows your company to operate 
without aggregating all the captured data. These systems capture and maintain 
an original fingerprint on a portable reader held by the authorized person. 
When the person reaches a checkpoint, he swipes his finger across the portable 
reader, which includes a stored copy of his biometric reference sample. The 
portable devise, no larger than a standard keychain fob, reads his thumbprint, 
compares files and sends a signal to the system if the samples match.
This method of capture provides two factor authentication: the finger-
print comparison and the portable device itself. It can be an efficient and 
effective method of implementing biometrics without the aggregation risk. If 
a device is stolen, then only one personal sample is compromised.

www.syngress.com
272	
Chapter 8 • Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security
­scrapping the entire system. Whereas, if a full photograph of the biometric attribute 
was stolen from a security system, the entire system may not be able to be 
rehabilitated.
Anticipating Legal and  
Policy Changes That Will Affect Biometrics
When choosing the elements of a SCADA security system, the security executive 
must consider how the system components work together and what special issues 
each component brings into the picture. What aspects of the SCADA security create 
the most significant risks for administration and trust in the system?
Biometric components offer a level of complexity that can be problematic for 
implementation and operation. Biometric readers are famously more fickle and more 
sensitive to environmental factors than simpler input devices. Unlike password sys-
tems that operate in a clear “ match or no match” environment, biometric systems 
provide a sample comparison that must be calibrated between the need to avoid both 
false positives and false negatives.
However, unlike nearly all other forms of data entry and verification for 
­authenticating people, biometric security brings a non-technical, social element to 
your defenses. Whenever people are forced to offer and leave a piece of themselves  
in the system, they will worry what that system is taking from them.
For the past several years, the California legislature has introduced bills to limit or 
stop the use of biometrics. Soldiers have sued the U.S. military to stop the use of 
biometric identification programs, and labor unions have sued companies to stop the 
forced biometric capture of workers’ physical data for security purposes. As personal 
privacy becomes a recognized right under the laws of the United States, then the 
potential harm of forcing people to participate in biometric capture and storage gains 
the attention of privacy advocates.
Currently, United States privacy laws leave a significant loophole related to 
biometric capture and maintenance of personal data. The Health Insurance Portability 
and Accessibility Act of 1995 (HIPAA) carved out a sphere of privacy in personal 
health care information. Doctors and hospitals must now protect all personally 
­identifiable health care data received from their patients.

www.syngress.com
	
Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security • Chapter 8	
273
The data relating to a person’s medical condition cannot be used for any purpose 
beyond its original function for diagnosing or treating the person, unless the patient 
gives permission to use it in another specific manner. This law applies to other infor-
mation receivers in the health care universe, such as drug stores, insurance companies, 
and the administrators of company health plans.
However, the protections apply only to data captured in the process of delivering 
health care. They do not apply to data captured for the purposes of security authenti-
cation. Therefore, if your employer takes a sample of your DNA as part of a diabetes 
screening sponsored by the company health plan, then that DNA sample is protected 
from disclosure under HIPAA.
Conversely, if the same company takes a DNA sample from you for the purpose 
of identification and authentication in a biometric security system, then that DNA 
sample is not protected under HIPAA or any other current federal law in the United 
States, and the company may be able to use the data for other purposes or even to 
sell it to other companies.
This leaves a gaping hole in protections for personal data relating to a person’s 
body, health, or other physical traits, and the hole in data protection can be applied  
to the most personal and private data about a person. Physical information, especially 
any sample that allows harvesting of DNA, can reveal an enormous amount of sensi-
tive information, from race and parentage, to likelihood of heart disease or high 
cholesterol, to behavioral propensities. Personal data about individuals has a value, and 
a company capturing this data may be tempted to use it in ways never intended by 
the person who offered it.
At some point, the law is likely to change to protect biometric samples. In the 
meantime, privacy activists and other people concerned about loss of their personal 
data could create a hostile environment for use of biometrics in security. In this case, 
collecting biometric signatures would be more difficult for the security department. 
In addition, various U.S. states have introduced laws to regulate biometric capture 
and storage. Your company should include the possibility of regulation in its risk 
calculations when deciding whether to include biometric components into its 
SCADA security system.

www.syngress.com
274	
Chapter 8 • Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security
Summary
Biometric authentication regimes can solve important problems within your company’s 
SCADA security system, but they are not helpful in all situations, and they present the 
system administrator with unique issues and risks. In a SCADA security network, 
biometric components are useful only at the edges of the network where people 
interact with the SCADA security and where secure facilities and equipment need 
authorized access. The variety of biometric readings, both invasive and remote, demon-
strates that biometric security can meet a wide array of priorities within your overall 
security program.
However, each biometric authentication capture device provides its own set of 
choices, such as whether it is more important to your company to allow ready access 
in an emergency or whether it is more important take extreme steps to exclude any 
unauthorized people from accessing secure facilities. These devices are not foolproof 
and can be beaten at a number of different points of vulnerability, including tricking 
the scanners or reworking the system software. Storage and protection of biometric 
samples can also be hazardous. Finally, biometric systems are not yet so widespread 
that the law and regulations for biometric capture can be expected to remain 
­constant over the several years of your company’s investment in these systems.
Solutions Fast Track
Understand the Strengths and  
Weaknesses of Biometric Solutions
Know that biometrics is appropriate only in limited circumstances in 
SCADA security.
Analyze the number of authentication factors needed.
Make realistic choices concerning the physical traits measured for identity.
Choose Biometric Technology  
That Matches Your Security Priorities
Is speed of access or certainty of authentication more important?
What current, cost-effective product meets your company’s needs?
Factor complexity and environmental concerns into your decision.
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
	
Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security • Chapter 8	
275
Learn About Your Biometric System’s Vulnerabilities
Systems mteasuring physical characteristics external to the body may be 
fooled by presenting a false sample.
Biometric systems may be attacked through their software systems.
Data and software integrity is critical and must be monitored and confirmed 
on a regular basis in biometric scanning and comparison systems.
Prepare for Social and Legal Changes
Some people refuse to provide invasive biometric samples for any purpose, 
including security.
Current U.S law contains loopholes relating to storage and use of physical 
data for security purposes.
Expect changes in law and regulation of biometrics that could affect the use 
of this technology in your SCADA security system.
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛
˛

www.syngress.com
276	
Chapter 8 • Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security
Frequently Asked Questions
Q:	What is biometric security authentication?
A:	It is application of the science of measuring living beings, humans in this case, 
and identifying/authenticating a person using some physical characteristic so that 
the person may interface with the system in an authorized manner.
Q:	Where can biometric authentication be used in SCADA security?
A:	Biometric authentication regimes are appropriate anywhere that humans interact 
with the system, but are most often used in authorizing access to secure facilities 
and equipment, either central or remote.
Q:	What physical characteristic should my company be measuring?
A:	This depends on your company’s security and administrative priorities. 
Fingerprint capture is common among vendor systems and is well-accepted 
by the general public. Voice and face recognition can be taken from a distance. 
Retinal scanning is difficult to spoof.
Q:	Where are biometric authentication systems vulnerable to fraud?
A:	Biometric capture systems may be attacked by providing a false but similar sample 
for authentication. Ultimately, biometric security is based on software compari-
sons of electronic files, where the files represent a physical characteristic of the 
measured person. Therefore, the systems are vulnerable to several types of software 
and database integrity attacks.
Q:	How is security measured in biometric authentication systems?
A:	A biometric authentication system is considered secure if it does not produce a 
level of false-positive readings or false-negative readings that are unacceptable to 
the system manager.

www.syngress.com
	
Biometric Authentication for SCADA Security • Chapter 8	
277
Q:	What can a system manager do to minimize the possibility that a biometric 
database will be compromised with biometric files stolen?
A:	The manager could choose a system that stores its biometric files separately and 
remotely. The manager could also choose a system that only measures certain 
minutia of a characteristic, so that the loss of that data will not compromise the 
entire regime.
Q:	What United States laws or regulations address the privacy of biometric samples 
taken for security purposes?
A:	At this writing, biometric samples taken for security purposes are not explicitly 
treated as protected private information by U.S. statutes or regulations.

279
Appendix
Personal, Workforce, 
and Family 
Preparedness
Phil Drake is Communications Manager for the Charlotte Observer in Charlotte, 
N. C. The Observer is a daily newspaper that serves readers throughout North 
and South Carolina. In addition to the newspaper, the Charlotte Observer 
produces specialty magazines, voice information, and Internet services.
Phil is responsible for all aspects of communications at Observer opera-
tions in both Carolinas, including telephone and data communications, 
wireless systems, conventional and trunked two-way radio, and satellite 
systems. He is also responsible for business continuity and disaster response 
planning and related budgeting. He is responsible for providing emer-
gency communications facilities for reporters and photographers covering 
breaking news stories.
His background includes photojournalism, mainframe computer support, 
network management, telecommunications planning and management, and 
business continuity planning. Phil is a former chairman of the Contingency 
Planning Association of the Carolinas and currently serves as a Board Advisor 
of the organization. He is a Certified Business Continuity Professional with 
the Disaster Recovery Institute International.
Phil speaks to public and private sector groups and has been interviewed by 
and written for a number of national publications on a wide range of emer-
gency communication issues, and business/homeland defense planning. He 
leads business continuity training seminars for both the public and private sec-
tors, and he has provided project management in business continuity. He has 
advised major national clients in emergency planning, workforce protection, 
threat assessment, and incident response for a number of large national 
corporations.
He enjoys backpacking and spending time in the outdoors. He also has taught 
outdoor living skills to youth group leaders. He was appointed by the North 
Carolina Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources 
as a voting member of the NC Geological Survey Advisory Committee.

www.syngress.com
280	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
Introduction
In this chapter, we’ll discuss the need for a personal, workplace, and family emer-
gency plan. We’ll cover the basics of creating a plan for you and your family, identify-
ing and obtaining the basic supplies you will need in an emergency, and why being 
prepared is so vitally important to you, your family, your community, and the nation. 
We’ll also discuss workforce preparedness and the new urgency that applies to this 
important area in business continuity planning.
Threats
We live in a time and a nation where one can no longer take a “neutral position” 
regarding preparedness. As individuals, families, and workgroups, we are either an asset 
or a liability for our communities and nation when disaster strikes. To be an asset, we 
must be prepared.
You must be able to care for yourself and your family or you must depend on 
others to take care of you when disaster strikes. For too long, we have abandoned 
one of the founding principles that has made this nation great: self-reliance. “It’s not 
my job” or “we have people to take care of that” when discussing preparedness is a 
far too common response.
Being prepared is having the ability to take care of yourself and your family at 
home, work, or school during an emergency situation. Likewise, business and govern-
ment agencies must prepare to keep operating and supplying the goods and services 
that our communities need so as to return to normal life quicker.
Since September 11, 2001, our nation and the world have awakened to the very real 
threat of terrorism. While terrorist acts against the United States were not new, the scale of 
the coordinated attack of September 11 finally made even the most skeptical citizen realize 
we are a primary target for politically or religiously motivated acts of criminal violence.
Note
A family that has a disaster plan, supplies, and know-how in order to com-
fortably shelter in-place or evacuate during a severe storm, natural disaster, 
or other emergency will lessen the impact of whatever the emergency 
might bring.

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
281
While terrorism demands constant vigilance, so do the other threats that cause a 
tremendous loss in lives and dollars. Natural disasters, accidents, workplace violence, 
and crime also require our constant attention and preparedness.
While the average citizen can do little to stop these catastrophic events, they 
can prepare now to lessen the impact on themselves, their families, and their work 
environment. The first step in this preparedness process is to accept the fact that  
“it can happen to me” and “it can happen here.”
Since Hurricane Katrina ravaged the Gulf Coast in 2005, FEMA and other 
government agencies have been clear in warning all who will listen that local state 
and federal government resources cannot save everyone. They cannot supply all  
the requested food, water, medical supplies, manpower, and infrastructure repairs 
requested in a widespread disaster in a matter of a few hours or days. With such 
things as the Katrina recovery, for example, we need to include months and years 
in our recovery projections.
For many years, the official recommendation was that you must be able to take care 
of yourself and your family for a minimum of at least 72 hours. Actually, two weeks is  
a more realistic estimate nowadays, given that the threat of a worldwide pandemic is a 
growing concern.
Public health experts are warning us that a major health crisis brewing in Asia 
will affect the entire world. We are being told that when a pandemic hits our nation 
(not if  ), it will be a very different disaster from any we have experienced in recent 
history. A pandemic will not only bring interruptions in key services and supply lines, 
but in the way we work and live for 12 to 18 months, perhaps longer. How can a 
business survive if the normally reliable electrical power, phone service, customers, 
suppliers, and workforce are missing?
How will our lives change when the schools and shopping malls close? In a highly 
contagious pandemic, few of us would want to find ourselves standing in a line to 
receive food or other basic supplies.
Our workplaces will change dramatically. The new terms of “social distancing,” 
“lone worker,” “virtual office,” and “virtual workforce” will become commonplace. 
Not only must a workforce be prepared for power and communications outages,  
it must now be prepared to use new tactics, including social distancing, family 
preparedness, sheltering-in-place, and workforce continuity to reduce the impact  
of this new threat.
Preparing yourself and your family for emergencies requires more than just good 
intentions and a willingness to take care of yourself and your loved ones. Being prepared 

www.syngress.com
282	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
means much more than just having cash in your pocket and a “good” credit card ready 
to go. Preparedness means having a plan and the resources on hand to be totally self-
sufficient during a natural disaster or other major emergency until normalcy is restored.
The Internet has made a wealth of family and workplace preparedness material 
available. “ready.gov,” The American Red Cross, and other “official information” 
sites now offer information for a variety of age and reading levels. Official govern-
ment pamphlets and booklets promote family preparedness and many commercial 
publications discuss this important topic. Being informed is important, but being ready  
is absolutely imperative.
“Workforce continuity” is defined as planning to have employees or contractors 
support the core business functions regardless of their work location. If the workplace 
is unreachable due to weather, road conditions, or some other workplace emergency, 
the employees can work from alternate locations or even from home. If an employee 
can’t work for whatever reason, “workforce continuity” planning means training a 
backup to be ready to fill in for the missing worker. This may be other company 
employees or in some cases, outside contractors.
Workforce continuity also entails planning for a dramatic increase of absenteeism 
rates. If 40 or 50 percent of the workforce cannot or will not report for physical or 
virtual work, how does the enterprise survive?
It’s smart to plan for the unexpected and use the Internet and wireless access to it 
to continue doing business. Virtual call centers and other technology depend heavily 
on the Internet and communications networks. What happens if those networks and 
other infrastructures are unavailable or so overtaxed that they become useless for 
mission critical use?
After all, what is the total capacity of the Internet? Internet World Stats reports that  
as of late 2006 there were 1,093 billion Internet users in the world. Now let’s suppose 
that the majority of these users are currently working at home to support their 
employer’s operations or are trying to keep abreast of the latest emergency information. 
At what point does the Internet cease to be a useful transport mechanism due to the 
demand for bandwidth? Probably long before the last user signs on.
A business that depends primarily on the Internet as a solution to a large-scale 
disaster or manmade crisis will be disappointed. Virtual office and a mobile workforce 
are ideal solutions to many of today’s environmental and business scheduling problems. 
However, a solution that depends heavily on public infrastructure for success is 
doomed from the beginning. The only dependable solution is a reliable workforce 
willing to be there when needed to keep the business running.

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
283
Business leaders must understand that they we now face the very real possibility 
of not having enough employees to keep the business “in business.”
Let’s talk for a while about what’s really important in your life, and what’s really 
important in your family’s life:  YOU. Do you have a personal emergency plan? Does 
your family? Most individuals and families believe they will think about this when 
the time comes. Unfortunately, when a disaster strikes, there is little warning and the 
“planning” gets replaced by panic and uncoordinated responses to the event.
Your Personal Preparedness Plan
Let’s start with that most valuable asset: “you.” You need to have a plan, and you need 
to make sure your family and co-workers know what that plan is. If they are part of 
your plan, they surely need to know that now. And yes, just as with any plan, yours 
needs to be tested routinely.
We’ll discuss workplace, home, and family preparedness a bit later in this chapter. 
It is vitally important to remember that personal, family, workplace, and community 
emergency preparedness complement each other.
Most of us spend the majority of our lives between home and work. If an emer-
gency is preceded by a warning period (a winter storm or hurricane), you will have 
time to plan your response. In a winter storm, for instance, you’ll probably stay at 
home or will be instructed to report later than usual by your employer. In the event of 
a fire, earthquake, or other unexpected emergency, your response must be immediate. 
You must act quickly to save your life and perhaps the lives of others. 
The first step in your plan must be the protection of your own life. Personal 
safety experts will tell you to “always be aware of your surroundings.” That’s excellent 
advice. Look around; walk around your home and workplace. Where is trouble most 
likely to occur? Is flooding from a nearby creek or river possible? Are you near any 
major railroads or highways where transportation accidents may impact you?
Tip
Your personal goal is to make sure you survive and remain healthy, regardless 
of what the emergency situation may be. Getting out of a dangerous situation 
and staying out of the way are paramount. Being prepared will reduce your 
mental and physical stress levels and increase your ability to assist others.

www.syngress.com
284	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
Do the same “walkabout” inside, too. Are there dangers you’ve ignored in the 
past? Could any of these be used against you and/or your home or workplace?  
Be aware of unlocked exit doors, trip hazards, and blocked exits.
Wherever you work, know the environment, and if the situation requires, know 
how to get out quickly. Make sure you know where the emergency exits are, and if 
the one closest to you is blocked, where the next closest exit is located. How long 
does it take you to exit your facility? Do these exits have battery-operated escape 
lights? If not, provide your own with a small flashlight or chemical light sticks.
If you work in a multistory building, are you physically able to walk down the 
exit stairs? If not, make sure you can. Even if you are in good physical shape, stairs 
can be a challenge. If you are physically unable to walk down stairs because of medical 
reasons, find “escape buddies” to help you get down or check with your employer  
to determine the locations of any identified evacuation safe havens.
If you’re shopping, at the movies, spending the night away from home, or conducting 
personal business in a building you’re not familiar with, know how to get out. 
Having a personal preparedness plan will make you and your loved ones safer. 
After all, they depend on you. A personal plan should include the following:
A commitment to be aware of your surroundings and current conditions
Alternate routes to and from home, work, or school
An emergency contact card with all family contact information
Knowing the locations of fire, police, and emergency medical facilities near 
your work, home, and routes of travel
If you commute, keep a spare car key hidden on the vehicle in case a build-
ing evacuation at work forces you to leave everything behind.
Everyone needs a few basic resources if circumstances strand you en route to 
home/work/school. (See the next section on the subject of escape packs.)
■
■
■
■
■
■
Warning
Wherever you are, always know where the emergency exits are located. They 
are required by law to be clearly marked. In a hotel, I always find the exits 
before turning in for the evening.

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
285
Always know the location of the nearest fire escape in your workplace, 
school, or hotel if traveling.
Familiarize yourself with the emergency exits and procedures on commercial 
buses, trains, and aircraft.
Remember my 3G rule: “Get out, Get away, and Get in touch.” Regardless of 
where you may be, always remember to get out of danger, get away from the 
danger, and let your family, friends, and employers know you are safe.
Don’t get caught standing outside your workplace due to an evacuation and 
wondering “now what”? Your personal response plan must cover not only safely 
getting out, but safely getting away if necessary. If you drive to work, where are your 
vehicle keys? Can you get into your vehicle if your keys are in your coat, hanging 
beside your desk? Hide a key under, around, or near your vehicle. In the case of 
keyless entry, keep an ignition key hidden inside the vehicle. If you’re carpooling, 
make sure everyone in the group knows how to get in, too.
One of the simplest ways to make sure you have basic items to help you respond 
in an emergency situation is to pack them now before you need them. This small 
“escape pack” is designed to help get you out of trouble if an emergency interrupts 
your normal routine. I’ll also explain what these items are since I’m not a big 
believer in buying (or carrying) a bunch of “stuff” just for the sake of doing so. You 
can also purchase commercially available kits that provide some of the same items. 
However, if you assemble this kit yourself, you’ll be more familiar with the contents 
and how to use them.
This is not a “survival kit” in the general context. It will supply your immediate 
needs in case you find yourself “on the street” unexpectedly due to an emergency in 
your workplace. All of these items can easily be packed in a small nylon pouch 
generally sold as “camera case.”
The Escape Pack
Thirty-minute high intensity light sticks (two)
Compass (basic and small)
Metropolitan or area map
Disposable plastic rain poncho
Emergency contact card
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
286	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
Small note pad
Pencil
Matches (one book)
Aluminum foil (12×24 inches)
Important phone numbers
Large handkerchief or bandana
Change (quarters for payphone or newspaper racks)
Extra cash (a $20 bill works nicely)
Critical medication (one or two doses)
Large 3×4 gauze pads and small roll of ½-inch adhesive tape
Four Large adhesive bandages (Band-Aids)
Small pocketknife
Energy bar or some hard candy
Ziplock bags (two)
Vehicle and/or home key if needed
Bag to carry the above items
Description of Kit Contents
Light sticks  Used for escape illumination in office hallways and stairwells.
Map and compass  If you must walk home or to safety, you’ll be able to 
navigate your way. Practice this important skill before you need it.
Plastic rain poncho  A inexpensive plastic poncho will keep you dry and 
help you retain body heat.
Emergency contact card  Keep those key emergency phone numbers, 
family, and out-of-area emergency contact numbers written down and 
handy. In a stressful situation, don’t rely on your memory. Your cell phone  
or PDA may have been left behind, or might not be functioning.
Small note pad and pencil  Important for writing messages, notes, or  
observations. A pencil will not leak in the summer or stop working in cold  
or rain.
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
287
Matches (one book)  Can be used for starting a fire for warmth, or light-
ing up a cigarette if it will make you feel better.
Aluminum foil (12×24 inches)  Has a hundred uses. First aid, signaling, 
and food preparation are three that come to mind quickly.
Large handkerchief or bandana  For first aid, keeping your head warm, 
and cleaning glasses.
Change and extra cash  Quarters for payphones (if working) or newspaper 
racks. Newspapers provide a host of uses. Extra cash in case ATMs aren’t 
working or merchants cannot use checks or read credit cards.
Workforce Preparedness
While the subject of workforce preparedness can fill an entire book, I want to devote 
some time to discuss its importance and offer some suggestions to help begin the 
planning process.
The most valuable asset any enterprise or organization has, regardless of its size, is 
its workforce. These are men and women who make a company run day-to-day and 
create ideas and products to serve its customers and communities. Until recently, the 
majority of business continuity efforts revolved around processes and systems that the 
company depends on to keep operating. Little attention has been paid to the most 
critical support process, those employees and their families who make the enterprise 
successful.
Throughout this section I use the descriptions of workplace, organization, agency, 
business, employer, and enterprise. These are generic terms of that place you call “work.” 
I realize there are thousands of public and private sector operations and agencies that, 
while not motivated by profit, do have products, services, and delivery obligations.
The threat dynamics have changed dramatically in the twenty-first century and 
every aspect of our normal lives is now considered a possible target for terrorism. 
■
■
■
■
Tip
Your vehicle is an excellent place to store some emergency supplies, including 
your “escape pack.” These items will be available in case of a workplace 
evacuation or other emergency away from home.

www.syngress.com
288	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
Senior managers must realize that interruptions to the normal flow of business may 
include community evacuations, workplace violence, lengthy supply chain interrup-
tions, mass casualty situations, and direct attacks by individuals or groups using 
unconventional weapons. Do not assume your workplace is safe from these new 
threats, or old ones such as fire, natural disasters, or criminal activity.
An organization that only prepares for the occasional power failure, fire, hurri-
cane, winter storm, or work stoppage is no longer exercising due diligence in the 
protection of the assets of that enterprise. Every organization, large or small, must 
have a business defense plan (business continuity plan) that includes protection and 
preparedness of the core operational functions, employees, and their families. In a 
community-wide emergency or disaster, companies and public agencies need their 
employees to return to work as quickly as possible to limit losses. A company or 
government agency may provide critical services that will be vitally necessary for the 
recovery of your community from the event. That company or agency must be pre-
pared to continue operations. If an employee must choose between family and 
­workplace, family will win every time. Senior executives, managers, and agency 
directors can no longer tell their employees that “we expect you to be here when  
we need you, under any circumstances” and be assured of a successful recovery.
Any organization that seeks to prepare their key processes for unexpected inter-
ruptions must maintain a prepared workforce to support those critical functions.
You may have heard the relatively new term workforce continuity. It’s defined as 
having an uninterruptible and trained workforce that can continue the critical 
­operations of the organization under any circumstances. Generally, this means 
­planning to use virtual workers when weather or other conditions make travel to  
the primary work location hazardous. Cross-training employees to fill in for job 
functions that are not ordinarily their responsibility is another workforce continuity 
tactic. Having contract employees on retainer is yet another. 
Tip
Simply having a contingency plan in case of trouble is no longer adequate. 
For the foreseeable future, we must expect trouble and make sure each of 
us—as well as our families, workplaces, and communities— are at a higher 
level of readiness.

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
289
A well-developed business continuity plan that prepares the key businesses 
­processes, employees, and employee families is no longer just smart planning.  
It is now critical to the survival of our economy (along with due diligence).
The most valuable asset your business, agency, organization, or home has is you. 
You, your family, co-workers, and stakeholders keep the enterprise running, and 
successful. What happens at home and in your personal life outside the workplace  
has a direct impact on how well you do your job. In an emergency situation, most 
people think of home and family first. Is everyone safe? If you are at home, will you 
report to work in a time of crisis? Will you leave your family to help your employer 
continue operations?
It’s vitally important that every enterprise, regardless of whether it’s a major 
corporation, small business, or government agency have plans to guarantee the safety 
of its employees. In fact, law in many instances requires it. However, don’t assume 
that just because you participate in a “fire drill” that you are safe. Does your work-
place have a safety committee? Are building evacuation plans documented? If an 
event happens in your community or workplace that places you in danger, how are 
you notified? Does your employer expect personnel to report to work under any 
conditions? If so, what are they doing to guarantee that?
The workplace that prepares employees and families by sharing preparedness 
information, plans, training, and support will have a workforce that is ready and 
willing to get things back to normal quicker than the unprepared. Replacing the  
fear and uncertainty in an emergency keeps the workforce, stakeholders, and  
families focused on recovery, not only in the enterprise but in the family unit and 
­community as well.
Steps for Successful Workforce Preparedness
Draw up a written business (or operations) continuity plan (BCP)
Share the plan with employees and families as appropriate
Exercise the BCP plan routinely
Update building evacuation plans and practice carrying them out routinely
Monitor local and national current events and share pertinent information 
with employees
Conduct personal safety, first-aid, and CPR classes for employees
Offer personal and family preparedness instruction and information
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
290	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
I’ve heard—and you probably have, too—the story about occupants in a 
­multitenant building looking out of the windows to see a parking lot full of other 
building occupants. This usually means that the emergency alarm didn’t sound or 
someone forgot to pass the word. Tragically, it can and does happen in real emer-
gency situations generally related to workplace violence or bomb incidents.
An alerting system that can be used to quickly inform the entire population of a 
building, or an entire community for that matter, saves lives. This tends to be bells, 
horns, or sirens. However a building “enunciation” or public address system offers 
more control of the alerting process and evacuation. Electronic message boards, 
digital paging, and instant messaging to all LAN users are additional and highly 
effective ways of alerting and sharing emergency information quickly.
Get Out, Get Away, and Get in Touch
Federal, state, and local laws require that a workplace have an emergency evacuation 
plan (depending on the number of employees and the building structure) that must 
include an alerting system and annual exercises. Just getting everyone out, however,  
is not enough. For everyone’s sake, you must prove it. That’s not a new federal 
­regulation, it’s common sense. After all, would you want to be left behind and not  
be missed until it’s too late?
In any emergency, remember the 3Gs rule of personal protection, which help 
remind you to get out, get away, and get in touch. Get out of danger—in this exam-
ple, your workplace during an emergency. Get away—don’t stand on the sidewalk in 
front of a building that may collapse or explode. And finally, get in touch with your 
supervisor, co-workers and family to let them know that you are accounted for.
First responders arriving on the scene at a fire, explosion, or building collapse will 
ask “is everyone out?” If you’re the senior manager or building owner, you’ll save 
time and precious resources by answering “everyone is accounted out” or be able to 
direct rescue teams to specific locations where missing workers were last seen.
If you cannot account for everyone, firefighters or search and rescue teams may 
have to search the building, and that puts lives at stake: those left behind and those 
searching.
In a large facility, your workplace evacuation plan should include “shelter locations.” 
These assembly points inside the building—usually in fire escapes or other safe havens—
offer shelter to injured or physically challenged employees. Such locations should be well 
marked and include some form of communication to a central emergency control point. 

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
291
Your local fire department can assist your efforts in identification and planning. 
Preparing a workplace evacuation plan includes the following.
Senior management must make it clear to every employee that when told  
to evacuate, they should do so immediately, without hesitation, and in an 
orderly fashion.
Permanent “meeting points” outside the building are identified and assigned 
by department or work location where a roll call is conducted. The results 
are communicated back to an evacuation control point by two-way radio or 
runners.
A central permanent “evacuation control point” is established to collect and 
distribute information from the evacuation.
Each department, section, or floor must have assigned “fire wardens” or 
“evacuation coordinators” who keep current rosters of all shifts and employ-
ees. These rosters are carried to, or stored at, the outdoor meeting points.
The control point relays the roll call and any injury reports to emergency 
responders.
The “all clear” signal to return to the facility (or other such information)  
can only be issued by the evacuation control point. All information or 
requests for assistance from the meeting points must go to the control 
point—no exceptions.
Routinely exercise the plan.
The meeting points mentioned in the preceding list should be located as far from 
the building as practical. Just being out of the building does not mean the workforce 
is out of danger. Most buildings today are constructed with beautiful glass exteriors. 
An explosion can send glass shards and other debris flying hundreds of yards.
One general concern expressed to me by executives of several corporations is  
that “fire drills” reduce production time and that’s why they are rarely done more 
than once a year—which, by the way, is not enough. I recently helped a large 
­company redesign their evacuation plan based on the preceding information. Each 
evacuation coordinator was assigned not only rosters but an inexpensive two-way 
radio and a bright yellow bag to carry them in to the meeting point. That company 
now ­routinely evacuates 800 employees from a multistory building, conducts a roll 
call, reports results, and returns all employees to the building in 15 minutes during 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
292	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
­evacuation drills. The executives of that company are proud of this accomplishment 
and their employees are safer.
In the event of an actual emergency, a final evacuation responsibility that you 
have to your family is to let them know your condition and plans as soon as possible.
If your workplace does not have an updated building evacuation plan, inquire 
about starting one. Ask your supervisor, safety committee, or safety director. This 
would also be a good time to get involved by offering to help make it happen or to 
make an existing program better with your participation.
Some workplaces have well-documented evacuation plans, and area evacuation 
coordinators ensure that all employees in their respective areas understand the plan, 
have “escape buddies” to help them if necessary, and “sweep” their assigned areas in 
an emergency making sure everyone has left the area. This is excellent safety 
­planning, but these plans must be practiced routinely. Unfortunately, far too many 
organizations pay too little attention to this vital preparedness planning. If you work 
in an organization that has not updated its evacuation planning or if you don’t fully 
understand the plans, get involved and make your workplace and yourself safer.
Are first-aid kits distributed for emergency use in your workplace? If so, where 
are they and are they properly supplied? If they are not adequate, point this out to 
your safety director or supervisor. Know how to use the supplies in a first-aid kit.  
If you’re unsure, enroll in a basic first-aid course. Such skills make you, your family, 
and co-workers safer in any circumstance. Your employer will probably be more than 
happy to arrange onsite classes through the local chapter of the American Red Cross.
Family Preparedness Plan
We create and work plans every day of our lives. We plan our days, what to wear, 
who to meet, where to go and how to get there, and what to eat. These are for the 
routine, good things in life. Why then don’t we plan for the bad things that can 
surprise us and threaten our safety?
One of the most chilling memories of the 2005 hurricane season was the CNN 
coverage of the hundreds of cars running out of gas on streets and highways as 
Hurricane Wilma approached. These “average Americans” were stranded, hungry and 
scared. I could not help thinking that a bit of planning would have avoided most of 
this suffering. These families probably didn’t have a family ready kit, a full gas tank, or 
extra cash on hand. They had not considered the possibility that another hurricane 
might strike so soon after Katrina. They aren’t alone in their denial; most Americans 
believe that bad things happen to other people.

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
293
Every book on family preparedness includes a list describing items that should be 
kept ready for use in an emergency situation. I’ve included a list (the Family Ready 
Kit) later in this chapter, but the kit doesn’t work by itself. It’s more important for 
family members to know what to do than to count on a box or bag of “stuff.” 
Family preparedness is a state of mind—it’s planning, practicing, and working 
together as a team to thrive, not just survive, in emergency situations.
The most important point in family preparedness is family communication. Talk 
about what your family plans to do in the event of a major storm, natural disaster, or 
terrorist incident. Talking through what you expect, what might happen, and what 
“we as a family” will do removes a tremendous amount of stress and fear from any 
situation. Children especially need to know that the family has a plan for emergencies 
and that they are an important part of the plan.
A good way to begin your preparedness planning is to create a family fire plan.
Check your smoke alarms for proper operation annually and change the 
batteries.
Plan escape routes including those from second stories.
Establish a family meeting point (more on this in the next subsection).
Call for help once outside.
Practice your plan until it works flawlessly.
Spend some time explaining that emergencies can happen anytime, and that if 
we’re all home together, we’ll be really lucky. In reality, that’s not likely to happen 
and family members will probably be separated for a number of hours (or even 
longer) until they can be reunited. Mom and Dad may be at work, or the kids may 
be at school when a major disaster happens. Discuss, now, how best to get together 
following a major emergency.
Each family member should have assigned tasks and a procedure to follow in the 
event of an emergency situation. This emergency planning begins with how to get 
out of the house in case of a fire or other emergency, and establishing a meeting 
point afterward for all family members.
The 3Gs rule applies to the home as well as the workplace. If you need to leave 
due to an emergency in your home, “Get Out, Get Away, and Get in touch.”
A key component in your family preparedness plan is to have several meeting 
points for various emergencies. These are locations the family identifies and where 
they agree to meet if separated due to a disaster or other emergency.
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
294	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
Possible Meeting Points
Here is a list of possible meeting points for your family following a disaster or 
emergency:
A neighbor’s home, the family swing set, the mailbox, bus stop, or tree in the 
yard where the family is to meet in case an emergency requires leaving the 
home on short notice
A community shelter, relative’s home, or neighborhood business in case a 
neighborhood requires evacuation
A relative or friend’s home or other location outside the community in case 
the family is separated in a wide-scale disaster
A virtual meeting place such as an e-mail address or phone number outside 
the community so family members can check in if separated
Schools have very specific procedures for early dismissal situations. Releasing 
children to family members is usually an option, but this must be approved before-
hand. Allowing the school system to transport your children home may be faster  
than you trying to pick them up. Find out what your children’s school system 
­policies are and discuss these policies with your children.
If students will be sheltered in-place (kept safe at school) how will they be released? 
Will students be transported to a community shelter? If so, where is that shelter located?
Community Shelter
Your local emergency management agency has designated certain facilities in your 
city or county as community shelters. These shelters are generally public high schools 
or other public buildings that can hold a large number of people for an extended 
period of time. Typically, the American Red Cross is the agency that manages these 
shelters and provides food services, cots, first aid, communications, and basic health 
care for individuals who may need it. Community shelters are a safe place to go 
when needed. In a dangerous situation—such as a tornado, hurricane, or other 
­general emergency—many people will try to stay at home. If the order is given to 
evacuate, do not hesitate. Leave immediately and go to a shelter as directed.
It’s important for you and your family to understand what to take and not take  
to a community shelter if you go to one of these facilities. You should bring pillows, 
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
295
blankets, toiletry items, prescription medications, games, snacks, and identification. 
Ask your local Red Cross or emergency management agency—before an emer-
gency—what can and cannot be brought with you to a local shelter. If you’re a pet 
owner, ask what arrangements will be in place for pet care.
The Personal Evacuation Bag
Jeans or heavy pants/slacks with belt
Two pairs of heavy socks
Long sleeved shirt/blouse
T-shirt and change of underclothing
One pair of shorts in warm weather
Work gloves and winter mittens or gloves if appropriate
Cap or hat with brim
Sunglasses and sunscreen (regardless of temperature)
Rain poncho or lightweight rain suit
Personal hygiene items (comb, tooth brush, toothpaste, soap, razor, and towel)
Sports/emergency or other lightweight blanket
Copy of government-issued ID (driver’s license)
Flashlight or headlamp
Pocketknife, whistle, compass, and matches/lighter
Other personal items as appropriate
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Tip
Assemble a personal “evacuation bag” for each member of the family. This 
small duffel bag or day-pack can be packed with a change of clothing appro-
priate for the season, as well as other personal items, in case you are forced 
to leave home quickly.

www.syngress.com
296	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
Preparedness Pantry
Every home should maintain a supply of nonperishable food and water for the entire 
family. When asked “how do I buy and store two weeks worth of food?” My response 
is that you simply have to fill your pantry. Most of us never do that. Instead, we 
depend on stopping by the supermarket or carry-out on the way home to pick up 
dinner. Now is the time to change that behavior and it can be done easily (and 
affordably) over a period of several weeks.
I’ve mentioned being prepared for at least 72 hours and more realistically two 
weeks, earlier in this chapter. Over the next several trips to the supermarket, purchase 
extra cans or packages of the foods you most often use. Supplement these with 
additional canned meats, vegetables, and fruits. Plan and stock your “preparedness 
pantry” to provide a two-week supply of meals. Be realistic: In an emergency situa-
tion, you won’t be entertaining, and in most cases “meals” will be simple and quick. 
Purchase additional items that store well and can be used in a wide variety of meal 
planning—rice, dried beans and pasta are ideal choices.
Simply add a few more items each time you grocery shop and plan to have your 
“preparedness pantry” completed in three trips. Shop with a list and buy shelf-stable 
items. Once your supply is purchased, date every item and rotate your supply by 
incorporating them into your normal menus. Always plan ahead by purchasing 
replacement items first before using anything from your “preparedness pantry.”
Once your pantry is stocked, rotate that stock by using the food purchased first 
and then re-supplying. I mark each can and package with its purchase date using a 
permanent marker. It’s easy to use the first purchased items and then replace on the 
next trip to the supermarket. If you don’t keep your preparedness pantry supplied 
with “rotated stock” you may find three-year-old tomato sauce that will add  
nothing but disappointment to your dinner plans.
I should at this point explain the term “shelf stable.” Shelf-stable foods are pre-
pared to be stored without refrigeration or any other special conditions for extended 
periods of time. Dried fruit and meat was the first “shelf-stable” food civilized man 
discovered. In fact, this food preservation method was used long before kitchens or 
shelves were invented.
While shelf-stable food purchased at the supermarket will easily last 12 to 18 
months, I recommend a six-month storage/use/replacement routine. By incorporat-
ing your “emergency pantry” into your normal menus, you’ll always have that  
two-week supply ready for use in an emergency.

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
297
Marking each container with the purchase date will help identify the “emergency 
pantry” items. Use these long-term storage items in normal weekly menus occasion-
ally. You can purchase a replacement before it’s actually used if you plan your menus  
a week beforehand. If you don’t have a replacement before use, simply tear the label 
off and purchase a replacement on your next shopping trip.
An exception to this is MREs (Meals Ready to Eat) and dehydrated long-term 
storage foods that have a shelf life of six years and longer (depending on storage 
conditions). It’s a good idea, however, to incorporate some of these occasionally into 
your regular meal planning, too, so family members know what these meals look and 
taste like. MREs (regardless of what you may hear) are tasty and nutritious.
“Soft pack canning” or MREs became the military standard in the 1960s. This 
process involves cooking the food in multilayer plastic envelopes that are impervious 
to the chemical action of the food or environment. This soft container maintains an 
airtight and almost indestructible “cocoon” for the fully cooked and “ready to eat 
food.” This stuff stores for years and maintains flavor and nutritional benefits. Do not 
buy “military surplus” MREs; buy them fresh from local or online dealers.
MREs are a great choice for any organization or business that may need to feed 
employees and or family members in an emergency situation. They are packaged in 
complete meal servings. Each meal is unit packed in a plastic envelope that includes 
the entree, side items, drink, dessert, and accessories pack with salt, pepper, eating 
utensils, and napkin. All that is needed is a method for warming the food which, in a 
pinch, can be eaten at room temperature. One envelope contains a complete and 
balanced nutritious meal. This is especially important when mass feeding a large 
group without a large dining or food preparation facility.
Canned foods will easily store for 12 to 18 months. Some of the new microwave 
entrees are use-dated for generally a year. Look closely on your grocery store shelves 
(not freezer section) and you may be surprised at what you’ll find that can be used in 
your emergency pantry. Along with canned vegetables and meats, you’ll discover fully 
cooked meals ready to be warmed in the microwave, which include chicken, turkey, 
and beef entrees. You’ll also find cooked pasta and rice dishes just waiting to be 
warmed and eaten.
Canning to preserve food and their flavors has been used for over two hundred 
years and is still the leading food preservation technology. Home canning remains 
popular especially when home gardens are producing more than we can use or  
give away.

www.syngress.com
298	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
Home freezing and frozen foods (TV dinners) became popular in the 1950s. 
Today, refrigeration and freezing are the most popular forms of food preservation.  
By the way, if you have a freezer full of frozen food and no power, don’t panic—and 
don’t open the freezer door. A full freezer will keep frozen food “frozen” for around 
48 hours if you avoid the urge to open the door.
Freeze-dried foods are very popular with backpackers. These foods are fully 
cooked and then flash frozen at temperatures around –125 degrees Fahrenheit. Water 
from the food is condensed and removed, leaving a dried food product, which is then 
packaged in an airtight (generally plastic/foil) package. All you need to do is add the 
water back, and heat the product when you’re ready to eat.
Freeze-dried foods are very light and compact, and will store for many years. 
Complete freeze-dried meals are available in any outdoor supply or camping store. 
One small drawback is that they are a bit more expensive than hard or soft pack 
canned food items, you must have an ample supply of water to add to the contents, 
and they are not as easy to incorporate in a normal family menu for pantry stores 
rotation.
Irradiated food processing is still fairly new and in very limited distribution in  
the U.S. at the time of this writing. Irradiation offers some major food safety and 
­preservation benefits. This technology uses a radioactive source to “sterilize” the food 
­without cooking it. So, in theory, meat could be stored in a container without 
­refrigeration for weeks and still be safe and favorable. Fruits and vegetables can be 
stored for months without loosing color, flavor, or food value. No radioactivity is 
transferred to the food, so your salad will not mutate into some giant walking green 
Note
Napoleon offered a cash prize to anyone who could find a way to keep food 
from spoiling so he could better feed his army on their long campaigns. In 
1795, Nicolas Appert discovered that by placing food in sealed containers and 
cooking them in boiling water the food lasted for long periods of time. He 
won the prize and his method of food preservation was declared a military 
secret. It wasn’t long, however, before this new preservation method found 
its way to England where in 1810 Peter Durrand improved the process by 
using metal containers or “cans.”

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
299
thing that chases you around the kitchen. The Food and Drug Administration reports 
that food irradiation is allowed in nearly 40 countries and is endorsed by the World 
Health Organization, the American Medical Association, and many other organiza-
tions. However, the percentage of food being irradiated is still very low due to the 
expense and lack of acceptance of this new process. Stay tuned, this process will be 
commonplace in a few years.
As you can see, we are blessed with an array of well-proven food preservation 
methods. You must keep a supply on hand and thus avoid the danger of going out  
to look for something to eat.
Water
Water is the most important item in your “preparedness pantry.” Store one gallon of 
water for each family member for each day you plan to be self-sufficient. Generally 
plan on using a half-gallon of water per day for drinking, and a half-gallon per day 
for sanitation for each family member. Date each container and rotate your stock 
every six months. Most commercial water containers are dated, saving you from 
having to do it yourself. Most commercially bottled water is use-dated for at least a 
year or two.
I recommend several one-, two-, or five-gallon containers of water for cooking 
and sanitation, and smaller 8- or 12-ounce bottles for drinking and refilling.
What’s the difference between distilled water, spring water, and drinking water? 
Generally, the price. Distilled water is of course distilled or boiled into steam, the 
steam is condensed back into liquid form and bottled. This process removes all of  
the minerals and impurities and in fact sterilizes the water. Spring water should  
come from a spring (no guarantees here) and is probably filtered.
Drinking water is just “tap water” from a municipal water supply that may or  
may not be filtered and then bottled. Most is filtered, but check the label. Do as  
you please, but I simply buy the cheapest “store brand” drinking water for less than 
60 cents a gallon.
If you have a natural water source near your home (spring, stream, or lake), 
consider purchasing a water purification filter. These filters generally consist of a 
small hand pump and a high-efficiency carbon or ceramic element that will purify 
the most questionable water supply. Several new water purification products are on 
the market. These include filtering straws and even battery-operated ultra-violet 
systems. For now, these tend to be expensive and produce limited volume. Having 

www.syngress.com
300	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
access to a water source and the proper purification equipment will reduce the 
amount of stored water you may need.
Storing a supply of food and drinking water is not just for personal or family 
emergency planning. The workplace must be able to support employees who may  
be stranded or “sheltered” in the workplace. Every business continuity plan must 
address the likelihood of supporting employees who may be required to stay put  
in order to keep critical operations running if conditions warrant.
Cooking
Simple one-pot “camping” meals are best in an emergency situation. After all, you’ll 
be concentrating on other important issues. Be extremely careful in how you prepare 
your meals, especially when operating gas or other open-flame stoves that should be 
used outdoors. Never use charcoal grills or other outdoor cooking “appliances” inside 
your home. Use them outside where they belong. The risk of fire (which is great) is 
overshadowed by the risk of carbon monoxide poisoning.
For one pot meal suggestions, look no further than your “crock pot” recipe book. 
Search out recipes that use foods stored in your “preparedness pantry” and simply 
adjust cooking time from s-l-o-w to shorter times with higher heat.
Other good recipe resources are camping cookbooks and the official Boy Scout 
Field Book. The Boy Scouts of America Field Book is one of the best available manuals, 
not only for cooking but for general self-sufficiency as well.
Try the recipes that look interesting to you and your family. Tailor the ingredients 
to meet your specific tastes and portion requirements. The ones voted most enjoyable 
should be written on recipe cards and kept in your pantry.
I’m a lazy cook who loves to prepare and eat but hates to clean up. So after 
years of practice, I’m pretty good at whipping up some decent meals with little  
or no clean-up. Heating (see note that follows) foil packed meats, vegetables, and 
MREs in their packages in a single pot of boiling water allows you to use the 
water for hot drinks, rice, pasta, kitchen clean-up, and/or personal care. Cooking 
rice or pasta in “boiling bags” allows you to avoid more clean-up and requires less 
water, which may be in short supply. Of course, in an emergency, fuel may also be 
in short supply. 

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
301
Most people have an outdoor gas grill, camping, or backpacking stove that will 
handle the cooking requirements just fine, just use them outside.
As with any new recipe or cooking technique, it’s best to try these first yourself 
before serving them to others. And, of course, before a disaster; otherwise, you will 
very likely lose your cooking privileges!
Testing Your Home Preparedness Plan
Just like a business continuity plan, a family preparedness plan is not complete until  
it is routinely tested and updated. At work, you and your co-workers must be familiar 
with your employer’s business continuity or emergency plan and understand your 
role in that plan. Semi-annual plan reviews and exercises are the best method of 
keeping the plan current and the recovery teams competent in their ability to 
­successfully execute the plan.
This is true for your family preparedness plan, too. Family members (regardless of 
their age or physical abilities) must actively participate and thoroughly understand the 
purpose of the plan and the importance of their respective roles in making the plan 
work successfully.
In the business environment, our continuity or preparedness plans are concerned 
with the safety of the employees and the welfare of the enterprise. At home, our 
focus is on our loved ones and the survivability of our home and family.
Tip
When heating food envelopes (“soft cans”), always tear a small “vent” 
opening in the envelope to eliminate any bursting hazard. If the contents 
start to boil and produce steam, the envelope may explode.
Warning
Installed home gas appliances are properly vented and have low oxygen 
shutdown safety features. Any portable cooking stove brought into your home 
does not. So keep the disaster—and the portable cooking stoves—outside your 
home.

www.syngress.com
302	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
I strongly suggest you use the same tactics for plan testing or exercising at 
home that you use (or should be using) at work. Tabletop emergency exercises at 
work can become a great rainy day “board game” at home. Plan “what if” and 
“how can our family handle an emergency” discussions, and include everyone’s 
input. Hold a “walkthrough” of your plan to see if parts of it are unrealistic. Of 
course, scheduled exercises or even a few unannounced drills are the best method 
of keeping your family preparedness plan the best it can be, and as a result, your 
family will be safer.
One of the most enjoyable ways to test your preparedness plans is to have a 
“camp-in.” Select a weekend evening and announce that you’ll all meet in the living 
room or den and camp out for the night. Off go the lights and the entire family uses 
only the supplies on hand to “survive the disaster.” Pretend there is no phone or 
power other than what you can supply with your own resources. Meals should be 
prepared using your “preparedness pantry” and alternate cooking methods.
We can promise three things if you follow our advice in this chapter. Your family 
will be better prepared for emergencies, you’ll all have some fun, and you and your 
family will discover that doing something a bit unusual as a team brings you closer 
together and builds a stronger family bond.
Family Ready Kit
Designating a central point where special supplies and basic equipment will be stored 
saves valuable time in responding to an emergency. While there are a few “family 
emergency kits” now being marketed online and in some stores, I suggest you make 
your own. You probably already have many of the things you’ll need, and by building 
the kit yourself and involving the entire family, everyone becomes familiar with the 
contents and the location of the kit.
Younger family members in particular feel more confident if mom and dad aren’t 
around by knowing that the family ready kit has basic emergency supplies to help 
them until other family members arrive.
If the family can stay at home and shelter-in-place, the ready kit is “ready” to help 
the family stay safe and more comfortable. If the emergency requires evacuation to a 
safer location, the kit is easily carried with the family. Following are some suggested 
items; adjust as appropriate for your family. Keep your ready kit in a closed container 
and be sure everyone in the family understands its purpose and storage location.
While not part of the regular “family ready kit,” don’t forget pet food and pet 
medications. Your pets are an important part of the family, too.

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
303
Family Ready Kit Contents
Water (one gallon per person per day)
Maps (local and state) with compass
Prescription and OTC medication; personal hygiene items
Identification for each family member (copies of driver’s licenses, other 
government-issued ID, and Social Security cards)
Copies of financial records (bank and credit card account numbers,  
brokerage account numbers)
Document copies (homeowners and other insurance policies, healthcare  
ID cards, and other important documents)
Contact telephone numbers (family, relatives, friends, physicians, schools)
Pre-paid long-distance calling card
Photos of home (exterior and interior), photos of family members, and pets
Inventory of home contents
Cash (including change) or travelers checks
Extra automobile and house keys
Reading and religious materials, Boy Scout fieldbook, other reference 
literature
Inoculation records (children and adults, if warranted), other health records 
as needed
Notepad and pens/pencils, permanent marker
Board games, crayons, cards, and card games
Disposable camera
Shelf-stable foods: MREs, instant drink mixes, soups, energy bars, fruit,  
trail mix
Special dietary supplements and/or infant formulas
Salt, pepper, sugar, instant creamer/milk, hard candy, and other fun foods
Camping or other small portable stove, extra fuel, and one-quart pot, 
matches, or lighter
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
304	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
Paper plates, cups, and disposable eating utensils; manual can opener
Sewing kit, nylon rope, repair tape, and wire ties
Flashlight/battery lantern, chemical light sticks (do not use candles for 
emergency lighting)
Extra batteries in plastic bag
Pocket or other folding knife, whistle, and small mirror
Rescue blanket for each family member and a group first-aid/medical kit
Chlorine bleach (unscented, 24 ounce)
Trash and plastic storage bags
Plastic sheeting/drop cloth; trash and plastic storage bags
Liquid soap, shampoo, and several small towels
Multipurpose tool or pliers; screwdriver
Plastic storage container or sturdy cardboard box to hold your “ready kit” 
items
No Lights? No Problem!
Lighting is a source of safety and comfort. Most of the conveniences in our homes 
and the tools in our workplaces are powered with electricity. When the power goes 
off, we suddenly find ourselves in an unfamiliar and sometimes scary environment. 
All the stuff we rely on to make us comfortable, help us do our jobs, and make us 
safe, stops working.
Let’s get this out of the way right now, candles are for birthday cakes, not emer-
gency lighting. In an emergency situation, you’ll have a tremendous number of things 
on your mind, stress will be affecting your ability to think clearly, and the fire depart-
ment will probably be busy, so let’s not complicate things by adding to whatever 
disaster you may be dealing with by burning your house down.
The major difference between candles and other sources of flame-dependent 
lighting is that candles provide little light, usually are not supplied with fire-resistant 
containers, and have an open flame. Coleman lanterns and the old reliable kerosene 
type lamps grandma used at least contain the flame in a fireproof enclosure. This 
enclosure (glass globe or chimney) generally prevents something from accidentally 
coming into contact with the flame and starting a fire. Generally, anything with a 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
305
flame requires great caution when used, and can cause a fire or explosion if employed 
where natural gas pipes may be leaking.
Start with the safest form of auxiliary lighting, chemical light sticks, and then after 
making sure there is no danger of explosion (broken gas lines, leaking or damaged 
containers of gasoline or other volatile liquids) work into flashlights and battery-operated 
lamps. Pressurized gas camping lanterns are for outdoor use. Kerosene and other oil 
lamps, even the high-efficiency models, require extreme caution if used indoors. In an 
emergency, avoid any device that uses a flame for lighting—especially candles.
In the well-prepared workplace, emergency lighting and power must be provided 
so critical operations can continue and provide a safe and comfortable working 
environment. At home, these same reasons apply.
Power outages can be caused by storms, natural disasters, accidents, human error, 
equipment failure, and intentional acts. Blackouts and brownouts caused by a lack of 
generating capacity in some areas of the country are becoming a summer routine. 
Corporations and individuals are searching for ways to avoid the dangers, stress, and 
financial loss associated with power failures.
Emergency Lighting
“Where’s the flashlight?” is the call of the unprepared when the lights go out. It’s so 
simple, but few people know where it is or routinely check to see if the batteries are 
producing power and the bulb works. When you buy batteries, date them with a 
laundry marker, test them every three months, and change them at least once a year. 
By the way, standardize on the type of light—and for goodness sake, the battery size. 
Shopping for batteries will be much easier this way.
Since we mentioned chemical light sticks first (sometimes referred to as “snap 
lights”), it’s only fitting to explain this safe light source first. My favorite is the 
Caylume 30-minute or one-hour high intensity white light stick. These six-inch long 
plastic tubes contain two nontoxic chemical agents that, when mixed, fluoresce with a 
bright white light. You simply bend the plastic tube at a sharp angle, which breaks 
(snaps) an inner capsule that starts the chemical process. Shaking the stick a couple of 
times completes the mixing process, and suddenly you have plenty of light to work 
with. There is no danger of heat, flame, fire, or explosion. These lights can be used 
safely in any environment, and they have a shelf life of approximately three years.
Light sticks can be purchased in a variety of colors and sizes. Buy high intensity 
where possible since these produce enough light to work and read by and will emit 
usable light for nearly an hour. The sticks will continue to glow for many hours, so 

www.syngress.com
306	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
they can be used to mark stairways, doors, or other locations. These light sticks have 
equal value as escape lights in both the workplace and home. They are a great source of 
comfort for children since they can be safely carried around, or even brought to bed.
Battery-operated lights, flashlights, and lanterns are the most common source of 
emergency lighting for most families.
While there are many flashlights and battery-operated lanterns on the market 
today, I want to discuss the four main categories of battery-operated lights. 
Handheld Lights
These include the regular two-cell (three-cell, four-cell, and counting) flashlights. 
Types and prices run from as cheap as a dollar to several hundred dollars (no kid-
ding). Avoid the cheap ones as they will break easily and the switching mechanism 
my not work more than a few times. Maglites are at the top of the scale in value. 
They are manufactured with aircraft aluminum, are water-resistant, come in many 
colors and battery-cell sizes, and contain a spare bulb. Several companies manufacture 
top of the line, expensive tactical flashlights designed for a military market that needs 
high intensity, indestructible combat-proven specialty lights. While these lights are 
bright, small, and indestructible, they are very expensive ($100.00 plus) and are 
designed more for target illumination than work area and general illumination.
A new family of flashlights has appeared on the market in the past several years 
and these lights use no batteries or bulbs. They are marketed as “everlasting” since 
there’s nothing to replace. They produce power when the user shakes the light, which 
causes a magnet to slide back and forth through a coil of wire (generator), which 
charges an onboard capacitor, which then powers an LED (light-emitting diode). All 
of this is wrapped in a sealed water-tight plastic housing. These lights can be stored 
for many years, and when needed can be “charged” and used. A half minute of 
shaking will produce approximately 20 minutes of light.
Warning
If you have gas appliances in your home, be extremely careful after any event 
(hurricane, tornado, or earthquake) that causes structural damage. Always 
check for gas leaks before switching on flashlights or anything else that may 
cause a spark resulting in an explosion.

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
307
Several models of “dynamo flashlights” are now available. These lights use a small 
hand-cranked dynamo to charge a battery to power the LEDs. Several models are 
available, including a camping lantern style.
When you purchase a flashlight, headlamp, battery lamp or spotlight, always buy 
extra bulbs and batteries (the exception of course being the LED models mentioned 
earlier, which last forever—almost). Remember to label the batteries with the pur-
chase date. Yes, if you’re using rechargeable batteries, you still need to date them since 
a two-year service life is average. After two years, rechargeable cells of all types 
become somewhat unreliable. OK, so you’ve had a set working for four years with 
no problems. I’m talking average commercial expectancy in critical situations.
Maglite and other manufacturers are marketing conversion kits to replace stan-
dard filament bulbs with LED modules. Generally, these aren’t cheap. Nevertheless, 
they’re worth the expense in my opinion due to the “lifetime” of service expected 
and the reduced battery replacement. You’ll be impressed with the higher light levels 
produced by LEDs. In fact, the Maglite LED conversion kit for a two-cell Maglite 
appears to be brighter than the original standard bulb.
Headlamps
Headlamps (my personal favorite) can be worn on your head, leaving both hands 
free. The new ultra-light weight headlamps using LEDs are fantastic. They are small, 
lightweight, and produce good usable work light for any situation. The bonus, of 
course, is that these allow you to use your hands for something other than shining a 
light on your work. They work well for hiking, camping, or any other outdoor 
Note
LED technology is advancing at a rapid rate, and soon filament-type incandes-
cent bulbs will be completely replaced in the majority of low-voltage lighting 
applications. The major benefit is that less power is needed for an equivalent 
amount of light output, so fewer batteries and longer operation times result. 
Since these LEDs are solid-state devices, they aren’t susceptible to filament 
breakage and burnout. Have you noticed that many commercial vehicles now 
use LEDs for brake and marker lights? Most new traffic lights now use LEDs 
instead of “bulbs.”

www.syngress.com
308	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
activity. Many search and rescue teams are converting to these lights. By the way, 
three AAA batteries will power an LED headlamp for 72 hours of continuous use.
A variety of larger headlamps are also available on the market. Some of these resem-
ble miner lights, with various sizes of lamp heads, and many have external battery packs. 
They are, of course, heavier and tend to be more complicated to wear and maintain.
General Illumination Lamps
Illumination lamps are used to light a room or specific area. Battery-operated flores-
cent lanterns or “pop-up” flashlights are the most popular. Many styles exist and 
some florescent lanterns are rechargeable. These offer good illumination for a room 
and usually have an option switch to choose between a “bright” setting (both flores-
cent tubes on) for reading and critical work, and a “normal” position (one tube on) 
for navigating around the room and conserving battery power.
“Pop-up” flashlights are a terrific blending of a hand-carried flashlight (usually 
with a lanyard) and a general light source or “tent light” with frosted window that 
distributes light in a 360-degree manner. To convert from flashlight to “tent” or table 
light, simply pull on the front reflector, which exposes the frosted window. The front 
reflector serves as a base that stabilizes the light. These will illuminate a small room or 
your home office with enough light that you can move around safely. They generally 
use four AA batteries and produce between five to seven hours of light.
A useful hybrid light is the “Syclone” made by Streamlight Inc. This small hand light 
has a tilting head and flat base that provides a good stable work light that can sit on a 
desk or work surface. The light has a dual position switch that selects either a regular 
tungsten bulb or an LED. The four AA batteries will power the LED continuously for 
72 hours. This light has a high-impact plastic case, a rubber handgrip, and belt clip, and 
is supplied with a helmet bracket for fire/rescue or construction use. A bonus feature is 
that this light is rated for use in explosive atmospheres (this is important when around 
gasoline, natural gas leaks, or other hazardous environments).
Coleman-type camping lanterns (pressurized gasoline), butane or propane lan-
terns, kerosene table lamps, barn lanterns, and railroad lamps use combustible fuels. 
These light sources require extreme care in use. Even if you are familiar with the 
operation and maintenance of these lamps and lanterns, if they are accidentally 
knocked over, they can and probably will start a fire. Be careful, and never attempt to 
use or fuel a pressurized gas lantern inside your home. Flame-dependant lighting is 

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
309
strictly prohibited in commercial structures. You should have the same rule in your 
home as well.
Spots and Floodlights
Spots and floodlights are usually 6- or 12-volt lights used by fire departments, rail-
roads, and utility crews. They tend to be heavy but very bright, and the batteries are 
long lasting. Some smaller versions of these “professional” lights are now showing up 
in the retail market. One of the best in the “professional” league is manufactured by 
Streamlight and sold by police/fire supply companies and larger hardware and out-
door outlets. The Streamlight power fail model comes with a 110-volt charger base 
and a 12-volt DC mobile charger base. When using the 110-volt AC charger base, if 
the power goes off, the light comes on. These lights are an excellent choice for the 
workplace as power fail lights in critical areas. Plus, you can remove the light from 
the charger base and carry it with you. You have three lamp options, flood, spot, and 
a fairly new flood/spot combination model. They cost around $100, but if you need 
a tough dependable light, look no further.
Emergency Power
The subject of emergency power could itself fill an entire book. We’ll spend a bit of 
time on portable electric generators because they are an emergency supply item that 
remains in high demand. As with any mechanical equipment, you must exercise good 
safety habits and understand the equipment, as well as potential risks from improper 
operation.
Whether your needs for a generator are of the “homeowners” variety with a 
capacity of one to five thousand watts, or a backup power plant with several million 
watts of capacity, some common decisions must be made before you go shopping. 
They are (1) What size do I need and what can I afford? (2) Will this be a portable or 
installed generator? (3) What fuel type do I plan to use?, and (4) How can I get the 
emergency power to the devices I plan to operate?
All portable and backup generators have an engine, which requires fuel. This fuel 
can be gasoline, propane, natural gas, or diesel fuel. The vast majority of smaller 
generators are gasoline powered, but propane and diesel are becoming more popular. 
The alternative “non-gasoline” fuels are safer to store, handle, and in the case of 
propane and natural gas, are cleaner burning. 

www.syngress.com
310	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
The electrical output of most portable generators runs anywhere from 300 to 
15,000 watts for generators sold through home improvement and hardware stores. 
Prices range from around $500 to a couple of thousand.
A relatively new entry in the portable generator market is the “inverter generator.” 
These units combine the functionality of a portable generator and the “clean power” 
output of a UPS best. These hybrids generate AC voltage, which is then converted to 
DC, and then reconverted back into AC voltage by an onboard voltage inverter. The 
inverter generator is an excellent choice when using power-sensitive electronics such 
as servers, switches, routers, and communications equipment.
Regardless of the size or type of generator you purchase, always read the instruction 
manual and follow the manufacturer’s operation recommendations. This includes 
grounding the generator before starting. This is probably one of the most overlooked 
safety steps by homeowners. Also protect the generator from flood water, rain, or other 
environmental hazards. Read the instruction manual.
Large commercial generators that can power an entire office complex or industrial 
operation, operate on the same basic principle as their smaller cousins (an engine turns 
an alternator to make electricity), but of course cost much more and require special 
engineering, installation, and maintenance. These larger generator installations generally 
use diesel fuel. Permanently installed generators for homes and small-to-medium busi-
nesses tend to use natural gas for simplicity of fuel delivery/storage issues. Prices includ-
ing installation start around $4,000 for a home version up to many hundreds of 
thousands of dollars for a backup power plant with multiple generators and related 
equipment for commercial applications.
Warning
Never use a generator indoors, no matter how small it is. When using a 
generator outside of your home or office, be absolutely sure it is sitting well 
away from air intakes and any doors or windows that have been opened to 
permit the use of drop-cords or cables. Carbon monoxide, an invisible, odor-
less, and toxic gas, can seep indoors and cause illness or even death. Never 
operate a generator or other gas-powered engine under your home, in the 
basement, or in your garage. Carbon monoxide can easily fill an enclosed 
area. You’ll nod off to sleep and very possibly die if carbon monoxide seeps 
into your home. Put generators outside!

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
311
How much emergency power do you need? The simplest method is to use one 
of the many power sizing charts available online or at retail outlets. A portable gen-
erator in the range of 3,500 to 5,000 watts is a good fit for most homeowners to 
keep things running.
If you require a generator above 10,000 watts, will it be permanently installed or 
transportable? This certainly has a bearing on fuel type and the connection to your 
“load” (stuff to be powered). One of the most overlooked issues for generators (large 
or small) is how to get the electricity to the devices you want to power. In other 
words, where do you plug it in?
You have only two choices. First, and by far the best option, is an automatic or 
manual transfer switch. This device disconnects commercial power and easily (and 
safely) connects your “load” (home, office, or manufacturing facility) to the generator. 
Automatic switches sense when commercial power has stopped, starts the generator, 
and then switches the load to the generator. A manual switch requires human inter-
vention to start the generator and then flip the switch to begin using the power. As 
you might expect, the automatic switches are expensive but worth the investment if 
power failure is not an option. All permanently installed generators require a transfer 
switch. Some small manual transfer switches are designed for residential use, allowing 
a single connection between the generator and the breaker panel. These cost a few 
hundred dollars and allow you to choose the area of the home to power while safely 
disconnecting from the commercial power supply. 
The second option (and most used) is to utilize individual power cables or drop 
cords connected between the generator and your equipment or appliances. For 
smaller generators and home use for powering only a few items, the drop-cord 
solution is fine. 
Tip
Hire an electrician. A professional will be able to advise you on the best and 
safest method of installing a generator and power transfer switch for home 
or commercial use. This is serious stuff and mistakes can cost many more 
times the amount paid for professional consultation and installation.

www.syngress.com
312	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
UPS and Battery Backup
An excellent way to keep critical equipment running during commercial power 
failures is a UPS power supply. These devices operate much like the automatic trans-
fer switch and generator combination mentioned earlier except that they have no 
moving parts and are thus safe and simple to operate for indoor and home use. You’ll 
probably find some of these near PCs and servers at the office.
The UPS contains one or more batteries that are kept charged by an onboard 
charging circuit that uses normal commercial power and an inverter to produce 110 
volts of AC from battery power. A power sensing circuit monitors the commercial 
power source for quality and consistency. If the unit detects a low-/no power or 
high-voltage condition, (in the blink on an eye) it disconnects commercial power and 
supplies electricity to any equipment plugged into its outlets. These devices also filter 
the commercial power source and remove voltage spikes and ripples, which can 
damage sensitive equipment. They are available in various sizes depending on how 
much current you need and the length of time you want to operate the protected 
equipment when the commercial power goes away.
With a large UPS, the main consideration is how much time you need, want,  
or can afford before the batteries run out of power and no longer provide sufficient 
current to power the inverters. Most large commercial installations provide enough 
battery capacity to allow a generator sufficient time to start and rev up to operating 
speed to supply enough power to begin charging the batteries once again.
Portable 12-Volt Inverters
A reliable source of emergency power is sitting right out in your driveway. Your auto-
mobile and its 12-volt DC power system can provide plenty of power for charging 
cellular phones (you probably have a cigarette lighter adapter or “12-volt power cord” 
now anyway) and for producing limited (a couple of hundred watts) amounts of AC 
Warning
Be extremely cautious when running drop cords into your home so that you 
do not allow carbon monoxide gas to enter as well. If using a window or 
door for cord entrance, be sure to make the access opening as small as pos-
sible and keep the generator well away. Use tape or weather stripping to 
make the entrance as air-tight as possible.

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
313
power with a DC inverter. As mentioned earlier, an inverter converts DC current into 
AC for the operation of lights, laptops, battery charging, and small power tools (this 
does not include hair dryers or toaster ovens). The inverters simply plug into the 
cigarette lighter socket of your automobile and provide a clean and quite safe source of 
voltage. They, however, cannot operate continuously and must be used intermittently. 
Larger inverters are available but require direct connection to the vehicle battery,
Solid-state inverter generators are marketed as “generators” but are in fact a large 
12-volt battery or array of batteries, a DC inverter, and a container with 12-volt DC 
and 110 AC outlets. The smaller units work well for limited power use and for jump 
starting your vehicle if needed. Since there are no moving parts, they are quiet and can 
be safely used indoors. They can be recharged from a 12-volt DC power source or the 
supplied battery charger. These inverters are available in a number of sizes and weights 
(the batteries are heavy) from around 20 pounds up to several hundred pounds.
Larger permanently installed inverters can power an entire small business or home 
for extended periods of time. Many homeowners living in remote locations depend 
on large inverters with a battery array to supply AC voltage for some of their power 
needs. The batteries can be charged using one of the alternative power sources 
­mentioned in the next section.
Alternative Power Sources
Wind, running water, and thermal and solar energy are all “alternative power” sources. 
While these may appear to be out of the financial reach of most homes and businesses, 
portable solar panels that can recharge cellular phones and laptops are becoming main-
stream and affordable. As we move deeper into the twenty-first century, the “alterna-
tive” sources that become cost effective and dependable will find market share quickly. 
Portable solar cells in neat fold-up cases are available for $60 to $100 in many electron-
ics and “road warrior” catalogs. Expect a good one to charge your cellular phone in 
several hours of bright sunlight. Larger “portable panels” can provide the power to 
charge and maintain satellite phones and other equipment requiring more current. 
Large solar panels for providing heat and electricity for homes is commonplace in 
many areas of the country, and these panels capable of supplying the needs of an entire 
home have dropped in price while gaining efficiency and market share. Solar-powered 
street lights, web cams, and traffic signs, while expensive, have an attractive return on 
investment.
Fuel cells are now finding their way into more common use. As environmental 
pressure increases, these “chemical generators” will become more cost-effective. While 

www.syngress.com
314	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
the technology is exciting, so is the cost. For the present, this technology is out of the 
reach of most individuals and companies for routine use.
Staying in Touch
I cannot overstate the importance of communications and how critical staying in 
touch will be for you and your family in a disaster or other crisis situation. (Under 
normal conditions, that’s easy now since everyone has a cellular phone and “on-hip” 
Internet access and e-mail.) However, when the lights go out along with the infra-
structure we depend on to make our normal communications effortless, we must 
have a “plan B.”
Remember when there was no Internet? Close your eyes for a moment and 
pretend we’ve been transported back to a time when there is no e-mail and no 
browsing the World Wide Web for information and current updates on breaking 
news. There is no cellular service, no voice mail, fax, and no easy and reliable tele-
phone service for that matter. It’s a bit hard to imagine, isn’t it? Really, it wasn’t that 
long ago (about 50 years) that basic telephone service was considered a rare com-
modity. Even 15 years ago, the Internet was something that most people believed 
involved fishing.
Fifteen years ago, cellular phones were the size of bricks, service was limited to 
metropolitan areas, and the phones were used by the very few and the well-to-do.
Think back to those times and try to imagine how you would stay in touch with 
your family, customers, and the office. Your little investment in a daydream may pay 
big dividends in your future, for as soon as tomorrow, next week, or next month, we 
may be left without some, or most, of our modern communications infrastructure.
As a society, we are so dependant on our communications infrastructure that it 
makes a tempting (and sometimes very soft) target for those who would do our way-
of-life harm. Turn off communications and you can no longer visit an ATM machine 
to withdraw cash. Businesses can’t receive or fill orders; our transportation, finance, 
utilities, and even law enforcement depend on reliable and uninterruptible communi-
cations links to conduct normal operations.
Our communications infrastructure is designed for routine network capacity  
and normal traffic patterns. An event that destroys infrastructure and disrupts these 
“normal patterns” can overload surviving infrastructure and cause failures in com-
munications networks. A “fast busy signal” is the first sign of trouble. How can you 
stay in touch when our normal communications services and systems fail or are 
taken away?

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
315
The first and most important radio you can own is a “SAME” all hazards alert 
radio. SAME is an acronym for “Specific Area Message Encoding.” It naturally is a 
U.S. government term, but we can overlook that because the technology and system 
are so important. These radios, which can be purchased at any home electronics store 
or from numerous sources online, alert you to impending dangerous weather or other 
life-threatening incidents in your community. These include tornadoes, hurricanes, 
hazardous materials incidents, terrorism, and other civil emergencies.
The SAME alert radio has an audio alert tone, an alphanumeric display, and a 
speaker so you can receive audio information from your local NOAA (National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) office. Yes, this alerting service is provided 
by the National Weather Service but this is not just your old reliable weather forecast. 
NOAA has partnered with local, state, and national emergency management agencies 
and the Office of Homeland Security to provide emergency information for any 
emergency situation.
After purchasing, you simply program the SAME receiver with your community’s 
unique alert code. Every city, county, and community has a unique code. When an 
emergency alert or warning is issued for your community, an alert tone sounds and 
the receiver’s audio is turned on to inform you of what action is necessary. The alerts 
provided are official information, not someone’s opinion based on second- or thirdhand 
reports.
Now, I’m sure you may be thinking that with CNN and the Internet, why 
bother? Unless you sleep with one eye on CNN or have someone at home or work 
monitoring local emergency response agencies around the clock, you need this radio. 
While CNN and other media reports are usually accurate, they are not “official” 
sources of information. The SAME all hazards radio is.
Several ideas and programs are in the works for an improved national alerting 
network, but for now the SAME radio is a dependable solution for quickly alerting 
the population of dangers at any time of the day or night. I urge you to purchase one 
for your home and workplace. Does your school have one of these? If not, make sure 
they do very soon. Cost varies from $30 to around $80. Most radios include a battery 
so the radio continues to work even if the power is off. By the way, once you pur-
chase the radio, there is no monthly charge for this vital service.

www.syngress.com
316	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
Dynamo Radios
Dynamo (emergency) radios are now marketed in numerous places and come in a 
variety of colors, including camouflage. I don’t have a clue why, but they do look 
cool. They cover the AM, FM, shortwave, and/or weather bands. Most include a small 
light for finding your way, and some include an outlet for charging your cell phone.
An onboard dynamo or “generator” produces power by turning a small crank. 
This action produces direct current which charges an internal battery supplying 
power to the radio. You can store this radio for years and “crank it up” when you 
need it.
FRS Radios
FRS is yet another acronym, this one for “Family Radio Service.” These two-way 
radios are the inexpensive pairs of “walkie-talkies” advertised in most of the sporting 
goods and electronics stores. They allow license-free family communication over 
distances of a half mile or so. They are extremely valuable for emergency communi-
cations in and around the neighborhood when nothing else works.
Ham Radio
When disaster strikes, ham (amateur) radio operators provide invaluable communica-
tions services to local, state, and federal authorities, the military, and the general public. 
These volunteer operators provide their own equipment, training, and electrical 
power to keep emergency information flowing when other communications facilities 
are out of service. It’s their hobby, and they do this important service for free.
If you know a ham radio operator in your community, ask about his or her ability 
to get messages into and out of disaster areas. One day you may have need to get 
information about a loved one or family member in a disaster area, or you may need 
to send word that “we’re OK.” And while you’re at it, you may just discover that you 
have an interest in getting involved in this fascinating hobby.
Tip
The SAME alert radio is as important to your safety as your smoke alarm,  
and just like your smoke alarm, it may save your life.

www.syngress.com
	
Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness • Appendix	
317
The “POTS” Line
We have access to so many cool communications technologies today that it’s 
astounding. VoIP (Voice over Internet Protocol), personal satellite phones that fit into 
a coat pocket, cellular, and cordless phones with range that allows us to carry them 
with us when we visit neighbors. Remember that if the power goes off, so do most 
of our communications. While many cordless phones in our homes have backup 
batteries, the majority do not. However, the “Plain Old Telephone System” (POTS) 
operates on DC voltage supplied by the telephone company central office. Having a 
simple “plain old telephone” to plug in and use during these times will allow you to 
stay in touch.

www.syngress.com
318	
Appendix • Personal, Workforce, and Family Preparedness
Summary
In this chapter, we’ve covered a great deal of information related to your prepared-
ness at work and at home for unexpected emergencies and disasters. If there is one 
single rule to remember, it is that all of us must be prepared mentally, physically, and 
emotionally for the next catastrophic event that may disrupt not only our lives, but 
also the lives of our family, friends, and coworkers. Having a plan, basic supplies, and 
the knowledge that we can and will get through it together will make us all stronger 
as individuals and as a nation.

Index
A
Advanced Local Emergency  
Response Team (ALERT), 233
American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI), 210
Ammonium Nitrate and Fuel Oil  
(ANFO), 243
Animal Liberation Front (ALF), 236
attack techniques, in SCADA systems
key-logger software, 183
Man-In-The-Middle Attacks  
(MITM), 182
Awareness intra-preneur, 162
B
battery-operated lights
handheld lights, 306–307
headlamps, 307–308
illumination lamps, 308
spots and floodlights, 309
BHMA/ANSI Standards
for auxiliary locks, 210
for high security locks, 210–211
for security locks, 201–202
transformation of convention lock, 203
156.30 version
deficiencies, 214–215
destructive testing, 213
key control, 213
surreptitious entry resistance tests, 214
Bilevel®, 200
BiLock®, 199
biometric authentication systems,  
SCADA security
comparison parameters, 258–260
description of, 255–256
factors for authentication, 257
measurement tools
DNA sampling, 262
facial recognition, 261–262
fingerprints analysis, 263
parameters used, 257–258
voice analysis, 262–263
minutia measurement, 271–272
vulnerabilities
device tricking, 266–268
electronic manipulation,  
268–269
identity theft, 269–272
biometric signature, 269–270
blasting caps, 241–242
bomb threat planning
explosive device components
container, 240
initiator, 241–242
main charge, 242–243
power source, 240
switch, 241
target hardening
delivery, 246
employee identification, 246
interior doors, 246–247
mail rooms, 247
outside of work environment, 245
using camera, 246
terrorist profiles
domestic terror targets, 236
formalized terror groups, 237
International terror targets, 236–237
terror target classification
commercial and transportation  
targets, 239
319

www.syngress.com
320 
Index
bomb threat planning (Continued)
infrastructure target, 238
statement target, 237–238
British Columbia Institute of Technology 
(BCIT), 174–175
Builders Hardware Manufacturers 
Association (BHMA), 210
business defense plan, 288–289
C
Charlotte Fire Department (CFD), 233
communication protocols, in SCADA, 
70–71
conventional pin tumbler lock
components of, 193
essentials for design, 196–197
mechanism of, 192
security enhancements
anti-bumping pins, 197
bitting design, 199–200
design of key, 200
keyways, 199
security pins, 198
vs. high security lock, 202–204
covert entry, 192
Crime deterrent technique, 244
Critical Infrastructure Information  
(CII) Act of 2002, 99–100
D
“data breaches,”, 139, 142
data matrix, 153, 157
Diamant®, 201
distributed control system (DCS), 66–67
double-detainer locking theory, 195
E
Egyptian pin tumbler lock, 194–195
electronic manipulation authentication, 
268–269
emergency planning
communication
dynamo radio, 315
family radio service (FRS) radio, 316
ham radio, 316
plain old telephone system  
(POTS) line, 317
specific area message encoding (SAME) 
alert radio, 314–315
cooking, 300–301
family
communication, 292–293
community shelter, 294–295
evacuation bag, 295
fire plan, 293
ready kit, 302–304
testing, 301–302
lighting
candles and other sources, 304–305
flashlight, 305
handheld lights, 306–307
headlamps, 307–308
illumination lamps, 308–309
light sticks, 305
spots and floodlights, 309
pantry
food, 296–299
water, 299–300
personal
escape packs, 285–287
safety, 283–285
power
alternative power sources, 313–314
inverter generator, 310–311
portable and backup electric  
generators, 309
portable 12-volt inverters, 312–313
UPS and battery backup, 312
threats, 280–283
workforce

www.syngress.com
 
Index 
321
business defense plan, 288–289
evacuation, 290–292
first-aid kits, 292
Environmental Liberation Front (ELF), 236
event loggers, 67–68
F
facial recognition technology, 261–262
fear-uncertainty-doubt (FUD) factor, 103
firewall architectures
application-level gateway, 85–86
circuit-level gateway, 84–85
deep packet inspection firewall, 88
intrusion prevention system (IPS), 87
stateful packet filtering, 83
static packet filter, 82–83
unified threat management (UTM), 89
firewall security infrastructure, 85–86
G
generic pin tumbler mechanism, 192
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 159
H
hand geometry biometric system, 263
Health Insurance Portability and 
Accessibility Act (HIPAA), 272
Human Machine Interface (HMI), 66, 173
hybrid controllers, 67
I
IDS/IPS devices, 181
Improvised Explosive Device (IED), 239, 
243
Information delivery channels, 146
Information security awareness program
Awareness Standard, 150–151
business plan presentations, 147–148
and communication failure, 157
company intranet, 154
designing, 143–145
financial (money) source for, 148–149
implementation of, 155–156
importance, 140–141
information delivery channels, 146
internal consultants, 161
Manager’s Quick Reference Guide, 158
materials for, 155
online orientation program, 154
program measurement
awareness quotient survey, 165
progress of program, 166
quality management process, 164
Quick Reference Guide
key topics, 152
post-acceptance package, 157
sensitive information, 153
stopgap solution, 147
Information Security Web site, 154
Insider information theft, 234
Instakey®, 199
Internal and external Security Incidents, 174
International Engineering Consortium 
(IEC), 66
Internet protocol Ethernet, 177
Intrusion Protection Devise (IPS), 175, 181
K
Kaba Peaks®, 199
Keso®, 197
key-logger software, 183
keystroke readers, 28–31
Kwikset, 197
L
Letter of Authorization (LOA), 120
locks, in SCADA systems
Abus Diskus No. 24 lock, 9–10
key control, 3–4
lock-picking equipment, 13–15

www.syngress.com
322 
Index
locks, in SCADA systems (Continued)
operation of, 4–5
pin tumbler Master brand padlock, 7
Sargent & Greenleaf 8077AD, 10–12
warded padlock, 8
M
Manager’s Quick Reference Guide, 158
Man-In-The-Middle Attacks (MITM), 182
Medeco®, 197
modern pin tumbler lock
essentials for design, 196–197
shear line and pins, 195
vs. Egyptian lock, 194–195
N
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), 98
National Security Agency (NSA), 97
NERC Critical Infrastructure Protection 
(CIP) Standards, 99
North American Electric Reliability 
Council (NERC), 97, 99
NSA INFOSEC Assessment Methodology 
(IAM), 97, 124
NSA INFOSEC Evaluation Methodology 
(IEM), 97, 124, 127
O
Organizational Information Criticality 
Matrix (OICM), 110
organizational vulnerabilities
documentation review and interviews, 123
system demonstrations and  
observations, 124
Organization for Optimal Power Supply 
(OOPS)
business description and mission  
statement, 108
critical information, 109
critical systems/networks, 113–116
impact considerations, 110
OICM, 112–113
organizational criticality, 113
P
physical security, in SCADA systems
dumpster diving process, 18–20
key control in locks, 3–4
operation of locks, 4–5
social engineering skills
corporate/agency phonebooks, 23–24
drop ceilings, 28
employee badges, 20–21
for internal auditor, 40
keystroke readers, 28–31
in Manholes, 37–39
motion-sensing light controls, 33–34
private branch exchange (PBX), 31–32
tailgating technique, 21, 24
video security logs, 32–33
piggybacking. See tailgating technique
pin stack, 195
pin tumbler lock
components of, 193–194
conventional cylinder, 197
design of key, 200
essentials for design, 196–197
mechanism of, 192
modern, 194–195
Pipe bombs, 244
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC)
continuous control applications, 65–66
discrete control applications, 65
Q
Quick Reference Guide
key topics, 152
post-acceptance package, 157
sensitive information, 153

www.syngress.com
 
Index 
323
R
Remote Terminal Units (RTUs), 65, 178
retinal scan technology, 263
S
SCADA security
biometric authentication systems
biometric signature, 269–270
comparison parameters, 258–260
device tricking, 266–268
DNA sampling, 262
electronic manipulation, 268–269
facial recognition, 261–262
fingerprint analysis, 263
minutia measurement, 271–272
voice analysis, 262–263
information protection requirements, 
98–100
logical flow diagram, 100
on-site assessment process
NSA baseline INFOSEC classes and 
categories, 123
organizational vulnerabilities, 123–124
technical vulnerabilities, 124–127
post assessment process
conducting analysis, 127–128
final report creation, 128
pre-assessment process
assessment plan  
components, 120–122
critical information, 107–109
critical systems/networks, 113–116
impact considerations, 109–110
information criticality matrix, 110–113
legal authorization, 120
logical and physical boundaries, 117
organizational mission, 107
rules of engagement, customer  
concerns, and constraints, 117–120
pre-project process
baseline/repeated assessment, 106
gaining management, 102–103
regulatory and policy  
requirements, 105
researching organization, 104
vetting assessment request, 102
primary phases, 101
resources, 129
Schlage Everest®, 199
Secure network management
business partner links, 180
configured firewalls, 180
corporate VPNs, 179
database links, 179–180
network access control, 176
RTU, dial-up access, 178
secure wide area network  
perimeter, 175
transmitting non-routable protocol, 
176–177
two-factor authentication, 176
vendor support agreements, 178
wide area network perimeter, 175
Security Event Management System 
(SEMS), 180–181
security pins, 198
security vulnerabilities, 126
Sequel Query Language  
(SQL), 180
Six Sigma quality management process
awareness quotient chart, 165
paper mailer survey, 164
progress of program, 166
Slurries and ditching charges, 243
sound amplification devices
amplified listening device, 35
radioshack amplified listener, 36
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA) systems, 238
applications for, 63–64

www.syngress.com
324 
Index
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA) systems (Continued)
attack techniques
key-logger software, 183
Man-In-The-Middle Attacks  
(MITM), 182
backup and recovery of, 176
challenges of, 173
communication protocols, 70–71
components
distributed control system  
(DCS), 66–67
event loggers, 67–68
hybrid controllers, 67
Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC), 
65–66
Remote Terminal Unit (RTU), 65
components and functions of, 173
controlling access, 177
firewall architectures
application-level gateway, 85–86
circuit-level gateway, 84–85
deep packet inspection firewall, 88
intrusion prevention system (IPS), 87
stateful packet filtering, 83
static packet filter, 82–83
unified threat management (UTM), 89
firewall tool
definition, 78
multi-network  
connectivity, 79–80
positive and negative security  
models, 79
reactive and proactive  
solutions, 80–81
internal and external security incidents, 
174
law enforcement on, 172–183
network architecture, 68–70
risk determination
active scanning, 75–76
passive scanning, 76
risk mitigation, 76–78
roles in industries, 62
security issues
British Columbia Institute of 
Technology (BCIT)  
report, 71–72
disadvantages, 75
high-level weaknesses, 74
security policy, 77–78
TCP/IP error handling, 73
vs. distributed control systems, 67
T
tailgating technique, 21
technical security, in  
SCADA systems
destroyed disk drive, 16–17
digital Shredder device, 15–16
EDR’s disk destroyer, 18
sound amplification devices, 35–36
technical vulnerabilities, 124
customer communication, 127
enumeration activities, 125
tools for IEM baseline activities, 127
vulnerability identification activities, 
125–126
terror targets, classification
commercial and transportation  
targets, 239
infrastructure target, 238
statement target, 237–238
touch point communications, 156
3T2R rule, 211
U
U-Change®, 199
UL (Underwriters Laboratories) 437 
Standards

www.syngress.com
 
Index 
325
deficiencies
bump key attacks, 207
decoding attacks, 208
forced entry resistance test, 206
key control, 208–209
mechanical bypass, 209
picking and impressioning  
techniques, 205–206
test by criminals, 204–205
for security locks, 201–202
transformation of convention  
lock, 203
unified threat management (UTM)
in firewall SCADA systems, 89
reactive signature-based  
systems, 81
V
Virtual Private Networks (VPN), 174, 
178–179
W
Water Infrastructure Security  
Enhancement (WISE), 99
workforce continuity
definition, 282, 288
planning, 282
World Trade Center,  
234–235, 237, 239
Y
Yale pin tumbler lock. See modern pin 
tumbler lock

