MARCH 2018
FIRST LOOK:
BEST BUY LAPTOPS, TABLETS, WEARABLES
Gigabyte Aero 15X  
APPLE’S MULTI-PROCESSING BEAST
iMAC PRO
WORD UP: BEST FREE  
ALTERNATIVES TO  
MICROSOFT OFFICE
Why you’ll love this 
portable gaming laptop
Honor 7X
REVIEW:
¬


MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   3
CONTENTS
ROUND-UP
FEATURE
FIRST LOOK
HANDS-ON
HOW TO
REVIEWS
Best free alternatives to Microsoft Ofﬁce
69
Wi-Fi network troubleshooting guide
89
Apple iMac Pro
56
Razer Phone
63
69
56
abyte Aero 15X         4
Acer Swift 1         15
Honor 7X         26
kBerry Motion         36
on Echo Show         48
Mute a website in Chrome, forever         103
Fix a touchpad that stops working         106

4   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
Gigabyte Aero 15X
£1,999 inc VAT from fave.co/2kehxp9
g
y
interesting gaming laptops we’ve seen. It 
has an Nvidia GTX 1070 GPU, making it a 
full-blooded gaming machine to compete with a 
high-end desktop. It is, however, just about small 
and light enough to be used as a portable everyday 
machine. Add in fantastic battery life and a meaty 
keyboard and, well, you start to wonder why you 
wanted an Alienware 15 in the ﬁrst place.
Given its semi-lifestyle angle it could do with a 
smoother look. But we imagine some of you will 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   5
REVIEW
disagree. The one part we can all agree on is that the 
fans get a bit loud at times, but not to an extent that 
puts us off this remarkable machine.
Price
Gigabyte produces some of the most affordable 
gaming laptops. But the Aero 15X is not one of them. 
Our review unit has the impressive GTX 1070 GPU, 
16 GB RAM, a 512GB SSD and a Core i7 CPU. It 
costs a wallet-worrying £1,999. There’s also a version 
with two 512GB SSDs, costing £2,199.
Your other option is the non-X, version of the 
Aero 15 (priced £1,849), which has a GTX 1060 GPU 
but otherwise similar speciﬁcations. 
One point to note about the Aero 15X is that 
it uses a special ,Maxi-Q, version of the 1070 with 
lower clock speeds. It’s what lets Gigabyte ﬁt such a 
powerful GPU into a slim laptop. You’ll still get a big 
boost over the 1060 model, but not as much as the 
GTX 1070 of, say, an Alienware 15.
The Aero 15X has a two-year warranty, although 
the battery is only covered for the ﬁrst year.
Design
The Gigabyte Aero 15X is the sort of laptop you could 
easily assume does not have a desktop-challenging 
graphics card inside, if it wasn’t for the rainbow 
keyboard backlit and GeForce sticker. It looks serious, 
but it’s far smaller and lighter than almost all laptops 
that have GPUs of this level.
It weighs 2.1kg and is 20mm thick. That’s thin and 
light enough to carry around in a rucksack all day, every 

6   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
day. Those whose ﬁrst laptop was a MacBook Air may 
disagree, but it’s a world removed from your average 
performance-obsessed gaming machine. These are 
often 30- to 40mm thick and weigh 3- to 4kg
Most of the shell is made of aluminium, although 
the aim of the design seems to be more industrial chic 
than pure style. It isn’t what I’d call pretty, but it well 
built and has plenty of modern design nods. There’s 
just 5mm of surround around the screen, and even less 
border around the keyboard. No space is wasted.
The lid is a bit too ‘sensitive’, putting the Aero 15X 
into sleep when it’s partially closed, but it’s a very minor 
issue we’ve only noticed because we’ve actually been 
using this laptop like a thin and light laptop at times.
Connectivity
Like most gaming laptops, the Aero 15X doesn’t have 
an optical drive. However, it does have a wide array of 
connections. There are three USB 3.0 ports and one 
newer USB-C type, which is speciﬁed to the very fast 
(40Gb/s) Thunderbolt 3 standard. For video there’s an 
HDMI and Mini DisplayPort (1.3), while an RJ45 lets 
you use wired Internet rather than having to rely on the 
ac-grade Wi-Fi. Gigabyte has also added a full-size SD 
card slot, which we’re always glad to see in a laptop.
Keyboard and trackpad
We’d expect a slim and light gaming laptop to have 
a standard shallow-action chiclet keyboard. But the 
Aero 15X’s is anything but ordinary.
This is a deep-action keyboard with very, very 
meaty key feedback. It feels a little like typing on an 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   7
REVIEW
old ThinkPad, which has some of the tactile DNA of 
a mechanical keyboard.
If you’re entirely accustomed to shallow designs, 
this may feel odd, but we love it. That said, it does 
take some getting used to. A full numberpad shunts 
the normal keys left of centre, so you’ll have to retrain 
your hands to avoid typos.
A little more unusual is that during typing we’ve 
noticed a tendency for the Aero 15X to register 
double characters for key presses on occasion. Typing 
too hard? Perhaps, but it’s more evidence this is a 
keyboard you have to give time to bed in.

8   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
The last special feature of the keyboard is the 
rainbow key backlight. This doesn’t extend to the 
pad or the laptop’s sides, but you can customize it 
using a Gigabyte app, Fusion. This lets you alter the 
colour per key, so you can come up with some truly 
odd combinations if you like.
The trackpad is a mid-size rectangle of textured 
glass. Its surface feels great, but again Gigabyte 
has made a design choice here that requires some 
conscious effort. Great big top-end gaming laptops 
tend to have separate mouse buttons, which gets rid 
of any ﬁnger confusion, and lets a manufacturer add 
better feedback than is possible with buttons integrated 
into the pad. The Aero 15X has integrated buttons, 
and their layout is one suited to an ultra-slim Windows 
MacBook homage. Much of the pad is given to the ‘left’ 
button – the right is half the height and just a couple of 
inches of the pad’s width. There’s also a zone towards 
the right button that doesn’t seem to allow ‘press and 
drag’ gestures, which feels slightly bizarre in practice.
You’ll need to learn these quirks to avoid frustration, 
or use a mouse for gaming and be happy Gigabyte 
has used this layout because it works well for general 
navigation and using simple apps such as the browser.
Display
The Aero 15X is the ﬁrst laptop we’ve reviewed to 
have an X-rite Pantone Certiﬁed display. This relates 
to screen calibration rather than a guarantee of panel 
quality, and to be honest the average 0.22 Delta E 
seems about right for a high-end laptop. Display quality 
is very good, although this is not a high-resolution or 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   9
REVIEW
wide-gamut screen. We doubt many will be bothered 
by conventional colour, but some of you may be after 
a 4K (or at least above 1080p) panel for £2,000.
This is a matt 1080p IPS LCD without touchscreen. 
It covers a respectable 83.5 percent of sRGB, 60.1 
percent of Adobe RGB and 62.9 percent of DCI P3. 
This is not the greatest screen ever seen on a laptop, 
but is good enough to satisfy even, at the price.
Colour is vivid and, thanks to 1009:1 contrast, blacks 
look good too. Maximum brightness of 352cd/m2 is also 
solid, and more than is needed most of the time. Using 
the laptop indoors for work and gaming we haven’t 
wanted to use more than 30 percent or so brightness.

10   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
Performance
At the time of the Aero 15X’s release the ﬁrst 8th 
Generation Core-series laptops are starting to come 
out. So why does this laptop still have a 7th Gen 
model? That’s simple. The ﬁrst chipsets out of the 
gate are ‘slim and light’ U-series models while laptops 
like this use HQ processors designed to provide more 
power over a longer period.
It has the Intel Core i7-7700HQ, which for the past 
12 months has been the default choice for just about 
every high-end gaming laptop. To go with that you get 
16GB DDR4 RAM and a 512GB Samsung SSD. There 
are two RAM slots and two PCIe X4/SATA slots, so you 
can upgrade these parts further down the line.
This speciﬁcation is perfect for high-end productivity 
jobs, that 16GB RAM probably more useful for video 
or photo editing than it is for most games. The 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   11
REVIEW
laptop scores an excellent 4801 points in PC Mark 10, 
beating the Acer Helios 300 we reviewed recently by 
600 points despite the use of the same CPU.
The low bulk of the Aero 15X doesn’t restrict CPU 
power, but it does affect the GPU. This laptop has a 
Max-Q version of the high-power Nvidia GTX 1070 
GPU with 8GB RAM. It has a lower clock speed than 
the version of the 1070 you might ﬁnd in a laptop 
twice as heavy, twice as thick, and this results in a loss 
of about 10- to 15 percent performance.
Make sure you’re happy with this before buying, but 
the Aero 15X still offers superb general gaming grunt. 
It runs Alien Isolation at 250fps at 720p and 181fps at 
1080p with settings maxed: incredible headroom.
The more challenging Deus Ex: Mankind Divided 
runs at 117.3fps at 720p, low settings. That drops 
to a still-good 52.7fps average at 1080p, Ultra. This 
represents a doubling of frame rate over the Acer 
Helios 300 and its lower-end GTX 1050Ti GPU.
You’ll get slightly better results out of a big 
laptop with a ‘full fat’ laptop GTX 1070. But for our 
purposes we’d much rather have a laptop that we 
can actually cart around without needing a sports 
massage at the end of the day.
The other predictable snag of a slim gaming 
laptop is fan noise. There’s not as much room for 
‘passive’ heat sinks or very large diameter fans, and 
this shows in use. The Aero 15X fans engage quickly 
as you start gaming, and do get loud.
Volume isn’t the most noticeable part, though. As 
the Aero 15X appears to have smaller-diameter fans 
than, say, the Alienware 15 or a top-end Asus RoG, the 

12   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
noise is higher-pitch. We ﬁnd it a little more distracting 
as a result. We expected worse, though, and given the 
dimensions the noise tax seems completely acceptable.
Battery life
Fantastic longevity is another pleasant surprise of the 
Gigabyte Aero 15X. Playing back a video on loop at 
120cd/m2 brightness, the battery lasts nine hours 55 
minutes, which is great for a workstation, let alone a 
high-powered gaming laptop. This seals the deal: the 
slim and light frame isn’t just for the look. You really 
could use this is a day-to-day roving laptop. Students 
with real money to spend should take note.
While part of this is down to the efﬁciency of Intel’s 
CPUs (and we can’t wait to see the results with 2018’s 
8th Gen models), the Gigabyte Aero 15X also has a 
huge 94.24Wh battery. That is far larger than the 68Wh 
of the much chunkier Alienware 15 R3. You have to 
wonder: how did Gigabyte ﬁt it all in?
As in most gaming laptops, the speakers aren’t all 
that impressive, with no real bass. However, the tone is 
clean and clear, and volume good enough for YouTube 
videos or the odd podcast.
The Aero 15X’s design also sees the webcam shifted 
from its normal place above the screen to down by 
the hinge. It points up at your face, but that upwards 
angle is not the most ﬂattering. Image quality is also 
mediocre, and resolution an unremarkable 720p.
Verdict
The Gigabyte Aero 15X is a gaming laptop that deﬁes 
the conventions of this class. It refuses to be 4cm 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   13
REVIEW
thick, to weigh at least 3kg and to last just four hours 
between charges. 
What you end up with is a very powerful, desktop-
rivalling laptop that is also slim, light and long-lasting 
enough to function as a portable computer. In this ﬁeld 
your best other option is the Razer Blade, which isn’t 
available with a GTX1070 Max-Q (yet) and works out 
more expensive anyway. This is a laptop that can do 
it all, although you will probably have to spend some 
time getting used to the keyboard. Andrew Williams
Speciﬁcations
•  15.6in (1920x1080, 141ppi) 1080p IPS LCD display
•  Windows 10 Home (64-bit)

14   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
•  2.8GHz Intel Core i7-7700HQ (3.8GHz boost) four 
cores, eight threads
•  Nvidia GTX 1070 Maxi-Q GPU with 8GB RAM
•  16GB 2,400MHz DDR4 RAM
•  512GB SSD
•  802.11b/g/n/ac single-band 2x2 MIMO
•  Bluetooth 4.2
•  1x USB-C Thunderbolt 3
•  3x USB 3.0
•  HDMI
•  Mini DisplayPort 1.3
•  RJ45 Ethernet
•  Kensington Security Slot
•  SDXC card slot
•  Stereo speakers
•  HD webcam
•  Single mic
•  3.5mm headset jack
•  UK tiled keyboard with numberpad
•  Two-button trackpad
•  57Wh lithium-ion battery, removable
•  356.4x250x19.9mm
•  2.1kg
•  2-year on-site warranty (1 year for battery) 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   15
REVIEW
Acer Swift 1
£329 inc VAT from fave.co/2kGNt4V
A
cer’s Swift 1 is one of the cheapest laptop 
you can buy that looks a little like a MacBook. 
It’s slim, and has a metal frame with plenty of 
bright aluminium on show.
Whereas MacBooks start at £949 for the arguably 
out of date Air 13, the Swift 1 costs £349 in the variant 
we’re using. Let that sink in: just over a third the price 
of Apple’s cheapest alternative.
Low CPU power and minimal storage make the 
Acer Swift 1 suitable for only light jobs like writing 
documents, surﬁng the web and streaming video. 

16   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
However, given the price, its impersonation of a £700- 
to £1,000 slim and light laptop is almost convincing.
Price
Our review unit, priced £329, has an Intel Pentium CPU, 
4GB RAM and 64GB storage. Shop around and you’ll 
also ﬁnd a version with a much better 128GB SSD, for 
around £415. Rarer still is a Core i3 model (£580) with 
8GB RAM and a 128GB SSD. A £250 hike may seem 
steep, but in the jump up to an i3 CPU, the Swift 1 
becomes a very different laptop on the inside.
Design
If a laptop costs £350 or less, we normally expect to 
see a somewhat thick plastic shell. The aim should be a 
solid, practical laptop, not a ﬂashy one, right?
The Acer Swift 1 is nothing like that. It’s affordable, 
but still has a full aluminium shell. Its lid, the keyboard 
surround and the underside all use plates of real 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   17
REVIEW
aluminium. This is the sort of look that makes you 
expect a £650-plus price tag, not a £350 one.
Acer has a history of providing that expensive 
aluminium look and feel at a low price, having used the 
same tactic (and a similar shell) in its 13in Chromebook.
For the price, the Swift 1 looks and feels lovely, and 
there’s no obvious sign Acer has done the job on the 
cheap. The panels don’t ﬂex like cardboard at the ﬁrst 
sign of pressure and the aluminium has an anodized 
ﬁnish just like several of the popular expensive 
alternatives. It’s a brighter, shinier ﬁnish than some, 
but still looks great.
Let’s not just gush, though. There are a few signs 
the Swift 1 isn’t really an expensive laptop. The display 
has a black border around it, which isn’t the prettiest 
look. And the display surround is that of a classic 
laptop. Many new models (including some cheaper 
ones) only have a few millimetres of redundant border 
around them. This one has – shock, horror – about an 
inch to the left and right.
Its thickness and weight let it easily slide into the 
‘thin and light’ category, though. The Swift 1 weighs 
1.3kg and is just under 15mm thick.
Connectivity
The Swift 1 also has all the main connections we 
like to see in a laptop, including some you’ll miss by 
choosing a much more expensive model. There are two 
USB 3.0 ports – great for the price – and one USB 2.0 
socket. A USB-C port complements these, although 
it’s predictably only speciﬁed to the 3.1 standard, not 
the much faster Thunderbolt 3.0. A full-size HDMI and 

18   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
full-size SD card slot ﬁnish off what is a connections 
array ﬁt for a more powerful laptop than the Swift 1.
Keyboard and trackpad
There are also no nasty surprises in the keyboard and 
trackpad either. Some super-affordable laptops have 
keys that feel cheap, often with hollow-feeling feedback 
or too much wobble. There’s none of this in the Swift 1. 
This is a rock-solid semi-shallow chiclet design. Buying 
this entry-level model, you beneﬁt from the fact there 
are signiﬁcantly pricier models with the same shell and 
keyboard. Acer couldn’t afford to cheap out too much.
We used the Swift 1 as our main work computer 
for a while, and came across no issues. There is, and 
this came as no surprise, no keyboard backlight. While 
some surprisingly affordable laptops have backlit 
keyboards, we don’t expect one in a £350 laptop that 
already has budget siphoned off to accommodate an 
aluminium shell.
The trackpad is similar: not high-end but great for 
the price. Its surface is plastic rather than textured 
glass, but then some laptops twice the price still use 
plastic. Swipes are relatively smooth and the click 
action is solid. It’s not too stiff, not too deep, not too 
loud and not broken. As in so many other aspects, the 
Swift 1 trackpad doesn’t seem like a melted Madame 
Tussauds mock-up even when stacked up against ‘real 
deal’ £1,000 laptops.
Acer has – although we’re not entirely sure why – 
also crammed in a ﬁngerprint scanner to the right of 
the trackpad. This is a little mad in a £350 laptop. It’s a 
little ﬁddly compared to that of high-end laptops, but 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   19
REVIEW
does let you login with your ﬁnger as promised. It just 
may take a couple of attempts.
Display
If the scanner is a case of Acer showing off 
unnecessarily, the screen is the sort of grandstanding 
we’re a sucker for. The Swift 1 may be cheap, but it 
still packs in a perfectly respectable 1080p IPS LCD 
display, one 13.3in across.
At ﬁrst it might seem the ‘1080p’ part is most 
important, but ‘IPS’ is. Plenty of cheap laptops still 
use ‘TN’ screens that look bad from even a slight 
angle, while even an entry-level IPS panel like this 
looks good from almost any angle.
Not every aspect of the Swift 1 is amazing, of 
course. Colour is visibly a little undersaturated, covering 
just 61.2 percent of the sRGB colour gamut. Tones 
don’t pop off the screen as they might in a £350 tablet, 

20   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
but this is undoubtedly among the best laptop displays 
at the price. Solid contrast of 985:1 also helps makes 
the most of this colour capability. For a £350 laptop, 
the display looks very good to us.
It’s a matte screen too, which is better if you’re 
going to use the Swift 1 out in daylight, or on a train 
with light streaming right through a window onto your 
Excel spreadsheet. However, brightness is only just 
good enough to reach an acceptable level for any 
sort of outdoor use. The Swift 1’s maximum brightness 
is 266cd/m2. You’ll really want to see 350cd/m2 or 
above for best results on a sunny day. But just by 
saying that we’re (once again) comparing the Swift 1 
to laptops twice the price.
This isn’t a touchscreen, but the display folds back 
almost 180 degrees, rather than the usual 130. It’s 
not useful in that many situations, but does make 
sharing what’s on screen easier.

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   21
REVIEW
Performance
If you’re waiting for the reason why the Swift 1 is so 
cheap when we keep comparing it to models twice the 
price, the best answer is the CPU. Our version of the 
laptop has an Intel Pentium N4200 processor. This is 
a quad-core CPU with a clock speed of 1.1GHz and a 
‘burst’ of 2.5GHz. However, compared to Core series 
processors, even the Core i3, this is a bit of a weakling.
Using the Swift 1 as we would any other laptop, we 
found installing and loading apps took signiﬁcantly 
longer than with a Core-powered system. And any 
intense applications like video editing or high-level 3D 
gaming are off the cards. However, with this generation 
of Pentium CPU, we’re ﬁnally past what has put off 
recommending most budget Windows laptops in 
recent years. Until this generation, Atom and Pentium-
powered laptops could be borderline painful to use at 
times even with light duties.
The Swift 1 and its Pentium N4200 feel just ﬁne, with 
minimal lag when you’re just coasting across the surface 
of Windows 10 and, say, using the browser or WordPad. 
This is the level at which the laptop is comfortable. 
But it’s important as it wrestles away some of the 
appeal of ‘premium’ Chromebooks, which we’ve often 
recommended over rock-bottom laptops.
You’ll need a little patience, but not anything like 
some older entry-level laptops require.
The Swift 1’s benchmark results are, of course, pretty 
poor, though. It scores 1134 points in PC Mark 10, 
where a Core i5 will push 2700.
There’s a more telling comparison, though. The 
Intel Pentium 4450U Lenovo used in its IdeaPad 320S 

22   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
scores 2295, making it much more like a lower-power 
alternative to a Core-series computer. Of course, the 
320S is more expensive, made of plastic and has a 
much, much worse screen. Comparing the two on 
performance is just one side of the story.
Gaming performance is poor, again worse than 
the IdeaPad 320S, but no worse than we expect from 
a Pentium CPU, which has a low-end Intel HD 505 
GPU. Alien: Isolation runs at an average 9.8fps at 
720p, minimum graphics. At 1080p with the settings 
maxed you’re looking at 3.3fps. We’re miles away 
from playable speeds.
We couldn’t even try our usual Deus Ex: Mankind 
Divided as there’s no enough room on the Swift 1’s 
paltry 64GB solid state storage. But we’d be looking at 
single ﬁgure frame rates no matter the setting.
Gaming is not a total bust, though. The Swift 1 can 
play Skyrim at 720p resolution, Low settings well.
One beneﬁt of using such a low-end CPU is the 
Swift 1 doesn’t need fans. It uses passive cooling, like 
a tablet. It’ll be silent (or near silent) no matter what 
you do. Putting an ear up to the ports, we can hear a 
slight almost HDD-like noise from the Swift’s insides. 
It’s likely to be noise from the power supply or another 
component. Your Swift 1 may not suffer from it, and in 
ours it’s only audible if you go listening for it.
Battery life
A CPU that barely uses any power makes you expect 
a battery that lasts forever. Acer says the 42Wh 
battery lasts 10 hours, but in our experience it’s not 
quite as long-lasting.

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   23
REVIEW
Playing a 90-minute video on loop at 120cd/m2 
brightness, the Swift 1 lasts seven hours 49 minutes. 
While not a mind-blowing result, it’s very close to what 
we tend to look for: a full day of work.
The speakers too are sufﬁcient, but not special. 
While clear and largely undistorted at higher output, 
they don’t have the volume, mid-range bulk or bass 
of the best laptop speakers.
Verdict
The Acer Swift 1 is perhaps the most expensive-looking 
and feeling laptop Windows 10 laptop you can get for 
£350. A metal shell, solid keyboard and trackpad, and a 
display that simply ﬂattens more at the price in terms of 
perceptual image quality are all to be celebrated.
There’s only one worry: performance. While the 
Pentium processor used here is signiﬁcantly better than 
that of previous generations, it’s a low-end chipset that 
will make more demanding tasks seem a real chore.

24   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
However, for light use – emails, browsing, some 
casual gaming – the Swift 1 performs ﬁne. It’s also 
a great choice for humanities students, as the sort 
of essay-making machine you can comfortably carry 
around all day, every day.
Speciﬁcations
•  13.3in (1920x1080) 1080p IPS LCD matt anti-glare 
display
•  1.1GHz Intel Pentium N4200 (2.5GHz boost) four 
cores, four threads
•  Windows 10 Home (64-bit)
•  Intel HD 505 GPU
•  4GB DDR3 RAM
•  64GB solid state memory
•  802.11b/g/n/ac single-band 2x2 MIMO
•  Bluetooth 4.1
•  1x USB-C 3.1
•  2x USB 3.0
•  1x USB 2.0
•  HDMI
•  SDXC card slot
•  Stereo speakers
•  HD webcam
•  Single mic
•  3.5mm headset jack
•  UK tiled keyboard with numberpad
•  Two-button trackpad
•  57Wh lithium-ion battery, removable
•  319x225x14.9mm
•  1.3kg
•  1-year carry-in warranty

THE WORLD’S BEST-SELLING APPLE MAGAZINE
HOW TO FIX HIGH SIERRA ROOT BUG
JANUARY 2018
FROM IDG
Best Mac
antivirus software
Adobe Photoshop
CC 2018
REVIEW: 
MAC SECURITY TIPS
+
MAC
GAMES
LATEST

26   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
Honor 7X
£269 inc VAT from fave.co/2k0UUno
A
fter the jaw-dropping Xiaomi Mi Mix back in 
2016, phone manufacturers quickly started 
launching ‘bezel-less’ phones. And many 
decided to cram in a larger screen rather than make 
a physically smaller phone. They did this by making it 
taller with an 18:9 aspect ratio instead of 16:9. 18:9 is 
super fashionable, but until now with the 7X, was out of 
reach for those on a budget. Even the OnePlus 5T costs 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   27
REVIEW
£449, which is the very top of mid-range. The Honor 
looks a lot like Huawei’s Mate 10 Pro, but saves on 
cost to bring the price right down.
Design
Let’s start with the screen, as it’s the most obvious 
feature. On paper the specs – 5.93in, 18:9 aspect, 
2160x1080 resolution – could fool you into thinking 
it’s the same display as the Mate 10 Pro. But it isn’t.
OLED screens are more expensive, so Honor has 
gone for an IPS panel in the 7X. It makes sense, and 
it’s still a great screen. Viewing angles are wide, it’s nice 
and bright and colours are surprisingly vibrant.
Obviously it doesn’t have the option of an always-on 
clock with notiﬁcations, but it still looks impressive 
with tiny size bezels and much smaller top and bottom 
borders than other phones at this level.
There’s no room for a ﬁngerprint reader so this is on 
the back in the middle. You’ll also ﬁnd a pair of cameras 
at the top with an LED ﬂash. Rather than spoiling the 
design, the antennae lines add a bit of interest to the 
otherwise featureless expanse of matt-ﬁnish aluminium.
Talking of ﬁnish, the 7X comes in black or blue – the 
gold version won’t be sold in the UK.
The bottom edge reveals a standard headphone 
jack, microphone and mono speaker and – slightly 
strange at the end of 2017 – a Micro-USB port. 
Maybe the 2018 Honor phones will move to USB-C. 
In any case, it makes it easy to charge as you’ll ﬁnd 
Micro-USB cables just about everywhere you go.
Nothing but a pinhole for a microphone breaks 
up the top edge: the SIM tray sits at the top of 

28   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
the left-hand side and takes a pair of nano SIMs. 
Alternatively, if you want extra storage you can insert 
a microSD card instead of a second SIM.
It isn’t unreasonable to expect some waterprooﬁng 
from a cheaper phone, as the Moto G5 Plus 
demonstrates, but while the 7X doesn’t have any Honor 
goes out of its way to talk about build quality. It says it 
has strengthened all four corners of the phone so it can 
better withstand drops. We’d still recommend using a 
case, but unlike with Huawei phones you don’t get one 
in the 7X’s box.
Performance
Internally, the specs are mid-range: a Kirin 659 
processor, 4GB of RAM and 64GB of storage. The latter 
two are generous, but overall performance is in line 
The ﬁngerprint reader is located on the rear of the phone

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   29
REVIEW
Geekbench 4
GFXBench 
Manhattan

30   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
with what you’d expect: this isn’t a ﬂagship-rivalling 
device, and it isn’t meant to be.
Benchmark results show that isn’t far from super-
fast, but in real-world use it’s perfectly quick. Apps 
may take a little longer to launch, but they run 
smoothly and you can run most games (such as 
Asphalt 8 and Pokémon GO) without issue: they 
won’t look quite as good as on much faster phones, 
but they also won’t run like the slideshows we saw 
in GFXBench, which is designed to highlight the 
differences between phones.
Honor is working with certain developers including 
Gameloft to optimize games for the 18:9 screen so 
you see more of a scene. With most games, forcing 
them to use the entire screen just crops them so you 
GFXBench 
T-Rex

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   31
REVIEW
actually see less (as is the case with all 18:9 screens 
at the moment).
Battery life, from our weekend of testing, shows 
that the 3,340mAh battery can make it through a 
whole day with normal use, but it drains quickly 
if you’re playing games. There’s no fast charging, 
so you’ll probably end up connecting the charger 
each night when you go to bed.
Cameras
The main camera has a 16Mp sensor and uses PDAF for 
focusing in a claimed 0.18 seconds. The second camera 
has a 2Mp sensor and is simply used for depth sensing 
rather than capturing photos or video. It means you get 
the same portrait and wide-aperture modes that you’ll 
ﬁnd on the Huawei Mate 10 Pro and the stock camera 
app is essentially the same minus a couple of features, 
and the Leica branding.
One of those is video stabilisation: the 7X doesn’t 
have any. It’s limited to recording at 1080p30 with no 
60fps option, so this will put some off.
There’s an 8Mp selﬁe cam and you can enable 
depth effect for blurry backgrounds. Thanks to gesture 
support you can wave and get a countdown for group 
shots. In selﬁe mode there’s the expected beauty 
mode, but you can also apply fun masks and effects.
Photo quality isn’t amazing from the main camera. 
It’s best in good light, where photos look sharp and 
have good detail levels. HDR isn’t automatic, so you 
have to select this from the list of modes if you think 
it’s needed. This was taken with HDR (image 1) on a 
gloomy day, but even so we’d expect colours to be a 

32   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
bit warmer. The portrait mode works well, though, and 
you can switch to the wide-aperture mode when taking 
a photo of something that isn’t a person. You also have 
lots of other modes, including light painting, time-lapse 
and slo-mo to play with.
Video defaults to 720p, so make sure you choose 
1080p to get the best possible quality. The lack of 
stabilisation means you need to keep the phone 
as still as possible, but video and audio quality is 
reasonably good.
In low light, including indoors at night with artiﬁcial 
lighting, you can easily notice the drop in quality (2): 
photos lack detail and sharpness, which is presumably 
caused by a lot of noise reduction. You also need to 
1.

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   33
REVIEW
make sure your subject stays still: we ended up with a 
lot of blurry photos of excitable animals and children.
Software
The 7X doesn’t have Oreo, but it’s possible Honor will 
release an update in the not too distant future. Out of 
the box you get Android 7.0 Nougat with EMUI 5.1 – 
older than the EMUI 8 you’ll ﬁnd on the Mate 10 Pro.
Still, the interface is pretty much identical and 
it’s hard to spot many differences between the 
versions. For those unfamiliar with EMUI, it’s looks a 
lot like Samsung’s TouchWiz and the default setting 
of placing all apps on home screens makes it very 
familiar to iOS users. It has some nifty features such 
2.

34   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
as double-tapping the screen to wake it, and double-
pressing the volume-down button to launch the camera 
app. You have to enable these through the settings as 
they’re disabled by default.
There’s one-key split-screen so you can carry on 
watching a video (on Netﬂix, say) while you reply to an 
email or message. You’ll also ﬁnd the same App Twin 
menu option, but unlike the Mate 10 Pro, you can only 
sign into two Facebook accounts – there’s no option for 
WhatsApp or Messenger here.
Like EMUI 8, you’ll get warnings when apps 
are using a lot of power in the background and it’s 
generally helpful for stopping lots of apps running, 
freeing up memory with one tap.
For audio, you get Huawei’s Histen effects, which 
lets you either play with the EQ or enable a ‘3D sound’ 
mode where you can adjust a slider from Near to 
Front to Wide. Unlike on the Mate 10 Pro, those 3D 
modes seemed ineffective, and it was far more useful 
having a customisable equaliser to add bass.
Verdict
Honor does pretty much everything right with the 7X. 
It looks like a much more expensive phone than it is, 
has a headphone jack and offers a choice of dual-SIM 
or expandable memory. The 18:9 screen is great to 
use, and most apps work okay when forced to ﬁll it. 
Battery life is good and cameras are acceptable, but 
not excellent. The bottom line is that Honor has put 
together a decent phone that gives you an 18:9 screen 
which looks like a ﬂagship for far less than ﬂagship 
prices. Jim Martin

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   35
REVIEW
Speciﬁcations
•  5.93in full-HD (2160x1080, 407ppi) IPS display
•  Android 7.0 Nougat
•  HiSilicon Kirin 659 processor
•  Octa-core (4x 2.36GHz Cortex-A53 and 4x 1.7GHz 
Cortex-A53) CPU
•  Mali-T830 MP2 GPU
•  4GB RAM
•  64GB storage, microSD up to 256GB
•  Fingerprint scanner (rear mounted)
•  Dual: 16Mp and 2Mp, phase detection autofocus, 
LED ﬂash
•  8Mp, 1080p
•  3.5mm headphone jack
•  802.11b/g/n Wi-Fi
•  Bluetooth 4.1
•  A-GPS, GLONASS, BDS
•  Micro-USB 2.0
•  Non-removable lithium-polymer 3,340mAh battery
•  156.5x75.3x7.6mm
•  165g

36   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
BlackBerry Motion
£399 inc VAT from fave.co/2jgqcpM
B
lackBerry continues to morph into its true second 
phase in 2017. The KeyOne was a minor success 
in tech circles, with people enjoying the classic 
aesthetic, physical keyboard and up to date Android 
experience. The Motion continues that revival as 
part of BlackBerry Mobile’s licensing deal with TCL. 
The former markets, the latter manufactures. On this 
evidence, it is doing a pretty great job.
The Motion is a solid, austere slab of smartphone 
at an affordable price point, but when you look at the 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   37
REVIEW
speciﬁcations, there are high-end options out there 
for less than £100 more.
Design
BlackBerry is remembered for its mid-2000s heyday 
when handsets like the Bold 9900 were strictly business 
looking and felt close to indestructible. The Motion 
is going to pick up scratches, dents and maybe a 
smashed screen like any other phone might, but 
it does feel solid with its aluminium frame, a nice 
addition at the price point.
Unlike the DTEK50 and DTEK60, TCL and BB 
Mobile’s other all-touchscreen BlackBerry phones, 
the Motion feels premium. It is slightly larger than 
the KeyOne and boasts a 5.5in display.
The bottom bezel is a tad chunky but houses 
capacitive navigation buttons that you can’t swap 
over as they are backlit, speciﬁc symbols. A physical 
button integrates a ﬁngerprint sensor and an 
unsubtle bit of BlackBerry branding. The top bezel 
is slimmer with camera and LED notiﬁcation light if 
you long for the retro BlackBerry vibe.
BlackBerry’s mappable convenience key is now 
on the right edge next to the power button, while 
you’ll also ﬁnd a headphone jack (hooray), downward 
facing speaker and camera with ﬂash. The back also 
has a Kevlar-esque texture that is less pronounced than 
on the KeyOne, but is still a great addition for grip 
and also doesn’t show ﬁngerprints like so many other 
phones do. It charges via USB-C and has an attractive 
textured detail to the metallic silver bumper. We also 
like how the phone curves over at the top rather than 

38   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
being ﬂat, something we’ve not seen on any other 
phones recently.
Hardware
The Motion is on the large side, measuring 
155.7x75.4x8.1mm with pronounced bezels. The 5.5in 
screen is just about manageable one handed, but it’s by 
no means a small device. Luckily you can swipe down 
on the ﬁngerprint sensor to pull down the notiﬁcation 
shade, but it’s not as intuitive as with a rear-mounted 
ﬁngerprint sensor.
The sensor itself recalls the Galaxy S6 and S7 in that 
it is a physical button rather than this year’s trend for 
static sensors. It’s not the fastest unlock mechanism 
on the market, but a simple placing of your thumb or 
ﬁnger on the sensor wakes the phone promptly.
In my initial use of the phone it has coped 
pretty well with all tasks considering the mid-range 
Snapdragon 625 processor found in the KeyOne 
and the Moto G5 Plus. 4GB RAM certainly helps 
that, while it has 32GB of expandable storage up to 
256GB for all your local media.
Display
The display is a 1920x1080p IPS LCD with 401ppi, 
and looks vibrant enough, but isn’t the brightest 
panel out there. Viewing angles are decent but it 
does struggle a bit in bright sunlight.
Touch responsiveness is decent, and the panel 
feels more rugged compared to the sometimes 
ﬂimsy-feeling KeyOne. The Motion has slight 
light bleed on the top and bottom of the screen 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   39
REVIEW
that’s particularly visible when it’s white, but that is 
commonplace on devices of this price.
You’re tapping directly onto glass that is nano-
diamond coated, a world ﬁrst according to BlackBerry 
Mobile. It’s therefore not the industry-favourite 
Gorilla Glass and considering the promise we actually 
picked up a small scratch on the ﬁrst day of use.
It feels nicer to use glass though than something like 
the plastic coated ShatterShield on the Moto Z2 Force, 
but BlackBerry is saying the Motion’s screen is anti-
scratch rather than scratch proof, so it just about gets 
away with it.
Cameras
The camera is a 12Mp sensor with f/2.0 aperture 
and a dual LED ﬂash. It’s also great to see 4K video 
recording at 30fps on a phone that costs under £400.

40   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
Results are predictably mixed, with bright sunlight 
being the optimum shooting condition (image 1). You 
need a steady hand too, as it’s easy to get blurry shots 
without realising until you view them enlarged. We also 
viewed some images on a monitor to ﬁnd they were 
better than the Motion’s display suggested.
So, we can’t recommend the Motion’s camera for 
more than the odd point-and-shoot situation, though 
it’s perfectly adequate for social media purposes.
Battery life
One of the headline specs here is the phone’s 
4,000mAh battery, and it delivers on the promise of two 
1.

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   41
REVIEW
days battery life. Charging happens over USB-C and 
Quick Charge 3, though you have to unlock the phone 
and select boost mode when you plug in or it won’t 
charge as fast.
The Motion breezes past three hours screen on time 
with at least 60 percent battery left, and with medium 
to heavy use using the phone as my main device, We 
comfortably got two full working days from the Motion, 
and only reached for the charger around midday on the 
third day. And if you’re wondering, yes this is insane.
Of all the phones we’ve tested recently, only the 
Lenovo P2 can match the Motion for this kind of battery 
stamina. It is no coincidence that these phones share 
the same Snapdragon 625 processor, but the P2 one-
ups with its 5,100mAh battery. The P2 is half the price, 
but a pain to get hold of in the UK, so the Motion is a 
ﬁne alternative.
BlackBerry Mobile relentlessly positions its 
handsets in the business market as productivity tools, 
and the battery life is a key part of this. But if you are 
an avid phone user who needs four hours of screen 
on time out of a single charge for video and music then 
the Motion is a phone to consider, but the mid-range 
processor means high level gaming isn’t possible.
Performance
Oddly, the Motion refused to run our normal 
Geekbench 4 benchmark tests (same as the KeyOne) 
so we ran Antutu and GFXBench tests to compare the 
Motion’s pure processing speeds to similar devices.
The phone is also IP67 dust and water resistant, 
the ﬁrst ever BlackBerry to be so. This means it’ll 

42   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
Antutu
GFXBench 
Manhattan

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   43
REVIEW
handle a downpour or an accidental submersion with 
no issues. It’s another attractive beneﬁt to picking the 
Motion over the KeyOne alongside the price and the 
increase in battery life.
The Motion did hiccup a few times when we ﬂipped 
between apps, downloaded them, or general tried to 
multitask like we might on a high-end device. This is to 
be expected, but as the Motion is £399, it’s creeping 
towards that arena. The Moto G5 Plus performs 
very similarly as the benchmarks show, and costs 
just £199.99. At ﬁrst glance, it looks like BlackBerry 
is charging £100 extra for the physical keyboard of 
the KeyOne, meaning unless you’re absolutely set on 
that slice of typing nostalgia, the new Motion will save 
you money and not compromise on any other specs.
GFXBench 
T-Rex

44   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
Connectivity and extras
Call quality is good, with a speaker that gets more 
than loud enough, and we used Bluetooth headphones 
and a Samsung Gear Fit2 Pro with no trouble over 
Bluetooth 4.2. Android Pay (and other functions) are 
a go with NFC, too. Also welcome are the included 
headphones. They are above-average, in-ear buds 
in a slick black, but like the ﬁngerprint sensor have 
unsubtle BB branding.
Software
The BlackBerry Motion ships with Android 7.1.2, and 
BlackBerry Mobile has conﬁrmed it will receive Oreo ‘in 
the new year’ which is incredibly open-ended, but good 
to hear. As with its previous Android devices, 
BlackBerry’s skin over Google’s stock UI is utilitarian 
unlike the playful versions found on OnePlus and even 
Samsung devices, but you may well prefer this.
We enjoyed the widget features where you swipe up 
on an app to quick-view your widget of choice right on 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   45
REVIEW
the home screen rather than having to place a whole 
widget on there permanently. There’s also an app called 
Locker that hides content in ﬁngerprint-secured folders 
if you don’t want people to access certain ﬁles.
An option in the camera is clever where you 
tap (not fully press) the ﬁngerprint sensor to take 
a photo and it goes directly to the Locker app, 
bypassing any cloud upload you have. We found 
ourselves using it more than we thought to store 
things like passport details and receipts.
As well as a Night Light feature to turn down the 
blue tint after dark, there’s the DTEK suite of security 
prompts and decent frequency of security updates. My 
review device arrived with a 6 November 2017 security 
patch, which was mere days before it landed on my 
desk. You’ll only ﬁnd this speed of update elsewhere 
on a Pixel device, and is a great reason to plump for 
the Motion if you want regular security patches (and 
you should, frankly). Consumers unknowingly walk 
around with Android devices with ancient security 
patches, and BlackBerry Mobile should be commended 
for taking the matter seriously.
We also like the convenience key, which you can 
map to something generic like to open the camera, 
or something as speciﬁc as new email to a speciﬁc 
contact. You can also pin these types of granular 
commands to the home screen for quick, efﬁcient 
and usually work-oriented tasks.  
There are other neat integrated features. We 
initially thought the physical home button was a step 
backwards in design, but a tap of the button (rather 
than a physical press) acts as a back button. Slightly 

46   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
odd as there is a back button directly to its left, but 
we found ourselves using it all the same.
You can do all the tweaks to the OS that you’d 
expect, but the skin doesn’t invite to customize as much 
as Samsung, OnePlus or Google. We get the feeling 
this is a phone to simply set up, be secure and last 
forever on a charge. And that is not a bad thing.
If you’re a die-hard BlackBerry fan, you’ll also enjoy 
being able to set app icons to the style of both the 
BlackBerry 10 and BlackBerry 7 operating systems. 
It’s a small nod to the old company’s past as is the 
Motion’s name, surely a nod to Research in Motion?
Verdict
The BlackBerry Motion proves a difﬁcult device to rate. 
It’s too big, and there’s not much to tempt a casual 
smartphone buyer here aside from outstanding battery 
life. It is too austere and clunky even in comparison 
to the KeyOne, and won’t stand out in the £400 price 
bracket. BlackBerry isn’t a cool brand, but the Motion 
has a huge battery, a headphone jack and a CPU that 
will just about cope with what you want it to do besides 
high level gaming. If the KeyOne was a comeback, 
the Motion is just about a solid sequel but there are 
phones like the Moto G5 Plus with similar speciﬁcations 
for half the price. Henry Burrell
Speciﬁcations
•  5.5in (1920x1080, 401ppi) IPS display
•  Android 7.1 Nougat
•  Qualcomm MSM8953 Snapdragon 625 processor
•  Octa-core 2GHz Cortex-A53

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   47
REVIEW
•  Adreno 506 GPU
•  4GB RAM
•  32GB storage, up to 256GB microSD card slot
•  12Mp, f/2.0, phase detection autofocus, dual-LED 
(dual tone) ﬂash
•   8Mp front-facing camera
•  802.11 b/g/n Wi-Fi
•  Bluetooth 4.2
•  Fingerprint sensor
•  A-GPS, GLONASS
•  4,000mAh lithium-ion battery
•  155.7x75.4x8.1mm
•  167g

48   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
Amazon Echo Show
£199 inc VAT from fave.co/2B0q6dL
T
he Echo Show is not just Amazon’s best smart 
speaker, it’s the most capable mainstream smart 
home assistant on the market. An Intel Atom 
x5-Z8350 processor and a 7in colour touchscreen 
pumps its price tag up to £199, but the display is 
worth the added cost to have at least one in a smart 
home with other Echo speakers. And the Show’s eight-
element far-ﬁeld mic array is stronger than the ones 
on Amazon’s other Echos, which for me eliminated the 
need to have an Echo Dot in an adjoining room.

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   49
REVIEW
Amazon takes full advantage of that display, 
providing not just useful visual feedback, but also an 
in-home intercom – with video, if two Echo Shows 
are used – and a VoIP-type videophone system. 
I’ll elaborate on the intercom feature shortly. The 
videophone service is a great way for families to stay 
in touch – especially grandparents who live far from 
their grandchildren – but video requires both parties 
to have Echo Shows (you can make voice-only calls 
between other Echo models).
That could be expecting a lot from grandma and 
grandpa unless they’re tech savvy or you’re willing to 
set it up for them (a task distance will make doubly 
difﬁcult). While that limitation takes a lot of the sizzle 
out of the proposition, it’s not much different than 
Apple requiring both parties to use an iOS device to 
make use of Facetime.
Amazon’s new Drop In feature is even more 
compelling. This enables two Echo devices to 
operate as a wireless home intercom. You simply say 
“Alexa, drop in on the Kitchen” (or whatever you’ve 
named the Echo you want to use) and a two-way 
communication session will start. With Echo devices 
that have screens (the Echo Show and, I assume, the 
new Echo Spot when it ships), you’ll get a two-way 
video intercom as well as audio. I tried this with a pair 
of Echo Shows operating on a Linksys Velop-based 
home network and it worked great.
As cool as that is, I can’t say the Echo Show has 
a fabulous touchscreen. The colours in the digital 
photos I displayed on it were somewhat muted, its 
resolution tops out at just 1024x600 pixels, and visual 

50   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
quality suffers when viewed off axis. It is responsive 
to touch, however, and it will save you from the need 
to pull out your smartphone to get information such 
as the current time and weather (accompanied by line 
drawings depicting the sun, clouds, or rain). Set a timer, 
and the Show will display a countdown, so you can 
see at a glance how much time is remaining. Link your 
calendars to your Alexa account, and the display will 
scroll through your upcoming appointments. Arrange 
for an Uber and you’ll get visual updates as to when 
your ride will arrive.
You can also display photos you’ve uploaded to 
Amazon’s cloud storage service (you can get 5GB 
of free storage or unlimited photo storage if you’re 
an Amazon Prime customer). Once you’ve uploaded 
your photos, you can identify the people in them, 
organize them into albums, and then ask Alexa to 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   51
REVIEW
show all your photos of a particular person, photos in 
a speciﬁed album, or photos that were shot during a 
stated time frame.
The movie and video experience
You can also watch movies and TV shows on Amazon 
Prime Video, although I don’t imagine many people 
will want to do that on such a small screen – there’s no 
video output, so you can’t connect the Show to your 
big-screen TV. You can request speciﬁc titles (“Alexa, 
show me Transparent,” or even “Alexa, show me 
Transparent, season one”). The titles, or TV episodes, 
appear in numbered boxes. To play the title or 
episode you want to watch, you say “Alexa, play one” 
or whatever number the box is labelled as.
With both music and video, you can use voice 
commands to play and pause, adjust volume, fast 
forward and rewind, skip forward and back, and so on. 
All this worked just ﬁne on two of the Echo Shows I 
got in for review, but a third unit refused to cooperate 
– at least not with videos. It would pause for a second 
or two, and then just go back to streaming as if I’d 
never interrupted it. 
If the manufacturer of your home security camera 
offers an Alexa skill, you can also view the camera’s 
video stream on the Echo Show. This feature works 
with popular cameras from Nest, Logitech, Ring, 
EZviz, and others. It also works with the security 
cameras – including the video doorbell – in the Vivint 
smart home system that I use.
It’s so much more convenient to just ask to see 
what my security cameras can see than it is to pull out 

52   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
my phone and call up an app. There is one caveat, 
however; if your broadband connect has a slow uplink 
– as mine does – there can be a bit of a delay between 
when you ask to see the video feed and when it 
appears on Show. But I have the same problem when 
viewing those feeds on my smartphone.
What it’s like to play  
music on the Echo Show
It’s no contest: this is Amazon’s best-sounding Echo. 
It’s the only one that comes close to delivering good 
sound, and like all other Echos, you can connect any 
Bluetooth speaker if you ﬁnd it inadequate. This is 
the only Echo, however, to not also include a 3.5mm 
auxiliary output.
The Echo Show’s bulky design – it’s 3.5 inches 
deep at its base – allowed Amazon’s engineers to put 
in a pair of 2in full-range speakers aided by Dolby 
DSP algorithms. It’s not an audiophile product by any 
stretch of the imagination – it would sound even better 
with discrete woofers and tweeters – and many people 
won’t want to rely on it alone for music reproduction. 
But the Show does deliver respectable dynamic range 
and it can get pretty loud. You can stream music 
from Amazon Music, Spotify (paid accounts only), 
iHeartRadio, Pandora, TuneIn, and SiriusXM. But you 
can’t connect Tidal or Deezer, which offer the option 
of streaming music encoded in FLAC.
Perhaps more importantly, you can’t stream any 
media from a server on your own network. If you 
want to stream your own music library, you’ll need to 
do it over Bluetooth or upload the ﬁles to Amazon’s 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   53
REVIEW
music service. But you’re limited to uploading 250 
tracks unless you pay for an Amazon Music storage 
subscription, in which case the limit increases to 
250,000 tracks.
There are more caveats you’ll want to be aware of: 
You won’t need to convert ﬁles from one format to 
another before you upload them (from FLAC to MP3, 
for instance), but you’ll get compressed ﬁles when you 
stream them back (Amazon will convert them in the 
cloud to either MP3 or AAC. And it will do that only if it 
can match the track to one in its library. If you have rare 
bootlegs or recordings of your own, you’re out of luck.)
On the bright side, you’ll be treated to a display 
of album art with the music, and you can even ask 

54   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
REVIEW
the Show to display the lyrics for the current song. 
This latter feature, however, seems to be available 
only with Amazon Music – not Spotify or any of the 
other services you can link to your account.
Verdict
Priced at £199, the Echo Show isn’t cheap, but it 
delivers plenty of value. As I found with the very ﬁrst 
Echo, once I had one, I wanted multiples – especially 
for the video intercom feature. And the video calling 
feature is good enough that my adult kids can look 
forward to receiving one for the holidays. You’ll doubly 
appreciate the Echo Show if you have a compatible 
smart home system. I’ve always liked the idea of having 
my smart home user interface on my TV – the biggest 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   55
REVIEW
screen in my house – but the Echo Show lets me have 
it on multiple screens in my house. This is particularly 
great for monitoring my home security cameras. I don’t 
have to go to one room to visually interact with my 
system, and the Echo Show experience is far superior 
to pulling out my smartphone.
Finally, the Echo Show is the only Echo that I’d 
remotely consider for a multi-room audio system – I 
really like the lyrics features and wish it was available 
with more services. But the Echo Show’s native audio 
capabilities don’t hold a candle next to my Sonos 
components, which will soon gain Alexa skills of their 
own with the launch of the Sonos One. Michael Brown
Speciﬁcations
•  7in touchscreen display
•  Intel Atom x5-Z8350 processor
•  5Mp camera
•  Dual 2in stereo speakers
•  Wi-Fi 802.11a/b/g/n
•  Bluetooth
•  187x187x90mm
•  1,170g

56   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
FIRST LOOK
Made for video editing, 3D graphics, software development and 
VR, this pro Mac is an engineering feat, writes ROMAN LOYOLA
T
he long-awaited iMac Pro is ﬁnally here. Late last 
year, Apple’s new workstation-class Mac became 
available on the company’s website. The 8- and 
10-core iMac Pro ships immediately, while the 14- and 
18-core models ship in January.
The release of the iMac Pro is signiﬁcant for Apple. 
The Mac Pro, released in 2013, has had only one 
Apple iMac Pro

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   57
FIRST LOOK
minor update in four years, and Apple earlier this year 
admitted that the machine is a mistake. And while the 
company could say that a top-of-the-line iMac has 
plenty of processing power, it’s not the workstation-
level computer that demanding professionals want. 
This machine is a sign that Apple still values pro 
users and wants to offer a Mac that can meet their 
demands. During an iMac Pro media event, company 
executives and third-party developers in attendance 
hammered that point home. Prices starts at £4,899 for 
the 8-core baseline conﬁguration. The 10-, 14- and 
18-core processors are offered as conﬁgure-to-order 
options, along with RAM (32GB, 64GB, or 128GB), 
ﬂash storage (1-, 2-, or 4TB), and graphics.
Processor and graphics
At the heart of the iMac Pro is an Intel Xeon processor. 
Speciﬁcally, the Xeon W, a workstation-class CPU 
targeted at workstation-class software that uses multiple 
processing cores. The processors incorporate Advanced 
Vector Extensions 512 (AVX 512), Intel’s instruction 
set for 512-bit SIMD (single-instruction, multiple-
data) operations. Apple offers four different processor 
conﬁgurations: 8-core, 10-core, 14-core, and 18-core. 
Apple considers the 10-core model the one that will 
appeal to most users, hitting a sweet spot between 
price and performance; it also offers the highest Turbo 
Boost frequency of the four models at 4.5GHz. The 
14-core iMac Pro was not previously announced as 
part of the line-up.
Pushing the pixels to the iMac Pro’s display are AMD 
Radeon Pro Vega graphics. Base conﬁgurations come 

58   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
FIRST LOOK
with 8GB Radeon Pro Vega 56 graphics, with an option 
to upgrade to the 16GB Radeon Pro Vega 64.
Apple reiterated throughout the event that these 
processors and GPUs were the fastest ever used in 
a Mac. In software demos of Adobe Dimension CC, 
Osirix, TwinMotion, Maxon Cinema 4D, high-resolution 
3D images rendered on the ﬂy in real time, with barely 
any noticeable jitter or lag. In VR demos with Gravity 
Sketch and Servios’ new Electronauts, 3D objects 
and animation ﬂowed smoothly. Most impressive was 
a demo of Apple’s Xcode, which ran several UI tests 
and VMware Fusion virtual machines at the same time 
without the iMac Pro breaking a sweat.
Display and design
Just as the iMac Pro’s processor and graphics 
are the best ever in a Mac, so too is the display, 
according to Apple.
The speciﬁcations of the display certainly are 
impressive. Sporting a 5120x2880 resolution 
and 500 nits of brightness, the 27in 
Retina display is capable of 
displaying billions of colours 
and uses the P3 colour 
gamut. It is not, however, 
an HDR display. At the 
event, it wasn’t possible 
to spend any time 
really examining the 
display’s picture 
quality and 
performance, and 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   59
FIRST LOOK
the specs match up with the current 27in 5K iMac. 
Apple’s iMac displays have always been of top quality, 
and chances are this display will follow suit.
As for the external design, Apple made a conscious 
decision to maintain the look of the iMac that we all 
know; it even has similar dimensions to the iMac. One 
main difference is that the iMac Pro allows for user-
conﬁgurable VESA mounting – the consumer iMac 
must be conﬁgured with a VESA mount at the time 
of purchase. Other differences include the obvious 
space grey ﬁnish (which is quite impressive in person) 
and rear air vents.
Speaking of the air vents, that brings us to the 
internal design of the iMac Pro. Though you’ll probably 
never see the insides, Apple made a great effort to 
address the cooling needs of this Mac. The iMac Pro 
doesn’t use a hard drive or a separate solid-state-
drive mechanism; all of the ﬂash storage is on the 
motherboard. This allowed Apple to install a massive 
heat sink and dual blowers, which Apple says results in 
80 percent better cooling than the iMac’s design.
In the software demos I mentioned previously, not 
once did I notice any fan noise. Not a whirl or the 
white noise of air blasting through the vents. During 
the Xcode demo we were encouraged to feel the 
back of the iMac Pro for a heat check, and it was warm 
to the touch, but I think I’ve felt more heat from my 
MacBook Pro.
A design decision that some users won’t agree 
with is the inability for users to access the iMac Pro’s 
RAM. Fortunately, the RAM is installed in DIMM slots, 
not soldered on to the motherboard, so if you have 

60   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
FIRST LOOK
the ability to open up the iMac Pro, you can upgrade 
the RAM. You don’t have to order more RAM than you 
need at the onset, but if you want to upgrade later, 
Apple considers this task one that needs to be done 
by a service provider.
T2 chip for security
In the MacBook Pro with Touch Bar, Apple introduced 
the T1 chip, which handles processing and display 
for the Touch Bar and provides the secure enclave for 
Touch ID. With the iMac Pro, Apple debuts the T2, 
which controls components and tasks that were once 
covered by other discrete chips, such as the FaceTime 
camera, LEDs, and storage devices. The T2 essentially 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   61
FIRST LOOK
frees the main CPU from these menial tasks so it 
can focus on serious processing.
The T2 chip also provides a new set of security 
features. The T2 provides a secure enclave for ﬁle 
encryption (FileVault) and a new startup security feature, 
which, unfortunately, wasn’t demonstrated at the event. 
Apple says that the iMac Pro will include a software 
utility for conﬁguring the secure boot process.
Apple doesn’t usually comment on future products, 
so the company won’t say if the T2 will be used in other 
Macs. But if you’ve been following the business side of 
Apple, you’ve probably heard about Apple’s dealings 
with third-party chip fabricators and the company’s 
desire to make their own silicon. It’s a foregone 
conclusion that we’ll see the T2 or a later generation 
of the chip in other Macs, it’s just a matter of when.
Space grey input devices
A space grey iMac Pro wouldn’t be complete without 
space grey accessories, and Apple includes a Magic 
Mouse 2 and a Magic Keyboard with Numeric Keypad 
that properly match the iMac Pro. For £50 more, you 
can get a space grey Magic Trackpad 2 instead of a 
mouse, or you can pay an additional £149 to get both.
Colour aside, these devices as the same as offered 
with Apple’s iMacs, so if you hate the ﬂat feel of the 
keyboard keys, you’ll hate the feel of the space grey 
keyboard. And I’m not a fan of the Magic Mouse 2, 
but man, the space grey mouse is gorgeous.
Apple wouldn’t say whether these devices will 
be available for sale separately, but there’s always a 
possibility if the demand is great enough.

62   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
FIRST LOOK
Verdict
The iMac Pro itself is a beast, both in power and price 
tag, capable of handling the most difﬁcult processing 
tasks you can throw at it. If you aren’t sure whether an 
iMac Pro is the Mac for you, take a look at the reasons 
why you should or should not buy an iMac Pro. 
Speciﬁcations
•  27in (5120x2880) Retina 5K display
•  macOS High Sierra
•  3.2GHz Intel Xeon W (4.2GHz Turbo Boost), eight 
cores, 19MB cache
•  Radeon Pro Vega 56 graphics processor, with 8GB of 
HBM2 memory
•  32GB of 2,666MHz DDR4 ECC RAM
•  1TB SSD
•  Wi-Fi 802.11ac
•  Bluetooth 4.2
•  1080p FaceTime camera
•  Stereo speakers
•  Four microphones
•  3.5mm headphone jack
•  SDXC card slot with support for UHS-II
•  4x USB 3.0 ports
•  4x Thunderbolt 3 (USB Type-C)
•  Space Grey Magic Keyboard with Numeric Keypad
•  Space Grey Magic Mouse 2
•  650x516x203mm
•  9.7kg

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   63
HANDS-ON
Razer Phone
High-end features without a high-end price. ADAM PATRICK 
MURRAY looks at Razer’s ﬁrst smartphone
T
he Razer Phone is a bit of a puzzle. It’s not 
surprising that it exists, given that Razer, best 
known for PC hardware and peripherals, acquired 
smartphone maker Nextbit in January of 2017 in order 
to produce this device. Nor is it surprising that, based 
on our hands-on time with the device at a recent 
brieﬁng, the Phone seems to be equal parts Nextbit’s 
Robin and Razer’s laptop line, touting impressive 
speciﬁcations at a reasonable price of £699.  

64   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
HANDS-ON
What’s confusing is what it isn’t. Razer says this isn’t 
meant to be a gaming phone. Rather, it’s a phone for 
gamers, Razer fans, and Android enthusiasts, meaning 
it’s intended to deliver a great experience for all kinds 
of ‘content consumption’, not just gaming. But it’s a 
weird message when Razer’s core audience is gamers – 
and Razer is still pushing gaming partnerships that take 
advantage of the Razer Phone’s unique screen.
A 120Hz display
The Razer Phone is packed with a 120Hz, 2560x1440, 
5.72in LCD panel. If you’ve ever used a high frame rate 
PC display, you know the difference a faster refresh rate 
can have on simple tasks – not just games.
Thumbing through feeds, switching apps, and 
‘consuming content’ all felt super-smooth. I even got to 
track the refresh cycles with Razer’s own built-in version 
of FRAPS (yes, I asked, and yes, you can turn it on in 
the ﬁnal version). The panel uses some of the same 
adaptive refresh technology as Nvidia’s G-Sync and

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   65
HANDS-ON
AMD’s FreeSync, so when you’re idle you also aren’t 
wasting precious battery. 
Speaking of battery, the Razer Phone packs a 
4,000mAh one inside its 197g body. That, paired with 
the newer Qualcomm Snapdragon 835, help it last for 
long ‘content consumption’ sessions. The phone also 
features 8GB of dual channel LPDDR4 RAM clocked 
at 1,600MHz. Razer really knows its audience when it 
lists detailed speciﬁcations like that for a device.
How about another PC-centric spec to catch your 
attention? Members from the same team that came 
up with the custom-cooling solutions in the Razer 
Blade line also had a hand in custom cooling for 
the Snapdragon 835. Razer says its cooling solution 
allows the 835 to run longer before throttling down, 
and when it does, it doesn’t throttle as low. 
Shared design language
Razer also wants the Razer Phone to feel right at home 
with the company’s other hardware offerings – and it 
does. The engineers worked with some of the same 
teams that helped make Razer’s reﬁned Razer Blade 
laptop series. At ﬁrst glance it looks much like the 
Robin that came before it, but in my hands, the Razer 
Phone made the Robin feel like a toy. I would describe 
the overall design to be monolithic. 
The chassis is aluminium and has a nice, tactile feel 
in my hand. I’ve never been a fan of all-glass phones, 
so I’m glad to see Razer lean into what it knows. It 
also feels like a tank that could easily withstand some 
drops – much like LG’s V20. It was dense without 
feeling too weighty.

66   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
HANDS-ON
The back of the phone is one solid piece of 
aluminium, disrupted only by Razer’s snake logo in 
the middle and a camera bump at the top. The edges 
show a glimpse of antenna lines, but they blend in well. 
On the front of the Razer Phone is a dual speaker grille 
– again, like the Razer Blade – with notches taken out 
for the front-facing camera and sensors.
Phone audio with a punch
The Razer Phone’s dual speaker grille and stereo 
speaker conﬁguration are not a ﬁrst by any means, 
but I’d be hard-pressed to ﬁnd a louder setup on 
any phone! Each speaker has its own amp, allowing 
the Phone to be pushed to higher decibels without 
distortion. I’m currently using a Google Pixel 2 XL 
(which also has dual front-facing speakers), and side 
by side it’s no contest: The Razer Phone blew the 
Pixel out of the water at the highest levels. 
Sadly, the Razer Phone does not include a 
headphone jack, and I’m not a fan of this decision. 
It especially makes no sense when Razer makes a 
number of high-quality headphones that still support 
this format. Razer does offer a couple of headphone 
options that support Apple’s Lightning connector, so 
I’m hoping the company releases USB-C support in 
the future. Until then we are stuck with dongles.
Stock for the Android enthusiast
Razer is also trying to court Android enthusiasts. The 
Phone runs a near-stock version of Android 7.1.1 out 
of the gate, and Razer promises 8.0 Oreo support 
in Q1 of 2018. Unlike Nextbit with the Robin, Razer 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   67
HANDS-ON
focuses on the basics while adding 
only a few custom tweaks, like its 
own Gamebooster technology 
and a theme store. We’ve heard 
this ‘focus-on-the-basic’ approach 
before (re: Essential), so I’m hoping 
Razer can deliver.
One choice I liked was Razer’s 
decision to default to Nova Prime 
Launcher rather than make its own. 
I’ve been using Nova Launcher 
for years, and it’s one of the most 
popular out there. The Robin had 
a heavily skinned UI that matched 
the aesthetic they were going for at 
Nextbit, and Razer could easily have 
gone down that same path. Instead 
Razer is allowing the freedom of 
stock Android and providing a 
theme store if you want custom Razer looks. 
To round out the enthusiast angle, the Razer phone 
is sold unlocked (GSM only), with the bootloader 
unlocked out of the box as well. This phone might be a 
great option for the tinkerers out there!
Verdict
I would have loved to have seen a headphone jack 
and more attention paid to the camera setup (it’s very 
basic), but there’s still plenty to like about the Razer 
Phone. Gaming phone or not, Razer is still partnering 
with big phone gaming publishers like Square Enix 
(Final Fantasy) and Tencent (Arena of Valor) to offer 

68   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
HANDS-ON
120Hz optimized experiences. During my meeting, I 
got the feeling that the team from Nextbit got to follow 
their passions on the software side while having access 
to the hardware resources of the teams at Razer. It feels 
like a grown-up Robin, which is what Razer needed. 
Speciﬁcations
•  5.7in full-HD (2560x1440, 515ppi) IPS display
•  Android 7.1.1 Nougat
•  Qualcomm MSM8998 Snapdragon 835 processor
•  Octa-core (4x 2.35GHz Kryo and 4x 1.9GHz Kryo) CPU
•  Adreno 540 GPU
•  8GB RAM
•  64GB storage, microSD up to 256GB
•  Fingerprint scanner (side-mounted)
•  Dual rear-facing cameras: 12Mp, f/1.8, 25mm and 
12Mp, f/2.6, 2x optical zoom, phase detection 
autofocus, dual-LED (dual tone) ﬂash
•  8Mp front-facing camera, f/2.0
•  802.11ac Wi-Fi
•  Bluetooth 4.2
•  A-GPS
•  NFC
•  USB Type-C
•  Non-removable lithium-polymer 4,000mAh battery
•  158.5x77.7x8mm
•  197g

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   69
ROUND-UP
MICHAEL ANSALDO reports on the battle of the free ofﬁce suites
M
icrosoft Ofﬁce is the king of ofﬁce productivity 
suites, but it doesn’t inspire warm, fuzzy 
feelings in all users. Parsing the ever-
expanding list of features can feel like stepping into a 
cockpit without a pilot’s licence. The ribbon interface, 
introduced a decade ago, has many fans, but others 
pine for the static menus of the early aughts. And then 
there’s Ofﬁce’s hefty price tag.
Best free alternatives 
to Microsoft Ofﬁce

70   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
ROUND-UP
Fortunately, alternatives abound, ranging from 
web apps to freemium and open-source desktop 
installations, many of which are compatible with 
Microsoft Ofﬁce docs. We compared six of the most 
popular free ofﬁce suites to see how well they replicate 
the most commonly used features of Microsoft Ofﬁce.
What to look for
When evaluating Ofﬁce alternatives, don’t look to 
replicate every feature, just the ones you need and 
use most. Depending on your situation, that could be 
robust spreadsheet calculations or the ability to access 
ﬁles from anywhere and share them with remote team 
members. Keep these considerations in mind:
The big three: Though Microsoft Ofﬁce has expanded 
over the years to include programs like Outlook, 
Access, and Publisher, its bread and butter is still its 
original trio of programs: Word, Excel, and PowerPoint. 
That’s because nearly everyone uses these three apps 
regardless of the nature of their work. For many of us, 
they are the only three we need in a suite.
Ofﬁce compatibility: Most of the working world will 
continue to use Microsoft Ofﬁce long after you’ve 
jumped ship. That means you’ll still have to work with 
ofﬁcial Ofﬁce ﬁles. Look for a suite that can cleanly read 
and write Microsoft Ofﬁce formats, from the current 
DOCX, XLSX, and PPTX ﬁle types to legacy formats.
Interface: The way you access an ofﬁce suite’s features 
matters as much as the features themselves. Polarized 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   71
ROUND-UP
opinions about Ofﬁce’s ribbon toolbar underscore 
this. Make sure you’re comfortable with the way a 
suite lays out its tools and that you don’t have to 
dig too deeply for those you’ll use a lot.
Collaboration capability: The irony that we still rely 
on ‘ofﬁce’ suites when many of us no longer work 
in physical ofﬁces means the ability to collaborate 
remotely with others is now a required feature. If 
you don’t want to have to email documents back 
and forth for editing – which can play havoc with 
version control – you’ll need an alternative that 
includes cloud support for sharing ﬁles and ideally 
the ability to co-author (make edits and comments 
on a document, for example) in real time.

72   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
ROUND-UP
Apache Open Ofﬁce
Price: Free from fave.co/2BJxg9C
Platform: Windows, Mac, Linux
Open Ofﬁce was the ﬁrst legitimate free contender to 
Microsoft Ofﬁce, though it has ceded that spotlight in 
recent years to alternatives like Google Docs, Sheets, 
and Slides, and its own spin-off product LibreOfﬁce. 
The open source suite includes word processing 
(Write), spreadsheets (Calc), presentation (Impress), 
and database management (Base) programs, along 
with drawing and math apps that don’t have a direct 
Microsoft corollary. It works with most Microsoft 
formats including DOCX, XLS, PPT, and XML. 
Hands on
If you still remember how Microsoft Ofﬁce looked circa 
2003, Open Ofﬁce’s interface will seem eerily familiar. 
The component programs make no concessions to the 
trendy ribbon interface, using only old-school menus 
and toolbars. That’s good news if you’re still sore over 
Microsoft’s decade-old UI makeover, but it can take 
some readjusting if you’re now accustomed to tabbing 
around your document and spreadsheet programs.
By default, Open Ofﬁce uses the Open Document 
standard for native ﬁles, but you can change it to 
save to Microsoft formats, and it can read and write 
existing Word, Excel, and PowerPoint ﬁles. It does 
so ﬂawlessly most of the time, even with complexly 
formatted documents like resumes and multi-column 
newsletters. Occasionally, it will hiccup as when it 
removed all the embedded images from a Word 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   73
ROUND-UP
document I had open. But those instances usually 
only require minor tweaks to correct. You can also 
export ﬁles to PDF from all three programs.
Where Open Ofﬁce diverges from Microsoft’s 
productivity suite is in collaboration. MS Ofﬁce’s tight 
integration with OneDrive and Outlook lets you easily 
share and work on ﬁles with others without leaving the 
respective program. Open Ofﬁce supports document 
review features like commenting and track-changes, 
but it has no native cloud storage or email program. It 
does, however, offer an extension that lets you connect 
to dozens of third-party cloud storage providers 
including Box and Google Drive, and the Open Ofﬁce 
programs can be conﬁgured to work with select open-
source email clients such as Mozilla Thunderbird.
Open Ofﬁce has excellent compatibility with Ofﬁce 
formats and can export to PDF from all three apps

74   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
ROUND-UP
Standout features
•  Excellent Microsoft Ofﬁce compatibility
•  Familiar, Microsoft-like interface
Missing features
•  Native cloud storage and email support
•  Mobile apps
Apache Open Ofﬁce is best for:
If you just need to work with Microsoft Ofﬁce formats, 
and you don’t mind a dated interface, Open Ofﬁce has 
all the comprehensive formatting and functionality you 
need. If you need to collaborate with others on those 
ﬁles, though, there are other ofﬁce alternatives that 
make it much easier.
Google Docs, Sheets, and Slides
Price: Free from fave.co/2BKyQby
Platform: Online
Once considered merely a lightweight web-based 
alternative to Microsoft Ofﬁce, Google’s trio of 
ofﬁce apps (fave.co/2B09iTR) has grown into a 
worthwhile productivity suite in its own right. Though 
its capabilities still aren’t quite as robust as most 
desktop ofﬁce suites, its tight ties to other Google 
products and extendability through a growing market 
of Chrome extensions make it a powerful, cost-effective 
option for students and workers.
Google Docs, Sheets, and Slides are free to use 
by anyone with a web browser, a Google account, 
and an Internet connection. The subscription-based G 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   75
ROUND-UP
Suite, which adds more business-oriented features, is 
available in three pricing tiers for organizations.
Hands on
Google Docs, Sheets, and Slides maintains a consistent 
look across its three component apps. Elegant and 
unadorned, the interface has clearly labelled menus 
with intuitive toolbar icons. All three apps also have 
a healthy set of hotkeys – accessible by typing Ctrl+/ 
on a PC or Cmd+/ on a Mac – for those who prefer 
to keep their ﬁngers on the keyboard.
Any ﬁles you work on in the suite have to be 
stored in Google Drive, the search giant’s popular 
cloud storage. New Docs, Sheets, and Slides ﬁles are 
automatically created in your Drive account, and you 
can also upload Microsoft Ofﬁce ﬁles for editing. All 
Google Docs collaborative editing features tower above all other suites

76   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
ROUND-UP
your changes are saved to Drive as long as you’re 
online; you can install a Chrome browser extension 
(fave.co/2BJnMuV) to edit ﬁles ofﬂine, but it requires 
some conﬁguring and it only works with native Docs, 
Sheets, and Slides ﬁles.
The respective apps do an admirable job of 
importing Word and PowerPoint ﬁles, though you 
sometimes have to tweak elements in the latter. 
Importing Excel ﬁles to Sheets is more of a mixed bag, 
with spreadsheets containing basic functions translating 
more faithfully than larger, more complex ones.
The suite still shines brightest as a collaborative tool 
for written documents, thanks to features like real-time 
commenting, revision tracking, and deep integration 
with Google Drive cloud storage. It’s also intimately 
connected to Google search, allowing you to search 
for information relative to what you’re working on from 
within the individual apps.
Standout features
•  Excellent collaboration tools
•  Tight integration with other Google products
•  Simple, fast interface
Missing features
•  Extensive formatting options
•  Ofﬂine editing capabilities
Google Docs, Sheets, and Slides is best for:
Road warriors, collaborative teams, and anyone 
else who needs the ﬂexibility to work from multiple 
locations will get the most out of Google’s ofﬁce 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   77
ROUND-UP
suite. If your needs run to creating large, intricate 
documents; mail merges; or serious number crunching, 
you’ll likely ﬁnd the suite’s capabilities limited and 
should look elsewhere.
Kingsoft WPS Ofﬁce 2016
Price: Free with ads from fave.co/2B00dKX, or 
$30 (about £22.40) per year without
Platform: Windows, Linux
Kingsoft touts WPS Ofﬁce as “your dream solution 
for a low-budget, no-commitment, free productivity 
ofﬁce suite,” and it’s not just hyperbole. The 
suite – comprised of the self-explanatory Writer, 
Spreadsheets, and Presentation apps – replicates most 
You can customize WPS Ofﬁce’s interface to use 
a ribbon toolbar or static menus a la Ofﬁce 2003

78   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
ROUND-UP
of the essential Microsoft Ofﬁce features and adds a 
few unique extras. It also comes with 1GB of online 
storage, called WPS Cloud, for sharing documents.
If getting all this for free sounds to good to be true, 
there is a small caveat. The free version requires you to 
view ads to gain time-limited access to certain features 
like printing and exporting to PDF. The ads are short, 
around 10 seconds, but if you want to banish them 
for good, you can purchase the Premium version for 
a modest $30 (about £22.40) per year. WPS Ofﬁce is 
available for Windows and Linux and offers companion 
apps for iOS and Android.
Hands on
As Ofﬁce alternatives go, none adhere as faithfully to 
the Microsoft suite as WPS Ofﬁce. Its ribbon interface 
is nearly identical to Microsoft Ofﬁce’s, with tabs and 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   79
ROUND-UP
tools in roughly the same spots in all three of its apps. 
Never really dug that look? Don’t worry – the interface 
is customizable so you can turn back the clock to 
an Ofﬁce 2003-style static menu interface with the 
click of a button. You customize each app’s interface 
independently, so you can mix it up if different UIs 
work for you in different programs.
A few features you won’t ﬁnd in Microsoft Ofﬁce 
make working with documents even easier. All three 
apps support tabbed documents, eliminating the 
hassle of toggling between multiple document 
windows. WPS Writer includes a feature called 
Paragraph Layout that lets you adjust line and 
paragraph spacing and indents with a drag-and-drop 
tool. And Section Navigation lets you quickly jump 
around large documents.
Compatibility with Ofﬁce ﬁles is excellent across 
all three apps, with Presentation standing out for 
accurately translating PowerPoint ﬁles better than any 
other non-Microsoft product we tested. There’s also 
scads of templates – over 100 in Writer alone – for all 
kinds of personal and business documents.
WPS Ofﬁce has limited collaboration capabilities. 
Document-reviewing features like commenting and 
track changes are included, and you can share ﬁles 
with others via link through WPS Cloud, but real-time 
co-authoring is not supported.
Standout features
•  Customizable interface
•  Excellent Ofﬁce compatibility
•  1GB cloud storage for sharing ﬁles

80   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
ROUND-UP
Missing features
•  Real-time co-authoring
WPS Ofﬁce is best for:
If you love everything about Microsoft Ofﬁce except 
the price, you’ll likely love WPS Ofﬁce. While it doesn’t 
support real-time collaboration, neither do most 
desktop Ofﬁce alternatives; if that’s a priority you’ll have 
to look to Google Docs, Sheets, and Slides or Microsoft 
Ofﬁce Online. Otherwise, this suite has everything else 
you could ask for in an Ofﬁce alternative, and if the ads 
ever become an annoyance, you can always upgrade to 
the premium version for a very modest fee.
LibreOfﬁce 5
Price: Free from fave.co/2BKd73j
Platform: Windows, Mac, Linux
LibreOfﬁce came to be when the community 
developing Open Ofﬁce jumped ship several years back 
and created their own suite on the same code. Without 
going in to the details of the divorce, sufﬁce it to say 
LibreOfﬁce has fared better than its ancestor, both 
in terms of development and popularity. Like Open 
Ofﬁce, LibreOfﬁce includes six programs: Write (word 
processing), Calc (spreadsheets), Impress (presentation), 
Base (database management), Draw (vector graphics) 
and Math (mathematical formulae). 
Hands on
Because LibreOfﬁce was forked off Open Ofﬁce, there 
are, unsurprisingly, many similarities between the two. 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   81
ROUND-UP
LibreOfﬁce seamlessly translates Ofﬁce formats
LibreOfﬁce has the same Ofﬁce 2003-style static menu 
look with easily navigated icons and toolbars. The only 
real difference is that it adds a splash of colour akin to 
the current version of Microsoft Ofﬁce and generally 
feels more polished.
LibreOfﬁce uses open document format as its 
native format, but it can also read and write a range of 
Microsoft Ofﬁce formats including the newer DOCX, 
PPT, and PPTX ﬁles. In our tests, it better handled the 
more complex documents that Open Ofﬁce struggled 
with. The installed template selection pales compared 
to what you get with Microsoft Ofﬁce, but you can beef 
it up with downloads from LibreOfﬁce’s Extensions and 
Templates library.

82   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
ROUND-UP
There’s no native cloud integration, but LibreOfﬁce 
does have a Remote Files feature that allows you to 
access ﬁles outside servers like Google Drive and 
OneDrive. That can facilitate sharing ﬁles for group 
review, but no real-time authoring.
Standout features
•  Fantastic compatibility with Microsoft Ofﬁce formats
•  Familiar Ofﬁce-like interface
Missing features
•  Integrated cloud storage
•  Real-time co-authoring
LibreOfﬁce is best for:
LibreOfﬁce should be the choice of open-source 
enthusiasts. Having relative feature parity with Open 
Ofﬁce, it comes down to the release frequency of new 
features and ﬁxes, and LibreOfﬁce wins that race hands 
down. That makes LibreOfﬁce the obvious choice for 
businesses, schools, and anywhere else security is 
important. And if you’re a Linux user, you may already 
be using LibreOfﬁce as it’s now included with many 
Linux distributions.
Microsoft Ofﬁce Online
Price: Free from fave.co/2AZrVr7
Platform: Online
Not to be outdone by Google’s free online ofﬁce suite, 
Microsoft offers its own gratis web-based apps in 
Microsoft Ofﬁce Online. The suite includes Word, Excel, 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   83
ROUND-UP
PowerPoint, and OneNote and is accessible to anyone 
with a desktop browser. There are mobile versions 
of each app for iOS and Android, and a dedicated 
extension for Google’s Chrome browser.
Hands on
The app interfaces for Ofﬁce Online look and 
navigate pretty much like their desktop counterparts, 
and therein lies the appeal. If you’re on the road or 
otherwise away from your trusty PC version of Word, 
you can open a document in the web version of the 
application – no conversion required – and dive right 
in. As these apps are made for down-and-dirty editing, 
you’ll notice some omissions on the tool ribbon – the 
Designs, References, and Mailings tabs are gone from 
Ofﬁce Online offers slimmed-down versions of Microsoft’s 
desktop programs, so not all features are supported

84   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
ROUND-UP
Word, for example – but all the basic functionality is 
accounted for.
As with Google Docs, Sheets, and Slides, Ofﬁce 
Online works right inside your browser. Also like the 
Google suite, it requires your documents be uploaded 
to the cloud – in this case to Microsoft OneDrive – 
before you can edit them. If you lose Internet access, 
there’s no way to work on those ﬁles ofﬂine without 
one of Microsoft’s paid Ofﬁce products.
These slimmed down-versions of the big three 
productivity apps are aimed primarily at home users, so 
you won’t ﬁnd pivot tables, fancy formatting options, 
or more advanced business-oriented capabilities. 
Many ﬁle formats that are supported in the desktop 
versions of the apps – .csv ﬁles, as one example – are 
not supported here. You can, however, collaborate in 
real-time in any of the apps with other Ofﬁce users, 
including taking advantage of Skype integration.
Standout features
•  Familiar Ofﬁce interface
•  Works with native Ofﬁce formats
•  Allows real-time collaboration with other Ofﬁce users
Missing features
•  Ofﬂine editing
•  Many of Ofﬁce’s advanced capabilities
•  Doesn’t support some popular ﬁle types
Microsoft Ofﬁce Online is best for:
Ofﬁce Online is an excellent way to work with Microsoft 
document formats if you have modest needs or you’re 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   85
ROUND-UP
on the road and just need to quickly view a ﬁle and 
make some simple edits. But as it was really made 
to complement rather than replace desktop Ofﬁce 
installations, it doesn’t have the advanced functionality 
business users require to make it your main tool.
SoftMaker FreeOfﬁce 2016
Price: Free from fave.co/2AYRXL0
Platform: Windows, Linux
If you believe less is more, SoftMaker’s FreeOfﬁce may 
the Ofﬁce alternative for you. FreeOfﬁce is the no-
charge version of SoftMaker Ofﬁce 2016 and offers its 
versions of Microsoft’s big three productivity apps in 
TextMaker (Word), PlanMaker (Excel), and Presentations 
(PowerPoint). It contains most of the features of 
FreeOfﬁce can read, but not save, ﬁles in DOCX, XLSX, and PPTX formats

86   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
ROUND-UP
the commercial product, but omits some key ones 
you can only get by upgrading to either SoftMaker 
Ofﬁce Standard 2016 for £61.70 or SoftMaker Ofﬁce 
Professional 2016 for £88.20. It’s available for Windows 
and Linux and has an Android companion app.
Hands on
FreeOfﬁce employs a static-menu interface that should 
feel comfy to users who preferred the pre-ribbon Ofﬁce 
look. Tools are intuitively organized and all three apps 
have a clean-and-light feeling about them. It’s more 
than cosmetic, too, as FreeOfﬁce is exceptionally fast, 
even when working with data-dense spreadsheets.
FreeOfﬁce provides excellent compatibility with 
Open Document format, as used by LibreOfﬁce and 
OpenOfﬁce, as well as the full spectrum of Microsoft 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   87
ROUND-UP
Ofﬁce formats, including password-protected ﬁles. 
However, newer Ofﬁce formats including DOCX, XLSX, 
and PPTX can only be opened – not saved – in the free 
version of the suite.
All three apps include advanced features similar to 
those of their Microsoft counterparts, including PDF 
creation, pivot tables, and interactive presentation 
capabilities, to name a few. Some other desirable 
features – tabbed documents, a thesaurus function, 
the ability to save modern Ofﬁce formats – are 
reserved for the pay product, though.
As with most free desktop suites, collaboration 
is where FreeOfﬁce falls short of Ofﬁce. It includes 
track-changes and commenting features, but with 
no cloud support you can’t co-edit documents with 
others in real time.
Standout features
•  Clean, fast interface
•  Excellent compatibility with lots of Ofﬁce formats
•  Pivot tables and conditional formatting (PlanMaker)
•  Animations and slide transitions (Presentations)
Missing features
•  Cloud support
•  The ability to save modern Ofﬁce formats
FreeOfﬁce is best for:
In terms of both format compatibility and features, 
FreeOfﬁce is a fantastic Ofﬁce alternative for anyone 
concerned with just the three core programs. But the 
inability to save ﬁles in DOCX, XLSX, or PPTX formats 

88   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
ROUND-UP
keeps it from being a truly viable Ofﬁce replacement. 
If that’s a deal breaker, you can still purchase one of 
the paid versions for a full Ofﬁce-like experience.
Runner up: Google Docs, Sheets, and Slides
Google Docs, Sheets, and Slides simply can’t be 
beat for collaboration. Its document review features 
and integration with Google Drive make it our go-to 
solution for anyone who routinely needs to co-author 
documents with others in real time. It also has tight 
ties with other Google products, including, of course, 
search, giving it capabilities you won’t ﬁnd in any other 
ofﬁce suite. Its relatively spartan interface is a welcome 
respite from Ofﬁce’s busy toolbars, too.
Winner: Kingsoft WPS Ofﬁce 2016
Kingsoft’s WPS Ofﬁce 2016 delivers the most Ofﬁce-
like experience of all the suites we tried. Built around 
its own versions of Word, Excel, and PowerPoint, it 
offers excellent compatibility with all Microsoft Ofﬁce 
formats and features a customizable interface that can 
be tailored to your preference for either the ribbon 
toolbar or the static menus of Ofﬁce 2003. It’s also 
the only desktop suite in our roundup that included 
integrated cloud storage for easily sharing and 
collaborating on ﬁles. 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   89
FEATURE
GLENN FLEISHMAN’s tips will help solve your Wi-Fi problems
W
i-Fi is everywhere and built into everything. 
It’s like oxygen for Internet access, media 
streaming, gaming, and all types of 
networking. And it should just work all the time – 
right? If you’ve had an average experience with Wi-Fi 
on mobiles devices, laptops, game systems, and more, 
you know that while a solid Wi-Fi connection might 
be the norm, those times when it’s not can leave you 
tearing your hair out.
Wi-Fi network 
troubleshooting guide

90   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
FEATURE
The Wi-Fi Alliance awards this logo to products that 
meet its interoperability standards, but its absence on a 
product’s packaging could just mean the manufacturer 
didn’t want to pay for the testing and certiﬁcation
Here, I look at a number of common scenarios 
that cause Wi-Fi problems and how to solve them, 
whether you’re running your own network or trying 
to connect to someone else’s using any platform. 
Wi-Fi basics
Before we get started, a very quick primer on a few 
Wi-Fi terms I’ll bring up repeatedly.
802.11: the name of the IEEE engineering trade 
group’s working group for wireless local area networks 
(WLANs). WLANs began in earnest with 802.11b in 
1999 (802.11a came out at the same time, but had less 
traction), and the group is all the way up to 802.11ac 
and 802.11ad today. We expect to see 802.11ax 
gear announced at CES. These speciﬁcations deﬁne 
how data is encoded into radio transmissions and 
exchanged among devices.

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   91
FEATURE
Wi-Fi: a trademarked name used to cover network 
adaptors that have passed a certiﬁcation test to work 
with each other using various 802.11 speciﬁcations.
Frequency bands: Wi-Fi networks use two unlicensed 
frequency bands: 2.4- and 5GHz. Many Wi-Fi routers 
and most modern mobile and desktop devices can 
create networks or connect over either band – these 
are ‘dual-band’ base stations or adaptors. 802.11b and 
g exclusively use the 2.4GHz band. 802.11a and ac 
exclusively use 5GHz. 802.11n works over either band.
Channels: Frequency bands are divided into numbered 
channels. In the UK, 2.4GHz has 13 available 
overlapping channels numbered 1 to 13, while 5GHz 
has about two dozen scattered across a broader range 
from 36 to 165. They run in groups for historic reasons 
in how the bandwidth was granted for unlicensed use 
to everyone. 
Can’t see a network you know is available
You know a network should be reachable from 
where you’re at, but it doesn’t show up in your list 
of available networks to which you can connect. Try 
these possibilities:
Check if you disabled Wi-Fi without realizing it. Some 
Windows laptops and other devices have hardware Wi-
Fi switches or buttons that you can press by accident. 
In Windows 10, the network icon will show a red X 
through the Wi-Fi in the taskbar. In macOS, the Wi-Fi 
‘fan’ in the system menu bar will be an empty outline.

92   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
FEATURE
Cycle your Wi-Fi adaptor. On many devices, you can 
choose a software setting to disable the Wi-Fi radio 
temporarily. Airplane Mode is the simplest way in 
operating systems that offer it, though using it disrupts 
cellular and Bluetooth connections on your device.
Out of range. Wi-Fi doesn’t have a hard cut-off as to 
when it will and won’t work. Sometimes you can get 
perfect reception in one place at one time but not 
another. That’s because the radio signals bounce off 
surfaces, pass through walls, and can be absorbed 
by people and materials. Move around and see if the 
network shows up.
Some computers have buttons that can 
turn the on board Wi-Fi adaptor on and off

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   93
FEATURE
Check your band. While many user devices can 
connect using either frequency band, you can still ﬁnd 
modern hardware that can only connect via 2.4GHz. 
If you are in a location where the only available signal 
that reaches is a 5GHz network, all your dual-band 
hardware will connect just ﬁne, but single-band 2.4GHz 
gear won’t. Because of the different characteristics 
of the band, it’s possible to be in a room in a house, 
ofﬁce, or public space where a 2.4GHz signal doesn’t 
reach, but the same base station’s 5GHz signal is crisp 
and clear. The Apple Watch in all its versions supports 
only 2.4GHz Wi-Fi. Older and inexpensive smartphones 
and tables may lack 5GHz radios, too, and many smart 
home products have only 2.4GHz support.
It’s a closed network. While it’s never been a truly valid 
way of improving security, some networks are set up so 
that they don’t broadcast their name. In that case, if you 
don’t have a connection proﬁle stored, you must use 
the method in the operating system to join a network 
manually, often listed as ‘Other’ in a menu. You’ll need 
to enter the name precisely and, if it’s using encryption, 
choose its security method and enter the password.
The network is down. Check from multiple devices or 
ask other people using the network. A router may need 
to be rebooted – or replaced.
Connected, but no Internet access
Wi-Fi is just a radio technology, which means you can 
have a perfectly strong signal and a valid connection, 
but still lack network access. 

94   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
FEATURE
First, check your network address and see if it’s in 
the ‘self-assigned’ range. If there’s something wrong 
with the way the local network assigns out addresses to 
devices as they attach, your computer or mobile device 
will create a self-assigned address, which can’t route 
data elsewhere. In some cases, small networks can run 
out of addresses to assign. Some operating systems 
provide a clue there’s a problem, like the Wi-Fi signal 
adaptor showing an exclamation point in it. In others, 
you’ll need to drill into network status or settings.
In Android: Settings > About Phone > Status.
In iOS: Settings > Wi-Fi and tap the ‘i’ info button.
Check the IP address assigned to your device to 
ensure that it has an address assigned by your router 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   95
FEATURE
In Windows: Settings > Network & Internet and then 
choose the Wi-Fi adaptor.
In macOS: Open the Network system preference 
pane, select the Wi-Fi adaptor, click Advanced, and 
click the TCP/IP tab.
If the IP address on your device for IPv4 networking 
(a set of four numbers separated by periods) starts 
with 169.254, then it’s a self-assigned address, which 
indicates your OS couldn’t receive an assignment from 
the local network’s DHCP (Dynamic Host Conﬁguration 
Protocol) server. (Some work and academic networks 
might require entering a static set of values, but you 
should know if you’re on one of those.)
Before assuming the network is at fault, however, 
check your ﬁrewall settings, if you have one installed 
or are using tools built into the OS. Some ﬁrewalls 
prevent connecting to new networks and routing 
trafﬁc over them without an explicit entry. In most 
cases, you should receive a prompt that warns you 
about a new network and asks you approve it. But 
depending on your conﬁguration, it’s possible the 
network routing has been blocked silently.
Once you eliminate the ﬁrewall or other ﬁlters, 
you can be sure it’s the network that’s the trouble. If 
you’re not the person who kicks routers when they 
misbehave, you’ll need to ﬁnd someone who is.
The IP address is valid, but nothing loads
If you’re using a public hotspot at a café, airport, 
conference centre, or elsewhere, you might have run 

96   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
FEATURE
afoul of a portal or login page without realizing it. Most 
operating systems’ last several versions understand 
that you might encounter a portal and act accordingly. 
Until you answer the right questions or click the right 
buttons, Internet access is locked away.
With a portal page, the hotspot effectively 
hijacks domain name service (DNS) lookups, so that 
everywhere you’re trying to go redirects to the portal. 
Apple’s macOS and iOS recognize this behaviour, and 
pop up a modal dialog that displays the portal web 
page. Once access successfully starts, the operating 
system can tell that DNS is working properly and 
dismisses itself or shows a Done button that can be 
tapped or clicked. Sometimes portals are wonky or, 
due to ﬁrewall or other ﬁltering software, your system 
doesn’t trust these redirections. This would prevent 
the portal page from appearing.
Open a browser and try to load any page, like 
techadvisor.co.uk, and see what happens. If you see 
loading and redirection start – look at the Location 
ﬁeld in your browser and see if the domain or IP 
addresses change – it’s likely something on your 
system that’s blocking completion. If nothing ever loads 
in the browser, consult with the venue. You may need to 
obtain a password, pay, or use a special conﬁguration.
Your network connections are inconsistent
There are four main culprits in inconsistent Wi-Fi 
performance and network access: an erratic broadband 
connection, distance from a base station, the wrong 
base station in a set selected, and a congested local 
networking environment.

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   97
FEATURE
Broadband. The ﬁrst is hard to test unless you can plug 
an ethernet cable into the router and use a bandwidth 
tester, like one from Ookla, or a network monitor that 
shows you performance over time. If you can, however, 
eliminate that as a possibility before you move forward.
Distance. This seems like an easy one, too: move 
closer. But if you don’t know where the Wi-Fi base 
stations are located or you’re in rooms away from those 
in which they’re placed, ‘closer’ may be hard to ﬁgure 
out. Because of signal reﬂection and absorption, it’s not 
always obvious where to move your own base stations 
Speed-test tools like Ookla’s Speedtest.net can measure 
the speed your broadband ISP is providing, but you should 
test with a hardwired connection whenever possible

98   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
FEATURE
for better coverage. NetSpot ($49, around £46, from 
fave.co/2B5RDdC for the Pro version for Windows 
and macOS; there’s also a feature-limited free version) 
can help you visualize your coverage area by building 
a heat map as you walk around. There’s also a free 
version of Ekehau’s Heatmapper (fave.co/2BN1996) 
that provides similar features.
Wrong base station. A network of identically named 
Wi-Fi routers with the same security settings lets you 
roam, whether in a million-square-foot ofﬁce tower or 
across rooms in your house. The device you’re carrying, 
however, doesn’t always make the right choice about 
the strongest signal. In my small house, we have three 
base stations due to thick walls. Laptops and mobiles 
routinely stay connected to a router in the basement 
when they’re within feet of one upstairs. You can pick 
which base station to join when they’re all named the 
same, but cycling your Wi-Fi adaptor from on to off to 
on typically causes it to make a better choice.
Congested local network. If you’re at home or in 
an ofﬁce where you run the gear, you may be able 
to improve the Wi-Fi situation around you. Outside 
of mesh networking ecosystems, you can typically 
connect to a Wi-Fi router and switch from the default 
automatic channel assignment in each band to 
choosing a channel. A little secret about Wi-Fi is that 
while the signal levels have a single maximum for all 
channels in 2.4GHz, the 5GHz band is divided into 
three major pieces, and until 2014, each of them had 
a different maximum signal limit. The lowest channel 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   99
FEATURE
range (36, 40, 44, and 48) could only operate at no 
more than ﬁve percent of the maximum of the highest 
channel range (149, 153, 157, and 161, typically). 
Setting your 5GHz band to channel 149 solves that if 
you have equipment that wasn’t revised to reﬂect the 
new rules, which is the vast majority of base stations 
that are at least two years old. (You can use a tool like 
WiFi Explorer [$20, around £15, from fave.co/2BLcBlJ] 
to examine what’s in use around you.)
One extra tip: Force 5GHz. Many base stations default 
to naming the separate 2.4GHz and 5GHz networks the 
It’s always a good idea to use a complex password, but they can be 
difﬁcult to communicate to others. Many modern routers, including the 
Linksys Velop router shown here, let you share them via text message

100   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
FEATURE
same to ease roaming. Most of them, however, also let 
you choose a separate name for each. If you want to 
ensure the fastest connection with the highest signal 
strength, having separate 2.4GHz and 5GHz network 
names helps alleviate the inconsistency you might 
experience as a result of connecting to the crowded 
2.4GHz brand.
Correct password, no connection
A network that requires either a password or a 
username and password will reject your device if you 
enter it improperly. But what if you’re positive you’re 
entering the username and password correctly?
•  Check whether you were given the password with 
correct capitalization, which counts in Wi-Fi passwords 
as in others. Spaces can be part of WPA2 passphrases, 
but spaces are hard to indicate when written down. 
Conﬁrm you’re not missing a space.
•  Make sure you’ve selected the correct network. In 
some places, you’ll be contending with dozens or 
more separately named networks, and you may have 
selected one named similarly to the one you want. 
Some businesses and hotspots run guest networks 
named only slightly differently than their internal, 
private networks.
•  Overloaded networks and routers with ﬁrmware that’s 
malfunctioning might reject a connection, even when 
you’ve entered the password properly. Consult with 
the network’s manual – if that’s you, reboot the router.

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   101
FEATURE
Your device repeatedly  
rejoins the wrong network
Most modern operating systems retain a list of every 
network to which you’ve connected ever. My Mac has 
entries that date back several years across several 
machine migrations. Some ecosystems sync access, 
too, so when you join the network on one device, all 
your other phones, tablets, and computers now can join 
without additional effort.
If you ﬁnd a ﬂaky network in a place you work or visit 
routinely that you’ve joined once, you might have tried 
to forget it, but it remains. I’ve seen this and heard from 
readers that deleting a network connection doesn’t 
Windows 10’s Manage Known Networks setting will show you every 
network your computer has ever joined (unless you’ve told it to 
forget some of them). If you know there are networks you’ll never 
need to connect to again, click on each one and select Forget

102   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
FEATURE
fully remove it, because a synced copy elsewhere gets 
copied back to your device! The trick is persistence: 
keep deleting it from every device you’re using so the 
syncing ﬁnally syncs up.
You can manage networks in each operating system 
after navigating to these locations:
Android: Settings > Wi-Fi, tap the Customize button 
and choose Saved Network.
iOS: In Settings > Wi-Fi, you can only forget the 
currently connected network.
Windows: Click the Network icon, choose Manage Wi-
Fi Settings, and then choose Manage Known Networks.
macOS: Open the Network system preference pane, 
click the Wi-Fi adaptor in the list at left, click Advanced, 
and then click the Wi-Fi tab.
Your adaptor could just be dead
Wi-Fi adaptors can just die, no matter what kind 
of device they’re embedded in. Before giving up, 
reinstalling the OS can be a ﬁnal ditch way to see if it’s 
a corrupted driver rather than broken hardware. 
With a computer, you can purchase a cheap USB 
nub that plugs in and offers compatible service. With 
mobile phones and tablets, they may be unrepairable. 
As I was writing this article, a friend had just returned 
from the Apple Store with a phone that had its Wi-Fi 
access go ﬂaky and then fail: the store said it couldn’t 
be ﬁxed, only replaced. 

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   103
HOW TO
I
f you’re the type of person who detests autoplaying 
video ads with sound, Google’s Chrome provides 
some help. The beta of Google Chrome 64 allows you 
to mute a site permanently, so even if a video pops up 
– and Chrome can block some of those, too – it won’t 
blow you out of your seat. The feature is expected to 
roll out to the general public sometime in January. 
Google’s Chrome 64 beta ships with a stronger 
popup ad blocker, which automatically prevents some 
How To: Mute a website 
in Chrome, forever
Autoplaying videos might still appear, but Chrome 64 ensures that 
you won’t have to listen to them. MARK HACHMAN shows how

104   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
HOW TO
dodgy ads from either appearing or re-routing you to 
other sites on the web. But it also applies some site-by-
site controls, so that when you visit a website, you have 
better control of what media to allow and disallow.
All of the per-site controls reside within the padlock 
(‘Secure’) icon to the very left of the URL bar. Somewhat 
ironically, Chrome has actually been paring down the 
granularity of per-site controls from Chrome 62 to the 
current Chrome 63, and on to the beta of Chrome 64: 
You used to be able to specify whether a site could 
use your microphone or play MIDI music, for example. 
Chrome 63 reduced the available options to items like 
Flash and cookie controls, while Chrome 64 lists only 
three controls you can specify: Flash, popup ads, and 
sound. For whatever reason, Chrome 64 is the ﬁrst time 
you can specify per-site audio settings. 
Using the new settings, Chrome now allows you to 
specify, on a per-site basis, whether to allow or block (or 
mute) ﬂash and audio, or simply default to the global 
Setting your site preferences is as 
easy as right-clicking the URL bar

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   105
HOW TO
settings you may have already applied. Naturally, this 
doesn’t necessarily block the video from playing, just 
automatically mutes it.
Because of the various solutions website operators 
to use to play video, Chrome appears to block some 
pop-up video (video that appears within an article), and 
not others. Video on the Bloomberg site played, for 
example, though a pop-out video (video that hovers 
over an article) on CNET.com was blocked. 
The new Chrome will also prevent what Google 
calls “abusive experience” ads from redirecting you to 
another location. So-called iframes that redirect users 
to another page will be blocked by Chrome 64, and the 
browser will notify you of the page’s attempt to redirect 
you. In the next version of Chrome, Chrome 65, links 
that open the desired destination in a new tab will also 
be blocked, and users will be notiﬁed.
Interestingly, the Chrome 64 beta blocked 
ads by default on some major sites

106   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
HOW TO
W
hen your laptop’s touchpad stops responding 
to your ﬁngers, you’ve got a problem. Have 
you ever tried to use a Windows PC without 
a mouse, touchpad, or other pointing device? It’s all 
but impossible. If the problem just started, reboot your 
computer and see if that ﬁxes it. (Yes, I know that’s 
painfully obvious, but we all sometimes overlook the 
obvious.) If that doesn’t work, try these solutions.
How To: Fix a touchpad 
that stops working
LINCOLN SPECTOR reveals how to ﬁx a broken touchpad

MARCH 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   107
HOW TO
First, make sure you haven’t accidentally 
disabled the touchpad. In all likelihood, there’s a key 
combination that will toggle the touchpad on and off. 
It usually involves holding down the Fn key (which is 
probably near the lower-left corner of the keyboard) 
while pressing another key.
But what other key should you press? It’s probably 
one of the function keys (F1 through F12), although 
it might be something else. Examine the keyboard, 
paying particular attention to the little icons (usually 
blue) on some of the keys. Look for an icon that 
might suggest the touchpad.
Unfortunately, not all touchpad icons are easy to 
ﬁgure out. I never would have guessed the one on my 
old Lenovo X220. I found it by searching on the model 
name and number plus ‘disable touchpad’. The answer, 
by the way, was F8. I had to search the answer again 
for my newer Lenovo Yoga 900, where it was F6. If you 
can’t guess the icon, I suggest you do the same.
If that doesn’t ﬁx the problem, check the touchpad 
settings. In Windows 7 or 8, go to the Start menu or the 
search charm and type mouse settings. Select Change 
mouse settings (there are other options that are very 
similar, so pick the one with that exact wording). In 
Windows 10, click the Windows key and go to Settings 
> Devices > Touchpad. This brings you to the Touchpad 
settings page, where you can conﬁrm the touchpad is 
enabled and check other options.
If that doesn’t help, you may need a new driver. Go 
to your laptop manufacturer’s website and search for 
your model number and the words touchpad driver. 
See if there’s a driver you can download and install.

108   TECH ADVISOR • MARCH 2018
HOW TO
If none of these suggestions work, you’ve got a 
hardware problem. Assuming you’re not ready to try 
this sort of repair yourself, you have two options: You 
can send the laptop to a shop for repairs, or you can 
buy a small, wireless mouse and use that in its place. 
Check your laptop’s Touchpad settings to make sure the touchpad 
is enabled, and check other settings there while you’re at it

ANDROID
ADVISOR
LATEST SMARTPHONES, TABLETS & WEARABLES
ISSUE  
How Google is
taking back
control of Android
 
H
I
D
D
E
N
 
F
E
A
T
U
R
E
S
FROM IDG
OnePlus 5T
TESTED:
OREO’S
BEST
Hands-on:
Razer Phone
+ 


