
This is a stone.

Digital
Mindﬁeld
When choosing MINDFIELD DIGITAL™ and our DBMD™ 
Program for your development services, you can be sure 
you will receive an app that will save you money and 
resources using the most advanced design and interface 
concepts.
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
We follow an Application Development Cycle where every 
step is carried out to maximum perfection. Our application 
developers are experienced and knowledgeable, and are 
skilled at delivering top high tech Apps. 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
Our team is constantly looking for promising partners in 
order to improve our quality, broaden our experience and 
create a global range of Apps with the most impressive 
conceptual designs, 3D Graphics and Sound FX.
This is a stone.


MICHIGAN STUDENTS DEVELOP MULTIPLE SKILLS FROM ROBOTICS  06
RANSOMWARE SLOWS NORTH CAROLINA COUNTY GOVERNMENT TO A CRAWL  14
HAVE YOU BEEN ‘PWNED’ IN A DATA BREACH? TROY HUNT CAN TELL  24
CHOOSING A STREAMING DEVICE WITHOUT OVERPAYING  34
GOOGLE BLOCKS YOUTUBE ON AMAZON DEVICES IN ESCALATING FEUD  46
COMIC-BOOK HEROES FLOCK TO TV, BUT WHY ARE THEY SO POPULAR?  54
DELIVERY ROBOTS WILL NEED PERMITS TO ROAM SAN FRANCISCO  64
APPLE PAY CASH: REVOLUTIONIZING MONEY  68
CLINICAL TRIAL PUTS APPLE WATCH’S HEART MONITORING PROWESS TO THE TEST  82
CALIFORNIA REGULATORS NIX RULES LIMITING CARMAKER LIABILITY  92
FACEBOOK LAUNCHES PARENT-CONTROLLED MESSENGER APP FOR KIDS  94
Q&A: HOW IS A BITCOIN MINED? A LOOK AT THE VIRTUAL CURRENCY  102
FEDERAL REGULATOR GIVES OK FOR BITCOIN FUTURES TO TRADE  106
iTUNES REVIEW  110
BOX OFFICE TOP 20: ‘COCO,’ ‘JUSTICE LEAGUE’ STAY ON TOP  126
‘THE LAST JEDI’ AIMS TO CAPTURE THAT OLD STAR WARS FEELING  136
JAMES PATTERSON AND EINSTEIN ARCHIVISTS CREATING NEW SERIES  144
JAMES RODAY AND DULE HILL RETEAM FOR ‘PSYCH: THE MOVIE’  148
TECH IS TAKING OVER OUR LIVES, AND OUR 401(K) ACCOUNTS  154
NASA NAILS TEST ON VOYAGER SPACECRAFT, 13 BILLION MILES AWAY  162
SUPER BIG BLACK HOLE FROM EARLY UNIVERSE FARTHEST EVER FOUND 166
NUCLEAR FUSION PROJECT HAILS HALFWAY CONSTRUCTION MILESTONE  170
DOCUMENTS: UK LAWMAKERS FLOUT EXPLICIT PASSWORD-SHARING BAN  176
APPLE, GOOGLE AT CHINESE INTERNET FEST SHOWS LURE OF MARKET  182
IRELAND TO START COLLECTING $15 BILLION IN TAX FROM APPLE  190
FORD COLLABORATES WITH ALIBABA AS IT EXPANDS INTO CHINA  194
RUSSIAN BITCOIN SUSPECT FIGHTS US EXTRADITION IN GREECE  196
TESLA BUILDS WORLD’ BIGGEST BATTERY IN AUSTRALIAN OUTBACK  200

6

Local schools are becoming more involved 
with robotics programs. Being in robotics helps 
students in their classes, helps them create 
leadership roles and helps build a student’s 
work ethic.
STEM education — science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics — is a new 
movement in A merican education that helps 
prepare students for the workforce. Being involved 
in STEM education classes helps a student prepare 
for the job openings that will be available.
MICHIGAN 
STUDENTS 
DEVELOP MULTIPLE 
SKILLS FROM 
ROBOTICS
7

“There are so many job openings right now, 
especially in Michigan,” teacher Melissa Doubek 
said. “There are job openings in stem-related 
careers and there are possibilities for jobs here 
in Alpena.”
One benefit of STEM education is that what 
students learn in their classes helps them in 
robotics and they can apply what they learn in 
class to the robots they are working on.
“We have our math and science classes and 
together with our work ethic, we can put those 
together to build the robots,” AHS sophomore 
Aaron West said.
Along with applying their school work 
to robotics, students learn about time 
management because they learn how to 
balance their time outside of the classroom. 
West said being in robotics helps students focus 
in their classes.
“We make sure that our classes are in top order 
because if our grades drop, we are not allowed 
on the team,” he said.
When Alpena goes to tournaments, West said 
students make sure that their homework is 
done before the tournament by using their time 
efficiently so they are able to compete.
“Robotics makes you realize how important 
hard work is and also realizing the value of 
cooperating with other people,” sophomore 
Emeline Hanna said. “Even if something goes 
wrong, you should still be determined to keep 
going because there are things that will go 
wrong in robotics.”
Robotics gives students experience in the 
science field and also gets the students 
8

9

10

interested and excited about learning new 
things. Doubek said some students never 
know that they are interested in engineering 
before joining robotics, but once they join, they 
get excited.
“They realize that what they are learning 
in math, physics, business and advertising, 
and public relations during the school day is 
important in robotics,” she said.
Students realize they like certain fields of science 
and there are different fields that students can 
pursue careers in. Doubek said there are some 
students who aren’t interested in engineering, 
but are instead interested in medicine. She 
said some students realize they want to learn 
leadership skills when in robotics.
“That is just as important as the students 
realizing that they want to go into engineering,” 
Doubek said. “We put a lot of students in 
leadership roles because we are trying to grow 
the leaders of tomorrow.”
When students are a part of a robotics program, 
they learn more than just building the robots 
with their teammates. Mentor Gary Stevens 
said robotics teaches students how to work in a 
group and as a team.
“You’re going to watch certain kids elevate as 
leaders and you’re going to watch other kids 
find things that they like to do,” he said.
Every student contributes in some way when 
they are a member of robotics. Stevens said 
there is a role for every student and if a student 
is concerned they’re not actively involved, 
there’s a way to help them and get them 
to contribute.
11

Mentor Kevin West said that outside of 
robotics, students learn how to develop and 
how to further themselves. He said that at the 
competitions, the students interact with the 
other teams and make friends with those on 
other teams.
“The teams learn from one another,” he said. “In 
an alliance, they have to align with two other 
teams during every qualifying match so they 
have to interact with people they don’t know. 
They have to work together to decide how each 
team functions and decide what their strongest 
points are.”
Alpena’s robotics program has multiple teams, 
which gives students the opportunity to share 
their knowledge in a smaller group.
“Robotics is a hands-on team experience. It’s like 
a varsity sport for the mind,” Stevens said.
Alpena High School hosted an offseason 
tournament the first weekend of November 
where the teams played last year’s game, the 
Alpena News reported . West said the offseason 
tournament is a good eye-opener for what the 
competitions are going to be like in the winter.
The tournament also gave teams more practice 
working with robots and exposed the new kids 
to what FIRST Robotics is all about. Most of the 
teams that participated had inexperienced 
drivers driving the robots to prepare themselves 
for the season.
“They got to see what a tournament looks like 
and got their interest sparked,” Doubek said. 
“When build season begins in January, they will 
already know what the end goal is.”
12

13

Image: Diedra Laird
14

A cyberattack slowed county government to 
a crawl Wednesday in North Carolina’s most 
populous metro area as deputies processed 
jail inmates by hand, the tax office turned 
away electronic payments and building code 
inspectors switched to paper records.
Data was frozen on dozens of Mecklenburg 
County servers after one of its employees 
opened an email attachment carrying malicious 
software earlier this week.
County manager Dena Diorio said late 
Wednesday that the county will not pay the 
$23,000 demanded by the hacker believed to 
be in Ukraine or Iran. Diorio said it would have 
taken days to restore the county’s computer 
system even if officials paid off the person 
controlling the ransomware, so the decision 
won’t significantly lengthen the timeframe.
“I am confident that our backup data is secure 
and we have the resources to fix this situation 
ourselves,” said Diorio.
RANSOMWARE 
SLOWS NORTH 
CAROLINA 
COUNTY 
GOVERNMENT 
TO A CRAWL
15

In the meantime, county departments were 
scrambling to conduct business without access 
to digital records.
“We are slower, but we are up and running,” 
Diorio said.
The county of more than 1 million residents 
includes Charlotte, but the city government 
appears not to have been compromised by 
the attack. The state’s largest city issued a 
statement that its separate computer systems 
have not been affected and that it severed direct 
connections to county computers.
The computer problems haven’t affected the 
processing of emergency calls because they 
are handled by the city, said Mecklenburg 
County Sheriff’s Office spokeswoman Anjanette 
Flowers Grube.
But it’s caused delays for the county jail and 
disrupted other county services ranging from 
domestic violence counseling to tax collection. 
Sheriff Irwin Carmichael said it’s taking longer to 
manually process arrestees, as well as inmates 
due to be released.
Calls to a county domestic violence hotline 
are rolling straight to voicemail, so counselors 
are checking messages every 15 minutes, 
officials told reporters. And the social services 
department is working to recreate its daily 
itinerary of 1,600 rides for elderly patients with 
medical appointments. Recurring appointments 
that account for most of the rides are less of a 
problem than those for patients who make one-
time reservations.
Patty Eagan, director of Mecklenburg County 
Social Services, said there are “300 trips that are 
medical demand, and that’s when someone 
16

Image: Bounce
17

Image: Diedra Laird
18

has scheduled a trip a week ago, two weeks 
ago. We are not able to see what trips have 
been scheduled.”
Meanwhile, payments to the tax office must 
be made with a check, cash or money order, 
and code inspectors are slowed down by 
using paper records, according to a list of 
affected services.
Diorio said county computers began to suffer 
Monday from the attack, which was publicly 
revealed the next day. A forensic examination 
shows 48 of the county’s 500 servers were 
affected, Diorio said, adding that county 
government officials believe that the hacker 
wasn’t able to gain access to individuals’ health, 
credit card or social security information.
The compromised servers have been 
quarantined, and even potentially healthy 
parts of the system were shut down to avoid 
spreading the malicious program, said Keith 
Gregg, the county’s chief information officer. 
But without getting the compromised servers 
unlocked, the county will have to rebuild 
significant parts of the system.
Diorio said county technology officials will use 
backup data from before the ransomware attack 
to restore the system, but the rebuild will take 
“patience and hard work.”
A security expert said cyberattacks on local 
governments aren’t unusual. For example, a 
hacking attack in late 2016 on San Francisco’s 
mass transit system led its operators to allow 
free rides over part of a weekend because of 
data problems.
Ross Rustici, senior director of intelligence 
services at the firm Cybereason, said 
19

ransomware schemes against local governments 
make the news every couple of months, but that 
they often tend to be smaller, rural areas. He said 
local governments are “easy targets” because of 
their older equipment and software.
He said businesses and local governments 
often pay the ransom because other means of 
recovering the data can be even more expensive.
“Once you’re in that situation, you really have no 
good option, so a lot of people and companies 
end up paying,” he said.
20

Image: Diedra Laird
21



24

Image: Carolyn Kaster
Troy Hunt has collected a trove of 4.8 billion 
stolen identity records pulled from the darkest 
corners of the internet — but he isn’t a hacker.
Instead, he uses that repository to help ordinary 
people navigate the growing scourge of 
the corporate data breach. All that personal 
information was originally taken from brand-
name services such as LinkedIn, Kickstarter, 
Dropbox, MySpace and the cheating website 
Ashley Madison, and later assembled by Hunt.
HAVE YOU BEEN 
‘PWNED’ IN A DATA 
BREACH? TROY 
HUNT CAN TELL
25

26

Working barefoot and in beachwear from 
his home office on Australia’s Gold Coast, 
the amiable security researcher set up his 
irreverent website, “Have I Been Pwned?” 
(POHND), in 2013. Millions of people have since 
used the free service to see if hackers have 
liberated their personal details from unwary 
companies and posted them online.
Along the way, Hunt has become a close  
student of data breaches and the slipshod 
security that makes many companies easy prey 
for attackers. He’s exposed several such thefts 
himself, in some cases identifying them before 
the companies themselves did.
AN EPIDEMIC OF PWNAGE
“Pwned” — a deliberate misspelling of  
“owned” — is slang used by gamers to mean 
“utterly defeated.” It’s an apt description of 
what it’s like to have criminals use your Social 
Security number, birthdate and other personal 
details to commit fraud in your name.
Hunt was invited to appear before Congress 
in late November to help lawmakers wrestle 
with this growing crisis of consumer data 
theft. In just the past two years, attackers have 
stolen sensitive information about hundreds 
of millions of people from the credit bureau 
Equifax, popular online services such as Uber 
and too many other companies to count.
Much of that stolen data flows directly into 
the black market. “Data breaches are another 
commodity, like heroin,” Hunt testified  
Thursday before the House Energy and 
Commerce Committee.
27

UNLIKELY MESSENGER
Hunt’s unlikely path from Queensland’s Surfers 
Paradise Beach to what he describes as “fancy 
government things” on Capitol Hill has been a 
running joke since his invitation to testify was 
announced. Virginia Republican Rep. Morgan 
Griffith, introducing Hunt to lawmakers, noted 
that he “put on a suit and tie for us when he 
normally wears jeans and a black T-shirt.”
Hunt said he splurged on the brand-new Hugo 
Boss suit and Australian outback-style boots 
because he didn’t have anything else to wear. He 
also downloaded an app that instructed him on 
how to tie his necktie.
“Doing my best ‘no really, I’m a professional’ 
impersonation,” he tweeted from the U.S. Capitol 
steps shortly before the hearing. “Did it work?”
28

29

30

ONCE MORE UNTO THE BREACH
Of course, this “new normal” of massive data 
breaches is no joke. So much personal data 
has been publicly exposed through both theft 
and voluntary sharing on social media that 
it’s eroded traditional methods for verifying 
identity, such as usernames, passwords or 
knowledge-based questions about birthdays or 
family history.
In late November, Hunt helped discover a 2014 
breach of the photo-sharing website Imgur 
after analyzing data from the hack passed along 
by one of his sources. Unlike Uber, which hid 
a recently-disclosed breach of more than 57 
million stolen passenger and driver records for a 
year, Imgur took just 25 hours to go public after 
Hunt emailed the San Francisco company on 
Thanksgiving Day.
“Troy Hunt was extremely helpful in bringing 
the data breach to our attention and ensuring 
the sensitive data was passed to us in a secure 
manner,” Roy Sehgal, Imgur’s chief operating 
officer, said in an email.
PWN ALL THE THINGS
Hunt originally launched his site “as a bit of a 
curiosity,” he said. At the time, he was a software 
architect at pharmaceutical giant Pfizer; a few 
years later, he quit to work as an independent 
information security consultant and instructor.
The researcher was analyzing data breaches 
floating around the web and noticed that 
many people were turning up in multiple data 
breaches. “It struck me that this was something 
they probably didn’t know,” Hunt said in a 
phone interview.
31

32

People using his site can search on their email 
address to see whether and where their records 
have been exposed. Roughly 1.7 million people 
also subscribe to alerts that sound when their 
details pop up in newly discovered breaches. 
The website’s user base has grown rapidly as 
bigger data breaches — some many years old — 
get attention.
WEARING THE WHITE HAT
Hunt “has credibility and integrity,” said U.K.-
based security researcher Ian Thornton-Trump, 
who has used Hunt’s site to build a system that 
keeps customer credentials safe from attacks 
that re-use previously disclosed passwords. “He’s 
resisted urges, and probably significant financial 
value, to sell out.”
Thornton-Trump and other supporters say 
Hunt’s usefulness has grown as more people 
confidentially share publicly exposed data 
with him, drawn by his reputation as an ethical 
gatekeeper of sensitive information.
“I hope they get a bit of a sense of doing the 
right thing,” Hunt said. “I hope there’s a sense of 
social good. They certainly don’t get any money 
out of it.”
Hunt warned Congress on Thursday that 
there’s now a “perfect storm of data exposure” 
thanks to the growth in online services that 
are collecting more information than they 
really need. He also slipped in a suggestion 
that that the U.S. government, like some of its 
counterparts elsewhere, should do more to 
penalize companies that don’t disclose their 
breaches properly.
33

34

Why watch video on a phone or a tablet when 
you can get a device for as little as $30 to stream 
shows on a big-screen TV?
Apple, Google, Amazon and Roku are all 
competing to be your gateway to online video. 
Which device you need will largely depend on 
what services you watch and what kind of TV 
you have.
Of course, the device alone won’t be enough. 
You’ll probably want at least one subscription  
to a video service such as Netflix or Hulu,  
which charge monthly fees. Others, such as 
WatchESPN, require a cable TV subscription. 
Plenty of others — YouTube, for instance —  
offer video for free with ads, although their 
selections can be limited.
CHOOSING 
A STREAMING 
DEVICE WITHOUT 
OVERPAYING
35

Here’s a holiday buying guide for the  
TV-streamers in your life.
STREAMING BUILT-IN
Smart TVs, game consoles and the TiVo digital 
video recorder all have streaming capabilities 
built in. If all you watch is Netflix and Hulu, 
you’ll be fine with those. But apps for individual 
channels such as The CW and FX won’t work 
with every device.
The exceptions are TVs that run Roku or Amazon 
software or that have Google’s Chromecast 
technology built in. They tend to have wider app 
selections, so you might not need a streaming 
device at all.
36

37

AMAZON FIRE TV
Although Amazon has gotten better about 
promoting rival services, its Fire TV device is 
best seen as a companion to the company’s 
$99-a-year Prime loyalty program. Video 
available through Prime is prominent. The 
device has Amazon’s Alexa voice assistant built-
in, giving you weather, sports scores, stock 
quotes and playback controls with selected apps 
— ask Alexa to forward 30 seconds, for instance.
Amazon’s $40 Fire TV Stick is good for regular, 
high-definition TV sets.
If you have a higher-resolution 4K TV, you’ll want 
the regular Fire TV for $70. There isn’t a lot of 
4K video yet, but the price difference is small 
compared with what 4K TVs cost. The regular 
Fire TV also offers high-dynamic range, which 
has better contrast and produces brighter 
whites and darker blacks. Again, HDR video is 
slowly coming.
Fire TV doesn’t offer apps for iTunes or Google 
Play video. Fire TV’s remote also lacks volume 
controls, something that’s becoming standard 
on streaming devices.
38

39

40

ROKU
Roku has one of the most complete channel 
libraries — more than 5,000, many you’ve never 
heard of. But there’s no iTunes.
Roku’s Express sells for just $30. The $50 
Streaming Stick gets you a remote with volume 
buttons and voice search — though we’re 
talking basic queries related to shows and apps, 
not playback controls or information such as 
weather. The $70 Streaming Stick Plus adds 4K 
and HDR. Bells and whistles in the $100 Ultra 
include a remote that will emit a sound to help 
you find it in your couch cushion.
The Ultra’s remote has a headphone jack, so you 
can watch TV without waking up roommates. 
For cheaper models, you can get that through 
Roku’s smartphone app. (With Fire TV and Apple 
TV, you can pair wireless headphones.)
41

GOOGLE
Google’s Chromecast is cheap but trickier to use, 
as you have to start video on your phone and 
then switch the stream to the TV. An entry-level 
streaming device from Amazon or Roku might 
be a better choice now that those prices have 
come down.
Separately, Google offers its Android TV software 
for other makers of streaming devices. Google’s 
YouTube and Play services often get prominent 
billing in search results. Again, no iTunes.
Nvidia’s Shield device is one notable example of 
an Android TV device, though it’s pricey, starting 
at $179. It comes with 4K and HDR. You get voice 
searches through Google Assistant — playback 
controls with some apps, weather and data you 
might never think to ask a TV, such as flight status.
Shield is powerful and designed with gamers 
in mind; one feature allows screen sharing of 
game play. A package that includes a game 
controller costs $20 more. The controller gives 
you a headphone jack for private listening and 
hands-free queries with Google Assistant. Even if 
you’re not a gamer, it’s nice not to have to press 
a microphone button on a remote to ask Google 
to pause or start video from the beginning.
42

image: Mark Madeo
43

APPLE TV
Though an iPhone isn’t required, Apple TV will 
be most useful with one. The basic device is 
$149; a version with 4K and HDR costs $30 more. 
You’re paying for the experience — in particular, 
integration and syncing with other Apple 
gadgets. For instance, you can type passwords 
on an iPhone instead of navigating a keyboard 
on the TV character by character.
Siri offers similar playback controls and 
information queries as Alexa and Google 
Assistant. The touchpad on the remote offers 
faster forwarding and rewinding than rivals.
And while all streaming devices offer more 
than just video, Apple TV goes much further 
in offering an iPhone-like experience on a big 
screen. You can browse Ikea’s catalog or order 
food from Grubhub, for instance. Apple TV is 
the only device to support iTunes, but there’s no 
Google Play. Amazon is expected by the end of 
the year.
44

45

Google is pulling its popular YouTube video 
service from Amazon’s Fire TV and Echo Show 
devices in an escalating feud that has caught 
consumers in the crossfire.
The decision to block YouTube is retaliation 
for Amazon’s refusal to sell some Google 
products that compete with Amazon gadgets. 
That includes Google’s Chromecast streaming 
device, an alternative to Fire TV, and an internet-
connected speaker called Home, which is trying 
to catch up to Amazon’s market-leading Echo. 
Amazon’s high-end Echo Show has a screen that 
can display video.
“Given this lack of reciprocity, we are no longer 
supporting YouTube on Echo Show and Fire TV,” 
Google said in a Tuesday statement.
Amazon didn’t immediately respond to a 
request for comment.
GOOGLE BLOCKS 
YOUTUBE ON 
AMAZON  
DEVICES IN 
ESCALATING FEUD
46

47

The battle highlights the power that the world’s 
major technology companies are gaining as they 
dominate important corners of commerce and 
communications. As the world’s largest online 
retailer, Amazon has tremendous sway over 
what people buy, while the results delivered by 
Google’s ubiquitous search engine often help 
determine what people do on and off the web.
Google is hoping to pressure Amazon into 
selling Google’s products by taking away access 
to the world’s most widely watched video 
service. Unless a truce is reached, YouTube will 
stop working on Fire TV on Jan. 1. YouTube was 
supposed to disappear from the Echo Show 
Tuesday, although Amazon has previously found 
ways to make unauthorized versions of YouTube 
available on that device.
The dispute between Amazon and Google 
mirrors the face-offs that occasionally crop up 
between pay-TV providers and TV networks 
when it comes time to re-negotiate their deals.
But in this instance, the two tech heavyweights 
aren’t fighting over licensing fees. Instead, they 
are jockeying to position their gadgets and, 
by extension, their digital services into homes 
as internet-connected appliances and devices 
become more deeply ingrained in people’s lives.
The bickering between Google and Amazon 
has been going on several years as they have 
ratcheted up the competition with each other. 
One of the first signs that the companies were at 
odds came when Amazon redesigned Google’s 
Android mobile software for its Kindle tablets. 
Two years ago, Amazon ousted Chromecast from 
its store, even though that device had previously 
been its top-selling electronics gadget.
48

49

The latest standoff between Google and 
Amazon was ridiculed by a trade association 
of high-speed internet providers. The group, 
USTelecom, has been trying to persuade 
skeptics that internet providers will preserve 
equal access to all digital services, even if  
the Federal Communications Commission 
adopts a proposal to rescind current “net 
neutrality” regulations .
Internet providers are committed to “protections 
like no content blocking or throttling,” said 
USTelecom CEO Jonathan Spalter. “Seems like 
some of the biggest internet companies can’t 
say the same. Ironic, isn’t it?”
50

51

Besides withholding Chromecast and the 
Home speaker from its store, Amazon has also 
rankled Google by declining to sell an internet-
connected thermostat made by Nest, which is 
owned by Google parent Alphabet Inc. Amazon 
also doesn’t allow its Prime video streaming 
service on Chromecast, an omission that Google 
wants to change.
Amazon also doesn’t sell Apple’s video 
streaming player. But that could change 
if Amazon’s video streaming service starts 
working on Apple TV, something Apple has 
said would happen by the end of this year.  
But that announcement was made in June  
and Prime video still isn’t available on  
Apple TV.
Roku’s market-leading streaming players  
are sold through Amazon. Roku’s players 
feature channels for watching both Prime  
video and YouTube.
52

53

54

When “Marvel’s The Punisher” debuted on Netflix 
last month, it was greeted with great interest 
and high anticipation.
But it arrived as just one of many comic-book 
adaptations. “The Punisher” is only the latest in 
a flood now comprising some 28 shows across 
nine broadcast, cable and streaming platforms, 
with no end in sight.
Granted, all comic-book shows aren’t 
created equal.
AMC’s “The Walking Dead,” beset by zombies, 
differs markedly from the teen adventures of 
Archie Andrews on the CW’s “Riverdale” and 
from Amazon’s superhero spoof “The Tick.”
COMIC-BOOK 
HEROES FLOCK 
TO TV, BUT WHY 
ARE THEY SO 
POPULAR?
55

But the majority exists within either of two 
expansive brands, not dissimilar to Pepsi 
and Coke.
One is DC, which (with the midseason arrival of 
“Black Lightning” on the CW) will be represented 
by nine shows on three networks. The other is 
Marvel with 13 shows arrayed on six outlets, 
chiefly Netflix, which currently hosts a half-
dozen of its own.
That all adds up to more spandex get-ups 
than you’d find in an aerobics class. But before 
concluding that superheroes have taken over 
the small screen, it’s worth noting a few things.
First, TV has always chased trends. Think: cop 
shows, doctor shows, lawyer shows. Way back in 
Fall 1959, more than two dozen Westerns were 
airing on just three broadcast networks. That 
would dwarf the current slate of comic book 
shows as a percentage of the 500-odd scripted 
original prime-time series airing in 2017.
“Comics-related television series have always 
been a mainstay of television,” says Paul Levinson, 
professor of communications and media studies 
at Fordham University. “Now it may seem like 
they’re all over the place. But that’s because 
there’s television all over the place.”
Even so, an upsurge of comic-based shows the 
past few years is unmistakable. Consider the CW, 
where, without “Smallville” after a decade’s run, 
no such shows were in its lineup in Fall 2011. But 
after a subsequent year-by-year buildup, it will 
boast seven this season.
Along the way, comics-related movies 
proliferated, while in October 2010, “The Walking 
Dead” made clear from its explosive arrival that a 
comic-book property could be a TV smash.
56

57

By then, the CGI (computer graphics imagery) 
that any superhero show requires had become 
more sophisticated yet sufficiently affordable for 
weekly TV productions. Conversely, superhero 
series were a perfect TV showcase for those 
ever-more-eye-popping special effects in a way 
that more realistic cop dramas or sitcoms could 
never be.
Meanwhile, the launch of more and more 
channels, especially streaming platforms 
with their limitless capacity, signaled an ever-
escalating need to create content.
“With this extraordinary appetite for source 
material, decades of comic books offered 
material just waiting to be plucked,” says Robert 
Thompson, director of Syracuse University’s 
Bleier Center for Television & Popular Culture.
Even better, they’re perfectly formatted for 
turning into TV.
“A comic book is like a TV storyboard: visual 
dialogue in frames,” Thompson says. “It’s so 
perfectly transferable! Comic books make the 
life of a network development executive really, 
really easy.”
But none of this accounts for the apparently 
insatiable hunger for these shows with which 
the audience receives them.
“All of it, one some level, is escapism,” explains 
Brett Rogers, classics professor at the University 
of Puget Sound. “If I’m watching ‘Jessica Jones’ 
for an hour, I’m not dealing with some real 
thing in my life. But the flip side is that comic-
book-inspired shows can be spaces for thinking 
through some serious questions: ‘Jessica Jones’ 
is an opportunity to explore sexual violence and 
post-traumatic stress disorder.
58

Image: Myles Aronowitz
59

60

“The comic book industry famously has had to 
fight the stigma of being for just for children and 
idiots,” he says. But as gifted “kids and idiots” like 
Joss Whedon and Kevin Smith came of age and 
made waves by nurturing a comics ethos across 
multiple media including TV, comics gained new 
gravitas, respect and urgency.
“It’s now being normalized as shared myth of 
mainstream culture,” Rogers said. “It’s a common 
myth shared between readers and viewers, 
adolescents and adults, comics and film buffs 
alike — NOT just kids’ culture.”
Such shows, like the comics that spawned them, 
can offer welcome moral clarity in an ever-more-
confounding world.
“It’s much easier to identify the heroes and 
villains, the good guys vs. the bad guys, than it is 
61

Image: Jessica Miglio
62

on other television shows,” says Levinson. “And, 
by and large, the good characters and heroes 
endure and triumph over adversity.”
“These characters were created as morality tales. 
They have a primal appeal, a simple appeal,” says 
Glen Weldon, a panelist on NPR’s “Pop Culture 
Happy Hour” podcast and author of “Superman: 
The Unauthorized Biography.”
“They represent our best selves. We are meant to 
look at them and strive to be more like them.”
And thanks to the internet, the appreciation of 
these comic-book heroes, whether they exist on 
the page or the screen, can now be enjoyed as a 
communal experience.
“In the past, if you grew up a nerd, you thought 
you were alone,” says Weldon. “Now you can go 
online and find people just like you who share 
your passion.”
How long will this craze last? For more than a 
half-century, TV’s trends have burst on the scene, 
then flared out and been given up for dead. 
(How many current TV Westerns can you count?)
But comics-inspired TV may not follow 
that cycle.
“It may ebb as well as flow,” says Thompson, 
“but I don’t think there’s any reason to believe 
that this genre will exhaust itself as others have 
done, or that viewers will get tired of it. It’s such 
a versatile genre.”
Versatile, and with room to grow, he adds, unlike 
other genres that may have reached their peak. 
While the police procedural may well have 
plateaued creatively, “the comic-book genre is still 
maturing,” he says. “We’re still seeing it evolve.”
63

64

Delivery robots in San Francisco will need 
permits before they can roam city sidewalks 
under legislation approved by city supervisors.
San Francisco has struggled to regulate 
hometown startups that grew too popular, 
including short-term vacation rental platform 
Airbnb and ride-hailing service Uber.
Supervisor Norman Yee proposed an outright 
ban on delivery robots but settled on a 
permitting system. The supervisors approved it 
this week.
DELIVERY ROBOTS 
WILL NEED  
PERMITS TO ROAM  
SAN FRANCISCO
65

66

A maximum of nine “autonomous delivery 
devices” may be allowed at any time in the city.
The robots can’t go more than 3 miles per  
hour (4.8 kilometers per hour) and human 
operators must be nearby. The robots must  
yield to pedestrians.
Chief executives for autonomous delivery 
companies Starship Technologies, Marble 
and Postmates submitted a letter saying they 
welcomed government regulations.
Other cities have taken similar steps.
67

68

69

A BRIEF HISTORY OF APPLE PAY
iPhone and Apple Watch users have had access 
to Apple Pay,  Apple’s mobile payments service, 
since October 2014. The feature allows users to 
buy lunch in a café or buy Christmas presents 
in a retail store and you can even make one-tap 
purchases within apps. The Cupertino firm’s 
latest venture, however, is Apple Pay Cash, 
which allows users to send and receive money 
from peers through the Messages app, making 
the process of transferring money even easier.
“Send money for books to your son in 
college. Split a bill. Pay a babysitter. Send 
and receive from across the table — or 
across the country. Instantly.”
No longer are iPhone users just able to pay 
businesses; with Apple Pay Cash, you can now 
send and receive money from friends. You can 
do so using the Messages app, or simply by 
asking Siri; it really is that simple. The best part 
is, you are not required to download an app, and 
instead can use the cards you already have set 
up in your Wallet. With this new technology, it’s 
never been easier to send money, so your most 
unreliable friend no longer has the excuse of 
leaving their wallet at home!
iOS 11.2 BRINGS APPLE PAY CASH
To access Apple Pay Cash, you’ll need to be over 
the age of 18, live in the United States and update 
your iPhone to the latest version of iOS, 11.2. 
Two-factor authentication will need to be set up 
for your Apple ID, and you’ll need to be signed 
in to iCloud. Once you’ve completed these steps, 
you just need to ensure you have a card added to 
your Apple Wallet and you’re ready to go.
Image: JOSH EDELSON/AFP/Getty Images
70

Inside iOS 11: Messages app gains 
Person-to-Person Payments
71

When using Apple Pay Cash on an iPhone, the 
process is simple.  First, open the Messages app 
and start a conversation with the person you’d 
like to send money to. Then, simply tap the small 
Apple Store icon, followed by the Apple Pay 
icon. You will be prompted to enter the account 
you want to send, and once you have verified 
the transfer with Touch ID or Face ID, the money 
will be on its way to your friend. It really is as 
simple as that.
You can also request a payment from a friend 
or family member using the same process, 
however, instead of tapping ‘pay’ after you 
have entered the amount, you instead click the 
‘request’ button. It is important to remember 
that you can only send to another Apple device 
user and you can only cancel a payment if the 
recipient hasn’t yet accepted it.
INSTANT MONEY WITH A VIRTUAL 
BANK CARD
When you receive payment from a friend or 
family member, the money will not go into your 
bank account, but instead will be transferred 
to your Apple Pay Cash Card. This card can be 
found in your Apple Wallet app and is created 
automatically. Think of it as a virtual bank 
account, where you’ll be able to access your 
new money instantly. No longer do you have to 
wait for the transfer to go through before you 
can buy an outfit for tonight’s party; as soon as 
the payment has been sent, you have access to 
the money straight away. You’ll be able to make 
payments via Apple Pay, or through the App 
Store. You can also transfer the funds to your 
bank account, should you wish to do so.
72

73

74

You can add money to your Apple Pay Cash 
Card using the cards you already have set up in 
the Apple Pay wallet. Apple has a very useful 
guide  on how to add money when using both 
an iPhone and an Apple Watch. 
A SECURE PAYMENT TRANSFER SERVICE
Apple Pay Cash has led to some security 
concerns, however, rest assured that before 
sending the first payments you have to agree 
to the terms and conditions and confirm your 
identity, and you can only send payments using 
Touch ID or Face ID.
There are also no fees when you use a debit card 
through the service, but you will have to pay the 
standard 3% fee when using a credit card. The 
service does not affect your credit, but there are 
limits in place on the amount you can transfer. 
Per message, you can receive a minimum of $1 
and a maximum of $3,000, and you the maximum 
you can receive over a 7-day period is $10,000.
You also don’t have to worry about your account 
if your phone is stolen or lost as the payments 
for the Apple Pay Cash Card are saved-off device 
and not stored solely in the Apple Wallet.
THE FUTURE FOR APPLE PAY 
CASH ABROAD
The question on everyone’s lips is when Apple 
Pay Cash will be available outside the United 
States. At present, Apple is giving no clues, 
although Apple Pay’s original rollout suggests 
that the UK will be next to receive the new Cash 
feature, especially when you take into account 
Facebook Messenger’s rival, which launched in 
the United Kingdom.
Image: Jason Cipriani/CNET
75

76

Image: Justin Sullivan
Apple Pay Cash
77

78

THE END OF PAYPAL COULD BE CLOSE
Although Apple Pay Cash may seem a 
revolutionary feature for your smartphone, it 
is not the first service of its kind. Venmo first 
introduced peer-to-peer payments, bringing 
them to PayPal in 2013 during its acquisition. 
Square also added the feature to its Square Cash 
application, while Google Wallet also allows 
users to send cash to one another. However, 
Apple Pay Cash now poses a real threat to these 
services that are also available in the United 
States, as it is a baked-in feature.
The real main competition Apple Pay Cash 
faces is with PayPal. PayPal not only offers P2P 
payments through Venmo but ahead of the 
launch of Apple Pay Cash, PayPal teamed up 
with Facebook to offer a similar peer-to-peer 
payment service. This allows users to send or 
request money using their PayPal account. 
ANDROID AND APPLE PAY CASH
Perhaps one of biggest drawbacks of Apple Pay 
Cash is that it can only be accessed from iOS 
devices – if one user has an iPhone and the other 
an Android, it won’t work. For the immediate 
future, Android users won’t have access to Apple 
Pay Cash, however, just like it did with its Apple 
Music service in 2015, Apple could introduce a 
standalone Apple Pay Cash application to the 
Google Play Store in due course.
APPLE REVOLUTIONIZES OUR 
RELATIONSHIP WITH MONEY 
The way money changes hands has been 
evolving for hundreds of years. In recent years, 
new payment currencies such as Bitcoin have 
79

revolutionized our relationship with money; and 
the introduction of Apple Pay Cash is another 
step up the ladder.
According to Virgin, Sweden could be 
the first completely cashless society, as it 
continued to crack down on organized crime. 
In Sweden, digital payments are accepted 
almost everywhere, including on buses and to 
buy magazines on the streets. This is a result 
of collaboration between major Swedish and 
Danish banks to create a direct payment app.
Cashless societies could entirely change the 
way our children learn about money, with 
Forbes suggesting that e-currency, such as the 
potential e-Korona in Sweden, could be sensitive 
to shocks and could make society vulnerable. 
At the moment, we can only speculate about 
the future of Apple Pay Cash. However, there is 
a potential that the US will follow in Sweden’s 
footsteps, as users begin to see the benefits of 
becoming a cashless society.
by Benjamin Kerry & Gavin Lenaghan
80

81

ALONG WITH TRACKING A WEARER’S 
WORKOUT, COMPANY HOPES TO SHOW 
ITS WATCH CAN EFFECTIVELY DETECT 
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION
Apple Inc. has a long reputation for disrupting 
the markets with new innovations, and the 
Silicon Valley tech giant is now skirting the 
edges of one very traditional field: cardiology.
Heart doctors and traditional medical 
technology companies appear to be keeping 
an open mind so far as Apple launches a 
massive 500,000-person research study to see 
whether the Apple Watch can detect signs of 
the potentially serious medical condition called 
atrial fibrillation.
CLINICAL TRIAL 
PUTS APPLE 
WATCH’S HEART 
MONITORING 
PROWESS TO 
THE TEST
82

83

“AFib” is a chaotic, out-of-sync heartbeat that can 
damage the heart and allow blood clots to form 
that travel to the brain, where they can lead to 
strokes. Although many people do not know 
they are affected, the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention says the condition contributes 
to more than 130,000 deaths per year and costs 
about $6 billion annually in the U.S.
Apple said last week that it’s launching the 
Apple Heart Study in collaboration with the Bay 
Area’s Stanford University School of Medicine. 
Researchers will examine how well the four 
green LED heart-rate sensors embedded 
in the Apple Watch can screen wearers for 
signs of AFib, compared to a traditional 
electrocardiogram (ECG).
A person at Apple who is familiar with the 
project said Monday that if the study goes as 
planned, Apple plans to submit the study data 
to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to 
get marketing clearance for the software portion 
of the system. There are also plans to publish the 
final study data, but the company declined to 
provide details about its early work to validate 
the system.
The system gathers real-time optical 
observations of blood flow through the skin, and 
runs the data through an algorithm designed to 
isolate a fibrillating heartbeat from other signals 
and “noise” that the sensor picks up. If the user 
has downloaded the Apple Heart Study app and 
joined the study, they will get an alert if their 
heart rhythm appears abnormal. Alerted users 
can receive a free telemedicine screening with a 
study doctor, plus a device that will take an ECG 
reading of the heart’s electrical activity.
84

85

Unlike a traditional clinical trial, which requires 
meeting with a doctor, participants in the Apple 
Heart Study can enroll just by downloading 
an app in the U.S. and having internet access 
on their phone. The study is approved by an 
institutional review board.
The study listing in clinicaltrials.gov, which was 
added over the weekend, said the effort aims 
to enroll as many as 500,000 users over the age 
of 22 to collect data through January 2019. 
Participants must have access to an iPhone 5s or 
later with at least iOS 11.0 and an Apple Watch 
Series 1 or later. Participants will be excluded if 
they have a self-reported diagnosis of AFib or 
heart palpitations known as “atrial flutter” or are 
currently taking anti-coagulation drugs.
Although the Apple Watch is advertised as 
being able to measure a user’s heart rate, it is 
not a medical device — a point emphasized by 
companies that make certified medical devices, 
such as longtime Minnesota cardiology device 
maker Medtronic.
“While the eventual impact of new atrial 
fibrillation detection screening technologies is yet 
to be determined, Medtronic supports proactive 
screening for AFib that allows people to seek 
medical care and early diagnosis,” Medtronic said 
in a statement. “Notably, consumer wearable 
technologies provide a generalized screening 
approach, but ultimately require additional 
monitoring to obtain actionable diagnoses to 
guide clinical care.”
86

87

Medtronic sells an implantable heart monitor 
called the Reveal Linq that is cleared by the 
FDA to monitor for irregular heart beats such as 
atrial fibrillation with a high degree of accuracy. 
If the company was concerned about losing 
any Linq sales to Apple Watches, it didn’t say so 
when asked.
Last week the FDA also cleared its first medical 
device accessory for the Apple Watch — a device 
called the Kardia Band, made by California’s 
AliveCor. The device uses what AliveCor calls 
artificial intelligence and cloud computing to 
detect when a person’s heartbeat is out of sync 
with their current physical activity, and then 
notifies the user to take an ECG reading on the 
single-electrode ECG reader mounted in the 
$199 Kardia Band.
88

The ECG data are then displayed on the Apple 
Watch and captured for later analysis by a 
physician. AliveCor also makes a $99 FDA-
cleared portable ECG reader called the Kardia 
Mobile, which is compatible with Android and 
iOS systems and can be attached to the back of 
a smartphone.
Stanford also runs its own app-based cardiac 
study called MyHeart Counts, which is among 
many different medical and fitness-related 
applications listed in Apple’s App Store. 
Apple has encouraged the development of 
medical-research apps by releasing an open-
source software framework called ResearchKit, 
which has been used to design apps related 
to everything from autism to melanoma to 
postpartum depression.
89

Regulators have urged consumers to approach 
medical apps with some skepticism. The 
Federal Trade Commission settled a lawsuit last 
December with California-based Aura Labs, 
which has claimed that its $4.99 Instant Blood 
Pressure app could give blood pressure readings 
as accurate as an armband cuff, even though 
clinical testing later found the app was much 
less accurate.
Still, doctors said that legitimate health-related 
smartphone apps can have value, by flagging 
potential cases that need professional care.
90

Dr. JoEllyn Moore, an electrophysiologist with 
the Minneapolis Heart Institute, said that in 
general, patients who go to the doctor when 
their Apple Watches send alerts about possible 
atrial fibrillation would most likely be given 
a routine heart screening with an onsite ECG 
machine. They may also get a small device 
to take ECG readings at home when they are 
having an AFib episode.
“It would be a similar screen for anyone who 
comes in complaining of an irregular heart 
rhythm,” Moore said.
The risk in technologies such as the Apple 
Watch’s heart-rate sensor test is that they may 
create false positives, inducing unnecessary 
anxiety in users and driving up overall health 
care costs without improving anyone’s health. 
Physicians and the tech industry will be 
watching closely to see whether the Apple 
Watch can keep false positives down while 
flagging previously unknown cases of AFib.
“It has the potential to be very exciting. I think 
time will tell how accurate this tool is going to 
be,” she said.
91

California regulators have nixed a plan to let 
self-driving car manufacturers evade liability for 
crashes if the vehicle hasn’t been maintained 
according to manufacturer specifications.
The new rules released this week delete a 
provision suggested by General Motors. 
California Department of Motor Vehicles 
spokeswoman Jessica Gonzalez said the change 
came after a review of comments on the plan.
John Simpson of the nonprofit advocacy group 
Consumer Watchdog called the change a “major 
victory for consumers.”
The rules could have absolved car makers of 
accident responsibility if a car owner hadn’t 
cleaned his sensors appropriately, said Simpson, 
the group’s privacy and technology director.
GM spokeswoman Laura Toole said the 
automaker appreciated the department’s 
transparency and added that the company is 
“pleased be part of the process.”
The department is taking comments on the 
latest changes until Dec. 15. The final regulations 
are expected to be enacted early next year.
CALIFORNIA 
REGULATORS NIX 
RULES LIMITING
CARMAKER LIABILITY
92

93

94

Facebook is coming for your kids.
The social media giant is launching a messaging 
app for children to chat with their parents and 
with friends approved by their parents.
The free app is aimed at kids under 13, who can’t 
yet have their own accounts under Facebook’s 
rules, though they often do.
Messenger Kids comes with a sle w of controls 
for parents. The service won’t let children add 
their own friends or delete messages — only 
parents can do that. Kids don’t get a separate 
Facebook or Messenger account; rather, it’s an 
extension of a parent’s account. Messenger 
Kids came out this week in the U.S. as an app 
for Apple devices — the iPhone, iPad and iPod 
Touch. Versions for Android and Amazon’s 
tablets are coming later.
FACEBOOK LAUNCHES 
PARENT-CONTROLLED 
MESSENGER APP FOR KIDS
95

A KIDS-FOCUSED EXPERIENCE
While children do use messaging and social 
media apps designed for teenagers and adults, 
those services aren’t built for them, said Kristelle 
Lavallee, a children’s psychology expert who 
advised Facebook on designing the service.
“The risk of exposure to things they were not 
developmentally prepared for is huge,” she said.
Messenger Kids, meanwhile, “is a result of seeing 
what kids like,” which is images, emoji and 
the like. Face filters and playful masks can be 
distracting for adults, Lavallee said, but for kids 
who are just learning how to form relationships 
and stay in touch with parents digitally, they are 
ways to express themselves.
Lavallee, who is content strategist at the 
Center on Media and Child Health at Boston 
Children’s Hospital and Harvard University, 
called Messenger Kids a “useful tool” that “makes 
parents the gatekeepers.” But she said that 
while Facebook made the app “with the best of 
intentions,” it’s not yet known how people will 
actually use it.
As with other tools Facebook has released 
in the past, intentions and real-world use do 
not always match up. Facebook’s live video 
streaming feature, for example, has been used 
for plenty of innocuous and useful things, but 
also to stream crimes and suicides.
96

97

98

HOOKED ON FACEBOOK
Is Messenger Kids simply a way for Facebook to 
rope in the young ones?
Stephen Balkam, CEO of the nonprofit Family 
Online Safety Institute, said “that train has left 
the station.”
Federal law prohibits internet companies from 
collecting personal information on kids under 13 
without their parents’ permission and imposes 
restrictions on advertising to them. This is 
why Facebook and many other social media 
companies prohibit younger kids from joining. 
Even so, Balkam said millions of kids under 13 
are already on Facebook, with or without their 
parents’ approval.
He said Facebook is trying to deal with the 
situation pragmatically by steering young 
Facebook users to a service designed for them.
99

MARKETING MATTERS
Facebook said Messenger Kids won’t show ads 
or collect data for marketing, though it will 
collect some data it says are necessary to run the 
service. Facebook also said it won’t automatically 
move users to the regular Messenger or 
Facebook when they get old enough, though 
the company might give them the option to 
move contacts to Messenger down the line.
James Steyer, CEO of the kids-focused non-
profit group Common Sense, said that while he 
liked the idea of a messaging app that requires 
parental sign-ups, many questions remain. 
Among them: Will it always remain ad-free, and 
will parents get ads based on the service?
“Why should parents simply trust that Facebook 
is acting in the best interest of kids?” Steyer said 
in a statement. “We encourage Facebook to 
clarify their policies from the start so that it is 
perfectly clear what parents are signing up for.”
100

101

102

A company in Slovenia that mines bitcoin says 
it has been hacked, for a potential loss of tens of 
millions of dollars.
The company, NiceHash, gives customers the 
ability to mine for bitcoins. As the price of the 
world’s most popular virtual currency keeps 
surging — to a record $15,000 on Thursday — 
here’s a look at what it is and how it is “mined.”
WHAT IS A BITCOIN?
Bitcoin is a digital currency that’s not tied to 
any bank or government. Like cash, it lets users 
spend or receive money anonymously, or mostly 
so; like other online payment services, it also lets 
them do so over the internet. There are several 
other virtual currencies, such as ethereum, but 
bitcoin is the most popular.
Bitcoins are basically lines of computer code 
that are digitally signed each time they travel 
Q&A: HOW IS A 
BITCOIN MINED? 
A LOOK AT THE 
VIRTUAL CURRENCY
103

from one owner to the next. Transactions can 
be made anonymously, making the currency 
popular with libertarians as well as tech 
enthusiasts, speculators — and criminals.
HOW IS A BITCOIN MINED?
Tech-savvy users called “miners” use their 
computers to make complex calculations that 
verify transactions in bitcoins. This so-called 
blockchain is a global running tally of every 
bitcoin transaction. The miners receive bitcoins 
in exchange according to a set of established 
rules. In this way, the bitcoin network harnesses 
individuals’ greed for the collective good.
NiceHash, the company that got hacked, 
made a business from matching people with 
spare computing power to those wanting to 
mine bitcoin.
HOW ARE BITCOINS KEPT SECURE?
Because the tally of bitcoin transactions, or 
blockchain, is verified constantly by a network of 
miners, rogues cannot spend the same bitcoin 
twice. As long as miners keep the blockchain 
secure, counterfeiting shouldn’t be an issue.
HOW DID BITCOIN COME TO BE?
It’s a mystery. Bitcoin was launched in 2009 by 
a person or group of people operating under 
the name Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin was 
then adopted by a small clutch of enthusiasts. 
Nakamoto dropped off the map as bitcoin 
began to attract widespread attention. But 
proponents say that doesn’t matter: The 
currency obeys its own internal logic.
104

Image: Dan Kitwood
105

Image: Bloomberg
106

A federal regulator gave the go ahead on 
Friday to the CME Group to start trading bitcoin 
futures later this month, the first time the 
digital currency will be traded on a Wall Street 
exchange and subject to federal oversight.
The CME Group, which owns the Chicago 
Mercantile Exchange, will start trading bitcoin 
futures Dec. 18, the company said. The 
Commodities Futures Trading Commission, the 
primary regulator for exchanges like the CME, 
gave approval for the exchange to create bitcoin 
futures after six weeks of discussions.
FEDERAL 
REGULATOR GIVES 
OK FOR BITCOIN 
FUTURES TO TRADE
107

Image: Thomas Trutschel
108

The CME Group is using a process known as 
“self-certification,” which is when an exchange 
pledges that the new instruments will not break 
any federal securities laws.
The price of bitcoin futures will be based on the 
price the digital currency is going for on four 
major bitcoin exchanges — Bitstamp, GDAX, 
itBit and Kraken. Due to its volatility, bitcoin 
futures will be subject higher margin levels and 
intraday price limits, the CME said.
The move will subject some of the bitcoin 
market to federal regulation for the first time. 
It will also open up bitcoin trading to a larger 
group of investors and traders, who have been 
reluctant to purchase the virtual currency on the 
private exchanges.
Bitcoin has gained more mainstream attention 
lately as its price has soared on the private 
exchanges. It was trading Friday at around 
$10,500, after being worth roughly $1,000 at the 
beginning of the year.
109

Movies
TV Shows
&
Trailer
110

Rotten Tomatoes
29%
by Jake Goldberger
Genre: Comedy
Released: 2017
Price: $12.99
16 Ratings
Almost Friends  
Once a promising young chef, Charlie 
(Freddie Highmore) is a twenty-something 
who now lives at home with his mom and 
stepfather while working at a movie theatre 
and living vicariously through his friend 
Ben(Haley Joe Osment). His life takes a turn 
when he falls for local barista Amber (Odeya 
Rush) who unfortunately has her own plans 
that involve her boyfriend and a move to 
New York.  
FIVE FACTS:
1. This is the second time Freddie Highmore 
plays a character named Charlie. The first was 
in Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (2005).
2. Odeya Rush appeared in an episode 
of Law & Order: Special Victims Unit in 
2010 where Christopher Meloni was the 
lead actor. 
3. The tagline for this movie is ‘Timing 
is everything’. 
4. Freddie Highmore’s performance in 
Finding Neverland (2004) was what brought 
him worldwide attention. 
5. Haley Joe Osment is best known for his 
role starring alongside Bruce Willis in The 
Sixth Sense (1999).
 
111

112

DinoTrailers 
113

Valerian and the City 
of a Thousand Planets 
In the 28th century, Valerian (Dane 
DeHaan) and Laureline (Cara Delevingne) 
are special operatives that must maintain 
order throughout human territories. Under 
assignment from the Minister of Defense, 
the two must embark on a mission to the 
city of Alpha where a dark force threatens 
the peaceful existence of not only the City of 
a Thousand Planets but the entire future of 
the universe. 
FIVE FACTS:
1. There are 200 different alien species in the 
movie, and director Luc Besson created a 
600-page book that described all the details 
of the species that the actors had to read 
before they began filming. 
2. The film is based on a French science 
fiction comic series Valérian and Laureline by 
Pierre Christin and was released on the year 
of the comic’s 50th anniversary. 
3. Before the Big Market mission, Laureline 
tells the commanding operative “nice hat” 
which is a nod to The Fifth Element (1997). 
4. Luc Besson chose not to shoot the film in 
3D because 3D cameras are too heavy for his 
usual style of filming. 
5. The first two trailers use the song 
“Because” by The Beatles. This is the first time 
a director could obtain the rights for using 
a Beatles song in a movie advertisement. 
Permission was granted by Paul McCartney.
 
by Luc Besson
Genre: Sci-Fi & Fantasy
Released: 2017
Price: $19.99
363 Ratings
Rotten Tomatoes
49%
114

Trailer
115

Teaser
116

117

Music
“Highway Tune” 
118

Genre: Rock 
Released: Nov 10, 2017
8 Songs
Price: $6.99
331 Ratings
From the Fires
Greta Van Fleet 
At last, this four-piece from Michigan have 
released the type of rock music that makes 
you want to rev your engine. Their breakout hit 
“Highway Tune” features high-pitched howls 
over ripping electronic guitars and hammering 
drums that would make Led Zeppelin proud. 
This is a must-listen for fans of classic 70’s rock. 
FIVE FACTS:
1. The band was formed in Frankenmuth, 
Michigan in 2012 by brothers Joshua “Josh” 
Kiszka, Samuel “Sam” Kiszka, Jacob “Jake” 
Kiszka and Kyle Hauck.
2. In October 2017, the band won Best New 
Artist at the Loudwire Music Awards. 
3. The band name was created when one of 
its members heard a relative mention Gretna 
Van Fleet, a resident of Frankenmuth. 
4. In 2014, their song “Standing 
On” was featured in 2014 Chevy 
Equinox advertisements. 
5. Their debut single, “Highway Tune”, topped 
the Billboard US Mainstream Rock and Active 
Rock Rock stations in September 2017.
119

120

Highway Tune (Audio)
121

Lambs & Lions 
Chase Rice  
Chase Rice’s fourth album delves deeper into 
personal topics like broken hearts and the 
power of God. Tracks like “Three Chords & 
The Truth” expose him more than ever and 
his cover of Chris LeDoux’s “This Cowboy’s 
Hat” recorded with LeDoux’s son Ned is one 
not to miss. 
FIVE FACTS:
1. Chase cites his father as the inspiration 
for his career, recalling his father saying “boy 
anyone can play guitar, but no one is gonna 
really listen to you until you start singing.”
2. He was a contestant on Survivor: 
Nicaragua, where he was the runner-up to 
Jud “Fabio” Birza.
3. He was a co-writer of Florida Georgia 
Line’s “Cruise”, which topped Billboard Hot 
Country Songs.
4. After graduating from UNC, Rice joined 
the Hendrick Motorsports pit crew and also 
worked on Jimmie Johnson’s Spring Cup 
Series car and won two championships with 
the Lowe’s team. 
5. One of his hobbies is woodworking, 
something he picked up while recovering 
from vocal surgery.
Genre: Country
Released: Nov 17, 2017
10 Songs
Price: $9.99
163 Ratings
122

“Three Chords & The Truth”
123

124

   “Everybody We Know Does” 
125

126

With no major new releases hitting theaters, 
Pixar’s acclaimed “Coco” again topped the 
North American box office with $27.5 million 
in its second week of release, according to final 
figures Monday.
Strong family films such as “Coco” and 
Lionsgate’s “Wonder,” along with an expanding 
list of Oscar contenders like “Three Billboards 
Outside Ebbing, Missouri” and “Lady Bird,” 
helped drive the box office to its best post-
Thanksgiving weekend in five years.
BOX OFFICE 
TOP 20: ‘COCO,’ 
‘JUSTICE LEAGUE’ 
STAY ON TOP
127

128

The top 20 movies at U.S. and Canadian theaters 
Friday through Sunday, followed by distribution 
studio, gross, number of theater locations, 
average receipts per location, total gross and 
number of weeks in release, as compiled 
Monday by comScore:
1. 
“Coco,” Disney, $27,533,304, 3,987 
locations, $6,906 average,  
$110,108,708, 2 Weeks.
2. 
“Justice League,” Warner Bros., 
$16,651,104, 3,820 locations,  
$4,359 average, $197,407,025, 3 Weeks.
3. 
“Wonder,” Lionsgate, $12,147,182, 
3,449 locations, $3,522 average, 
$87,679,805, 3 Weeks.
4. 
“Thor: Ragnarok,” Disney, $9,885,936, 
3,148 locations, $3,140 average, 
$291,633,535, 5 Weeks.
5. 
“Daddy’s Home 2,” Paramount, 
$7,572,390, 3,403 locations,  
$2,225 average, $82,886,836, 4 Weeks.
129

6. 
“Murder on the Orient Express,”  
20th Century Fox, $6,767,002,  
3,201 locations, $2,114 average, 
$84,839,515, 4 Weeks.
7. 
“Three Billboards Outside Ebbing 
Missouri,” Fox Searchlight, $4,396,537, 
1,430 locations, $3,075 average, 
$13,537,057, 4 Weeks.
8. 
“Lady Bird,” A24, $4,291,590,  
1,194 locations, $3,594 average,  
$16,837,041, 5 Weeks.
9. 
“The Star,” Sony, $4,078,423,  
2,822 locations, $1,445 average, 
 $27,358,076, 3 Weeks.
10. 
“A Bad Moms Christmas,” STX 
Entertainment, $3,385,484,  
2,251 locations, $1,504 average, 
$64,737,307, 5 Weeks.
130

131

132

11. 
“Roman J. Israel, Esq.,” Sony, 
$1,958,702, 1,669 locations,  
$1,174 average, $9,526,792, 3 Weeks.
12. 
“The Disaster Artist,” A24, 
$1,211,345, 19 locations, $63,755 
average, $1,211,345, 1 Week.
13. 
“The Man Who Invented Christmas,” 
Bleecker Street, $882,836,  
673 locations, $1,312 average,  
$3,170,258, 2 Weeks.
14. 
“Titanic 20th Anniversary,” 
Paramount, $438,602, 87 locations, 
$5,041 average, $438,602, 1 Week.
15. 
“Blade Runner 2049,” Warner Bros., 
$401,403, 515 locations,  
$779 average, $90,785,165, 9 Weeks.
133

134

16. 
“Junior Majeur,” Entertainment One 
Films, $345,710, 87 locations,  
$3,974 average, $1,198,440, 2 Weeks.
17. 
“Call Me By Your Name,” Sony 
Pictures Classics, $295,561,  
4 locations, $73,890 average,  
$922,456, 2 Weeks.
18. 
“Marshall,” Open Road, $247,772, 
651 locations, $381 average, 
$9,150,000, 8 Weeks.
19. 
“Jigsaw,” Lionsgate, $222,803, 
301 locations, $740 average, 
$37,603,791, 6 Weeks.
20. 
“Loving Vincent,” Good Deed 
Entertainment, $213,066,  
162 locations, $1,315 average,  
$5,503,561, 11 Weeks.
Universal and Focus are owned by NBC Universal, a unit of Comcast 
Corp.; Sony, Columbia, Sony Screen Gems and Sony Pictures Classics 
are units of Sony Corp.; Paramount is owned by Viacom Inc.; Disney, 
Pixar and Marvel are owned by The Walt Disney Co.; Miramax is owned 
by Filmyard Holdings LLC; 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight are 
owned by 21st Century Fox; Warner Bros. and New Line are units 
of Time Warner Inc.; MGM is owned by a group of former creditors 
including Highland Capital, Anchorage Advisors and Carl Icahn; 
Lionsgate is owned by Lions Gate Entertainment Corp.; IFC is owned by 
AMC Networks Inc.; Rogue is owned by Relativity Media LLC.
135

136

Han Solo is dead. Luke Skywalker is back, but 
changed. And Leia Organa’s story will soon be 
coming to an end.
The Star Wars that inspired four decades of 
passionate fandom appears to be slowly 
but surely fading as “Star Wars: The Last Jedi” 
prepares to descend on Dec. 15, giving way to 
a newer generation of intergalactic rebels and 
their foes, like Rey and Kylo Ren, and a fresh 
voice behind the endeavor in writer-director 
Rian Johnson (“Looper”).
J.J. Abrams’ “The Force Awakens” set the stage 
for this new era of the franchise, but “The Last 
Jedi” has to move it forward and keep audiences 
interested for the next one too.
After all these years and billions of dollars, Star 
Wars isn’t exactly a scrappy underdog anymore, 
but the franchise is in somewhat uncharted 
‘THE LAST JEDI’ 
AIMS TO CAPTURE 
THAT OLD 
STAR WARS 
FEELING
137

138

territory. The prequels did their own damage, 
but at least no one had to say goodbye to their 
original heroes.
And then there’s the seemingly impossible 
standard set by that other Star Wars sequel, “The 
Empire Strikes Back.”
Besides the main cast, filmmakers and some 
Lucasfilm and Walt Disney Co. brass, no one 
will see “The Last Jedi” until the Los Angeles 
premiere on Dec. 9. And determining what exactly 
audiences should expect is a bit like trying to 
assemble a puzzle with no picture and most of the 
pieces missing. The cast has left some adjective 
breadcrumbs (“intense,” “emotional,” “intimate,” 
“cinematic”) but for the most part, it’s a mystery.
“For me, ‘The Last Jedi’ is not a particularly happy 
story to tell, but it’s just my part,” Mark Hamill 
says cryptically. Hamill, 66, returns to play Luke 
Skywalker after being seen in only a few frames 
of “The Force Awakens,” which ends on a wind-
swept cliff as the young protege Rey (Daisy 
Ridley) approaches him looking for training from 
the missing Jedi. Luke and Rey are just one of 
the new pairings promised for the film, which 
finds every character out of their comfort zone 
and facing new challenges as the Resistance 
organizes to go up against the First Order.
“It’s got so much going on,” Hamill adds. “You 
can cut from the more somber scenes I have to 
the action/adventure, the suspense, the humor 
... I’ve only seen it once but I thought, ‘This is too 
much information to process.’”
The marketing campaign, no doubt playing 
into the tone set by “Empire,” has focused on 
the darkness and intensity of “The Last Jedi,” 
but Johnson says that’s only one element. 
139

He stresses that it is, first and foremost, a Star 
Wars movie. To him, that means capturing 
that thing that makes you want to “run out of 
the theater and into your backyard” to play 
with your spaceship toys — even without the 
curmudgeonly wit of Harrison Ford’s Han Solo.
“That’s what everyone was concerned about 
going in: How do you do it without him?” 
Johnson, 43, says. “I saw so much potential 
for humor in it. I was looking at every single 
character and trying to find opportunities to 
break the tension. I think people are going to be 
surprised by how fun and light on its feet it is.”
In addition to Luke and Rey, the film brings 
back Carrie Fisher as Leia in her last film role 
(Fisher died after filming had wrapped), Adam 
Driver’s Kylo Ren, fresh off murdering his father 
Han Solo, the mysterious Supreme Leader 
Snoke (Andy Serkis), Domnhall Gleeson’s 
General Hux, the ace pilot Poe (Oscar Isaac), 
the ex-Stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega) and 
his old boss Captain Phasma (Gwendoline 
Christie), Chewbacca, the droids and a host of 
newcomers, like Laura Dern’s purple-haired Vice 
Admiral Holdo, a maintenance tech, Rose (Kelly 
Marie Tran), a hacker (Benicio Del Toro) and 
some cute little creatures called Porgs.
His script, which he was able to write while “The 
Force Awakens” was being made, took some of 
the cast aback at first.
“I was going, ‘Uh, I’m not sure about this,’” Ridley 
says. “It just took us all a second to be like, ‘Ok 
this is where the story is heading.’”
Johnson jokes that he’s like the new boyfriend 
at Thanksgiving dinner who everyone has to get 
used to.
140

Image: Jonathan Olley
141

“(Rian) had a different challenge which was to 
expand the Star Wars universe further with more 
inventive ideas, taking more risks,” Boyega says. 
“He was a real fan. I feel like he ticked off his 
Star Wars fanboy theories just one by one with 
this film.”
That fandom has also helped Johnson, who 
Hamill refers to as his Obi-Wan, reach a sort of 
zen-like state with the film. It also doesn’t hurt 
that Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy, who 
has not been afraid to make tough decisions 
and fire or bench directors if something isn’t 
working, was so pleased with their collaboration 
and the resulting film that she has already 
enlisted Johnson to develop a new Star Wars 
trilogy separate from the Skywalker saga (he’ll 
write and direct the first).
Now it’s just a matter of putting “The Last 
Jedi” out in the world. Financially, there’s not 
much to worry about — it’s tracking to open 
somewhere in the $200 million range (far below 
“The Force Awakens’” $248 million debut, but 
stunning nonetheless). Also box office and 
the expectations and hopes of a loyal fanbase, 
who have been burned before, are two very 
different things.
“Having been a Star Wars fan myself for the 
past 40 years, I know intimately how passionate 
they are about it and how everyone has stuff 
they love and hate in every single movie. That 
takes the pressure off a little bit just thinking, 
‘Ok, there’s going to be stuff that everyone likes, 
there’s going to be stuff that people don’t like 
and it’s going to be a mixture,’” Johnson says.
And with a smile and a shrug, he adds: “That’s 
what being a Star Wars fan is.”
142

143

144

Already co-writing a political thriller with former 
President Bill Clinton, James Patterson is now set 
for a collaboration with the managers of Albert 
Einstein’s archives.
The best-selling and prolific novelist is 
developing a series for middle schoolers inspired 
by Einstein’s scientific discoveries. In a licensing 
deal with the Einstein archive, Little Brown 
will publish the first of three planned books, 
currently untitled, next fall. The release will come 
through the author’s own JIMMY Patterson 
children’s imprint.
“I love the idea of introducing Einstein and the 
ideas of science to millions of kids around the 
world,” says Patterson, sounding childlike himself 
as he speaks of “taking this so freaking seriously.”
Patterson, admittedly still learning when it 
comes to science, has worked in an innovation 
of his own. The series’ young protagonist, Max 
Einstein, is a girl.
JAMES PATTERSON 
AND EINSTEIN 
ARCHIVISTS 
CREATING 
NEW SERIES
145

“Women are definitely underrated in science and 
I wanted to address that,” he told The Associated 
Press during a recent telephone interview. Little, 
Brown describes Max as “inventive, irreverent, 
highly imaginative,” one who “loves to solve 
problems in fun, unconventional ways, much 
like Einstein himself.”
“The high-stakes adventure series follows Max 
and the world’s brightest kids as they travel the 
globe to solve humanity’s biggest problems with 
the power of science,” the publisher announced.
Financial terms for the books were not disclosed. 
According to Little Brown, Einstein archivists 
will assist Patterson with research and also have 
input in the manuscripts and artwork. Proceeds 
will be divided among the archive, the publisher 
and Patterson.
Einstein has inspired fiction before, such as 
Alan Lightman’s critically praised “Einstein’s 
Dreams.” He also was the subject of a best-selling 
biography by Walter Isaacson and of numerous 
biographies for children.
Officials for the Einstein archives, which are 
based at Hebrew University in Jerusalem, cite 
Patterson’s enormous popularity and see the 
new series as an ideal way to expand Einstein’s 
appeal among young people. Dr. Roni Grosz, 
curator of the archives, praised Patterson’s ability 
to keep readers interested.
“You don’t want readers just putting the books 
down because they’re not interesting enough,” 
he told the AP. “There’s tremendous interest in 
Einstein, but it’s not easy to convey his lessons 
and his knowledge. These books are one way to 
package this rather complex information and 
present it to young readers.”
146

Image: Taylor Jewell
147

148

Dule Hill was searching for the right word to sum 
up how it felt that some original crew members 
from his series “Psych” turned down other jobs to 
work on “Psych: The Movie.”
“I think that is a...” he began.
“Testament,” interrupted his co-star, James 
Roday. “I knew where you were at.”
And that pretty much sums up the rapport 
between the two actors who played best friends 
and screwball crime solvers for eight years on 
their USA series.
JAMES RODAY 
AND DULE HILL 
RETEAM FOR 
‘PSYCH: 
THE MOVIE’
149

150

Their shorthand and chemistry was a large part 
of the show’s appeal, plus running gags like how 
a pineapple was strategically placed in each 
episode like a “Where’s Waldo?” game to keep 
fans invested. The series went off the air in 2014 
but they’re back on Thursday for a two-hour 
TV movie.
“We didn’t want to come back so soon that we 
hadn’t been missed but we also didn’t want to 
wait too long so that we had been forgotten,” 
said Roday of finding the sweet spot to return.
“This was the year that seemed the most right 
and the planets aligned and everybody’s 
scheduled worked out.”
In an interview with media, the actors recall how 
they first met, inside jokes and whether there 
will be more “Psych.”
Q: Do you recall how you first met?
Dule Hill: I went in for a meeting... You and I read 
there. We read the scene together. It’s actually 
funny because he was hired for the job, we had 
the chemistry read, it was nice. Good vibe.
James Roday: So we thought it would be a 
good idea to get together and because I had 
already been cast I thought it would be a nice 
gesture to go to Dule, to his home. We could 
rehearse there. I thought that was a standup, 
solid guy who already has the job, thing to do. I 
expected him to live somewhere in the general 
area (of Los Angeles) but he lived way the hell 
out (laughs.)
Dule Hill: You’d think since he already had the 
job it would be like, ‘Oh, let me come to you.’ 
There was none of that. I was like, ‘Thank you for 
coming by, I appreciate it.’ (Laughter.)
151

Q: Did you have that quick banter right away?
Hill: I had just come from doing ‘The West Wing’ 
and Aaron Sorkin is: What is written is what you 
say. I get into the read with this dude and he’s 
just all over the place.
Roday: To watch this guy come in and to think 
about (where he came from) and see some of 
the stuff that he was doing at the end of our 
show, talk about a journey. I watched this guy 
bloom into a comedic powerhouse.
Q: Did anything come from you guys just joking 
around that made it into the show?
Hill: Oh, man. What hasn’t?
Roday: We decided that we were huge fans of 
Ed Lover’s ‘C’mon, Son!’ viral videos and worked 
that in.
Hill: That only happened because I was in my 
trailer watching the video and I showed it to 
Roday and he was crying (laughing) and then 
we had to go do a scene and he goes, ‘C’mon, 
son.’ And I go, ‘Don’t do Ed Lover on me.’
Q: Will there be more reunions like this? Another 
movie, perhaps?
Hill: If I had 10 pineapples to bet, I’d probably 
bet all 10.
Roday: If we can keep it to two-hour specials 
every year or two then I feel pretty confident 
we’ll always be able to give fans the level of 
‘Psych’ they are entitled to.
Online: http://www.usanetwork.com/Psych?
152

153

As technology takes over more of people’s daily 
lives, it’s also taking over ever-bigger chunks of 
their retirement accounts.
Surging prices for technology stocks around the 
world mean the industry is making up a larger 
proportion of global markets. In the United 
States, Apple, Google’s parent company and 
other tech companies account for nearly 24 
percent of the Standard & Poor’s 500 index. A 
decade ago, they made up less than 17 percent 
of S&P 500 index funds. The makeover is even 
more dramatic overseas, where ascendant 
companies like China’s Tencent and Alibaba 
have quickly stormed into the ranks of the 
world’s largest.
As a result, investing in many stock funds has 
increasingly become a bet on technology 
companies. That could be reassuring for 
investors given how tech companies have 
been able to deliver big profit growth for years, 
TECH IS TAKING 
OVER OUR LIVES, 
AND OUR 401(K) 
ACCOUNTS
154

155

156

even when global economic growth was only 
middling. But it’s also a concern for skeptics who 
see tech stocks as overly pricey and primed for 
a pullback. The worries came into starker relief 
in recent weeks, after tech stocks tumbled more 
than the rest of the market.
To see how the tech takeover is changing 
investing, consider mutual funds and 
exchange-traded funds that focus on stocks 
from emerging markets. These kinds of funds 
offer access to growth in China and other 
developing economies.
A decade ago, these funds were dominated 
by hulking telecoms, energy companies and 
the commodity producers that feasted on fast 
growth in construction and factory activity. 
They included China Mobile, the Brazilian 
oil giant Petrobras and Russia’s Gazprom 
natural-gas company.
In late 2007, technology companies made up 
less than 11 percent of Vanguard’s Emerging 
Markets Stock Index fund. But in the ensuing 
years, tech companies like Tencent and Alibaba 
grew to serve hundreds of millions of users 
buying things with their mobile phones, 
chatting online and listening to music.
Now the Vanguard fund, which is the largest 
emerging-market stock fund by assets, 
has almost twice as much of its portfolio 
apportioned to technology stocks. Its biggest 
single holding is Tencent, which is behind 
the popular WeChat messaging app and 
other products.
“It’s a sign of the times,” said Patricia Ribeiro, 
senior portfolio manager at the American 
Century Emerging Markets fund and the 
157

158

American Century Emerging Markets Small Cap 
fund. “In the emerging space, it’s a story about 
the consumer.”
The shift toward technology stocks and away 
from old-economy companies is a result of 
the rise of emerging markets’ middle classes, 
which are increasingly going online and also 
benefiting from the world’s voracious demand 
for technology, she said.
Ribeiro has 33 percent of her Emerging Markets 
fund invested in technology stocks, more than 
any other sector. Some of her recent acquisitions 
include Momo, a Chinese dating app, and AAC 
Technologies, a Chinese supplier for Apple. A 
decade ago, the fund invested more money in 
financials, raw-material production and other 
areas of the market. The portion devoted to tech 
was just 12 percent. The fund has ranked in the 
top 8 percent of its category for returns over the 
last five years, according to Morningstar.
In the United States, tech stocks in the S&P 500 
doubled the gain of the index through the year’s 
first 11 months. A slump in the sector in recent 
weeks reminded investors that tech stocks are 
historically prone to price swings and expensive 
of late, based on several measures of value.
Analysts attribute the drop in tech stocks — 
nearly 4 percent in a little more than a week — 
to investors looking for reasons to sell and take 
profits. Washington’s push to overhaul the tax 
system served as a trigger. Tech stocks stand 
to gain less from lower tax rates than other 
industries, so some investors moved money 
out of tech and into those sectors expected 
to be tax-overhaul winners, such as financial 
companies and retailers.
159

But technology companies are in the midst 
of reshaping several industries, from retail to 
media, and proponents see even more growth 
ahead. Ken Allen, portfolio manager at the T. 
Rowe Price Science & Technology fund, calls 
it “being on the right side of change.” Plus, 
the pace of adoption is accelerating. It took 
Microsoft’s Windows nearly 26 years to get to 
1 billion users. For Google’s Android operating 
system, it took less than six years.
Many mutual-fund managers seem to agree. 
After looking at 495 mutual funds that invest 
$1.9 trillion, strategists at Goldman Sachs found 
that actively managed funds generally have 
even more invested in the technology sector 
than index funds do.
The margin has been shrinking a bit recently, 
but the preference nevertheless remains.
A big difference between tech stocks of today 
and the last time the industry was such a 
dominant force in the market during the late 
1990s is how much profit they’re making.
Tech companies are not only making money, 
they’re delivering some of the strongest gains 
as customers continue to snap up iPhones and 
click on ads in Facebook. Tech stocks in the S&P 
500 reported 21 percent growth in earnings 
per share last quarter, triple the rate of the 
overall index.
That’s a far cry from 2000, when tech stocks 
made up nearly 35 percent of the S&P 500 at 
the height of the dot-com bubble and investors 
were more interested in capturing “eyeballs” and 
web traffic than in something as mundane as 
sales or even earnings.
160

161

162

NASA has nailed an engine test on a spacecraft 
13 billion miles away.
Last week, ground controllers sent commands 
to fire backup thrusters on Voyager 1, our most 
distant spacecraft. The thrusters had been idle 
for 37 years, since Voyager 1 flew past Saturn.
To NASA’s delight, the four dormant thrusters 
came alive. It took more than 19 hours — the 
one-way travel time for signals — for controllers 
at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, 
California, to get the good news.
Engineers wanted to see if these alternate 
thrusters could point Voyager 1’s antenna 
toward Earth, a job normally handled by a 
different set that’s now degrading. The thrusters 
will take over pointing operations next month. 
The switch could extend Voyager 1’s life by two 
to three years.
NASA NAILS TEST ON 
VOYAGER SPACECRAFT,
13 BILLION MILES AWAY
163

164

Launched in 1977, Voyager 1 is the only 
spacecraft traveling through interstellar space, 
the region beyond our solar system. Voyager 
2 is close on its heels — nearly 11 billion miles 
from Earth. The thruster test worked so well that 
NASA expects to try it on Voyager 2. That won’t 
happen anytime soon, though, because Voyager 
2’s original thrusters are still working fine.
The Voyager flight team dug up old records and 
studied the original software before tackling the 
test. As each milestone in the test was achieved, 
the excitement level grew, said propulsion 
engineer Todd Barber.
“The mood was one of relief, joy and incredulity 
after witnessing these well-rested thrusters pick 
up the baton as if no time had passed at all,” he 
said in a statement.
The twin Voyagers provided stunning close-
up views of Jupiter and Saturn. Voyager 2 also 
offered shots of Uranus and Neptune.
165

166

Astronomers have discovered a super-size 
black hole harkening back to almost the dawn 
of creation.
It’s the farthest black hole ever found.
A team led by the Carnegie Observatories’ 
Eduardo Banados reported in the journal Nature 
on Wednesday that the black hole lies in a quasar 
dating to 690 million years of the Big Bang. 
That means the light from this quasar has been 
traveling our way for more than 13 billion years.
Banados said the quasar provides a unique 
baby picture of the universe, when it was just 5 
percent of its current age.
It would be like seeing photos of a 50-year-old 
man when he was 2 1/2 years old, according 
to Banados.
SUPER BIG BLACK 
HOLE FROM 
EARLY UNIVERSE 
FARTHEST 
EVER FOUND
167

“This discovery opens up an exciting new 
window to understand the early universe,” he 
said in an email from Pasadena, California.
Quasars are incredibly bright objects deep in 
the cosmos, powered by black holes devouring 
everything around them. That makes them 
perfect candidates for unraveling the mysteries 
of the earliest cosmic times.
The black hole in this newest, most distant 
quasar is 800 million times the mass of our sun.
Much bigger black holes are out there, but none 
so far away — at least among those found so far. 
These larger black holes have had more time to 
grow in the hearts of galaxies since the Big Bang, 
compared with the young one just observed.
“The new quasar is itself one of the first galaxies, 
and yet it already harbors a behemoth black 
hole as massive as others in the present-
day universe,” co-author Xiaohui Fan of the 
University of Arizona’s Steward Observatory said 
in a statement.
Around the time of this newest quasar, the 
universe was emerging from a so-called Dark 
168

Ages. Stars and galaxies were first appearing 
and their radiation ionizing the surrounding 
hydrogen gas to illuminate the cosmos.
Banados suspects there are more examples like 
this out there, between 20 and 100.
“The newfound quasar is so luminous and 
evolved that I would be surprised if this was the 
first quasar ever formed,” Banados said. “The 
universe is enormous and searching for these 
very rare objects is like looking for the needle in 
the haystack.”
Only one other quasar has been found in 
this ultra-distant category, despite extensive 
scanning. This newest quasar beats that previous 
record-holder by about 60 million years.
Still on the lookout, astronomers are uncertain 
how close they’ll get to the actual beginning of 
time, 13.8 billion years ago.
Banados and his team used the Carnegie’s 
Magellan telescopes in Chile, supported 
by observatories in Hawaii, the American 
Southwest and the French Alps.
169

170

A vast international experiment designed to 
demonstrate that nuclear fusion can be a viable 
source of energy is halfway toward completion, the 
organization behind the project said Wednesday.
Construction of the International Thermonuclear 
Experimental Reactor, or ITER, in southern 
France has been dogged by delays and a surge 
in costs to about 20 billion euros ($23.7 billion).
ITER’s director-general, Bernard Bigot, said 
the project is on track to begin superheating 
hydrogen atoms in 2025, a milestone known as 
“first plasma.”
“We have no contingency plan,” he told media 
from Paris.
Scientists have long sought to mimic the process 
of nuclear fusion that occurs inside the sun, 
arguing that it could provide an almost limitless 
source of cheap, safe and clean electricity. 
Unlike in existing fission reactors, which split 
plutonium or uranium atoms, there’s no risk of 
an uncontrolled chain reaction with fusion and it 
doesn’t produce long-lived radioactive waste.
NUCLEAR 
FUSION PROJECT 
HAILS HALFWAY 
CONSTRUCTION 
MILESTONE
171

A joint project to explore the technology was first 
proposed at a summit between U.S. President 
Ronald Reagan and Soviet leader Mikhail 
Gorbachev in 1985, with the aim of “utilizing 
controlled thermonuclear fusion for peaceful 
purposes ... for the benefit for all mankind.”
It took more than two decades for work to begin 
at the site in Saint-Paul-les-Durance, about 50 
kilometers (30 miles) northeast of Marseille. 
The project’s members — China, the European 
Union, India, Japan, South Korea, Russia and the 
United States — settled on a design that uses a 
doughnut-shaped device called a tokamak to 
trap hydrogen that’s been heated to 150 million 
degrees Celsius (270 million Fahrenheit) for long 
enough to allow atoms to fuse together.
The process results in the release of large 
amounts of heat. While ITER won’t generate 
electricity, scientists hope it will demonstrate 
that such a fusion reactor can produce more 
energy than it consumes.
There are other fusion experiments, but ITER’s 
design is widely considered the most advanced 
and practical. Scientists won’t know until 2035, 
following a decade of testing and upgrades, 
whether the device actually works as intended.
Still, fusion experts said Wednesday’s milestone 
was noteworthy.
“The glass is half full, rather than half empty,” 
said Tony Donne of EUROfusion, a consortium of 
European research organizations and universities 
that provide scientific advice for ITER.
Donne said the appointment of Bigot had 
helped the project overcome what he called 
a “very difficult period” during which political 
172

173

174

considerations had hampered construction 
of what some consider the most complicated 
machine ever built.
Cost remains an issue, though, and Bigot was 
visiting Washington on Wednesday to drum 
up support from the United States, which 
contributes about 9 percent of the budget. Much 
of the funding goes to suppliers in the member 
states — in the case of the U.S. that includes 
General Atomics, which is building the central 
solenoid, an 18-meter (59-foot) electromagnet 
that’s powerful enough to lift an aircraft carrier.
Bigot said most other members, including the 
European Union which pays 45 percent of the 
budget, had pledged their financial support for 
years to come and he was hopeful the Trump 
administration would see the benefits of staying 
on board.
“All countries including the United States know 
that their energy supply is not sustainable 
beyond this century,” said Bigot, who was 
previously France’s nuclear energy chief.
Should Washington cut its funding, the project 
won’t collapse, he said. “It’s too important for the 
other members. But there would be some delay.”
Gerald Navratil, a professor of applied physics 
at Columbia University, said fusion could help 
solve the problem of how to reliably produce 
large amounts of electricity without emitting 
greenhouse gases, noting ITER’s current cost 
is comparable to that of developing a large 
passenger aircraft.
“Energy is such an important part of our 
technological society that expenditure of 20 
billion to develop a new energy source is really 
not out of line,” he said.
175

176

Image: Antonio Gaudencio
British lawmakers are flouting explicit 
instructions to lock their computers and not 
to share their passwords, documents obtained 
by The Associated Press show, a revelation that 
raises questions about the security of Britain’s 
parliamentary network only months after a  
well-publicized email break-in.
Conservative Member of Parliament Nadine 
Dorries first drew attention to the practice on 
Saturday when she said in a message posted to 
Twitter that her staff and even interns had access 
to her log-in details. Dorries defended herself 
by suggesting that the practice was widespread 
and that colleagues had no choice but to 
outsource email management to employees.
DOCUMENTS:
UK LAWMAKERS 
FLOUT EXPLICIT
PASSWORD-
SHARING BAN
177

“All staff send emails in our name,” she said , a 
statement echoed by fellow Tory lawmakers 
Will Quince, who said he left his office computer 
unlocked, and Nick Boles, who revealed that he 
often forgot his own password “and have to ask 
my staff what it is.”
Documents recently obtained through a British 
public records request show that lawmakers are 
explicitly warned by parliament’s information 
technology division to keep their computers 
locked and not to tell anyone their passwords.
“Make sure that you never share them,” reads 
a slideshow shown to incoming lawmakers, 
with the words “never share” in bold. Another 
document — a digital services guide addressed 
to members of the House of Commons — warns 
that lawmakers have been targeted by hackers.
“Never share your password or write it down 
where others could find it” is among the 
“minimum” practices the guide advises them 
to follow. It goes on to suggest that there is no 
need for lawmakers to share their passwords 
with employees.
“We can arrange for your staff to access your 
mailbox, calendar and documents through their 
own accounts,” the guide states. It also reminds 
lawmakers to keep their computers locked and 
that: “Cyber security is everyone’s responsibility.”
The House of Commons press office, which 
handles inquiries for the lower house of 
Parliament, confirmed that the ban on 
password-sharing applied to lawmakers.
“We will generally aim to engage constructively 
with people found to have been breaching policy 
inadvertently,” the press office said in a statement.
178

Image: Chris McAndrew
179

An email sent to Dorries’ office wasn’t 
immediately answered. In a Twitter message 
posted Sunday, Dorries seemed to shrug off  
the concern over digital safety, suggesting  
there weren’t any government documents on 
her machine.
“On my computer, there is a shared email 
account,” she said . “That’s it. Nothing else. Sorry 
to disappoint!”
British security researcher Kevin Beaumont 
said lawmakers routinely handled sensitive 
messages from their constituents and that by 
flouting IT staff’s instructions “they are failing  
to provide any protection to those people,  
their voters.”
“Members also sit on the internal Parliamentary 
network,” Beaumont said in an email. “They 
might not think their PCs can access sensitive 
information, but rogue actors would absolutely 
test this theory.”
The digital security of Britain’s Parliament was 
thrust into the spotlight in June following an 
aggressive attempt to break into lawmakers’ 
emails. The hack, which was closely covered 
in the United Kingdom, came about a year 
after the dramatic leak of Democratic Party 
operatives’ emails in the heat of the U.S. 
presidential contest.
Those leaks were blamed by some for  
derailing the candidacy of former Secretary 
of State Hillary Clinton and their fallout has 
overshadowed the presidency of Donald Trump.
Online: Documents relating to  
Parliament’s cybersecurity
180

Image: Chris McAndrew
181

The high-profile attendance of the leaders of 
Apple and Google at a Chinese conference 
promoting Beijing’s vision of a censored internet 
highlights the dilemma for Western tech 
companies trying to expand in an increasingly 
lucrative but restricted market.
The event in Wuzhen, a historic canal town 
outside Shanghai, marked the first time chiefs 
of two of the world’s biggest tech companies 
have attended the annual state-run World 
Internet Conference.
Apple CEO Tim Cook told the gathering as the 
conference opened Sunday that his company 
was proud to work with Chinese partners to 
build a “common future in cyberspace.”
His and Google CEO Sundar Pichai’s presence 
along with other business leaders, diplomats 
and other experts, some analysts say, helped 
bestow credibility on Beijing’s preferred version 
of an internet sharply at odds with Silicon 
Valley’s dedication to unfettered access.
APPLE, GOOGLE 
AT CHINESE 
INTERNET FEST 
SHOWS LURE 
OF MARKET
182

183

Chinese President Xi Jinping vowed, in remarks 
to the conference conveyed by an official, that 
“China’s door to the world will never close, but 
will only open wider.”
As in previous years, organizers allowed 
attendees unrestricted access to the internet, 
contrary to official policy under which internet 
users face extensive monitoring and censorship 
and are blocked from accessing many overseas 
sites by the so-called Great Firewall of China.
Since Xi came to power in late 2012, he has 
tightened controls and further stifled free 
expression, activists say.
Beijing’s restraints also extend to Western 
companies such as Google, Twitter and 
Facebook, which have largely been shut out 
from the market, leaving it to homegrown 
internet giants like Tencent.
184

185

186

Apple has a large production base in China, 
which is one of its biggest markets, though 
domestic smartphone makers are catching up.
It has been criticized by some app developers for 
complying with Chinese censorship demands. In 
July, companies that let people get around the 
government’s internet filters — known as virtual 
private network providers — said their programs 
had been removed from Apple’s app store in 
China. One such company, ExpressVPN, said 
Apple was “aiding China’s censorship effort.”
Apple said that China began requiring this year 
that developers of virtual private networks have 
a government license. The California-based tech 
giant said it had removed apps “in China that 
do not meet the new regulations.” Two Apple 
spokeswomen couldn’t be reached by phone 
for comment.
“The problem is that these companies are 
between a rock and a hard place,” said Rogier 
Creemers, a China researcher at Leiden 
University who attended the conference. 
They covet China’s huge market but if they do 
make it in, as in Apple’s case, local law “requires 
things that Western observers generally are 
uncomfortable with,” he said.
Cook’s speech drew a big crowd. He said the 
company supports more than 5 million jobs in 
China, including 1.8 million software developers 
who have earned more than 112 billion yuan 
($17 billion) building apps available through 
Apple’s App Store.
It’s Apple’s responsibility to ensure that 
“technology is infused with humanity,” he said. 
He avoided direct mention of any sensitive 
topics, though he hinted at them by stressing 
187

the need for “safeguards to keep everyone 
protected: Privacy. Security. Decency,” according 
to a transcript.
Google shut the Chinese version of its search 
engine in 2010 over censorship concerns. Pichai 
has talked about wanting to re-enter China, and 
he told a panel discussion in Wuzhen that small 
and mid-sized Chinese businesses use Google 
services to get their products to other countries, 
according to a report in the South China 
Morning Post.
Spokespeople for Apple and Google declined 
to comment.
The tech giants may have chosen to appear at 
the conference because the current political 
climate in the United States encourages a 
pragmatic approach in pursuing business 
regardless of other concerns, said Jonathan 
Sullivan, director of the University of 
Nottingham’s China Policy Institute.
“There has never been a time when an American 
company is less likely to be called out by the 
White House for pursuing a business-first 
approach,” said Sullivan.
188

189

190

Ireland has struck a deal with Apple to collect 
up to 13 billion euros ($15 billion) in back taxes 
and hold it in an escrow account pending 
an appeal before the Court of Justice of the 
European Union.
The government said in a statement this week 
that an agreement had been reached “in relation 
to the framework of the principles that will 
govern the escrow arrangements.”
The European Commission had ordered Ireland 
to collect the money after concluding that two 
Irish tax rulings allowed Apple to pay less tax 
than other businesses — thus giving them an 
IRELAND TO START 
COLLECTING 
$15 BILLION IN 
TAX FROM APPLE
191

unfair advantage. The Commission ordered 
Ireland to collect back taxes for the years 2003-
2014, which it estimated to be as much 13 
billion euros plus interest.
Ireland disagreed with the Commission’s analysis 
and appealed the decision.
Apple said in a statement that it remains 
confident the court will overturn the 
commission’s decision once it has reviewed 
the evidence.
“The Commission’s case against Ireland has 
never been about how much Apple pays in 
taxes, it’s about which government gets the 
money,” Apple said in a statement. “The United 
States government and the Irish government 
both agree we’ve paid our taxes according to 
the law.”
192

Image: Bloomberg
193

194

Ford is joining with Chinese e-commerce giant 
Alibaba Group to explore new ways for people 
to buy and own vehicles in the world’s largest 
auto market.
The carmaker said Thursday that it’s signed a 
three-year agreement to test marketing sales 
and marketing as well as collaborate on cloud 
computing and distribution strategies.
Initially the companies will study methods for 
people to buy vehicles from pre-sale research, 
to test drives and leasing options. They’ll study 
areas to cooperate “that are reshaping the 
automotive industry in China and around the 
world,” Ford said in a prepared statement.
Ford also hopes to better incorporate digital 
technologies and platforms into its vehicles.
Ford is a relatively small player in China and has 
been focusing on expanding into the market to 
better compete globally. It recently promised 
to roll out more than 50 new vehicles in China 
over the next eight years including 15 powered 
by electricity.
FORD 
COLLABORATES 
WITH ALIBABA 
AS IT EXPANDS 
INTO CHINA
195

Image: Alexandros Avramidis
196

Russian cybercrime suspect Alexander Vinnik, 
who is wanted in the United States on charges 
of laundering billions of dollars’ worth of the 
virtual currency bitcoin, appeared Wednesday 
before Greece’s Supreme Court for a hearing into 
his extradition to the U.S.
Vinnik is the subject of a judicial tug-of-war 
between the U.S. and Russia, which is also 
seeking his extradition on lesser charges.
The U.S. is accusing Vinnik of laundering $4 
billion worth of bitcoins through BTC-e, one of 
the world’s largest digital currency exchanges, 
which he allegedly operated.
Russia, meanwhile, wants him back to  
face charges related to a 667,000-ruble  
($11,500) fraud.
RUSSIAN BITCOIN 
SUSPECT FIGHTS 
US EXTRADITION 
IN GREECE
197

Lower courts in Greece have approved both 
extradition requests. The Supreme Court is 
expected to issue a decision in coming days. 
If it decides in favor of extradition to the U.S., 
Greece’s justice minister will have the final word 
on where the suspect will be sent.
Vinnik, who denies any involvement in bitcoin 
fraud, is fighting his extradition to the United 
States, but not to Russia.
The 37-year-old was arrested on a U.S. request 
in July while on holiday with his family in the 
Halkidiki area of northern Greece, which is 
popular with Russian tourists.
The U.S. Justice Department says Vinnik has 
been indicted by a grand jury in the Northern 
District of California on charges including money 
laundering, conspiracy to commit money 
laundering, and engaging in unlawful monetary 
transactions. The charges carry maximum 
sentences of up to 20 years in prison.
198

199

The world’s biggest lithium-ion battery has 
plugged into an Australian state grid, an official 
said last week, easily delivering on Tesla Inc. 
chief executive Elon Musk’s 100-day guarantee.
Musk promised to build the 100-megawatt 
battery within 100 days of the contracts being 
signed at the end of September or hand it over 
to the South Australia state government for free.
South Australia Premier Jay Weatherill 
announced the battery began dispatching 
power into the state grid, providing 70 
megawatts as temperatures rose above 30 
degrees Celsius (86 degrees Fahrenheit).
TESLA BUILDS 
WORLD’ BIGGEST 
BATTERY IN 
AUSTRALIAN 
OUTBACK
200

201

“South Australia is now leading the world in 
dispatchable renewable energy, delivered to 
homes and businesses 24/7,” Weatherill said.
The official launch came a little over 60 days 
after the deal was signed. But crucially, it came 
on the first day of the Australian summer — 
the season when power usage soars due to air 
conditioning use.
Tesla says the battery has the capacity to power 
30,000 homes for up to an hour in the event 
of a severe blackout, but is more likely to be 
called into action to boost supply during peak 
demand periods.
The battery power packs are installed near 
the Outback town of Jamestown, about 200 
kilometers (120 miles) north of the state capital 
Adelaide. They store energy generated by the 
neighboring Hornsdale Wind Farm, owned by 
French renewable energy company Neoen, to 
bring added reliability and stability to the  
state grid.
202

203

204

Tesla partnered with Neoen to build the 
battery, which is more than three times  
larger than the previous record-holder at  
Mira Loma, California.
South Australia, which relies heavily on solar and 
wind-generated energy, has been scrambling 
to find a way to bolster its fragile power grid 
since the entire state suffered a blackout during 
a storm last year. Further blackouts plagued the 
state over the next few months.
The battery farm is part of a 550 million 
Australian dollar ($420 million) plan announced 
in March by Weatherill to make the state 
independent of the nation’s power grid. The cost 
of the battery has not been made public.
The Australian grid operator has warned of 
potential shortages of gas-fired electricity 
across southeast Australia by late next year. The 
shortage is looming as Australia is expected 
to soon overtake Qatar as the world’s biggest 
exporter of liquid natural gas. Australia is also a 
major exporter of coal, which fires much of its 
electricity generation and makes the country 
one of the world’s worst greenhouse gas 
polluters on a per capita basis.
205

ads@techlifenews.com
Digital
Mindﬁeld

TechLife News is an independent publication and has not been authorized, sponsored, or otherwise approved by Apple Inc.
TECHLIFE NEWS© Copyright 2016-2012. All Rights Reserved.
No part of the document may be circulated, quoted, or reproduced for distribution without prior written approval. Proper Trademark 
Notice and Attribution iPad™, iPhone™, iPod™, Mac™, iMac™, Macbook™, iOS™, OS X™ are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the 
U.S. and other countries. Please contact support for additional trademark ownership rights information. The following is a list of 
Apple’s trademarks and service marks http://www.apple.com/legal/ trademark/appletmlist.html. All other trademarks are the 
properties of their owners.
WRIWRITERS
 
Precise English Inc.
 
Benjamin Kerry  (UK)
 
Gavin Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Craig Lenaghan  (UK)
 
Elena Lusk  (US)
COLUMNS
COLUMNS
 
iTUNES REVIEW
 
Benjamin Kerry
 
FINANCE NEWS
 
Associated Press / Bloomberg
REVISION
 
Gavin Lenaghan
  
Elena Lusk
PRODUCTION SUPPORT / COLLABORATORS
 
Rui da Costa
 
Segolene Vincent
 
Lise Berda
 
James Jarvis
 
Richard Sawyer
  
Lauren Brown
 
Matthew Coburn
 
Jeﬀrey Milks
 
Gustavo Leite
 
Susan Kiesling
 
Raquel Serrano
 
Robert Fluellen
  
Lisa Swiniarski
 
Roger Gayalkar
 
Gustavo Labanca
 
Held Souza
PRIVACY POLICY
 
techlifenews.com/privacy-policy/
TERMS OF USE
 
techlifenews.com/terms-of-use/
SOCIAL NETWORKS
 
 
Twitter
 
 
@TechLife_News
 
 
twitter.com/#!/TechLife_News
 
 
Facebook
 
 
facebook.com/TechLifeNews
SUBSCRIPTIONS
SUBSCRIPTIONS
 
TechLife News Website
 
techlifenews.com
 
iTunes App Store™ / Newsstand
 
itunes.apple.com/app/techlife-news/id529054466?mt=8
CONTACTS
 
Executive Director - ceo@techlifenews.com
  
Relationship Management - crm@techlifenews.com 
 
Editor - editor@techlifenews.com 
 
Advertise - ads@techlifenews.com 
 
Social Network - network@techlifenews.com
 
Promotions - promo@techlifenews.com 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
 
Ivan Castilho
  
Chief Executive Oﬃcer / Design Conception
MINDFIELD DIGITAL ART & GRAPHIC DESIGN
 
Glauco Ribeiro
 
Chief Design Oﬃcer / Art & Graphic Design Director
 
Michael Danglen
 
Art & Graphic Design Producer
 
Anderson Oliveira
  
Art & Graphic Design Producer
OFFICIAL WEBSITE
 
Yogh Inc.
 
WordPress Production & Website Support
 
Lucas Carvalho
 
Production Director
 
Fellipe Giesel
 
Web Designer / Producer
 
Filipe Siems
 
Web Designer / Programmer
TECHLIFE NEWS INTERNATIONAL
TechLifeNews.comMASTHEAD

TechlifeNews.com

