FEBRUARY 2018
FULL
REVIEW
BEST BUY LAPTOPS, TABLETS, WEARABLES
Microsoft Surface  
Book 2:
STAY SAFE WITH OUR GUIDE TO THE BEST
ANTIVIRUS SOFTWARE
Huawei Mate 10 Pro
¬
The ultimate 
laptop
OnePlus 5T


FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   3
CONTENTS
ROUND-UP
HOW TO
REVIEWS
Best antivirus software         84
Play PC games on a TV         115
Microsoft Surface Book 2         4
OnePlus 5T         24
Huawei Mate 10 Pro         37
Apple iPhone X         53
Motorola Moto X4         73
84
24
4

4   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
Microsoft Surface Book 2
13in: £1,499 inc VAT from fave.co/2A0rw84
15in: £2,499 inc VAT (available early 2018)
T
he Surface Book 2 solves a big problem for 
Microsoft: how do you market the Surface 
Book as a performance notebook when it’s 
two years out of date? As our review shows, by 
making it bigger and faster, with longer battery life.
Microsoft brings 8th-generation Intel Core 
processors and powerful, discrete Nvidia GPUs with 
enough horsepower to start thinking of the Surface 
Book 2 as a graphics workstation. But Microsoft’s 
big October surprise was the debut of not one, but 
two Surface Book 2 devices: a 13.5in and a new 15in 
model (we reviewed the latter). Neither is a simple 
clamshell notebook, though calling them convertible 
2-in-1s instead seems like we’re selling them short. 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   5
REVIEW
As our review shows, however, the new generation 
isn’t perfect. An ambitious decision to use a USB-C 
port has ripple effects for expansion capabilities. 
And then there’s the price: up to £3,299.
Display and chassis
Microsoft’s Surface Book has always reminded me of 
an answer to Lenovo’s classic ThinkPad, replacing the 
classic black Bento box with a nearly uniform silver 
slab. Unlike the Surface Pro and the Surface Laptop, 
there are no colour options, and the only adornment 
is the Windows logo on the outer casing. Raise the 
display into a laptop conﬁguration, and the keyboard’s 
backlighting is the only visual cue that the Surface 
Book 2 is awake and active.
Your eyes are sucked toward the big, bright, vibrant 
screen. Our Surface Book 2’s display pumped out 
412 nits, more than enough. And while a 3.2K IPS 
display might not quite reach that magic 4K milestone, 
the superb visual quality lives up to the Surface 
brand. More pixels would have negatively affected 
performance and battery life. It’s a good trade-off. 
Though Microsoft doesn’t tout the Surface Book 2 
as a content-creation machine as it does the Surface 
Studio, the Book 2 does include both of its colour 
proﬁles: standard RGB, and its ‘enhanced’ proﬁle, 
which makes colours a bit more vivid. If you’d like, 
you can also use the Surface Dial peripheral on the 
ten-point touchscreen. Unfortunately, the Surface 
Book 2 reclines to about the same 50-degree angle 
as the original Book, not nearly ﬂat enough to let 
the Dial rest without sliding to the ground. 

6   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
Though the Surface Book’s weight climbs to 1,905g, 
the incredibly long battery life means you can leave 
your charger at home. (If you’re an acolyte of the 
Microsoft ecosystem, you probably already own a 
Surface Dock for expansion and charging, anyway.) 
Still, it’s no wonder why Microsoft’s device chief Panos 
Panay refers to the Surface Book 2 as a desktop, as the 
device is big and bulky, though not especially heavy. 
The Surface Book 2 is a 2-in-1 convertible. Though 
it lacks the 360-degree hinge of most such models, the 
display can be ﬂipped over and reattached into a tent 
mode for viewing videos, or detached to function as a 
conventional tablet. Press a button on the keyboard, 
and after a second or two the ‘muscle wire’ retracts, 
and the tablet disconnects from the base. 
Microsoft claims the tablet disconnects more 
quickly than in the previous Surface Book, though 
in testing both, I couldn’t see any difference. After 
a second or two, the Surface Book 2 releases the 
tablet, and you can lift it free. This is no Amazon 
Kindle, though: Undocked, the 15in tablet is almost 
ludicrously huge, and unless you’re in the NBA, I 
doubt one hand will have enough breadth to hold 
it comfortably. By itself, the tablet weighs around 
800g, surprisingly light for something so big, but it’s 
still awkward. Once detached, it feels like it needs a 
Surface Pro-like kickstand. The tablet is multi-touch, 
with the standard ten points of contact.
(Undocked, you’ll discover that a Surface connector 
provides the data interface between the base and 
tablet. Though you can connect a charger or Surface 
Dock to this port, there’s very little point in doing so.)

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   7
REVIEW
The silvery metallic exterior of the Surface Book 
and Surface Book 2 both exude an almost military-like 
solidity. In a year or so of using the original Surface 
Book as a daily driver, it became slightly dented in 
places from normal wear and tear within a sometimes 
crowded backpack, and suffered a larger divot from 
a Kinect that plunged from the top of my roll-top 
desk as it lay, closed, on my desk. Neither affected 
its performance. That’s a good indicator that the 
Surface Book 2 will be equally durable.
Piling an additional notebook or two on top 
of the Book never damaged its iconic, accordion 
‘dynamic fulcrum’ hinge, which remains within the 
Surface Book 2. When the Book 2 is closed – now 
with a more authoritative click – a small gap remains 
near the hinge. While that space may still be oddly 
frustrating to some, it doesn’t affect performance 
and seems as structurally rigid as before. The tablet 
does wobble when you jiggle the base, though not 
as much as with the original Surface Book. It’s a 
reminder, though, that this isn’t a true notebook.
Perhaps the most surprising thing about the 
Surface Book 2, though, is simply how quiet it is. 
Microsoft uses a passive cooling system to cool the 

8   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
clipboard or tablet portion of the Surface Book 2, 
forgoing the fan entirely. Yes, it’s a fanless Core i7.
The keyboard, and the port debacle
The Surface Book 2 didn’t mess too much with one 
good thing: Its keyboard feels essentially unchanged 
from the ﬁrst iteration. Note, however, that it 
follows the  Surface Laptop’s layout, rather than the 
original Book’s: Microsoft eliminated the ‘Insert’ 
key, and added a separate key for toggling through 
various backlight controls. Otherwise, a wider bezel 
surrounds the keyboard on the 15in model, really 
emphasizing how vast the available space is. 
I’ve always found the Surface Book’s keyboard 
quite comfortable to type upon, with a ﬁrm response 
and good key travel. The Surface Book 2 keyboard 
felt ever so slightly stiffer, with response that felt 
a tad shallower. The trackpad feels identical: slick, 
smooth, and responsive. 
Microsoft did mess with the port allotment, 
however, and it’s one area where I feel the Surface 
Book 2 takes a step back. The left side of the base 
should look familiar to Surface Book owners: with 
two USB 3.0 Type A connectors, plus a UHS-II SDXC 
card reader. Microsoft even preserved the 3.5mm 
headphone jack. Along the right side, though, 
things change: Alongside the expected Surface 
connector, there’s a USB-C connector – and that’s it. 
Previously, Surface Books included a mini-
DisplayPort connector, a simple way to connect to a 
single monitor by way of a miniDP-to-HDMI cable. To 
connect to multiple monitors, you used the Surface 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   9
REVIEW
Dock, a £189 (from fave.co/2zVKjRT) hub with two 
additional miniDP connections. 
With the Surface Book 2, the miniDP connector 
is gone. Instead, you’ll need to invest in new 
infrastructure, beginning with a  new adaptor – a USB-C 
to HDMI cable, perhaps – that will cost you about £20. 
Theoretically, the USB-C connector also anticipates 
a future where you’ll be able to connect the Surface 
Book 2 to an ecosystem of external hard drives and 
other devices. But Microsoft’s implementation also 
lacks the Thunderbolt I/O implementation, part and 
parcel of Apple’s MacBook Pro and an easy way to 
connect multiple displays to a device that supports it.

10   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
That means connections to external monitors are 
somewhat limited. Ofﬁcially, the Surface Book 2 can 
drive two 4K monitors at 30Hz either via the USB-C 
port or the Surface Dock. Alternatively, either the Dock 
or the USB-C port can power a single 4K monitor at 
60Hz. (If you try simultaneously to connect a monitor 
via USB-C and a second monitor over the Dock, only 
the Dock-connected monitor will light up, Microsoft 
says.) We successfully connected the Book 2 to a 
conventional 1080p monitor at full frame rate, but 
managed only 30fps on a 120Hz 4K HDTV.
Microsoft’s traditional solution for multi-monitor 
setup has been the Surface Dock, which allows you to 
connect up to two external displays via a pair of mini-
DisplayPort connectors. But that has a problem, too: 
The 144W Dock doesn’t supply as much power as the 
Surface Book 2’s 180W native charger. Microsoft says 
that, under load, a Surface Book 2 powered by the 
Dock may use up so much power that it will drain the 
battery and enter sleep mode.
During testing, I played a few 3D-intensive games 
for nearly an hour, while using the Dock, as well as 
an additional 15 minutes or so while completely 
undocked. During that time, the battery decreased 
to about 65 percent overall. During ordinary use – 
web browsing, ofﬁce work, and so on – the Dock 
supplied sufﬁcient power without issue. And if the 
Surface Book 2 is connected to its charger, as well as 
to a single monitor via a USB-C to HDMI cable, the 
Book 2 should operate normally.
Microsoft claims that the Book 2 will charge from 
any USB-C PD3.0 compliant charger from 7.5- to 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   11
REVIEW
Surface Dock
95W, with a 60- to 95W USB-C charger powering the 
Surface Book 2 to 80 percent charged in 1.5 hours 
time. I didn’t have enough time to conﬁrm the latter 
claim, but as for the former, our Surface Book 2’s USB-C 
port didn’t accept power from a few random external 
chargers or battery packs. (And no, you can’t charge 
the Surface Book 2 from the USB-C and Surface ports, 
simultaneously – we asked.)
Confused? Well, so were we. Microsoft had a 
pricey but effective solution in the Surface Dock, 
but complicated the matter unnecessarily. 
All of this talk of ports and power sparked a 
somewhat lively debate between myself and a 
colleague, Gordon Ung. His take: how many people 
actually connect more than one monitor to a laptop? 
My response was to point to all of our coworkers 
with two or more displays. It may be somewhat of a 
niche case, but it’s a niche that lines up neatly with 
the power users that make the most likely candidates 
for Surface Book 2 purchases. One ﬁx would simply 
be to release an upgraded Surface Dock that could 
accommodate the power needs of the Surface Book 2.
Otherwise, the Surface Book 2 also includes 
802.11ac for wireless connectivity, which connected 

12   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
satisfactorily as I roamed around my home and ofﬁce. 
Bluetooth 4.1 Low Energy is also built in, which avoids 
collisions with the Wi-Fi signal. Finally, there’s a bonus 
for gamers: Xbox Wireless is built into the 15in version, 
meaning you can connect your wireless Xbox One 
controller for gaming on the go.
Speakers, cameras, the  
Pen and the Precision Mouse
Like the original Surface Book, the Book 2 sports both 
front (5Mp, 1080-capable) and rear (8Mp autofocus, 
1080p-capable) cameras that take serviceable pictures 
and enable Windows Hello’s biometric logins. Normally, 
few people would care about a tablet camera. But the 
Windows 10 Fall Creators Update that’s rolling out now 
includes such fun utilities as the Mixed Reality Viewer, 
where you can snap a photo with the rear camera and 
drop in a computer-generated dinosaur, giant taco, or 
bug right into the scene. Our review unit shipped with 
the older Creators Update, however.

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   13
REVIEW
The Surface Book 2 continues the Surface Book 
tradition of decent audio, accompanied by Dolby 
Audio processing. Though it supplies an adequate 
range of sound, you’d still be better off routing 
Spotify through headphones or an accompanying 
Invoke speaker for better bass response. The speakers 
are mounted inside the tablet, unlike the Surface 
Laptop’s base-mounted speakers.
Microsoft also provided what it calls a “next-
generation” Surface Pen for review (£99 from fave.
co/2j8q9MI). To be honest, the increasing levels 
of sensitivity – 4,096 in this version – have moved 
beyond our ability to test. Microsoft’s new Pen 
looks nice, writes smoothly, and is powered by a 
replaceable AAAA battery. That’s enough.
We didn’t receive Microsoft’s new Precision 
Mouse in time for review, but we were quite impressed 
in the short hands-on time we had earlier.
Performance
We expect an Nvidia GTX 1060-powered system 
such as the Surface Book 2 to perform well. Microsoft 
created extra pressure, however, by claiming the 
Surface Book 2 would perform three to four times 
better than the original Surface Books. In our 
performance charts below, you’ll see us compare the 
Surface Book 2 to its predecessor, as well as some 
recent laptops we’ve reviewed that have discrete 
graphics: Dell’s XPS 15, Lenovo’s Yoga 720, and 
Samsung’s Notebook 9 Pro.
We threw both mainstream and gaming benchmarks 
at the Surface Book 2. Somewhat surprisingly, the 

14   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
Surface Book 2 doesn’t necessarily top the heap in 
general productivity performance, but as a graphics 
workstation it’s among the very best.
Our ﬁrst test is PCMark Work 8 Conventional, 
which simulates everyday activities like web browsing 
and document editing. It’s a good test for isolating 
the CPU’s role in everyday use. Any machine scoring 
2,000 or above will sail along smoothly during these 
low-intensity tasks. The Surface Book 2 lands square in 
the middle: a little faster than its predecessors, but a 
little slower than the trio of recent competitors.
The Home and Creative broaden the scope 
somewhat, adding light gaming, photo editing, and 
ﬁnally some image and video processing. In general, 
how the Surface Book 2 compares against the Surface 
Microsoft’s Surface Book 2 landed in the middle 
during PCMark Work 8 Conventional. It was 
faster than its predecessors but slower than 
other laptops we’ve tested with discrete GPUs

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   15
REVIEW
Book most likely ties into the base processor clocks 
of both chips: 2.6GHz for the original Book, 1.9GHz 
The PCMark Home test offers a richer mix of 
photo editing and light gaming. Any of these 
machines will perform well in these tasks
Cinebench R15 offers a useful counterpoint to 
PCMark Work 8 Conventional. It’s a free 3D rendering 
test based on Maxon’s professional Cinema4D 
engine. It’s almost entirely CPU-bound and scales 
well with the number of cores and threads

16   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
for the Surface Book 2. When needed, the Book 2 can 
boost up to 4.2GHz – but in these tests, it doesn’t 
need to. As with the Work Conventional test, it scores 
below similar laptops with discrete GPU.
Remember, the eighth-generation Core chips use 
four cores and eight processing threads. Applications 
that take advantage of all of them perform better than 
the earlier dual-core Core chips. Maxon’s Cinebench 
benchmark takes advantage of this, with benchmarks 
that exercise all available cores. Here, the Surface Book 
2 is in the middle of the quad-core leading edge, while 
all the dual-core systems fall into place behind them.
We ran HandBrake, a prolonged test that converts 
a Hollywood movie into a format suitable for an 
Android tablet. One of the advantages of Windows 10 
and the new Core chips is that they’re optimized for 
Editing and converting videos offers another good 
test of dual-core versus quad-core, because more 
cores make a big difference. We used the popular 
and free HandBrake encoder to convert a 30GB 
1080p video using the built-in Android tablet preset

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   17
REVIEW
video playback. Still, the test is both a good workout 
as well as a real-world application, especially if you’re 
preparing some in-ﬂight entertainment for your kids. 
Here, Microsoft’s Surface Book 2 is the slowest of the 
quad-cores, possibly because it throttles its fanless 
Core i7 chip under prolonged load. 
The Surface Book 2 differs slightly from gaming 
machines in that it’s more of a general-purpose 
performance notebook. If you’d like, you can download 
an Play Anywhere title for the Xbox, like Gears of 
War 4, and ﬁre it up. Conversely, Microsoft also offers 
a complimentary three months of Adobe Creative 
Cloud  as encouragement to use it for more traditional 
creative pursuits. Either way, it’s hard to go wrong.
Here, we tested using the 3DMark Sky Diver 
benchmark, where the Surface Book 2 really begins 
Futuremark’s 3DMark Sky Diver is a synthetic test 
that measures the graphics performance of a PC. 
Although it doesn’t use an actual video game engine, 
it’s still well respected and clearly shows what you get 
if you opt for a discrete GPU

18   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
to strut its stuff, outpacing all comers. Compared 
to the prior-generation Surface Book with discrete 
GPU, Microsoft’s claim of a 3X to 4X performance 
difference is proven out.
I also played around with performance-hungry 
games from yesteryear, like Crysis 2, and maxed it out 
on my 1080p monitor at Ultimate performance levels. 
Modern games, such as Watch Dogs 2, also rendered 
smoothly at High and Very High settings. Just for fun, 
I tried Far Cry 3 on the Surface Book 2’s native tablet 
settings. It didn’t quite deliver playable frame rates, 
though the detail, naturally, was amazing. 
Finally, there’s battery life – a traditional strength 
of the Surface Book, and one that carries over here. 
We gauge a laptop’s stamina with our video rundown 
test. We ﬁrst charge the laptop to 100 percent, then 
set its screen between 250 and 260 nits to simulate the 
The Surface Book 2 tops the charts in our 
video rundown test, coming fairly close to 
Microsoft’s claim of “all-day battery life”

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   19
REVIEW
brightness level you’d use in an ofﬁce. With a pair of 
earbuds plugged in and the volume set to 50 percent, 
we run a 4K video ﬁle (the open-source Tears of Steel) 
on continuous loop in Windows 10’s Movies & TV app 
until the laptop shuts itself off.
Over time, we’ve expanded the notion of ‘all-day 
battery life’ from a generous six hours to more than 
eight hours and above. The Surface Book 2 carves 
out new territory at the high end, pushing past a 
whopping thirteen hours with ease. Microsoft’s Surface 
Book 2 includes two different batteries: a 23.2 Watt-
hour battery in the tablet, and a separate 62.2Wh 
battery in the base. (Interestingly, those are the design 
capacities, as measured by Windows; the batteries 
actually charged to 23.6- and 65.6Wh, respectively.)
Sure, 13 hours is far less than the 17 hours at which 
Microsoft rates the Surface Book 2. But Microsoft 
typically dials down the brightness to below the 
levels at which we test. On the other hand, our 
tests didn’t take advantage of the Windows 10 Fall 
Creators Update’s ability to prolong battery life by 
playing back video at a lower resolution, or running 
entirely in battery-saver mode. As our previous tests 
showed, aggressively managing battery life can tack 
on as much as 30 percent more runtime – enough to 
match up with Microsoft’s own numbers.
Verdict
Reports of the PC’s death have ushered in a renaissance 
of sorts, producing marvellous designs from Microsoft, 
HP, Lenovo, and others. I used the original Surface 
Book as a daily driver for months, if not years, and 

20   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
I’m an unabashed fan of that original – and now, 
the Surface Book 2.
The trap that Microsoft sets, though, is not unlike 
Apple’s: the company tacitly encourages you to think 
within its ecosystem and only its ecosystem, rather than 
its competition. Once you begin looking elsewhere, 
options like the Lenovo Yoga 720 begin to look more 
attractive, and at possibly cheaper prices, too. Other 
alternatives include the Dell XPS 15, which tops the 
performance charts, above – save for battery life, 
where it ﬁnishes at the bottom. Otherwise, what’s a 
few thousand pounds between friends?
There’s one question we can’t answer: stability. One 
of the unfortunate legacies of the Surface products is a 
shakedown period of a few months where some early 
models suffered anything from ‘hot bag’ refusals to 
enter a sleep state, to screen ﬂickering. Our Surface 
Book 2 exhibited a strange buzzing noise almost 
immediately, which persisted for about an hour or 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   21
REVIEW
other glitches. The bottom line? If you can afford a 
Surface Book 2, we’d recommend it. So many of its 
attributes are simply fantastic, including its graphics 
performance and stellar battery life. If Microsoft had 
avoided all of the complications associated with its 
decision to incorporate USB-C (omitting Thunderbolt, 
upgrading the Dock), we’d be hard-pressed to 
ﬁnd anything wrong with the Surface Book 2 at all. 
Microsoft has made its ‘ultimate laptop’ even better, 
in many ways. Just not all of them. Mark Hachman
Speciﬁcations
13.5in Surface 2
•  13.5in (3,000x2,000, 260ppi) PixelSense display
•  Windows 10 Pro Creators Update 64-bit
•  8GB or 16GB RAM 1,866MHz LPDDR3 
•  256GB, 512GB, or 1TB PCIe SSD
•  7th Gen Intel Core i5-7300U dual-core processor, 
3.5GHz Max Turbo
•  8th Gen Intel Core i7-8650U quad-core processor, 
4.2GHz Max Turbo
•  Intel HD Graphics 620 integrated GPU (on Intel 
i5-7300U model)
•  Nvidia GeForce GTX 1050 discrete GPU with 2GB 
GDDR5 graphics memory (on Intel i7-8650U models)
•  2x USB Type-A
•  1x USB Type-C
•  3.5mm headphone jack
•  2x Surface Connect ports
•  Full-size SD card reader
•  802.11ac Wi-Fi
•  Bluetooth 4.1

22   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
•  Windows Hello face authentication camera 
(front-facing)
•  5Mp front-facing camera with 1080p HD video
•  8Mp rear-facing autofocus camera with 1080p 
HD video
•  Dual microphones
•  Front-facing stereo speakers with Dolby Audio 
Premium
•  Support for Windows Sonic for Headphones
•  Up to 17 hours video playback
•  45W USB-C power adaptor
•  312x232x3-23mm
•  Core i5 1,534g; Core i7 1,642g

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   23
REVIEW
15in Surface 2
•  15in (3,240x2,160, 260ppi) PixelSense display
•  Windows 10 Pro Creators Update 64-bit
•  16GB RAM 1866MHz LPDDR3 
•  256GB, 512GB, or 1TB PCIe SSD
•  8th Gen Intel Core i7-8650U quad-core processor, 
4.2GHz Max Turbo
•  Nvidia GeForce GTX 1060 discrete GPU with 6GB 
GDDR5 graphics memory
•  2x USB Type-A
•  1x USB Type-C
•  3.5mm headphone jack
•  2x Surface Connect ports
•  Full-size SD card reader
•  802.11ac Wi-Fi
•  Bluetooth 4.1
•  Xbox Wireless built in
•  Windows Hello face authentication camera 
(front-facing)
•  5Mp front-facing camera with 1080p HD video
•  8Mp rear-facing autofocus camera with 1080p 
HD video
•  Dual microphones
•  Front-facing stereo speakers with Dolby Audio 
Premium
•  Support for Windows Sonic for Headphones
•  Up to 17 hours video playback
•  45W USB-C power adaptor
•  343x251x15-23mm
•  1,905g

24   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
£449 inc VAT from fave.co/2jclVDD
OnePlus 5T
M
aking a mark on the smartphone market is hard 
enough. Muscling in to compete in the same 
arena – if not at the top step – doesn’t happen 
often. OnePlus has bucked this trend over the last three 
years with its phones of high specs and low prices.
Times change though. You may have needed an 
invitation to buy the OnePlus One in 2014, but the 
clamour was justiﬁed when the phone cost just £229 
at a time when the then-ﬂagship iPhone 5s sold for 
£549 and could compete on specs.

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   25
REVIEW
The £449 OnePlus 5T is an upgrade on the ﬁve-
month-old OnePlus 5 in the same way the 3T was 
to the 3 a year ago. In eighteen months, there have 
been four ﬂagship devices from a company that had 
previously only made two (the mid-range OnePlus X 
being its other device).
The new phone is excellent – a huge, crisp screen 
and screaming performance – but it’s coming from 
a company that is dangerously close to annoying its 
fans and appearing like it has run out of ideas, even 
though it hasn’t. It’s an impressive reﬁnement of the 
company’s fast progression in smartphones. It’s very 
similar to the OnePlus 5, but the new screen size and 
face unlock feature make it feel surprisingly fresh.
Design
Let’s not pretend here, the OnePlus 5T naturally 
looks like the OnePlus 5. The front is more attractive 
with the lack of bezels and ﬁngerprint sensor but the 
phone itself is largely unchanged aside from the new 
18:9 display. It’s only available in midnight black at 
launch and yes, it looks a lot like the Oppo R11S. 
It’s a tiny bit taller than the OnePlus 5 to 
accommodate the new screen, measuring 
156x75x7.3mm. It won’t ﬁt properly in an old case, 
but you wouldn’t want it to now that the ﬁngerprint 
sensor is on the back. Luckily, it’s really fast, easy to 
use and is circular. The rear otherwise looks the same, 
with dual cameras and a OnePlus logo. It charges 
via USB-C (and its excellent but proprietary Dash 
Charge charger) and retains a headphone jack, but 
ships with no headphones.

26   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
There is no waterprooﬁng of any kind, nor any form 
of wireless charging. We don’t care about the latter 
too much, but the former is something the 5T lacks in 
comparison to nearly every other Android ﬂagship this 
year. So there are some sacriﬁces to achieve the price. 
It’s a phone we ﬁnd to be ridiculously slippery. It’s 
so thin, and the back isn’t easy to grip so snapping it 
into a case almost a must. This is a shame, as the cases 
don’t show off the excellent premium build underneath. 
This isn’t a problem unique to OnePlus, though.
It’s also deﬁnitely a two-handed phone. The lack 
of bezels looks lovely, but makes a phone harder to 
hold. Only the massive-handed will be able to reach 
their thumb to the top of the display, and for us 
texting with one hand is impossible.
But for £449, wow, what a looker. It is a more 
attractive and pleasing phone to use than the OnePlus 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   27
REVIEW
5, whose bezels now look antiquated in comparison. 
And though the specs haven’t changed much, they 
remain credibly high-end.
Performance
Unlike the OnePlus 3T, the 5T does not get a notable 
bump over the previous generation in terms of 
core specs. But with a Snapdragon 835 and 8GB 
RAM in the £499 version we tested (and a perfectly 
adequate 6GB in the cheaper model) that won’t 
prove a  problem for all your smartphone needs.
A benchmark of the handset against phones 
with similar specs shows that the ﬁeld is pretty well 
balanced. It’s worth mentioning that the benchmark 
speeds of the iPhone X (reviewed on page 53) will beat 
anything Android for this year and probably the next 
Geekbench 4

28   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
GFXBench 
Manhattan
GFXBench 
T-Rex

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   29
REVIEW
couple, but that the OnePlus 5T feels as ﬂuid as an 
Android phone can feel other than the Pixel 2.
The OnePlus 5 scores higher than the 5T on a 
couple of tests, but it is a tiny difference. OnePlus 
was also accused of boosting the 5 for tests, so 
they may have stopped that when everyone noticed. 
The 5T is the fastest phone we have ever used 
besides the Pixel 2 this year. Away from Android, 
this year’s iPhones are also ridiculously quick with 
Apple’s new A11 Bionic chip.
Display
The display is altered with a 6.01in Optic AMOLED 
panel that uses a 2160x1080 resolution to create 
the 18:9 aspect ratio. It takes up a whopping 80.5 
percent of the front of the device.
It’s a bright, colourful panel that is a smidge 
under Samsung-quality, but as is usually the case 
with OnePlus, it’s a belter of a screen for the price. 
We found though that the auto-brightness setting 
is too aggressive and makes the screen too dim 
much of the time. The only changes are the display, 
ﬁngerprint placement, camera sensors and new 
face unlock feature. The latter works stupidly fast 
but is less secure than Apple’s Face ID, and akin to 
the same feature on the Galaxy S8 in that it records 
a 2D image that can potentially be fooled by a 
decent quality print out of your face. Apple’s uses 
3D mapping, which can’t be tricked this way.
It’s also great that the 5T does not suffer from 
the jelly scroll effect that plagues the OnePlus 5 still. 
The display size and quality is the best upgrade here.

30   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
Cameras
The camera set up is now two Sony sensors. The main 
is 16Mp with f/1.7 aperture while the secondary is a 
20Mp with f/1.7 aperture. This is an upgrade from 
the OnePlus 5, whose secondary camera was an f/2.6 
telephoto lens.
With improved aperture, OnePlus claims the 5T is its 
best ever phone for low light photography (photo 1), 
and this appears to hold true. 
We noticed that it takes a lot for the second sensor 
to even kick in though, and it feels a bit redundant as 
an inclusion. It’s not needed at all for zoom, and is best 
reserved for portrait mode. This, like on the OnePlus 5, 
performs with mixed results.
1.

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   31
REVIEW
Below is a shot of a goose (2), where the bokeh 
effect worked pretty well, but zoomed into the head 
you can see that the phone struggles to identify exactly 
where bird ends and background ends, with blurred 
patches. There were better results of human subjects 
(3), and the cameras did well in the below shot to well 
deﬁne the position of the camera, with the person 
blended better into the background.
It doesn’t perform as well as the Pixel 2 (which only 
has one lens) and is less consistent than the iPhone 8 
Plus and iPhone X. The camera best performs in bright 
daylight, where landscapes look excellent (4), but it 
doesn’t achieve the same standard as the best cameras 
in phones from Apple, Google and Samsung.
2.
3.

32   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
The front-facing camera is a 16Mp sensor with 
f/2.0 aperture and is pretty decent in daylight and 
for video calling. The 5T isn’t the high-end phone 
to pick if you want the ultimate smartphone camera, 
despite its relentless ‘Shot on OnePlus’ social media 
campaigning. You’ll ﬁnd better results in phones 
that are admittedly more expensive.
Connectivity and audio
Call quality has been solid, and it’s good to see 
OnePlus plough on with the dual-SIM slot as standard, 
but there’s still no expandable storage. It gets 
Bluetooth 5.0 which paired the phone ﬂawlessly with a 
Samsung Gear Fit2 Pro for the duration of our testing.
4.

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   33
REVIEW
Full LTE compatibility, 802.11ac Wi-Fi and NFC 
round up all the inclusions you’d expect.
Battery life
The battery life is about the same as the 5, and the 
5T shares the same capacity. Dash Charge remains an 
excellent charging technology even if it only works 
with the supplied cable and brick. We also saw the 5T 
achieve four hours of screen on time under fairly heavy 
usage until it was reaching empty.
It’s not as much of a two-day powerhouse like the 
BlackBerry KeyOne (£399 from tinyurl.com/y99qsxp6), 
but for a phone with the best speciﬁcations out there 
and an OLED display, the OnePlus 5T holds its own.
Software
It’s a disappointment that the 5T doesn’t ship with 
Android Oreo. It’s on Nougat 7.1.1, but we’re hopeful 
for 8.0 Oreo in the coming months. 
Oxygen OS, the ﬁrms interface, continues to 
improve. OnePlus pushes you on set up to use its 
new font ‘OnePlus Slate’ which is toying with a comic 
sans vibe at times. We still prefer the other option, 
‘Roboto’, Google’s preferred font.
We used the 5T with the Dark theme, a nice 
touch that changes the whole UI to a slicker black 
hue with the ability to change the accent colour of 
icons and menus.
The changes to stock Android are thoughtful and 
unobtrusive. Swipe up for apps is better than an 
app tray, while the notiﬁcation shade is familiar but 
excellently customizable.

34   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
Unlike previous OnePlus phones, the navigation 
buttons are now exclusively software features as the 
bottom bezel can no longer accommodate capacitive 
buttons either side of a ﬁngerprint sensor. They can of 
course be remapped, and there are little features like 
swiping down anywhere on the home screen or on the 
ﬁngerprint sensor to pull down the notiﬁcation shade.
The top bezel still has room for a camera, and that’s 
how you can set up face unlock. It’s less secure than the 
ﬁngerprint sensor or a simple PIN, but it is the fastest 
face unlock we’ve ever seen on a phone.
Tap the power button while looking at the device 
and it’s so fast you don’t even see the lock screen. It’s 
odd at ﬁrst, but is the fastest on any Android device 
we’ve used by a country mile. OnePlus also says that 
it won’t integrate it to be used in sensitive apps such 
The home screen, app drawer, notiﬁcation shade 
and settings menu on OxygenOS (customized)

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   35
REVIEW
as for banking, acknowledging its security pitfalls 
compared to ﬁngerprint or PIN. 
Along with Google, Nokia and Motorola, OnePlus 
ships a clean, uncomplicated version of Android that’s 
all the better for it. If you like a bit of Samsung style 
ﬂash on your phone though it might not be for you – 
the 5T is blindingly fast but partly because of its lack 
of animations. Everything is very austere and clean cut 
in order to get a process done as fast as possible, but 
it’s a phone that encourages you to tinker to get a truly 
unique look and feel – which we love.
The customization is now key to the OnePlus 
experience. People (including us) buy iPhones and 
Samsung phones and never tweak anything. Using the 
5T implores you to dig into the UI and change things 
for the better, and we welcome that wholeheartedly. 
OnePlus conﬁrmed at the phone’s launch event 
that it will be getting Oreo in ‘early 2018’, which will 
bring better notiﬁcations, security, handy features 
like password autoﬁll, and visual tweaks. 
Verdict
The OnePlus 5T isn’t a surprise, both in its existence 
and the fact it’s very similar to the OnePlus 5. It stands 
as a reminder that 2017 was the year every company 
quickly produced a phone with an 18:9 display to make 
sure its bezels didn’t look outdated on the store shelf.
But OnePlus isn’t on many store shelves given its 
online retail approach, and its many vocal core fans 
who bought the 5 will be annoyed by the 5T. OnePlus 
needed to update its design language quickly to keep 
up with the wider market where it is yet to make a dent, 

36   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
and the 5T is overall a better device than the 5. And 
let’s not forget that for £449, the 5T is an exceptionally 
well-rounded smartphone. It is at least £100 cheaper 
than similar handsets, and sometimes close to £300 
less. If you buy into the design (without waterprooﬁng 
and wireless charging) and price but can accept that the 
camera isn’t top draw and it’ll probably be superseded 
in six months, then it’s a great choice. Henry Burrell
Speciﬁcations
•  6.01in full-HD (2160x1080, 401ppi) display
•  Android 7.1.1 Nougat
•  Qualcomm MSM8998 Snapdragon 835 processor
•  Octa-core (4x 2.45GHz Kryo and 4x 1.9GHz Kryo) CPU
•  Adreno 540 GPU
•  6/8GB RAM
•  64/128GB storage, no microSD support
•  Fingerprint scanner
•  Dual 20Mp and 16Mp, f/1.7, 27mm, EIS (gyro), phase 
detection autofocus, dual-LED ﬂash
•  16Mp, f/2.0, 20mm, EIS (gyro), 1μm pixel size, 1080p, 
Auto HDR
•  3.5mm headphone jack
•  4G FDD-LTE UK bands B3/B7/B20
•  802.11ac Wi-Fi
•  Bluetooth 5.0
•  A-GPS, GLONASS, BDS, GALILEO
•  NFC
•  USB 2.0
•  Non-removable lithium-polymer 3,300mAh battery
•  156.1x75x7.3mm
•  162g

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   37
REVIEW
£699 inc VAT from fave.co/2jc1FSy
Huawei Mate 10 Pro
H
uawei is the biggest telecoms company on the 
planet, but the brand is still relatively unknown 
in the UK. Although other phone makers such as 
Samsung and Apple only very recently launched bezel-
less phones, Huawei has quietly been doing this since 
2014. Its Mate series has always had practically zero 
side bezels so although some will think that Huawei is 
just copying the big boys with the Mate 10, it’s actually 
the other way around.
The past few Mates have all looked pretty much the 
same, but Huawei has shaken things up for 2017 and it’s 

38   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
no overstatement to say this is one of the best-looking 
phones around. It’s also one of the most powerful 
and longest-lasting, attributes which should ensure its 
place on your upgrade shortlist alongside the Galaxy 
S8, Note8 and – maybe – iPhone 8 Plus.
Design
The Mate 10 Pro – the only model from the range 
that will be sold in the UK later in November – is a 
gorgeous-looking phone that’s taller and slimmer 
than its predecessors thanks to the switch to an 18:9 
screen and smaller top and bottom bezels than on 
the Mate 9. It’s a bit smaller than the iPhone 8 Plus, 
but has a 6in screen rather than 5.5in.
A glass back is the main change from previous 
Mate designs. Unlike the iPhone 8 which also adopts 
the glass sandwich, the Mate 10 Pro doesn’t support 
allow wireless charging. Instead, the Gorilla Glass 5 
is there purely for aesthetics.
And it looks stunning. The glass curves on all 
four edges and reﬂects the light beautifully (see 
opposite). It joins the alloy frame almost invisibly 
and feels silky smooth in the hand.
The problem with this is that – hardened or not 
– glass is still glass. Huawei provides a plastic case 
in the box, and a screen protector is ﬁtted at the 
factory, but the case hides that glorious ﬁnish so it’ll 
always be tempting to go case-less and run the risk 
of the drop-smash. 
At least it will continue to work if it falls in the bath: 
the Mate 10 is Huawei’s ﬁrst phone to have proper 
waterprooﬁng. And since the cameras protrude by a 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   39
REVIEW
millimetre or so and aren’t part of that rear glass, they 
should continue working even if it does get cracked.
The Mate 10 Pro comes in four colours: Midnight 
Blue, Titanium Grey, Pink Gold, Mocha Brown. In my 
eyes, the blue version looks best, but plenty of people 
are taken with the bronze-like Mocha Brown.
Just be sure to have a lens cloth handy at all times 
to clean the glass of those inevitable ﬁngerprints.
Another departure from previous Mate designs is the 
stripe which highlights the dual cameras. These are still 
aligned vertically but are separated instead of having a 
single cover as on the Mate 9.
The arrangement is essentially the same, though, 
with 12- and 20Mp sensors, the former colour and the 
latter mono. Both lenses have a faster f/1.6 aperture to 

40   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
let in more light than before, but only the 12Mp camera 
beneﬁts from optical stabilisation.
The ﬁngerprint scanner sits below the cameras and 
is a bit larger than the Mate 9’s. Having used enough 
phones with a rear scanner, it’s just as good – if not 
better – than a front-mounted sensor as your ﬁnger falls 
naturally on it when you pick up the phone.
But therein lies the rub: you have to pick it up to 
access the scanner. That, or press the power button 
and enter your PIN or swipe pattern to unlock.
There’s another slight niggle: you won’t ﬁnd a 
3.5mm headphone jack on the Mate 10 Pro, though 
there is one on the standard Mate 10 (a model you 
can’t buy in the UK).
The top edge of the phone has what looks like a 
headphone jack, but it’s actually an IR blaster next to 
a microphone. This lets you control your TV or set-top 
box, should you want to.

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   41
REVIEW
Another oddity is that the Pro doesn’t offer 
expandable storage via microSD whereas the standard 
Mate 10 does. Fortunately, the Pro packs 128GB as 
standard, but you’ll have to be sure that’s all you’ll 
need for the lifetime of the phone. 
It is a dual-SIM phone, though, and it supports 4G 
for both nano SIMs. The modem supports Cat 18 LTE 
so it’s one of the ﬁrst phones which can download at 
1.2Gb/s. Unfortunately, you’re not going to experience 
this in the UK for a long while as the fastest download 
speed to date (offered by EE) is 150Mb/s.
Huawei is calling it 4.5G, but while it’s interesting, 
ultimately it isn’t a reason to buy the Mate 10 Pro (or 
any other phone with similar tech.)
Display and audio
We never got the Mate 9 Pro in the UK, but that 
model had an OLED screen as opposed to the IPS 
LCD screen in the standard Mate 9. Things are the 
same in 2017 and it means the Mate 10 Pro should 
be compatible with Google’s Daydream VR headsets 
(it isn’t yet certiﬁed, but is expected to be shortly).
It has a resolution of 2160x1080 which is lower 
than its rivals, but in the ﬂesh it looks great and, at 
480ppi, everything looks nice and sharp. The OLED 
tech means contrast is fantastic and colours are 
also great: it has a wide colour gamut (112 percent 
of the NTSC standard) which allows it to display 
HDR10 content.
Colours pop as they do on the Galaxy S8 Plus 
and viewing angles are nice and wide with no 
noticeable colour shifting. 

42   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
The 18:9 aspect ratio screen is becoming more 
common, which is a good thing for the Mate 10 Pro 
as more apps will be optimized to run in full-screen 
mode. The phone lets you force any app to do this, but 
doesn’t guarantee it’ll work properly.
Unlike the Pixel 2 XL which has two front-ﬁring 
stereo speakers, Huawei opts for an Apple-like 
approach with the top one facing the front and the 
bottom-ﬁring speaker used as the second. 
They’re loud enough, but not particularly well 
balanced with the front speaker noticeably quieter.
Cameras
The lenses may have f/1.6 apertures, but the cameras 
are not the Mate 10 Pro’s strong suit. At least, certainly 
not when compared to the amazing snappers on the 
Pixel 2 XL.
Put simply, the Mate 10 Pro cannot resolve the same 
level of detail. When you look close up, photos don’t 
look sharp and there’s evidence of noise reduction, 
even in good light. This makes textures looks a bit 
smeary, and it’s worse in low light.
We’ve also reason to quibble about video quality. 
Everything looks a little soft at 1080p but while 4K is 
decent enough, there’s no stabilisation on offer (despite 
the OIS).
Annoyingly, the same restriction is imposed if you 
choose to shoot at 1080p60, so you either live without 
stabilisation or put with less detail and half the number 
of frames per second to get smoother video.
Audio quality on videos is pretty good, with 
none of the noise reduction you get on other phones 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   43
REVIEW
that makes it sound as though the recordings were 
made under water. It’s a stereo soundtrack, too. You 
can see a 1080p30 clip with stabilisation enabled at  
tinyurl.com/y7hgbr7q.
Plus, while it’s easy to be critical of the quality when 
really scrutinising photos at 100 percent, they look 
good when viewed normally. The lack of sharpness 
isn’t noticeable: focus is actually very good.
You can snap a shot in a hurry and still get good 
results thanks to the array of focusing techniques 
(and depth perception) at the rear which mean there’s 
no perceptible delay between tapping the shutter 
button and the photo being taken.
Auto settings

44   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
There are lots of modes to play with including 
slo-mo video (which works a lot like the iPhone’s and 
lets you adjust which portion is slowed down), a pro 
mode for photo and video that gives enthusiasts access 
to shutter speed, ISO, metering, EV correction, focus 
and white balance. You can even lock the last three 
while you make other changes.
You can also use the monochrome camera to take 
20Mp photos and they’re clean even in low light:
Huawei’s signature light painting mode is great fun 
at night, and long exposures can be used to get light 
trails or other effects.
On top of all that, there’s the option to enable 
Motion photos (basically the same as Apple’s Live 
Monochrome
Portrait mode

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   45
REVIEW
Photos) and both portrait mode and ‘wide aperture’ 
mode. The latter is usable with the standard ﬁeld of 
view which means you can take photos of several 
people and still get a nice blurry background.
In portrait mode, results can look great, but it 
doesn’t always correctly detect hair. Again, though, 
this is only something you’d notice if you zoom in 
and look closely.
Around the front the 8Mp selﬁe camera is decent 
enough and you can play with the beauty settings 
in the portrait mode and even toggle on the ‘artistic 
bokeh effect’ which uses the power of the Kirin 970 
to ﬁgure out what’s in the background and blur it. 
And it works surprisingly well.
The stock camera app has the same interface 
as before, but the AI certainly appears to help with 
scene recognition. A symbol appears at the bottom-
left corner to indicate what it has recognized.
For example, there’s almost no delay switching 
to foliage mode when pointing the camera at a 
plant. Similarly, face recognition (and tracking) 
worked really well when taking photos of a ballerina 
– despite the relatively dim lighting.
Even when its very dark, the cameras are still able 
to focus quickly and take sharp-looking photos with 
good skin tones.
Each camera has its own ISP (image signal processor) 
and these are used in conjunction with the AI engine 
to process images according to the type of scene 
detected. The processing power is also used to enable 
software zoom up to 2x, and the results can be better 
than the telephoto lens on the iPhone 7 Plus.

46   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
Performance
Huawei uses its own-design processors in its phones 
and the latest is the Kirin 970. It’s an eight-core chip 
and, like Apple’s A11 Bionic, it has dedicated neural 
network hardware which allows it to handle tasks 
such as language translation and image classiﬁcation 
on the phone instead of requiring it to call home to 
servers on the Internet.
Huawei says the performance of this so-called 
NPU (Neural Processing Unit) is 25 times better than 
the main CPU, and 50 times more efﬁcient.
Overall the Kirin 970 is 20 percent more efﬁcient 
than the Mate 9’s Kirin 960 and the new Mali G72-MP12 
GPU is 50 percent more efﬁcient.
All of this means the Mate 10 Pro has excellent 
battery life. With a 4,000mAh capacity, it easily lasts 
Geekbench 4

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   47
REVIEW
GFXBench 
Manhattan
GFXBench 
T-Rex

48   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
a day even with heavy use. And if you’re not playing 
games, taking videos or constantly using the screen 
to browse the web, watch videos or send messages, 
it’ll (almost) last two days. 
When it’s empty, the included SuperCharge power 
supply will charge the Mate 10 Pro to almost 60 
percent in only 15 minutes.
As for the processor’s performance, it’s fantastic. 
It comfortably sits with Snapdragon 835-powered 
phones and thanks to the lower resolution than some of 
those phones, the GPU doesn’t have such a hard time 
rendering all those pixels so it can deliver as many, if 
not more frames per second.
Only the A11 goes noticeably quicker in 
benchmarks, but this doesn’t include image 
recognition. Huawei says the Mate 10 Pro can identify 
scenes in photos at a rate of 2000 per minute, while 
the iPhone 7 Plus can manage only about 500. 
And in real-world use, the Mate 10 Pro feels as 
fast and responsive as you’d expect from a top-end 
ﬂagship phone.
The real question is whether developers will use 
Huawei’s APIs to create apps that take advantage of 
the NPU. If not, you’re not going to see a huge beneﬁt 
beyond translation and image and scene recognition 
or other apps Huawei itself releases.
Translation needs to improve before you can 
rely on it. Once you’ve downloaded the respective 
language packs, you can use the app ofﬂine
It works pretty well, but in the (admittedly hard) test 
above, it completely fails to translate the Spanish for 
department stores and calls them “large surfaces”. 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   49
REVIEW
Software
As you’d hope from a brand new Android phone, the 
Mate 10 Pro comes with Android 8.0 Oreo and this is 
overlaid with Huawei’s EMUI interface.
EMUI is one of the most iOS-like Android interfaces 
out there and this makes it ideal if you’re jumping ship 
from an iPhone. The default layout is to show all apps 
in a grid, but you can change this for the traditional 
app drawer in the settings.
From the home screen you can drag down to get 
a search bar to ﬁnd apps, music or other media.
The previous version was EMUI 6, but in order to 
match Android, this has now been bumped up to EMUI 
8.0 for the Mate 10. You won’t notice too many major 
changes, since these are lurking behind the scenes.
EMUI 8 is great to use, although it does take a bit of 
adjusting if you’re used to plain Android. What’s nice 

50   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
is that you have a choice of whether to use the usual 
Android soft navigation keys or EMUI’s ﬂoating button.
You’ll have to learn the gestures for the button, 
but because you can position it anywhere on the 
screen, it could be a quicker way to operate the phone 
with one hand. Disabled by default is the always-on 
display. This shows the time, date and notiﬁcations 
just like the Pixel 2 XL and Galaxy S8. You can 
schedule this, too, so it doesn’t use power at night.
Like Motorola, Huawei adds quite a few handy 
features to Android, such as double-pressing the power 
button to launch the camera when the phone is off, and 
letting you quickly call someone by holding the volume 
down button and speaking their name.
Thanks to the wider screen, the Mate 10 Pro has a 
feature called Smart Split-screen. This automatically 
displays some apps in two columns in landscape 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   51
REVIEW
mode and means you can keep watching a video 
while replying to an email, for example.
And as with previous versions, you can use your 
knuckle to knock on the screen to achieve certain 
things. For example, a double knock takes a screenshot 
and you can draw letters with your knuckle to launch 
certain apps. You can also draw a line across the screen 
to enter split-screen mode – getting the knack just 
takes a little practice.
A potentially useful feature for some is the ability 
to connect a big screen using just a USB-C to HDMI 
adaptor cable. When you do this, you get a Windows-
style desktop for running apps and the phone screen 
becomes a virtual touchpad for the on-screen cursor. A 
keyboard also pops up when relevant for text entry.
The desktop environment is fairly rudimentary, but 
if Huawei develops it, this could be a reason to get the 
Mate 10 over one of your other shortlisted phones. 
Verdict
The Mate 10 Pro is the best phone from Huawei yet 
and  although the cameras aren’t as good as the 
Pixel 2 XL’s, it has a better screen, better battery 
life and just as much processing power. In fact, with 
the AI processor there’s arguably more on board, 
but there’s no guarantee that apps will appear to 
make use of it. Even if they don’t, this is still an 
outstanding phone. Jim Martin
Speciﬁcations
•  6in (2160x1080, 402ppi) IPS display
•   EMUI 8.0 (Android 8.0 Oreo)

52   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
•   Hisilicon Kirin 970 processor
•   Octa-core (4x 2.4GHz Cortex-A73, 4x 1.8GHz 
Cortex-A53) CPU
•   Mali-G72 MP12 GPU
•   4/6GB RAM
•   64/128GB storage
•   Fingerprint scanner
•   Dual 20Mp and 12Mp, f/1.6, OIS, 2x lossless zoom, 
Leica optics, phase detection and laser autofocus, 
dual-LED (dual tone) ﬂash
•   8Mp, f/2.0 front camera
•   Bluetooth 4.2
•   GPS, A-GPS, GLONASS, BDS
•   USB-C 3.1
•   4,000mAh lithium-polymer battery
•   154.2x74.5x7.9mm
•   178g

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   53
REVIEW
Apple iPhone X
I
t’s 10 years since Steve Jobs unveiled the ﬁrst iPhone 
and Apple has marked the occasion with a new 
handset that doesn’t just jump one generation, it 
jumps several. The ﬁrm has leaped from iPhone 7 (via 
64GB: £999 inc VAT from fave.co/2iyEGRo
256GB: £1,149 from fave.co/2iywdhe

54   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
the iPhone 8) all the way to iPhone X, bypassing the 
iPhone 7s and leapfrogging the iPhone 9 altogether.
Despite rumours of limited stock, thousands of 
people queued around blocks the world over to pick 
up the new handset, in scenes we haven’t seen for a 
few years. All Apple had to do to get so much attention 
was redesign the iPhone. That sounds easy, but the 
redesign involved the removal of the Home button, 
and to make that possible Apple had to rethink the 
way you interact with the phone.
Face ID
The iPhone X feature that’s received the most attention 
is Face ID, Apple’s technology for unlocking the 
iPhone X and authenticating 
your ID. It replaces Touch 
ID, Apple’s ﬁngerprint 
technology that served the 
same purpose. 
Setting it up is easy. In 
a process similar to Touch 
ID, where the Home button 
records several impressions 
of your ﬁngerprints, the 
you’ll need to move your 
head in different angles 
as the TrueDepth camera 
system records different 
spots on your face. It 
takes a few minutes, and 
then it’s ready to go. Face 
ID only allows a single 
Setting up Face ID is easy and 
takes a couple of minutes

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   55
REVIEW
person to register their face. Touch ID lets you register 
different ﬁngers; you can use this capacity to register 
the ﬁngerprints of other people who you want to have 
access to your device. This is handy if you’re okay 
with, say, your other half having access to your iPhone. 
Maybe Face ID’s one-face limitation will change if 
Apple decides to use Face ID on the iPad, a device 
that’s more likely to have multiple users.
By default, Face ID requires your eyes to be open 
in order for it to work, But if you go into Settings > 
Face ID & Passcode and turn off the Require Attention 
for Face ID setting, Face ID will work when you have 
your eyes closed.
I had some concerns about Face ID because I’ve got 
so used to Touch ID, which feels like it has seamlessly 
integrated with how I use my iPhone. But for me, 
there was actually nothing to really be concerned 
about. Face ID is much 
closer to the idea of 
seamless integration than I 
imagined with Touch ID.
By default, Face ID 
requires your eyes to 
be open in order for it 
to work, But if you go 
into Settings > Face ID 
& Passcode and turn off 
the Require Attention 
for Face ID setting, Face 
ID will work when you 
have your eyes closed

56   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
When it works, Face ID works really well. To access 
your iPhone X after it’s been sitting in your pocket, 
purse, bag, desk, and so on, you need to unlock it 
using Face ID. At ﬁrst, I had a tendency to wait for 
the lock icon on the screen to unlock. But the key is 
to not wait. You should swipe up to get to the Home 
screen as you’re looking at the iPhone X. It takes some 
practice, but before too long, unlocking your phone 
will feel effortless.
I’ve had some conversations with Android users 
who have tried the iPhone X, and their main beef with 
Face ID is that it’s too slow compared to a ﬁngerprint 
scanner. In their limited time with the iPhone X, they’re 
not accessing the Home 
screen in the manner I 
described above – and since 
they’re not invested in the 
iPhone, they’re not willing to 
learn, either. It’s still true that 
access to the Home screen 
using Face ID isn’t as fast as 
using a ﬁngerprint scanner, 
but it’s maybe a second 
slower. If that one second 
is all the difference to you, 
then I hope you’re using 
that time wisely.
Using Face ID with some 
third-party apps is done in 
a manner similar to that of 
Touch ID. For example, with 
the app for my bank and with 
Third-party apps such as 
Dropbox have updated its 
apps with Face ID support

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   57
REVIEW
Dropbox, the login screen appears, and then a Face 
ID icon appears, and then the app unlocks. It’s really 
no different than how Touch ID was implemented in 
those two apps, this, it’s no more convenient.
Face ID has a certain viewing angle you need 
to be within to work, which is where I have a very 
minor issue with the technology. I try to keep my 
personal correspondence on my iPhone when I’m 
using my work laptop, and the iPhone X lays on my 
desk to the side. When I get a text, I can see it on 
the iPhone’s lock screen. On the iPhone 6s Plus, I 
use Touch ID to unlock my handset while it’s still at 
my side. But with the iPhone X, my face is out of 
range of the TrueDepth Camera. The solution to this 
minor issue: move the iPhone X in a new location so 
it’s within range of my face. I have also found that 
Face ID works when the iPhone X is in my car mount, 
which is attached to an air  vent to the right of the 
steering wheel.
Apple is very conﬁdent in Face ID’s security, stating 
that it’s much more secure that Touch ID. Many other 
publications have tried to see if they can trick Face ID, 
with their results matching what Apple has said, that 
twins can get by Face ID. Since I don’t have access to 
twins, I didn’t test this, but Face ID wasn’t fooled when 
I tried to have my two sons access the iPhone X.
Apple has said a lot about how it believes 
augmented reality is going to be a big deal, and 
we’ve seen AR apps, like Ikea, The Machines, and 
AR MeasureKit. There are even rumours of Apple 
working on an AR wearable The TrueDepth camera 
will have a big role in AR, and Apple demonstrated 

58   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
how it can be used with its recent release of Clips 2.0. 
Clips uses the TrueDepth camera so it can ﬁlter out 
background objects for its Selﬁe Scene feature, and 
the app can use you in the foreground for a virtual 
scene. Other than some issues with clipping your 
foreground image, the Selﬁe Scene implementation 
works quite well. Expect to see a lot of fun and 
innovative apps that use the TrueDepth camera 
coming soon in the App Store.
Display
The other feature that 
demands your attention is 
the iPhone X’s screen. It’s the 
ﬁrst iPhone with an organic 
light-emitting diode (OLED) 
display. It’s also the biggest 
iPhone display, measuring 
5.8 inches diagonal.
I can’t emphasize enough 
how much I love the iPhone 
X’s screen. I can say it’s 
gorgeous, but that feels 
like an understatement. The 
colours are rich and pop, text 
looks clean and sharp, and 
the black is so deep that I 
actually ﬁnd it mesmerizing. 
I’ve seen lots of screens that 
don’t look black – more like 
a 98 percent grey – and as 
stupid as it sounds, I like to 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   59
REVIEW
gaze at the black gap on the second page of my Home 
screen. This is the best screen I’ve seen on an iPhone.
OLEDs are currently susceptible to burn-in, the 
effect where you can see a shadow of an image 
when something else is on screen. This was evident 
in Google’s Pixel 2 phone, which also uses an OLED. 
Apple has even stated in a knowledge base article 
that burn-in on the iPhone X’s display is ‘expected 
behaviour’ and that the company has done what it 
can to minimize burn-in. I haven’t noticed it in the 
nearly two weeks since I’ve had the iPhone X, but it 
is something I’ll keep an eye on and will update this 
review accordingly should anything change.
When ﬁrst using the iPhone X, I had to get over the 
false impression that the iPhone X’s screen is smaller 
than what I’m used to on the iPhone 6s Plus. Based 
on diagonal measurement, the iPhone X is bigger (5.8 
inches) than the iPhone 6s Plus (5.5 inches, the same as 
the iPhone 7s Plus and the iPhone 8 Plus). The iPhone 
X’s screen is a slightly narrower, though, and noticeably 
taller. Overall, it’s a bigger screen.
But it’s not the screen that gave me the impression 
that the iPhone X’s is smaller. It’s the bezel on the Plus 
iPhones. The black border on the Plus iPhones, even 
though they aren’t part of the screen, unconsciously 
became part of the screen in my head. It took me a 
few days to clear this psychological hurdle (or optical 
illusion, if you will). While showing the iPhone X to 
other people, some of them also were fooled into 
thinking that the iPhone X’s screen is smaller, so I think 
this could be a phenomenon experienced by many 
new iPhone X owners.

60   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
What didn’t take me long to get over was the 
notch. Yes, the notorious notch, the one that houses 
the TrueDepth camera system. I found it a distraction 
at ﬁrst, but it was yet another head game I played 
on myself – what really bugged me wasn’t the actual 
notch, but that I feel like the notch goes against Apple’s 
design aesthetic. But I was able to realize that in typical 
use, I don’t notice the notch at all. Even with full-screen 
videos, the notch doesn’t bother me. (There is an 
option to resize videos so that the avoid the notch, but 
that means video is smaller than full-screen.)
The notch does get in the way when watching a full-screen video. You 
have the option of resizing the video so that the picture avoids the notch

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   61
REVIEW
Gestures
Apple had to come up with a new set of gestures to 
make up for the lack of a Home button on the iPhone 
X. I learned these new gestures quickly – you use 
them a lot, so if you need ‘practice’ for the muscle 
memory to kick it, you’ll get it.
We have a complete list of the new gestures you’ll 
need to learn. Most of them are simple, like swipe up 
from the bottom to get to the Home screen, or swipe 
down from the top of the display’s right side to get to 
Control Centre.
Speaking of the Control Centre swipe, it’s the one 
new gesture I don’t like – you really need to reach to 
To use the Flashlight or Camera from the lock screen, you 
perform a hard press on each button, similar to a 3D Touch

62   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
the top of the screen area next to the notch, and this 
requires more effort than the previous Control Centre 
gesture (swipe up from the bottom of the screen, 
which works on the iPhone 8 and older iPhones).
The iPhone X’s lock screen has two quick 
access buttons, one for the ﬂashlight, and another for 
the camera. They’re easy to get to at the bottom of 
the screen, but simply tapping each button doesn’t 
activate it. You need to do a hard press, like you do 
for 3D Touch. A hard press is necessary, because you 
don’t want these buttons activating while in your 
pocket, and these lock screen functions don’t require 
Face ID veriﬁcation to work. But there’s nothing in 
the included documentation that tells you how to 
use these buttons.
People’s tolerances for UI vary, and I can see 
how someone would absolutely hate not having a 
Home button. If you’re one of those people, then 
the iPhone X is not for you. But keep in mind, the 
Home button is probably not in the iPhone’s long-term 
plans. It could be ﬁve or six years before we see 
Apple completely abandon the Home button, but it 
will happen eventually.
The cameras
The iPhone X’s rear camera has a 12Mp dual lens 
camera with a ƒ/1.8 wide-angle aperture, ƒ/2.4 
telephoto aperture, optical zoom, 10x digital zoom, and 
optical image stabilization on both lenses.
The pictures from the iPhone X are excellent, with 
vibrant colours and great sharpness. The iPhone X 
seems better at handling a wide array of lighting 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   63
REVIEW
situations compared to other iPhones I’ve used in the 
past. As someone who has no skill at adjusting camera 
settings and prefers to rely on automatic settings, the 
iPhone X produces results that make me very happy. 
The camera feature that I really want is the optical 
image stabilization on both lenses. My lack of a steady 
hand (or my heavy-handedness with pushing the 
shutter) often results in jitter that creates blur, and I 
found that with the iPhone X, I had more good pictures 
than blurry, unacceptable ones.
Shot with no ﬂash at 1x zoom

64   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
The iPhone X comes with the new Portrait Lighting 
mode, a special camera mode that applies different 
lighting effects to portraits. (On the iPhone X, this 
feature is available on both the front and rear cameras.) 
The results you’ll get with Portrait Lighting are mixed. 
I found that the Natural Light setting worked the best, 
producing even results and nice bokeh. Contour Light 
and Studio Light seemed to create hot spots depending 
on the angle of your subject, but emphasized different 
detail elements to change the emotion of a picture.
Landscape shot at night, no ﬂash, 1x zoom

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   65
REVIEW
Two of the Portrait Lighting modes, Stage Light 
and Stage Light Mono, are just…well, I’ll say that I’m 
not going to use them. The pictures I took using these 
settings – as well as a vast majority of the pictures I’ve 
seen from other people – look cheesy, and they’d be 
used as examples of bad image editing. Apple decided 
to label Portrait Lighting mode as beta, seemingly as 
Portrait Lighting mode on the 
iPhone X can be hit or miss

66   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
an excuse for the mixed results, so let’s hope we see 
improvements in the near future.
The rear camera is capable of shooting 4K video at 
24 frames per second, 30- or 60fps. Shooting 4K video 
at 60fps feels overindulgent, and if you have only 64GB 
of storage, it’s probably a setting you will seldom use. 
But gosh, it looks so buttery smooth and the detail is 
amazing. If you have a 4K TV and love shooting your 
own videos, 4K at 60 fps is the reason why you need to 
get 256GB of storage. If you don’t want to shoot any 
kind of 4K video, you’ll be happy with the 1080p and 
720p video from the iPhone X.
My favourite new feature of the video camera is the 
Super Slo-mo mode, which captures video at 240fps at 
1080p resolution. It’s another space-hogging camera 
mode, but it’s a lot of fun.
Speaking of fun, I have to mention the new Animoji, 
since they’re exclusive to the iPhone X (for now). 
Animoji uses the TrueDepth camera to sync your 
head and facial movements to an animated emoji. 
You’ve surely seen them all over the Internet, and it’s 
guaranteed to make you laugh. 
Performance
The iPhone X has Apple’s new A11 Bionic processor, 
a 64-bit six-core beast. It has a pair of performance 
cores that Apple says are 25 percent faster than its 
predecessor, the A10 Fusion. And Apple says the A11 
Bionic’s four efﬁciency cores are 70 percent faster. 
We used the Geekbench 4 app to get an idea of the 
speed of the A11 Bionic in the iPhone X. Obviously, the 
A11 Bionic is faster than the A10 Fusion, but what’s of 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   67
REVIEW
note here – and not surprising – is that the iPhone X 
essentially performs the same as the iPhone 8. These 
two phones have the same processor, so if all you want 
in a new iPhone is faster performance and you could 
not care less about new features like Face ID or the 
cameras, get an iPhone 8 and save some serious cash.
Overall, the iPhone X feels like a snappy phone 
when launching apps, unlocking the phone, 
playing videos (streaming and stored on the iPhone), 
and other tasks. When I tried doing simple video edits 
in iMovie, or when I created a short video in Clips, the 
iPhone X rolled along smoothly, though the higher the 
resolution of the video, the more performance was hit, 
but never to a point where I was left frustrated.
Geekbench 4 CPU test. Longer bars/higher scores are better

68   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
Battery life
Apple states the following stats for battery life:
•  Up to 21 hours talk time
•  Up to 12 hours Internet use
•  Up to 13 hours wireless video playback
•  Up to 60 hours wireless audio playback
No one performs only a single task on their phone. 
When was the last time you spent a day using your 
iPhone just for phone calls? What’s important is whether 
or not you can get through a day on a single battery 
charge, using your phone for different tasks. And the 
more power you have left on your phone at the end of 
the day, the better.
The day I decided to keep a close eye on battery 
life was a particularly busy day for the iPhone X. I used 
the phone for email, texts, and a phone call of ﬁve 
minutes. I looked up a recipe on the Internet, tracked 
my fantasy football team throughout the day, and 
got driving directions for a 30-minute trip. I shot 129 
photos and nine short videos, and uploaded them via 
Wi-Fi to my Dropbox account. I watched a couple of 
steaming YouTube videos (one over Wi-Fi, the other 
over LTE) for a total of about 30 minutes. And at the 
end of the day, I took my dog for a walk for over an 
hour, during with time I played Pokémon Go (which 
is a battery killer).
After all that, the iPhone X’s battery life was at 52 
percent – before I went on my Pokémon Go dog walk, 
the battery was at 68 percent. Typically, I’m not this 
busy with my phone, so I can get through a working 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   69
REVIEW
day without worrying about charging the iPhone X. 
Of course, your mileage may vary.
Mostly glass design
With the 2017 iPhones, Apple decided to go back to a 
glass front and back. The main reason is so the phone 
can support wireless charging. The iPhone X works with 
wireless chargers that adhere to the Qi standard.
I don’t have a wireless charger to work with the 
iPhone X, and frankly, I think wireless charging is 
overrated. Sure, it’s convenient; just place the iPhone 
X on the charging pad (if it’s in a non-metal case, you 
can keep it on), and that’s it, the pad does all the work 
and charges the phone. Of course, you have to place 
the iPhone X properly; if it’s slightly off to the side, it 
won’t charge. To me, it’s not that much of an effort 
to plug a Lightning cable into the iPhone X. And you 
The back of the iPhone X uses glass to allow for wireless charging

70   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
have to pay extra for a wireless charger, whereas the 
iPhone X comes with a 5W adaptor and a Lightning 
cable. Finally, there’s no speed advantage (as of yet) to 
using a wireless charger. But hey, just because it’s not 
something I’m interested in doesn’t mean it’s not right 
for you. I just don’t see wireless charging as something 
you need to think about when deciding if you want to 
buy an iPhone X or not.
The glass construction feels nice in the hand, and 
on the silver iPhone X that I have, the silver steel frame 
between the two pieces of glass sparkles and dazzles 
– it looks so good that it’s a shame that I keep my 
iPhone X in a case. Because after all, glass, even as 
strong as the glass on the iPhone, still isn’t as strong 
as metal and can shatter after a fall.
The back of the iPhone X, like other iPhones, is still 
saddled with a camera bump. As I mentioned earlier, I 
often use my iPhone by my side when I’m on my work 
computer, and the phone can’t lay ﬂat on its back, 
rocking in a tottering motion when I tap on the screen. 
Fortunately, the case I use provides enough thickness to 
compensate for the camera bump and let the iPhone X 
lie ﬂat. But it sure would be nice if the bump went away, 
either by advancements in camera technology, or by 
making the iPhone thicker (maybe add more battery?).
Verdict
As I mentioned in the introduction, 2017 marks the 
tenth anniversary of the iPhone. What I remember most 
about the ﬁrst iPhone was the sense of astonishment. 
Sure, it had its ﬂaws, but I felt like I was holding the 
future of computing in the palm of my hand.

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   71
REVIEW
However, with each new generation of iPhones 
introduced, I started to feel less and less like the iPhone 
was a harbinger of what’s to come. The new features 
felt more like incremental steps that helped solve a 
current problem than giant leaps that made you wonder 
what incomprehensible thing will be unleashed. That’s 
not to say that those iPhones were bad products; on the 
contrary, they were great. But they weren’t inspirational.
And now we have the iPhone X, and that sense of 
astonishment and inspiration is back, for me. That’s 
mostly because of the TrueDepth camera and the A11 
Bionic – AR development could really take off, and it’s 
going to be fun to see what comes of it. Other features, 
like the spectacular quality of the OLED screen, the 
bigger screen in a smaller footprint, and the cameras, 
complete the package.
All of this comes at a price – the iPhone X is Apple’s 
most expensive phone. Is it worth it? If you simple want 

72   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
a great tool for the job, you’ll probably be ﬁne with the 
iPhone 8. But if you are a true iPhone fan, or you like 
the idea that the future is in your hand, you need the 
iPhone X. Roman Loyola
Speciﬁcations
•  5.8in (2436x1125, 458ppi) Super AMOLED display
•  iOS 11.0
•  Apple A11 Bionic processor
•  Hexa-core (2x Monsoon, 4x Mistral)
•  Apple GPU
•  3GB RAM
•  64/256GB storage
•  Dual 12Mp, f/1.8 and f/2.4, phase detection 
autofocus, OIS, 2x optical zoom, quad-LED (dual 
tone) ﬂash
•  7Mp, f/2.2, 1080p at 30fps, 720p at 240fps, face 
detection, HDR, panorama
•  A-GPS, GLONASS, GALILEO, QZSS
•  Wi-Fi 802.11ac
•  Bluetooth 5.0
•  NFC
•  Lightning Connector
•  IP67 certiﬁed
•  2,716mAh non-removable lithium-ion battery
•  143.6x70.9x7.7mm
•  174g

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   73
REVIEW
£349 inc VAT from fave.co/2j8Kphb
Motorola Moto X4
M
otorola’s mid-range X series of smartphones 
is back with the new Moto X4, which follows 
2015’s Moto X Play, X Style and X Force 
line-up. This time, Motorola has opted to go back 
to just the one model to keep things simpler, and 
it’s certainly a compelling offering with plenty of 
interesting and impressive features. But it has stiff 
competition from Honor and OnePlus.
Design
In a bit of a departure from the rest of its phones, 
Motorola has gone for glass on the front and back 

74   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
(like many of 2017’s phones) mated to an anodized 
aluminium frame. This results in a premium-look and 
feel that’s lovely at ﬁrst glance but little too shiny 
and smudge-prone. It’s available in Sterling Blue 
or Super Black.
The back is described as a 3D contour, which 
essentially means that it’s slightly curved to feel 
comfortable in the hand. That’s aided by its 5.2in 
screen, which keeps the X4 at a manageable size 
that’s easy to use one-handed.
The X4 is 7.99mm thick for the most part, aside 
from the 9.45mm circular portion that houses the 
camera. It weighs 163g. While those measurements 
aren’t particularly outstanding, they’re good for a 
phone of this price.
Impressively, the X4 has an IP68 water resistance 
rating, which we tested by dropping the phone into 
a shallow pool of water and can conﬁrm that it still 
worked perfectly when we took it back out. That’s 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   75
REVIEW
actually better than the ﬂagship Z2, which is simply 
described as “splashproof”, and the Honor 9, which 
isn’t waterproof.
Like the Honor 9 you’ll ﬁnd a standard headphone 
jack alongside a USB-C port on the bottom edge, but 
the X4 has just one speaker, which doubles as the ear 
piece for phone calls. It’s fairly loud, and pretty much 
on a par with the Honor’s single bottom-ﬁring speaker.
Display
The X4’s 5.2in screen is Full HD, which means a 
resolution of 1920x1080 pixels. During our testing, 
we found the screen to be bright, colourful and crisp. 
It’s doesn’t live up to the standards of ﬂagships from 
the likes of Samsung and LG, and its bezels prevent it 
from being as immersive as an edge-to-edge would, 
but for the price it’s very good. In fact, the colours 
are so bold in vivid mode that you’d be forgiven for 
thinking it was an OLED panel. In fact, it’s a top-tier 
LCD screen with great viewing angles.
Performance
Inside the X4 is arguably its biggest weakness: 
Qualcomm’s mid-range processor, the Snapdragon 
630, paired with 3GB RAM.
In itself, that’s a ﬁne combo for a mid-range phone. 
The problem comes from the competition, namely the 
Honor 9 which is a lot faster for only £30 more. 
You can see the difference in the graphs below. But 
in the real world, with real use, the phone is suitably 
speedy, launching and running apps without a problem 
and allowing us to switch between them without delay.

76   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
Geekbench 4
GFXBench 
Manhattan

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   77
REVIEW
The worry is that although adequate for now, you’ll 
probably hanker after the Honor 9’s extra performance 
in a year or two’s time when the X4 could well feel 
slower than it does when you get it out of the box.
Storage-wise you get 32GB storage built-in, but 
there’s support for a microSD card up to 2TB. This ﬁts 
into the tray above the nano SIM card, which can be 
ejected from the top of the phone.
Cameras
One of the Moto X4’s key features is its dual camera. 
Like the LG G6 and Asus ZenFone 4 it has standard and 
wide-angle lenses rather than telephoto. 
And like the ZenFone, it has 12Mp and 8Mp sensors 
respectively, so your wide-angle shots aren’t going to 
GFXBench 
T-Rex

78   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
have as much detail as photos from the main camera. 
However, unlike the Asus and LG, the X4 supports 
depth effect so you can get nice blurry backgrounds for 
your portrait photos. And there’s a handy slider at the 
bottom so you can adjust how much blur you want.
Dual Autofocus Pixel technology means focusing 
is quick, and auto HDR is enabled by default. 
There’s a very slight delay after taking some photos 
for processing, but in most situations there’s no 
perceptible lag. 
In good light, the main 12Mp camera takes great 
photos which look nice and sharp. They’re a tad 
Standard shot

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   79
REVIEW
oversharpened, but we’d rather this than be too soft. 
Colours aren’t always the best: they tend to be a little 
dark and drab but this is all easily sorted in Snapseed 
or your favourite Android photo editor.
As you can see above, there is noticeable 
distortion when using the wide-angle camera. With 
enough natural light, it’s perfectly possible to get 
lovely, sharp shots. In dim light there’s a bit of noise, 
but colours and detail are still good. However, in very 
low light, the X4 simply can’t cope and managed this 
dismal attempt of our standard low-light scene (see 
the image overleaf).
Wide-angle shot

80   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
Around the front is a 
16Mp front-facing camera 
for selﬁes which offers an 
adaptive low light mode as 
well as a Panoramic Selﬁe 
feature to capture bigger 
groups or the environment 
behind you.
In terms of video, it 
can shoot 4K up to 30fps, 
and 1080p at 60fps. 
Unfortunately, like even 
certain ﬂagship phone 
(such as the Mate 10 
Pro) stabilisation is only 
possible at 1080p30 or 
lower. That’s frustrating as the stabilisation is pretty 
good. But as it’s done in software, it seems there’s 
not enough processing grunt to work at higher frame 
rates or resolutions. The camera app also includes 
a 3D Detector, which scans an object in front of the 
camera, attempts to identify it and then give you 
relevant information. We tried it on an iPhone X and it 
successfully recognized it and brought up Apple’s web 
page for the phone. You’ll also ﬁnd an AR feature for 
both the rear camera and selﬁes. It allows you to add 
animations to photos and videos, like Snapchat, but this 
isn’t going to appeal to everyone.
Battery
The 3,000mAh battery is a non-removable and 
Motorola says it’s capable of providing power “all day”. 
Low light shot

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   81
REVIEW
It charges via USB-C and supports TurboPower fast 
charging with the bundled adaptor, which means six 
hours of power is achievable with just 15 minutes of 
charging time. And it certainly does last all day, even 
with pretty heavy use. Obviously, if you play games 
for hours on end you’ll need that charger before the 
day is out, but with mixed use you can usually make 
it through to the following morning.
Software
The Moto X4 runs Android 7.1 Nougat (not Oreo, sadly) 
out of the box. As with all Moto phones, it’s almost 
plain Android with no annoying overlays or heavily 
modiﬁed menus and settings. Even the icons are the 
default Android ones.
And, as any Motorola owner will know, you also 
get Motorola’s Moto app which includes a variety of 
features such as Moto Display and Moto Actions. With 
Moto Display you can get notiﬁcations to fade in and 
out when the screen is off, and the ‘one-button nav’ 
feature lets you use taps and swipes on the ﬁngerprint 
sensor instead of the on-screen navigation keys.
There’s the usual ‘karate chop’ to turn on the torch 
and double-twist to launch the camera. Moto Key 
means you can access password-secured websites 
using your ﬁngerprint rather than having to type your 
password every time.
Built into the US version of the Moto X4 is Amazon’s 
Alexa voice assistant, which is a ﬁrst for Motorola and 
it can be used hands-free. Google Assistant is still 
available, so you’ll be able to take your pick. As of yet, 
there’s no support for Alexa in the UK model.

82   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
REVIEW
Verdict
We’re pleased to see that Motorola has revived the 
Moto X. For the most part, we like the new glass design 
and the specs and features are good for the £350 price 
– it looks like a more expensive phone.
Waterprooﬁng and the dual-lens camera sets this 
apart from rivals, and we like the 5.2in screen size for 
comfort and practicality.
It’s slower than the Honor 9, and has half the storage 
as standard, but if you’d prefer the water-resistance 
over the extra speed, the Moto X4 is a great choice 
for anyone that can’t afford the hefty price tags of the 
current ﬂagships. Ashleigh Macro
Speciﬁcations
•  5.2in (1920x1080, 424ppi) IPS display
•  Android 7.1 Nougat

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   83
REVIEW
•  Qualcomm Snapdragon 630 processor
•  Octa-core 2.2GHz Cortex-A53 CPU
•  Adreno 508 GPU
•  3GB RAM
•  32GB built-in storage, up to 2TB microSD card slot
•  Dual-lens 12Mp and 8Mp rear camera with Dual-LED 
ﬂash
•  16Mp front-facing camera
•  4G LTE
•  802.11ac Wi-Fi
•  Bluetooth 5.0 LE
•  Fingerprint sensor
• A-GPS, GLONASS, GALILEO
•  NFC
•  Water Resistant IP68
•  3,000mAh battery with Turbo Charging
•  148.4x73.4x8mm
•  163g

84   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
Best antivirus software
Keep your Windows PC safe from spyware, Trojans, malware, and 
more. IAN PAUL shows how
A
ntivirus software ranks nearly as crucial as a PC’s 
operating system. No matter how careful you 
are, some threats can’t be prevented without 
the additional help of an antivirus program – or a full 
antivirus suite. You could visit your favourite website 
when it’s unintentionally displaying malicious ads. 
You may accidentally click on a phishing email. You 
could also get caught by a zero-day threat, where 
an undisclosed bug in Windows, your browser, or 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   85
ROUND-UP
an installed program allows hackers to install other 
malware on your machine. 
Sure, PC security software isn’t fool-proof. Antivirus 
software often can’t do much to stop zero-day exploits, 
for example, but it can detect when the undisclosed 
vulnerability is used to install other nasty bits on your 
machine like ransomware. In general, the average user 
actively using email, clicking on links, and downloading 
programs will beneﬁt from an antivirus suite.
So what should you pick? Our recommended 
suggestions strike a balance between excellent 
protection, a worthwhile selection of features, and 
minimal impact on your PC’s performance.
What to look for
Here are three requirements an antivirus suite needs:
•  High detection rate for malware and other threats
•  Low impact on system resources
•  An easy-to-use interface
That’s not all to consider, however. These days, 
many security suites come with extras such as a backup 
service for your most essential ﬁles, Android apps 
for mobile security, a more advanced ﬁrewall, family 
protection (read: child restriction) features, and the right 
to use the program on multiple PCs. Whether you need 
those extras depends on your personal situation.
How we test
First, we take a look at the interface to determine 
how easy or complicated it is. Does the interface 

86   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
make it easy to get at essential tools like PC scans 
and password managers, for example, or is everything 
buried under multiple clicks? Are there elements that 
look like they should be clickable but aren’t? Are alerts 
interactive or purely informational, and does that make 
sense in context?
We also examine the features on offer. Every good 
antivirus suite should have the basics like scanning and 
real-time protection, but many vendors offer elements 
that go beyond basic security like password managers 
or ﬁrewalls. We try to discern whether any of these 
extra features are particularly useful, or just frills that 
look nice but don’t serve a practical purpose.
To test the suite’s demand on system resources, 
we run two benchmarks. The ﬁrst is PCMark 8’s 
Work Conventional test, which simulates a variety of 
workloads including editing spreadsheets, browsing the 
web, and running video chat. 
We run the benchmark before the security suite is 
installed. Then we install the software, have it run a 
full scan on our Windows 10 test machine, and start a 
second run of the benchmark at the same time. Then 
we compare the overall scores to see if the decline 
between the two benchmarks is signiﬁcant.
As a harsher stress test, we also use Handbrake to 
transcode a video before and after installing the A/V. 
On most home PCs, this encoding task utilizes 100 
percent of the CPU. We then compare transcoding 
times to see if there’s any signiﬁcant decline.
Our test machine is an Acer Aspire E 15 (pictured 
opposite) with an Intel Core i3-7100U, 4GB RAM, and 
a 1TB hard drive. Each security suite is tested on a 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   87
ROUND-UP
clean install of Windows 10 Home. As for the antivirus 
suite’s detection capabilities, we’ll rely on the opinions 
of security researchers dedicated to this task. We’ll 
take into consideration reports from outlets such as A-V 
Comparatives, A-V Test and SE Labs. 
We’ll also take pricing into account and what you 
get for it. Whenever possible we’ll review security suites 
using a free trial to get a sense of what consumers see 
when they ﬁrst try out a new product.
Avast Premier
Price: £59.99 from fave.co/2jaNI7A
Avast is one of the more popular free, third-party 
antivirus programs. For anyone willing to pay for more 
advanced features, however, Avast’s premium products 
also have a lot to offer. At the top of the company’s 
line-up is Avast Premier for £59.99, which comes ﬁlled 
Avast’s ‘Protection’ options

88   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
with features. Though it only offers two additional 
extras compared to Avast’s £49.99 Internet Security 
product (fave.co/2jb09QJ), those particular features are 
potentially useful for those who want them.
The ﬁrst is Data Shredder, which deletes ﬁles 
by immediately overwriting them so they are not 
recoverable. The second is Software Updater, which 
automatically updates third-party programs, plug-
ins, and utilities on your PC. Both are nice features, 
however, you can use free programs to perform 
the same functions – like FileHippo App Manager  
(fave.co/2jd9BTF), which monitors and automatically 
updates your programs.
Despite being packed with features, Avast 
manages to not overwhelm the user with a messy 
interface. The program uses a fairly standard design 
that includes a left rail with a pop-out menu, and a 
main screen that displays the settings and primary 
interface for each feature.
The program also uses colour effectively to help 
convey important information. The program’s primary 
background is a bluish grey, with the active section in 
the left rail highlighted in purple.
Avast Premier features four main categories: Status, 
Protection, Privacy, and Performance. The Status 
section is pretty simple with a basic green check mark 
when all is well. The main interface has one button to 
run a quick scan for viruses. This is also the section 
where you can get direct links to Avast’s catalogue of 
Android and iOS apps.
Protection is where you can run antivirus scans, as 
well as get access to a roster of other security features. 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   89
ROUND-UP
There’s Rescue Disk, which puts a version of Avast 
Antivirus on a CD or USB stick to more effectively 
scan and remove stubborn malware. You’ll also ﬁnd 
Avast’s ﬁrewall settings, a Wi-Fi inspector, Real Site 
phishing protection, Ransomware Shield (which 
monitors speciﬁc folders for ransomware threats), 
the aforementioned software updater, and a sandbox 
to wall off suspect ﬁles from the rest of your PC.
The Privacy section includes Avast’s built-in 
password manager, Data Shredder, and Sensitive Data 
Shield. The latter probes your machine for important 
documents, and then it adds extra monitoring and 
protection to those ﬁles to guard against malware. It 
also acts as a quick access list of your important ﬁles. 
There’s also a link to SecureLine VPN, but VPN service 
is not part of the Avast subscription. Instead, your 
prompted to pay extra for the VPN.
Avast’s ‘Protection’ options

90   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
Finally, there’s the Performance section with only 
two features. The ﬁrst is Cleanup, which is similar to 
programs like CCleaner that scan your system for extra 
ﬁles, temporary folders, and caches that can be cleared. 
Although it looks like it’s included, Cleanup only scans 
your PC for free. To actually clean up your PC, you 
need to shell out cash for Cleanup Premium.
Performance also houses the settings for Avast’s 
gaming mode. This feature automatically detects 
when you’re playing a game and forces Avast and 
Windows to reduce its resource footprint – allowing 
you to play your game unencumbered.
Installing Avast Premier is very easy and using 
the free trial does not require you to register with 
the company. Ironically, Avast tries to install extra 
software at installation – something a security suite 
should guard against. In the case of our test PC, 
Here’s the ‘Performance’ section

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   91
ROUND-UP
it was Google Chrome. On a system with Chrome 
already installed, Avast offered to install its own 
secure browser, SafeZone. Later on, I noticed that 
Avast installed two Chrome extensions: Avast Online 
Security and Avast SafePrice. I don’t recall explicitly 
agreeing to install either of them.
Avast makes it easy to opt-out of this download, 
but it’s also easy for users to get a surprise Chrome 
install if they’re not paying close attention.
Performance
As one of the top security ﬁrms, Avast performs very 
well. In A-V Test’s June test of zero days, web, and 
email threats, Avast scored a perfect 100 percent. 
Regular malware scans also did well, scoring 100 
percent against more than 10,000 samples.
Avast performed similarly high during A-V 
Comparatives’ evaluation. It scored 100 percent 
in the organization’s malicious URL test and 99.8 
percent against nearly 38,000 malware samples. 
In A-V Comparatives’ ofﬂine test, that detection 
number dropped slightly to 98.8 percent. SE Labs 
gave Avast a AAA rating, noting that it and AVG were 
the most effective free products. Avast and AVG did 
fail to stop ﬁve targeted attacks in SE Labs’ tests.
During our benchmarks, Avast had no drop 
in performance. When we ran PCMark 8’s Work 
Conventional test – a simulation of web browsing, 
video chat, word processing, and spreadsheet editing 
– without Avast running, our test PC netted a score 
of 2517. With Avast running, it got 2515, which is 
well within the standard margin of error.

92   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
In our more-punishing Handbrake test, our test PC 
typically takes one hour, 15 minutes, and 30 seconds to 
transcode a 3.8GB MKV ﬁle using the Android Tablet 
preset. With Avast installed the ﬁle took one hour, 
ﬁfteen minutes, and ﬁve seconds.
We also looked at how Avast’s Sensitive Data Shield 
performed, since that feature is likely to be intriguing 
to most users. It did a good job, though there were a 
high number of false positives. For example, it included 
many Word documents in the ‘Employee documents’ 
section likely because they were my old articles with 
company names in the title. Avast also inspected 
folders that weren’t even on my PC via the Keybase.io 
desktop program for Windows. That is admittedly an 
edge case as Keybase is a niche program. Nevertheless, 
if you are a Keybase user, turn off the program before 
scanning for sensitive documents.
Avast Internet Security’s Data Shredder feature

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   93
ROUND-UP
Verdict
Avast Premier is a very well-designed program with 
all kinds of extra features that will appeal to security 
conscious users looking for more than just antivirus 
protection. But if you don’t mind the inconvenience, 
you can get an alternative that is almost equally as 
good for £10 less – Avast’s £49.99 Internet Security 
product is easily supplemented with free software to 
replace Avast Premier’s Data Shredder and Software 
Updater features.
AVG Internet Security
Price: £49.99 from fave.co/2zZJEin
AVG has a big advantage in the free antivirus space 
since it owns both Avast and its homegrown product, 
AVG Free. The hope is you’ll love the free stuff so much 
that you’ll upgrade to one of its paid products.
In the case of AVG, most people go with its 
Internet Security program. Priced at £49.99, it’s one 
step down from the company’s ﬂagship product, 
AVG Ultimate (£69.99 from fave.co/2zZJEin), and 
lacks a number of Ultimate’s less crucial features. For 
example, you don’t get AVG’s PC tune up package or 
third-party desktop software updater. That’s hardly a 
loss, though, as you can ﬁnd free programs to dump 
cached folders taking up too much space or monitor 
software updates. The important security features are 
all included in the security suite, however, including 
antivirus, ﬁrewall, and phishing protection.
Unlike Avast, AVG opted not to include a password 
manager as part of its various security packages. 

94   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
Instead, you have to fork over an extra £10 per year to 
make that a part of your security set-up. That’s not a 
bad price, though for a few pounds more you can get 
an annual subscription to LastPass.
When you ﬁrst open up AVG, it offers a similar 
aesthetic to its corporate counterpart Avast. The app 
largely has a grey background with bright green to 
highlight important information. You’ll ﬁrst see a status 
dashboard that lets you know which AVG security 
features are active. This dashboard is not intuitive, 
though. Almost nothing is clickable in the main part 
of the screen. To tweak most options, you have to 
click on the Menu hamburger icon at the top right of 
the window. There you can get into the nitty-gritty of 
the application’s settings, including general options, 
controls for ransomware protection, a data safe 
(encrypted folders), and a ﬁle shredder feature that 
overwrites deleted data to make it harder to recover.
AVG Internet Security’s primary dashboard and menu

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   95
ROUND-UP
Overall, the settings could be better organized 
and made clearer. Most of the key settings you’ll want 
to access, for example, are under Menu > Settings > 
Components. From there you can tweak your ﬁrewall 
and play with the spam scanning settings.
Reinforcing my point about organization is how 
the options are laid out. Each part of the component 
settings is hidden under a downward facing arrow. 
Click that arrow and you reveal each section’s panel, 
but all you’ll see is an explanation of the feature and 
an option to uninstall individual parts of the security 
suite. To actually get deeper into those ﬁrewall 
settings, you have to click the Customize link in 
each tile, which is never hidden.
The Components settings

96   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
To access other options, you’ll have to go back to 
the main dashboard. In the upper left hand corner 
is an arrow – when you click on it, it opens another 
window where you can add another device to your 
subscription, as well as download and subscribe to 
other AVG products such as PC TuneUp, Secure VPN, 
and Password Protection. This window is reminiscent 
of Norton Security.
AVG’s overall interface is not a deal breaker, and 
once you get used to the logic of the application, it’s 
not hard to navigate. However, during testing I often 
kept thinking about its Avast counterpart, which I 
found to be far more intuitive with items more readily 
accessible and not buried under a mountain of clicks.
One thing that AVG Internet Security does make 
very easy is the ability to scan your PC, as the Scan 
Computer button is the most prominent item on the 
primary dashboard.
AVG Internet Security’s secondary dashboard

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   97
ROUND-UP
Performance
Like many of the mainstream security programs, 
AVG got very high marks for antivirus and malware 
protection. A-V Test’s August tests gave AVG 100 
percent detection in its 0-day and malware tests. In A-V 
Comparatives’ real-world protection test, meanwhile, 
AVG scored 100 percent as well with three false 
positives out of 329 samples. 
When pitted against A-V Comparatives’ malware 
protection test, AVG scored 99.8 percent in an 
online scan against nearly 38,000 samples and 98.8 
percent ofﬂine.
SE Labs gave AVG an AAA rating, saying that both 
it and Avast were the most effective free software in its 
tests, but AVG did fail to detect ﬁve targeted attacks. 
All three organizations used the free versions of AVG’s 
antivirus, which doesn’t have the ransomware, ﬁrewall, 
or phishing protection.
AVG also did well in our performance benchmarks. 
When we ran PCMark 8’s Work Conventional test (a 
simulation of everyday tasks like word processing, web 
browsing, and video chat), our initial score was 2521. 
With AVG running in the background, that score was 
2524 – a tiny enough difference that the improvement 
could be chalked up to margin of error.
Our Handbrake test, which puts much more stress 
on a system, showed no signiﬁcant performance dip. 
Our Windows 10 PC takes an average of one hour, 15 
minutes, and 30 seconds to transcode a 3.8GB MKV ﬁle 
using the Android Tablet preset. With AVG installed, 
Handbrake transcoded the same ﬁle in one hour, 15 
minutes, and 25 seconds.

98   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
Verdict
AVG Internet Security leaves a lot to be desired when 
it comes to app design, especially compared to Avast. 
Given that the same company owns both development 
teams, we hope to see some improvement. 
Nevertheless, AVG gets high marks for security, has 
enough features to satisfy most users, and doesn’t 
drag on your performance.
Comodo Internet Security Pro 10
Price: £39.99 from fave.co/2zZQepg
When we previously looked at Comodo’s Internet 
Security Pro, the company had a habit of bundling 
software with its security suite – and that trend hasn’t 
changed with Internet Security Pro 10. Underneath the 
hassle of warding off extra installs, however, is a security 
suite that does a good job of detecting threats.
When you install Internet Security Pro 10, you 
have to read every screen very carefully. If you don’t, 
the program will attempt to set your browser’s home 
page and search engine to Yahoo, change your DNS 
provider to Comodo (fave.co/2jcORvv), set Comodo 
Dragon (fave.co/2jaVXR6) as your default browser, and 
import all the data from your current default browser.
Certainly, some might like all that. Comodo 
Secure DNS is a popular choice among security 
enthusiasts who don’t want to use their ISP’s default 
service. Other security suites also route your DNS 
through their services. As for the browser, Comodo 
Dragon is a Chromium-based browser that some 
users might enjoy.

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   99
ROUND-UP
But here’s the thing: most people will click through 
the install screens without reading them, and software 
companies count on that. It’s just unseemly. Plus, 
the attempt to switch your search engine and home 
page makes all the other extra software look hostile. 
This approach is just not a good idea, even when 
acknowledging that companies are trying to make a 
buck. There has to be a better way.
As for the app itself, Comodo Internet Security Pro 
has some nice features. Comodo’s interface comes in 
three parts: the main application window, a widget 
that sits in the upper right corner of your desktop, 
and the system tray icon.
Comodo wants to change your 
default home page and search engine

100   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
That’s a lot, but you can 
close the main window and 
get rid of the widget quite 
easily, leaving only the 
system tray icon. The widget, 
though, might be appreciated 
by some users as it has 
easy access to Comodo’s 
primary features.
At the very top there’s a 
status icon telling you the 
state of your PC. (Before 
running your ﬁrst scan, it’s 
yellow.) Below that is a 
counter informing you of your 
current bandwidth usage for 
both up and down streams.
Then there’s a mini-
dashboard shows the status 
of Comodo’s containment 
tasks (a feature that lets 
you run untrusted apps as 
well as browsers in a virtualized space); the number 
of tasks the security software is currently running; 
and a listing of suspect ﬁles. That last feature isn’t 
particularly great, given that Comodo treated the 
EXE ﬁles for two common and popular services – 
CrashPlan and Slack – as suspect.
The widget also has quick access to Comodo’s four 
basic operations: scan, unblock applications, update, 
and secure shopping. Finally, you’ll see the symbols 
for all of your installed browsers if you’re using any of 
Comodo Internet Security Pro’s 
desktop widget in Windows

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   101
ROUND-UP
the big four: Internet Explorer, Chrome, Firefox, and 
Opera, plus Comodo Dragon. There isn’t an icon for 
Edge on Windows 10 PCs.
If you open any of these browsers from the widget, 
they launch in a security container – one of those 
virtualized environments that are sandboxed from the 
rest of the PC. When you run a browser in one of these 
containers, the entire window will be outlined in green. 
Oddly, Edge has a tab inside the Internet Explorer 
container that is supposed to launch the newer browser. 
It doesn’t work, however. As for other, lesser known 
browsers like Vivaldi, Comodo ignores them.
This containers feature is supposed to keep you 
more secure, and it does seem to be a ﬁne feature. 
However, during one test, my PC became unusable 
after enabling Internet Explorer in a secure container. 
Comodo’s secure shopping feature also inexplicably 
Here’s the  basic view after ﬁrst launch

102   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
ate up 25 percent of my CPU resources even though I 
hadn’t activated it, and I had to restart my PC.
Comodo’s main application is just a bigger version 
of the widget. It has the same four main options: scan, 
unblock applications, update, and secure shopping.
Scan opens a second window where you can 
choose carry out a full scan, quick scan, a ‘rating scan’ 
for commonly infected areas, or a customized scan. 
Unblock Applications is where you can re-enable any 
desktop programs that Comodo may have prevented 
from running. Update lets you manually check for new 
virus deﬁnitions. Secure Shopping, meanwhile, is a 
virtualized, sandboxed desktop environment where 
you can only access Windows File Explorer and a select 
number of installed browsers that launch in incognito 
mode. The idea is to create a secure space where you 
can do online shopping.
Comodo Internet Security Pro 10’s advanced view

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   103
ROUND-UP
Overall, the basic look of Comodo Internet Security 
Pro is clean and easy to understand. If it’s too basic, 
however, there’s also an advanced view that provides 
a lot more at-a-glance data. It includes ﬁrewall details, 
a list of enabled services, blocked applications or 
network intrusions, and other information. Personally, 
I prefer the advanced view since it behaves like a 
security dashboard for your system. It also has a nice 
drag-and-drop area to scan ﬁles for viruses.
Performance
Comodo has a reputation for being something of a 
resource hog. That perception is less deserved these 
days, but we still found some truth to it.
During our ﬁrst performance test, which checks 
how an antivirus program affects system resources 
during lighter tasks, Comodo held its own against 
the competition. When we ﬁred up PCMark 8’s Work 
Conventional benchmark, the synthetic simulation of 
word processing, spreadsheet editing, web browsing, 
and video chat churned out a score of 2507. After 
starting an antivirus scan, the second score for PCM8 
was 2535 – ever so slightly within Comodo’s favour, 
though not signiﬁcant because the number falls 
within normal margin of error.
However, when we moved on to our more strenuous 
Handbrake benchmark, Comodo caused a notable 
drop in performance. On our test PC, Handbrake 
v0.9.9 typically takes an hour, 15 minutes, and 30 
seconds to transcode a 3.8GB MKV ﬁle to MP4 using 
the Android Tablet preset. With Comodo running, that 
same ﬁle conversion took one hour, 41 minutes, and 31 

104   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
seconds. That 34.4 percent increase in time is the worst 
Handbrake result of the suites we’ve tested so far.
As for virus detection, A-V Test rated Comodo’s 
Internet Security Premium quite high, with 100 percent 
detection against real-world threats like malware attacks 
and web and email threats. Virus detection, meanwhile, 
was equally high at 99.9 percent. A-V Comparatives 
did not test Comodo’s performance – the organization 
only tests security suites that are submitted to it by 
the vendor – nor did SE Labs.
Verdict
Comodo’s antivirus and malware detection is ﬁne, but it 
has some of the lowest-scoring benchmark performance 
Comodo’s  Wi-Fi connection assistant

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   105
ROUND-UP
results we’ve seen so far. However, this program does 
have a very nice price of £39.99 per year for three 
devices. If you don’t mind the slip in performance for 
resource-intensive operations, then Comodo is a ﬁne 
choice. For those with mid-range PCs, however, you’d 
do well to look elsewhere.
Norton Security Premium
Price: £39.99 from fave.co/2A0OEDw
Norton is one of the oldest names in PC security – and 
despite some ups and downs, it’s still one of the best. 
Currently, Symantec offers several versions of its long-
lived antivirus software: the current ﬂagship product is 
Norton Security Premium, which costs £39.99 per year. 
Following that are Norton Deluxe (£24.99 per year from 
fave.co/2zZOLiC), Norton Security Standard (£19.99 per 
year from fave.co/2jbcODi), and Norton Antivirus Basic 
(£24.99 from fave.co/2jaZVsV). 
This review covers the top dog among the set, 
Norton Security Premium. Downloading and installing it 
is simple enough, and the program doesn’t try to add a 
lot to your system outside of the program itself. It does, 
however, encourage you to enable its own browser-
based password manager once you’re up and running.
One of its standout aspects is its unobtrusiveness. 
Outside of a small cluster of notiﬁcations when you ﬁrst 
install it, the program doesn’t inundate you with pop-
ups. The interface is also clean and easy to use, though 
the settings for each category aren’t immediately 
obvious. (You’ll have to click on a downward-facing 
arrow on the far right side of the screen.)

106   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
Norton Premium’s dashboard is divided into four 
main categories: Security, Identity, Backup, and 
Performance. There’s also a ﬁfth section that houses 
account management, access to extra features, and ads 
for more Norton services and apps. Like many antivirus 
programs, Norton Security uses a colour-coded scheme 
where green means you’re protected, yellow means 
caution, and red means you’re not protected.
The Security section is the most important section 
for PC users, as it houses the settings for regular PC 
scans. By default Norton will do a quick scan, but 
there are also options for full and customized scans. 
There’s also a feature called Power Eraser that is 
supposed to eliminate ‘difﬁcult-to-detect threats’.
The Identity section, meanwhile is about protecting 
you. You’ll ﬁnd the anti-phishing settings here, as 
well as Norton’s ‘Identity Safe’, which is the desktop 
version of the built-in password manager. Like other 
The interface is clean and organized

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   107
ROUND-UP
services, the safe can house your username, passwords, 
addresses, credit card information, and secure notes. 
Norton does have a nice tags feature to help you 
better organize your data, which you won’t always 
ﬁnd in all password managers.
Backup is where Norton lets you setup and manage 
the 25GB of free cloud storage that comes with the 
suite. You can use it to upload ﬁles or folders to 
Norton’s servers via encrypted incremental backups. 
When you activate the feature, Norton monitors your 
documents, pictures, contacts, and other items by 
default. It will not, however, backup your videos by 
default or any email databases you may have.
Performance is the least useful of the categories, 
since its features are mostly redundant. You’ll ﬁnd 
options like a ﬁle cleanup utility, disk defragmenter, and 
a tool for restricting startup programs – all tools that 
come built into Windows. If you want to stop programs 
from starting up at boot, for example, the Task Manager 
in Windows 8.1 will work just ﬁne. The Backup section 
does have a graph that details the current processor 
usage of Norton and Windows, as well as recent 
security events and alerts from Norton.
Performance
Norton Premium 22.9 received high marks from both 
A-V Test and A-V Comparatives for malware detection. 
In June, A-V Test threw 10,252 samples of malware at 
Norton and the software came back with a 99.9 percent 
detection rate. A-V Test also put Norton up against 202 
samples of zero-day, web, and email threats for which 
Norton came back with a 100 percent rating.

108   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
A-V Comparatives got a similar result of 99.8 percent 
in March using nearly 38,000 samples. However, 
that was with an active Internet connection: ofﬂine, 
that detection rate fell to 86.8 percent. SE Labs, 
meanwhile, gave Norton a AAA rating.
Those are all great results. The only concerning 
aspect would perhaps be the ofﬂine detection rate, 
though you could ameliorate it with other tools such as 
Windows Defender periodic scanning or Malwarebytes. 
Norton did not have an appreciable drain on 
resources. When we ran PCMark 8’s Work Conventional 
benchmark, which simulates basic tasks like 
spreadsheet editing, web browsing, and video chat, our 
test PC scored 2538 without Norton installed. When we 
installed Norton Security Premium, started a full scan, 
and then ran PCMark 8 again, the second score was 
2526. That’s a drop of less than one percent and within 
the PCMark 8 benchmark’s typical margin of error.
Norton’s security scans settings

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   109
ROUND-UP
We also didn’t see any real difference in 
performance during our Handbrake test, which puts 
far more stress on a system. It took our test PC one 
hour, 15 minutes, and 30 seconds to transcode a 
3.8GB MKV ﬁle. With Norton installed, the time was 
22 seconds faster at 1:15:08.
Verdict
Norton is extremely user friendly and well organized, 
and it doesn’t interfere too much with users’ day-
to-day activities. That last part is key since security 
applications work best when they stay out of your 
way. The software also has some handy extras, like 
the online backup and password manager that make 
it an all-in-one security suite.
You certainly have to pay for the privilege, however. 
Symantec will give you a really nice discount for your 
ﬁrst year – 45 percent off – but don’t be fooled, as 
The built-in report card feature

110   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
you’ll ultimately be paying £39.99 for the privilege 
of running Norton Security Premium.
Windows Defender Security Centre
Price: Free with Windows 10
In 2006, Microsoft added built-in security software to 
Windows for the ﬁrst time. Since then, it’s appeared 
under various names, but currently it’s known as 
Windows Defender Security Centre (WDSC). What 
started out as a basic antivirus detection feature has 
slowly grown into something that resembles a security 
suite. It doesn’t have anything close to the features 
you’d see in a third-party suite, but it does a fair job 
at antivirus and malware scanning.
Brieﬂy, however, WDSC has ﬁve sections: Virus 
& threat protection, Device performance & health, 
Firewall & network protection, App & browser 
control, and Family options.
The crucial section is Virus & threat protection. This 
is where you can manually start a full scan, enable 
real-time protection, or carry out an ofﬂine scan for 
removing particularly nasty bits of malware.
Device performance & health, meanwhile, just 
gives your PC a general health report card including 
Windows Update status, driver status, and so 
on. It does not report on any potential security 
weaknesses, short of lagging updates.
Firewall an network protection is fairly self-
explanatory, while App & browser control houses 
all of your PC’s SmartScreen settings for Edge, 
downloads, and the Windows Store.

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   111
ROUND-UP
You can dive a little deeper into WDSC beyond 
this, but not by much. If I had to guess, Microsoft 
plans to expand its functionality over time, and right 
now we’re just seeing the basic scaffolding being 
built. That’s just speculation, however.
Performance
Windows Defender stacks up alright in anti-virus 
detection. A-V Test gave Defender a 99 percent 
detection rate for real-world testing against 0-day, 
web, and email threats. For run-of-the-mill malware, 
meanwhile, Defender scored very highly against more 
than 10,000 samples at 99.7 percent detection.
A-V Comparatives found a similarly high 
performance level for real-world protection, with about 
Windows Defender’s primary dashboard

112   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
nine false positives out of 329 test samples. SE Labs, for 
its part, gave Defender a AA overall rating in the period 
of April through June. (The highest that an antivirus can 
score with SE Labs is a AAA rating.) During its testing, 
Defender failed to protect against six targeted attacks 
and four web-based attacks.
As for the drain on your PC’s resources, that’s a 
little harder to measure than with third-party software. 
WDSC is built right into the operating system and starts 
up automatically. To counteract that, we turned off 
the entirety of Windows Defender (both the scanning 
tool and the overall program) using the registry. Then 
we ﬁred up our ﬁrst benchmark: PCMark 8’s Work 
Conventional benchmark, which simulates everyday 
Windows Defender’s device 
performance and health report

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   113
ROUND-UP
tasks like video chatting, web browsing, and word 
processing, and recorded the score. Afterward, we 
switched WDSC back on and started a full system 
scan before running PCMark 8 again.
The results fell in line with the best third-party 
options: Windows Defender had no real effect on 
performance. Running Windows 10 with Defender off 
garnered a PCMark score of 2498. Once it was back on, 
the score went up to 2516 – right within the margin of 
error for PCMark 8 results.
That story also held true in our Handbrake 
performance benchmark, which puts far more strain 
on system resources. With Windows Defender turned 
off, we were able to transcode a 3.8GB MKV ﬁle on the 
Android Tablet preset in one hour, 14 minutes, and 21 
seconds. With Windows Defender turned on, it took 
one hour, 15 minutes, and 30 seconds. That difference 
is so small it’s insigniﬁcant.
Verdict
Windows Defender is a ﬁne basic security solution. 
For advanced users who are hyper-aware about all 
the various threats out there, this free option might 
be enough if they also periodically scan their systems 
with something like the free version of Malwarebytes 
(fave.co/2zZlV1Z). The average user, however, should 
look for a more feature-rich third-party solution.
Best overall antivirus suite:  
Norton Security Premium
Norton Security Premium is an old name in security, but 
it has an easy-to-use interface, highly-rated protection, 

114   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
ROUND-UP
and a number of helpful extra features. It’s on the 
higher end of the price spectrum at £39.99 per year, 
but you can install it on up to 10 devices. 
Best budget antivirus suite:  
AVG Internet Security
AVG Internet Security does an excellent job of 
protecting your PC, but it’s interface could be a lot 
better. Nevertheless, with unlimited installs for £49.99 
per year, it’s hard to beat this popular security solution.

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   115
W
indows may have the most robust library of 
games in the world, but many people enjoy 
playing games in the living room – yes, even 
PC gamers. Valve, the company behind Steam, helps its 
users cross the bridge between computers and couches 
with the Steam Link (£29.92 from fave.co/2zYlnth), 
How To: Play  
PC games on a TV
The Steam Link bridges the gulf between gaming on your 
computer and gaming on your couch. SAMUEL AXON reports
HOW TO

116   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
HOW TO
a diminutive set-top box that streams games from 
your gaming PC straight to your TV.
We’ll go over how to set it up, but ﬁrst, let’s 
take note of a few key considerations.
Input devices and controller support
The Steam Link supports a number of input devices. 
They include USB-based or wireless-with-a-USB-dongle 
keyboards or mice, Xbox 360 or Xbox One controllers 
connected via USB (wireless dongles are technically 
possible but require a lot of workarounds and hassle), 
a PlayStation 4 controller connected via USB, or 
Valve’s own wireless Steam Controller.
All the USB devices are very easy – just plug them 
in, and they should work right away. If you’re using a 
Steam Controller, you’ll have to sync it. To do this:
•  First turn on your Steam Link
•  While holding down the X button on the Steam 
Controller, press the Steam button to put it into 
discovery and pairing mode
•  It should work straight from there
Wired versus wireless
Valve recommends connecting both your Steam 
Link and your host machine with a wired ethernet 
connection. Why? Well, streaming high-resolution 
games at 60 frames per second is one of the most 
taxing things you can do on a network connection. 
And since the games are interactive, you could very 
easily encounter game death-ensuing stutters or 
other issues with the slightest hiccup.

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   117
HOW TO
Wireless connections are better than they’ve ever 
been, but they’re still subject to interference from 
other wireless signals, as well as signal degradation 
over long distances or going through walls and 
furniture. If you have an ideal scenario, Wi-Fi will be 
ﬁne for the Steam Link – but most of us don’t.
Use a wired connection if you can. But if it’s 
not possible, troubleshoot your network and you 
might be able to improve your circumstances well 
enough to play. It helps to use a 5GHz network, too. 
Just note that your Internet connection speed is 
irrelevant since Steam Link only streams games from 
PCs on your local network.
Set up your PC
Chances are, your PC is good to go right off the bat. 
Just make sure it’s on, connected with a stable local 
The Steam Link’s physical connections include an ethernet port

118   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
HOW TO
network connection, and running Steam. But if you have 
any issues, go to Steam preferences and verify that 
Enable streaming is checked in the In-Home Streaming 
section. You’ll see some other settings here too, but 
we’ll tweak most of those on the Steam Link itself.
Set up the Steam Link on your TV
This part’s really easy. The Steam Link comes with a 
power cable, an ethernet network cable, and an HDMI 
cable. Plug the power cable into the wall, the HDMI 
cable into your TV, and if possible, the ethernet cable 
into your network router. You can also connect it to 
the network with Wi-Fi, as previously discussed. When 
you’ve plugged everything in and powered up your 
The in-home streaming interface 
inside the Steam PC client

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   119
HOW TO
Steam Link, you’ll be taken through an easy, step-by-
step process for conﬁguring it. If you’re connected 
over ethernet, it may automatically download an 
update ﬁrst, though – let it, if so. After that, you may 
be prompted to pick your language. Easy enough; 
pick the language of your choice.
Set up the display
The Steam Link will now run you through two screens 
where you’ll have to conﬁgure your display settings.
In one, you’ll be asked to set the screen scaling to 
make sure the entirety of the image is visible on your 
TV. If you’ve connected a controller, you can use left 
and right on the directional pad to set this.
In another screen, you’ll be presented with some 
basic settings: scaling, resolution, and CEC. Leave 
scaling at 0 percent in most cases, and pick the 
resolution and Hz refresh that best matches your 
TV. Sometimes you’ll even see this automatically 
recognized at the top of the screen, as seen in the 

120   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
HOW TO
below screenshot. But other times, you just have to 
know what your TV can support. Chances are it’s the 
highest setting listed in the menu.
CEC is a feature on some TVs that lets you to 
control multiple devices connected to your TV with 
the same controller. If you don’t need this, leave it 
off. But if you have thought through how to set up 
a whole CEC scenario, keep it enabled.
Pick and connect your host PC
Your Steam Link will now try to automatically detect 
available PCs that are running Steam. If everything’s 
set up on your PC, it should appear on the menu and 
you just have to hit a button (‘A’ on most controllers) 
to proceed. If it’s not listed, you’ll have to search for 
it (‘Y’ on most controllers). If you search, you’ll be 
prompted for information that will help the Steam 
Link ﬁnd your PC, like its host name or IP address.
Once you’ve selected your host, the Steam Link 
will show a four-digit PIN number that you need to 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   121
HOW TO
enter on the host PC to conﬁrm the connection. Look 
at your host PC, and you should see that a prompt has 
appeared asking for the code. Type it in and you’re 
set. From here, you’ll be taken to the main menu.
Stream games from your PC to Steam Link
From this point, you’re home free. Just load up your 
‘Library’ and look at the list of games. You can remotely 
install games to your PC from your purchased games 
library here. If you’re using a gamepad, you can press 

122   TECH ADVISOR • FEBRUARY 2018
HOW TO
a designated button to apply a ﬁlter (‘Y’ on the Xbox 
controllers, triangle on the PlayStation 4 controller, 
and so on – it’s listed at the bottom of the screen). 
This is helpful for identifying which games support the 
gamepad and thus are easily playable on your TV.
There are a few settings you should know about, 
too. In In-Home Streaming on your Steam Link, you can 
pick from three quality presets – Fast, Balanced, and 
Beautiful – or you can more ﬁnely tweak the settings 
that affect quality and consistency of the image. If 
you’re on an ethernet connection, the maximum 
settings will probably work. If you’re on Wi-Fi, you may 
spend some time adjusting these options.
The process should be pretty straightforward, but 
be sure to check out Valve’s guides to Steam Link 
network settings and network troubleshooting if you 
run into any trouble.
Remember that the Steam Link only streams actual 
gameplay from your PC, so you may need to upgrade 
your graphics card if you want to crank up graphics 

FEBRUARY 2018 • TECH ADVISOR   123
HOW TO
quality without sacriﬁcing frame rate. If your gaming 
PC can’t play a game at Ultra settings, your Steam Link 
won’t either. Steam Link won’t magically make your 
games any smoother.
That’s it. It might take some tweaking, depending 
on your network conditions, but you should be playing 
Steam games on your TV before long.


