www.ebook3000.com

Television
‘The founding text of television studies. A true classic;
always worth consulting for its style, scope, and insights.’
Jostein Gripsrud, University of Bergen
‘This book is a classic because it inaugurated ways of
thinking about a new technology – television – as part of
everyday material culture which are even more pertinent to
us now as we enter the digital age.’
Charlotte Brunsdon, University of Warwick
‘Television: Technology and cultural form is a powerful
and original book which marked the beginning of a new
breed of British accounts of television. Instead of focusing
solely on the content of television programs, it examined
the shaping effect of television’s technological structures
upon its characteristic forms.’
Graeme Turner, University of Queensland
‘Williams understood that TV was the theatre of capital-
ism, the drama of modernity. He took both drama and cap-
italism seriously, and this book is the result – a decisive
moment in the formation of TV studies as a properly theor-
ized ﬁeld, and a permanently useful account of cultural
form.’
John Hartley, Queensland University of Technology

www.ebook3000.com

Raymond
Williams
Television
Technology and cultural form
Edited by Ederyn Williams
With a new preface by Roger Silverstone
London and New York

First published 1974 by Fontana, London
First published in the USA 1975
by Schocken Books, New York
Second edition published 1990 by Routledge
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
© 1974 Raymond Williams
Preface to the Routledge Classics edition ©
2003 Roger Silverstone
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted
or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
ISBN 0–415–31456–9
First published in Routledge Classics 2003
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2004.
ISBN 0-203-42664-9 Master e-book ISBN
ISBN 0-203-44048-X (Adobe eReader Format)
(Print Edition)
www.ebook3000.com

CONTENTS
Preface to the Routledge Classics Edition
vii
Foreword
xiv
Foreword to the Second Edition
xvi
The technology and the society
1
1
Institutions of the technology
26
2
The forms of television
39
3
Programming: distribution and ﬂow
77
4
Effects of the technology and its uses
121
5
Alternative technology, alternative uses?
139
6
Notes
158
Selected Bibliography
162
Index
167

www.ebook3000.com

PREFACE TO THE ROUTLEDGE CLASSICS EDITION
The space between the ﬁrst sentence of this book, ‘It is often said
that television has altered our world’, and its last, in which
Raymond Williams, with characteristic passion and intelligence,
insists that the future of our media will depend on our capacity
to make informed judgements and decisions about that future, is
ﬁlled by a critical, insightful, iconoclastic and humane reading
of television’s ﬁrst half-century.
It is a reading which is informed, perhaps more than any-
thing, by a night in Miami and a year at Stanford. It might appear
that the latter was needed to enable him to understand the for-
mer, a night during which Williams, newly landed by boat from
Europe, found himself entirely bemused by the ﬂow of U.S. tele-
vision, a ﬂow in which one programme blended into another, in
which advertisements were seamlessly threaded through the
texts of soap operas, and in which trailers for one ﬁlm provided
a kind of invasive sub-text for the unfolding of another. At Stan-
ford, in the Department of Communications, where this book
was written, he worked through this confrontation, and in

doing so he addressed the particular social and historical speci-
ﬁcity of television, making it clear, powerfully and politically
clear, how much its past, present and future, owed to human
agency.
Television: Technology and cultural form is a book which has proved
to be extraordinarily inﬂuential within the emergent ﬁelds of
media and communication studies, but it has also become a
classic statement of a range of arguments and critiques that still
remain on the agenda whenever the present and future of the
media are being discussed. What makes it so?
Perhaps above all because Williams rejects any form of techno-
logical determinism. He rejects those arguments which insist
that technologies have a life of their own, that they emerge from
a process of research and development untarnished by social
expectations or political and economic interests. He rejects just
as forcefully the arguments that technologies, by themselves, can
determine a social response, that they have determining eﬀects
and consequences which are just as equally resistant to the com-
plications and uncertainties of society and history. In other
words he rejects the characterisation of television as technology,
as such. It is not reducible.
Television emerged, as the telegraph, the telephone and radio
had before it, as a technologically synthetic response to a set of
newly emergent and radical social, political and economic needs.
Industrialisation and modernisation had created new demands
and new challenges: for order, for control and for communica-
tion. Machines that had been both imagined and developed
to provide singular responses to, mostly, military and indus-
trial requirements (the management of both empires and rail-
roads, and as often as not, both at once), would develop in
unexpected ways in social and civilian guises. Williams’s notion
of ‘mobile privatisation’ elegantly captures the particularity of
the newly social, one might say suburban, world with which
radio and television were to engage. This was a world of
preface to the routledge classics edition
viii
www.ebook3000.com

increasing individualisation and fragmentation; of the structur-
ally displacing movements of populations from country to city,
and from city to suburb; of the daily movements of work-
forces from private homes to public workplaces. Radio and tele-
vision, mobilised within a dialectic of isolation and participation,
created and enabled the ‘as-if’ of mediated sociability within a
framework of broadcast communication. Broadcasting was,
then, in every sense, a social product. And what follows from
this is a committing observation that the history (and even
the sociology) of technology must be a history of its distribution,
its institutionalisation and its uses.
That history in turn is one that is driven not by an abstract
process of innovation, but by such human things as intention,
interest, purpose and value. Williams has no time for abstraction.
His materialism is both motor and brake, for while it is the case
that technologies emerge and are shaped by the most powerful
forces present in society, these forces, those of capital above all,
are not omnipotent (though they are immensely potent) and can
still be opposed by other, public interests, and mobilised by
democratic states and articulate communities.
Television is therefore a distinct cultural product. Williams is
in no doubt about its signiﬁcance, even if he refuses singular
accounts of it. But he is ambivalent, as Walter Benjamin before
him was ambivalent when confronted with the cinema, about its
value. Television operates at the interface between the elite and
the popular, the commercial and the public, the state and the
citizen; and each of its expressions, the various forms that he
analyses in some detail, manifests the tensions, the ambiguities
and the contradictions which subsequent critics, analysts and
practitioners have continued to identify and yet still not resolve.
Williams is hardly unusual in ﬁnding both things to praise and
things to decry in contemporary television – though his radical
worldview never lets him his lose his guard.
The forms of reporting, interrogation, visualisation and
preface to the routledge classics edition
ix

dramatisation which television manifested provided a very dif-
ferent public culture than any that had gone before. Of course
many of these forms were borrowed from other media. News,
drama, talk, educational programming, variety, all had their pre-
cursors. But Williams is at pains to point out the distinctiveness
and the novelty of television, above all, perhaps, in its directness
and its closeness to the ordinariness of everyday life. Television
oﬀers a technologically and institutionally discrete form of cul-
tural framing and expression, one which can only be understood
in situ, as it were, as in turn an expression of wider social,
political and economic forces.
At the heart of the book is an investigation of what he dis-
covered in Miami: television’s continuity, its ﬂow. In eﬀect what
Williams analyses here is the layering of its discourses. Television
is endless (though not, at least in the 1970s, quite the 24/7
eternity of the twenty-ﬁrst century), and we are not invited to
watch, anymore than we do watch, individual programmes. We
watch television: its continuous streaming; and we listen to the
eccentric and repetitive juxtapositioning of news reporting,
advertising and programme trailers, equally seamless, and
equally naturalised through an eternity of distracted, non-
sequitorial ﬂow. Broadcasters in the 1970s did this in diﬀerent
degrees. There was still a distinction to be made between the
commercial and the public service. News gave the impression,
however, in both, of a hurried blur.
The point of this analysis was not, of course, to reify tele-
vision, but to indicate a particular institutionalisation of culture, a
cultural form of the title of the book; and while the form that
Williams identiﬁes was clearly an established and constraining
dimension of television, it was not necessarily inviolate. Williams
saves his most pointed invective for the theories of Marshall
McLuhan whose heraldic metaphors of medium as message and
massage, are seen as both ideological and oﬀensive. They repre-
sent the worst kind of formalism, abstracted from meaning and
preface to the routledge classics edition
x
www.ebook3000.com

divorced from history. If the medium really is the message,
Williams asks, what is left for us to do or say? McLuhan’s views
will not survive. And yet, of course they have and were indeed
revived triumphantly on the mastheads, both the literal and the
symbolic, of those who celebrated the arrival of the new
medium of the Internet, whose message, apparently, it was clear
for all to see.
Williams’s frustration and critique were grounded in a fun-
damental belief in the eﬀectiveness of human agency: our cap-
acity to disturb, disrupt and to distract the otherwise cold logic
of history and the one-dimensionality of technology. And, he
argues, human beings are, or can be, trouble in the still-
incomplete unfolding of television. Technologies may constrain,
but they do not determine. The routes their developments follow
are marked by competing interests, struggles over meaning, and
the limitlessly unintended consequences of human action.
Indeed broadcasting oﬀers, or so it seems to Williams, alternative
forms of expression and communication, not just because it is
by deﬁnition a social formation and structured to ﬁt into the
mosaic of everyday social life, but because new technologies
continue to oﬀer new opportunities, momentarily outside the
sway of transnational capital or the grasp of media moguls, for
new forms of self-expression and, above all, for new forms of
political expression.
Readers of Television: Technology and cultural form have tended to
focus their critical appreciation of the text on Williams’s con-
cepts of mobile privatisation and on his analysis of ﬂow, and
rightly so. Fewer have paused to think through his discussion, in
the ﬁnal chapter of the book, of alternative technologies and
alternative uses. But it is worth pausing on this, not so much
because of the rights or wrongs of his predictive identiﬁcation of
which new technologies were around the corner and what their
likely potential was, nor indeed to buy into the always-qualiﬁed
hopefulness that this potential might be realised, but because
preface to the routledge classics edition
xi

his writing here not only shows a willingness to interrogate
technological innovation as it manifests itself in the ins and outs
of everyday life, but also oﬀers an account of an appropriate, one
might even say a proper, political position in relation to it.
The technological world with which Williams engages at the
end of the book, is a pre-Internet world; a world of cable deliv-
ery systems, recordable video, home video (only for the ‘very
well-oﬀ’), satellite transmission and reactive and interactive
devices. These technologies were yet unformed institutionally.
Some could lower the price of entry so that producers outside
the mainstream could begin to oﬀer alternative programming;
some could provide an opportunity for communities to com-
municate amongst themselves; others could give consumers
more choice over their programming. But equally all could be
captured by dominant interests, in which communities became
fronts for commercial interests, interaction was constrained by
those who control the gateways, and the internationalisation of
media content, and the capacity of small producers to reach
wider audiences, just as equally overwhelmed by programme-
dumping transnational media conglomerates.
It is unlikely that Williams was entirely seduced by the possi-
bilities of alternatives. He knew as well as anyone about the
power of dominant institutions and repressive greed. Yet, despite
this, and because of his deep commitment to the human, as
opposed to the technological, project, his writing refuses capitu-
lation. If technologies are human, and if the contemporary
institutionalisation of television is but one, albeit now a well-
established, possibility among others, then critique and creative
intervention in its continuing development must be sustained.
Technologies lead double lives, and television is no exception.
They are both, as Williams argues, the ‘contemporary tools for
the long revolution towards an educated and participatory dem-
ocracy’ – a project of which he never lost sight; but they are also
the tools of what he dubs the counter-revolution, in which the
preface to the routledge classics edition
xii
www.ebook3000.com

forces of capital successfully intrude into the ﬁnest grain of our
everyday lives.
In 1974 Raymond Williams asked his readers to recognise the
immediacy of the situation and the signiﬁcance of decisions
being taken then to form the future of the media. In 2003, and
for the foreseeable future, we can ask the next generation of his
readers to do the same thing. For the terms of the debate remain
as he identiﬁed them, even though the medium is the Internet
rather than television (though television is still not out of the
frame).
‘ . . . information, analysis, education, discussion . . . ’: these
are what he left on the last page of the book as his preconditions
for action. Then, and now.
R S
F 2003
preface to the routledge classics edition
xiii

FOREWORD
This book is an attempt to explore and describe some of the
relationships between television as a technology and television
as a cultural form. In the contemporary debate about the general
relations between technology, social institutions and culture,
television is obviously an outstanding case. Indeed its present
importance, as an element in each of these areas, and as a point
of interaction between them, is in eﬀect unparalleled.
I have been meaning to attempt this inquiry since I wrote The
Long Revolution and Communications, which were more closely con-
cerned with the cultural institutions of print. As in those earlier
studies, the social history and the social analysis needed to be
directly related to critical and analytical examination of the
materials and processes of the speciﬁc communication. Over
four years, from 1968 to 1972, I wrote a monthly review of
television for the BBC weekly journal The Listener. I was able
to choose my own subjects and on several occasions tried to
sum up my impressions of a particular television use or form –
sport, travel, police serials, commercials, political reporting,
www.ebook3000.com

discussions. These articles are a necessary background for the
present inquiry, and I have drawn on some of their experience
for this book, which was, however, mainly written in California,
in a very diﬀerent television situation. I have taken the opportun-
ity to make some comparisons between British and American
practice. I also took the opportunity of discussion with colleagues
in the Department of Communications at Stanford University
and was especially helped by some of their work on new and
emerging television technologies. I am especially grateful to
Edwin B. Parker, and for discussions elsewhere to Mr Rice of
KQED San Francisco, to Dr John Fekete, to Mr Nicholas Garnham
and to my son Dr Ederyn Williams. My wife’s work on the
material for Chapters 3, 4 and 6 was at once primary and in-
dispensable. I am also grateful to Mr Jonathan Benthall for his
help throughout the inquiry.
S, C,  C, E.
J–J, 1973.
foreword
xv

FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION
My father had agreed to revise this book shortly before his sad
death in February 1988.
Much has changed since he wrote it in 1973, though I found
it amazing, on re-reading, to see how much of today’s media
environment he had accurately predicted then. Many of the
issues and arguments that he forecast have since been splashed in
headlines across newspapers, though due to the slightly slower
pace of technological progress than he then supposed, many of
them are still live or yet to come.
He would have revised the book more thoroughly than I dare.
I have conﬁned myself to a few notes on the earlier chapters, to
updates on certain factual points, and to fuller notes on Chapter
6. Many of the technical developments that he discussed in 1973
have now occurred, though the political and cultural issues are
still live, and many decisions on structure and control are still
open to argument. My notes to Chapter 6 are intended to
reveal the continuing relevance of these issues, converting the
predictions into fact and providing recent examples.
www.ebook3000.com

I trust that you too will ﬁnd this book as relevant today as it
was in 1974.
E W
L 1989
foreword to the second edition xvii

www.ebook3000.com

1
THE TECHNOLOGY AND
THE SOCIETY
It is often said that television has altered our world. In the same
way, people often speak of a new world, a new society, a new
phase of history, being created – ‘brought about’ – by this or
that new technology: the steam engine, the automobile, the
atomic bomb. Most of us know what is generally implied when
such things are said. But this may be the central diﬃculty: that
we have got so used to statements of this general kind, in
our most ordinary discussions, that we can fail to realise their
speciﬁc meanings.
For behind all such statements lie some of the most diﬃcult
and most unresolved historical and philosophical questions. Yet
the questions are not posed by the statements; indeed they are
ordinarily masked by them. Thus we often discuss, with anima-
tion, this or that ‘eﬀect’ of television, or the kinds of social
behaviour, the cultural and psychological conditions, which
television has ‘led to’, without feeling ourselves obliged to ask
whether it is reasonable to describe any technology as a cause,

or, if we think of it as a cause, as what kind of cause, and in what
relations with other kinds of causes. The most precise and dis-
criminating local study of ‘eﬀects’ can remain superﬁcial if we
have not looked into the notions of cause and eﬀect, as between
a technology and a society, a technology and a culture, a tech-
nology and a psychology, which underlie our questions and
may often determine our answers.
It can of course be said that these fundamental questions are
very much too diﬃcult; and that they are indeed diﬃcult is very
soon obvious to anyone who tries to follow them through. We
could spend our lives trying to answer them, whereas here and
now, in a society in which television is important, there is
immediate and practical work to be done: surveys to be made,
research undertaken; surveys and research, moreover, which we
know how to do. It is an appealing position, and it has the
advantage, in our kind of society, that it is understood as prac-
tical, so that it can then be supported and funded. By contrast,
other kinds of question seem merely theoretical and abstract.
Yet all questions about cause and eﬀect, as between a tech-
nology and a society, are intensely practical. Until we have begun
to answer them, we really do not know, in any particular case,
whether, for example, we are talking about a technology or
about the uses of a technology; about necessary institutions or
particular and changeable institutions; about a content or about
a form. And this is not only a matter of intellectual uncertainty; it
is a matter of social practice. If the technology is a cause, we can
at best modify or seek to control its eﬀects. Or if the technology,
as used, is an eﬀect, to what other kinds of cause, and other
kinds of action, should we refer and relate our experience of its
uses? These are not abstract questions. They form an increasingly
important part of our social and cultural arguments, and they are
being decided all the time in real practice, by real and eﬀective
decisions.
It is with these problems in mind that I want to try to analyse
the technology and the society
2
www.ebook3000.com

television as a particular cultural technology, and to look at
its development, its institutions, its forms and its eﬀects, in
this critical dimension. In the present chapter, I shall begin the
analysis under three headings: (a) versions of cause and eﬀect
in technology and society; (b) the social history of television as
a technology; (c) the social history of the uses of television
technology.
A. VERSIONS OF CAUSE AND EFFECT IN
TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY
We can begin by looking again at the general statement that
television has altered our world. It is worth setting down some
of the diﬀerent things this kind of statement has been taken to
mean. For example:
(i)
Television was invented as a result of scientiﬁc and tech-
nical research. Its power as a medium of news and enter-
tainment was then so great that it altered all preceding
media of news and entertainment.
(ii)
Television was invented as a result of scientiﬁc and tech-
nical research. Its power as a medium of social com-
munication was then so great that it altered many of our
institutions and forms of social relationships.
(iii)
Television was invented as a result of scientiﬁc and tech-
nical research. Its inherent properties as an electronic
medium altered our basic perceptions of reality, and
thence our relations with each other and with the world.
(iv)
Television was invented as a result of scientiﬁc and tech-
nical research. As a powerful medium of communication
and entertainment it took its place with other factors –
such as greatly increased physical mobility, itself the result
of other newly invented technologies – in altering the
scale and form of our societies.
the technology and the society
3

(v)
Television was invented as a result of scientiﬁc and tech-
nical research, and developed as a medium of entertain-
ment and news. It then had unforeseen consequences, not
only on other entertainment and news media, which it
reduced in viability and importance, but on some of the
central processes of family, cultural and social life.
(vi)
Television, discovered as a possibility by scientiﬁc and
technical research, was selected for investment and devel-
opment to meet the needs of a new kind of society, es-
pecially in the provision of centralised entertainment and
in the centralised formation of opinions and styles of
behaviour.
(vii) Television, discovered as a possibility by scientiﬁc and
technical research, was selected for investment and pro-
motion as a new and proﬁtable phase of a domestic con-
sumer economy; it is then one of the characteristic
‘machines for the home’.
(viii) Television became available as a result of scientiﬁc and
technical research, and in its character and uses exploited
and emphasised elements of a passivity, a cultural and
psychological inadequacy, which had always been latent
in people, but which television now organised and came
to represent.
(ix)
Television became available as a result of scientiﬁc and
technical research, and in its character and uses both
served and exploited the needs of a new kind of large-scale
and complex but atomised society.
These are only some of the possible glosses on the ordinary bald
statement that television has altered our world. Many people
hold mixed versions of what are really alternative opinions, and
in some cases there is some inevitable overlapping. But we can
distinguish between two broad classes of opinion.
In the ﬁrst – (i) to (v) – the technology is in eﬀect accidental.
the technology and the society
4
www.ebook3000.com

Beyond the strictly internal development of the technology there
is no reason why any particular invention should have come
about. Similarly it then has consequences which are also in the
true sense accidental, since they follow directly from the tech-
nology itself. If television had not been invented, this argument
would run, certain deﬁnite social and cultural events would not
have occurred.
In the second – (vi) to (ix) – television is again, in eﬀect, a
technological accident, but its signiﬁcance lies in its uses, which
are held to be symptomatic of some order of society or some
qualities of human nature which are otherwise determined. If
television had not been invented, this argument runs, we would
still be manipulated or mindlessly entertained, but in some other
way and perhaps less powerfully.
For all the variations of local interpretation and emphasis,
these two classes of opinion underlie the overwhelming maj-
ority of both professional and amateur views of the eﬀects of
television. What they have in common is the fundamental form
of the statement: ‘television has altered our world’.
It is then necessary to make a further theoretical distinction.
The ﬁrst class of opinion, described above, is that usually known,
at least to its opponents, as technological determinism. It is an
immensely powerful and now largely orthodox view of the
nature of social change. New technologies are discovered, by an
essentially internal process of research and development, which
then sets the conditions for social change and progress. Progress,
in particular, is the history of these inventions, which ‘created
the modern world’. The eﬀects of the technologies, whether
direct or indirect, foreseen or unforeseen, are as it were the
rest of history. The steam engine, the automobile, television,
the atomic bomb, have made modern man and the modern
condition.
The second class of opinion appears less determinist. Tele-
vision, like any other technology, becomes available as an element
the technology and the society
5

or a medium in a process of change that is in any case occurring
or about to occur. By contrast with pure technological determin-
ism, this view emphasises other causal factors in social change. It
then considers particular technologies, or a complex of tech-
nologies, as symptoms of change of some other kind. Any par-
ticular technology is then as it were a by-product of a social
process that is otherwise determined. It only acquires eﬀective
status when it is used for purposes which are already contained
in this known social process.
The debate between these two general positions occupies the
greater part of our thinking about technology and society. It is a
real debate, and each side makes important points. But it is in the
end sterile, because each position, though in diﬀerent ways, has
abstracted technology from society. In technological determinism,
research and development have been assumed as self-generating.
The new technologies are invented as it were in an independent
sphere, and then create new societies or new human conditions.
The view of symptomatic technology, similarly, assumes that research
and development are self-generating, but in a more marginal
way. What is discovered in the margin is then taken up and
used.
Each view can then be seen to depend on the isolation of
technology. It is either a self-acting force which creates new
ways of life, or it is a self-acting force which provides materials
for new ways of life. These positions are so deeply established, in
modern social thought, that it is very diﬃcult to think beyond
them. Most histories of technology, like most histories of scien-
tiﬁc discovery, are written from their assumptions. An appeal to
‘the facts’, against this or that interpretation, is made very dif-
ﬁcult simply because the histories are usually written, con-
sciously or unconsciously, to illustrate the assumptions. This is
either explicit, with the consequential interpretation attached, or
more often implicit, in that the history of technology or of
scientiﬁc development is oﬀered as a history on its own. This can
the technology and the society
6
www.ebook3000.com

be seen as a device of specialisation or of emphasis, but it then
necessarily implies merely internal intentions and criteria.
To change these emphases would require prolonged and
cooperative intellectual eﬀort. But in the particular case of tele-
vision it may be possible to outline a diﬀerent kind of interpret-
ation, which would allow us to see not only its history but also
its uses in a more radical way. Such an interpretation would
diﬀer from technological determinism in that it would restore
intention to the process of research and development. The tech-
nology would be seen, that is to say, as being looked for and
developed with certain purposes and practices already in mind.
At the same time the interpretation would diﬀer from symptom-
atic technology in that these purposes and practices would be
seen as direct: as known social needs, purposes and practices to
which the technology is not marginal but central.
B. THE SOCIAL HISTORY OF TELEVISION
AS A TECHNOLOGY
The invention of television was no single event or series of
events. It depended on a complex of inventions and develop-
ments in electricity, telegraphy, photography and motion pic-
tures, and radio. It can be said to have separated out as a speciﬁc
technological objective in the period 1875–1890, and then,
after a lag, to have developed as a speciﬁc technological enter-
prise from 1920 through to the ﬁrst public television systems of
the 1930s. Yet in each of these stages it depended for parts of its
realisation on inventions made with other ends primarily in
view.
Until the early nineteenth century, investigations of elec-
tricity, which had long been known as a phenomenon, were
primarily philosophical: investigations of a puzzling natural
eﬀect. The technology associated with these investigations was
mainly directed towards isolation and concentration of the
the technology and the society
7

eﬀect, for its clearer study. Towards the end of the eighteenth
century there began to be applications, characteristically in rela-
tion to other known natural eﬀects (lightning conductors). But
there is then a key transitional period in a cluster of inventions
between 1800 and 1831, ranging from Volta’s battery to Fara-
day’s demonstration of electro-magnetic induction, leading
quickly to the production of generators. This can be properly
traced as a scientiﬁc history, but it is signiﬁcant that the key
period of advance coincides with an important stage of the
development of industrial production. The advantages of electric
power were closely related to new industrial needs: for mobility
and transfer in the location of power sources, and for ﬂexible
and rapid controllable conversion. The steam engine had been
well suited to textiles, and its industries had been based on local
siting. A more extensive development, both physically and in the
complexity of multiple-part processes, such as engineering,
could be attempted with other power sources but could only be
fully realised with electricity. There was a very complex inter-
action between new needs and new inventions, at the level of
primary production, of new applied industries (plating) and of
new social needs which were themselves related to industrial
development (city and house lighting). From 1830 to large-scale
generation in the 1880s there was this continuing complex of
need and invention and application.
In telegraphy the development was simpler. The transmission
of messages by beacons and similar primary devices had been
long established. In the development of navigation and naval
warfare the ﬂag system had been standardised in the course of
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. During the Napoleonic
wars there was a marked development of land telegraphy, by
semaphore stations, and some of this survived into peace time.
Electrical telegraphy had been suggested as a technical system as
early as 1753, and was actually demonstrated in several places in
the early nineteenth century. An English inventor in 1816 was
the technology and the society
8
www.ebook3000.com

told that the Admiralty was not interested. It is interesting that it
was the development of the railways, themselves a response to
the development of an industrial system and the related growth
of cities, which clariﬁed the need for improved telegraphy. A
complex of technical possibilities was brought to a working
system from 1837 onwards. The development of international
trade and transport brought rapid extensions of the system,
including the transatlantic cable in the 1850s and the 1860s. A
general system of electric telegraphy had been established by the
1870s, and in the same decade the telephone system began to be
developed, in this case as a new and intended invention.
In photography, the idea of light-writing had been suggested
by (among others) Wedgwood and Davy in 1802, and the camera
obscura had already been developed. It was not the projection but
the ﬁxing of images which at ﬁrst awaited technical solution,
and from 1816 (Niepce) and through to 1839 (Daguerre) this
was worked on, together with the improvement of camera
devices. Professional and then amateur photography spread
rapidly, and reproduction and then transmission, in the develop-
ing newspaper press, were achieved. By the 1880s the idea of
a ‘photographed reality’ – still more for record than for obser-
vation – was familiar.
The idea of moving pictures had been similarly developing.
The magic lantern (slide projection) had been known from the
seventeenth century, and had acquired simple motion (one slide
over another) by 1736. From at latest 1826 there was a devel-
opment of mechanical motion-picture devices, such as the
wheel of life, and these came to be linked with the magic lan-
tern. The eﬀect of persistence in human vision – that is to say,
our capacity to hold the ‘memory’ of an image through an inter-
val to the next image, thus allowing the possibility of a sequence
built from rapidly succeeding units – had been known since
classical times. Series of cameras photographing stages of a
sequence were followed (Marey, 1882) by multiple-shot cameras.
the technology and the society
9

Friese-Greene and Edison worked on techniques of ﬁlming and
projection, and celluloid was substituted for paper reels. By the
1890s the ﬁrst public motion-picture shows were being given in
France, America and England.
Television, as an idea, was involved with many of these devel-
opments. It is diﬃcult to separate it, in its earliest stages, from
photo-telegraphy. Bain proposed a device for transmitting pic-
tures by electric wires in 1842; Blakewell in 1847 showed the
copying telegraph; Caselli in 1862 transmitted pictures by wire
over a considerable distance. In 1873, while working at a ter-
minal of the Atlantic telegraph cable, May observed the light-
sensitive properties of selenium (which had been isolated by
Berzelius in 1817 and was in use for resistors). In a host of ways,
following an already deﬁned need, the means of transmitting
still pictures and moving pictures were actively sought and to a
considerable extent discovered. The list is long even when select-
ive: Carey’s electric eye in 1875; Nipkow’s scanning system in
1884; Elster and Geitel’s photoelectric cells in 1890; Braun’s
cathode-ray tube in 1897; Rosing’s cathode-ray receiver in
1907; Campbell Swinton’s electronic camera proposal in 1911.
Through this whole period two facts are evident: that a system of
television was foreseen, and its means were being actively
sought; but also that, by comparison with electrical generation
and electrical telegraphy and telephony, there was very little
social investment to bring the scattered work together. It is true
that there were technical blocks before 1914 – the thermionic
valve and the multi-stage ampliﬁer can be seen to have been
needed and were not yet invented. But the critical diﬀerence
between the various spheres of applied technology can be stated
in terms of a social dimension: the new systems of production
and of business or transport communication were already organ-
ised, at an economic level; the new systems of social communi-
cation were not. Thus when motion pictures were developed,
their application was characteristically in the margin of
the technology and the society
10
www.ebook3000.com

established social forms – the sideshows – until their success was
capitalised in a version of an established form, the motion-
picture theatre.
The development of radio, in its signiﬁcant scientiﬁc and
technical stages between 1885 and 1911, was at ﬁrst conceived,
within already eﬀective social systems, as an advanced form of
telegraphy. Its application as a signiﬁcantly new social form
belongs to the immediate post-war period, in a changed social
situation. It is signiﬁcant that the hiatus in technical television
development then also ended. In 1923 Zworykin introduced the
electronic television camera tube. Through the early 1920s Baird
and Jenkins, separately and competitively, were working on sys-
tems using mechanical scanning. From 1925 the rate of progress
was qualitatively changed, through important technical advances
but also with the example of sound broadcasting systems as a
model. The Bell System in 1927 demonstrated wire transmission
through a radio link, and the pre-history of the form can be seen
to be ending. There was great rivalry between systems – es-
pecially those of mechanical and electronic scanning – and there is
still great controversy about contributions and priorities. But this
is characteristic of the phase in which the development of a
technology moves into the stage of a new social form.
What is interesting throughout is that in a number of complex
and related ﬁelds, these systems of mobility and transfer in pro-
duction and communication, whether in mechanical and elec-
tric transport, or in telegraphy, photography, motion pictures,
radio and television, were at once incentives and responses
within a phase of general social transformation. Though some of
the crucial scientiﬁc and technical discoveries were made by
isolated and unsupported individuals, there was a crucial com-
munity of selected emphasis and intention, in a society charac-
terised at its most general levels by a mobility and extension
of the scale of organisations: forms of growth which brought
with them immediate and longer-term problems of operative
the technology and the society
11

communication. In many diﬀerent countries, and in apparently
unconnected ways, such needs were at once isolated and technic-
ally deﬁned. It is especially a characteristic of the communications
systems that all were foreseen – not in utopian but in technical ways – before
the crucial components of the developed systems had been discovered and reﬁned.
In no way is this a history of communications systems creating a
new society or new social conditions. The decisive and earlier
transformation of industrial production, and its new social
forms, which had grown out of a long history of capital accumu-
lation and working technical improvements, created new needs
but also new possibilities, and the communications systems,
down to television, were their intrinsic outcome.
C. THE SOCIAL HISTORY OF THE USES OF
TELEVISION TECHNOLOGY
It is never quite true to say that in modern societies, when a
social need has been demonstrated, its appropriate technology
will be found. This is partly because some real needs, in any
particular period, are beyond the scope of existing or foreseeable
scientiﬁc and technical knowledge. It is even more because the
key question, about technological response to a need, is less a
question about the need itself than about its place in an existing
social formation. A need which corresponds with the priorities
of the real decision-making groups will, obviously, more
quickly attract the investment of resources and the oﬃcial per-
mission, approval or encouragement on which a working tech-
nology, as distinct from available technical devices, depends.
We can see this clearly in the major developments of industrial
production and, signiﬁcantly, in military technology. The social
history of communications technology is interestingly diﬀerent
from both of these, and it is important to try to discover what are
the real factors of this variation.
The problem must be seen at several diﬀerent levels. In the
the technology and the society
12
www.ebook3000.com

very broadest perspective, there is an operative relationship
between a new kind of expanded, mobile and complex society
and the development of a modern communications technology.
At one level this relationship can be reasonably seen as causal, in
a direct way. The principal incentives to ﬁrst-stage improve-
ments in communications technology came from problems of
communication and control in expanded military and com-
mercial operations. This was both direct, arising from factors of
greatly extending distance and scale, and indirect, as a factor
within the development of transport technology, which was for
obvious reasons the major direct response. Thus telegraphy and
telephony, and in its early stages radio, were secondary factors
within a primary communications system which was directly
serving the needs of an established and developing military
and commercial system. Through the nineteenth and into the
twentieth century this was the decisive pattern.
But there were other social and political relationships and
needs emerging from this complex of change. Indeed it is a
consequence of the particular and dominant interpretation of
these changes that the complex was at ﬁrst seen as one requiring
improvement in operational communication. The direct priorities
of the expanding commercial system, and in certain periods of
the military system, led to a deﬁnition of needs within the terms
of these systems. The objectives and the consequent tech-
nologies were operational within the structures of these systems:
passing necessary speciﬁc information, or maintaining contact
and control. Modern electric technology, in this phase, was thus
oriented to uses of person to person, operator and operative to
operator and operative, within established speciﬁc structures.
This quality can best be emphasised by contrast with the electric
technology of the second phase, which was properly and signiﬁ-
cantly called broadcasting. A technology of speciﬁc messages to
speciﬁc persons was complemented, but only relatively late, by a
technology of varied messages to a general public.
the technology and the society
13

Yet to understand this development we have to look at a wider
communications system. The true basis of this system had pre-
ceded the developments in technology. Then as now there was a
major, indeed dominant, area of social communication, by word
of mouth, within every kind of social group. In addition, then
as now, there were speciﬁc institutions of that kind of com-
munication which involves or is predicated on social teaching
and control: churches, schools, assemblies and proclamations,
direction in places of work. All these interacted with forms of
communication within the family.
What then were the new needs which led to the development
of a new technology of social communication? The development
of the press gives us the evidence for our ﬁrst major instance. It
was at once a response to the development of an extended social,
economic and political system and a response to crisis within
that system. The centralisation of political power led to a need
for messages from that centre along other than oﬃcial lines.
Early newspapers were a combination of that kind of message –
political and social information – and the speciﬁc messages –
classiﬁed advertising and general commercial news – of an
expanding system of trade. In Britain the development of the
press went through its major formative stages in periods of cri-
sis: the Civil War and Commonwealth, when the newspaper
form was deﬁned; the Industrial Revolution, when new forms of
popular journalism were successively established; the major
wars of the twentieth century, when the newspaper became a
universal social form. For the transmission of simple orders, a
communications system already existed. For the transmission of
an ideology, there were speciﬁc traditional institutions. But for
the transmission of news and background – the whole orienting,
predictive and updating process which the fully developed press
represented – there was an evident need for a new form, which
the largely traditional institutions of church and school could
not meet. And to the large extent that the crises of general
the technology and the society
14
www.ebook3000.com

change provoked both anxiety and controversy, this ﬂexible and
competitive form met social needs of a new kind. As the struggle
for a share in decision and control became sharper, in campaigns
for the vote and then in competition for the vote, the press
became not only a new communications system but, centrally, a
new social institution.
This can be interpreted as response to a political need and a
political crisis, and it was certainly this. But a wider social need
and social crisis can also be recognised. In a changing society,
and especially after the Industrial Revolution, problems of social
perspective and social orientation became more acute. New re-
lations between men, and between men and things, were being
intensely experienced, and in this area, especially, the traditional
institutions of church and school, or of settled community and
persisting family, had very little to say. A great deal was of course
said, but from positions deﬁned within an older kind of society.
In a number of ways, and drawing on a range of impulses from
curiosity to anxiety, new information and new kinds of orien-
tation were deeply required: more deeply, indeed, than any
specialisation to political, military or commercial information
can account for. An increased awareness of mobility and change,
not just as abstractions but as lived experiences, led to a major
redeﬁnition, in practice and then in theory, of the function and
process of social communication.
What can be seen most evidently in the press can be seen also
in the development of photography and the motion picture. The
photograph is in one sense a popular extension of the portrait,
for recognition and for record. But in a period of great mobility,
with new separations of families and with internal and external
migrations, it became more centrally necessary as a form of
maintaining, over distance and through time, certain personal
connections. Moreover, in altering relations to the physical
world, the photograph as an object became a form of the pho-
tography of objects: moments of isolation and stasis within an
the technology and the society
15

experienced rush of change; and then, in its technical extension
to motion, a means of observing and analysing motion itself, in
new ways – a dynamic form in which new kinds of recognition
were not only possible but necessary.
Now it is signiﬁcant that until the period after the First World
War, and in some ways until the period after the Second World
War, these varying needs of a new kind of society and a new way
of life were met by what were seen as specialised means: the
press for political and economic information; the photograph
for community, family and personal life; the motion picture for
curiosity and entertainment; telegraphy and telephony for
business information and some important personal messages. It
was within this complex of specialised forms that broadcasting
arrived.
The consequent diﬃculty of deﬁning its social uses, and the
intense kind of controversy which has ever since surrounded it,
can then be more broadly understood. Moreover, the ﬁrst def-
initions of broadcasting were made for sound radio. It is signiﬁ-
cant and perhaps puzzling that the deﬁnitions and institutions
then created were those within which television developed.
We have now become used to a situation in which broadcast-
ing is a major social institution, about which there is always
controversy but which, in its familiar form, seems to have been
predestined by the technology. This predestination, however,
when closely examined, proves to be no more than a set of
particular social decisions, in particular circumstances, which
were then so widely if imperfectly ratiﬁed that it is now
diﬃcult to see them as decisions rather than as (retrospectively)
inevitable results.
Thus, if seen only in hindsight, broadcasting can be diagnosed
as a new and powerful form of social integration and control.
Many of its main uses can be seen as socially, commercially and
at times politically manipulative. Moreover, this viewpoint is
rationalised by its description as ‘mass communication’, a phrase
the technology and the society
16
www.ebook3000.com

used by almost all its agents and advisers as well, curiously, as by
most of its radical critics. ‘Masses’ had been the new nineteenth-
century term of contempt for what was formerly described as
‘the mob’. The physical ‘massing’ of the urban and industrial
revolution underwrote this. A new radical class-consciousness
adopted the term to express the material of new social forma-
tions: ‘mass organisations’. The ‘mass meeting’ was an observ-
able physical eﬀect. So pervasive was this description that in the
twentieth century multiple serial production was called, falsely
but signiﬁcantly, ‘mass production’: mass now meant large
numbers (but within certain assumed social relationships)
rather than any physical or social aggregate. Sound radio and
television, for reasons we shall look at, were developed for
transmission to individual homes, though there was nothing in the
technology to make this inevitable. But then this new form of
social communication – broadcasting – was obscured by its def-
inition as ‘mass communication’; an abstraction to its most gen-
eral characteristic, that it went to many people, ‘the masses’,
which obscured the fact that the means chosen was the oﬀer
of individual sets, a method much better described by the
earlier word ‘broadcasting’. It is interesting that the only devel-
oped ‘mass’ use of radio was in Nazi Germany, where under
Goebbels’ orders the Party organised compulsory public listening
groups and the receivers were in the streets. There has been
some imitation of this by similar regimes, and Goebbels was
deeply interested in television for the same kind of use. What
was developed within most capitalist societies, though called
‘mass communication’, was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent.
There was early oﬃcial intervention in the development of
broadcasting, but in form this was only at a technical level. In the
earlier struggle against the development of the press, the State
had licensed and taxed newspapers, but for a century before the
coming of broadcasting the alternative idea of an independent
press had been realised both in practice and in theory. State
the technology and the society
17

intervention in broadcasting had some real and some plausible
technical grounds: the distribution of wave-lengths. But to these
were added, though always controversially, more general social
directions or attempts at direction. This social history of broad-
casting can be discussed on its own, at the levels of practice and
principle. Yet it is unrealistic to extract it from another and per-
haps more decisive process, through which, in particular eco-
nomic situations, a set of scattered technical devices became an
applied technology and then a social technology.
A fascist regime might quickly see the use of broadcasting for
direct political and social control. But that, in any case, was when
the technology had already been developed elsewhere. In capital-
ist democracies, the thrust for conversion from scattered tech-
niques to a technology was not political but economic. The
characteristically isolated inventors, from Nipkow and Rosing to
Baird and Jenkins and Zwyorkin, found their point of develop-
ment, if at all, in the manufacturers and prospective manufactur-
ers of the technical apparatus. The history at one level is of these
isolated names, but at another level it is of EMI, RCA and a score
of similar companies and corporations. In the history of motion
pictures, capitalist development was primarily in production;
large-scale capitalist distribution came much later, as a way of
controlling and organising a market for given production. In
broadcasting, both in sound radio and later in television, the
major investment was in the means of distribution, and was
devoted to production only so far as to make the distribution
technically possible and then attractive. Unlike all previous
communications technologies, radio and television were systems
primarily devised for transmission and reception as abstract processes, with little
or no deﬁnition of preceding content. When the question of content was
raised, it was resolved, in the main, parasitically. There were
state occasions, public sporting events, theatres and so on,
which would be communicatively distributed by these new
technical means. It is not only that the supply of broadcasting facilities
the technology and the society
18
www.ebook3000.com

preceded the demand; it is that the means of communication preceded their
content.
The period of decisive development in sound broadcasting
was the 1920s. After the technical advances in sound telegraphy
which had been made for military purposes during the war,
there was at once an economic opportunity and the need for a
new social deﬁnition. No nation or manufacturing group held a
monopoly of the technical means of broadcasting, and there was
a period of intensive litigation followed by cross-licensing of the
scattered basic components of successful transmission and
reception (the vacuum tube or valve, developed from 1904 to
1913; the feedback circuit, developed from 1912; the neutro-
dyne and heterodyne circuits, from 1923). Crucially, in the
mid-1920s, there was a series of investment-guided technical
solutions to the problem of building a small and simple
domestic receiver, on which the whole qualitative transform-
ation from wireless telegraphy to broadcasting depended. By the
mid-1920s – 1923 and 1924 are especially decisive years – this
breakthrough had happened in the leading industrial societies:
the United States, Britain, Germany and France. By the end of the
1920s the radio industry had become a major sector of indus-
trial production, within a rapid general expansion of the new
kinds of machines which were eventually to be called ‘consumer
durables’. This complex of developments included the motor-
cycle and motor-car, the box camera and its successors, home
electrical appliances, and radio sets. Socially, this complex is
characterised by the two apparently paradoxical yet deeply con-
nected tendencies of modern urban industrial living: on the one
hand mobility, on the other hand the more apparently self-
suﬃcient family home. The earlier period of public technology,
best exempliﬁed by the railways and city lighting, was being
replaced by a kind of technology for which no satisfactory name
has yet been found: that which served an at-once mobile
and home-centred way of living: a form of mobile privatisation.
the technology and the society
19

Broadcasting in its applied form was a social product of this
distinctive tendency.
The contradictory pressures of this phase of industrial capital-
ist society were indeed resolved, at a certain level, by the insti-
tution of broadcasting. For mobility was only in part the impulse
of an independent curiosity: the wish to go out and see new
places. It was essentially an impulse formed in the breakdown
and dissolution of older and smaller kinds of settlement and
productive labour. The new and larger settlements and industrial
organisations required major internal mobility, at a primary
level, and this was joined by secondary consequences in the
dispersal of extended families and in the needs of new kinds of
social organisation. Social processes long implicit in the revolu-
tion of industrial capitalism were then greatly intensiﬁed: espe-
cially an increasing distance between immediate living areas and
the directed places of work and government. No eﬀective kinds
of social control over these transformed industrial and political
processes had come anywhere near being achieved or even fore-
seen. Most people were living in the fall-out area of processes
determined beyond them. What had been gained, nevertheless,
in intense social struggle, had been the improvement of
immediate conditions, within the limits and pressures of these
decisive large-scale processes. There was some relative
improvement in wages and working conditions, and there was a
qualitative change in the distribution of the day, the week and
the year between work and oﬀ-work periods. These two eﬀects
combined in a major emphasis on improvement of the small
family home. Yet this privatisation, which was at once an eﬀect-
ive achievement and a defensive response, carried, as a con-
sequence, an imperative need for new kinds of contact. The new
homes might appear private and ‘self-suﬃcient’ but could be
maintained only by regular funding and supply from external
sources, and these, over a range from employment and prices to
depressions and wars, had a decisive and often a disrupting
the technology and the society
20
www.ebook3000.com

inﬂuence on what was nevertheless seen as a separable ‘family’
project. This relationship created both the need and the form of a
new kind of ‘communication’: news from ‘outside’, from
otherwise inaccessible sources. Already in the drama of the
1880s and 1890s (Ibsen, Chekhov) this structure had appeared:
the centre of dramatic interest was now for the ﬁrst time the
family home, but men and women stared from its windows, or
waited anxiously for messages, to learn about forces, ‘out there’,
which would determine the conditions of their lives. The new
‘consumer’ technology which reached its ﬁrst decisive stage in
the 1920s served this complex of needs within just these limits
and pressures. There were immediate improvements of the con-
dition and eﬃciency of the privatised home; there were new
facilities, in private transport, for expeditions from the home;
and then, in radio, there was a facility for a new kind of social
input – news and entertainment brought into the home. Some
people spoke of the new machines as gadgets, but they were
always much more than this. They were the applied technology
of a set of emphases and responses within the determining limits
and pressures of industrial capitalist society.
The cheap radio receiver is then a signiﬁcant index of a gen-
eral condition and response. It was especially welcomed by all
those who had least social opportunities of other kinds; who
lacked independent mobility or access to the previously diverse
places of entertainment and information. Broadcasting could
also come to serve, or seem to serve, as a form of uniﬁed social
intake, at the most general levels. What had been intensively
promoted by the radio manufacturing companies thus inter-
locked with this kind of social need, itself deﬁned within general
limits and pressures. In the early stages of radio manufacturing,
transmission was conceived before content. By the end of the
1920s the network was there, but still at a low level of content-
deﬁnition. It was in the 1930s, in the second phase of radio, that
most of the signiﬁcant advances in content were made. The
the technology and the society
21

transmission and reception networks created, as a by-product, the
facilities of primary broadcasting production. But the general
social deﬁnition of ‘content’ was already there.
This theoretical model of the general development of broad-
casting is necessary to an understanding of the particular devel-
opment of television. For there were, in the abstract, several
diﬀerent ways in which television as a technical means might
have been developed. After a generation of universal domestic
television it is not easy to realise this. But it remains true that,
after a great deal of intensive research and development, the
domestic television set is in a number of ways an ineﬃcient
medium of visual broadcasting. Its visual ineﬃciency by com-
parison with the cinema is especially striking, whereas in the
case of radio there was by the 1930s a highly eﬃcient sound
broadcasting receiver, without any real competitors in its own
line. Within the limits of the television home-set emphasis it has
so far not been possible to make more than minor qualitative
improvements. Higher-deﬁnition systems, and colour, have still
only brought the domestic television set, as a machine, to the
standard of a very inferior kind of cinema. Yet most people have
adapted to this inferior visual medium, in an unusual kind of
preference for an inferior immediate technology, because of the
social complex – and especially that of the privatised home –
within which broadcasting, as a system, is operative. The cinema
had remained at an earlier level of social deﬁnition; it was and
remains a special kind of theatre, oﬀering speciﬁc and discrete
works of one general kind. Broadcasting, by contrast, oﬀered a
whole social intake: music, news, entertainment, sport. The
advantages of this general intake, within the home, much more
than outweighed the technical advantages of visual transmission
and reception in the cinema, conﬁned as this was to speciﬁc and
discrete works. While broadcasting was conﬁned to sound, the
powerful visual medium of cinema was an immensely popular
alternative. But when broadcasting became visual, the option for
the technology and the society
22
www.ebook3000.com

its social advantages outweighed the immediate technical
deﬁcits.
The transition to television broadcasting would have occurred
quite generally in the late 1930s and early 1940s, if the war had
not intervened. Public television services had begun in Britain in
1936 and in the United States in 1939, but with still very expen-
sive receivers. The full investment in transmission and reception
facilities did not occur until the late 1940s and early 1950s, but
the growth was thereafter very rapid. The key social tendencies
which had led to the deﬁnition of broadcasting were by then
even more pronounced. There was signiﬁcantly higher invest-
ment in the privatised home, and the social and physical
distances between these homes and the decisive political and
productive centres of the society had become much greater.
Broadcasting, as it had developed in radio, seemed an inevitable
model: the central transmitters and the domestic sets.
Television then went through some of the same phases as
radio. Essentially, again, the technology of transmission and
reception, developed before the content, and important parts of
the content were and have remained by-products of the technol-
ogy rather than independent enterprises. As late as the introduc-
tion of colour, ‘colourful’ programmes were being devised to
persuade people to buy colour sets. In the earliest stages there
was the familiar parasitism on existing events: a coronation, a
major sporting event, theatres. A comparable parasitism on the
cinema was slower to show itself, until the decline of the cinema
altered the terms of trade; it is now very widespread, most evi-
dently in the United States. But again, as in radio, the end of the
ﬁrst general decade brought signiﬁcant independent television
production. By the middle and late 1950s, as in radio in the
middle and late 1930s, new kinds of programme were being
made for television and there were very important advances in
the productive use of the medium, including, as again at a
comparable stage in radio, some kinds of original work.
the technology and the society
23

Yet the complex social and technical deﬁnition of broadcast-
ing led to inevitable diﬃculties, especially in the productive
ﬁeld. What television could do relatively cheaply was to transmit
something that was in any case happening or had happened. In
news, sport, and some similar areas it could provide a service of
transmission at comparatively low cost. But in every kind of new
work, which it had to produce, it became a very expensive
medium, within the broadcasting model. It was never as expen-
sive as ﬁlm, but the cinema, as a distributive medium, could
directly control its revenues. It was, on the other hand, implicit
in broadcasting that given the tunable receiver all programmes
could be received without immediate charge. There could have
been and can still be a socially ﬁnanced system of production
and distribution within which local and speciﬁc charges would
be unnecessary; the BBC, based on the licence system for
domestic receivers, came nearest to this. But short of monopoly,
which still exists in some state-controlled systems, the problems
of investment for production, in any broadcasting system, are
severe.
Thus within the broadcasting model there was this deep con-
tradiction, of centralised transmission and privatised reception.
One economic response was licensing. Another, less direct, was
commercial sponsorship and then supportive advertising. But
the crisis of production control and ﬁnancing has been endemic
in broadcasting precisely because of the social and technical
model that was adopted and that has become so deeply estab-
lished. The problem is masked, rather than solved, by the fact
that as a transmitting technology – its functions largely limited
to relay and commentary on other events – some balance could
be struck; a limited revenue could ﬁnance this limited service.
But many of the creative possibilities of television have been
frustrated precisely by this apparent solution, and this has far
more than local eﬀects on producers and on the balance of
programmes. When there has been such heavy investment in a
the technology and the society
24
www.ebook3000.com

particular model of social communications, there is a restraining
complex of ﬁnancial institutions, of cultural expectations and of
speciﬁc technical developments, which though it can be seen,
superﬁcially, as the eﬀect of a technology is in fact a social
complex of a new and central kind.
It is against this background that we have to look at the devel-
opment of broadcasting institutions, at their uses of the media,
and at the social problems of the new technical phase which we
are about to enter.
the technology and the society
25

2
INSTITUTIONS OF THE
TECHNOLOGY
A. TYPES OF EARLY DEVELOPMENT
The technology of broadcasting was introduced as a marginal
element in very complex social structures. It is indeed diﬃcult to
realise how marginal it then seemed, as we look back from a
period in which broadcasting policies have become a central
issue of politics. The key factor in the earlier period, as has
already been emphasised, was that the directing impulse came
from the manufacturers of broadcasting apparatus, and especially
of receivers. Yet because of the general importance of radio tele-
phony there was always another kind of pressure, from political
authorities: questions of the security and integrity of the nation-
state were implicitly and at times explicitly raised, but were
complicated by the fact that the political authorities were think-
ing primarily of radio telephony while the manufacturers were
looking forward to broadcasting. In Britain all transmitters and
receivers had to be licensed by the Post Oﬃce, under an Act dating
www.ebook3000.com

from 1904. When the Marconi company began broadcasting in
1920, there were complaints that this use for entertainment of
what was primarily a commercial and transport-control medium
was frivolous and dangerous, and there was even a temporary
ban, under pressure from radio-telephonic interests and the
Armed Forces. There were then complicated negotiations
between the competing manufacturers, the Post Oﬃce and the
Armed Services Committee; and in 1922 a consortium of manu-
facturers, who would provide programmes under terms agreed
with the Post Oﬃce and the Government, was formed as the
British Broadcasting Company. The keys to this agreement were
the granting of monopoly to the Company and the decision to
ﬁnance broadcasting by the sale of licences for receivers. In the
period 1925–1926, through continuous controversy and nego-
tiation, what had been essentially a public utility company was
becoming a true public broadcasting corporation: the BBC which
received its charter in 1926. Granted the elements of monopoly
and of guaranteed ﬁnance from the sale of licences, it acquired
as a by-product of regulation the necessary continuity and
resources to become a producer rather than merely a transmitter
of broadcasting. This qualitative change in the character of the
institution was never clearly foreseen, at least by a majority of
those involved in the negotiations, and its potential would not
have been realised if the deﬁnition of broadcasting as a public
service – which at the time meant very diﬀerent things – had not
been specialised, by its early controllers, to a positive program-
ming policy. The speciﬁc elements in the British solution can be
seen as threefold:
(i)
the early development of Britain as an industrial society,
with an extended communications network over a rela-
tively small geographical area, had already to an important
extent ‘nationalised’ its culture; it had, for example, led to
a predominantly national press.
institutions of the technology
27

(ii)
a dominant version of the national culture had already
been established, in an unusually compact ruling-class, so
that public service could be eﬀectively understood and
administered as service according to the values of an
existing public deﬁnition, with an eﬀective paternalist
deﬁnition of both service and responsibility.
(iii)
the character of the British State which, because of the
compactness of its ruling class, proceeded in many mat-
ters by appointment and delegation rather than by central-
ised state administration. This permitted the emergence of
a state-regulated and state-sponsored public corporation
which was yet not subject to detailed state control. The
ﬂexibility which was latent in this kind of solution,
though continually a matter of dispute, permitted the
emergence of an independent corporate broadcasting
policy, in which the independence was at once real,
especially in relation to political parties and temporary
administrations, and qualiﬁed, by its deﬁnition in terms
of a pre-existing cultural hegemony.
These were speciﬁc factors within what is otherwise a common
area of pressures, as broadcasting was developed not only within
a capitalist society but speciﬁcally by the capitalist manufacturers
of the technological apparatus. As the varying solutions in dif-
ferent capitalist societies are examined it is clear that the tech-
nology as such was in no way determining. The bargain struck
in Britain between state and capitalist interests was in terms of
a limited separation of powers. The more typical solution, in
Western European societies of a similar size, was direct state
regulation of broadcasting, at the level of its early technical
regulation, leading to direct state regulation of broadcasting
production, as still for example in Italy and France.1 In fascist
societies this direct state control was a natural instrument
of policy. In communist societies state control of broadcasting
institutions of the technology
28
www.ebook3000.com

was rationalised as the guarantee and instrument of popular
power.
The alternative solution, in a quite diﬀerent direction, was
that established in the United States. There was always pressure
to control broadcasting in the national interest, but the manu-
facturers of equipment were too powerful to be controlled, and
the competing consortia which they formed pushed out directly
into a rapidly expanding market. Federal control was only estab-
lished after the technical consequences of this kind of expansion
had become chaotic, at that level of technology. The early broad-
casting networks were federations of prime manufacturers, who
then acquired production facilities as an essentially secondary
operation: secondary, that is, to the production and selling of
sets. The ﬁnance for production, in this highly competitive situ-
ation, was drawn from advertising, in its two forms of insertion
and sponsorship. More clearly than anywhere else, because all
countervailing factors were less strong, the American insti-
tutions realised the pure forms of a simple applied technology.
The manufacturing institutions, both directly in the sale of sets
and indirectly in the supply of advertising money, determined
the shape of broadcasting institutions. Thus the broadcasting
public was eﬀectively, from the beginning, the competitive
broadcasting market. The major networks, which began forming
in 1926, became the characteristic institutions of both radio and
eventually television. Public service in any other than a market
sense developed within a structure already dominated by these
institutions. As it eventually emerged it was a classic kind of
market-regulatory control, into which were inserted, always
with diﬃculty and controversy, notions of a non-market public
interest. Until 1927 the market competition was open and
direct. From 1927 to 1932 the new Federal Radio Commission
organised a system of allocation of frequencies, and from 1932
to 1937 attempted to control speciﬁc abuses, such as fraud. The
‘airways’, it was decided, were public property, and licence was
institutions of the technology
29

given to competitors to use them, under technical controls and
then regulatory controls to prevent speciﬁc abuses. From 1937,
in radio and in the early period of television, the FRC, now the
Federal Communications Commission, tried to keep the com-
petitive market open, against strong tendencies to monopoly,
especially in production. It was mainly after 1944 that the FCC
began to try to deﬁne the public interest in terms other than
keeping the market open. It sought to introduce standards of
social usefulness, of political fairness, and of public morality. In
the period of the development of television, these attempts were
redoubled, but the structure of the existing institutions led to
curious anomalies. Thus the Commission could revoke a
station’s licence, but could not really control the networks to
which some of the stations belonged and others were aﬃliated.
For most programme production, the networks were obviously
responsible, yet the eﬀective controls were on stations. This
anomaly has worked both ways. A political administration seek-
ing to control or limit television freedom (as under Nixon in
1972–1973) can try to use pressure on the individual stations to
get them to put pressure on the networks; mainly to alter their
political content, especially in news reporting and commentary.
This is rationalised as ‘community control’ of the ‘irresponsible’
networks, and the networks are indeed large private corpor-
ations without public responsibility. Yet since the stations are
bought and sold, subject to licence, they are themselves a capital-
ist version of community interests, but a small-scale capitalism
dependent on the large-scale networks for broadcast production
of any fully developed kind. Much of the argument about ‘com-
munity television’, in other societies, shows the same features of
uneven competition between monopoly or network interests,
small-scale local or pseudo-local capitalism, and the political
power of the state.
It is then possible to abstract the basic early development
of television institutions as a contrast or competition between
institutions of the technology
30
www.ebook3000.com

‘public service’ and ‘commercial’ institutions. In Britain, es-
pecially, this has seemed a natural perspective, since the unique
‘public service’ deﬁnition of the BBC was in the mid-1950s
successfully challenged by, and made competitive with, a com-
mercial network: the Independent Television Authority (now the
Independent Broadcasting Authority, with the addition of com-
mercial local radio stations). This public authority (public in
legal status and in the character of its constitution, commercial
in its dependence for income on its contracted companies) owns
its means of transmission but contracts for the provision of
programmes with a number of regional companies. These obtain
their own funds from selling insertion-advertisement time; and
a national network and programming, dominated by the larger
companies from the richer regions, is then built up, with some
local variations. This network has been, from the beginning, of a
commercial type, with a built-in relationship between ‘peak-
hour’ programme planning and the selling of advertising time.
In this sense, the contrast between ‘public service’ and
‘commercial’ television holds good, and in programming this is
signiﬁcant (as will be seen in Chapter 4, below).
The same kind of contrast, though in more limited terms, can
be made in the United States, where the ﬁrst development was
commercial and a public-service element was later added, in the
margin or as a palliative. The Public Broadcasting Corporation
was established as late as 1967, building on earlier work of the
National Educational Television organisation (from 1952) and
the Public Broadcasting Laboratory. Local stations of this type
had been established from the 1950s (e.g. KQED, San Francisco,
1954), and there were Federal grants for station combination
and co-operation from 1962. Throughout its development, this
public-service television has been a poor relation of the com-
mercial networks. Its production funds are subject to central
control and in fact, through this, to political decision. The
stations themselves are member-supported, and survive with
institutions of the technology
31

great diﬃculty only by constant local fund-raising. Once again,
however, the ‘public service’ and ‘commercial’ contrast has not
only an institutional but a programming signiﬁcance (see below,
Chapter 4).
So useful a perspective ought not to be given up lightly. Yet it
has to be critically reviewed in two respects: ﬁrst, to take account
of the ordinary terms of the commercial broadcasters’ oﬀensive
against it; second, and more important, to take account of the
complicated relationship between a public authority and state
and corporate political and economic interests.
As in the general rhetoric of the defence of capitalism, com-
mercial broadcasting does not call itself commercial, let alone
capitalist. It uses public-relations descriptions like ‘free’ and
‘independent’, and often contrasts itself with ‘monopoly’ and
‘state control’. This rhetoric dissolves when we look at the char-
acter of the large American broadcasting corporations or of the
British programme companies. In diﬀerent ways these are con-
glomerates of established capital interests. (The diﬀerence
between them follows from the earlier history of the insti-
tutions, in that the American corporations belong to the large-
capital spectrum, while the British companies are mainly in the
medium and even small-capital range.) Whatever public controls
or policy deﬁnitions may then be set, the institutions have as
their primary aim the realisation and distribution of private
proﬁt on invested capital, and this visibly aﬀects their major
policies. By contrast the public-service institutions are in eﬀect
non-proﬁt-making, so that revenue is devoted almost wholly to
production and development of the broadcasting service. Up to
this point the contrast still holds, and needs to be emphasised.
Yet there is, at the next level, an undoubted ambiguity about
the public interest, and especially about its relation to the State.
Here a liberal rhetoric can be equally confusing, for there is no
simple equation between the State in a capitalist society and the
public interest in its broadest deﬁnition. The point is made
institutions of the technology
32
www.ebook3000.com

harder to see by the existence of true state monopolies in broad-
casting, as in societies modelled on the Soviet Union and as in
some West European and developing countries. Here the state
can be correctly identiﬁed with a partisan version of the public
interest (whether approved or not, by those subject to it and by
observers, is another question) and state control of broadcasting
is a function of general state control of information and ide-
ology. Where competitive versions of the public interest have in
eﬀect been eliminated, the situation is simple, if also dead. But
where such competitive versions are active, as for example in
France and Italy, the equation between state and public interest is
especially vulnerable, and this leads not only to internal conﬂicts
but, in modern conditions, to complicated international pres-
sures which we shall have to examine. In the United States,
where it was federal action, in response to many public and local
initiatives, which established a limited public-service network,
there is as yet no sign of any real insulation of a continuing
broad-term public interest from the temporary political pres-
sures of particular administrations. But even where such an insu-
lation exists, as to some extent genuinely in Britain, in the case of
the BBC, the equation of state and public interest, at the level of
the formula of the public corporation or authority, must not be
uncritically accepted. In real terms, after all, the government
appoints the public authorities: characteristically, in Britain,
former Ministers and politicians and members of the available
full-time and part-time administrative bureaucracy. It is done
with some skill and with the kind of window-dressing of mar-
ginal appointments on which any such system depends for its
apparent legitimacy. But within its conventional terms all pro-
posals for directly elected authorities, or for measures of internal
democratic representation or control by actual producers and
broadcasters, are very vigorously opposed. The authorities, as
they stand, are then part of a complicated patronage system on
which the real state, as distinct from the formal state, eﬀectively
institutions of the technology
33

relies. It is much less rigid than formal control through a Minis-
try, and it allows for marginal controversy between the competi-
tive political parties. In the looseness and indeﬁnition of some of
its structures it further allows for some genuine independence
from immediate and short-term government pressures. But it
depends, ﬁnally, on a consensus version of the ‘public’ or
‘national’ interest: a consensus which is ﬁrst assumed and then
vigorously practised, rather than a consensus which has ever
been openly arrived at and made subject to regular open review.
Moreover, in all these varying systems the terms of the discus-
sion of broadcasting institutions have remained obstinately local
and marginal, while the real situation has become very general
and highly dynamic. Essentially, the mode of discussion of
broadcasting institutions has remained in what can best be called
a pre-1950s stage, while the developments of the 1950s and
after have opened up a quite diﬀerent broadcasting world.
B. TYPES OF CURRENT DEVELOPMENT
In the whole non-communist world the determining factor in
broadcasting development, since the 1950s, has been the expan-
sion of the American communications system. This has to be
understood in two related stages: the formation, in the United
States, of a complex military, political and industrial communi-
cations system; and then, in direct relation to this, the operation
of this system to penetrate the broadcasting systems of all other
available states.*
There has been a close relation in the United States, since the
Second World War, between military and political communi-
cations research and development, and what is still thought of in a
separate way as general broadcasting. There has been continual
* I am especially indebted in this section to Herbert I. Schiller: Mass Communica-
tions and American Empire: Kelley, New York, 1970.
institutions of the technology
34
www.ebook3000.com

interaction between governmental investment in new com-
munications and electronic techniques and the general devel-
opment of broadcasting facilities: the case of television satellite
broadcasting (to be examined in detail in Chapter 6, below) is
only the most spectacular. During the 1950s and 1960s the insti-
tutional framework of broadcasting became very complicated,
with an uncertain frontier between military and political and
general institutions. Thus the Interdepartment Radio Advisory
Committee, concerned with the allocation of frequencies,
moved from civilian to military control, and this emphasis was
extended into international negotiations. In the early 1960s a
National Communications System, with a directorate of
telecommunications, was established for direct governmental
purposes, but had some eﬀect on the development of general
broadcasting. The overlap of procurement between state and
network agencies, and the ties between general electronic and
broadcasting corporations (e.g. the Radio Corporation of Amer-
ica which is an electronics manufacturer as well as the owner of
one of the three main networks, the National Broadcasting
Corporation),2 led to a situation in which it was not possible to
separate, into distinct categories, military electronics, govern-
ment agencies concerned with information and propaganda, and
the most visible institutions of general ‘commercial’ broadcast-
ing. From this it was only a short but deliberate step to the
operation of this network on an international scale, over a range
from space communications and communication satellites to the
planned export of propaganda, information and entertainment
broadcasting. Thus the Department of Defense has a world-wide
network of thirty-eight television and over 200 radio transmit-
ters, and the great majority of its audience is non-American. The
United States Information Agency has transmitters and prepares
programmes for use in foreign countries: many of these pro-
grammes are not identiﬁed, when shown on foreign American-
controlled or American-sponsored stations, as USIA-originated.
institutions of the technology
35

In quantity this direct governmental intervention beyond its
frontiers is overshadowed by the dynamic export policies of the
broadcasting corporations, over a range from equipment and
management to programme sales. In more than ninety foreign
countries, the three leading corporations have subsidiaries,
stations and networking contracts; they are particularly strong in
Latin America, the Caribbean, Africa, Asia and the Middle East.
From this base there is continual pressure, some of it already
successful, to penetrate societies with developed broadcasting
systems, in which various forms of local governmental control
have prevented ordinary expansion. This pressure has included
arrangements with local groups seeking commercial broadcast-
ing, often requiring a change of national law. In a number of
cases, including some planned ‘pirate’ broadcasting – often rep-
resented in local terms as a few small independent operators
against the local state monopoly – the planning and ﬁnance have
come from the United States. Much of this penetration is seen
only in terms of the sale of programmes, which is indeed
important, representing the diﬀerence between proﬁt and loss
for all U.S. teleﬁlm production, and already, in some countries,
accounting for a signiﬁcant and in some cases a major part of all
television programming. But the expansion has to be seen also as
serving the international advertiser, for in a trading world dom-
inated by para-national companies and U.S. subsidiaries the pro-
vision of programmes and types of service which open the way
to international commercial advertising has this inevitable per-
spective. The ‘commercial’ character of television has then to be
seen at several levels: as the making of programmes for proﬁt in a
known market; as a channel for advertising; and as a cultural and
political form directly shaped by and dependent on the norms of
a capitalist society, selling both consumer goods and a ‘way of
life’ based on them, in an ethos that is at once locally generated,
by domestic capitalist interests and authorities, and internation-
ally organised, as a political project, by the dominant capitalist
institutions of the technology
36
www.ebook3000.com

power. It is then not too much to say that the general transition,
in the last twenty years, from what was normally a national and
state-controlled sound broadcasting to what are now, in world
terms, predominantly commercial television institutions, is a
consequence of this planned operation from the United States.
What surfaces in one country after another as a local argument,
and is quickly and persuasively described as a choice between
‘state monopoly’ and ‘independent broadcasting’, is in the
overwhelming majority of cases a put-up job by these American
interests, their local associates, and the powerful international
advertising companies.
The terms of the older argument about broadcasting insti-
tutions are then not only inadequate but sometimes positively
misleading. In the developing world old ﬁlms and television
programmes are in eﬀect dumped, at prices which make any
local production seem ludicrously expensive by comparison. A
market is then created in which available entertainment, adver-
tising and general political and cultural inﬂuence come in a
single ‘cheap’ package. In developed countries, including those
in which primary television production is at a higher level than
in the United States itself, the graded export price is still favour-
ably competitive with primary national production, and the
degree of dependence on advertising revenue, within a broad-
casting institution, tends to settle how far the door will be
opened to this kind of commercial penetration. Where any par-
ticular nation holds out there are internal campaigns for a
change of policy, in which local branches of the international
advertising agencies are heavily involved, and, as has been noted,
there are planned frontier stations and pirate transmitters, aim-
ing to ‘capture’ domestic audiences. Even in Britain, where
another tradition was strong, the campaigns to commercialise
both television and radio have eventually succeeded, at least
in part. In many other countries, and especially in small-
and medium-scale societies which ﬁnd a primary-producing
institutions of the technology
37

television service expensive, the eﬀective penetration is now vir-
tually complete.
It is then in this precise context that new and very power-
ful technical means are being introduced: especially satellite
television transmission. It is clear that in some societies, with
established national traditions and institutions in modern broad-
casting, certain controls against the global commercialisation of
television have some chance of success. But throughout the
monopoly-capitalist period of communications institutions it
has been evident that the level of viability, the scale-mark of
independent survival, rises continuously, and at times dramatic-
ally, as the general market is extended. Just as a nineteenth-
century popular newspaper, in Britain, could survive and
ﬂourish with a circulation of 100,000, but is now in danger at
anything less than 2,000,000, so a television service, in condi-
tions of uncontrolled and therefore unequal competition, may
pass very quickly from healthy viability to chronic ﬁnancial
crisis. It may then, if nothing else is done, either surrender to the
general trend or, more subtly, change itself internally to survive
within the trend: a change which will have its clear origins in
the general pressures but which will usually be rationalised as
some form of independent ‘modernisation’.
I shall return to these questions about institutions, especially
as they relate to the new and emerging technologies, in Chapter
6. Meanwhile, to regain the substance of the medium, we need
to look more closely at television as a cultural form.
institutions of the technology
38
www.ebook3000.com

3
THE FORMS OF TELEVISION
There is a complicated interaction between the technology of
television and the received forms of other kinds of cultural and
social activity. Many people have said that television is essentially
a combination and development of earlier forms: the newspaper,
the public meeting, the educational class, the theatre, the cin-
ema, the sports stadium, the advertising columns and billboards.
The development is complicated in some cases by the earlier
precedents of radio, and these will need to be considered. Yet it
is clearly not only a question of combination and development.
The adaptation of received forms to the new technology has led
in a number of cases to signiﬁcant changes and to some real
qualitative diﬀerences. It is worth looking at each of the main
forms with these questions in mind. But when we have done
this, it will be necessary also to look at those forms which are
not in any obvious way derivative, and which can usefully be
seen as the innovating forms of television itself.

A. COMBINATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF
EARLIER FORMS
(i) News
The newspaper had gone through all its major phases of devel-
opment before the coming of broadcast news. In the early days
of radio there was virtually absolute dependence on existing
press agencies for the collection of news. Techniques of broad-
cast presentation were at ﬁrst the simple transmission of news
agency dispatches read by ‘announcers’ who were assumed to be
at once authoritative and neutral, though the real ‘authority’ and
‘neutrality’ were those of the agencies. The use of special broad-
casting reporters and correspondents developed mainly during
the Second World War. By the time a majority television service
was being developed, there were speciﬁc internal facilities for
news gathering and news presentation, although the general
news agencies continued to be used.
Relations between the broadcast news bulletin and the
newspaper, as forms, are then complicated. They can best be
analysed under four headings: sequence; priorities; presentation;
visualisation.
(a) Sequence
The printed page of the ordinary newspaper had become, before
television, a mosaic of items. Earlier newspapers had followed a
certain sequence, by column division. But even before this div-
ision had been broken down to the mosaic layout which was
common in most papers from the 1920s, the act of reading a
newspaper page involved a glancing over or scanning, and then,
within the terms of the newspaper’s selection, the reader’s selec-
tion of items on which to concentrate. Since particular pages of
the paper were specialised to certain kinds of news and related
the forms of television
40
www.ebook3000.com

material, any particular mosaic page was then itself selected,
before scanning within the mosaic began.
Some elements of this virtually simultaneous presentation of a
number of news items were technically possible in broadcasting,
and have to a limited extent been used. But the simplest mode of
presentation in broadcasting was linear in time. In British radio
it was only during the war that what were still called, from
newspaper practice, ‘headlines’ were assembled at the beginning
of the bulletin. This kind of headlining is now widely used in
television newscasts, although not universally. Repetition of the
main points at the end of the bulletin is again common but not
universal. Yet whether or not these techniques of attention and
repetition are locally employed, the main form of television
news is, within its own structure, linear.
(b) Priorities
Linear presentation has necessary eﬀects on questions of priority
between news items. The mosaic newspaper page has its own
techniques of catching attention and indicating relative import-
ance, but these are to a certain extent subject to the reader’s
capacity to ﬁnd his or her own way through. The broadcast news
bulletin thus tends to retain more apparent editorial control of
priority and attention.
It is impossible to estimate the eﬀects of this without looking
at what had happened to priorities in diﬀerent kinds of news-
paper. In Britain, for example, a comparison of lead stories (see
Communications, 1966, pp. 76–82) showed marked variations of
priorities in diﬀerent kinds of paper. A further comparison with
broadcast bulletins showed that broadcasting priorities were, on
the whole, those of the minority press. In the United States the
press situation is diﬀerent, but the general point still holds. The
worldview indicated by the selection and relative priority of
news items is very similar as between broadcast bulletins and
the forms of television
41

those minority newspapers which are written by and for the
relatively highly educated. The distribution of interests in the
more popular press, which supposedly follows the interests of
its characteristic readers, is hardly to be found anywhere in
broadcast news, although very similar deﬁnitions of what is
popular and interesting tend to predominate in the non-news
programming.
The eﬀects of this are complex. It can be said that the broad-
cast bulletins impose certain priorities, and that among these are
characteristic deﬁnitions of high politics, with a centralising
emphasis on the acts and words of political leaders. Yet, though
this is in general true, the national television news bulletins
provide more public news than all but a very few newspapers.
Moreover, they provide this to a very wide public, in ways that
would not happen if we had only a ‘minority’ and a ‘popular’
press.
(c) Presentation
In Britain until the Second World War, the broadcast announcer
was an anonymous authoritative (ruling-class) voice. Personal
identiﬁcation was introduced only as a security measure under
the threat of invasion and capture of the stations. In television
personal identiﬁcation has become more marked, though in BBC
bulletins it is still only lightly emphasised, while in ITN bulletins
the formula is ‘the news with . . .’ and then the names of the
readers.1 This is also a common formula in American newscasts,
but then there is additionally, as in most American television,
immediate self-introduction.
Through any of these formulas the visual presence of a famil-
iar presenter is bound to aﬀect the whole communication situ-
ation. The BBC, at one extreme, tries continually to limit the
presenter to a reading function, going out of its way to show
him being handed papers or with the news-writers visible
the forms of television
42
www.ebook3000.com

behind him. At the other extreme, in the mixed bulletins of local
and national and international news in American television,
there is a studied informality which is meant to create the eﬀect
of a group of men telling you things they happen to know. Even
in the network bulletins there is less emphasis on a script and
more on a personal presentation. Further, in the network bul-
letins, one of the presenters normally ends with a commentary,
of an editorial kind, including relatively controversial points. In
BBC television, commentary is strictly separated from the pre-
senter, and specialist ‘correspondents’ are introduced to give
what is in eﬀect – though local neutrality is usually maintained –
an editorial interpretation or point of view.
Most television news now includes a large number of reports
from outside the studio, by reporters on the spot or in the wings.
There is a variation of formula here also. In BBC bulletins it is
‘our reporter’ but it is ‘his report’. In many American bulletins
there is a closer identiﬁcation between the central presentation
and the substance of the distant report. This diﬀerence is quite
marked in matters of commentary and interpretation, which at
least formally, in BBC bulletins, are placed as the views of a
section editor or correspondent. Though these diﬀerences are
quite important, most of them are in practice overridden by the
generalised authority of the presentation as a whole.
(d) Visualisation
Much of the real content of news has been altered by the facts of
visual presentation. In certain kinds of report there seems to be
an absolute diﬀerence between the written or spoken account
and the visual record with commentary. It is true that much can
be altered by selection and editing, but of course this is true also
of any observer’s account. It can be reasonably argued that the
televisual impression of ‘seeing the events for oneself’ is at times
and perhaps always deceptive. It matters very much, for example,
the forms of television
43

in the visual reporting of a civil disturbance, whether ‘the cam-
era’ is looking over the heads of the police being stoned or over
the heads of the demonstrators being tear-gassed. The former is
much more common, and the ‘middle’ view, which is often
attempted in commentary, is rarely visually present – a fact
which can make the ‘neutrality’ of the commentary essentially
abstract. An intermediary is always present if not visible, and this
can be more misleading than situations in which awareness of an
intermediary is inevitable. Such awareness, however, is com-
monly absorbed, to an important degree, by habituation and
routine, and indeed there are many events which come through
the television camera with less processing or ﬁltration than in
any other medium. This has had important eﬀects in the report-
ing of wars, natural disasters and famines. Its eﬀect has also been
important in the matter of political leaders, who are now less
protected by standard communication formulas such as ‘the
President said . . .’, and who, in spite of many consequent
devices, are more regularly visible as whole persons.2 This has
had complicated and controversial eﬀects on many of the styles
of politics. However, when we add the general facts of visuali-
sation to the altered selections and priorities of the broadcast
bulletins, we have to see a qualitative diﬀerence, and almost cer-
tainly a qualitative gain, in television as compared with printed
news. Print, of course, retains its incomparable advantages as a
way of collecting, recalling and checking information.
One signiﬁcant diﬀerence between current British and Ameri-
can television should be noted in this context. British news bul-
letins now make much more intensive use of visual material
beyond the immediate presentation. Indeed it is sometimes pos-
sible to feel, in British bulletins, that the item is there, or has that
priority, because the ﬁlm has come in. Or, if the ﬁlm is not
available, still photographs of people and events in the news ﬁll
the whole screen while much of the report is being read. In
American bulletins, by contrast, the most obvious opportunities
the forms of television
44
www.ebook3000.com

for this kind of visualisation – whether by ﬁlm or stills – are
often as it were deliberately ignored. The main visual experience
of an American news bulletin is of the news-readers themselves,
with very simple visual background signs, and in current prac-
tice a signiﬁcantly lower proportion of ﬁlmed reports, especially
in regional news. Accustomed to British television news presen-
tation, I felt after watching some weeks of American television
bulletins that some new term was needed: perhaps ‘visual radio’.
I do not know all the reasons for this diﬀerence. There are some
obvious problems of physical distance. But in regional and local
bulletins many obvious opportunities for visual presentation are
not taken. It presumably makes the news service very much
cheaper to run. On the other hand, where there has been good
visual reporting, as in some of the powerful ﬁlm from Vietnam,
the eﬀect is proportionately very much more striking.3
(ii) Argument and discussion
There can be little doubt that broadcasting as a whole, and televi-
sion especially, has markedly broadened the forms of public
argument and discussion. All earlier forms, in large-scale so-
cieties, were more limited in character and scale. The sermon, the
lecture, the political address were obviously more limited in
immediate points of view. Only in certain favourable situations
was there that regular choice and variety of viewpoints which is
now common within even the limited range of current televi-
sion argument. Public debates and meetings, or sessions of local
and national government, reached many fewer people. Only a
few newspapers, and some minority magazines, opened their
columns to a wide range of controversy.
Yet it has been diﬃcult to acknowledge this qualitative change
because of the various restrictions still placed on the full range of
argument. In some services there is a regular and virtually abso-
lute exclusion of oppositional or minority views. When there is
the forms of television
45

any change in this, as in Prague with Dubcek, the extent of the
repression but also of the consequent potential for liberation can
be seen as remarkable. It is then useful to compare the situation
in relatively open societies such as Britain and the United States.
At ﬁrst glance, American television is much more open to public
argument. There is a crucial diﬀerence in the fact that many
public proceedings in the United States, from Senate hearings
to local schools’ boards, are broadcast or televised, whereas in
Britain there have been repeated refusals to allow the televising
or broadcasting of any parliamentary proceedings.4 Again, there
is the American use of the ‘free-speech message’, which usually
comes among the commercials. This excludes certain categories
of message which are subject to law or formal vote, but includes
points of view about a wide range of public actions and atti-
tudes, given on the speaker’s own responsibility. Again, there is
rather more public questioning of local elected oﬃcials on
American television, and this includes sharp controversy
between them – a rare public situation in Britain. What can be
said in general is that the transmissive elements of television are
more widely used in American practice: an interpretation in
terms of access.
In British television, where this kind of access and entry is
much less common, there is on the other hand a much wider
area of specially arranged discussion and argument. It is not only
that there are many more controversial features and docu-
mentaries. It is that in prime time on majority channels there are
many more discussion and argument programmes. In current
(1973) American television most such programmes – and there
are really not many – are in public service broadcasting, and are
characteristically presented through the personality of an inter-
viewer or interrogator (Bill Moyers’ Journal; William Buckley’s Firing
Line, The Reasoner Report, Sixty Minutes). The British range, from Pan-
orama and Twenty-four Hours or Midweek to Man Alive, This Week and
World in Action, is not only very much wider; it is also more
the forms of television
46
www.ebook3000.com

freestanding – more consistently an arranged service rather than
transmitted access. This can be seen more clearly if we separate
out the kind of programme which is most directly a continu-
ation of an earlier form of public argument, the arranged and
formal debate – in the United States The Advocates; in Britain
several short-running experiments. Here the formality of the
presentation as debate, with a chairman or moderator and cer-
tain declared rules of procedure, makes the special nature of the
discussion explicit. In most British television discussions and
arguments there are indeed some ground-rules, expressed in
abstraction in the concepts of ‘fairness’ and ‘balance’, but these
are normally dissolved into the actual presentation, and given
little or no emphasis. What emerges, or is meant to emerge, is a
representation of the state of ‘informed opinion’, with its own
internal diﬀerences and nuances. There is then the paradox that
though in British television there is more sustained and on the
whole more serious discussion of public aﬀairs than in Ameri-
can television, its characteristic process is at once consensual and
substitutional. Certain producers try, at times successfully, to
break this mode, and to develop it towards confrontation or the
presentation of irreconcilable diﬀerences. But the majority tone
and mode remain consensual, and the ﬁgure of the interrogator
or the chairman develops into the ﬁgure of the true ‘moderator’.
There is then the question of the relation of these processes of
public argument and discussion to the orthodox representative
political process. The most visible relation is one of tension. In
the United States, the Administration openly resents the power of
the networks to present arguments from an independent pos-
ition. In Britain there are continual allegations of party bias, this
way or that. In relation to national leaders, American television
still largely depends on or is limited to the form of the press
conference, where the leader takes questions from the ﬂoor, and
a status relation is then contained within the communication
format. In Britain, by contrast, there are many more highlighted
the forms of television
47

interviews and direct interrogations, often of a critical kind,
where leader and interviewer are given positions of apparent
equality. Directly transmitted public addresses, by leaders, are of
course also used, in both kinds of television, on especially
important occasions.
Yet there is quite another dimension of relationship between
television discussion and the orthodox political process. To an
important extent these uses of television serve to mediate the
political process to its real constituencies. It is in this sense an
apparently public form, in which there is reactive and speculative
discussion of a decision-making process which is in real terms
displaced or even absent. The exceptions to this are the direct
American transmissions of public hearings and some of the dir-
ect British interrogations of Ministers. In these cases the public
remains, evidently, beyond the screen; we are watching a pro-
ceeding which we can see as separate from us; we can then
independently, though in eﬀect silently, respond. But what more
often happens is that a public process, at the level of response
and interrogation, is represented for us by the television inter-
mediaries. Not only the decisions and events, but what are
intended to be the shaping responses to them, come through in
a prepared and mediated form. These are apparently responses
by ‘our’ representatives, though we have not selected them (as
selected politicians, for their own defensive purposes, are often
quick to point out). In any large and complex society this medi-
ation of representation is especially important, since in its speed
and general availability it tends towards monopoly of the
reactive process, and is no less a monopoly when it includes an
internally selected balance and diﬀerentiation of opinion. This is
especially important in that it reinforces tendencies within the
orthodox process of political representation, where representa-
tives, between elections, acquire and claim a certain absolute
character; if we do not like them, and through them their policies,
we can change them at the appointed times. There is then, in these
the forms of television
48
www.ebook3000.com

diﬀerent ways, a displacement and attenuation of representation
which can be felt, at times, as its absence. Oppositional elements
who are outside the existing structures of representation have to
ﬁnd other ways to present their views: by petition or lobbying,
directed towards existing representatives; or with much more
diﬃculty, by actions and demonstrations directed towards the
already ‘represented’ people. Characteristically, and in direct
relation to the mediating nature of current television, many such
eﬀorts are governed by the attempt to become real – that is to
say, to become present – in television terms. This is obviously
true of the march or the ‘happening’, to attract the cameras. But
there is then an obvious contrast, of a structural kind, between
the apparently reasoned responses of the arranged studio discus-
sion and the apparently unreasoned, merely demonstrative,
responses of the arranged and marginal visual event. This is in its
turn often mediated as a contrast between serious informed
responses and emotional simplifying responses.
A powerful centralising medium such as television can then,
in much the same way as the representative but centralising
processes of government, exhaust and even claim to exhaust the
necessarily manifold and irregular processes of true public
argument. Orthodox politics exhausts it at a formally represen-
tative level. Television exhausts it at a reactive level. In relatively
closed societies, this exhaustion can be almost total. In relatively
open societies, it remains a tendency, but a very powerful
tendency, since its means of arrangement and access are funded
and permanently available, while alternative means are depend-
ent on continual creation and recreation and in any case ordinar-
ily lack its reach. The best television arguments and discussions
are in fact those which open themselves towards people not
assumed in advance to be already represented; for example,
BBC 2’s Open Door. Some of the worst, for all their internal skills,
are those which simulate a representation by their own criteria. When
this is, however statically, an attempted representation of public
the forms of television
49

opinion, it can often be justiﬁed, within current institutions and
techniques. But the criterion is more often likely to be a repre-
sentation of informed opinion, and here a distinct social structure
produces a distinguishable television form.
‘Informed’ is sometimes interpreted as ‘having publicly
attested skills’. It is more often interpreted as ‘having access to
real sources’. What then materialises is in eﬀect an anteroom to a
court: ‘informed opinion’ is the White House correspondent,
the Lobby correspondent, the political editor, the ﬁnancial
journalist. These are literally mediators, since their skills and
knowledge (and therefore the dimensions of their discussions)
are determined by the fact of access. Around the centralised and
only intermittently visible processes of decision there develops
what is at worst a session of political gossip, at best a session of
café politics. Political argument is not so much heard as
overheard, and the relation of these mediators to the centres of
decision is duplicated in the relation of the audience to the
mediators. This most powerful medium of public presentation is
then in large part limited to what is at every level an intended
mediation. The shock of vitality, when other conceptions of
argument and discussion occasionally break through, is the best
evidence of the deadness of the familiar and now orthodox
routines of displacement.
(iii) Education
The lecture, the lesson, the demonstration and the class have all
been taken over from educational practice into television. In
many cases the possibilities of the medium have been extensively
realised. Large audiences can be reached by exceptional lecturers
and teachers. Visual demonstration of rare or complex material
has markedly improved presentation of aspects of the physical
sciences, of medicine, of geography, and of elements of drama
and history. A developed educational service, such as the BBC or
the forms of television
50
www.ebook3000.com

IBA or American Public Television schools programmes, or the
British Open University, is a remarkable demonstration of some
of the true possibilities of television. There are some obvious
problems: the technical diﬃculties of clariﬁcation and question-
ing, and the continuing diﬃculties of making the student’s own
work active. It is signiﬁcant that these have been best met when
television has not attempted to exhaust the teaching process, but
has been oﬀered as an aid, in planned relation to the work of
classroom teachers, or in planned relation to other kinds of
material (as in the printed units of the Open University). These
are uses which depend on and relate to an already organised
educational programme. Yet the reach of television has under-
standably prompted other kinds of educational work: some of it
aimed at speciﬁc groups (language teaching for minority ethnic
groups in the United States or for immigrants in Britain); some
aimed at professional and vocational groups; and then an
indeterminate area in which educational broadcasting is dis-
tinguished from entertainment broadcasting, though it is tied to
no speciﬁc group or course. In this last and very important area
the forms used have often speciﬁcally and deliberately broken
away from received educational forms, and must be separately
considered.
(iv) Drama
There was a signiﬁcant development of radio drama in Britain,
especially in the War and post-War years, and at its best this was
something more than straight broadcast transmission of known
theatrical forms. Through the inter-War period there had been,
in the theatre, several short-lived experiments in more mobile
and ﬂexible dramatic structures, as alternatives to the drama
of the enclosed room which had been, since the 1880s, the
dominant theatrical form. The work of Sean O’Casey in The Silver
Tassie, of T. S. Eliot in Murder in the Cathedral, and the important
the forms of television
51

experiments of the Group and Unity Theatres had made some
real progress in experimental dramatic structures, but with
only intermittent and short-run establishment in conventional
theatres. Sound broadcasting, for the ﬁrst time, gave some regu-
lar base for this kind of experiment. Much radio drama was still
of an orthodox theatrical kind, but by the early 1950s there was a
signiﬁcant body of new work, best seen in the broadcast plays of
Louis MacNeice and, above all, in Dylan Thomas’s Under Milk
Wood. The new concept of a play for voices surpassed, in many
instances, the limiting assumptions of an enclosed stage-as-
room theatre. A new mobility in time and space, and a new
ﬂexibility in movement between kinds of dramatic speech – and
especially between the conventions of ‘spoken’ and ‘unspoken’
thought and feeling – were important real gains. What could be
seen from an orthodox theatrical position as the limitations of
the broadcasting medium became opportunities for diﬀerent
kinds of dramatic creation.
With the coming of television as a majority service the situ-
ation again changed. It was possible to transmit performances of
an orthodox theatrical kind, and it could be argued that the
television play was the ultimate realisation of the original natur-
alist convention: the drama of the small enclosed room, in
which a few characters lived out their private experience of an
unseen public world. Since a major structure of feeling, in the art
of the period, was in any case of this kind, it is not surprising
that many television plays reproduced this assumption of the
nature of representative reality. This was a drama of the box in
the same fundamental sense as the naturalist drama had been the
drama of the framed stage. The technical possibilities that were
commonly used corresponded to this structure of feeling: the
enclosed internal atmosphere; the local interpersonal conﬂict;
the close-up on private feeling. Indeed these emphases could be
seen as internal properties of the medium itself, when in fact
they were a selection of some of its properties according to the
the forms of television
52
www.ebook3000.com

dominant structure of feeling. Powerful work was then done on
these bearings, from Reginald Rose’s Twelve Angry Men (U.S.A.,
1954), through a whole range of isolating and enclosing plays to
a late case like Ingmar Bergman’s The Lie.
Yet for more than half a century there had been an especially
interesting and complex relation between dramatic structures
and the new technological means of production. It is signiﬁcant
that the most advanced drama in Europe in the 1890s – that of
Strindberg moving towards The Road to Damascus and the Chamber
plays – was employing dramatic means that were beyond the
reproduction of an observed and static external reality. Indeed it
is one of the most striking instances of the complicated relations
between new forms of experience and new kinds of technology
that Strindberg was experimenting with moving dramatic
images in the same decade in which, in quite another environ-
ment, the pioneers of motion pictures were discovering some of
the technical means that would eventually make this kind of
dramatic imagery possible and in the end even commonplace.
Strindberg was trying, against many of the limitations of the
theatre stage, to create – as in Dreamplay – a ﬂow of images which
would be capable of realising some of the intense particular
worlds seen under stress, in conﬂict, in personal isolation, in
dream or in nightmare. In the experimental ﬁlms of the 1920s,
and especially in Germany, there was a direct continuity from
these experiments by Strindberg, with new techniques that
made possible the central mobility, fragmentation or dissolution
of things seen, things remembered, things imagined. But in the
1920s, also, there was another kind of dramatic mobility. The
enclosed room of the naturalist drama – the world of the private
family or group – was exposed, by new techniques, to the public
pressures that were seen as determining it: not just as messages
from the streets or the stock exchanges or the battleﬁelds, but as
the dramatic inclusion of just these elements, in an indivisible
dramatic action. Meanwhile the signiﬁcant development of
the forms of television
53

large-scale public dramatic action, in the cinema from Griﬃth
and Eisenstein, had transformed our whole sense of dramatic
reality and possibility.
By the mid-1950s – that is to say, by the period in which
television drama became a majority form – each of these ten-
dencies had gone through major developments in the cinema
itself. Yet in some ways television was now replacing the cinema
as the major dramatic institution. Public attendances at the cin-
ema were falling very sharply, while in Britain, for example, by
the 1960s, there could be television audiences of ten or twelve
million for a single play. The new possibilities of television
drama brought a signiﬁcant creative response. The work of
Paddy Chayefsky, from Marty in 1953, and of Reginald Rose and
others in the middle and late 1950s, was the most creative con-
tribution in all American broadcasting. In substance and in
method – the exploring ‘eye of the camera’, the feel for everyday
ordinary life, the newly respected rhythms of the speech of work
and the streets and of authentic privacy (what was later
described ominously, though it was intended as compliment, as
‘dialogue as if wire-tapped’) – this new television drama stimu-
lated similar work elsewhere, though in the United States,
because of sponsorship diﬃculties, it was shamefully cut short.
The BBC’s Wednesday Play series, in the mid-1960s, is the most
notable British example of a similar phase of creative innovation
and exploration. Though the surviving theatres still commanded
and received cultural prestige, much of the best new work of the
younger dramatists was by the mid-1960s in Britain going
straight into television. It was predominantly a radical dramatic
movement, drawing on and developing two major kinds of
possibility: the drama of internal dissolution (David Mercer’s In
Two Minds) and the drama of public action or public-and-private
tension (Dennis Potter’s Nigel Barton plays). John Hopkins’ quar-
tet, Talking to a Stranger, explored the possibility of alternating
viewpoints, in a family which was seen, in a sequence of four
the forms of television
54
www.ebook3000.com

plays, from the points of view of its four members. There was
also a signiﬁcant and controversial development of drama-
documentary: ‘social issues dramatised’ as it was ordinarily put;
the best-known example is Jeremy Sandford’s Cathy Come Home.
All this work was uneven, but the vitality of American televi-
sion drama in the 1950s and of British television drama in
the 1960s was by any standards remarkable. In Britain by the
early 1970s it had not wholly died away; there were still many
important local examples. But, as earlier in the United States,
though within a very diﬀerent immediate institution, several of
the most creative producers and dramatists were pushed out to
the margins. For it had been also, signiﬁcantly, a social move-
ment. The existence of very large audiences, for disturbing and
controversial plays of this kind, was in many ways embarrassing
to the broadcasting authorities and to orthodox public opinion.
The single play, even when presented in a general series, was
said, in a new conventional wisdom, to be ‘diﬃcult to arrange’.
Under this and other kinds of pressure, a momentum was lost,
perhaps only temporarily.
Yet at certain levels the whole situation of drama had already
been transformed. What had ordinarily been, in the theatres, a
minority art, was now a major public form. The cinema had
preceded television in this, but in its high costs and in its ten-
dencies to monopoly had been checked by deep social and eco-
nomic forces. The comparatively low-cost original television
play, which could quite quickly be shown to a very large
audience, represented a new dimension of cultural possibility.
Yet the phenomenon of television drama has also to be looked
at in quite another way. In most parts of the world, since the
spread of television, there has been a scale and intensity of dra-
matic performance which is without any precedent in the his-
tory of human culture. Many though not all societies have a long
history of dramatic performance of some kind; but character-
istically, in most societies, it has been occasional or seasonal. In
the forms of television
55

the last few centuries regular performances have been available
in large cities and resorts. But there has never been a time, until
the last ﬁfty years, when a majority of any population had regu-
lar and constant access to drama, and used this access. Even
within the last half-century, at the peak of popularity of the
cinema, ﬁgures for Britain indicate an average of less than one
attendance a week per head of the adult population. It is diﬃcult
to get any precise comparative ﬁgures for television. But it seems
probable that in societies like Britain and the United States more
drama is watched in a week or weekend, by the majority of
viewers, than would have been watched in a year or in some
cases a lifetime in any previous historical period. It is not
uncommon for the majority of viewers to see, regularly, as much
as two or three hours of drama, of various kinds, every day. The
implications of this have scarcely begun to be considered. It is
clearly one of the unique characteristics of advanced industrial
societies that drama as an experience is now an intrinsic part of
everyday life, at a quantitative level which is so very much
greater than any precedent as to seem a fundamental qualitative
change. Whatever the social and cultural reasons may ﬁnally be,
it is clear that watching dramatic simulation of a wide range of
experiences is now an essential part of our modern cultural
pattern. Or, to put it categorically, most people spend more time
watching various kinds of drama than in preparing and eating
food.
It is easy to see the eﬀect of this new and extraordinary scale
of dramatic forms. Beyond the characteristics of the single tele-
vision play, which have already been discussed, there is the signiﬁ-
cant and indeed central fact of the television series or serial.
These have precedents in the cinema and in radio, and an earlier
precedent in the serialised ﬁction of the late eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries. But their recent proliferation has been vast.
The serial is the more familiar form: a dramatised action divided
into episodes. Most of the cultural precedents are for this form.
the forms of television
56
www.ebook3000.com

The series has fewer precedents, and these are mainly in later
nineteenth-century and twentieth-century ﬁction, especially in
certain categories: detective stories, westerns, children’s stories.
Here the continuity is not of an action but of one or more
characters.
It is clear that both serials and series have advantages for pro-
gramme planners: a time-slot, as it is signiﬁcantly called, can be
ﬁlled for a run of weeks, and in their elements of continuity the
serial and the series encourage attachment to a given station or
channel. Many television dramatists now write episodes for
serials or series more often than they write single plays. They
then usually ﬁnd themselves writing within an established for-
mation of situation and leading characters, in what can be
described as a collective but is more often a corporate dramatic
enterprise. Certain formulas on which the continuity depends
are then the limiting conventions within which they must work.
It is interesting to notice the highly specialised character of
most of these serials. Police and private detectives, ranchers and
cowboys, doctors and nurses, make up the overwhelming major-
ity of the people seen. All these were already popular ﬁctional
types, before television. Yet it is doubtful whether, before the
epoch of television serials and series, anything like the current
proportion of dramatic attention to crime and illness had ever
existed.
Yet there have been interesting serials of other kinds: in eﬀect
successors to the widely ranging realist and naturalist works of
an earlier ﬁctional period. In Britain Coronation Street is a distanced
and simpliﬁed evocation and prolongation of a disappearing
culture: the Northern urban back-streets of the depression and
its immediate aftermath. More serious engagements with the
run of ordinary experience, like A Family at War, have again often
depended on an essential retrospect, and serials like The New-
comers, set in a New Town, proved more diﬃcult to establish.
One of the more successful attempts to engage with the run
the forms of television
57

of contemporary majority experience was Irish television’s The
Riordans.
Since their origins in commercial radio in the 1930s, many
serials have been dismissed as ‘soap opera’. Yet their persistence
and popularity is signiﬁcant, in a period in which, in so much
traditionally serious drama and ﬁction, there has been a wide-
spread withdrawal from general social experience. The serial as a
form now gets its prestige from dramatisation of well-known
works; in Britain signiﬁcantly oﬀered as ‘Classic Serials’, and
many of them re-broadcast in the United States, no less signiﬁ-
cantly, as ‘Masterpiece Theatre’. This attempted blending of
ﬁctional and dramatic forms is interesting in itself. But the cul-
tural importance of the serial, as an essentially new form, ought
not to be limited to this kind of traditional ratiﬁcation. Few
forms on television have the potential importance of the original
serial. If the form has been overlaid, understandably, by the ‘clas-
sic’ emphasis, and more generally by the stock formulas of crime
and illness, that is a particular cultural mediation, which it is
necessary to understand and look for ways beyond.
(v) Films
Widespread television came at a time when cinema attendances
were declining: this development was in general one of cause
and eﬀect. It was then obvious that one resource for television
programming was the huge repertory of already-made ﬁlms, and
– after some early competitive withholding – these increasingly
made their way into the schedules. They ﬁtted, exactly, the
model of broadcasting as the transmission of work which was
already available. Under the eﬀects of competition established
ﬁlm companies and centres eventually began making new ﬁlms
for television distribution.
But the media of ﬁlmscreen and television are only super-
ﬁcially similar. In basic composition there are many similarities,
the forms of television
58
www.ebook3000.com

but in transmission the results are radically diﬀerent. The size of
the screen is the most obvious factor. In certain situations this
diﬀerence of size can radically alter the eﬀect of the image,
though in other situations the viewer adjusts proportions for
himself. Certain spectacular eﬀects of battle and storm, of
monumentality, and of overpowering close-up are lost or dimin-
ished on the smaller screen.5 Even more signiﬁcant, perhaps, is
the diﬀerent light quality of the television as compared with the
ﬁlm screen. There are minor diﬀerences here between Britain
and the United States, since in Britain, in many people’s experi-
ence, the television screen is clearer, more luminous and sharper
in deﬁnition. But this is still a matter of degree within an over-
riding diﬀerence. Much of the light-and-shade composition of
the cinema ﬁlm is lost in the dimmer, more blurred and
more ﬂickering screen of the ordinary television set. The planes
and perspectives of much cinematic composition are again
characteristically ﬂattened.
The distribution of ﬁlms through the television networks is
then something diﬀerent in kind from their distribution
through cinemas. A degree of loss – in the case of some ﬁlms, a
quite unacceptable degree – is inevitable in present conditions.
Yet to most viewers the ﬁlm repertory of television is a welcome
resource. I have often been told in the United States, and have at
times felt myself, that the old movies were the only good reason
for watching television at all. It is not only that many ﬁlms hold
up very well in comparison with directly competitive original
television work, under present production conditions. It is also
that the availability of so wide a repertory – from the endless
stock features to the important ﬁlms and the masterpieces – is a
quite new situation for most viewers. The only comparable
access is in quite specialised repertory ﬁlm theatres and archives
in a very few cultural centres.
Yet this advantage, which ought to be seen as absolute, is limi-
ted by two factors: the technical limitations already mentioned,
the forms of television
59

and the character of most of the commercial distribution con-
tracts. Some of the technical disadvantages are unlikely to be
overcome, though there has been important work in adjust-
ments of the speed of frames, and in transfer through special
lens systems from ﬁlm to videotape. The size of domestic
screens remains as a major problem, but this is in part a func-
tion of the individualised character of television viewing. Of
course a ﬁlm that we have seen on a cinema screen loses much
of its visual quality when we see it on the average television
screen. Yet, equally, most television productions gain enor-
mously when they are seen on the larger viewing screens
which are available within the broadcasting organisations. I
have seen a television feature, which I helped to make, in three
diﬀerent situations; on an editing machine, on a set in the
home, and on a large viewing screen. The diﬀerences were
extraordinary, and I found it signiﬁcant that the least satis-
factory experience was that of viewing on the ordinary set. Some
of what are now described broadly as the ‘technical limitations
of television as a medium’ are fundamentally related to the pat-
terns of technical use in the home-centred small-set distribution
system.
The problem about ﬁlm distribution contracts is similarly
related to the commercial character of the industry. What gets
sold is a package: of a particular studio, a particular category, a
particular director, a particular actor. Some of these packages are
compatible with a form of programming that would deserve the
title ‘repertory’. But others are clearly forms of dumping: in
order to get one or two ﬁlms, half a dozen others must be
bought; or in order to ﬁll a ‘time-slot’ otherwise unsaleable
material is indiﬀerently acquired. The eﬀects of this particular
system on the television transmission of ﬁlms have given the
whole arrangement a worse name than it deserves, especially in
the United States, where typical distribution (except on public
service channels) is in any case subject to the extraordinary
the forms of television
60
www.ebook3000.com

process of constant interruption by commercials and trailers.
This very speciﬁc social eﬀect, combined with the technical dif-
ﬁculties, has been built into popular generalisations about
‘movies on TV’ which in any real analysis must be taken back to
their speciﬁc and in some cases alterable factors. It is all the more
necessary to do this since, if some of the problems could be
solved, the ﬁlm could remain and could develop as an important
popular art. In a more common and fashionable perspective, in
recoil from the speciﬁc diﬃculties of current cinema and tele-
vision distribution, the past and future of the ﬁlm would be rele-
gated to minority cinemas and to the archives. Characteristically
– and with television seen as the enemy – there is much con-
temporary pressure for just this solution. But that kind of hiving-
oﬀ, whatever its local attractions, would be disastrous for the
future of our most popular modern art.
(vi) Variety
In orthodox cultural analysis there is a simple equation between
drama and theatre. But this was altered in our own century,
when drama was created also in ﬁlm, in radio and in television.
And before our own century there had been a signiﬁcant cultural
division, between what were called ‘legitimate’ and (if not
illegitimate) ‘variety’ theatres. This goes back, signiﬁcantly, to
the Restoration period in Britain; it bears many marks of a con-
sciously class-divided culture. Spectacle and the various forms of
pantomime, usually contrasted with ‘drama’ – though of course
with many mixed examples – are among its earliest forms. In the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries the variety theatre was
intensively developed, at several diﬀerent social levels. One of the
characteristic forms of the urban industrial development was the
music-hall, which in a very speciﬁc environment provided a mix
of singing, dancing, physical display and new kinds of comedy.
This cultural mix which developed in the variety theatres and
the forms of television
61

then the music-halls is in many ways the precedent for an
important part of television.
There was an element of participation in the music-halls if not
in the variety-theatres; in some cases people could meet, drink
and move about, as in earlier popular theatres; in many of the
music-halls there was lively and continuous response. But this
element of participation was only part of the new formation.
Equally important was the discovery of forms which presented
and interpreted the contemporary interests and experiences of
the new audiences. Most drama, in the legitimate theatres of the
period, was still not contemporary in apparent content and style,
and in any case ordinarily belonged to a diﬀerent level of social
life. The variety theatres and the music-halls included con-
temporary experiences and responses at least a generation before
the naturalist revolution in drama. Some of the material was
seen, from the beginning, as belonging to ‘low’ culture. But in
fact there was more signiﬁcant dramatic experience in early and
mid-nineteenth-century melodrama than in the ‘high’ drama of
the same period. In some variety sketches, burlesques, extrava-
ganzas and the like there was at least much more vitality. And in
the music-hall especially there emerged a generation of solo
performers whose line has since been unbroken: the performers
we call entertainers and comedians. Their songs, monologues,
sketches and routines have precedents in a long tradition of
comic acting, but their presentation as individuals was in eﬀect
new.
These forms had, from the beginning, a mixed quality. The
solo performer could be the man articulating elements of a new
social experience, through a speciﬁc characterisation. In this
respect there is a real continuity between an early music-hall
performer like Sam Hall and a radio and television comedian like
Tony Hancock.6 But the music-hall always included (and the
variety theatres were built on) articulations of a diﬀerent kind:
the tinsel-and-plush spectaculars, deliberately oﬀered to a
the forms of television
62
www.ebook3000.com

relatively drab or deprived audience: those glimpses of ‘high
life’, an expensively furnished display, which among the solo
performers are represented by the succession of ‘Champagne
Charlies’. In the physical displays of jugglers, acrobats, ventrilo-
quists and conjurers, all the traditional skills of professional
entertainers found a new home; from the music-halls to the
television screen is in these cases a true succession. But the
‘high-life’ displays are diﬀerent; they were designed on
the assumption of an audience which was on the outside look-
ing in, and increasingly what was shown was not an actual fash-
ionable life but, more interestingly, a spectacular exaggeration of
its external assets, and in the negotiable forms of tinsel and
sequins rather than, say, diamonds. This kind of display went
through Hollywood cinema in the 1930s and is still a signiﬁcant
part of television entertainment: obvious examples include
Liberace, most shows built around singers, and in Britain the
Black and White Minstrels.7
Solo performers of other kinds show direct continuities
between variety theatre or music-hall and contemporary televi-
sion. A signiﬁcant proportion of what might abstractly be classi-
ﬁed as television drama is composed in eﬀect of variety-theatre
sketches. Elements of melodrama have similarly been retained.
The satirical sketches and revues of little theatres and night-clubs
have found much wider audiences on television, though it is
interesting that their popularity has often led to authoritarian
pressure against them. Performers trained to variety-theatre and
music-hall tours found obvious diﬃculties in the transition to
broadcasting, if only because their material was used up more
quickly. But shows were built around them, and a new gener-
ation of variety writers came to stand behind them. Along with
popular drama and serials, these shows came to form the greater
part of majority television.
In most of these cases there has been an adaptation of older
forms to the altered technology and the altered relations with
the forms of television
63

audiences which television involved. But there are some other
cases: for example, the evolution of both the solo turn and the
variety sketch into ‘situation comedy’. In some of its forms this
is essentially unevolved, merely adapted. But in some very sig-
niﬁcant and popular cases, from Steptoe and Son to Till Death us do Part
and All in the Family, an eﬀectively new form has been created and
needs to be separately considered.
(vii) Sport
Television is said to be the medium and probably the cause of
‘spectator sport’, but this is a simpliﬁcation. There have always
been some kinds of spectator sport, from gladiators to bear-
baiting, and there is a real overlap between the circus – itself a
relatively modern form drawing upon older skills of physical
display and animal-training – and the variety theatre: an overlap
which is repeated in television. But ‘spectator sport’, as a concept
in relation to other kinds of game, is a more complex phenom-
enon. It is now often said that gladiators, bear-baiting, the skills
of the circus, are not ‘sport’ but ‘entertainment’. ‘Sport’ is a
description of other kinds of organised physical exercise: the
games of football, golf, tennis, and so on. In fact, the old basic
skills of running, jumping and throwing, generalised as athletics,
were in many earlier societies ‘spectator sports’ in the sense that
they formed the centre of organised festivals. Yet the develop-
ment of spectator sport in the modern sense belongs to an urban
industrial phase of culture. In Britain league football and the
more organised popular forms of horse-racing began in the
third quarter of the nineteenth century, and their development
and expansion are indices of the development of a new urban
leisure system.
Thus the extraordinary development of the many kinds of
professional spectator sports in the twentieth century antedates
broadcasting. Radio and television came to satisfy and extend an
the forms of television
64
www.ebook3000.com

already developed cultural habit. Yet, in the extension, there
were further eﬀects. Televised sport has an eﬀect on attendances
at minor sporting events, and in some cases is controlled for this
reason. In the last ten years, especially in golf and tennis, ﬁxtures
have increasingly been arranged for television, and this has had
important eﬀects on their internal and professional organisation,
among other things bringing players much higher fees.8 These
are the aspects stressed in criticism of television as an agency of
spectator sport and commercialism, and some of the eﬀects,
including those of sponsorship, are undoubtedly important. In a
number of cases, the old governing bodies of sports are being
challenged or displaced by the new international commercial
and sponsoring interests, with mixed eﬀects. The sport may be
better organised but it may also come to be associated with such
irrelevant or even contradictory interests as smoking: the
tobacco companies, responding to government controls on
cigarette advertising, have been signiﬁcantly active in sports
sponsorship. Yet we should also recognise that regular televising
of a wide range of sports has created new kinds of interest, not
only among spectators but among potential participants. There is
a large sub-culture of sporting gossip which takes a great deal of
television time but which was already basically present in news-
papers. The national and international sporting networks form a
social dimension of an increasingly signiﬁcant kind in urban
industrial culture. In all these tendencies, and in their essentially
varied eﬀects, television has been a powerful agency of certain
trends which were already active in industrial society, rather
than a distinctly formative element. At the same time, some of
the best television coverage of sport, with its detailed close-ups
and its variety of perspectives, has given us a new excitement
and immediacy in watching physical action, and even a new
visual experience of a distinct kind.
the forms of television
65

(viii) Advertising
It is often said that advertising is as old as urban society, and it
undoubtedly increased in the expanding trade of early capitalist
societies. Yet there was a qualitative change at a much later date:
in Britain in the late nineteenth century, related primarily to
corporate developments in production and distribution, and to
the attempt, following major trade crises, to organise rather than
simply supply or inform a market. In newspapers, and on hoard-
ings and billboards, advertising was already a major feature
before the beginning of broadcasting. In some societies, such as
the United States, it became the feature around which radio and
television were organised, as well as the main source by which
they were ﬁnanced. In Britain it was as late as the 1950s in
television, and the early 1970s in radio, that advertising became
a feature of broadcasting. What in the United States was seen as a
central element, determining certain qualities of the media, can
be seen by this contrast to be a feature not of broadcasting itself
but of its uses in a speciﬁc society.
The sponsorship of programmes by advertisers has an eﬀect
beyond the separable announcement and recommendation of a
brand name. It is, as a formula of communication, an intrinsic
setting of priorities: a partisan indication of real social sources.
In some American series the advertising agency takes part in the
selection and development of ideas and scripts, and this works
both as a positive inﬂuence in content, and as a negative inﬂu-
ence against certain themes and ideas. Again, to see international
news brought by courtesy of a toothpaste is not to see separable
elements, but the shape of a dominant cultural form. The in-
sertion of advertisements in unsponsored programmes is a dif-
ferent formula; it has had, as we shall see, extraordinary eﬀects
on television as a sequential experience, and has created quite
new visual rhythms. Indeed it is possible to see television of this
kind as a sequence in which the advertisements are integral
the forms of television
66
www.ebook3000.com

rather than as a programme interrupted by advertisements. This
question will be discussed in more detail later.
Many television advertisements, especially on local and
regional channels, are of an old kind: speciﬁc announcements
with various styles of recommendation or invitation. Networked
advertising is diﬀerent; it contains some information but it
draws on these other uses of the medium:
(a) rapidly dramatised situations, of an apparently general kind,
in which the governing response – to pain, to anxiety, to the
need to enhance attractiveness or pleasure – is sharply spe-
cialised to a brand product. Heavily concentrated on cos-
metics, packaged foods and (more heavily in the United
States than in Britain) patent drugs and medicines, it inter-
acts through its styles with the kinds of drama – one
might also say, the kinds of human simulation – which are
common in ‘programme’ material.
(b) entertainment techniques, current styles of singing and
dancing, which are reshaped to product recommendations
and associations.
(c) picture-sequences of sport, leisure and travel, within which
the product is inserted.
(d) the use of television performers, as themselves or in their
character parts, to recommend products, or to be shown
using them.
The real continuities which exist between print and poster
advertising and television advertising certainly need to be
stressed. There are common elements of prestige recommenda-
tion and of emotional displacement (of a need or an anxiety or a
fear or a wish) to a brand of product. But in television com-
mercials there are powerful new elements of visual and aural
emphasis, which can be fully understood only if their connec-
tion and interaction with non-advertising television material is
the forms of television
67

recognised and emphasised. The reduction of various life styles
and characteristic situations to fast-acting televisual conventions
is thus a feature not only of commercials but of the kind of
television within which they are important. The attachment of
these conventions to a range of products can be separately ana-
lysed, but the particular specialisations to products and brands
are in the end less important than the common conventional
mode within which the deﬁnitions of need, satisfaction and
anxiety are quite generally made. And these are evidence of the
character of a dominant culture, in which needs and satisfactions
are mediated, over a very wide range, in terms of commodities,
rather than of a separable and marginal commercial enterprise.
Because of the sequential and integrating characteristics of tele-
vision in almost all its existing uses and systems, this organic
relationship between commercials and other kinds of material is
much more evident than at any point in earlier systems of adver-
tising, and television advertising is in this sense qualitatively
diﬀerent from press and poster and isolated display advertising
in any period (though the new relationship has been imitated in
some recent colour magazines).
(ix) Pastimes
A surprisingly large amount of television, though more in the
United States than in Britain, consists of programmed versions of
earlier forms of game and pastime. Several parlour games which
had in eﬀect disappeared have been restructured as television
shows, and use has been made of every kind of quiz and guess-
ing game. In many cases the change has consisted almost wholly
of public presentation of what was formerly a private group or
family activity. The new features are the presenter (who has
some precedents in the older masters of ceremonies) and, most
signiﬁcantly, the greatly increased prizes. There is a direct cul-
tural connection between the ethos and the conventions of
the forms of television
68
www.ebook3000.com

many commercials and these usually simple games played for
expensive prizes or quite large sums of money. The games and
pastimes of real groups are projected and enlarged as conven-
tions of insigniﬁcant competition but now signiﬁcant acquisition.
But there have been other and deeper changes. Shows like The
Dating Game, for example, are conventionalised speculative mim-
ings of various kinds of personal relationships: between pro-
spective partners, husbands and wives, parents and children. The
ordinary processes of human understanding, judgement and
choice are turned into projected games for the entertainment of
others: in some cases light-heartedly, as in some other and
earlier social forms; in a signiﬁcant number of cases in quite
alienated ways, as the relationship is made into the material of
deliberate embarrassment or prospective acquisition. There was
an extreme case of this kind in a short-lived San Francisco
programme which was in eﬀect (since it used telephone call-in
techniques) a use of television for prostitution. Some cultural
line had been crossed there, and the programme was taken oﬀ
(though there are several much like it in radio). But in one way it
had followed, logically, from the kinds of presentation of people,
as isolated and negotiable features and quantities, which are
characteristic of many commercial television forms. Indeed, if
the dominant mode of human perception and interaction is very
generally mediated by commodities, though it has continually
then to struggle with more direct perceptions and relationships,
there is a real basis for programmes which present human
beings and their detachable characteristics as commodities,
either for purchase or, more generally and more discreetly, for
window-shopping.
B. MIXED AND NEW FORMS
We have seen that there have been some signiﬁcant innovations
in the use, by television, of earlier cultural forms. We have
the forms of television
69

already noticed, for example, the visualisation of news and the
development of new kinds of dramatic serial, new kinds of sell-
ing conventions, new kinds of presented games. It is clear that
television has depended heavily on existing forms, and that
its major innovation has been their extension, which can be
qualitative as well as quantitative. But to the signiﬁcant in-
novations within forms we must now add some possibly new
forms, which television has pioneered. There is rarely, as we
shall see, absolute innovation, but some at least of these new
forms seem to me qualitatively diﬀerent.
(i) Drama-documentary
A new kind of drama-documentary was brieﬂy noticed in the
more general discussion of television’s use of existing dramatic
forms. But it is so important that it needs some separate
emphasis. It relies on what is taken as an intrinsic element of
television: its capacity to enter a situation and show what is
actually happening in it. Of course in all such cases there is
mediation: directors, cameramen and reporters select and pres-
ent what is happening. There is thus an intrinsic overlap between
what is classiﬁed as factual report and what is classiﬁed as dra-
matic presentation. This overlap is often confusing, and a good
deal of attention has been paid to its negative consequences: the
selection and distortion of news, the promotion or blackening of
individuals.
Yet the overlap ought to be looked at also in its positive con-
sequences. It may be easier to do this if we remember that in a
number of arts – and especially in the ﬁlm and the novel – there
has been, in our own generation, a rethinking and reworking of
the conventional distinction between ‘reality’ and ‘ﬁction’.
Already, in British television, there have been interesting ‘mixed’
cases: Cathy Come Home, Three Women. In American television there
is the fascinating case of the serial An American Family (1973). This
the forms of television
70
www.ebook3000.com

was a regular presentation – as if in serial dramatic episodes – of
the life of an actual Californian family, in its various aspects and
relationships. As it happened, the wife in the family ﬁled for
divorce while the series was being made; it was said for quite
unconnected reasons.9 I know that many other Californian fam-
ilies became deeply involved with this unusual presentation or
exposure of the lives of a family of their neighbours. In general
the presentation was ‘undramatic’; there was no obvious editing,
and some ‘scenes’ were correspondingly slow or disjointed. Yet
the husband complained that it was all edited with a purpose:
that of dramatising any row or diﬃculty. In its sustained use of
what appeared to be a neutral camera, looking in on how an
American family was living, the programme was a signiﬁcant
and intrinsically dramatic experiment.
It is certainly important to watch what is being done in each
case, and it is probably right to say that there should always be
frankness about the convention being used. But some of the
complaint about ‘confusion between reality and ﬁction’ is naive
or disingenuous. This attempt to hold a hard line between abso-
lutely separated categories seems to depend on a ﬁction about
reality itself. It depends also on the convention that ‘factual’
television simply shows, neutrally, what is happening. The real
engagement of every observer in the events he or she is observ-
ing is doubtless a matter of degree. But it is so crucial and gen-
eral a fact that its possibilities for creative television drama, of a
new kind, ought to be directly examined, rather than ruled out
by an ultimately untenable classiﬁcation.
One of the strengths of television is that it can enter areas of
immediate and contemporary public and, in some senses, pri-
vate action more fully and more powerfully than any other tech-
nology. The neutral or would-be-neutral reporter is then at
times a necessary ﬁgure, but his is not the only mode of
attention. The true participant is often as relevant, and at times
more relevant. To move from observing an action to sharing or
the forms of television
71

communicating its experience needs to be a conscious step, but
it is one that ought often to be taken. An editing technique can
be used in either interest, and just as there should be social
controls when accurate reporting is in question, so there should
be social opportunities when it comes to creative interpretations.
Some of the best experimental television drama has moved into
this area. A line is crossed when actors are added to editing, or
sets to locations, but there have been interesting occasional uses
of both within the same overall form: actors and people in their
own lives; places and events and their deliberate re-creations.
What was being attempted in some expressionist drama (by the
use of inserted newsreels) and has been successfully achieved in
several contemporary novels and ﬁlms, can then be practised in
television over a wide range and with important qualities of
immediacy. It is not, obviously, the only kind of television
drama, but it may prove to be one of the most signiﬁcant
innovations in our contemporary culture.
(ii) Education by seeing
Some of the best educational television, and indeed some of the
best general television, has altered some of our concepts of
teaching and learning. There is, as we noted, a good deal of
transmitted teaching and demonstration. But there are many
examples of what can best be called educational practice: the
language ‘lesson’ which is simply half an hour in a foreign town,
listening to people speak while we watch them doing things and
meeting each other, in a whole social context; the natural history
or geography ‘lesson’ which is in eﬀect a televisual visit to some
place where we can see as if for ourselves; the presentation of
some other way of life, or some work process, or some social
condition. These kinds of practice, which television makes
possible by its range and scope, are directly related to some of
the most encouraging methods within formal education itself,
the forms of television
72
www.ebook3000.com

trying to experience a process rather than being taught ‘about’ it.
They do not replace other kinds of education, but they add to
them, and in some cases change them qualitatively, in what is
clearly an innovating way.
(iii) Discussion
The extension of range in television discussions has already
been noted. For most people, it is a signiﬁcant cultural fact.
But there have also been some innovations in styles of discus-
sion, and these should be noted, since they amount, in eﬀect,
to new forms. There has been an obvious loosening of manner.
At its worst, which is most often noted, this culminates in the
talk-show or chatshow, where it is not what is said but that it
is someone saying it which is made important. The contrived
conversations to sustain the notions of ‘guests’ and ‘person-
alities’ are among the worst things television ever does, and on
this scale this is new. But there are times in other kinds of
discussion when a new medium seems evident: sustained and
deﬁned conversation, with a closeness of interaction that is
made publicly available. Some of the best of this kind of dis-
cussion was developed in radio but television at times has
added a real dimension to it: physical presence, attention, ges-
ture and response which, when they are not merely spec-
tacular or the devices of publicity but belong to the sustained,
deﬁned and developing interaction, can be, in their unity with
the words, an experience that is signiﬁcantly shared in some
new ways.
(iv) Features
Some of the best work in television belongs to a mode which
combines and extends elements of the essay, the journal and
the ﬁlm documentary. In Britain, where in the 1930s the
the forms of television
73

ﬁlm-documentary tradition was especially strong, there was
some direct transfer to television. But the range of uses has
become much wider. There is the personal television essay or
journal, such as One Pair of Eyes; the personalised social report,
such as The Philpott File; the television argument, such as Clark’s
Civilisation or Berger’s Ways of Seeing; the television exposition, such
as The Restless Earth; the television history, such as The Great War; the
television magazine, Horizon for science, Chronicle for archaeology,
Aquarius and Omnibus for the arts; The Countryman and Look, Stranger;
the many reports of exploration and natural history. Taken in
sum, work of this kind – I have given only British examples, for
the mode is well established there – amounts to well over half of
the best television now being made. Moreover, it can hold its
own with some of the best work being done in any cultural
ﬁeld. In traditional terms it falls somewhere between serious
journalism, especially in general periodicals, and the popular
book, and it is at least as good as either in contemporary prac-
tice. Indeed in some important respects, where the visual elem-
ent is central, it is the best work of this kind now being done
anywhere.
(v) Sequences
Certain forms have evolved within the conventions of current
television programming. In American television, with its extra-
ordinarily short units and as it were involuntary sequences,
mainly determined by commercials, there have been such inter-
esting innovations as Laugh In, Sesame Street and The Electric Company.
The comic eﬀects of fast-moving disconnection, using many of
the local techniques of commercials and trailers, made Laugh In in
its early years a fascinating example of an eﬀective form created
out of a deformation. In Britain, in a diﬀerent way, Monty Python’s
Flying Circus developed new kinds of visual joke out of standard
television conventions, by simply altering the tone and
the forms of television
74
www.ebook3000.com

perspective. Sesame Street is perhaps a diﬀerent case. It has been
said that it uses the techniques of commercials for education. Yet
this is a doubtful description. Many of the technical possi-
bilities for mobility of every kind were ﬁrst exploited, at a
popular level, for commercials, and have no necessary con-
nection with that kind of simpliﬁed selling. Some of the best
mobility of Sesame Street and The Electric Company is a way not
only of responding to a highly mobile society but of respond-
ing in some depth, since the central continuities, within the
fast-moving sequences, relate not only to planned teaching but
to a kind of eager openness, a sympathetic curiosity, which is
perhaps a truer social use of some of the intrinsic properties
of television than any of the more ﬁxed and conﬁrming social
forms.
(vi) Television
It is ironic to have to say, ﬁnally, that one of the innovating forms
of television is television itself. So many uses of the medium have
been the transmission and elaboration of received forms, or have
been dominated by the pressures of overt content, that it is often
diﬃcult to respond to some of its intrinsic visual experiences,
for which no convention and no mode of description have been
prepared or oﬀered. Yet there are moments in many kinds of
programme when we can ﬁnd ourselves looking in what seem
quite new ways. To get this kind of attention it is often necessary
to turn oﬀ the sound, which is usually directing us to prepared
transmissible content or other kinds of response. What can then
happen, in some surprising ways, is an experience of visual
mobility, of contrast of angle, of variation of focus, which is
often very beautiful. I have known this while watching things as
various, in their overt content, as horse-racing, a street interview,
an open-air episode in a play or a documentary. To most analysts
of television, preoccupied by declared or directed content, this
the forms of television
75

is, if seen at all, no more than a by-product of some other
experience. Yet I see it as one of the primary processes of the
technology itself, and one that may come to have increasing
importance. And when, in the past, I have tried to describe and
explain this, I have found it signiﬁcant that the only people who
ever agreed with me were painters.
the forms of television
76
www.ebook3000.com

4
PROGRAMMING:
DISTRIBUTION AND FLOW
We have looked at some uses of received cultural forms in the
new technology of television, and we have looked also at some
of the new and mixed forms which have been created within
the technology. We ought now to look at the selection and
association of these diﬀerent forms in diﬀerent kinds of
programming. The concept of ‘programme’ needs, as we shall
see, analysis. But it is useful, as a ﬁrst step, to look in some detail
at the distribution of varying forms of television within diﬀerent
kinds of service. We cannot properly speak of the uses of tele-
vision until we have made these internal comparisons and con-
trasts. But it will then be all the more necessary to go beyond
the static concept of ‘distribution’ to the mobile concept of
‘ﬂow’.

A. COMPARATIVE DISTRIBUTION IN FIVE
TELEVISION CHANNELS
The distribution of types of television programme, in ﬁve chan-
nels – three in Britain, two in the United States – was analysed
for a week in March 1973.
The channels are:
BBC 1, London.
BBC 2, London.
IBA, Anglia, Norwich.
KQED (Public Television), San Francisco.
Channel 7 (ABC), San Francisco.
The categories used are conventional, as follows:
(a) News and Public Aﬀairs: This category can be subdivided into
news bulletins, general news magazines, news magazines for
particular ethnic groups, and public aﬀairs discussions.
There is some overlap between these, at certain points, in
that there are often magazine items within news bulletins,
news announcements within magazines, discussion within
bulletins and magazines, and so on. The signiﬁcance of
the ﬁgures, while occasionally interesting for the minor
categories, is mainly in relation to the category as a whole.
(b) Features and Documentaries: These are as deﬁned in 3, B, (iv)
(page 73 above). It is a category not always easy to separate
from, for example, news magazines and public aﬀairs dis-
cussions. The normal criterion used is that an item is classi-
ﬁed as ‘feature’ or ‘documentary’ when a substantial part
of it is oﬀered as direct presentation of the substance of a
problem or an experience or a situation, by contrast with the
‘discussion’ in which a situation or problem may be illus-
trated, usually relatively brieﬂy, but in which the main
emphasis falls on relatively formal argument about it.
(c) Education: This is deﬁned as items of formal educational
programming: distribution and flow
78
www.ebook3000.com

intention, as distinct from ‘educational’ elements in other
kinds of programme. It is subdivided into course-
programmes for schools, colleges and universities;
instructional programmes, not normally related to external
courses, mainly on crafts, hobbies, etc.; and adult education
of a more general kind – speciﬁc teaching of general skills,
which is however not related to formal courses and qualiﬁca-
tions. There is again some overlap between these categories,
and the course programmes, for example, are available to and
often watched by the general public. The total ﬁgure for edu-
cation is thus more signiﬁcant than the subsidiary ﬁgures.
(d) Arts and Music: This is a diﬃcult category to separate, since it
depends on received deﬁnitions of ‘the arts’ – painting,
sculpture, architecture, literature – and ‘music’ in the sense
of the established classical concert repertory and opera. It is
given as a separate category because it is usually planned
in these terms and is then signiﬁcant as a received inter-
pretation and as a proportion.
(e) Children’s Programmes: This is deﬁned as programmes speciﬁc-
ally made for and oﬀered to children, at certain special
times. Children of course watch many other kinds of
programme, but this separable category is signiﬁcant. It is
subdivided into programmes composed mainly of cartoons
and puppet-shows; other kinds of entertainment pro-
gramme, usually ‘live’ stories and plays; and educational
programmes. This last subdivision needs explanation. Such
programmes – Sesame Street, The Electric Company, Playschool –
often use cartoons or puppets, and are often entertaining.
But they are separately listed because their formal intention
is to help with learning, and much speciﬁc teaching of skills
is included in them, though often in informal ways.
(f ) Drama: This includes all kinds of dramatic work (other
than the special categories found in education, children’s
programmes and commercials). It is subdivided into ‘plays’
programming: distribution and flow
79

oﬀered singly, even if under some general title such as Play
for Today or Armchair Theatre; ‘series’, in which each play is
normally self-contained but in which certain regular char-
acters recur – principal characterisation, for example, thus
building up through several items; and ‘serials’, in which a
connected dramatic presentation is oﬀered in several linked
episodes.
(g) Movies: This is deﬁned as ﬁlms originally made for distribu-
tion in cinemas and movie theatres. Plays, series or serials
which may in whole or in part have been ﬁlmed have been
included under Drama.
(h) General Entertainment: This is a miscellaneous category, but as
such signiﬁcant; in Britain it is often grouped under a Light
Entertainment Department. It is subdivided into ‘musical
shows’ – where singers or groups are principally presented,
at times with rather diﬀerent supporting items; ‘variety
shows’ – where the main emphasis is on comedy, in a num-
ber of cases with supporting musical items; ‘games and quiz-
shows’ – where in many diﬀerent forms there is some kind
of overt game-playing or competition (often of the ‘parlour-
game’ kind, in its many modern variants, often with mem-
bers of the public participating) and question-and-answer
shows of the same competitive kind; ‘talk-shows’ – a cat-
egory not always easy to separate from ‘discussions’ and
‘magazines’ but conventionally deﬁned as a separate form and
presented as entertainment, usually late at night: in matter
and manner usually strongly linked to ‘show-business’.
(i) Sport: Televised Sport and sports discussion.
(j) Religion: Religious services, discussions and features, pre-
sented at speciﬁc times.
(k) Publicity (internal): A channel’s presentation of its own
programmes, by trailers, advance announcements, etc.
(l) Commercials: Advertising programmes of all kinds other than
internal publicity.
programming: distribution and flow
80
www.ebook3000.com

The analysis is presented in table form, in hours and decimal
fractions of hours. All timings have been carefully made, but it
must be noted that in the absence of any published statistics of
detailed programming, and in the absence also of any really
adequate facilities for exact timing over several simultaneous
channels, the ﬁgures are necessarily subject to some marginal
errors. This is especially the case in relation to commercials and
internal publicity, which break the form of the published sched-
ules. In these cases spot-checks were made and then an average
ﬁgure applied.
The ﬁgures as a whole are signiﬁcant not so much for exact
allocations as for purposes of general discussion and comparison.
Table 1: Programme Distribution by Hours
Sample week
3–9 March 1973
bbc 1
bbc 2
Anglia
kqed
Ch. 7
A. News and Public Affairs
News
5.7
3.5
5.0
5.2
11.6
News mag. (gen.)
7.1
–
5.1
5.1
5.3
News mag. (ethnic)
3.1
–
–
2.5
0.3
Public affairs dis.
8.3
4.3
3.0
8.5
1.8
24.2
7.8
13.1
21.3
19.0
B. Features and Documentaries
Features
5.6
6.2
4.5
4.5
0.6
Documentaries
1.0
5.9
2.0
1.0
–
6.6
12.1
6.5
5.5
0.6
C. Education
Schools, colleges,
etc.
17.9
16.5
10.7
18.6
–
Instructional
2.9
1.7
2.2
3.5
0.9
Adult education
1.9
–
–
2.5
2.0
22.7
18.2
12.9
24.6
2.9
D. Arts and Music
1.2
1.7
–
4.5
–
programming: distribution and flow
81

Comment on Table 1
Of the ﬁve stations listed, three are public-service channels
(BBC 1, BBC 2 and KQED), two are commercial channels
(Anglia, Channel 7). There are diﬀerences to be observed quite
generally, between television programming in Britain and the
Table 1: continued
Sample week
3–9 March 1973
bbc 1
bbc 2
Anglia
kqed
Ch. 7
E. Children’s Programmes
Cartoons, puppets
4.4
0.1
1.1
–
2.5
Other entertainment
1.4
0.7
4.6
–
2.0
Educational
5.7
3.3
2.6
25.0
0.8
11.5
4.1
8.3
25.0
5.3
F. Drama
Plays
4.4
3.1
3.5
–
–
Series
6.3
0.9
8.7
1.0
16.3
Serials
0.8
1.5
8.1
3.7
6.1
11.5
5.5
20.3
4.7
22.4
G. Movies
6.7
6.6
12.3
5.2
23.8
H. General Entertainment
Musical shows
2.7
3.0
2.0
–
1.1
Variety shows
1.2
0.5
3.7
–
0.4
Games, quiz shows
1.5
1.0
3.2
–
15.9
Talk shows
2.0
–
0.9
–
15.0
7.4
4.5
9.8
–
32.4
I.
Sport
5.9
1.1
6.7
2.0
6.4
J.
Religion
1.1
–
0.6
–
0.8
K. Publicity (internal)
1.1
0.7
1.7
1.4
1.4
L. Commercials
–
–
10.8
–
18.4
Total Hours
99.9
62.3
103.0
94.2
133.4
programming: distribution and flow
82
www.ebook3000.com

United States, but the most striking fact is a certain similarity of
distribution within the public-service channels on the one hand
and the commercial channels on the other. Since total hours
vary so considerably, it is useful to express the distribution, by
categories, as proportions of the total material broadcast. This
distribution is shown in Table 2.
Comment on Table 2
Certain striking particular variations can be seen from this table
– in particular in News and Public Aﬀairs, in Education, in Child-
ren’s Programmes, in Drama series and serials, and in General
Entertainment. Indeed it is possible to distinguish two broad
types of programming, which might provisionally be called Pub-
lic Service (Type A) and Commercial (Type B). A comparative
distribution of these types is shown in Table 3.
Table 2: Comparative Percentages in Programme Category Distribution (to
nearest half-percentage point)
Sample week 3–9 March 1973
bbc 1
bbc 2
Anglia
kqed
Ch. 7
News and Public Affairs
24.5
12.0
13.0
22.5
14.0
Features and Documentaries
6.5
20.0
6.3
6.0
0.5
Education
23.0
29.5
12.5
26.0
2.0
Arts and Music
1.0
2.5
–
5.0
–
Children’s Programmes
11.5
6.5
8.0
27.0
4.0
Drama – plays
4.5
4.5
3.1
–
–
Drama – series and serials
7.0
4.0
16.6
5.0
17.0
Movies
6.5
11.0
12.0
5.5
18.0
General Entertainment
7.5
7.5
9.5
–
24.5
Sport
6.0
1.5
6.2
2.0
4.5
Religion
1.0
–
0.6
–
0.5
Publicity
1.0
1.0
1.5
1.0
1.0
Commercials
–
–
10.7
–
14.0
programming: distribution and flow
83

Table 3: Comparative Percentages of Types of Programming (to nearest
half-percentage point)
Type A: News and Public Affairs, Features and Documentaries, Education,
Arts and Music, Children’s Programmes, Plays.
Type B: Drama Series and Serials, Movies, General Entertainment.
Sample week
3–9 March 1973
bbc 1
bbc 2
Anglia
kqed
Ch. 7
Type A
71
75
42.9
86
20.5
Type B
21
22.5
38.1
10.5
59.5
Comment on Table 3
If comparisons are made only between the British channels or
between the American channels, the distinction between Public
Service Television (Type A) and Commercial Television (Type B)
is especially clear. Yet when all ﬁve channels are compared, it is
clear that the situation in American television is more sharply
polarised. The American commercial channel (Channel 7) is a
more complete representation of the predominantly commercial
distribution than its British counterpart (Anglia) which shows
some of the same tendencies but is midway between the British
public-service type (BBC 1 and 2) and the American commercial
type. Correspondingly, the American public-service channel
(KQED) is more markedly of a public-service type, and in that
sense less of a general broadcasting service, than its British
public-service counterparts.
General comment on Tables 1, 2 and 3
Tables of distribution by categories can show us some signiﬁcant
features of the uses of television in diﬀerent kinds of broad-
casting institutions. Moreover, some of these features are signiﬁcant
programming: distribution and flow
84
www.ebook3000.com

indicators of quality. But some are not, and we must try to make
this clear, as a way of seeing beyond simple equations of quality
and type.
Thus a category such as drama serials can vary from ‘classic
serials’ and ‘masterpiece theatre’ to what is still, in very much
the original terms, ‘soap opera’. Movies, obviously, can vary
enormously, from routine productions to signiﬁcant works in
the ﬁlm repertory. It is true to say that distribution, in these
respects, often follows the general tendency of the program-
ming, but in the case of movies, especially, this is by no means
universally so. A ﬁlm on KQED is likely to be of the ‘repertory’
type, and serials on KQED and BBC 2 of the ‘classic’ type, while
serials on Anglia and Channel 7 are quite often ‘soap-opera’. But
there is no such distinction between the selection of movies on,
for example, BBC 1 and Anglia and Channel 7. The same general
point holds for games and quizzes. In general those on BBC 1
and BBC 2 oﬀer themselves as of a ‘cultural’ type, while those on
Channel 7 are wholly commercial in conception and presen-
tation, and those on Anglia vary between the two kinds. There is
some real variation of quality here: University Challenge and Top of the
Form are in real respects diﬀerent from The Golden Shot and Double
Your Money. But the diﬀerence does not necessarily hold for games
like Call my Bluﬀ, where the surface material – the meanings of
rare words – is ‘cultural’ but the essential presentation is a matter
of straight show-business.
What can be discerned, indeed, is not only a general distinc-
tion between ‘cultural’ and ‘commercial’ programmes – of the
kind roughly indicated by Type A and Type B programming –
but also an equally signiﬁcant cultural ‘set’ in each type of
programming. Thus Type A is based not only on assumptions
about education and the learning process – though these are
evident – but also on characteristic deﬁnitions of public and
general interest which often, on analysis, show themselves as
essentially abstract and at times merely passive. In Type B there are
programming: distribution and flow
85

evident assumptions of entertainment and distraction, but these
involve deﬁnitions of interest which are sometimes more closely
centred on individually presented persons and on a kind of par-
ticipation (these elements are particularly evident in some of the
serials and in some of the relationship games). It is then only on
the assumption of a particular cultural ‘set’ – itself related to the
character of education and daily life, and containing within it
quite evident class characteristics – that one can assume that, for
example, a documentary on international aviation is more serious
than a serial or a game involving the presentation of a relation-
ship between husbands and wives or parents and children. The
mode of attention in each case has a speciﬁc character, and if the
latter is trivialised or vitiated by a manner of presentation, so
may the former be abstracted and in its own way trivialised by
its more conventionally ‘serious’ abstract examination. That is
why, though the distribution shown and the broad distinction
between types are necessary elements of analysis, they are only
one kind of analysis of real content, either generally or in terms
of the particular television experience. It is then to another mode
of analysis that we must now turn.
B. PROGRAMMING AS SEQUENCE OR FLOW
Analysis of a distribution of interest or categories in a broadcast-
ing programme, while in its own terms signiﬁcant, is necessarily
abstract and static. In all developed broadcasting systems the
characteristic organisation, and therefore the characteristic
experience, is one of sequence or ﬂow. This phenomenon, of
planned ﬂow, is then perhaps the deﬁning characteristic of
broadcasting, simultaneously as a technology and as a cultural
form.
In all communications systems before broadcasting the essen-
tial items were discrete. A book or a pamphlet was taken and
read as a speciﬁc item. A meeting occurred at a particular date
programming: distribution and flow
86
www.ebook3000.com

and place. A play was performed in a particular theatre at a set
hour. The diﬀerence in broadcasting is not only that these events,
or events resembling them, are available inside the home, by the
operation of a switch. It is that the real programme that is oﬀered
is a sequence or set of alternative sequences of these and other
similar events, which are then available in a single dimension
and in a single operation.
Yet we have become so used to this that in a way we do not see
it. Most of our habitual vocabulary of response and description
has been shaped by the experience of discrete events. We have
developed ways of responding to a particular book or a particu-
lar play, drawing on our experience of other books and plays.
When we go out to a meeting or a concert or a game we take
other experience with us and we return to other experience, but
the speciﬁc event is ordinarily an occasion, setting up its own
internal conditions and responses. Our most general modes of
comprehension and judgement are then closely linked to these
kinds of speciﬁc and isolated, temporary, forms of attention.
Some earlier kinds of communication contained, it is true,
internal variation and at times miscellaneity. Dramatic perform-
ances included musical interludes, or the main play was pre-
ceded by a curtain-raiser. In print there are such characteristic
forms as the almanac and the chapbook, which include items
relating to very diﬀerent kinds of interest and involving quite
diﬀerent kinds of response. The magazine, invented as a speciﬁc
form in the early eighteenth century, was designed as a miscel-
lany, mainly for a new and expanding and culturally inexperi-
enced middle-class audience. The modern newspaper, from the
eighteenth century but very much more markedly from the
nineteenth century, became a miscellany, not only of news items
that were often essentially unrelated, but of features, anecdotes,
drawings, photographs and advertisements. From the late nine-
teenth century this came to be reﬂected in formal layout,
culminating in the characteristic jigsaw eﬀect of the modern
programming: distribution and flow
87

newspaper page. Meanwhile, sporting events, especially football
matches, as they became increasingly important public occa-
sions, included entertainment such as music or marching in
their intervals.
This general trend, towards an increasing variability and mis-
cellaneity of public communications, is evidently part of a whole
social experience. It has profound connections with the growth
and development of greater physical and social mobility, in con-
ditions both of cultural expansion and of consumer rather than
community cultural organisation. Yet until the coming of broad-
casting the normal expectation was still of a discrete event or of a
succession of discrete events. People took a book or a pamphlet
or a newspaper, went out to a play or a concert or a meeting or a
match, with a single predominant expectation and attitude. The
social relationships set up in these various cultural events were
speciﬁc and in some degree temporary.
Broadcasting, in its earliest stages, inherited this tradition and
worked mainly within it. Broadcasters discovered the kinds of
thing they could do or, as some of them would still normally
say, transmit. The musical concert could be broadcast or
arranged for broadcasting. The public address – the lecture or the
sermon, the speech at a meeting – could be broadcast as a talk.
The sports match could be described and shown. The play could
be performed, in this new theatre of the air. Then as the service
extended, these items, still considered as discrete units, were
assembled into programmes. The word ‘programme’ is charac-
teristic, with its traditional bases in theatre and music-hall. With
increasing organisation, as the service extended, this ‘pro-
gramme’ became a series of timed units. Each unit could be
thought of discretely, and the work of programming was a serial
assembly of these units. Problems of mix and proportion became
predominant in broadcasting policy. Characteristically, as most
clearly in the development of British sound broadcasting, there
was a steady evolution from a general service, with its internal
programming: distribution and flow
88
www.ebook3000.com

criteria of mix and proportion and what was called ‘balance’, to
contrasting types of service, alternative programmes. ‘Home’,
‘Light’ and ‘Third’, in British radio, were the eventual names for
what were privately described and indeed generally understood
as ‘general’, ‘popular’ and ‘educated’ broadcasting. Problems of
mix and proportion, formerly considered within a single ser-
vice, were then basically transferred to a range of alternative
programmes, corresponding to assumed social and educational
levels. This tendency was taken further in later forms of reorgan-
isation, as in the present specialised British radio services One to
Four. In an American radio programme listing, which is before
me as I write, there is a further specialisation: the predominantly
musical programmes are brieﬂy characterised, by wavelength, as
‘rock’, ‘country’, ‘classical’, ‘nostalgic’ and so on.1 In one sense
this can be traced as a development of programming: extensions
of the service have brought further degrees of rationalisation and
specialisation.
But the development can also be seen, and in my view needs
to be seen, in quite other ways. There has been a signiﬁcant shift
from the concept of sequence as programming to the concept of
sequence as ﬂow. Yet this is diﬃcult to see because the older
concept of programming – the temporal sequence within which
mix and proportion and balance operate – is still active and still
to some extent real.
What is it then that has been decisively altered? A broadcast-
ing programme, on sound or television, is still formally a series
of timed units. What is published as information about the
broadcasting services is still of this kind: we can look up the time
of a particular ‘show’ or ‘programme’; we can turn on for that
item; we can select and respond to it discretely.
Yet for all the familiarity of this model, the normal experience
of broadcasting, when we really consider it, is diﬀerent. And
indeed this is recognised in the ways we speak of ‘watching
television’, ‘listening to the radio’, picking on the general rather
programming: distribution and flow
89

than the speciﬁc experience. This has been true of all broadcast-
ing, but some signiﬁcant internal developments have greatly
reinforced it. These developments can be indicated in one simple
way. In earlier phases of the broadcasting service, both in sound
and television, there were intervals between programme units:
true intervals, usually marked by some conventional sound or
picture to show that the general service was still active. There
was the sound of bells or the sight of waves breaking, and these
marked the intervals between discrete programme units. There is
still a residual example of this type in the turning globe which
functions as an interval signal in BBC television.
But in most television services, as they are currently operated,
the concept of the interval – though still, for certain purposes,
retained as a concept – has been fundamentally revalued. This
change came about in two ways, which are still unevenly repre-
sented in diﬀerent services. The decisive innovation was in ser-
vices ﬁnanced by commercial advertising. The intervals between
programme units were obvious places for the advertising to be
included. In British commercial television there was a speciﬁc
and formal undertaking that ‘programmes’ should not be inter-
rupted by advertising; this could take place only in ‘natural
breaks’: between the movements of a symphony, or between the
acts in Hamlet, as the Government spokesman said in the House of
Lords! In practice, of course, this was never complied with, nor
was it ever intended that it should be. A ‘natural break’ became
any moment of convenient insertion. News programmes, plays,
even ﬁlms that had been shown in cinemas as speciﬁc whole
performances, began to be interrupted for commercials. On
American television this development was diﬀerent; the spon-
sored programmes incorporated the advertising from the outset,
from the initial conception, as part of the whole package. But
it is now obvious, in both British and American commercial
television, that the notion of ‘interruption’, while it has still
some residual force from an older model, has become
programming: distribution and flow
90
www.ebook3000.com

inadequate. What is being oﬀered is not, in older terms, a pro-
gramme of discrete units with particular insertions, but a
planned ﬂow, in which the true series is not the published
sequence of programme items but this sequence transformed by
the inclusion of another kind of sequence, so that these
sequences together compose the real ﬂow, the real ‘broadcast-
ing’. Increasingly, in both commercial and public-service tele-
vision, a further sequence was added: trailers of programmes to
be shown at some later time or on some later day, or more
itemised programme news. This was intensiﬁed in conditions of
competition, when it became important to broadcasting plan-
ners to retain viewers – or as they put it, to ‘capture’ them – for a
whole evening’s sequence. And with the eventual uniﬁcation of
these two or three sequences, a new kind of communication
phenomenon has to be recognised.
Of course many people who watch television still register
some of these items as ‘interruptions’. I remember ﬁrst noticing
the problem while watching ﬁlms on British commercial tele-
vision. For even in an institution as wholeheartedly commercial
in production and distribution as the cinema, it had been pos-
sible, and indeed remains normal, to watch a ﬁlm as a whole, in
an undisturbed sequence. All ﬁlms were originally made and
distributed in this way, though the inclusion of supporting ‘B’
ﬁlms and short features in a package, with appropriate intervals
for advertising and for the planned selling of refreshments,
began to develop the cinema towards the new kind of planned
ﬂow. Watching the same ﬁlms on commercial television made
the new situation quite evident. We are normally given some
twenty or twenty-ﬁve minutes of the ﬁlm, to get us interested in
it; then four minutes of commercials, then about ﬁfteen more
minutes of the ﬁlm; some commercials again; and so on to stead-
ily decreasing lengths of the ﬁlm, with commercials between
them, or them between the commercials, since by this time it is
assumed that we are interested and will watch the ﬁlm to the
programming: distribution and flow
91

end. Yet even this had not prepared me for the characteristic
American sequence. One night in Miami, still dazed from a week
on an Atlantic liner, I began watching a ﬁlm and at ﬁrst had some
diﬃculty in adjusting to a much greater frequency of com-
mercial ‘breaks’. Yet this was a minor problem compared to
what eventually happened. Two other ﬁlms, which were due to
be shown on the same channel on other nights, began to be
inserted as trailers. A crime in San Francisco (the subject of the
original ﬁlm) began to operate in an extraordinary counterpoint
not only with the deodorant and cereal commercials but with a
romance in Paris and the eruption of a prehistoric monster who
laid waste New York. Moreover, this was sequence in a new
sense. Even in commercial British television there is a visual
signal – the residual sign of an interval – before and after the
commercial sequences, and ‘programme’ trailers only occur
between ‘programmes’. Here there was something quite diﬀer-
ent, since the transitions from ﬁlm to commercial and from ﬁlm
A to ﬁlms B and C were in eﬀect unmarked. There is in any case
enough similarity between certain kinds of ﬁlms, and between
several kinds of ﬁlm and the ‘situation’ commercials which often
consciously imitate them, to make a sequence of this kind a very
diﬃcult experience to interpret. I can still not be sure what I
took from that whole ﬂow. I believe I registered some incidents
as happening in the wrong ﬁlm, and some characters in the
commercials as involved in the ﬁlm episodes, in what came to
seem – for all the occasional bizarre disparities – a single
irresponsible ﬂow of images and feelings.
Of course the ﬁlms were not made to be ‘interrupted’ in this
way. But this ﬂow is planned: not only in itself, but at an early
stage in all original television production for commercial sys-
tems. Indeed most commercial television ‘programmes’ are
made, from the planning stage, with this real sequence in mind.
In quite short plays there is a rationalised division into ‘acts’. In
features there is a similar rationalised division into ‘parts’. But
programming: distribution and flow
92
www.ebook3000.com

the eﬀect goes deeper. There is a characteristic kind of opening
sequence, meant to excite interest, which is in eﬀect a kind of
trailer for itself. In American television, after two or three min-
utes, this is succeeded by commercials. The technique has an
early precedent in the dumbshows which preceded plays or
scenes in early Elizabethan theatre. But there what followed the
dumbshow was the play or the scene. Here what follows is
apparently quite unconnected material. It is then not surprising
that so many of these opening moments are violent or bizarre:
the interest aroused must be strong enough to initiate the
expectation of (interrupted but sustainable) sequence. Thus a
quality of the external sequence becomes a mode of deﬁnition
of an internal method.
At whatever stage of development this process has reached –
and it is still highly variable between diﬀerent broadcasting
systems – it can still be residually seen as ‘interruption’ of a
‘programme’. Indeed it is often important to see it as this, both
for one’s own true sense of place and event, and as a matter of
reasonable concern in broadcasting policy. Yet it may be even
more important to see the true process as ﬂow: the replacement
of a programme series of timed sequential units by a ﬂow series
of diﬀerently related units in which the timing, though real, is
undeclared, and in which the real internal organisation is
something other than the declared organisation.
For the ‘interruptions’ are in one way only the most visible
characteristic of a process which at some levels has come to
deﬁne the television experience. Even when, as on the BBC, there
are no interruptions of speciﬁc ‘programme units’, there is a
quality of ﬂow which our received vocabulary of discrete
response and description cannot easily acknowledge. It is evi-
dent that what is now called ‘an evening’s viewing’ is in some
ways planned, by providers and then by viewers, as a whole; that it
is in any event planned in discernible sequences which in this
sense override particular programme units. Whenever there is
programming: distribution and flow
93

competition between television channels, this becomes a matter
of conscious concern: to get viewers in at the beginning of a
ﬂow. Thus in Britain there is intense competition between BBC
and IBA in the early evening programmes, in the belief – which
some statistics support – that viewers will stay with whatever
channel they begin watching. There are of course many cases in
which this does not happen: people can consciously select
another channel or another programme, or switch oﬀ altogether.
But the ﬂow eﬀect is suﬃciently widespread to be a major elem-
ent in programming policy. And this is the immediate reason for
the increasing frequency of programming trailers: to sustain that
evening’s ﬂow. In conditions of more intense competition, as
between the American channels, there is even more frequent
trailing, and the process is speciﬁcally referred to as ‘moving
along’, to sustain what is thought of as a kind of brand-loyalty to
the channel being watched. Some part of the ﬂow oﬀered is then
directly traceable to conditions of controlled competition, just
as some of its speciﬁc original elements are traceable to the
ﬁnancing of television by commercial advertising.
Yet this is clearly not the whole explanation. The ﬂow oﬀered
can also, and perhaps more fundamentally, be related to the
television experience itself. Two common observations bear on
this. As has already been noted, most of us say, in describing the
experience, that we have been ‘watching television’, rather than
that we have watched ‘the news’ or ‘a play’ or ‘the football’ ‘on
television’. Certainly we sometimes say both, but the fact that we
say the former at all is already signiﬁcant. Then again it is a
widely if often ruefully admitted experience that many of us ﬁnd
television very diﬃcult to switch oﬀ; that again and again, even
when we have switched on for a particular ‘programme’, we
ﬁnd ourselves watching the one after it and the one after that.
The way in which the ﬂow is now organised, without deﬁnite
intervals, in any case encourages this. We can be ‘into’ some-
thing else before we have summoned the energy to get out of the
programming: distribution and flow
94
www.ebook3000.com

chair, and many programmes are made with this situation in
mind: the grabbing of attention in the early moments; the reiter-
ated promise of exciting things to come, if we stay.
But the impulse to go on watching seems more widespread
than this kind of organisation would alone explain. It is signiﬁ-
cant that there has been steady pressure, not only from the
television providers but from many viewers, for an extension of
viewing hours. In Britain, until recently, television was basically
an evening experience, with some brief oﬀerings in the middle
of the day, and with morning and afternoon hours, except at
weekends, used for schools and similar broadcasting. There is
now a rapid development of morning and afternoon ‘pro-
grammes’ of a general kind.2 In the United States it is already
possible to begin watching at six o’clock in the morning, see
one’s ﬁrst movie at eight-thirty, and so on in a continuous ﬂow,
with the screen never blank, until the late movie begins at one
o’clock the following morning. It is scarcely possible that many
people watch a ﬂow of that length, over more than twenty hours
of the day. But the ﬂow is always accessible, in several alternative
sequences, at the ﬂick of a switch. Thus, both internally, in its
immediate organisation, and as a generally available experience,
this characteristic of ﬂow seems central.
Yet it is a characteristic for which hardly any of our received
modes of observation and description prepare us. The reviewing
of television programmes is of course of uneven quality, but in
most even of the best reviews there is a conventional persistence
from earlier models. Reviewers pick out this play or that feature,
this discussion programme or that documentary. I reviewed tele-
vision once a month over four years, and I know how much
more settling, more straightforward, it is to do that. For most of
the items there are some received procedures, and the method,
the vocabulary, for a speciﬁc kind of description and response
exists or can be adapted. Yet while that kind of reviewing can be
useful, it is always at some distance from what seems to me the
programming: distribution and flow
95

central television experience: the fact of ﬂow. It is not only that
many particular items – given our ordinary organisation of
response, memory and persistence of attitude and mood – are
aﬀected by those preceding and those following them, unless we
watch in an artiﬁcially timed way which seems to be quite rare
(though it exists in the special viewings put on for regular
Reviewers). It is also that though useful things may be said about
all the separable items (though often with conscious exclusion
of the commercials which ‘interrupt’ at least half of them)
hardly anything is ever said about the characteristic experience
of the ﬂow sequence itself. It is indeed very diﬃcult to say any-
thing about this. It would be like trying to describe having read
two plays, three newspapers, three or four magazines, on the
same day that one has been to a variety show and a lecture and a
football match. And yet in another way it is not like that at all, for
though the items may be various the television experience has in
some important ways uniﬁed them. To break this experience
back into units, and to write about the units for which there are
readily available procedures, is understandable but often mis-
leading, even when we defend it by the gesture that we are
discriminating and experienced viewers and don’t just sit there
hour after hour goggling at the box.
For the fact is that many of us do sit there, and much of the
critical signiﬁcance of television must be related to this fact. I
know that whenever I tried, in reviewing, to describe the experi-
ence of ﬂow, on a particular evening or more generally, what I
could say was unﬁnished and tentative, yet I learned from cor-
respondence that I was engaging with an experience which
many viewers were aware of and were trying to understand.
There can be ‘classical’ kinds of response, at many diﬀerent
levels, to some though not all of the discrete units. But we are
only just beginning to recognise, let alone solve, the problems of
description and response to the facts of ﬂow.
programming: distribution and flow
96
www.ebook3000.com

C. ANALYSIS OF FLOW
We can look at some examples of ﬂow in television, in three
diﬀerent orders of detail. First, there is the ﬂow (which is at this
stage still, from one point of view, only sequence) within a
particular evening’s programmes. For this we can use the general
notation which has become conventional as ‘programming’ or
‘listing’. Second, there is the more evident ﬂow of the actual
succession of items within and between the published sequence
of units. Here notation is already more diﬃcult, for we have to
move beyond the abstract titles and categories of listing, and yet
we are still not at the stage of the detailed sequence of words and
images. Flow of this second kind, however, is centrally important
in our experience of television, since it shows, over a suﬃcient
range, the process of relative uniﬁcation, into a ﬂow, of other-
wise diverse or at best loosely related items. Third, there is the
really detailed ﬂow within this general movement: the actual
succession of words and images. Here notation of a kind is avail-
able, but it is still subject to the limitation that it notes as discrete
(if then related) items not only the planned combination and
fusion of words and images, but the process of movement and
interaction through sequence and ﬂow. Some of these limita-
tions are, in print, absolute. But my examples are presented, with
some commentary, as experiments towards some new methods
of analysis.
(i) Long-range analysis of sequence and ﬂow
(a)  1, 14  1973
5.15 Children’s programme: Robinson Crusoe
5.40 Children’s puppet-show: Hector’s House
5.45 National News
6.00 News magazine: Nationwide
6.45 American western serial: The Virginian
programming: distribution and flow
97

8.00 Film: Chaplin Super-Clown
8.30 Documentary: An Australian Mining Millionaire
9.00 National News
9.25 Series: Warship (KGB oﬃcial defects in Mediterranean
naval context)
10.15 Night Music
10.45 Public Aﬀairs discussion: Midweek
11.30 Late News
11.35 Educational programme: Mammals
(b)  2, 15  1973
7.05 Series: Mistress of Hardwick (scenes from an Elizabethan
life)
7.30 News
7.35 Gardeners’ World
8.00 Money at Work: The Gold Rush
9.00 Film: Little World of Don Camillo
10.40 Film Night: Review of James Bond ﬁlms
11.10 News
(c)  2, 9  1973
7.35 News
7.50 Feature: Saboteurs of Telemark (wartime)
8.40 Serial: Song of Songs (Sudermann); early twentieth-
century Vienna
9.30 Feature: The Ascent of Man (history of science)
10.20 Farce: Ooh La La!; late nineteenth-century France
11.20 News
11.25 Film: The Razor’s Edge
(d) , 15  1973
5.50 News
6.00 News magazine
6.35 Serial: Crossroads
programming: distribution and flow
98
www.ebook3000.com

7.00 Quiz-show: The Sky’s the Limit
7.30 American series: Hawaii Five-O
8.30 Series: Romany Jones (domestic comedy)
9.00 Series: Between the Wars (drama)
10.00 News
10.30 Magazine: County Show (ponies, vintage tractors)
11.00 Series: Theatre of Stars: The Enemy on the Beach
(wartime)
12.00 Sport: tennis
12.30 Prayers for World Children’s Day
(e)  7, 12  1973
5.30 News Scene
6.00 National News
6.30 Movie: Annie Get Your Gun
8.00 Series: The Rookies (police)
9.00 Movie: Doc Eliot
11.00 News
11.30 Talk-show
(f ) , 5  1973
5.30 Children’s programme: The Electric Company
6.00 Children’s programme: Zoom
6.30 Magazine: Mission and 24th Street
7.00 Newsroom
8.00 TV movie: Winesburg Ohio
9.30 Movie: Bergman’s The Silence
11.20 Station publicity
11.30 Newsroom (repeat)
Commentary
These samples of ‘an evening’s viewing’, on the ﬁve channels
studied, correspond, in general, with the impressions gained
programming: distribution and flow
99

from distribution analysis. The types of programming already
described can be seen in their detailed sequences (two examples
are given from BBC 2, because it is, in general, more variable
than the others).
The speciﬁc content is in some cases worth special notice.
There is a signiﬁcant frequency of military material (much of it
retrospective) and of costume-drama in BBC and Anglia pro-
gramming. Anglia and (to a lesser extent) BBC 1 carry important
amounts of American material. The BBC 2 mix is more cultural
(and international) in its range, as is KQED, but BBC 2 is also
quite closely attuned to speciﬁc English middle-class interests.
Channel 7, as has been noted, has a limited range of largely
pre-made programming.
The problems of sequence and ﬂow are already apparent.
Sequences (b), (c) and (f ) seem designed for more conscious
selection of particular items than (a) and (e) and especially (d). In
(d) there is an evident sequence – in eﬀect a ﬂow – from 6.35 to
10.00 (a series of comparatively brief programmes of essentially
displaced events and dramatisations), and the same might be said
of 6.45 to 8.30 or 8.30 to 10.15 in (a). It is worth considering
what eﬀect, for example, the documentary at 8.30, in (a), and the
series at 9.25, have on the News which comes between them: a
certain deﬁnition of interests, of a characteristic kind, seems indi-
cated. There would be a diﬀerent eﬀect in (d), where the News is
preceded by retrospective drama and succeeded by the County Show.
The problems of deﬁnition of mood and attention occur in
several of the sequences. It is noticeable that the sharpest con-
trasts occur in (b), (c) and (f ), while there is a relative homogen-
isation – the most evident speciﬁc feature of ﬂow – in (d) and
(e) and to some extent in (a).
We can next look at some speciﬁc problems of sequence and
deﬁnition, and from these of attention and mood, in what is in
many ways the binding factor of television programming: the
news bulletins and news magazines.
programming: distribution and flow
100
www.ebook3000.com

(ii) Medium-range analysis of ﬂow and ‘sequence’
(a) Channel 7, San Francisco, 12 March 1973, from 5.42 p.m.
. . .
(News Scene; three announcers at desk; camera alter-
nates between general shot of all three and medium
shot of the one who is speaking; inset for stills or
drawings above, left)

(Announcer 1)
A government committee has reported that many
claims in drug advertisements are false: one brand
of aspirin is not ‘much better than another’; one
brand does not ‘work faster than another’. (Inset:
shelves of packets of drugs, still)
The committee recommends that 25% of the time
of drug advertisements should in future be given to
correcting these misleading claims.

(Announcer 1)
A Senator has suggested that pharmacists should
display comparative prices of drugs.
Interview (ﬁlmed) with a pharmacist: he disagrees;
people should go to a store they trust.

(Announcer 1)
(Inset drawing of food boxes and shopping bag)
Consumers need all the help they can get, with all
prices rising. A housewife, angry at rising costs, has
sent the President four hundred peanut-butter sand-
wiches, in protest against the rising price of meat.

(Announcer 2)
(Inset, still, of Federal Building, San Francisco) There
have been protests in the city against the Presidential
impounding of funds for projects voted by Congress.
(Film of Mayor and local Congressmen)
The Mayor and the local Congressmen say impound-
ing is unconstitutional. The country should be
programming: distribution and flow 101

brought to a halt until this unconstitutional action
is stopped.

(Announcer 2)
(Inset drawing of wreath)
The oldest Catholic Priest in the United States has
died in San Francisco. He was 102. He attributed his
longevity to brisk early morning walks.

(Announcer 2)
A mayor in Alameda County is working for a prop-
osition to ban further apartment construction in
his city. But his wife and six daughters are working
on the other side.
(Reporter) (ﬁlm of street in city; cars and houses):
The proposition is being voted on tomorrow. The
issue is legal and environmental. Further develop-
ment, it is said, will reduce open spaces and lead to
extra traﬃc pollution.

(Woman) (ﬁlm of hand spraying from can; table
dusted). Liquid Gold furniture polish; brings new
sparkle to your furniture; it’s like meeting an old
friend again.

(Man) (ﬁlm clip): The 6.30 movie is Annie Get Your
Gun. Betty Hutton as the sharpest-shooting gal the
Wild West ever saw.

(Weather forecast; Medium, with charts). An area of
high pressure, bringing in cold air.

(Announcer 2)
In Utah, for the second time in a month, an entire
barn has been stolen.

(Announcer 1)
Two strikes in the San Francisco area today; (Inset
still of Golden Gate Bridge) one at an oil reﬁnery;
the other at a hospital.
programming: distribution and flow
102
www.ebook3000.com


(Announcer 2)
News soon about a man released from China and
about the situation at Wounded Knee.

(Man)
(Film of cats eating)
Little Friskies high-protein cat dinners.

(Man)
(Film of women in home)
Anacin relieves headaches.

(Model of house, with gold coins inside it)
(Man and woman)
Loans available on house property in Bay Area.

(Woman)
One-day sale at Macy’s.

(Announcer 2)
A former CIA agent was released today from China.
(Film of man crossing border)

(Announcer 2)
Situation between Indians and Justice Department
at Wounded Knee still tense.
(Still of Indian in headdress)

(Announcer 2)
(Still of Château)
Pompidou is still President of France.
(Still of hand and ballot-box)

(Announcer 2)
Vice-President Agnew says there is no constitutional
crisis.
(Film of Agnew speaking at meeting)

(Announcer 3)
A murder victim in San Francisco has been
identiﬁed.
(Film of police at scene of discovery of body)
programming: distribution and flow 103


(Announcer 1)
Many reports of vicious dogs in the area.
(Reporter)
Farmers have reported attacks on animals.
(Film of dogs and ﬁlm of sheep)

(Announcer 2)
The sports news will be next.

(Man)
If you didn’t know this was freeze-dried coﬀee you
would take it for fresh.
(Film of can undoing itself; cup being ﬁlled with
coﬀee)

(Man)
Let United Airlines show you this great land you
live in.
Song: ‘Come to your land.’
(Film of Golden Gate Bridge: girl singing
City street
: girl and man
Country fence
: two girls and man
Seashore
: group singing
Group travelling in plane
Black face close-up
Group travelling: song ends)

(Film of acted episode)
(Crook)
I used to be able to steal this kind of car. Now it has
an alarm system.
He opens door: Alarm sounds: Sheriﬀ appears.
Crook shows key.

(Announcer 3)
Sports news: winning run by basketball team.

(Man)
(ﬁlm clip): On the 6.30 movie, Annie Get Your Gun.
Betty Hutton as the sharpest-shooting gal the West
has ever seen.
programming: distribution and flow
104
www.ebook3000.com


(Network news: one man at desk; oblique medium
shot)
A former CIA agent has been released from
China.
(Film of group of men at border; ex-prisoner arrives
at airﬁeld; interview – he is glad to be back)
(Still of his invalid mother)

(Announcer)
In Vietnam, many permanently disabled men have
been released from ‘tiger-cages’.
(Film of disabled men in hospital; several emaciated
and crippled; one crawling on ﬂoor)

Newsroom
(Title: ABC Evening News)

Family camping in wood; children running under
trees: the wife has brought margarine instead of
butter; it is fresh and healthy.

Man at bank, in obvious pain. He is given a tablet in
each hand; he walks away.

(Map of Wounded Knee)
(Announcer)
Situation still tense.
(Film of car stopped and searched; close-up of Just-
ice Department spokesman; close-up of Indian
leader; Indian pointing to barricade)

(Announcer)
(Stills of Bermuda street; ﬂags)
Scotland Yard called in to investigate Bermuda
murders.

(Announcer)
A supporter of Peron has been elected President of
Argentina.
(Stills of Peron and Cremona)
Newsroom
(Title: ABC Evening News)
programming: distribution and flow 105

(Film) Truckload of television sets; one taken out;
pictures shown on it, man talking; camera draws
back to show more than twenty sets, each with
same man talking.

(Cartoon) a ﬁsh jumps over the world; tinned tuna;
woman eating from plate; ﬁsh jumps again.

(Announcer)
A government committee has reported that many
claims in drug advertisements are false.
(Still of shelves of packets of drugs)
Commentary
What seems to me interesting in this characteristic evening news
sequence is that while a number of important matters are
included, the connections between them are as it were delib-
erately not made. Consider, as examples:
(i)
the lack of direct relation between , ,  and ,
which in any normal perspective are directly connected;
(ii)
the lack of conscious connection between , , ,
 and , though one kind of connection had been
made by the Indian demonstrations at Wounded Knee;
(iii)
the lack of connection between the directly related items
of political controversy  and ;
(iv)
the lack of conscious connection in the various items
about prisoners, , , , ;
(v)
the apparent unconsciousness of contrast in  and
.
More generally, the eﬀect of undiscriminating sequence can be
seen in –, –, as well as in the periods of ‘interruption’ by
advertisements, e.g. – or –.
Nevertheless, if the overall ﬂow is examined, it can be seen
programming: distribution and flow
106
www.ebook3000.com

that a range of news and views – some reported, some propa-
gated, some dramatised – has in eﬀect been fused into what can
properly be seen as a sequence. Items such as  or  are
not incidental; they are among the controlling general images of
the ﬂow as a whole – the perspective of the society, the practice
of the medium. The apparently disjointed ‘sequence’ of items is
in eﬀect guided by a remarkably consistent set of cultural rela-
tionships: a ﬂow of consumable reports and products, in which
the elements of speed, variety and miscellaneity can be seen as
organising: the real bearers of value. Within this organisation, ,
,  and  are not contradictory but are unpaired alterna-
tives; as are also , , ,  and , where the
mediation, however, is more generally diﬀused. The organised
exclusion of certain kinds of connection and contrast, as in 
and , is part of the eﬀect of the ﬂow, with its own more
compelling internal signposting and directions of attention.
(b) BBC 1, 13 June 1973, from 5.42 p.m.
. . .
(Hector’s House – children’s puppet-show)

(Dog puppet)
‘I’m a gentleman.’

(Local Announcer 1)
In Look East after the National News there will be a
report on a new safety material for airﬁeld runways.
Also a report on a man who has broken the world
speed record for beer drinking.

Clock.

(National Announcer)
(Still of Lord Lambton)
Lord Lambton ﬁned £300 on drug charges.
(Reporter: against background of Lambton still)
Report of case hearing.
(Film of car arriving at court, men entering by
special back entrance)
programming: distribution and flow 107


(National Announcer)
The ten-week-old work-to-rule at a Peterborough
factory continues.
(Aerial view of factory)
(Reporter)
Result of voting at workers’ meeting.
(Film of crowd raising hands)
Interview with union oﬃcial: ‘We shall stay out.’
(Film of factory and engines, as reporter continues)
Interview with manager (oﬃce).
(National Announcer)
House of Commons reply to Peterborough M.P.

(National Announcer)
Pay strike at Cowley.

(National Announcer)
(Film of factory and pickets)
Dispute at Chrysler factory.

(National Announcer)
Britain’s largest monthly trade payments deﬁcit
ever.
(Graph of deﬁcit over recent months)
(Economics Correspondent)
(Background still of docks)
Figures very bad; reasons include ﬂoating pound,
imports for industrial boom.

(National Announcer)
Prime Minister and TUC leaders have been discuss-
ing the economy.

(National Announcer)
Agreement signed in Paris, between USA, North
and South Vietnam, ‘Vietcong’.
(Film of Kissinger signing; others signing)

(National Announcer)
Princess Anne’s wedding date ﬁxed.
programming: distribution and flow
108
www.ebook3000.com

(Stills of Princess and ﬁancé; Westminster Abbey;
Archbishop of Canterbury)

(National Announcer)
Tribune Group of Labour M.P.s say nationalisation
must be included in election manifesto.

(Still of Chief-Inspector of Constabulary)
Crimes of violence are increasing.

(National Announcer)
Commons statement about terrorism in Northern
Ireland.

(National Announcer)
Plans to disperse some government oﬃces.
(Map and list of areas, with numbers)
(Still of Ministry and new town)

(National Announcer)
School bus accident.
(Film of crashed bus, ﬁremen)

(National Announcer)
General Gawon of Nigeria has arrived in Britain.
(Film of reception)
(Film of his wife at children’s hospital)

(National Announcer)
New safety material on runways.
(Film of aircraft running into foam bed).

(National Announcer)
Rust makes car crashes worse.
(Film of test crashes of rusted and unrusted cars).

(Weatherman)
(Maps)
Warm and sunny.

Nationwide titles: picture of baby in swing, lorry, baby
lifted, car crash, man on phone.

(Nationwide Announcer 1)
Later: Meet a man who talks to ﬂowers.
programming: distribution and flow 109


(Nationwide Announcer 2)
Later: Two new reporters – children – report on
toys.
(Film of children)

(New Announcer 1)
‘All that and more as you move in to your own
programmes, nationwide.’

Titles: Look East

(Local Announcer 2)
Decision at Peterborough dispute meeting.
(Film of meeting; voting)
(Film of workers giving reasons for their vote)
Interview with union oﬃcial.
(Film of factory)
Interview with manager (oﬃce).
Interview with President of local Chamber of
Trade.

(Local Announcer 1)
Work-to-rule at Wisbech; rail services disrupted.

(Local Announcer 1)
Demonstration (ﬁlm) against motorway plan.

(Local Announcer 1)
Claim of irregularities in local council election.

(Local Announcer 1)
Bird’s Eye factories expanding (ﬁlm).

(Local Announcer 1)
A grave in Colchester desecrated. Black magic
suggested.

(Local Announcer 1)
Two men rescued from dinghy.

(Local Announcer 1)
Explosives found in pit in Cambridgeshire.

(Local Announcer 1)
Norfolk deputation about by-pass.
programming: distribution and flow
110
www.ebook3000.com


(Local Announcer 1)
Huntingdonshire road accidents caused by uncut
grass verges.

(Local Announcer 1)
Peterborough Development Corporation selling
houses.
(Local Announcer 1)
Date of football match.
(Still of captain)
Bishop of Ely arrives at a ceremony by boat.
Challenges another bishop to tug-of-war.
(Film of tug-of-war)

(Local Announcer 2)
A young girl still missing.
(Still of policeman; still of girl)
(Film of road she walked on)
(Map of area)

Reporter: New runway safety material.
(Film of aircraft testing new runway safety material)
Interview with pilot.

(Local Announcer 2)
Beer-drinking speed record.
Interview: how fast? how many? why? – ‘to break
the record’.

Rupert the Bear at Yarmouth.
(Film of man dressed as bear on beach with
children)

Closing titles: Look East.

Regional weather map.

National weather map.

(Nationwide Announcer 1)
(Reporter)
Pyramid selling; new legislation.
(Still of calendar)
programming: distribution and flow 111


(Nationwide Announcer 1)
(Reporter)
A community in Scotland where people talk to
plants to make them grow; extraordinary success,
no other explanation.
(Film of gardens)
Interview: director.
Interview: man who has seen an elf, the little people
who live in plants.
Interview: gardener – he talks to plant.
Song: ‘I dreamed a dream . . . of natural harmony.’
(Film of ﬂowers)

(Nationwide Announcer 1)
‘Back with a bump’: decentralisation of government
departments.
Regional reporters: Glasgow, Newcastle.
(Film of existing oﬃces)
Interview with junior minister involved.
Regional reporters asked for comment (3-way
discussion).

(Nationwide Announcer 2)
Children (boy and girl) reporting on new toys; test
them and give prices.

Closing titles.
(Film of ﬂowers repeated with song, ‘. . . natural
harmony’)
Commentary
This is a characteristic British news and news-magazine sequence.
It is more deliberately arranged than the American example in
(a), and there is less apparently spontaneous reporting and com-
mentary. The ﬂow characteristics are strongly marked, e.g. ,
, , or , , . The more intensive use of visual
programming: distribution and flow
112
www.ebook3000.com

material assists a diﬀerent kind of ﬂow, with correspondingly less
emphasis on the personalities of the readers (though in the maga-
zine this emphasis is made). Within the ﬂow, a characteristic set
of priorities emerges, e.g. in  to . An item of scandal () is
placed ﬁrst, followed by a group of items ( to ) on industrial
disputes. The most important item of general news () is then
placed in a context indicated by this ﬂow (though the direct
commentary on it oﬀers diﬀerent reasons) and this underlying
perspective is conﬁrmed in . A related item, , occurs at a
diﬀerent and unconnected point. There is an interesting possible
interaction, on a separate theme, between  and . State
ceremonies are dispersed between  and ; accidents between
,  and  (returned to in , , ).
There is a more general point about the overall emotional
tone. Compare , part of , part of , , , , ,
,  with , , , , , –,  or again with ,
 or , (), , . The sequence – is particu-
larly interesting for its apparently extraordinary ﬂuctuations, but
the point is that this is contained – as are the other alternative
normal sequences – by the fact of overall ﬂow. A conﬁrmation of
this is given in the enclosure of the diversity and extreme
unevenness of items within the playful emphasis of the initial
– and the closing  and . This, essentially, is how a
directed but apparently casual and miscellaneous ﬂow operates,
culturally, following a given structure of feeling.
(iii) Close-range analysis of ﬂow
(a) (Items xi–xxi from (ii) (a))
(Inset: still of Golden Gate Bridge)
Announcer 1
Well, there’s still no progress to report on two
major strikes in the San Francisco Bay Area today.
The news from that Shell Oil strike at Martinez is –
programming: distribution and flow 113

there is no news. All News Scene has heard
unconﬁrmed rumours of negotiation not far away.
Inside the plant supervisory employees are keeping
the thing running smoothly, they say – in full
operation as a matter of fact. Strikers were also out
today at San José Hospital,
(Inset still of hospital building and pickets)
and late this evening News Scene had unconﬁrmed
reports that Engineers’ Local No. 39 have also
walked out.
(Medium: announcer)
and in Martinez today too two doctors are back on
the job after they had initially been ﬁred by the
County Human Resources Agency. The County
Board of Supervisors has agreed to rehire them and
the terms of that negotiation were hammered out
in an informal session over the weekend.
Announcer 2 (Medium) Legal proceedings are now going on
against the Indians at Wounded Knee, and a man in
prison in China for twenty years is a free man
tonight. We’ll have ﬁlm stories on those and other
events as News Scene continues.
(Film, music: cats walking in diﬀerent directions)
Male Voice
Chinese or Persian, Calico or American Blue,
Angora or mixed, all cats want variety. And Little
Friskies has six delicious high-protein dinners with
a ﬂavour that isn’t artiﬁcial. It’s made from real
beef liver, real chicken, real seafood.
(Cats eating)
That’s Little Friskies, the best tasting high-protein
cat dinners.
(Film of young woman at telephone, older woman
putting dishes in cupboard; rattle of crockery)
Young Woman Will you please stop that racket?
programming: distribution and flow
114
www.ebook3000.com

Male Voice
When headache pain and the tension it can build
bring out the worst in you, take Anacin. Compared
to Anacin –
(Diagram of circle, with segment cut out)
– simple aspirin tablets would have this much pain
reliever. Anacin has –
(Rhythmic bleeps of sound; segment closes until
circle is complete)
– all this extra strength to every tablet, rushing
relief power to your headache. Anacin relieves
headache and so its tension, fast.
(Film of women again; younger woman brings
coﬀee to older woman; they sit down together)
Anacin!
Young Woman I had the worst headache . . . (smiles)
(Model house)
Male Voice 2
If you own a house anywhere in the Bay Area,
you’re sitting
(Model lifts and gold coins pour out from front)
on a goldmine
Young Woman 2 (smiles) and Paciﬁc Plan will help you get the
gold out. If you need from 1000 to 15,000 dollars,
you can turn your equity into instant cash
(smiles invitingly)
by calling the girl at Paciﬁc Plan. So, house-owners,
dig into your white pages
(Still of telephone directory, focused on number)
and get the gold out.
Young Woman 2 Call the girl at Paciﬁc Plan today (smiles) or
tomorrow.
Male Voice 2
Home Owners
(Model house: gold coins pouring out. Metallic
tinkle)
get the gold out.
programming: distribution and flow 115

Woman
(with ﬂower on hat) This Thursday is White Flower
Day at Macy’s. It’s one of the biggest one-day sales
of the year, at all Macy’s. (Waves) Don’t miss it.
Announcer 2
(Medium) In international news today, the very
good news coming out of the Republic of China
because a man who had been there for an awful
long time is ﬁnally out. Another prisoner of war
free today, only this former prisoner
(Film of man at border post)
is ex-CIA agent J– D–. He was a warrior of the
Cold War, he was captured in ’52 in the People’s
Republic of China, on a spy mission. Today he
arrived at Clark Air Force Base in Manila, a free
man again on his way home to his sick mother.
The battle of Wounded Knee continues. The Sioux,
who are holding a tiny piece of reservation, say they
no longer recognise the United States Government
(Still of Indian, with headdress)
they say they’ve seceded. Meanwhile the Justice
Department is considering legal action and it is
very tense and touchy at this moment in Wounded
Knee.
(Still of French Château)
And in picturesque France Georges Pompidou is
still President of the Republic. Most of the Gaullist
support came from the conservative French
countryside. Still the communist and socialist
representation doubled.
(Still of hand and ballot-box)
They cut the Gaullist majority to sixty seats. Big
and sweeping social reforms now predicted for the
Republic of France after this election.
(Medium: announcer)
Some very tough words today from Vice-President
programming: distribution and flow
116
www.ebook3000.com

Agnew here in San Francisco. He told an audience
it’s up to Congress to hold back spending if inﬂa-
tion is to be halted, and then he also attacked those
who say the President is getting too strong and
usurping powers from the Congress. That’s just not
true, according to
(Film of meeting)
Vice-President Spiro Agnew.
Agnew
Some members of Congress, abetted by certain
eternally despairing commentators and colum-
nists, are working diligently to persuade the coun-
try that a constitutional confrontation
(Applause begins; voice rises)
is at hand.
(Loud applause)
And to support this thesis the Congress, according
to a Washington newspaper, the other day brought
in a collection of scholars for advice on its Consti-
tutional crisis with Richard Nixon, and was taught
that there really isn’t any crisis at all.
(Medium: announcer)
Announcer 2
The Vice-President also wanted to say that he isn’t
aware that any Congress has ever felt suﬃciently
loved by a President to fully approve his exercise
of power invested in him by the United States
Constitution.
Steve.
Announcer 3
(Medium)
Well, we have more details now of that grisly mur-
der in San Francisco last night in which the body of
a man was discovered by police
(Film of police in street)
in a metal container this morning. The victim’s
throat had been cut . . .
programming: distribution and flow 117

Commentary
It is only as we come really close to the substance of what is
spoken and shown that we see the real character of television
ﬂow. A newscast is, of course, a particular case, but the kind of
ﬂow which it embodies is determined by a deliberate use of the
medium rather than by the nature of the material being dealt
with. As in the earlier analysis ((ii), (a)) the lack of demon-
strated connection between items is evident. Yet connections of
another kind are continually used:
. . . power invested in him by the United States Constitution.
Steve.
Well, we have more details now of that grisly murder . . .
This order is predetermined, but is handled in such a way as to
suggest the continual arrival of reports. Most evident, perhaps, is
a sense of the announcers spinning items along, following a
rough schedule. They are clearly not reading from scripts (this is
a speciﬁc diﬀerentiation in American television news) but they
have certain cue formulas. At times these are of a distancing,
placing kind:
. . . the very good news coming out of the Republic of China . . .
. . . And in picturesque France . . .
(In this latter case the phrase is determined, however curiously,
by the illustration.) Over much of the actual news reporting
there is a sense of hurried blur. The pace and style of the news-
cast take some priority over the items in it. This sense of hurried
transmission from all points is then in sharp contrast with the
cool deliberation of the commercials. At one level the average
length of a news item is in eﬀect determined by the time-unit of
attention which the commercials have established. Nothing is at
programming: distribution and flow
118
www.ebook3000.com

all fully reported, though time had been found for the theft of a
barn in a distant state. Yet the ﬂow of hurried items establishes a
sense of the world: of surprising and miscellaneous events com-
ing in, tumbling over each other, from all sides. The events are
caught as they ﬂy, with a minimal and conventional interpret-
ative tag. The most ordered messages, with a planned use of sight
and sound, are the recorded commercials, which clearly operate
in the same communicative dimension. Voices are used in both
news and commercials to catch passing attention. Devices of
repetition to sustain emphasis within ﬂow are common to
both:
The news from . . . Martinez is – there is no news . . .
Anacin . . . Anacin . . . Anacin . . . Anacin . . . Anacin . . .
Get the gold out . . . get the gold out . . . get the gold out . . .
The Battle of Wounded Knee . . . at this moment in Wounded
Knee . . .
The sense (in general, false) of instantaneous, simultaneous8
happening is similarly sustained:
today . . . today . . . today . . . now . . . fast . . . today . . . or
tomorrow . . . don’t miss it . . . today . . . coming out . . . today
. . . today . . . at this moment . . . today . . . now . . .
It is indeed the day’s news, but taken emphatically on the wing.
If an interest can not be satisﬁed (‘unconﬁrmed rumours’,
‘unconﬁrmed reports’) it is nevertheless stimulated. In and
through all this, certain nodal references of meaning and value
are given emphasis:
strikes . . . running smoothly . . . ﬁred . . . rehire . . . free man
. . . variety . . . extra strength . . . gold . . . free man . . . sick
mother . . .
programming: distribution and flow 119

The selected preoccupations are the dominant internal currents of
what might seem, at ﬁrst hearing (and there is usually only one)
a miscellaneous, even casual, externally determined ﬂow.
The implicit meanings and values of the commercials require
a brief ﬁnal comment. There is mutual transfer between their
formulas and those of separate programmes. The encapsulated
information of the news item is transferred to the mode of
recommending a cat food: ‘high protein . . . isn’t artiﬁcial’;
compare ‘tiny piece of reservation . . . very tense and touchy’,
‘still President . . . big and sweeping social reforms’. The mode
of the domestic serial interacts with that of the heachache-tablet
commercial, with the signiﬁcant interpretation ‘tension . . . the
worst in you’. The property-loan company relies on memories
of the historical ﬁlm (this is in California): ‘sitting on a gold-
mine . . . get the gold out’. The breeds of cat, in the cat-food
commercial, are shown as in animal interest ﬁlms. The
‘instructional device’ of the ‘extra strength’ in the headache tab-
let is interactive with educational television and diagrams. The
model house with gold coins pouring out of it is interactive
with children’s entertainment television. The girl inviting a tele-
phone call (from a money-borrower to a money-lender) uses
the look and accent of a generalised ‘personal’ (partly sexual)
invitation.
In all these ways, and in their essential combination, this is the
ﬂow of meanings and values of a speciﬁc culture.
programming: distribution and flow
120
www.ebook3000.com

5
EFFECTS OF THE
TECHNOLOGY AND ITS USES
A. CAUSE AND EFFECT IN COMMUNICATIONS
SYSTEMS
Since television became a popular social form there has been
widespread discussion of its eﬀects. The most signiﬁcant feature
of this discussion has been the isolation of the medium. Espe-
cially in advanced industrial societies the near-universality and
general social visibility of television have attracted simple cause-
and-eﬀect identiﬁcations of its agency in social and cultural
change. What is signiﬁcant is not the reliability of any of these
particular identiﬁcations; as will be seen, there are very few such
eﬀects which come near to satisfying the criteria of scientiﬁc
proof or even of general probability. What is really signiﬁcant is
the direction of attention to certain selected issues – on the one
hand ‘sex’ and ‘violence’, on the other hand ‘political manipula-
tion’ and ‘cultural degradation’ – which are of so general a kind
that it ought to be obvious that they cannot be specialised to an

isolated medium but, in so far as television bears on them, have
to be seen in a whole social and cultural process. Some part of
the study of television’s eﬀects has then to be seen as an ideol-
ogy: a way of interpreting general change through a displaced
and abstracted cause.
Cultural science, when it emerged as a method in early clas-
sical sociology, was concerned with the necessary diﬀerentiation
of its procedures from those of natural science. In its central
concept of ‘understanding’, and in its sensitivity to the problems
of judgement of value and of the participation and involvement
of the investigator, it was radically diﬀerent from the assump-
tions and methods of the ‘sociology of mass communications’
which is now orthodox and which at times even claims the
authority of just this classical sociology. The change can be seen
in one simple way, in the formula which was established by
Lasswell as the methodological principle of studies of com-
munication: the question ‘who says what, how, to whom, with
what eﬀect?’. For what this question has excluded is intention, and
therefore all real social and cultural process.
Suppose we rephrase the question as ‘who says what, how, to
whom, with what eﬀect and for what purpose?’. This would at
least direct our attention to the interests and agencies of com-
munication, which the orthodox question excludes. But the
exclusion is not accidental. It is part of a general social model
which abstracts social and cultural processes to such concepts as
‘socialisation’, ‘social function’ or ‘interaction’. Thus socialisa-
tion has been deﬁned as ‘learning the ways and becoming a
functioning member of society’, but while it is clear that in all
societies this process occurs, it is for just this reason an in-
diﬀerent concept when applied to any real and particular social
and cultural process. What the process has in common, in many
diﬀerent societies, is given a theoretical priority over just the
radical diﬀerences of ‘ways’ and ‘functioning’, and over the
highly diﬀerential character of being a ‘member’ of the society,
effects of the technology and its uses
122
www.ebook3000.com

which in practice deﬁne the real process. The abstract notions of
‘socialisation’ and ‘social function’ have the eﬀect of conferring
normality and in this sense legitimacy on any society in which a
learning and relating process may occur. And when this is so,
intention, in any full sense, cannot be recognised, let alone stud-
ied. To say that television is now a factor in socialisation, or that
its controllers and communicators are exercising a particular
social function, is to say very little until the forms of the society
which determine any particular socialisation and which allocate
the functions of control and communication have been precisely
speciﬁed.
The central concepts of cultural science – understanding,
value-judgement, the involvement of the investigator – have thus
been excluded or circumvented. This explains the consequent
emphasis on ‘eﬀects’, and the dissolution of causes into abstract
notions of ‘socialisation’ or ‘social function’ or into the false
particularisation of a self-directing technology. It explains also
the orthodox description of such studies as the study of ‘mass
communications’. What is really involved in that descriptive
word ‘mass’ is the whole contentious problem of the real social
relations within which modern communications systems oper-
ate. Its merely descriptive and assumptive use is a way of avoid-
ing the true sociology of communications, yet it is orthodox
over a very wide range and in theories and studies which are
otherwise sophisticated. A particular version of empiricism – not
the general reliance on experience and evidence, but a particular
reliance on evidence within the terms of these assumed func-
tions (socialisation, social function, mass communications) –
has largely taken over the practice of social and cultural inquiry,
and within the terms of its distortion of cultural science claims
the abstract authority of ‘social science’ and ‘scientiﬁc method’
as against all other modes of experience and analysis. Against
this conﬁdent and institutionalised practice it cannot be said
too often that the work of social and cultural science is only
effects of the technology and its uses 123

secondarily a matter of methodological procedures; it is primar-
ily the establishment of a consciousness of process, which will
include consciousness of intentions as well as of methods and of
working concepts.
Eﬀects, after all, can only be studied in relation to real inten-
tions, and these will often have to be as sharply distinguished
from declared intentions as from assumed and indiﬀerent gen-
eral social processes. This will require the study of real agency,
rather than of its apparent forms. As it is, however, the study of
eﬀects has mainly been rationalised in advance. It studies eﬀects
in ‘the socialisation process’, that is to say in the practice or
breach of social norms – ‘violence’, ‘delinquency’, ‘permissive-
ness’, or in ‘mass reactions’ (a mass, to be sure, that is then
classiﬁed into sectors) – the reactions of political or cultural or
economic consumers, in voting, ticket-buying or spending.
With this distinction however: that the latter studies have been
mainly ﬁnanced by interested agencies (broadcasting organ-
isations, market research and advertising agencies, political
parties), while the former have been mainly ﬁnanced by social-
interest groups and political and cultural authorities. Some stud-
ies have escaped the deﬁnitions of interest which their true
agencies have imposed; in some universities, while there has
been hiving and blurring, there has also been some independent
initiative. But very little has escaped the overall deﬁnitions,
including the deﬁnitions of procedure, which are the real con-
sequences of the social system and the ideology within which
the inquiries are framed. If we are to begin to approach any
real study of eﬀects, we shall have to return to a scientiﬁc
consideration of causes.
B. SOME STUDIES OF EFFECTS
The case of ‘violence on television’ is a useful example. Here the
experimental evidence is extraordinarily mixed (see the useful
effects of the technology and its uses
124
www.ebook3000.com

summary in Halloran, The Eﬀects of Television, 1970; pp. 54–64). In
majority it supports the view that ‘the observation of mass
media violence’ may be, while not a determining, a contributory
factor to subsequent aggressive behaviour. A minority view is
quite diﬀerent: that the eﬀect of observing violence on television
is cathartic. A further minority view stresses the possibility of
both provocative and cathartic eﬀects. Useful attempts have been
made to distinguish, as is crucially necessary, between diﬀerent
forms of violence, diﬀerent levels of its portrayal or represen-
tation, and diﬀerent groups of viewers. There has also been a
necessary distinction between immediate and long-term eﬀects.
It is important that this work should continue and be
developed. But ‘violence’ is a notable example of the eﬀects of
the abstract concept of ‘socialisation’. It is assumed, for example,
that violent behaviour is undesirable, in that it contradicts the
norms of accepted social behaviour. But it must be immediately
evident, if we look at real societies, that this is not the case. Each
of the societies in which this work was done was at the time
engaged in violent action – some of it of exceptional scale and
intensity – which had been authorised by the norms of the
society, in the sense of political decisions within normal pro-
cedures to undertake and continue it. At the same time, and for
discoverable social reasons, certain other violent practices – not-
ably ‘violent protest’ and armed robbery within the societies –
had been identiﬁed and condemned. In what sense then are we
to say that ‘violence’ is a breach of the socialisation process? The
real norm, in these actual societies, would seem rather to be:
‘unauthorised violence is impermissible’. This would depend on a
precise set of distinctions, within a given social system, between
approved and impermissible forms of behaviour, and at the level
of this true agency the identiﬁcations would never be in doubt
and would indeed be rationalised as ‘law’. (The law may punish
you if you refuse to kill in a foreign war; the law may punish you
if you kill or assault in the course of domestic robbery or
effects of the technology and its uses 125

internal political struggle.) This rationalisation corresponds to a
particular social structure.
But then, while it may at that level be clear to the agency
concerned, it may also, as it enters the communication process,
be far from clear not only to the viewers but to the producers of
its representations. Such confusion in viewers may indeed be
separately studied: that is a discoverable and important eﬀect.
But it is at the level of agency and production that the real prac-
tices, and their implicit or possible confusions, require analysis.
The ordinary assumption seems to run: ‘this society discourages
violent behaviour; violent behaviour is constantly represented
and reported on television; we need to study its eﬀects on
people’. But surely anyone looking analytically at those ﬁrst two
statements would feel the need to examine their quite extra-
ordinary relationship. Of course the apparent contradiction can
be rationalised: the controllers of television are indiﬀerent and
greedy, governed only by the proﬁt that can be made from pro-
grammes which show violence. (At a further level of rationali-
sation the medium itself can be reiﬁed: ‘television ﬁnds violence
exciting’.) But this does not explain the odd relationship
between ‘discouragement by the society’ and constant represen-
tation by a major social communications system. Are we to
assume perhaps that the television organisations are outside the
normal social structure? But in all the countries in which the
research is done the control and ownership of television systems
is centrally characteristic of general social control and ownership
and (in part) authority. When this is realised, it would be as
reasonable to say: ‘this society encourages violent behaviour;
violent behaviour is constantly represented and reported on tele-
vision, its major communications system’. But the truth is that
neither assumption will do. What we are really faced with is a
contradiction within the social system itself. And it is then to the
sociology of that contradiction that we should direct our
primary scientiﬁc attention.
effects of the technology and its uses
126
www.ebook3000.com

A diﬀerent kind of problem arises when we look at studies of
the eﬀects of television on political behaviour. These have been
usefully reviewed by Jay G. Blumler (The Eﬀects of Television, pp. 70–
87). The centre of the problem is that a given society deﬁnes
political behaviour in its own terms: in Britain and the United
States, for example, as voting or as rating of political leaders.
These have the additional advantage that they are relatively easy
to count. Early studies seemed to show, moreover, that television
had little discernible inﬂuence on either. Later studies, while
not controverting this, found some measurable inﬂuence on
information about party policies and, though it remains diﬃcult
to interpret, on the persuasibility of those with initially low
party-political motivations or attachments.
But while it is useful to know these ﬁndings, and to look for
similar further work, the most important question to ask is about
the causes of these deﬁnitions of political eﬀects. It is true that
there is now beginning to be some study of ‘system eﬀects’, as
distinct from eﬀects on countable individual voters. But this, too,
has normally been undertaken within the terms of the political
model from which the initial deﬁnitions were shaped. Thus it
has been observed, correctly, that during elections but also at
other times of general controversy, television as a system has
become the most evident area in which political argument is
conducted. Television interviewers and commentators have
become, in a sense, political ﬁgures in their own right, and there
has been evident tension between them and orthodox (usually
elected) political leaders. Yet to the degree that elected leaders
depend, or believe they depend, on television coverage, this ten-
sion does not prevent leaders submitting themselves to more
open and public questioning of their policies than has ever been
the case in any comparable communications system. This much,
at least, is clear gain.
Yet it remains true that this kind of eﬀect is within the terms
of a given political system and its deﬁnitions of political
effects of the technology and its uses 127

behaviour. The competitive assessment of leaders and through
them (but normally only through them) of policies is taken as a
norm. But this at once raises a question. In Britain at least, during
the period of television as a majority service, this mode of polit-
ical behaviour has in fact been declining, in the important sense
that the proportion of people voting at elections has been stead-
ily going down. In the same period, other forms of political
behaviour – notably demonstrations and political strikes – have
quite markedly increased. It would require a very diﬀerent
model of cause and eﬀect to inquire into this. It could be argued
that increased exposure to competitive assessment in these terms
has weakened adherence to occasional election as a political
mode, or even that (given other kinds of political stimulation by
television – the reporting of demonstrations, the dramatisation
of certain issues) it has had some strengthening inﬂuence on
alternative modes. Hardly anything is known about this, for the
important reason that the assumption of eﬀect was made,
initially, in terms of the functioning of a given system.
Underlying orthodox investigation of the eﬀects of television,
whether on a matter like violence or on a quite diﬀerent matter
like voting, we can then see a particular cultural model, which
tends to determine scope and method. What is usually asked
about television is what inﬂuence it has by comparison with
other inﬂuences. All these inﬂuences – television, the home, the
school, the press, work – are assumed as discrete though then
conceded to interact. Eﬀects can then be measured, and tech-
niques reﬁned. But in an important sense there can be no
inquiry about cause because the total social practice has been
either disintegrated into these separable factors, or – an import-
ant condition for just this separation – has been assumed as
normal: the real process of socialisation or democratic politics or
what may be. Thus eﬀect is ordinarily studied at a tertiary level,
as between competing or alternative factors, and in the breach or
observance of given social, cultural and political norms. Yet just
effects of the technology and its uses
128
www.ebook3000.com

these factors and norms are themselves eﬀects; they are the estab-
lished institutions, relationships and values of a given order of
society. Primary causes, in the given order of society, are then
ordinarily displaced by a doubtful sphere of eﬀects taken as
causes, with the study of eﬀects then becoming, in real terms,
the isolable eﬀects of eﬀects.
The particular importance of this, in the case of television, is
that it reinforces tendencies to think of a given cultural system –
the intentions and uses of a technology – in limited or mislead-
ing ways. That is to say, it studies the symptoms of the operation
of an otherwise unexamined agency or – for this is the position
which the former position in part prepares – it studies an agency
as a system, in extreme cases performing the ﬁnal feat of abstrac-
tion when it is supposed that what is being studied is simply ‘a
medium’, ‘a technology’, with its own quite internal laws of
cause and eﬀect.
C. THE TECHNOLOGY AS A CAUSE
Sociological and psychological studies of the eﬀects of televi-
sion, which in their limited terms have usually been serious and
careful, were signiﬁcantly overtaken, during the 1960s, by a
fully developed theory of the technology – the medium – as
determining. There had been, as we have seen, much implicit
ideology in the sociological and psychological inquiries, but the
new theory was explicitly ideological: not only a ratiﬁcation,
indeed a celebration, of the medium as such, but an attempted
cancellation of all other questions about it and its uses. The work
of McLuhan was a particular culmination of an aesthetic theory
which became, negatively, a social theory: a development and
elaboration of formalism which can be seen in many ﬁelds, from
literary criticism and linguistics to psychology and anthro-
pology, but which acquired its most signiﬁcant popular inﬂuence
in an isolating theory of ‘the media’.
effects of the technology and its uses 129

Here, characteristically – and as explicit ratiﬁcation of particu-
lar uses – there is an apparent sophistication in just the critical
area of cause and eﬀect which we have been discussing. It is an
apparently sophisticated technological determinism which has
the signiﬁcant eﬀect of indicating a social and cultural determin-
ism: a determinism, that is to say, which ratiﬁes the society and
culture we now have, and especially its most powerful internal
directions. For if the medium – whether print or television – is
the cause, all other causes, all that men ordinarily see as history,
are at once reduced to eﬀects. Similarly, what are elsewhere seen
as eﬀects, and as such subject to social, cultural, psychological
and moral questioning, are excluded as irrelevant by comparison
with the direct physiological and therefore ‘psychic’ eﬀects of
the media as such. The initial formulation – ‘the medium is the
message’ – was a simple formalism. The subsequent formulation
– ‘the medium is the massage’ – is a direct and functioning
ideology.
There are of course speciﬁc characteristics of diﬀerent media,
and these characteristics are related to speciﬁc historical and
cultural situations and intentions. Much of the initial appeal of
McLuhan’s work was his apparent attention to the speciﬁcity of
media: the diﬀerences in quality between speech, print, radio,
television and so on. But in his work, as in the whole formalist
tradition, the media were never really seen as practices. All spe-
ciﬁc practice was subsumed by an arbitrarily assigned psychic
function, and this had the eﬀect of dissolving not only speciﬁc
but general intentions. If speciﬁc media are essentially psychic
adjustments, coming not from relations between ourselves but
between a generalised human organism and its general physical
environment, then of course intention, in any general or par-
ticular case, is irrelevant, and with intention goes content, whether
apparent or real. All media operations are in eﬀect desocialised;
they are simply physical events in an abstracted sensorium, and
are distinguishable only by their variable sense-ratios. But it is
effects of the technology and its uses
130
www.ebook3000.com

then interesting that from this wholly unhistorical and asocial
base McLuhan projects certain images of society: ‘retribalisation’
by the ‘electronic age’; the ‘global village’. As descriptions of any
observable social state or tendency, in the period in which elec-
tronic media have been dominant, these are so ludicrous as to
raise a further question. The physical fact of instant transmission,
as a technical possibility, has been uncritically raised to a social
fact, without any pause to notice that virtually all such transmis-
sion is at once selected and controlled by existing social author-
ities. McLuhan, of course, would apparently do away with all
such controls; the only controls he envisages are a kind of allo-
cation and rationing of particular media for particular psychic
eﬀects, which he believes would dissolve or control any social
problem that arises. But the technical abstractions, in their
unnoticed projections into social models, have the eﬀect of can-
celling all attention to existing and developing (and already chal-
lenged) communications institutions. If the eﬀect of the
medium is the same, whoever controls or uses it, and whatever
apparent content he may try to insert, then we can forget ordin-
ary political and cultural argument and let the technology run
itself. It is hardly surprising that this conclusion has been wel-
comed by the ‘media-men’ of the existing institutions. It gives
the gloss of avant-garde theory to the crudest versions of their
existing interests and practices, and assigns all their critics to
pre-electronic irrelevance. Thus what began as pure formalism,
and as speculation on human essence, ends as operative social
theory and practice, in the heartland of the most dominative and
aggressive communications institutions in the world.
The particular rhetoric of McLuhan’s theory of communica-
tions is unlikely to last long. But it is signiﬁcant mainly as an
example of an ideological representation of technology as a
cause, and in this sense it will have successors, as particular
formulations lose their force. What has to be seen, by contrast, is
the radically diﬀerent position in which technology, including
effects of the technology and its uses 131

communication technology, and speciﬁcally television, is at
once an intention and an eﬀect of a particular social order.
D. TECHNOLOGY AS AN EFFECT
If we cancel history, in the sense of real times and real places, we
can conceive an abstract human nature which has speciﬁc psy-
chic needs and which variable forms of technology and inter-
course come to satisfy. This purely idealist model of human
history may have variable speciﬁc culminations – the end of
alienation, the rediscovery of the tribe – but within it technol-
ogy is a simple human eﬀusion, the extension of a limb or a
sense. The destiny and the process can be believed in only if we
assume a human essence waiting to come to realisation, in these
ways, with inbuilt if not yet realised metaphysical purposes. The
model can be related to history only by endless retrospect, in
which by selection such a process can be generalised or demon-
strated. Characteristically, in such a model, there will be no more
history: a culminating age has arrived.
Any cancellation of history, in the sense of real times and real
places, is essentially a cancellation of the contemporary world, in
which, within limits and under pressures, men act and react,
struggle and concede, co-operate, conﬂict and compete. A tech-
nology, when it has been achieved, can be seen as a general
human property, an extension of general human capacity. But all
technologies have been developed and improved to help with
known human practices or with foreseen and desired practices.
This element of intention is fundamental, but it is not exclusive.
Original intention corresponds with the known or desired
practices of a particular social group, and the pace and scale of
development will be radically aﬀected by that group’s speciﬁc
intentions and its relative strength. Yet at many subsequent stages
other social groups, sometimes with other intentions or at least
with diﬀerent scales of priority, will adopt and develop the
effects of the technology and its uses
132
www.ebook3000.com

technology, often with diﬀerent purposes and eﬀects. Further,
there will be in many cases unforeseen uses and unforeseen
eﬀects which are again a real qualiﬁcation of the original inten-
tion. Thus an explosive may be developed at the command or by
the investment of a ruling class, or by the investment or for the
proﬁt of an industrial enterprise, yet come to be used also by a
revolutionary group against that ruling class, or by criminals
against the industrialist’s property.
In other words, while we have to reject technological deter-
minism, in all its forms, we must be careful not to substitute for
it the notion of a determined technology. Technological deter-
minism is an untenable notion because it substitutes for real
social, political and economic intention, either the random
autonomy of invention or an abstract human essence. But the
notion of a determined technology has a similar one-sided, one-
way version of human process. Determination is a real social
process, but never (as in some theological and some Marxist
versions) a wholly controlling, wholly predicting set of causes.
On the contrary, the reality of determination is the setting of
limits and the exertion of pressures, within which variable social
practices are profoundly aﬀected but never necessarily con-
trolled. We have to think of determination not as a single force,
or a single abstraction of forces, but as a process in which real
determining factors – the distribution of power or of capital,
social and physical inheritance, relations of scale and size
between groups – set limits and exert pressures, but neither
wholly control nor wholly predict the outcome of complex
activity within or at these limits, and under or against these
pressures.
The case of television is an excellent example. We have seen
that the complex process of its invention had speciﬁc military,
administrative and commercial intentions, and each of these
interacted with what were, for real if limited periods and in real
if limited ways, scientiﬁc intentions. At the stage of transition
effects of the technology and its uses 133

from invention to technology, the process of its development
came to be dominated by commercial intentions, though still
with some real political and military interests. But then a primar-
ily commercial intention acquired social and political intentions
of a general kind, in notions of social training and social control
which in part harmonised and in part conﬂicted with the driv-
ing commercial intention (the latter gaining ascendancy in the
United States, though never an unqualiﬁed ascendancy; the for-
mer gaining but then losing ascendancy in Britain, though again
the loss is not unqualiﬁed). Yet as intention became eﬀect
another dimension opened. It was not only ruling or com-
mercial groups who recognised the problems of communication
in conditions of complex or of privatised mobility. It was also
the many people who were experiencing this process as subjects.
To controllers and programmers they might seem merely
objects: a viewing public or a market. But from their own side of
the screen there was a diﬀerent perspective: if they were exposed
by need in new ways, they were also exposed to certain
uncontrollable opportunities. This complicated interaction is
still very much in the process of working itself out.
Literacy had shown similar complications. It is interesting that
at the beginning of the industrial revolution in Britain, when
education had to be reorganised, the ruling class decided to
teach working people to read but not to write. If they could read
they could understand new kinds of instructions and, moreover,
they could read the Bible for their moral improvement. They did
not need writing, however, since they would have no orders or
instructions or lessons to communicate. At most they might
struggle to produce simple signatures, which would be
occasionally required for oﬃcial purposes. The full range of
writing came later, with further development of the society and
the economy. But it is what happened to reading that is really
signiﬁcant. For there was no way to teach a man to read the
Bible which did not also enable him to read the radical press. A
effects of the technology and its uses
134
www.ebook3000.com

controlled intention became an uncontrolled eﬀect. Yet the
acquisition of literacy, then as now, almost always involved sub-
mission to a lengthy period of social training – education – in
which quite other things than literacy or similar skills were
taught; in which, in fact, values and norms were taught which
became, very often, inextricable from the literacy.
The unique factor of broadcasting – ﬁrst in sound, then even
more clearly in television – has been that its communication is
accessible to normal social development; it requires no speciﬁc
training which brings people within the orbit of public author-
ity. If we can watch and listen to people in our immediate circle,
we can watch and listen to television. Much of the great popular
appeal of radio and television has been due to this sense of
apparently unmediated access. The real mediations will have to
be noted, but again and again they are easy to miss. What is
oﬀered is a set with a tuner and a switch: we can turn it on or
oﬀ, or vary what we are receiving. Throughout its history there
has been this popular sense that broadcasting is a welcome
alternative to the normal and recognisable social order of
communications.
Many people who are aware of the manipulative powers of
radio and television, or of its apparently inexhaustible appeal to
children, react in ways which implicitly suppress all the other
history of communication. Thus it is often indignantly said that
television is a ‘third parent’, as if children had not in all
developed societies had third parents in the shape of priests,
teachers and workmasters, to say nothing of the actual parents
and relations who, in many periods and cultures, intervened to
control or to instruct. Against those real alternatives this switch-
able communication has profound attractions. Or it is said that
people are exposed to propaganda by television, as if there had
never been masters, employers, judges, priests.
It is interesting that many of the contradictions of capitalist
democracy have indeed come out in the argument about
effects of the technology and its uses 135

television control. The British version of ‘public responsibility’
was an emphasis, in new terms, of the priest and the teacher,
with behind them a whole dominant and normative set of mean-
ings and values. The American version of ‘public freedom’ was
open broadcasting subject only to the purchase of facilities,
which then settled freedom in direct relation to existing eco-
nomic inequalities. In each case the control theoretically lost by
the switchable receiver was regained by the assertion of pater-
nalist or capitalist ownership of transmission. This explains the
realities of contemporary mediation, but it explains also the
apparently irrepressible search, by listeners and viewers, for
other sources. Many British working-class people welcomed
American culture, or the Americanised character of British
commercial television, as an alternative to a British ‘public’
version which, from a subordinate position, they already knew
too well. In many parts of the world this apparently free-ﬂoating
and accessible culture was a welcome alternative to dominant
local cultural patterns and restrictions. Young people all over
Europe welcomed the pirate broadcasters, as an alternative to
authorities they suspected or distrusted or were simply tired of.
The irony was that what came free and easy and accessible was a
planned operation by a distant and invisible authority – the
American corporations. But in local and immediate terms, as in
the other cases mentioned, this did not at ﬁrst greatly matter; a
choice was being exercised, here and now.
Television has now been a majority service for a whole gener-
ation. It has had certain intended eﬀects corresponding to certain
explicit intentions, essentially declared by the variable character
of television institutions. But it has also had unforeseen eﬀects,
among them the desire to use the technology for oneself. In the
young radical underground, and even more in the young cul-
tural underground, there is a familiarity with media, and an
eager sense of experiment and practice, which is as much an
eﬀect as the more widely publicised and predicted passivity.
effects of the technology and its uses
136
www.ebook3000.com

Indeed, by prolonged use of a technology which had seemed to
be contained and limited to commercial or paternal or authori-
tarian ends, many people – we do not yet know whether they are
enough people – conceived quite diﬀerent intentions and uses.
This is the critical answer to the notion of a determined technol-
ogy as well as the more ordinary notion of a technological
determinism. For these new uses are at least as appropriate to the
technology as the uses and intentions which have hitherto
deﬁned it. It is from this generation, raised on television, that we
are continually getting examples and proposals of electronic cre-
ation and communication which are so diﬀerent from orthodox
television as to seem a quite new technology and cultural form.
The town-meeting by television is a radically alternative deﬁn-
ition of the relations between ‘broadcasters’ and ‘viewers’. The
multi-screen play is a radically alternative deﬁnition of the
framed projection or the framed ﬂow. Just as television was
coming to seem a determined cultural form or a determined
technology, there are these radically alternative deﬁnitions and
practices, trying to ﬁnd their way through.
How the technology develops from now on is then not only a
matter of some autonomous process directed by remote engin-
eers. It is a matter of social and cultural deﬁnition, according to
the ends sought. From a range of existing developments and
possibilities, variable priorities and variable institutions are now
clearly on the agenda. Yet this does not mean that the issue is
undetermined; the limits and pressures are real and powerful.
Most technical development is in the hands of corporations
which express the contemporary interlock of military, political
and commercial intentions. Most policy development is in the
hands of established broadcasting corporations and the political
bureaucracies of a few powerful states. All that has been estab-
lished so far is that neither the theory nor the practice of televi-
sion as we know it is a necessary or a predicting cause. Current
orthodox theory and practice are, on the contrary, eﬀects. Thus
effects of the technology and its uses 137

whether the theory and the practice can be changed will depend
not on the ﬁxed properties of the medium nor on the necessary
character of its institutions, but on a continually renewable social
action and struggle. It is therefore to the immediately emergent
problems of the technology and the institutions that we must
now turn.
effects of the technology and its uses
138
www.ebook3000.com

6
ALTERNATIVE TECHNOLOGY,
ALTERNATIVE USES?
There can be little doubt that in the early 1970s we are already in
a new generation of communications technology, and that
much of this is centred on new forms of television. At the same
time we are in a very contentious and confused situation about
the institutions and social processes of all communications.
There is still an unﬁnished struggle and argument over the
institutions and control of sound and vision broadcasting: the
conﬂict that has been clear for two generations between ‘public
service’ and ‘commercial’ institutions and policies. It would be a
major error to suppose that this conﬂict is over; indeed the signs
are that it is now entering one of its most acute and diﬃcult
phases. But at the same time the actual and prospective develop-
ment of new kinds of technology is altering some of the terms
of this long-standing conﬂict, and may, if we are not careful,
merely confuse it. On the other hand, some of the new technical
developments seem to open the way to institutions of a radically
diﬀerent kind from either ‘public service’ or ‘commercial’

broadcasting; indeed of a diﬀerent kind, in some cases, from
‘broadcasting’ itself.
We have then to try to clarify, ﬁrst, the new technology and,
second, the eﬀects this may have on institutions, policies and
uses of television. But we have to do this while remembering
that the technology will not determine the eﬀects. On the con-
trary, the new technology is itself a product of a particular social
system, and will be developed as an apparently autonomous
process of innovation only to the extent that we fail to identify
and challenge its real agencies. But it is not only a question of
identiﬁcation and defence. There are contradictory factors, in the
whole social development, which may make it possible to use
some or all of the new technology for purposes quite diﬀerent
from those of the existing social order: certainly locally and
perhaps more generally. The choices and uses actually made
will in any case be part of a more general process of social
development, social growth and social struggle.
A. THE DEVELOPING TECHNOLOGY
(i) There will be continuing development within existing
television systems. As in capitalist industry generally, there is
continual internal pressure to devise new forms of existing
machines – the ‘consumer durables’ as they are, with
unintentional irony, described. By deﬁnition these must be
attractive or made to seem attractive to existing owners, so
that a new wave of demand can be generated.1 The colour
receiver was the last such innovation, and it has still some way
to run. The portable television set is contemporary with it,
and will be extensively developed. Micro-receivers are already
coming into view. But the major development of the late
1970s may well be the large-screen receiver: ﬁrst the screen of
four by six feet which is already in development; then the ﬂat-
wall receiver. This technology has a direct continuity with its
alternative technology, alternative uses?
140
www.ebook3000.com

immediate predecessors in sound and vision receivers, and
even on its own it stands a good chance of remedying some
of the faults of domestic television reception, with the particu-
lar advantage that it would directly serve existing mainstream
television broadcasting, in an obvious alliance (already in
some cases quite formal) of existing social and economic
interests.
(ii) Cable distribution of television is, however, likely to
attract even more attention. It began as a way of remedying
imperfect general broadcast transmission: to bring signals to
otherwise inaccessible or diﬃcult areas, and to improve existing
signals. Cable distribution is already widespread and is develop-
ing rapidly in North America. In Britain it is currently estimated
that it will reach thirty per cent of the population by 1980; in
North America it will be almost universally available well before
that.2 On its own, cable distribution is simply an ancillary of
broadcasting: picking up normal television on headend facilities;
ﬁltering, amplifying and retransmitting it. But two new de-
velopments are already in progress. First, a cable distribution sys-
tem can become an independent broadcasting service: there are
already many examples in North America, and some experi-
mental examples in Britain. Secondly, a cable distribution system
can be linked, via computers, with a range of services. These
include, as probable developments now and on through3 the
1970s and 1980s:
(a) wired news, weather and traﬃc information services;
(b) shopping services, with the telephone system keyed in, so
that goods can be seen and ordered;
(c) educational programmes of all kinds;
(d) ‘demand’ information services from libraries and memory-
banks;
(e) ‘demand’ television programmes, ﬁlms, etc. ordered from a
library catalogue;
alternative technology, alternative uses? 141

(f) ‘telefax’ or ‘homofax’ replication of newspapers, magazines
and other printed material;
(g) medical consultancy services;
(h) public meetings, discussions, conferences and voting.
None of these uses and projected uses presents any major tech-
nical problem in itself, but there is dispute about the carrying
capacity of various cable systems, and this question could
become critical as the diversity of services, and especially of
‘demand’ services, extends. Most systems now in operation have
a twelve-channel capability, while some have twenty-channel. A
forty-channel system is in development.4 Many of the important
decisions about channel-capacity equipment will be made in
direct relation to the uses foreseen, and these will in turn be
directly related to the types of institution controlling and direct-
ing them. There is also an important controversy about relative
costs, as between broadcasting and cable, for diﬀerent types of
community, and this bears very closely on institutional
solutions. Meanwhile an alternative method of short-range
distribution, by quasi-laser systems, is at an early stage.5
(iii) A related complex of visual information systems is cer-
tain to develop.6 These include the visual telephone – already in
operation for conference systems – and a range of domestic
devices from telereading of meters and telecast security alarms
to developed systems of closed-circuit television, inside and
between individual houses. These are relevant in so far as some
of them may aﬀect the design of receivers.
(iv) During the 1960s an extensive system of space satellite
communications and ground-stations, including television, was
developed.7 Much of the existing capacity is used for telephonic
purposes, as ‘common carrier’, but there is a striking develop-
ment of satellite television, both for relaying particular pro-
grammes and events, and as the means of a special service
(already under way in India and in Latin America). Normal
alternative technology, alternative uses?
142
www.ebook3000.com

future development may be through ground-stations, which in
receiving and then distributing signals will be in a position to
select for transmission within the areas they cover. But it is esti-
mated that by the mid-1970s direct transmission into aug-
mented home receivers will be technically possible, though
costly. Prototype models already exist, including in Britain.
Transmission into unaugmented domestic receivers is not likely
before the mid-1980s. Yet both will come, technically, with
extraordinary eﬀects on all existing national and local systems,
subject always to political decisions. A very likely development is
the linking of satellite television via ground stations to cable
systems. These may well be the ﬁrst ‘multinational’ – more
strictly para-national – television corporations.
(v) Video-cassette production and distribution is already well
under way. In its ﬁrst stages it will bear the relation to television
broadcasting that records have borne to concerts and radio. But
as the market is expanded it seems certain that there will be, in
addition to the cheaper forms of video-recording of already
transmitted television programmes, some production of
specialised video-cassettes. There will be an alternative, here,
between cassette production and demand-cable library-
catalogue services. Meanwhile, movie cartridge projectors are
being intensively developed.
(vi) Comparatively low-cost videotape recording equipment
has already arrived, and is beginning to be quite extensively used
for a diﬀerent kind of television production, in community
experiments and radical cultural enterprises. This could be rap-
idly extended, technically, but in general it serves a set of radic-
ally diﬀerent interests from large-screen, satellite and cassette
production. However, it has interesting practicable links with
certain uses of cable television, especially in independent
community stations.
(vii) Perhaps the most revolutionary technical developments
are in the area of interactive television. It is already possible in
alternative technology, alternative uses? 143

some cable systems to respond to programmes in certain pre-
determined ways: choosing an item from a shop display or from
an advertisement, for example.8 There are already plans in the
United States for instantaneous audience reaction to pro-
grammes being transmitted; it has even been suggested that at a
certain point in a play viewers could choose, by majority vote,
whether it should have a ‘sad’ or a ‘happy’ ending. Audience
measurement will in any case become a more accurate and virtu-
ally instantaneous procedure, by use of the reactive technology
now available. It is clear that the use of button-pressing reactive
equipment would enable many kinds of choice to be made
quickly and accurately; it is for example a perfectly possible
voting procedure, given certain technically available safeguards.
But we have to distinguish between reactive and interactive
technology. Nearly all the equipment that is being currently
developed is reactive; the range of choices, both in detail and in
scope, is pre-set. This will, undoubtedly, be very widely used.
More genuinely interactive television would depend on cable
systems with associated special equipment. But there is an area
of developing technology which allows for something between
pre-set reaction and full interaction.9 This is a development from
a technical possibility which is already being used to increase
channel capacity. Between normal television signals there is a
normally unseen and inaudible gap. An adapter ﬁtted to an
ordinary set can receive information or another programme
transmitted during these signal gaps in an ordinary programme;
the subliminal programme can then be played back on its own.
Work is now going on in the United States to develop equipment
for using the signal-gap for reaction-interaction, especially
in educational programmes (there will of course be many
normal educational programmes of a pre-set reaction, teaching-
machine type).
alternative technology, alternative uses?
144
www.ebook3000.com

B. INSTITUTIONS OF THE NEW TECHNOLOGY
It is clear that some of these technical developments taken singly,
and certainly all of them taken together, will have a radical eﬀect
on all the institutions of television. We can ﬁrst look at the eﬀects
of each kind of development taken separately.
(i) New types of receiver: these will mainly strengthen the exist-
ing large-network television institutions which, as in the case of
colour, will undoubtedly develop programmes to promote and
exploit them. But their cost, especially in the case of large-screen
receivers, may open the way to other kinds of institution which
are now pressing hard to get in. They might be associated, for ex-
ample, with pay-television systems; there is already an American
company oﬀering ﬁrst-run feature ﬁlms by direct on-the-spot
subscription, and the large screen would be especially useful
for this.10 Monopoly transmission, by subscription, of many
national and international sporting events is another probability.
(ii) Cable systems: these, undoubtedly, form the ﬁrst major area
of controversy, for a number of organisations, of diﬀerent kinds,
are ready to use cable technology to weaken or even to break the
relative monopoly of the large-network broadcasting authorities.
The irony is that the best-ﬁnanced cable companies are oﬀering
what is, essentially, a version of the very worst kind of broad-
casting service. It is not uncommon for a twelve-channel cable
system to be planned to carry nothing but old movies or old
television entertainment series. The choice which is oﬀered as a
fruit of the new technology is a choice only within this repeti-
tive dimension. The real motive, of course, is proﬁt through
advertising, but if this kind of cable television captured a signiﬁ-
cant share of advertising money, the funds available for produc-
tion within the existing system would be considerably reduced.
It is improbable, given the costs of cable-laying, that there would
be much competition between cable systems, even in large cities.
Moreover, commercial cable systems would concentrate on the
alternative technology, alternative uses? 145

cities and on areas of dense population. The reduction of avail-
able funds for ordinary broadcasting could thus lead to a reversal
of some of the real social beneﬁts of a broadcasting service.
Moreover, even within cities, cable service would be selective
by income. A Mitre Corporation analysis (Urban Cable Systems,
William F. Mason, 1971) showed that maximum proﬁt would be
obtained at about 50 per cent coverage, while a Rand Corpor-
ation study (Cable Communications in the Dayton Miami Valley, L. L.
Johnson, 1972) showed high proﬁt on 40 per cent coverage, at a
relatively high subscription fee, and predicted that lowering the
subscription, while increasing coverage, would reduce the proﬁt
rate.11 Given the bias of such systems to advertising, itself seek-
ing relatively aﬄuent viewers, a commercial cable system would
not really provide a community service, though there would
usually be some time set aside for local information and services
as a way of gaining prestige or consent. It might, rather, take over
a signiﬁcant part of general television entertainment service,
with radical eﬀects on general broadcasting. In the British sys-
tem, where public service television is ﬁnanced by licence fees, it
is easy to imagine the campaign against licences which could be
mounted when many viewers could get much of their television
from a service ﬁnanced by advertising or a service to which they
were already subscribing at about the rate of a licence.
For all these reasons the existing broadcasting establishment is
hostile to cable television, and the real social situation is then
profoundly contradictory and paradoxical. For cable systems of a
diﬀerent kind, genuinely run by and serving local communities,
with access to a full range of public programmes for which the
necessary resources had been speciﬁcally provided, could indeed
democratise broadcasting. This argument for democracy, for
local needs, for freedom of reception and access, supports cable
television as a technology. It would be a way of diminishing the
power of remote and centralised broadcasting corporations,
with their typical dependence on large capital or on state control
alternative technology, alternative uses?
146
www.ebook3000.com

or appointment. Similar arguments will indeed be used by the
existing cable companies and their friends, but hypocritically,
for locally controlled systems are the last thing they want, and
community service, in their mouths, means consumer pene-
tration. Yet the necessary opposition to that kind of cable system
development could very easily turn into an uncritical defence of
the existing large broadcasting corporations.
This problem can be resolved only if we realise that the cable
system is indeed no more than a technology, and that every
argument about it depends on its highly variable institutions and
on the consequently variable links between cable distribution
and other forms of service and production. All that needs to be
re-emphasised now is that in its most common forms, in the
companies which have the ﬁnance and the technology available,
cable television is an extreme form of the earliest deﬁnition of
broadcasting as simple transmission. Its extensive development, by
the criteria of these companies, would gravely damage television
production. Yet we are already able to see, from some publicly
ﬁnanced local experiments, that cable technology could alter the
whole social and cultural process of televised communications.
(iii) Visual information systems: these are certain to be developed,
though of course unevenly, as utilities. But if their proﬁts are to
go to private companies or to state agencies, there will again be
some eﬀect on the resources available for any planned public
television and visual-information service of a co-ordinated kind.
(iv) Satellite communications: these systems, potentially, could
have the greatest impact on existing institutions, for in one very
probable kind of development they will be used to penetrate or
circumvent existing national broadcasting systems, in the name
of ‘internationalism’ but in reality in the service of one or two
dominant cultures. Complicated and inconclusive international
negotiations on the use of satellite television have already taken
place. The two nations which could now mount a global satellite
service, the United States and the Soviet Union, would have
alternative technology, alternative uses? 147

much to lose (though, temptingly, also much to gain) by a
system of beaming television into each other’s territories. The
signs are that they will reach a stand-oﬀ agreement to leave each
other’s territories alone, but there is then still the problem of the
rest of the world. It is probable that agreement will be reached
that in international law the concept of national sovereignty will
include the right to refuse beamed satellite signals. There are,
after all, simple practical means of control, for a decade or so
ahead, when reception could mainly depend on ground-
stations, which can exercise selection or censorship. Alter-
natively, as in the European Broadcasting Union project, the
satellite would have twelve-channel narrow-beam transmission
which, in favourable geographical circumstances, would
transmit only to the areas of particular nation states.
When cheaper domestic satellite receivers become available,
the conﬂict will become more open. Greater sensitivity in the
receivers or, as probably, greater power in the satellite transmit-
ters (though by a factor of ten, which is still some way to go)
could enable people to get reception well beyond their frontiers.
Smaller nations would have either to ban such receivers or accept
what will be called the open sky. But even before that, in many
poor countries, and in many medium-sized nations, where in
varying degrees the costs of an independent national television
service already present serious problems, there will be strong
pressure to accept what will look like manna. In capitalist coun-
tries, especially, and in the third world, apparently national or
local services, often funded by para-national corporations, could
be set up, using their own ground-stations and cable systems, or
their own satellite receivers, to oﬀer comparatively cheap tele-
vision which would have almost wholly originated outside the
country. This would have important political and cultural eﬀects,
as already in the dumping of old series, or the penetrative pro-
motion of current series, by the American corporations. Already
many smaller societies, especially those on the borders of larger
alternative technology, alternative uses?
148
www.ebook3000.com

societies, are powerless to resist technical broadcast penetration.
The primary motive of the operation, then as now, would be the
penetration by para-national corporation advertising. The proﬁts
from this would be the factor making the service locally cheap,
and in the course of time it could be very favourably competitive
with all independent national systems.
Here again there is a paradox. A world-wide television service,
with genuinely open skies, would be an enormous gain to the
peoples of the world, as short-wave radio, bypassing national
controls, has already clearly been. Against the rhetoric of open
skies, which in fact, given the expense and sophistication of
satellite technology, would be monopolised by a few large cor-
porations and authoritarian governments, it will sound strange
and reactionary to defend national autonomy. But the probable
users of the technology are not internationalists, in the sense of
any signiﬁcant mutuality. The national or local components in
their services would be matters merely of consent and publicity:
tokenism. In most countries, if these systems gained control,
independent production would become very diﬃcult or impos-
sible. Most of the inhabitants of the ‘global village’ would be
saying nothing, in these new terms, while a few powerful cor-
porations and governments, and the people they could hire,
would speak in ways never before known to most of the peoples
of the world.
There is still some time before this situation becomes critical.
The major problems will arise in the 1980s. But the international
negotiations so far conducted have been unimpressive. An inter-
national supervisory body, which could not only protect all
nations’ interests but also actively promote genuine international
interchange, has so far been blocked by the relative monopoly of
satellite technology and the consequent demands for weighted
voting. Yet it remains an urgent need.
(v) Cassettes: in the early 1970s video-cassettes have been
mainly selling to institutions; a new general market drive is now
alternative technology, alternative uses? 149

about to open. In its early stages it will not greatly aﬀect existing
institutions; it will serve as a domestic ancillary, which many
people will ﬁnd useful. Behind this innocent front, more signiﬁ-
cant developments are already occurring. Links are being made
between television production companies, publishers and cas-
sette manufacturers. A situation could arise where with access to
backlog material and with technical monopoly for educational
contracts a new centre of production and distribution would
acquire international signiﬁcance. Some of these ﬁnancial moves
have as their objective the circumvention of existing national
television systems and regulations, and the creation, within these
monopoly terms, of an international video-consumer market.
The irony is again that the cassette, as a technology, oﬀers
opportunities of a quite diﬀerent kind: not only for individual
use – seeing a programme when you want it, having a private
cassette library – but for new ‘publishing’ institutions: small
independent 
production 
companies, 
oﬀering 
cassette
programmes in ways similar to book-publishing before the
monopoly tendencies of the 1960s; larger public and semi-
public production companies, oﬀering a ‘public library’ cassette
service. But as in every other phase of current development of
the new technology, the interests (often protected by patents)
which are now in charge have quite diﬀerent ends in view.
(vi) Videotape equipment: this will be marketed as a domestic
sideline (though for very well-oﬀ people), but it oﬀers extra-
ordinary opportunities for the development of independent
community and educational television. Most of the centrali-
sation of broadcasting arose from high capital costs. There are
already enough examples of successful local experiments in
video-making to encourage us to believe that the availability of
this equipment may make a signiﬁcant contribution to genu-
inely popular television. However, this will have to exist and
survive in a world in which all the other technical tendencies are
in an opposite direction, and it is then not so much a matter of
alternative technology, alternative uses?
150
www.ebook3000.com

costs alone, but of the eﬀect of available models and expectations
in what people produce for themselves.
(vii) Reactive and interactive devices: here, clearly, there are sharply
alternative possible eﬀects on the institutions. The technology
has clear possibilities in community information and politics,
and outstandingly in certain kinds of education. The main use
that will be funded, however, unless some political change very
quickly occurs, will be commercial. Advertising agencies are
already deep in its techniques and possibilities. What matters,
here, is how the necessary consoles are designed and how the
computers will be controlled and programmed. Most signs now
are that the eﬀective deﬁnition will be of people as reactive
consumers.
Any of the developments noted would, in itself, have some
measurable eﬀect on existing television institutions and policies.
Cable, satellites and cassettes will have major eﬀects. But it is only
when we consider them in combination that we get some notion
of the true scale of the problem. Consider, for example, the
combination of a satellite, cable and cassette service, or of a
broad-beam satellite service with augmented receivers. It would
be para-national, ﬁnanced by para-national corporation advertis-
ing, with cable distribution systems or manufacturing sub-
sidiaries in many countries. It would command funds which
would drive out of competition, from other kinds of service,
most general entertainment, including backlog, many inter-
national news services, and almost all international sport, which
would be tied in by sponsorship and monopoly contracts. There
might well be two or three competing monopolies on this giant
scale, though there are strong reasons against this, in satellite
costs, and in the relative monopoly of ground-station and cable-
distribution systems. There would be choice within such a system,
but choice on its terms. It is of course perfectly possible – indeed
there are already signs of this in the United States – that with
alternative technology, alternative uses? 151

majority television taken care of in this way, marginal systems
would grow up: a limited educational service, limited national
‘cultural’ services, a cultural underground using its own video
equipment. The major system would be so dominant that gov-
ernments might be forced to ‘rescue’ a few things from it: edu-
cation or minority programmes – a service at the level of a few
publicly ﬁnanced universities, galleries or museums. Despising
the system, the cultural and political radicals would develop
their own local community and cultural alternatives. These
exceptions would be very much better than nothing. But the
social and cultural deﬁnitions of the best of broadcasting would
have been decisively left behind.
C. ALTERNATIVE USES
We have always to remember that full development of the new
video technology will take some twenty years: say between now
and 1990.12 For this reason, some people, especially in the estab-
lished authorities, manage to feel fairly relaxed about it: the
problems will be sorted out as we go; it is no use trying to cross
bridges before we come to them. But this is wrong on two main
counts. First, some of the most serious problems will arise
within the next few years: notably in relation to policies for cable
television. Secondly, the history of broadcasting institutions
shows very clearly that the institutions and social policies which
get established in a formative, innovative stage – often ad hoc and
piecemeal in a confused and seemingly marginal area – have
extraordinary persistence into later periods, if only because they
accumulate techniques, experience, capital or what come to
seem prescriptive rights. The period of social decision has then
to begin now.
In Britain this is especially the case, since the existing charters
of mainstream broadcasting have to be renewed or revised
within the next two or three years. In the United States the crisis
alternative technology, alternative uses?
152
www.ebook3000.com

of public television similarly requires immediate campaigns and
decisions. And since within this exact period some of the key
decisions about cable and satellites will have to be made – in the
United States by the Federal Communications Commission, in
Britain by the Minister and the Post Oﬃce – there has never
been, and is unlikely to be in the future, a more suitable time for
a general reconstruction of communications policies.
The politics of these decisions will be exceptionally compli-
cated. It will be widely argued that the old choice between ‘pub-
lic service’ and ‘commercial’ broadcasting is now outdated by
the new technology, and that we can move beyond both to
community services. This is to some extent true, but ‘com-
munity service’, in this confused argument, will turn out on
examination to mean radically diﬀerent things, and the choice
between them can still best be expressed as a choice between
public service and commercial development. However, if, in the
course of the argument, we can make a further distinction
between ‘public service’ of a traditional kind, controlled by
appointed central authorities, and ‘public service’ of a new kind,
controlled democratically by local communities and by those
who work in the institutions, a new range of social possibility
will have been opened. It may even turn out that the public-
service institutions can only be saved from their probable defeat
or absorption by the new international commercial institutions
if they can themselves be reformed into fully democratic and
experimental enterprises.
For many years yet, central programming and networking
authorities are going to continue. They must become or
continue as public authorities, expressing the concept of
the airwaves as public property. But it would be wise to look
again at the question which is still unresolved from the earliest
days of broadcasting: the relation between transmission and
production. In all current systems too few people are making the
primary decisions about production. The real need is for more
alternative technology, alternative uses? 153

independent production companies, which would be given pub-
licly protected contracts with the programming and networking
authorities. It would not be an easy system to devise and
administer, but it is the only creative social course to take
between the existing monopolies and their new challengers.
Moreover it oﬀers a model for the solution of the problem of
cable-television institutions. At a national level cable facilities,
like the air-waves, must be conceived as public property, and the
operation of these facilities, by any group to which licence has
been given, must be part of the system of publicly protected
contracts between the cable operators and production com-
panies. In many cases there could be permanent links, in particu-
lar communities, between local public-owned cable companies
and production companies: real local bases from which some
material would pass into one or other of the networks. At the
same time it would be necessary to have some specialised
national production companies: alternative providers of national
and international news and public aﬀairs programmes; edu-
cational and arts companies; a central library and information
video-service. These would be necessary to accompany the main
emphasis, in cable policy, on community stations. The com-
munity emphasis is so right, in its own terms, and could so
notably contribute to solving the problems of urban information
ﬂow, democratic discussion and decision-making and com-
munity identity, that it is easy to overlook the dimension that is
inevitably there, beyond the community – the nation and the
world with which it is inevitably involved. The back-up national
and international services would protect community television
from its greatest danger: that its legitimate sense of locality will
leave a gap which will be exploited by wholly irresponsible
institutions beyond it.
The political problems must then again be stressed. First,
community is a word that will be exploited by commercial
operators and by the political enemies of the now partly
alternative technology, alternative uses?
154
www.ebook3000.com

independent programming and networking authorities. But a
community is also a real social fact: not an idealised notion but a
social system containing radical inequalities and conﬂicts of
interest. Judging from all previous experience, nothing will be
easier, for the national and international commercial operators,
than to sign up local community representatives. I say ‘sign up’;
the real terms are buy or hire. It will be treated as a ‘dealership’,
‘outlet’ or ‘appointed agency’ problem, as now with Toyota or
Esso. Again and again, unless it is speciﬁcally prevented, ‘com-
munity’ stations will be mere fronts for irresponsible networks
which have their real centres elsewhere. There is no solution to
this problem but to make local communications ownership and
control subject to open and democratic local process, with spe-
ciﬁc provisions against ﬁnancing, salary payments and consult-
ancies from outside commercial bodies. The political ﬁght to
achieve that will be long and bitter, but it is better to face it than
to be deluded by the public-relations version of ‘local com-
munity’ which major capitalist interests are already circulating.
The same point applies when the ‘local community’ is what is
still thought of as the independent national state. In the third
world, but also very clearly even in Western Europe, for all its
residual national prides, the real political situation already is that
many so-called national agencies are in fact or in eﬀect branch
oﬃces of international capitalist corporations. American corpor-
ations, especially, have been skilful and persistent in these kinds
of penetration and hiring, and there is never any shortage of
local people, local nationals, willing to be penetrated or hired.
Since this process further extends, in whole or in part, to gov-
ernments and political parties, it can be seen that it is not
enough to make simple appeals to national authorities to act in
the public interest. On the contrary, only independent demo-
cratic organisations – themselves engaged in just this kind of
struggle over a very wide ﬁeld – can honestly engage with
the problems. But for this they need information, publicity,
alternative technology, alternative uses? 155

sustained campaigning: much of it necessarily in the areas and in
the channels which are in dispute, and where, in too many cases,
their hired enemies are already ﬁrmly established. The battle
for free communications is then necessarily part of a much
wider social struggle, but that is no reason for abstaining from
struggle, from proposal and counter-proposal, on each and
every issue as it arises.
Legislation on foreign agencies, in the whole ﬁeld of com-
munications, is then a necessary and urgent objective. What is
already a serious situation will have become virtually irretriev-
able by the 1980s, unless very strong action is taken. In another
dimension, there must be continual pressure for proper inter-
national agreements on satellite television, in particular refusing
all control bodies with weighted voting, since these in practice
would mean control by the superpowers. Smaller nations may
seem to have little to bargain with, but while they retain control
over ground-stations and over foreign or foreign-hired broad-
casting or cable distribution systems, they are in fact in a strong
position. The positive position in these negotiations can then be
the institution of international and transnational television
systems under democratic international agencies.
All this will take time and prolonged eﬀort. The struggle will
reach into every corner of society. But that is precisely what is at
stake: a new universal accessibility. Over a wide range from
general television through commercial advertising to centralised
information and data-processing systems, the technology that is
now or is becoming available can be used to aﬀect, to alter, and
in some cases to control our whole social process. And it is ironic
that the uses oﬀer such extreme social choices. We could have
inexpensive, locally based yet internationally extended television
systems, making possible communication and information-
sharing on a scale that not long ago would have seemed utopian.
These are the contemporary tools of the long revolution towards
an educated and participatory democracy, and of the recovery of
alternative technology, alternative uses?
156
www.ebook3000.com

eﬀective communication in complex urban and industrial soci-
eties. But they are also the tools of what would be, in context, a
short and successful counter-revolution, in which, under the
cover of talk about choice and competition, a few para-national
corporations, with their attendant states and agencies, could
reach farther into our lives, at every level from news to psycho-
drama, until individual and collective response to many diﬀerent
kinds of experience and problem became almost limited to
choice between their programmed possibilities.
There is good reason to believe that many people will resist
this worst of developments, but as the size of eﬀective decision-
taking communities gets so much larger, and as the scale and
complexity of interlocking agencies makes identiﬁcation let
alone struggle more diﬃcult, it is not enough to rely on unaided
virtues. Within the next few years, decisions will be taken or will
fail to be taken which will to a large extent determine which of
these possible roads we are likely to take, for the remainder of
this century. But if action is necessary now, its ﬁrst conditions are
information, analysis, education, discussion, to which this book
is oﬀered as a small contribution and, it is hoped, an incentive.
alternative technology, alternative uses? 157

NOTES
Note: these notes were added to the second edition in 1990 by Ederyn
Williams.
2 INSTITUTIONS OF THE TECHNOLOGY
1
The situation has changed very radically in Italy and France since this
was written, though in the direction predicted later in the book. In
Italy, a judicial decision that existing broadcasting laws contravened
the constitutional right to free speech resulted in a rash of semi-pirate
cable and local TV stations. Many of these were subsequently welded
into a national commercial network by Berlusconi. In France, govern-
ment deregulation resulted in one of the three state channels being
privatised and taking commercials, while three new channels, Canal
Plus, La Cinq and M6, opened up within three years. A higher propor-
tion of U.S. material, interspersed with commercials, is the normal
form of these new channels.
2
Today, both are subsidiaries of General Electric of the U.S.
3 THE FORMS OF TELEVISION
1
Again we see that the passage of ﬁfteen years has brought even the
BBC nearer to the U.S. pattern. News-readers on both major channels
www.ebook3000.com

are now media personalities: their identity is strongly projected, and
they are presented as adding their personality to the news, not just
reading the items.
2
Of course, this is much more true and more widely recognised today,
with the U.S. taking its use of television to the extreme of electing an ex-
actor as president, while in Europe, political leaders are now regularly
assessed and selected on their televisual appeal.
3
The advent of ENG (Electronic News Gathering) in U.S. television has
dramatically lowered the cost of ﬁlming in the ﬁeld, so the difference
between U.K. national news and U.S. regional news is probably less
evident today.
4
Fifteen years later, the U.K. House of Commons is about to be televised
(though the House of Lords has been televised for several years). In
the U.S. there is a whole cable channel, C-SPAN, devoted to televising
congressional events.
5
The recent resurgence of the cinema after decades of decline can be
attributed to the late recognition by ﬁlm makers that they must use
the power of the large screen. Space epics, such as Star Wars or Close
Encounters of the Third Kind, do this especially well, and are a quite
different experience when seen on television.
6
For those to whom Tony Hancock isn’t even a memory, today’s
equivalents are Ronnie Barker in the U.K. and Bill Cosby in the U.S.
7
The all-singing all-dancing shows seem to have almost disappeared
by the late 1980s, perhaps because they lack the attractive individual
personality that is becoming more and more a factor in ensuring
popularity, as multiple channels fragment the audience.
8
The last ﬁfteen years have brought other striking examples. Television
has elevated athletics, snooker, and even darts to the status of major
sports, but the standard game of soccer, the most popular game in
the world, never had a chance in the U.S. because halves of forty-ﬁve
minutes were just too long a gap between commercials.
9
Much the same happened in the imitative U.K. version, The Family,
with not only the parents, but two of the children escaping family life
through divorce.
4 PROGRAMMING: DISTRIBUTION AND FLOW
1
In Britain, 1990 brings you such diversity only through the pirate
(illegal) radio stations. A recent listing in the Independent newspaper
described ﬁfty-nine such stations, mainly ethnic, musical, or both.
notes 159

2
This predicted trend has matured rapidly in the U.K., with breakfast
television now well established, and 24-hour programming arriving in
1987.
6 ALTERNATIVE TECHNOLOGY, ALTERNATIVE USES?
1
The technology of reception equipment obviously hasn’t moved as
quickly as here anticipated. Portable, as opposed to luggable, TVs
have ﬂoundered on the problems of battery power, and are unlikely to
be common until liquid crystal technology develops much further.
Attention in the last years of the century is now focused on high
deﬁnition television with screens up to four foot square, with the
promise of the ﬂat-screen receiver still tantalising in the distance.
2
Cable now passes over eighty per cent of homes in the U.S., with over
ﬁfty per cent subscribing, and is equally common in Canada, Belgium
and the Netherlands. In Britain, progress has been much slower,
impeded by the high capital investment and only marginally more
attractive programming, and in 1989 less than half a million house-
holds were subscribers.
3
In practice, interactive cable has not gained commercial acceptance,
with pioneering schemes such as Warner-Amex’s Qube closing in the
early 1980s. We can expect to see more promise than reality until
nearer 2000, when ﬁbre optics are cheap enough to run right into
the home. Unfortunately, this has meant that cable remains mainly
a source of entertainment programming, and lacks distinctive
advantages over satellite broadcasting.
4
Today, newly built systems more commonly have ﬁfty to 100 channels.
5
Microwave distribution of television is now the preferred technology,
though it is not widely permitted in Europe, and has tended to lose
out to cable in the U.S.A.
6
All these developments seem as far away in 1990 as they were in 1974.
The videotelephone, particularly, is a very expensive development
which seems not to attract the potential users.
7
This has all happened very much as predicted. In the U.S., satellite
transmission to ground stations at cable head-ends started in 1974
with WTBS from Atlanta, and since there has been an explosion of
such channels, so there are over forty in the U.S. today, and another
dozen in Europe. While these channels, transmitted from low-
powered satellites, have required a four-foot dish, beyond the means
of most households, we are now entering the era of high-powered
notes
160
www.ebook3000.com

satellites, which beam out strong enough signals to be received on a
dish no more than a foot in diameter. The political and cultural issues
are still being argued.
8
Instantaneous audience reaction to programmes is now quite com-
mon in the U.S., with reaction being by interactive cable, or more
frequently by telephone, with automatic equipment recording the
votes. This has tended to be used as a form of entertainment, the
most famous example being whether Larry the Lobster should be
boiled or saved, which stimulated over 500,000 telephone votes (he
was just saved).
9
This technology is now known as teletext (Oracle and Ceefax), but is
being used for news rather than educational purposes.
10
Home Box Ofﬁce is now the leading U.S. ﬁlm subscription service, with
about twenty million subscribers, while most major boxing matches
have now gone over to pay-per-view as predicted.
11
Recognising this problem, the governing bodies in the U.S. and U.K.
have, when awarding franchises, insisted on 100 per cent coverage of
all the densely populated areas, though they have not been able to
force a pricing scheme that encouraged more than sixty per cent of
households passed by cable to subscribe.
12
Due to the slightly slower pace of technical change than predicted in
1974, we are still in the latter part of the period of political decision
making, but many decisive battles have already been won and lost.
notes 161

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
actt. Fortyeight Times The Usual Junk. London, 1973
Arons, L. Television and Human Behaviour. New York, 1963
Bakewell, J. and Garnham, N. The New Priesthood: British Television Today.
London, 1970
Barnouw, E. A History of Broadcasting in the United States. Vol. 1: A Tower in
Babel, Vol. 2: The Golden Web, Vol. 3: The Image Empire. Oxford,
1966–70
Belsen, W. A. The Impact of Television. Hamden, Conn., 1967
Black, P. The Mirror in the Corner. London, 1972
Blumler, J. and McQuail, D. Television in Politics. London, 1968
Bogart, L. The Age of Television: a study of viewing habits. New York, 1972
Briggs, A. The Birth of Broadcasting. London, 1961
Brown, L. Television: the business behind the box. New York, 1971
Center for Policy Research. Minerva: a study in Participatory Technology.
Working Paper, 1972
Council, C. From Circuits to Circus: daily TV. New York, 1970
De Forest, L. Television Now and Onwards. London, 1946
Dubin, R. The Medium May Be Related to the Message. Oregon, 1965
Dunlap, O. E. Understanding Television. New York, 1948
Dyer, R. Light Entertainment. London, 1973
Efron, E. The News Twisters. Los Angeles, 1971
www.ebook3000.com

Eguchi, H. International Studies in Broadcasting. NHK, 1971
Emery, W. B. National and International Systems of Broadcasting. Michigan,
1969
Everson, G. The Story of Television. New York, 1949
Fekete, J. A Theoretical Critique of Some Aspects of North American Critical
Theory. (Ph.D. thesis, Cambridge, 1972)
Feldman, N. E. Cable Television: opportunities and problems. Santa Monica,
1970
Feshbach, S. Television and Aggression. San Francisco, 1971
Fielding, R. A Technological History of Motion Pictures and Television.
Berkeley, 1967
Garnham, N. Structures of Television. London, 1973
Garvey, D. E. Social Control in the Television Newsroom. (Thesis, Stanford,
n.d.)
Green, T. The Universal Eye. New York, 1972
Greenberg, B. S. Use of the Mass Media by the Urban Poor. New York,
1970
Groombridge, B. Television and the People. London, 1972
Halloran, J. Effects of Mass Communication. Leicester, 1964
Halloran, J. (ed.) Effects of Television. London, 1970
Halloran, J. D., Brown, R. L., and Chaney, D. Television and Delinquency.
Leicester, 1970
Hazard, P. D. (ed.) Television as Art. National Council of Teachers of
English, USA, 1966
Heath, R. Radio and Television. London, 1969
Himmelweit, H. T., Oppenheim, A. N., and Vince, P. Television and the
Child. London, 1958
Hubbell, R. W. 4000 Years of Television. New York, 1942
Innis, H. Empire and Communications. Oxford, 1950
International Broadcasting Convention. Report. London, 1970
Janky, J. M. Optimisation in Design of Mass-production Microwave Receiver
Suitable for Direct Reception from Satellites. (Thesis, Stanford, 1971)
Johnson, L. L. Cable Television and Question of Protecting Local Broadcasting.
Santa Monica, 1970
Johnson, L. L. The Future of Cable Television; some problems of federal
regulation. Santa Monica, 1970
Johnson, L. L. Cable TV and Higher Education. Santa Monica, 1971
Johnson, N. How to Talk Back to Your TV Set. Boston, 1970
Kirschner, A. and L. Radio and Television. New York, 1971
Klavan, G. Turn That Damned Thing Off. Indianapolis, 1972
selected bibliography 163

Kuroki, S. An Analysis of Modulation Techniques for Wideband FM Television
System. (Stanford, 1972)
Lackman, R. Remember TV? New York, 1971
Lichty, L. World and International Broadcasting: a bibliography. New York,
1971
Maddox, B. Beyond Babel. London, 1972
Mayer, M. About Television. New York, 1972
McLuhan, M. Understanding Media. New York, 1964
Mickleson, S. The Electric Mirror: politics in the age of television. New York,
1972
Mitre Corporation. Cable Television: report. 1972
Morris, N. S. Television’s Child. Boston, 1971
National Citizens’ Committee. The State of Public Broadcasting. New York,
1968
Park, R. E. Potential Impact of Cable Growth on Television Broadcasting.
Santa Monica, 1970
Park R. E. Cable Television and UHF Broadcasting. Santa Monica, 1971
Parker, E. B. Assessment and Control of Communication Technology. Stan-
ford, 1972
Pilkington Report. London, 1962
Postmaster-General. Report of Television Committee. London, 1935
Radical Software. New York, 1970–71
Ross, G. TV Jubilee. London, 1961
Rotha, P. Television in the Making. London, 1956
Schiller, H. I. Mass Communications & American Empire. New York, 1970
Shapiro, P. D. Networking in Cable Television. Stanford, 1972
Shayon, R. L. Open to Criticism. Boston, 1971
Skolnik, R. A Bibliography of Selected Publications in Foreign and Inter-
national Broadcasting. Michigan, 1966
Skornia, H. J. Television and Society. New York, 1965
Skornia, H. J. and Kitson, J. W. Problems and Controversies in Television and
Radio: basic readings. Palo Alto, 1968
Small, W. J. To Kill a Messenger: TV news and the real world. New York, 1970
Stanford Institute for Communication Research. Educational Television: the
next ten years. Stanford, 1962
Stavens, R. L. (ed.) Television Today: the end of communication and death of
community. Washington, 1969, 1971
Steiner, G. A. The People Look at Television: a study of audience attitudes.
New York, 1963
Summers, R. E. Broadcasting and the Public. Belmont, 1966
selected bibliography
164
www.ebook3000.com

Surgeon-General’s Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee. Television and Growing
Up. Washington, 1972
Taggart, R. B. Instructional TV via Satellite. (Thesis, Stanford, 1970)
Tate, C. (ed.) Cable TV in the Cities. New York, 1972
Thomson, R. TV Crime Drama: its impact on children and adolescents.
Melbourne, 1959
unesco. World Radio and Television. New York, 1965
unesco. Communications in the Space Age: the use of satellites by the mass
media. Paris, 1968
Wedell, E. G. Broadcasting and Public Policy. London, 1968
Wedell, E. G. (ed.) Structures of Broadcasting. Manchester, 1970
Weil, G. L. (ed.) Communicating by Satellite: an international discussion. New
York, 1969
Wells, A. F. Picture-tube Imperialism. New York, 1972
Williams, R. Communications. London, 1966
Wolf, F. Television Programming for News and Public Affairs. New York, 1972
Worsley, T. C. Television the Ephemeral Art. London, 1970
selected bibliography 165

www.ebook3000.com

INDEX
advertising: analysis of news
sequence 101–7, 113–20; channel
self-publicity 80, 82, 83–6; forms
of 66–8; intervals and
interruptions 90–3; study of
distribution 80, 82, 83–6 see also
broadcasting: commercial
The Advocates (television
programme) 47
aesthetic theory: McLuhan and 129
Agnew, Spiro T. 117
All in the Family (television
programme) 64
American Broadcasting
Corporation (ABC): study of
programme distribution 78–86
An American Family (television
programme) 70–2
arts programmes 79, 81, 83–6
Bain, Alexander 10
Baird, John Logie 11
Bell, Alexander Graham 11
Benjamin, Walter ix
Bergman, Ingmar: The Lie 53
Berzelius, Johan J. 10
Blakewell, Frederick 10
Blumler, Jay G. 127
Braun, Ferdinand 10
Britain 19; authority over
broadcasting 26–8; cable and
satellite television 141–3;
commercial television 37–8;
discussion and debate 45–50;
ﬂow analysis of news 107–13;
licence system 146; nature of
ruling class 28; news
programmes 41, 44–5;
programme interruption 90–3;
public responsibility 136;
television and politics 128
British Broadcasting Corporation
(BBC): challenged by
commercial rival 31;

establishment 27; licence system
24, 146; newsreaders 42–3;
political control 33–4; reporters’
authority 43; study of
programme distribution 78–86
broadcasting: alternative
programming xii; authority over
26–9, 152–7; commercial 29–30,
66–8, 153; content follows facility
of 18–19; effect of new
technologies 139–44; lead by US
model 34–7; licensing 24–5, 146;
as mass communication 16–18;
mobile privatisation 19–21;
overcomes technical problems
22–3; political use of 17–18;
public service 30–3, 153; radio
21–2; satellite transmission 38;
second phase of 13; as social
product ix
Buckley, William F. 46
Cable Communications in the
Dayton Miami Valley (Johnson)
146
Campbell Swinton, A. A. 10
capitalism: and control of
broadcasters 32–4, 153–7
Carey, George 10
cars 5
Caselli, Giovanni 10
Cathy Come Home (Sandford) 55,
70
Chayefsky, Paddy 54
Chekhov, Anton 21
children’s programmes 79, 82, 83–6
cinema see ﬁlms
class: broadcast voices 42;
programming aims 100; ruling 28
comedy: fast-moving sequences
74–5 see also variety programmes
communication: content follows
facility 18–19; interactive systems
142, 143–4; McLuhan’s
technological determinism
129–32; mass 16–18; operational
13; violence and socialisation
124–6
communications technology:
continuing developments
139–44; development of viii–ix;
need for 12–13 see also television
communist societies: broadcasting
institutions 28–9; control of
information 33
Coronation Street (television
programme) 57
cultural science: central concepts of
123; discussing cause and effect
121–4; methodology 122–4
culture, institutionalisation of x
Czechoslovakia 46
Daguerre, Louis 9
The Dating Game (television
programme) 69
Davy, Humphry 9
discussion programmes 45–50, 73;
effect on political behaviour
128–9; study of distribution 78,
81, 83–6
documentaries: drama- 70–2
drama 21; -documentaries 70–2;
cinema attendance 54; in the
planned ﬂow 87; radio 51–2;
sequence and ﬂow 100; serials
and series 56–8; study of
programme distribution 79, 82,
83–6; technological possibilities
52–4; types of 85
Dreamplay (Strindberg) 53
Dubcek, Alexander 46
index
168
www.ebook3000.com

Edison, Thomas A. 10
education: literacy and social
training 134–5
educational programmes: forms of
50–1; interactive systems 144; by
seeing 72–3; study of distribution
78–9, 81, 83–6
The Effects of Television (Halloran)
125
The Electric Company (television
programme) 74, 75, 79
electricity, technology of 7–8
Eliot, T. S.: Murder in the Cathedral
51
Elster, Julius 10
European Broadcasting Union
148
Family at War (television
programme) 57
Faraday, Michael 8
feature programmes 73–4; study of
distribution 78, 81, 83–6
Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) 29–30,
153
ﬁlms 7; cinema attendance falls 54,
56; intervals 90–2; study of
programme distribution 80, 82,
83–6; superior techology of 22–3;
technical evolution of 9; on
television 58–61
Firing Line (television programme)
46
formalism: McLuhan and 129–30
France 19, 28
freedom 136; broadcasting
institutions 32–4; discussion
and debate 45–50; international
broadcasting 153–7
Friese-Greene, William 10
game programmes 68–9; study
of distribution 80, 82,
83–6
Geitel, Hans Fredrich 10
Germany 19; Nazi use of
broadcasting 17–18
globalisation xii see also
internationalism
Goebbels, Joseph 17
Hall, Sam 62
Halloran, J.: The Effects of Television
125
Hancock, Tony 62
history: and technological
determinism 132–3
Hopkins, John: Talking to a Stranger
54
Ibsen, Henrik 21
In Two Minds (Mercer) 54
Independent Broadcasting
Authority (IBA): study of
programme distribution 78–86
Independent Television Authority:
challenge to BBC’s public service
31
Independent Television Network
(ITN): newsreaders 42–3
industry viii; and capitalist
nations 19–20; uses for
electricity 8
Interdepartment Radio Advisory
Committee 35
internationalism 151; of American
culture 136; commercial
broadcasting 153–7; satellite
television 147–9
Irish Television 58
isolation xi
Italy 28
index 169

Jenkins, C. F. 11
Johnson, L. L.: Cable
Communications in the Dayton
Miami Valley 146
journalism: social need for 14–15;
television news 40–5
KQED, San Francisco: study of
programme distribution
78–86
Lasswell, Harold D. 122
Laugh-In (television programme)
74
libraries and videos 150, 154
The Lie (Bergman) 53
McLuhan, Marshall x–xi;
technological determinism
129–32
MacNeice, Louis 52
Man Alive (television programme)
46
Marconi company 27
Marey, Etienne 9
Marty (Chayefsky) 54
Marxism 133
Mason, William F.: Urban Cable
Systems 146
masses: deﬁning 17
Mercer, David: In Two Minds 54
Midweek (television programme)
46
military: need for technology 12, 13
mobile privatisation viii–xi, xi; and
broadcasting 19–21
modernity viii, 5
money matters: advertising 66–8;
commercial broadcasting 29–30,
34–7; control of broadcasters
32–4; games 69; licensing
system 24–5; public service 31–2;
sport on television 65
Monty Python’s Flying Circus
(television programme) 74
motion pictures see ﬁlm
Moyers, Bill 46
Murder in the Cathedral (Eliot) 51
music programmes: study of
distribution 79, 81, 83–6
nation-states: authority over
broadcasting 26–7; control of
information 32–4; US
broadcasting model 34–7
National Broadcasting Corporation
(NBC) 35
National Communications System
35
National Educational Television
31
The Newcomers (television
programme) 57
news programmes: BBC ﬂow
analysis 107–13; early forms of
40; presentation 42–3; sequence
and priorities 40–2; study of
distribution 78, 81, 83–6; US ﬂow
analysis 101–7, 113–20;
visualisation 43–5
Niepce, Joseph 9
Nipkow, Paul 10
Nixon, Richard 29, 117
nuclear power 5
O’Casey, Sean: The Silver Tassle 51
Open Door (television programme)
49
Open University 51
Panorama (television programme)
46
index
170
www.ebook3000.com

participation: interactive television
142, 143–4, 151; music halls and
variety 62
photography 7, 9; social need for
15–16
Playschool (television programme)
79
politics: authority over new uses
153–8; discussion and debate
programmes 45–50; effect of
television on 127–8; expression
of xi; fascism 17–18, 28;
international television 148–9;
Nazi use of broadcasting 17–18;
need for communication 14–15;
participatory democracy 156
Potter, Denis: Nigel Barton plays 54
press: social need for 14–15
programming: BBC ﬂow analysis
107–13; channel competition 94;
intervals and interruptions 90–3,
96; kaleidoscope of 87–8; long-
range analysis of 97–101;
meaning of ‘ﬂow’ 77; planned
ﬂow 86–96; US news ﬂow
analysis 101–7, 113–20
Public Broadcasting Corporation 31
public service programmes 29–31,
153
radio 7; drama 58; general
broadcasting 16, 21–2; technical
development 11
Radio Corporation of America
(RCA) 35
The Reasoner Report (television
programme) 46
religious programmes: study of
distribution 80, 82, 83–6
The Riordans (television
programme) 58
Rose, Reginald 54; Twelve Angry
Men 53
Rosing, Boris 10
Sandford, Jeremy: Cathy Come
Home 55
Schiller, Herbert I. 34n
self-expression xi
Sesame Street (television
programme) 75, 79
sex 121
The Silver Tassle (O’Casey) 51
Sixty Minutes (television
programme) 46
socialisation 122–3; through
literacy 134–5; through television
134–8; violence and 124–6
society: need for communication
12–16; norms 124; technological
determinism and 5–7
sociology see cultural science
Soviet Union 147–8
sport: effect of television on 64–5;
study of distribution 80, 82, 83–6
steam engines 5, 8
Steptoe and Son (television
programme) 64
Strindberg, August: Dreamplay 53
Talking to a Stranger (Hopkins) 54
technological determinism: deﬁned
5; and history 132–3; McLuhan
and 129–32; and social change
5–7; and television 133–8
technology: causes and effects 1–7;
development of viii–ix, 7–12;
historical context 132–4; as
human xii–xiii; innovation and
xi–xii; the medium as cause
129–32; social need for 12–16, 19
telegraphy 7, 8–9, 19
index 171

television: alternative uses 152–7;
cable and satellite 141–3, 145–9,
151; causes and effects of 3–5,
121, 123–4, 128–9; colour 23;
continous ﬂow of x; as cultural
product ix–x; effect on political
behaviour 127–8; inferior
technology of 22–3; intentions of
use 133–4; interactive 143–4, 151;
picture size and quality 59–60,
145; reception and transmission
140–3, 145–9; and socialisation
134–8; technical evolution of
7–12, 139–44; transmission and
reception 23; video recorders and
cassettes 143, 149–52; and
violence 124–6; visual beauty of
75–6
television forms 39; advertising
66–8; changes and innovations
69–70; discussion and debate
45–50, 73; drama 51–8; drama-
documentaries 70–2; education
50–1, 72–3; fast-moving
sequences 74–5; feature
programmes 73–4; ﬁlms 58–61;
games and pastimes 68–9; news
40–5; sport 64–5; variety
programmes 61–4
This Week (television programme)
46
Thomas, Dylan: Under Milk Wood
52
Till Death us do Part (television
programme) 64
Twelve Angry Men (Rose) 53
Twenty-Four Hours (television
programme) 46
Under Milk Wood (Thomas) 52
United States 19; advertising 66,
67; broadcasting controls 29–30;
discussion and debate 45–7, 48;
distribution of culture 136; ﬂow
analysis of news 101–7, 113–20;
as model in broadcasting 34–7;
news programmes 41, 44–5;
planned advertising
interruptions 90–1; public
service broadcasting 30–2;
public television 153; quality of
picture 59; satellite television
147–8
United States Information Agency:
foreign broadcasting 35–6
Urban Cable Systems (Mason)
146
variety programmes 61–4; study of
distribution 80, 82, 83–6
violence 121; effects of television
124–6
visual images: beauty of television
75–6; news programmes 43–5;
quality of picture 59
Volta, Alessandro 8
Wedgwood, Josiah 9
Wednesday Play (television
programme) 54
Williams, Raymond: rejects
determinism viii; and television
in the US vii–viii
World in Action (television
programme) 46
Zworykin, Vladimir 11
index
172
www.ebook3000.com

