Magazine
5 Components  
for Analytics 
in the Cloud  2
Why Cloud Security 
Fears Are Completely 
Misguided  4
The Cloud Is Not 
a Silver Bullet for 
Analytics  6
Step 
into the 
Cloud  7
The 
Perfect 
Fit  9
Special Edition
Enterprise Analytics 
in the Cloud

5 Components 
for Analytics 
in the Cloud 
Criteria for Success
Different vendors offer analytics that 
excel in various areas so make sure you 
investigate each competitor’s compe-
tency in these five critical areas: 
1   Analytic Performance 
Determining how easily and quickly 
information can move from a source 
system to the cloud-based environ-
ment is essential in supporting 
analytic use cases. Slow or cumber-
some data acquisition will impact how 
quickly decisions can be made, while 
laborious preparation and multi-step 
data loading hurdles can slow produc-
tivity and add ongoing operational 
costs. How much information can 
I
nnovative organizations are reviewing their data management 
strategies to identify where and how cloud solutions should 
play a role. An array of offerings and technology advancements 
are enabling companies to disrupt traditional data management 
paradigms in favor of new ways to create value. 
A great example is cloud-based analytics. Research by 
Enterprise Management Associates (EMA) identified a growing 
trend toward a hybrid data management landscape focused on 
leveraging purpose-built platforms to align data, applications 
and workloads for performance and cost advantage. A recent 
survey by the company found that 60% of respondents are 
using two to three platforms to execute sophisticated work-
loads, and the cloud often plays a vital role in this mix.  
Cloud solutions are here to stay. 
This is how to successfully use them 
to create new value. 
by Shawn Rogers
PAGE 2  l  TeradataMagazine.com  l  Special Edition  l  Enterprise Analytics in the Cloud

be stored is also important since it 
dictates the amount of history associ-
ated with business questions. Systems 
unable to handle higher data scaling 
will restrict fast-growing projects. 
Cloud-based platforms need to 
support not only a single user asking 
business questions, but allow multiple 
users to query the system at the same 
time. Insights must be processed and 
returned in a timely fashion no matter 
how many people are querying the sys-
tem. Long queues and delayed insight 
will restrict adoption and reduce or 
eliminate ROI.  
2   Workload Flexibility 
Reporting, iterative OLAP, ad hoc and 
data mining or advanced analytics are 
common. It’s the ability to support 
multiple workloads that is the hall-
mark of an agile and flexible platform. 
Database orientation can enhance 
performance and flexibility, and 
serve workloads in different ways. 
Traditional row-based strategies offer 
an easy way to add inserts and updates 
to records, but can be a disadvantage 
to columnar layouts when queries scan 
entire tables. Some platforms have a 
mix of columnar and row-based tech-
nologies to meet the demands of ana-
lytical workloads. Meanwhile, big data 
strategies that require an Apache™ 
Hadoop® infrastructure and discovery 
analytics for a deeper capability to 
explore data are important to compa-
nies looking to optimize their existing 
capabilities with a cloud offering.  
3   Advanced Technologies 
Analytic projects often evolve beyond 
their initial scope. After a time, most 
platforms hold greater quantities of 
data than initially planned as more 
users adopt them and additional 
needs are placed on the system. That’s 
why planning for the long term and 
pushing project requirements forward 
is important, even though it may not 
seem necessary initially. 
As a data-driven project matures, so 
does the need for more advanced fea-
tures and functions. This is especially 
true as users demand insights that go 
beyond traditional system functional-
ity. The ability to extend and integrate 
a cloud environment with innovative 
functions such as discovery-based ana-
lytics creates an immediate need for 
a platform capable of executing this 
style of work. Complementing a data 
warehouse with a Hadoop solution 
presents opportunities for advanced 
insights, while having the option to 
expand into new areas of execution 
can help a project stay on track, grow 
and deliver unexpected value. 
4   Expert Support 
Provisioning a database infrastructure 
is a key aspect of implementing an 
analytic solution, but it is not the only 
part. To support business questions, 
information must be in the proper 
format. This allows a platform to effec-
tively deliver accurate and relevant 
information to users. 
Building and designing an architec-
ture may require advanced database 
management skill sets and experience 
with data modeling, data integration 
and security. Organizations that move 
to the cloud are often challenged by 
IT skill issues and can’t always get the 
new project support that matches the 
required speed of implementation. 
Working with the solution provider 
for professional services, training and 
execution can make the process easier.  
5   Enterprise Ecosystem 
Business insights have limited value 
when they’re locked in a single solu-
tion. The cloud is more effective when 
analytic platforms work within a 
wide ecosystem.  
Leveraging the capabilities of 
advanced analytic or discovery 
platforms can enable sophisticated 
workloads and projects. Most, if not 
all, solution providers offer partner 
networks to extend capabilities and 
function, which add value to a project. 
Pick a Platform to Fit 
the Need
As workloads and more sophisticated 
applications evolve, it’s becoming 
increasingly important to consider the 
use case when selecting a cloud plat-
form. Organizations across all indus-
tries are investigating cloud analytics to 
drive innovation. Given the wide variety 
of technology offered by vendors, care-
ful evaluation of all the relevant criteria 
is vital when choosing a solution to 
ensure it will deliver the performance—
and value—that is expected. T
Shawn Rogers, formerly the vice 
president of research at Enterprise 
Management Associates, has more than 
20 years of IT experience with a focus 
on Internet-enabled technology.
This article originally appeared in the  
Q3 2014 issue of Teradata Magazine.
ONLINE  This article is based on  
the white paper “Analytics in the 
Cloud: Five Components for Success.” 
Download it on Teradata.com.
PAGE 3  l  TeradataMagazine.com  l  Special Edition  l  Enterprise Analytics in the Cloud

Cloud providers employ 
rigorous standards 
and audits to achieve 
security compliance.
by Marc Clark
Why Cloud Security Fears 
Are Completely Misguided
PAGE 4  l  TeradataMagazine.com  l  Special Edition  l  Enterprise Analytics in the Cloud

I
n a 2015 survey from the Cloud Security Alliance (CSA), 73% of respondents said their concerns about  
security of data are a top challenge to adopting the cloud. And with all the high profile data breaches in just the  
past 12 months, who could blame them?
And yet, is this cloud security fear truly grounded in reality? The answer, perhaps surprisingly to some, is a resound-
ing no. The fact is that when one thinks about data breaches, not a single one that comes to mind was actually a cloud 
breach—they were all on-premises breaches or incursions resulting from stolen (or guessed) user login credentials. 
Might this mean that the cloud is actually a safer place for data than in an on-premises deployment? Maybe so.
Cloud Security Compliance
Consider this: most major cloud pro-
viders are putting themselves through 
rigorous audits to validate compli-
ance with security standards such as 
FedRAMP, HIPAA, ISO 27001, PCI, 
SSAE 16, and others. To pass such audits 
a provider must prove that its security 
practices meet or exceed an exhaus-
tive list of controls and policies. Now 
ask yourself this: do your on-premises 
datacenters and the systems deployed in 
those datacenters have the capabilities 
to pass the same types of audits listed 
above? Are you sure? How do you know? 
If a cloud provider can meet more, 
and possibly stricter, security audits 
than your on-premises deployments, 
hasn’t security ceased to be a legitimate 
excuse for not deploying in the cloud?
Cloud vs On-Premises Security
Many of the people holding out on 
moving anything to the cloud are actu-
ally confusing control with security. 
They seem to feel somehow that if 
systems are on-premises and under 
their visibility and “control” that they 
necessarily have better security.
However, don’t we all know intui-
tively that location of data does not 
equate to security? Access and the 
controls around data are immensely 
more important than location. And 
although champions of on-premises 
systems have the best of intentions, 
often they are not afforded the budget 
or resources that major cloud provid-
ers have to secure and monitor their 
environments.
For example, if a retailer has a data 
breach, maybe some people don’t shop 
there for a few weeks or months. Or 
maybe customers start paying in cash 
more than by debit/credit card. So 
although security is important to these 
types of companies, the fact is that 
until they have a breach that costs them 
WAY more than they would have ever 
paid for better security, they typically 
aren’t putting the money and resources 
needed to really stay ahead in the secu-
rity game. The insurance is considered 
more expensive than the risk.
For cloud providers whose products 
are not hammers or hobby crafts or 
paper towels, however, a security breach 
means that trust is lost in their core 
offering, full stop. And it is very hard to 
recover that trust. Therefore, securing 
their product—the cloud—should and, 
in most cases does, get the money and 
resources it needs.
Critical Requirements
Still, you should not blindly assume that 
every cloud provider is doing what is 
needed for data security. It is vital when 
engaging with any cloud provider that 
you review their security policies and 
that you ensure they have all the regula-
tory audits that pertain to your industry.
Also understand that not all certi-
fications are done at the same level. 
For example, a PCI audit against IaaS 
(Infrastructure as a Service), comput-
ing and storage in the cloud, is different 
than one done against PaaS (Platform 
as a Service), platform resources in the 
cloud, or SaaS (Software as a Service), 
applications delivered via the cloud. 
Just make sure you recognize the differ-
ences and clearly delineate where your 
cloud provider’s security responsibili-
ties end and yours begin. Mind the gap!
Calm Your Fears
Whether or not to enter the cloud is a 
matter of security, not one of control. 
Ultimately you have to feel as though 
your cloud provider will take care of your 
data as well as, or better than, you will. 
The first step is to take a deep breath 
and set aside any thoughts that the 
cloud is not a safe place. Then talk to a 
few select vendors’ trusted advisors who 
can put your mind at ease as you work 
toward finding your best options. And 
then, finally, step into the cloud! T 
Marc Clark is director of cloud strategy 
and deployment at Teradata.
PAGE 5  l  TeradataMagazine.com  l  Special Edition  l  Enterprise Analytics in the Cloud

A Different Cloud
The key to understanding the value of the cloud is to know 
what you want and then determine whether available solu-
tions are a good fit. If you need to provide your company 
with a state-of-the-art environment for data analytics, you 
will likely require:
>
> A data warehouse to capture transactions and enable 
analysis and reporting
>
> A way to manage workloads that helps meet perfor-
mance expectations for hundreds of users 
>
> A platform that enables rapid prototyping, experimen-
tation, and discovery
>
> Systems for profiling, transforming, cleansing, refining, 
and managing data
Teradata® understands that a different cloud is needed for 
data analytics. That’s why its cloud offering provides a fully 
functional environment for data analytics that’s ready to 
help you find real value in your data. It includes the best-in-
class Teradata Database for data warehousing and opera-
tional analytics, Teradata Aster Discovery Platform for data 
discovery and exploration, and a portfolio for open source 
Apache™ Hadoop® for data refining and management.
Experts On Hand
Once you decide to move analytic workloads to the cloud, 
you still need the right people to manage security, integra-
tion, data modeling, analytics for specific industry problems, 
and so on. A cloud analytics stack, with expert and certified 
people for support, will ensure you’re not left sitting with  
a complicated virtual toolbox that doesn’t really work for 
your business.
Some of the areas where you might need a hand to deploy 
a complete cloud analytics solution include:
>
> Protection of sensitive corporate data in the cloud—for 
risk and compliance purposes
>
> Development and validation of your solution concept 
on top of a cloud architecture
>
> Data integration and business intelligence application 
connections
>
> Data movement between on-premises systems and the 
cloud
>
> Workload management assistance for running analytics 
at cloud scale
>
> Database administration to offload the burden for IT 
staff
>
> Application development to meet the needs of key 
stakeholders
Unlike most cloud environments, Teradata includes in its 
cloud offering an incredible innovation: skilled profession-
als well prepared to talk with you about how to set up your 
environment and how to tailor it for your industry. 
A Better Way
Teradata offers a completely different approach to analytics 
in the cloud. Not only do you get great tools, but also expert 
guidance in making cloud analytics work for you and your 
business. Using the cloud is not in and of itself a silver bullet, 
but using great analytic tools in the cloud—and getting 
sound advice when you need it—just might be. T
Marc Clark is director of cloud strategy and deployment  
at Teradata. 
The Cloud Is Not a  
Silver Bullet for Analytics
Great analytic tools and expert support are requirements in the new era of cloud.
by Marc Clark
T 
he cloud is not a silver bullet. But isn’t the silver bullet just a myth anyway?
In its first era, the cloud offered applications like Salesforce.com or 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) such as Amazon Web Services. If you 
wanted to run a CRM application via a web browser or didn’t want to manage a 
data center, then cloud was a good fit.  
But now we are entering a new era of the cloud. 
PAGE 6  l  TeradataMagazine.com  l  Special Edition  l  Enterprise Analytics in the Cloud

Step into  
the Cloud 
Gain the power of data warehousing 
and analytics with the simplicity of 
cloud computing. 
by Paul Barsch
C
loud computing is consis-
tently a top priority for CIOs, 
and analysts predict that in 
the next three years, more resources 
in dollars, time and talent will be 
allocated to cloud-based solutions. 
However, before the rush to shift IT 
responsibilities to a contracted service 
provider, companies should carefully 
consider whether they’re getting the 
right analytics infrastructure, software 
and support to successfully transition 
to the cloud.
While there are many definitions 
of cloud computing, one of the 
most common is the delivery of IT 
resources—as a service—in a scalable 
and elastic manner. In any case, 
resources should be available via a 
budget-friendly subscription model.
Advanced Capabilities  
Cloud computing adoption is increas-
ing for myriad reasons. With cloud 
implementations, there’s no longer a 
need to worry about procuring, main-
taining and continually investing in IT 
resources. Instead, organizations that 
previously could not afford world-
class infrastructure and talent can 
access these capabilities on a subscrip-
tion basis. When capital constraints 
are an issue, cloud computing is 
attractive because solution ownership 
transfers to a cloud service provider. 
If applicable, companies can shift 
their cloud investment to operating 
expenses rather than capital expenses.
However, organizations stepping 
into the cloud—especially for ana-
lytic capability—should be cautious 
of workload demands. Analytic 
workloads are often compute- or 
I/O-intensive, or both, and there-
fore may not be ideally suited for 
traditional cloud services. Moreover, 
when transferring workloads to 
cloud infrastructures, special atten-
tion to security may be warranted 
to comply with data privacy and 
security regulations.  >> 
PAGE 7  l  TeradataMagazine.com  l  Special Edition  l  Enterprise Analytics in the Cloud

Teradata understands the importance 
of acquiring the right analytics infra-
structure that is protected, secured and 
managed by industry professionals.   
For companies that want to acquire 
data warehousing, big data analytics or 
data management, Teradata now deliv-
ers these advanced capabilities with the 
simplicity of cloud computing.
Pick Your Cloud Type
Teradata Cloud services are based on 
Teradata’s workload-specific plat-
form family, including balanced and 
configured solutions designed for a 
company’s analytic needs today and 
tomorrow. These engineered platforms 
are combined with either the Teradata® 
Database, Teradata Aster Database or 
Apache™ Hadoop® Distributed File 
System (HDFS) and include hardware 
and software support, hosting services 
and options for varying levels of 
Managed Services.
Providing Teradata Cloud services 
on a subscription-based model aims to 
eliminate upfront capital investments. 
These service offers include monitor-
ing, security, maintenance and support 
for entire analytics environments. In 
addition, data integration, business 
intelligence (BI), master data manage-
ment and visualization applications 
are available.
Because organizations often have 
diverse requirements, and some don’t 
necessarily want to manage and/or 
maintain an analytics infrastructure, 
Teradata Cloud services are available 
in two formats: 
>
> Private cloud service is for a 
core database infrastructure in 
which no equipment, software, 
or networking is shared with any 
other customer. Teradata provides 
remote access to the Teradata 
Database, Teradata Aster Database 
or HDFS with maintenance, oper-
ating system (OS) management 
and database availability services. 
In this model, a customer accepts 
responsibility for data integra-
tion and applications that use 
the database. Additional service 
options include DBA assistance 
for immediate user needs, or next-
day business ticket response.
>
> Hybrid cloud service offers a fully 
administered analytic environ-
ment. Teradata provides the entire 
data warehouse or discovery envi-
ronment, data integration, BI and/
or Teradata applications. Teradata 
also provides all operational 
support services for the environ-
ment, including activities such as 
database and system administra-
tion, data backup, application 
operations, authentication, access 
controls, security, and perfor-
mance and capacity management. 
For both formats, Teradata provides 
secure connectivity between a cus-
tomer’s network and Teradata’s cloud 
environment. In addition, security 
services consultants review a custom-
er’s specific requirements, architect 
and implement mutually agreed upon 
controls as well as perform activity 
monitoring and patching. Teradata 
also offers increasing levels of security 
tiers in which customers can choose 
to add optional in-database column-
level encryption or detailed logging, 
log data retention and a tamper-proof 
audit trail of all activity.
Advanced Analytics for All  
Unlike other analytics companies 
arriving to market with cloud offers, 
Teradata can provide a full range of 
services for analytics design and devel-
opment, including data loading into 
the cloud environment, data model-
ing, BI reporting, advanced analytics 
and more. Not all cloud computing 
services are created equal—especially 
since some are not expressly designed 
for analytics. Teradata Cloud services 
run leading Teradata Database and 
discovery solutions on an infrastruc-
ture that is scalable, highly available 
and reliable. 
Companies can be confident that 
Teradata certified professionals will 
ensure infrastructure availability 
alongside day-to-day analytics sup-
port. Best of all, these capabilities are 
delivered in a budget-friendly monthly 
subscription, making powerful analyt-
ics available to organizations of all 
sizes with the benefits of a cloud. T
Paul Barsch is a services marketing 
director for Teradata and a regular 
contributor to Teradata Magazine. He 
has more than 15 years of IT experience. 
This article originally appeared in the  
Q3 2013 issue of Teradata Magazine.
Teradata understands the importance of acquiring the right 
analytics infrastructure that is protected, secured and managed  
by industry professionals.
PAGE 8  l  TeradataMagazine.com  l  Special Edition  l  Enterprise Analytics in the Cloud

T
oday’s agile businesses are seeking to expand analytics fast, gain 
flexible analytic deployment options and smooth cash flows. Teradata 
understands these needs and has engineered a cloud solution that 
meets organizations’ analytic needs.
Teradata® Cloud provides enterprises with flexible “as a service” options for 
data warehousing, discovery platform solutions and open-source Apache™ 
Hadoop®.  These capabilities are available in a simple subscription-based 
pricing model that helps reduce capital expenditures. Cloud starter kits are also 
available that allow companies to leverage Teradata’s vast industry expertise to 
load data quickly, create BI reports and gain business value in a rapid fashion. 
Organizations can now choose between an on-premises installation or flex-
ible cloud options that are secure and highly available. With Teradata Cloud, 
it has never been easier to gain instant access to Teradata technologies to meet 
today’s competitive forces head on and capitalize on future opportunities.  >> 
The Perfect Fit  
Teradata Cloud offers fast, easy access to a powerful analytics 
platform in an affordable and flexible pricing model.
by Paul Barsch and Ed White
PAGE 9  l  TeradataMagazine.com  l  Special Edition  l  Enterprise Analytics in the Cloud

Key Considerations  
Industry analysts enjoy debating 
the substance of cloud computing. 
However, squabbles on definitions 
are mostly counterproductive 
because the real value of cloud isn’t 
in how it is defined; it’s the business 
value it delivers. In a Financial Times 
publication titled, “The Business 
Landscape of Cloud Computing,” 
analyst Darryl Plummer writes: 
“Cloud computing means someone 
else runs your computers and soft-
ware while you use what they deliver 
and focus on delivering value.” This 
simple definition shows the real 
value of cloud is the ability to focus 
on customer needs while “someone 
else” takes care of analytic infra-
structure and operations.
In terms of performance, it’s impor-
tant to recognize that not all cloud 
infrastructures are created equal. 
That’s because analytic workloads 
are typically CPU- and I/O-intensive. 
Therefore, it does not make sense to 
run analytic workloads on cloud ser-
vices that are provisioned for general 
purpose computing one day and for 
data warehousing the next. Business 
users expect top tier performance, 
which is why a cloud environment 
dedicated and engineered specifically 
for analytic workloads is imperative. 
Lastly, when weighing analytic 
cloud options, considerations such as 
performance and functionality should 
override the siren song of “lowest 
cost per terabyte.” Few people would 
buy a house based on the lowest price 
per square foot. Likewise, a low price 
for limited features and lethargic 
performance might work for a modest 
dataset and a small number of concur-
rent queries, but these cloud offerings 
will usually not meet the needs of 
demanding business users.
Fast, Flexible and Powerful
Because performance, service level 
agreements (SLAs) and availability are 
important to business users, Teradata 
is now offering a complete cloud 
solution that delivers a cloud founda-
tion, enhanced operational services 
and consulting services to help advise, 
architect and manage analytics. 
Teradata Cloud eliminates the need 
for organizations to procure, maintain 
and capitalize an analytic infrastruc-
ture. Instead, analytic resources can be 
quickly added to scale up for expand-
ing business needs. 
With Teradata Cloud, organizations 
have the capability to be up and run-
ning in days instead of waiting weeks 
or even months for IT equipment to 
be shipped, installed and powered on. 
And cloud capabilities from Teradata 
can be acquired in a subscription pric-
ing model to help smooth cash flows 
for asset-light businesses. 
Adding to Teradata’s success in 
cloud computing are flexible options 
to deploy: 
>
> Teradata Database, the world’s 
most robust database engine with 
sophisticated workload manage-
ment and unparalleled features 
such as support for geospatial, 
temporal and columnar-based 
analytics. 
>
> Teradata Aster’s pre-built library of 
more than 100 SQL-MapReduce® 
 
Cloud Foundation
(Teradata Database)
Cloud Foundation
(Teradata Aster 
Database)
Cloud Foundation
(Apache Hadoop)
Enhanced
Services
Enhanced
Services
Enhanced
Services
Consulting
Services
Consulting
Services
Consulting
Services
Data Management 
as a Service
Discovery 
as a Service
Data Warehouse 
as a Service
figure
Teradata Cloud Foundation and “As a Service” Options
Teradata® Cloud offers a full range of analytic services, including data 
warehousing, discovery capabilities and data management. 
PAGE 10  l  TeradataMagazine.com  l  Special Edition  l  Enterprise Analytics in the Cloud

functions that allow business users 
to perform statistical analytics, text 
analytics, graph, path analysis and 
more in a single solution.
>
> Teradata Portfolio for Hadoop 
for capturing, storing and refining 
multi-structured data. 
Teradata’s “as a service” options can 
include everything for end-to-end 
analytics, such as production DBA 
support, improved security for com-
pliance purposes, enhanced backup, 
and management for data integration 
and business intelligence (BI) servers. 
Additional consulting services are also 
available for advising on analytic best 
practices, migrating from existing 
databases, implementing new applica-
tions and providing analytic access.
To succeed in analytics, customers 
require more than just a platform and 
database. Teradata is leveraging its 
unique vertical industry expertise to 
provide optional industry starter kits 
to help enterprises jump-start their 
analytics projects. These accelerated 
packages include high-level logical and 
physical data models, and industry 
report templates.  
Remote Access to 
Powerful Analytics   
Some enterprises have invested heavily 
in acquiring, training and developing 
talent in database administration, 
application development and sus-
tainment, data modeling and other 
analytic skill sets. For these situations, 
the Teradata Cloud Foundation is a 
perfect fit since it offers remote access 
to the Teradata Database, Teradata 
Aster’s analytic services and Portfolio 
for Hadoop with maintenance, daily 
backup and base security all included 
in one low monthly subscription price. 
(See figure, previous page.)
With this solution, Teradata handles 
basic cloud infrastructure functions 
such as hardware/software monitoring 
and maintenance, security admin-
istration and resource provisioning. 
Teradata Cloud Foundation includes 
assistance with:
>
> Customer onboarding 
>
> Base security and networking 
>
> Data center management 
>
> Backup and recovery 
>
> System availability 
>
> Provisioning 
>
> Daily operational management
Best Solution Possible 
With Teradata Cloud, organizations 
can select flexible cloud options that 
deliver data warehousing, discovery 
analytics and data management 
solutions. All data types, including 
structured and multi-structured, can 
be conveniently stored and analyzed 
in a cost-effective and cash-flow 
friendly manner. To meet current 
and future business needs, there’s no 
better option than Teradata Cloud—a 
powerful analytic solution that’s scal-
able, reliable, secure, and supported by 
trained and certified associates. T
Paul Barsch is a services marketing 
director for Teradata and a regular 
contributor to Teradata Magazine. He 
has more than 15 years of IT experience.
Ed White is the general manager 
for Teradata Cloud responsible for 
the cross functional development 
and deployment of Teradata’s cloud 
strategy. Ed has more than 15 years of 
data warehousing experience.
This article originally appeared in the  
Q4 2013 issue of Teradata Magazine.
6 Factors Driving Cloud Analytics 
In addition to improved business agility, organizations are increasingly 
turning to cloud-based analytics for six reasons:
>
> “Cloud first” mandates. Some enterprises institute a “cloud first” policy 
because C-level leadership no longer wants to support data centers, 
license software and capitalize IT assets.
>
> Departmental use. Business users will acquire application-specific data 
marts in the cloud. 
>
> Analytic pilots. Data warehousing or discovery pilot projects can take 
advantage of cloud services for a short duration to show business value 
quickly.
>
> Platform for applications. Cloud options are often attractive for 
enterprises that wish to build solutions on top of an existing analytic 
platform. 
>
> Development. Workloads for development are shifting to the cloud to 
avoid affecting production data warehouse service level agreements.
>
> Disaster recovery. Cloud services provide a convenient, affordable 
option for IT disaster recovery.
PAGE 11  l  TeradataMagazine.com  l  Special Edition  l  Enterprise Analytics in the Cloud

10000 Innovation Drive, Dayton, OH 45342    Teradata.com
Teradata and the Teradata logo are registered trademarks of Teradata Corporation and/or its affiliates in the U.S. and worldwide. Teradata continually improves products as new 
technologies and components become available. Teradata, therefore, reserves the right to change specifications without prior notice. All features, functions, and operations  
described herein may not be marketed in all parts of the world. Consult your Teradata representative or Teradata.com for more information. 
Copyright © 2015 by Teradata Corporation    All Rights Reserved.    Produced in U.S.A.
07.15 EB8913
To subscribe visit Teradata Magazine

