
THE U.S. NAVY SEAL SURVIVAL
HANDBOOK
LEARN THE SURVIVAL TECHNIQUES AND
STRATEGIES OF AMERICA’S
ELITE WARRIORS
Don Mann and Ralph Pezzullo
Skyhorse Publishing
2

Copyright © 2012 by Don Mann and Ralph Pezzullo
All Rights Reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced
in any manner without the express written consent of the
publisher, except in the case of brief excerpts in critical
reviews or articles. All inquiries should be addressed to
Skyhorse Publishing, 307 West 36th Street, 11th Floor, New
York, NY 10018.
All statements of fact, opinion, or analysis expressed are
those of the author and do not reflect the official positions or
views of the U.S. Government. Nothing in the contents should
be construed as asserting or implying U.S. Government
authentication of information or endorsement of the author’s
view.
This
material
has
been
reviewed
by
the
U.S.
Government and the U.S. Military to prevent the disclosure of
classified information.
Skyhorse Publishing books may be purchased in bulk at
special
discounts
for
sales
promotion,
corporate
gifts,
fund-raising, or educational purposes. Special editions can
also be created to specifications. For details, contact the
Special Sales Department, Skyhorse Publishing, 307 West
36th
Street,
11th
Floor,
New
York,
NY
10018
or
info@skyhorsepublishing.com.
3

Skyhorse®
and
Skyhorse
Publishing®
are
registered
trademarks of Skyhorse Publishing, Inc.®, a Delaware
corporation.
Visit our website at www.skyhorsepublishing.com.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Library
of
Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication
Data
is
available on file.
ISBN: 978-1-61608-580-3
Photo
research
by
Erika
W.
Hokanson
of
RefreshMediaResources.com
Printed in China
“Never Get Lost AGAIN! As a former Navy SEAL, not only
did I enjoy Don Mann’s U.S. Navy SEAL Survival Handbook,
4

but learned several things as well. This book is written by a
career Navy SEAL combat medic and life long adventure
racer.
He
knows
more
about
surviving
in
potentially
dangerous situations/nature than anyone I personally know. I
look forward to keeping this book readily available—just in
case!”
—by Stew Smith, Navy SEAL Fitness Author
“Don has certainly walked the walk in his years serving in the
SEAL teams. Having gone through military survival training
(land/water survival, SAR, SERE, etc.) and non-military
(winter mountaineering) I can appreciate the depth of
knowledge within each section. Surviving life threatening
situations requires something unique for each individual. Don
articulates a holistic view to help educate and prepare the
reader for various scenarios. This publication is a must read
for anyone looking to hone their survival skills.”
—by Brian Dickinson, ex-USN CSAR Swimmer, Everest
Summiteer/Survivor
“The Navy SEAL Survival Handbook is a comprehensive
guide from an expert with the experience to back it up! The
Navy Seal Survival Handbook is a terrific, one stop source for
your survival needs.”
—by Randy Spivey, CEO and Founder, Center for
Personal Protection and Safety
“I’ve been on multiple operational deployments with Don and
taken a few recreational adventure trips with him. I assure
you that Don knows about what he has written in The Navy
5

SEAL Survival Handbook. I don’t mean theory or practicing
survival
techniques
in
protected
environment
where
a
time-out can be called and someone will come and provide a
little assistance. Don has applied most of the things he
describes in the real-world and in risky situations. Heck, he’s
probably done all of this stuff but couldn’t share it because of
the sensitive nature of his missions! While Don describes
skills that are critical to survival, what you really gain from
reading this handbook is a sense of the attitude required to be
successful in the harsh environments in which America’s
secret warriors thrive.”
—by John Wright, US Air Force and DoD SERE Trainer,
Multiple Deployments in Support of the Global War on
Terror
“The Navy SEAL Survival Handbook is essential reading for
any adventure racer, climber, explorer, military personnel or
outdoors person; ensure you have a copy of this in your
kit-bag! Everything from what to include and how to prepare
your emergency kit to living off the land, from essential
shelter building to personal administration and from the
effects of weather to celestial and obscure navigation can be
found in this hand-book.
I know this is one manual I will be using for the Hellweek
PT™ Baalsrud Trail Challenge to the Arctic in 2013.”
—by (Naval) Lt. Seán Ó Cearrúlláin (Rtd.), Hellweek
PT™ Founder
“The Navy SEAL Survival Handbook has all the lessons,
reasons why and also the why not’s, of how to survive when
6

“it” hits the fan. Everyone from Back Country to the Urban
folks can benefit from all the information. You just never
know and like it has been said “knowledge is power”. The
lessons in this book can mean the difference between
surviving and being home with those you love or not. Will
you be part of the solution or live a life time of regret? I
started reading it, but wound up studying it!”
—by Jim Kelleher, Survivalist
“The Navy SEAL Survival Handbook brought back some
really wild and vivid memories of courses I’d been through in
the military. It really captured what it was like to be there and
how each evolution unfolded. Special Operation Forces
(SOF) guys are pretty special just as the studies show. This
Survival Handbook tells the public exactly how they are able
to do survive in the wilderness.”
—by LTC Blain Reeves, US Army
“Having been trained by some of the most highly regarded
survival experts in the US, I can say definitively that no one
has more experience or knowledge on the topic of mountain,
jungle, desert, sea or urban survival than Don Mann. Don’s
survival techniques along with his philosophy on combat
mindset have served me well in real world survival situations
and life in general. The Navy SEAL Survival Handbook
should be mandatory reading for anyone who spends time in
the wilderness.”
—by Dr. Stephen M. Erle, Director SEAL Training
Adventures
7

“A veritable how-to guide, The Navy Seal Survival Handbook
is an absolute must have for every outdoor enthusiast,
adventurer or Armed Forces member. This book is packed
with a ton of useful information on wilderness survival
techniques. A retired member of the elite U.S. Navy SEALs,
Don Mann shares his acumen and experiences as an expert in
the field.”
—by Rick Sheremeta, Outdoor Photographer and Author
“Navy SEAL, Don Mann, comes through again with another
insightful and inspiring book. His knowledge of survival is
apparent from the get go in The Navy SEAL Survival
Handbook. The psychological angle intrigued me the most
and was an amazing view of what SEALs sacrifice IN
TRAINING, let alone what happens in combat situations. I
gained a great deal of insight into the world of survival as
well as deepened my respect for the Navy SEALs. Frankly if I
was in a survival situation, I would want Don Mann there
with me. After reading his book I at least feel like I am much
better prepared. If you are a fan of survival, get this book. If
you are intrigued by the Navy SEALs, get this book. Just
GET THIS BOOK!”
—by Matthew Fox, Expedition competitor
“I found the chapters on Survival Mindset and Basic Survival
Tips to be especially beneficial. These two chapters alone are
a vital read for all outdoors recreationalists. I highly endorse
this book as the definitive guide on wilderness survival and
recommend it strongly as essential reading for military,
civilian, and search and rescue specialists.”
8

—by Jim C. Blount, retired CIA Senior Instructor and the
author
of
Stay
Alert,
Stay
Alive,
A
Guide
to
Counterterrorism for Everyday Life
“The Navy SEAL Survival Handbook is much more than a
basic “Survival 101” handbook. Having retired from the
Army, after a twenty-four year career, I read from a
perspective of does this handbook have applicability in my
life today, as a business executive? Answer: YES! It raises
the business leader’s awareness that we travel in a dangerous
world, that knowledge, skill and proper preparation is
required to successfully meet our daily challenges, a “can do”
attitude positively affects those around us and mental
toughness is a required trait for success. This is a great read,
for the special ops soldier, survivalist, adventurist, and
business executive!”
—by
Terry
L.
Carrico,
VP,
Corporate
Security,
McKesson Corp. Colonel (R), U.S. Army, Military Police
Corps
9

CONTENTS
Introduction
Chapter One—SEAL/SERE Training
Chapter Two—The Elements of Survival
Chapter Three—Jungle Survival
Chapter Four—Mountain and Arctic Survival
Chapter Five—Desert Survival
Chapter Six—Survival at Sea
Chapter Seven—Basic Survival Tips
Chapter Eight—Water
Chapter Nine—Shelter and Fire
Chapter Ten—Food and Hunting
Chapter Eleven—Weather
Chapter Twelve—Navigation
Chapter Thirteen—Survival Medicine
Chapter Fourteen—Survival Kits
Chapter Fifteen—The Mystery of Survival
10

Acknowledgments
Photo Credits
11

“It is not the strongest of the species that survive, nor the
most
intelligent, but the one most responsive to change.”
—Charles Darwin
12

U.S. service members participating in a Survival, Evasion,
Resistance and Escape (SERE) course march to their first
field training evolution at a training site in Warner
Springs, Calif. Personnel attending the SERE course are
trained in evading capture, survival skills and the military
Code of Conduct.
13

14

Rangely,
Maine—A
student
at
the
Navy
Survival,
Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) school crosses a
frozen creek.
Life can change in an instant. One moment you’re trekking
along a mountain ridge, and then you’re suddenly struck by a
rattlesnake. One minute you’re skiing down a mountain, the
next you’re facing an oncoming avalanche.
As Navy SEALS, we are trained to face dangerous situations
all over the world—at sea, in the air, and on land. We
understand that every time we launch a mission, unforeseen
circumstances—flash
floods,
aircraft
crashes,
poisonous
insect, animal or marine life bites—can cause us to be trapped
in an unfriendly environment, cut off from communication to
outside support. With every tick of the clock, our situation
can become more desperate. We are trained to deal with these
emergencies. We learn how to survive in the harshest of
environments without food and water.
But what if, God forbid, something like that happens to you?
Will you know how to treat yourself if you’re bitten by a
poisonous snake? Will you know what plants you can extract
water from if trapped in the desert? Or how to protect
yourself and your teammates from freezing to death in the
mountains? The answer to all these questions should be “yes.”
This handbook is all about developing the SEAL survival
mind-set, and arming yourself with the appropriate survival
techniques for numerous potentially fatal scenarios.
We live in a dangerous world. It’s your responsibility to be
prepared.
15

—Don Mann
U.S. sailors undergoing the third and final phase of Basic
Underwater Demolition/SEAL training use a rope to
guide themselves down the side of a cliff and into the
ocean during a field training exercise at San Clemente
Island, Calif. The third phase of the training provides the
students with skills in small arms weapons, demolitions,
and
tactics,
which
culminate
in
the
planning
and
execution of various missions as an independent platoon.
16

INTRODUCTION
17

1
“Return with honor.”
—SERE school motto
U.S. Navy SEALs
I’ve spent my adult life as a Navy SEAL, preparing for and
dealing with the most dangerous situations imaginable.
From 1962, when the first SEAL teams were commissioned,
to the present, SEALs have distinguished themselves as being
individually reliable, collectively disciplined, and highly
skilled. Because of the dangers inherent in what we do,
prospective SEALs go through what is considered by military
experts to be the toughest training in the world—Basic
Underwater Demolition SEAL Training (BUD/S).
BUD/S is a six-month SEAL training course held at the Naval
Special Warfare Training Center in Coronado, California,
which
starts
with
five
weeks
of
indoctrination
and
pre-Training. Following that, all trainees go through three
phases of BUD/S. The first phase is by far the toughest and
consists of eight weeks of basic conditioning, with a grueling
“hell week” in the middle—which is five days and nights of
continuous training on a maximum of four hours of sleep.
18

Hell week is a test of physical endurance, mental tenacity, and
team-work. As many of two-thirds of the class are likely to
“ring the bell” and call it quits during this phase. Those who
grit it out to the finish get to hear the instructors yell, “hell
week is secured!” The trainees continue on with a new sense
of pride, achievement, and self-confidence to second phase
(eight weeks of diving) and third phase (nine weeks of land
warfare).
19

20

U.S. Navy SEAL candidates from Basic Underwater
Demolition/SEAL (BUD/s) Class 288 participate in log
physical training (log PT) during the first phase of
training at Naval Amphibious Base Coronado, Calif.
21

Coronado,
Calif.
A
student
in
Basic
Underwater
Demolition/SEAL (BUD/S) class 270 navigates his way
through the chaos of smoke and explosions in one of the
final evaluations of hell week. On average, students are
allowed only four hours of sleep during hell week, and
those who complete it have about a 95 percent chance of
graduating BUD/S.
Basic Underwater Demolition/ SEAL (BUDs) students
participate in Surf Passage at Naval Amphibious Base
Coronado.
After BUD/S is completed, all trainees go through three
weeks of basic parachute training, followed by eight weeks of
22

SEAL qualification training in mission planning, operations,
and tactic, techniques, and procedures.
BUD/S ends with the formal BUD/S class graduation. It was
a very proud day for me to stand with my classmates in our
dress navy uniforms and listen to our SEAL officers talk
about the special group we were about to enter, and the great
honor it is to serve as a U.S. Navy SEAL.
BUD/S Phases
Phase 1—Physical Conditioning (eight weeks)
Soft sand runs
Swimming—up to two miles with/fins in the ocean
Calisthenics Timed obstacle course
Four-mile timed runs in boots Small boat seamanship
Hydrographic surveys and creating charts
Hell week—week 4 of phase 1—five and one-half days of
continuous training on little to no sleep
Phase 2—Diving (eight weeks)
Step up intensity of the physical training
Focus on combat diving
Open-circuit (compressed air) SCUBA
23

Closed-circuit (100% oxygen) SCUBA
Long-distance navigation dives
Mission-focused combat swimming and diving techniques
Phase 3—Land Warfare (nine weeks)
Increasingly strenuous physical training
Weapons training
Demolitions (military explosives)
Small unit tactics
Patrolling techniques
Rappelling and fast rope operations
Marksmanship
24

As an instructor monitors a training evolution, Basic
Underwater Demolition/ SEAL (BUDS) Class 244 receives
instructions on their next exercise while they lay in the
surf.
25

Kodiak, Alaska—Navy SEALs perform advanced cold
weather training to experience the physical stress of the
environment and how their equipment will operate, or
even sound, in adverse conditions. Navy SEALs are
maritime special operations forces that strike from the
sea, air, and land. They operate in small numbers,
infiltrating their objective areas by fixed-wing aircraft,
helicopters, navy surface ships, combatant craft and
submarines. SEALs have the ability to conduct a variety
of high-risk missions, utilizing unconventional warfare,
direct action, special reconnaissance, combat search and
rescue, diversionary attacks and precision strikes.
All BUD/S graduates then fly out to Kodiak Island, Alaska,
for a twenty-eight day winter warfare course, during which
they train in snow and freezing wind while often carrying half
26

their body weight in weapons and gear. The course includes
cross-country skiing, snow shoe travel, building shelters,
procuring food and water, fire building, using specialized
survival gear to plot courses in the mountainous and
snow-covered terrain, and conducting ice-cold ocean swims,
river crossings, and long-range navigation through the
mountain
wilderness
to
infiltrate
and
establish
covert
surveillance of target sites.
BUD/S and winter warfare training prepares SEAL trainees to
become combat-ready warriors. But they don’t learn the nitty
gritty of survival until they complete SERE School.
27

28

Kodiak, Alaska—A SEAL qualification training candidate
looks out from a two-man tent during a re-warming
exercise in which he spent five minutes in near freezing
water.
Kodiak,
Alaska—A
SEAL
qualification
training
candidate checks the gear of another member of his squad
during
a
long-range
land
navigation
exercise.
The
candidates will spend forty-eight hours in the Alaskan
mountains learning how to navigate through the rugged
terrain
and
survive
the
frigid
conditions.
The
twenty-eight-day cold weather training course, taught in
29

Kodiak, is part of a year long process to become a U.S.
Navy SEAL.
SERE Training
As a young Navy SEAL recently graduated from Basic
Underwater Demolition School (BUD/S), I was told by a
Vietnam-era SEAL that if I were captured during wartime,
there was a good chance I’d be beheaded or skinned alive. I
immediately volunteered to attend the Navy Survival Evasion
Resistance and Escape (SERE) course conducted at Warner
Springs, California.
Since I knew that as a SEAL I would likely be deployed
overseas behind enemy lines, I took my survival training
seriously.
Most of the twenty members in my SERE class were navy
pilots and aircrew personnel considered to be at high risk of
capture. I was the only SEAL.
The course started with basic lessons in land navigation,
poisonous plants, animals and insects, water procurement, fire
making, shelter building, and evasion and escape techniques.
Then, the twenty of us were dropped off in the desert without
food or water and ordered to find our way to a safe area while
trying to avoid contact with the “enemy.”
We were thirsty and hungry. We drank from the prickly pear
cactus and looked for edible plants to eat. I happened to see a
small rabbit running under a bush, threw my KA-BAR knife
at it, and to my surprise, pinned the rabbit’s neck into the
ground. I skinned it and made rabbit stew for the team by
30

mixing the rabbit with edible plants. But one little rabbit was
hardly enough to feed twenty hungry men.
Eventually, all of us were captured. I was plastic-tie tied,
blindfolded, and thrown into a Jeep. The instructors, outfitted
in realistic communist-style clothing, played their parts,
screaming, barking orders, trying their best to intimidate us.
I played it for real, too. When my captor stepped out of the
Jeep, I managed to wrestle my bound hands in front of me,
grab his PRC-77 radio, and throw it under the vehicle. I also
hid a knife and lighter in my boots.
I was driven to a fenced POW training camp. There I saw
enemy guards interrogating other “prisoners,” slamming them
into walls, humiliating them by having them stand naked
while being drilled with questions and slapped in the face.
They started working on us immediately, trying to get us to
break. There were hard cell interrogations with guards
shouting questions and slapping you, and soft cell sessions,
where you were called into a warm office where a pretty
woman or friendly guard would offer you coffee, snacks, and
warm clothing.
31

U.S. Air Force Airmen of the 336th Training Group head
out for a six-mile road march while wearing sixty-pound
packs during the first ever Survival, Evasion, Resistance
and Escape (SERE) Challenge held at Fairchild Air Force
Base, Wash. Thirty SERE members are participating in
the
challenge,
which
includes
an
obstacle
course,
three-mile run, six-mile road march, and a variety of
other events that test the strength and stamina of the
participants.
What is SERE Training?
32

Because of the violent nature of the world we live in, all U.S.
military and other government personnel, and even civilians
traveling overseas, run the risk of kidnapping, captivity, and
exploitation
by
governmental
and
non-governmental
organizations (including terrorist groups) that ignore the
Geneva Convention and/or other human rights conventions. If
you travel overseas frequently, especially to areas of conflict,
you need to know how to avoid danger, evade capture, and, if
captured, survive while waiting for extraction.
NATO
countries
provide
basic
level
Survival
Evasion
Resistance and Escape (SERE) training to all their deployable
forces.
SERE Training Levels
Level A is initial entry-level training that all military
personnel— enlisted and officers—receive upon entering the
service. It provides a minimum level of understanding of the
code of conduct.
33

Getting the attention of four A-10 Thunderbolt II pilots
by using a mirror during Combat Search And Rescue
(CSAR) training near Osan Air Base, South Korea.
Annual CSAR training is conducted by Survival Evasion
Resistance Escape (SERE) instructors and is designed to
reacquaint aircrew members with CSAR procedures and
techniques.
34

35

A soldier waits for an HH-60 Pave Hawk helicopter to
extract him from a simulated hostile area during a
Survive, Evade, Resist and Escape (SERE) exercise in
support of Red Flag-Alaska (RF-A) near Eielson Air
Force Base, Alaska. Feeman is role-playing a downed pilot
who was shot down behind enemy lines. RF-A is a Pacific
Air Forces-directed field training exercise for U.S. and
coalition
forces
flown
under
simulated
air-combat
conditions.
As seen under night vision photography, U.S. sailors
assigned to Basic Underwater Demolition/ SEAL class 281
carry an inflatable boat toward the surf during a first
36

phase navigation training exercise in San Diego, Calif.
First phase is an eight-week course that trains, prepares,
and
selects
SEAL
candidates
based
on
physical
conditioning, water competency; mental tenacity and
teamwork.
Level B is designed for personnel whose “jobs, specialties or
assignments entail moderate risk of capture and exploitation.”
Department of Defense Policy No. 1300.21 lists as examples
“members of ground combat units, security forces for high
threat targets and anyone in the immediate vicinity of the
forward edge of the battle area or the forward line of troops.”
Current operations in Iraq and Afghanistan have shown that
practically everyone deployed in theater falls under this
category. Consequently, the demand for Level-B training has
proliferated exponentially and has become mandatory for
most deploying forces. Level B is conducted at the unit level
through the use of training/support packets containing a series
of standardized lesson plans and videos.
Level C is designed for personnel whose “jobs, specialties or
assignments entail a significant or high risk of capture and
exploitation.” According to military directive AR 350-30, “As
a minimum, the following categories of personnel shall
receive formal Level-C training at least once in their careers:
combat aircrews, special operations forces (e.g., navy special
warfare combat swimmers and special boat units—i.e.,
SEALs, Army Special Forces and Rangers, Marine Corps
Force Reconnaissance units, Air Force special tactics teams,
and psychological operations units) and military attaché.”
SERE C-Level Training
37

The course spans three weeks with three phases of instruction.
Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) students
aboard a life raft prepare to perform a twenty-man egress
during water survival training at Langley Air Force Base,
Va. The training, conducted by SERE specialists, teaches
students how to survive if they egress over water. The
course also covers proper signaling, desalinating water,
38

finding sustenance, and how to properly release from a
parachute drag.
Students in the Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape
(SERE) carry partners to obtain a 1,000-meter pace count
during land navigation in the survival portion course at a
training site in Warner Springs, Calif. The SERE course
provided training in evading capture, survival skills and
the Code of the U.S. Fighting Force.
Phase One consists of approximately ten days of academic
instruction on the code of conduct and in SERE techniques
39

that incorporate both classroom learning and hands-on field
craft.
Phase Two is a five-day field training exercise in which the
students
practice
their
survival
and
evasion
skills
by
procuring food and water, constructing fires and shelters, and
evading tracker dogs and aggressor forces for long distances.
Phase Three takes place in the resistance-training laboratory,
a mock prisoner-of-war camp, where students are tested on
their individual and collective abilities to resist interrogation
and exploitation and to properly apply the six articles of the
code of conduct in a realistic captivity scenario. The course
culminates with a day of debriefings in which the students
receive individual and group feedback from the instructors.
These critiques help students process everything they have
been through to solidify the skills they applied properly and to
correct areas that need adjustment.
SERE Training Objectives
Within SERE training, every student is taught to understand
and practice techniques in the following procedures:
40

Rangely, Maine—A student at the Navy Survival,
Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) school repacks
his gear after a lesson.
41

U.S. Navy SERE training is conducted at the navy’s remote
training site in Warner Springs, California, and in the
mountains of Bath, Maine.
Besides teaching survival, SERE is also an advanced code of
conduct course. All military personnel get their initial code of
conduct instruction during basic training, where they’re
taught an American service member’s legal responsibilities
regarding capture by enemy forces. But SERE training goes
far beyond that. Because the school is a combination of
courses
designed
for
personnel
with
jobs
that
entail
greater-than-normal risks of being stranded behind enemy
lines or captured by enemy forces, students get a deeper
insight into the philosophies behind the code.
Article I
•
I am an American fighting in the forces which guard my
country and our way of life. I am prepared to give my life in
their defense.
42

Article II
•
I will never surrender of my own free will. If in command,
I will never surrender the members of my command while
they still have the means to resist.
Article III
•
If I am captured, I will continue to resist by all means
available. I will make every effort to escape and aid others to
escape. I will accept neither parole nor special favors from the
enemy.
Article IV
•
If I become a prisoner of war I will keep faith with my
fellow prisoners. I will give no information or take part in any
action which might be harmful to my comrades. If I am
senior, I will take command. If not, I will obey the lawful
orders of those appointed over me, and will back them up in
every way.
Article V
•
When questioned, should I become a prisoner of war, I am
required to give name, rank, service number and date of birth.
I will evade answering further questions to the utmost of my
ability. I will make no oral or written statements disloyal to
my country and its allies or harmful to their cause.
Article VI
43

•
I will never forget that I am an American, fighting for
freedom, responsible for my actions, and dedicated to the
principles which made my country free. I will trust in my God
and in the United States of America.
44

45

Warner Springs, Calif. U.S. Navy Survival, Evasion,
Resistance and Escape (SERE) instructors teach members
of Boy Scout Troop 806 of Coronado, Calif. how to trap
food to survive in the wilderness. Sailors from the Naval
Air Station North Island SERE detachment volunteered
to train the Boy Scouts.
The instruction starts with classroom work and then focuses
on real-world applications of the code of conduct. Following
the classroom part of the course, students begin to learn
methods of avoiding capture by the enemy. Eventually, they
are captured and enter resistance and escape training.
The SERE field instructors are highly motivated, well trained,
and possess an immense knowledge of the subject. As
instructors,
they’re
part
naturalist,
part
guide,
part
psychologist, and part mentor. Their expertise includes
techniques for surviving in the arctic, desert, open ocean,
jungle, and mountain regions, in combat and in captivity.
Much of the training at SERE School contains lessons learned
by service members who made it back across enemy lines or
spent time as prisoners of war. Their experience makes them
highly valued advisors.
During the field phase of the course, students are introduced
to specific methods of navigation through hostile territory.
The rule regarding navigating is twofold. First, you need to
figure out how to get where you’re going without being
spotted. Second, you have to reach specific locations on
schedule. With the clock ticking, caution sometimes has to be
sacrificed for speed, which can result in close calls.
46

Survival lessons are interspersed. These include: fire building,
trapping, creating shelters, and finding edible plants.
The SERE School Experience
The following are the impressions of an army soldier who
completed SERE training.
“Most of the modesty the students brought with them
disappears very quickly. When they sleep, they huddle
together to stay warm as the temperature dips into the
twenties and frost coats their packs. When they’re hiking,
they know that everyone else is just as hungry and thirsty as
they are. Not knowing what is coming next also bonds them.
When surprises occur, they must act as a team. There is a
chain of command for each group, as well as the entire class.
The leaders are doubly challenged, as they are responsible for
ensuring their team acts properly, no matter what comes up.
When there are lapses in leadership and issues could have
been avoided or resolved in the chain of command, the
instructors take the group leaders aside later to advise them on
appropriate responses.”
In his book, In the Company of Heroes, retired 160th Special
Operations Aviation Regiment pilot CW4 Mike Durant
reflected on the SERE training he received at Camp Mackall
in the winter of 1988 and the strength it gave him during his
eleven-day captivity in Somalia in October 1993: “I came
away (from SERE) with tools that I never believed I would
ever really need, but even in those first seconds of capture at
the crash site in Mogadishu, those lessons would come
rushing back at me. Throughout my captivity, I would
summon them nearly every hour . . . I thanked Nick Rowe
47

[Colonel Rowe developed the rigorous Survival, Evasion,
Resistance and Escape (SERE) training program] silently
every day, for the lessons I learned in SERE training. I asked
that God bless him, as I tried to plan my next move.” (Nick
Rowe died in 1989.)
Why Do Some Handle Stress Better Than Others?
Even though SERE School was a “theoretical setting,” it
taught me that some people are better at dealing with the
stresses and strains of life than others. Why?
Dr. Andy Morgan of Yale Medical School set out to find a
real-world laboratory where he could watch people under
incredible stress in reasonably controlled conditions. He
found one in southeastern North Carolina at Fort Bragg, home
of the Army’s elite Airborne and Special Forces. This is
where the Army’s renowned survival school (their version of
Navy SERE school) is located. It’s also where they practice
something called stress inoculation. Based on the concept of
vaccines, soldiers are exposed to pressure and suffering in
training in order to build up their immunity. It’s a form of
psychological conditioning: the more shocks to your system,
the more you’re able to withstand.
While soldiers are frightened and worn down with sleep
deprivation and lack of food, they’re also interrogating them
using enemy techniques used during World War II, Korea,
and Vietnam. The sessions are known to be extremely tough.
For Morgan, POW school was the perfect place to study
survival
under
acute
stress.
Even
though
the
soldiers
understood that they were in training, and, therefore, not in
48

serious danger, Morgan’s findings were revealing. During
mock interrogations, prisoners’ heart rates skyrocketed to
more than 170 beats per minute for more than half an hour,
even though they weren’t engaged in any physical activity.
Meanwhile, their bodies pumped more stress hormones than
the amounts measured in aviators landing on aircraft carriers,
troops awaiting ambushes in Vietnam, skydivers taking the
plunge, or patients awaiting major surgery. The levels of
stress hormones measured were sufficient to turn off the
immune system and produce a catabolic state, in which the
body starts to break down and feed on itself.
Morgan’s research (which was the first of its kind) produced
some fascinating findings in terms of what types of soldiers
most successfully resisted the interrogators and stayed
focused. Morgan examined two different groups going
throughout this training: regular army troops and elite special
forces soldiers, who are known to be especially “stress hardy”
or cool under pressure. At the start, the two groups were
essentially the same. But once the stress began, he saw
significant differences. Specifically, the two groups released
very different amounts of a chemical in the brain called
neuropeptide Y (NPY). NPY is an amino acid produced by
our bodies that helps regulate blood pressure, appetite,
learning, and memory. It also works as a natural tranquilizer,
controlling anxiety and buffering the effects of stress
hormones like norepinephrine—also known as adrenaline. In
essence, NPY is used by the brain to block alarm and fear
responses and keep the frontal lobe working under stress.
Morgan found that special forces are superior survivors
because they produce significantly greater levels of NPY
compared with regular troops. And, twenty-four hours after
49

completing survival training, NPY levels in Special Forces
soldiers returned to normal, while those in regular soldiers
remained significantly lower.
With much more NPY in their systems, special forces soldiers
really are special. Not only are they able to remain
clearheaded under interrogation stress because of their ability
to produce massive amounts of natural antianxiety chemicals,
but they also bounce back faster once the stress is removed. In
the pressure of warfare, that’s a major advantage.
Dr. Morgan’s Findings at the Navy Diving and Salvage
Training Center
At the elite Navy Diving and Salvage Training Center in
Panama City, Florida, instructors have a quick way of
figuring out who will be capable of accomplishing extremely
dangerous underwater missions. They take young sailors (not
SEALs), tie their hands behind their backs, bind their feet,
strap a dive mask between their teeth (similar to BUD/S
training), and then throw them into the pool. The challenge is
to stay afloat and live.
“The more you struggle,” Morgan said, “the harder it is to get
air and the more tired you get. You just have to inhibit the
powerful, incredible instinct to breathe and your anxiety and
alarm.”
Most trainees quickly realize that the only way to avoid
drowning is to relax and sink to the bottom of the pool, kick
off powerfully toward the surface, gasp for a little bit of air
through clenched teeth, then fall back into the water and drop
down to the bottom again.
50

During this testing, a large number of sailors black out. They
simply don’t get enough oxygen and lose consciousness. Dr.
Morgan watched many of them sink to the bottom of the pool
before divers pulled them to the surface. Once back on the
deck, the unconscious sailors are rolled on their side. As soon
as they’re revived, an instructor shouts repeatedly: “Are you
gonna quit?”
Sailors are given thirty seconds to answer or they’re kicked
out of the program. If they say they want to keep going,
they’re given another thirty seconds to recover and then are
thrown back into the pool. It might sound sadistic, but the
Navy is simply trying to identify those who are likely to
survive the most dangerous missions. Through this grueling
test, it finds sailors who refuse to give up, who can suppress
the need to breathe, who trust that they’ll be rescued if
something goes wrong, and who are prepared to lose
consciousness—or even die.
In another arduous test, Navy divers are taken three miles off
the Gulf Coast at night and are given a target destination on
the beach. Dumped in the water, the students submerge and
are not allowed to surface until they reach their objective
(similar to BUD/S training). To make the challenge even
more stressful, a clock is running and the sailors aren’t
allowed to go deeper than twenty-five feet. Despite the tides
and currents, they’re also forbidden to swim parallel to the
beach looking for their target. The penalty for breaking any of
the rules is immediate expulsion from the course. Speed,
efficiency, and accuracy are a critical part of their grade.
51

Scuba students at the Naval Diving and Salvage Training
Center undergo confidence training in a twelve-foot pool
as part of their scuba certification course. Confidence
training is one part of the students five-week course used
to test their reaction to real-world emergency situations.
52

U.S. soldiers conduct a convoy through the snow-covered
Salang Pass in the Parwan province, Afghanistan. The
pass navigates through a winding road and tunnel
through some of the harshest terrain in Afghanistan.
Nearly two miles above sea level, the Salang Pass connects
the Parwan and Baghlan provinces and serves as one of
the routes to move cargo and supplies from the main
logistics hub at Bagram Air Field, located in eastern
Afghanistan, to Regional Command North. The Soldiers
are with the 101st Sustainment Brigade.
53

In this underwater navigation test, as in the pool exercise,
Morgan again found that brain chemistry plays a huge role.
The more NPY your body can pump into your system, the
better you will perform.
Morgan also learned that the best underwater navigators
release
a
lot
of
a
natural
steroid
called
DHEA
(dehydroepiandrosterone), which buffers the effects of the
stress hormone cortisol and helps the brain’s hippocampus
with spatial relationships and memory. Divers with the most
NPY and DHEA graduated at the top of the class. Conversely,
those with the lowest amounts performed poorly.
The Metronomic Heart
At POW camp and dive school, Morgan discovered a simple
and accurate way of predicting who will survive and perform
the best under extreme stress. You might call it the telltale
heart. It starts with something called heart-rate variability, or
HRV, the variations between beats. Healthy people have a lot
of variability in the intervals between their beats, with their
hearts speeding up and slowing down all the time.
It turns out that the best survivors have very little heart-rate
variability. They have “metronomic heartbeats.” In other
words, their hearts thump steadily, like metronomes, with
almost no variability between beats. The intervals between
beats are evenly spaced. Morgan believes that a metronomic
heartbeat is an easy way to detect good survivors and high
neuropeptide Y releasers, which makes sense biologically
because your brain stem, which controls your heartbeat, has a
high density of neuropeptide Y.
54

Morgan analyzed the heartbeats of soldiers and sailors before
they experienced major stress and found that the ones with
metronomic heartbeats performed the best in survival school
and underwater navigation testing. They also performed the
best in what’s called closequarters combat (CQC) training.
55

56

Coronado, Calif—A Special Warfare Combatant-craft
Crewman
(SWCC)
candidate
from
Crewmen
Qualification
Training
(CQT)
Class
61
jumps
into
Coronado Bay for a floatation check. CQT is a 14-week
course that teaches SWCC candidates the skills they need
as members of the Naval Special Warfare Boat Teams,
including
navigation,
craft
maintenance
and
repair,
towing, anchoring, and weapons. SWCC operate and
maintain
the
navy’s
inventory
of
state-of-the-art,
high-speed boats in support of special operations missions
worldwide.
Morgan analyzed soldiers’ heart rates right before they went
into mock battle—while they were suited up in combat gear,
waiting for a buzzer to ring that would send them running into
a building to “neutralize” (kill) the enemy and rescue
hostages. (They use “simunitions,” simulated ammunition)
The ones with metronomic heartbeats, Morgan concluded,
neutralized more of the enemy and shot at fewer hostages and
other non-threats.
But he also found that the metronomic effect is usually
associated with early heart disease and even sudden death.
Apparently the same body chemistry that allows people to
survive under high stress does not translate into optimal heart
health past the age of fifty. But without it, these elite forces
might never have survived that long.
57

SEAL/SERE TRAINING
58

2
“We all knew there was just one way to improve our odds for
survival: train, train, train. Sometimes, if your training is
properly intense, it will kill you. More often—much, much
more often—it will save your life.”
—Richard Marcinko, Navy SEAL
The Survival Mind-Set
Why do some people with little or no survival training
manage to prevail in life-threatening circumstances, while
others with survival training die? The answer is mental
fortitude, or the will to survive.
The key to survival is your mental attitude!
Psychology of Survival
Life-threatening situations create challenges that impact the
mind. The thoughts and emotions that result can transform a
confident, well-trained person into an indecisive, ineffective
mass of neuroses and fears.
Obviously, none of us wants to fall apart when challenged.
That’s why it’s imperative to familiarize yourself with the
specific stresses associated with survival—and learn to
understand and manage your own reactions to those stresses.
59

Stress
Whether we like it or not, stress is a condition that we’re all
familiar with. It’s basically our reaction to the pressures of
living. It can be defined as “a specific response of the body to
a stimulus (such as pain) that interferes with the normal
physiological equilibrium of an organism.”
While stress is a condition most people seek to avoid, it also
has benefits. For example, it provides a means of testing our
strengths and values. It also helps us measure and develop our
adaptability and flexibility. And, it can stimulate us to
perform at higher levels.
Since we usually don’t consider unimportant events to be
stressful, stress can also be an excellent indicator of the
significance we attach to a particular event. In other words, it
tells us what we consider important.
All of us need some stress in our lives, but too much can be
destructive. The goal, therefore, is to learn to manage stress
so that it never becomes overwhelming. Too much stress
leads to distress, which can adversely affect individuals and
organizations.
Distress causes an uncomfortable condition that we try to
escape and, preferably, avoid. Listed below are some
common indicators of stress becoming distress:
Difficulty making decisions
Angry outbursts
60

Forgetfulness
Low energy levels
Constant worrying
Propensity for mistakes
Thoughts about death or suicide
Trouble getting along with others
Withdrawing from others
Hiding from responsibilities
Carelessness
Stress can be constructive or destructive. It can encourage or
discourage, move us forward or stop us dead in our tracks. It
can fill life with added meaning or render it meaningless.
Stress can inspire us to perform at our maximum efficiency in
a survival situation. It can also cause us to panic and forget all
our training.
The key to your survival is how effectively you manage the
inevitable stresses you will encounter. The survivor will work
with his stresses instead of letting his stresses work on him.
Survival Stressors
Events—such as diving, shooting, skydiving, or being shot
at—produce stress. The events themselves are not stress, but
61

they produce it and are called “stressors.” In other words,
stressors are the cause, while stress is the response.
Once the body recognizes the presence of a stressor, it begins
to prepare to protect itself—to either “fight or flee.” First, the
brain sends a message throughout the body. The body
responds by releasing stored fuels (sugar and fats) to provide
quick energy. Breathing rate increases to supply more oxygen
to the blood. Muscle tension increases to prepare for action.
Blood clotting mechanisms are activated to reduce bleeding
from cuts. Senses become more acute (hearing becomes more
sensitive, eyes widen, sense of smell sharpens) so that you are
more aware of your surroundings. Heart rate and blood
pressure rise to provide more blood to the muscles. This
protective posture prepares you to cope with potential
dangers. But it’s impossible to maintain such a level of
alertness indefinitely.
One stressor doesn’t leave because another one has arrived.
Stressors piggyback on one another. And the cumulative
effect of minor stressors can add up to major distress,
especially when they happen simultaneously.
As the body’s resistance to stress wears down and the sources
of stress continue or increase, the body becomes exhausted.
At this point, the body loses its ability to resist stress or use it
in a positive way, and signs of distress appear.
So anticipating stressors and developing strategies to cope
with them are two important ingredients in the effective
management of stress. Therefore, it’s essential that a person
in a survival setting be aware of the types of stressors he or
she is likely to encounter.
62

Injury, Illness, or Death
In a survival setting, injury, illness, and death are potential
dangers. It can be very stressful being alone in an unfamiliar
environment and knowing that you could die from hostile
action, an accident, or from eating something lethal.
Furthermore, illness and injury can add to stress by limiting
your ability to maneuver, procure food and water, find shelter,
and defend yourself. Illness and injury also add to stress
through the pain and discomfort they generate.
It’s only by learning to control the stress associated with
one’s vulnerability to injury, illness, and death that a survivor
can muster the courage to take the risks associated with
performing survival tasks.
Uncertainty and Lack of Control
Some people have trouble operating in settings where
everything isn’t preplanned and laid out. The only guarantee
in a survival situation is that nothing is guaranteed. You’ll be
operating on limited information in a setting where you have
little or no control over your surroundings. This uncertainty
and lack of control can add to the stress of being ill, injured,
or killed.
Environment
Even under ideal circumstances, nature is an unpredictable
and potentially dangerous force. In a survival situation, you
will have to contend with the stressors of possible capture by
the enemy, extreme weather conditions, rugged terrain, and
63

the variety of creatures inhabiting a particular area. Heat,
cold, rain, winds, mountains, swamps, deserts, insects,
dangerous reptiles, and other animals are just a few of the
challenges that you might expect. Depending on how you
handle the stresses of your environment, your surroundings
can either provide a source of food, water, and protection, or
can be a cause of extreme discomfort leading to injury,
illness, or death.
Hunger and Thirst
Foraging can be another major source of stress. Without food
and water, you will weaken and eventually die. Therefore,
securing and preserving food and water will take on increased
importance as your time in a survival setting increases.
Fatigue
Maintaining the will to survive is likely to get harder as you
grow tired. In fact, it’s possible to become so fatigued that the
act of staying awake is stressful in itself. There are distinct
advantages to facing adversity with others. The company of a
teammate(s) can provide you with a greater sense of security
and a feeling that someone is available to help if problems
occur. In many survival situations, however, one is often
called upon to rely solely on his or her own resources.
Summary
The survival stressors mentioned above are by no means the
only ones you may face. Remember, what is stressful to one
person may not bother another. Your experience, training,
attitude,
physical
and
mental
conditioning,
level
of
64

self-confidence, and survival mind-set will determine what
you will find stressful in a survival environment. The object is
not to avoid stress, but rather to manage the stressors of
survival and make them work for you.
Now that you are armed with a better understanding of stress
and the stressors common to survival, the next step is to
examine how you are likely to react to the stressors you may
face.
Natural Reactions
Human beings have been able to survive many major changes
in their environment throughout the centuries. Their ability to
adapt physically and mentally to a changing world has helped
them thrive, while other species have gradually died off.
The same survival mechanisms that worked for our ancestors
can help keep us alive today! Our challenge is to understand
them better and anticipate how they will affect us in situations
of acute danger.
Survival circumstances will produce psychological reactions
in the average person. Let’s examine some of the major
reactions you might experience when faced with the survival
stressors described above.
Fear
Fear is an emotional response to dangerous circumstances that
has the potential to lead to death, injury, or illness. The
anticipated harm need not be only physical. The threat to
65

one’s emotional and mental well-being can generate fear as
well.
When trying to survive, fear can have a positive function if it
encourages you to be especially cautious in situations where
recklessness could result in injury. But fear can also
immobilize you and cause you to become so frightened that
you fail to perform activities essential to your survival.
It’s perfectly normal to experience a certain degree of fear
when placed in unfamiliar surroundings under adverse
conditions. But it’s imperative that you learn not to be
overcome by these fears. Realistic training can help you
acquire the knowledge and skills needed to increase your
confidence and manage your fears.
Anxiety
Because it is natural to be afraid, it is also natural for us to
experience anxiety. Anxiety can be an uneasy, apprehensive
feeling we get when we anticipate or are faced with
dangerous situations (physical, mental, and emotional). When
used in a positive way, anxiety can motivate us to act to end,
or at least master, the dangers that threaten our existence.
Look at it this way: If we were never anxious, there would be
little motivation to make changes in our lives. The act of
reducing your anxiety brings the source of that anxiety—i.e.,
your fears—under control. When it motivates us to take
positive steps to relieve it, anxiety is helpful. But it can also
have a devastating effect, overwhelming you to the point
where you become easily confused and have difficulty
thinking clearly. Once this happens, it becomes increasingly
66

difficult to make good judgments and sound decisions.
Therefore, it’s important to learn techniques to calm anxieties
and keep them in the range where they’re helpful, not
debilitating.
Anger and Frustration
Frustration arises when a person is continually thwarted in his
or her attempts to achieve a goal. The goal of survival is to
stay alive long enough until you are able to reach help or until
help can reach you. To reach this goal, it’s necessary to
complete certain tasks with minimal resources. And it’s
inevitable that something will go wrong in trying to execute
these tasks. Something will happen that’s beyond your
control. With one’s life at stake, every mistake is magnified in
terms of its importance.
Thus, sooner or later, you will have to cope with frustration
when your plans run afoul. One byproduct of this frustration
is anger.
As you would imagine, there are many events in a survival
situation that can cause frustration or anger. Getting lost,
damaged or forgotten equipment, the weather, inhospitable
terrain, proximity to the enemy, and physical limitations are
just a few.
Frustration
and
anger
encourage
impulsive
reactions,
irrational behavior, poorly thought-out decisions, and, in
some instances, an “I quit” attitude (as people will sometimes
avoid doing something they can’t master). If harnessed and
properly channeled, the emotional intensity associated with
anger and frustration can help you productively answer the
67

challenges of survival. Failure to do so can cause you to waste
energy in activities that do little to further either your chances
of survival or those of your teammates.
Depression
It takes a rare person not to feel some sadness when faced
with the privations of survival. As this sadness deepens, we
label the feeling “depression,” which is closely linked with
frustration and anger.
A person who is frustrated becomes angrier as he fails to
reach his goals. If the anger fails to push you to succeed,
frustration levels usually climb even higher, creating a
destructive cycle between anger and frustration. As the cycle
continues, one becomes increasingly worn down—physically,
emotionally, and mentally. Finally, one starts to give up as his
focus shifts from “What can I do?” to “There is nothing I can
do.”
Depression is an expression of hopelessness. There’s nothing
wrong with feeling sad as you think about your loved ones
and remember what life is like back in “civilization.” Such
thoughts, as long as they remain temporary, can spur you to
try harder and survive another day. On the other hand, if they
become obsessive, you’re likely to sink into a depressed state
that saps your energy and, more important, your will to
survive. It’s imperative to resist falling into depression.
Loneliness and Boredom
68

Man is a social animal. We human beings generally enjoy the
company of others. Very few people want to be alone all the
time!
As you are aware, many survival situations involve isolation.
This isn’t necessarily a bad thing. Because loneliness and
boredom can bring to the surface qualities you never knew
you had, You might find that your imagination and creative
abilities surprise you or that you have a hidden talent. Most
important, you may tap into a reservoir of inner strength and
fortitude you never knew you had.
Conversely, loneliness and boredom can lead to depression.
In a survival situation you must find ways to keep your mind
productively
occupied
and
develop
a
degree
of
self-sufficiency. You must have faith in your ability to “go it
alone.”
Survivor’s Guilt
The circumstances that have caused you to be in a survival
setting are sometimes dramatic and tragic. You might be there
because of an accident or a mission gone bad. Perhaps you
were the only or one of a few survivors. While relieved to be
alive, you might also be mourning the deaths of others who
were less fortunate.
It’s not uncommon for survivors to feel guilty about being
spared while others die. This feeling, when used positively,
has encouraged people to try harder to survive with the belief
they were allowed to live for some greater purpose. Others
have willed themselves to live so that they could carry on the
work of those killed. Whatever reasoning you employ, it’s
69

critical to never undermine your will to survive. The
alternative will only serve to compound the original tragedy.
It’s the survivor’s imperative to survive.
Preparing Yourself
Your mission in any survival situation is to stay alive. As
discussed, you should expect to experience a whole gamut of
thoughts and emotions. These can either help you or lead to
your
downfall.
Fear,
anxiety,
anger,
frustration,
guilt,
depression, and loneliness are all possible reactions to the
many stresses you’re likely to encounter.
Now that you understand the psychological dynamics of
survival situations, you need to prepare yourself to deal with
them so you can further your ultimate interest, which is
staying alive with honor and dignity. Know that the
challenges of survival have produced countless examples of
heroism, courage, and self-sacrifice.
Below are some tips to help you prepare yourself mentally:
Know Yourself
Strengthen your stronger qualities and work even harder to
develop the areas where you know you’re vulnerable.
Anticipate Fears
Begin thinking about what would frighten you the most if you
were forced to survive alone. Train harder in those areas of
concern. The goal is not to eliminate the fear, but to build
confidence in your ability to function.
70

Be Realistic
Don’t be afraid to make honest appraisals. See circumstances
as they are, not as you want them to be. Keep your hopes and
expectations
within
the
parameters
of
your
situation.
Understand that unrealistic expectations only increase the
probability of disappointment. Follow the adage, “Hope for
the best; prepare for the worst.” It is much easier to adjust to
pleasant surprises than to cope with unexpected harsh
realities.
Maintain a Positive Attitude
See the potential good in any situation. This not only boosts
morale, it also stimulates your imagination and creativity.
Remind Yourself What Is at Stake
Failure to prepare yourself mentally for the stresses of
survival can invite depression, carelessness, inattention, loss
of
confidence,
poor
decisionmaking,
and
giving
up
psychologically before the body does. Your life and the lives
of your teammates may be at stake.
Train
Prepare yourself to cope with the rigors of survival. Whether
you’re engaged in military training or learning from life
experience, understand that the skills you’re acquiring will
give you strength and confidence. The more realistic the
training, the less overwhelming an actual survival setting will
be.
71

Learn Stress Management Techniques
People under high levels of stress are more likely to panic if
they’re
not
well-trained
physically
and
prepared
psychologically to face life-threatening situations. While it’s
impossible to control specific survival circumstances, it is
within our ability to monitor and manage our responses to
those circumstances. Learning stress management techniques
can significantly enhance your capability of remain calm and
focused as you work to keep yourself and others alive.
Important techniques to develop include relaxation skills,
time management skills, assertiveness skills, and cognitive
restructuring skills (the ability to control how you view a
situation).
S-Size Up the Situation
72

If you are in a potential hostage situation, find a place where
you can conceal yourself from the enemy. Security takes
priority. Use your senses of hearing, smell, and sight to get a
feel for your surroundings.
Size Up Your Surroundings
Determine the pattern of the area. Get a feel for what is going
on around you. Every environment, whether forest, jungle,
arctic, desert, water, or urban, has a rhythm or pattern. This
rhythm or pattern includes animal and bird noises and
movements and insect sounds. It may also include enemy
traffic and civilian movements.
Size Up Your Physical Condition
Check any wounds you may have sustained and provide
self-aid. Give first aid to your teammates if required. Take
care to prevent further bodily harm. Stay hydrated. Dress
appropriately for the environment.
Size Up Your Equipment
Check to see what equipment you have and what condition
it’s in.
Once you’ve sized up your situation, surroundings, physical
condition, and equipment, you’re ready to make your survival
plan. In doing so, keep in mind your basic physical
needs—water, shelter, and food.
U-Use All Your Senses; Undue Haste Makes Waste
73

During combat, any quick move or reaction made without
thinking or planning can result in your capture or death. Don’t
move just for the sake of taking action. Consider all aspects of
your situation before you make a decision and a move. If you
act in haste, you may forget or lose some of your equipment
or become disoriented so that you don’t know which way to
go. Plan your moves. Be ready to move out quickly without
endangering yourself. Use all your senses to evaluate the
situation. Note sounds and smells. Be sensitive to temperature
changes. Be observant.
R-Remember Where You Are
Always know your position on the map and relate it to the
surrounding terrain. If there are other people with you, make
sure they also know their location. Pay close attention to
where you are and to where you’re going. Don’t rely on
others in the group to keep track of the route. Constantly
orient yourself. During wartime, always try to determine how
your location relates to—
The location of enemy units, hostile elements, and safe areas.
The location of friendly units.
The location of water sources.
Areas that will provide good cover and concealment.
V-Vanquish Fear and Panic
The greatest enemies in a combat survival and evasion
situation are fear and panic. If uncontrolled, they can destroy
74

your ability to make an intelligent decision. They may cause
you to react to your feelings and imagination rather than to
your situation. They can drain your energy and thereby cause
other negative emotions.
I-Improvise
In the United States, we have all types of items available for
our every need. Many of these items are cheap to replace
when damaged. Our easy-come, easy-go, easy-to-replace
culture makes it unnecessary for us to improvise much. This
inexperience in improvisation can be an enemy in a survival
situation.
Learn to use natural objects around you for different needs
(i.e., using a tree limb as a lever). No matter how complete
your survival kit may be, it will be insufficient and in time
will run out or wear out. Your imagination and ingenuity
must take over when that happens.
V-Value Living
Many of us have become creatures of comfort and dislike
inconveniences and discomforts. What happens when we’re
faced
with
a
survival
situation
with
its
stresses,
inconveniences, and discomforts? This is when your will to
live is vital. The experience and knowledge you’ve gained
through life, training, and past experiences will have a
bearing on your will to live. Stubbornness, or a refusal to give
in to problems and obstacles, will give you the mental and
physical strength to endure.
A-Act Like the Natives
75

The natives and animals of a region have adapted to their
environment. To get a feel for the area, watch how the people
go about their daily routine. When and what do they eat?
When, where, and how do they get their food? When and
where do they go for water? What time do they usually go to
bed and get up? These actions are important to you when
you’re trying to avoid capture.
Animal life in the area can also give you clues on how to
survive. Animals require food, water, and shelter. By
watching them, you can find sources of water and food. Keep
in mind that the reaction of animals can reveal your presence
to the enemy. If in a friendly area, one way you can gain
rapport with the natives is to show interest in their tools and
how they get food and water. By studying the people, you
learn to respect them, you often make valuable friends, and,
most important, you learn how to adapt to their environment
and increase your chances of survival.
L-Live by Your Wits and Learn Survival Skills
Without the right mind-set and proper training in survival,
your chances of living through a survival and evasion
situation are slight.
Learn these basic skills now. How you decide to equip
yourself before deployment can impact whether or not you
survive. You need to know about the environment to which
you’re going, and you must practice basic skills geared to that
environment.
Practice basic survival skills during all training programs,
exercises, and missions. Survival training reduces fear of the
76

unknown and gives you self-confidence. It teaches you to live
by your wits.
Pattern for Survival
Develop a survival pattern, one that includes water, food,
shelter, fire, signals, and first aid. For example, in a cold
environment, you’ll need a source of water, traps or snares to
get food; a shelter to protect you from the elements; fire for
warmth and cooking; a means to signal friendly aircraft; and
first aid to maintain health. If injured, first aid has top
priority no matter what climate you’re in.
Change your survival pattern to meet your immediate
physical needs as the environment changes.
Project Planning
• Develop a safety and communications plan
• Anticipate problems
• Weigh production vs. safety
• Preplan for emergencies
• Organize available resources
Wilderness Emergency Management
• Stay in control of your situation
• Analyze any immediate threats to your safety
77

• Prevent dehydration and heat or cold injuries
• Eat
• Get off your feet when possible
• Remain positive
• Try to determine the length of your survival situation and
prepare accordingly
• Protect and maintain your life
• Stay out of the elements when possible
• Seek or make a shelter
• Administer self-aid and first aid to teammates
• Protect your equipment
• Keep all equipment in your shelter
• Conserve your resources
• Do not throw anything away
• Inventory both man-made and natural materials available to
you
• Use all available signaling equipment to give your status
and location to friendly forces
• Rest when you can
78

• Stay alert
• Be patient
The Will to Survive—by Wade Chapple
One of the training venues the rescue center in Colombia
offers to embassy folks is called “High Risk of Isolation.”
Essentially, the term “isolated” means“ being separated from
your unit or organization and friendly authorities.” Anybody
working outside of major population centers in Colombia can
find themselves isolated and in need of assistance. In extreme
circumstances, persons may find themselves isolated deep in
the jungles of Colombia with their very survival totally
dependent on their ability to help themselves.
A frequent question that comes up during this training venue
is, “What is the most important key to survival when isolated
in the Amazon jungle?” My response is always quick and to
the point: the will to survive. Yes, knowing how to collect
water and make it potable is important and yes, being able to
make a fire, build shelter, and procure food are also important
to survival. However, if one does not possess a fierce desire
to survive, that person will likely perish if his/her rescue
doesn’t come quick.
This desire to survive is a form of mental toughness or
psychology that enables a person in life-threatening survival
situations to overcome the stresses that produce adverse
emotional reaction and indecision.
Managing stress, controlling emotions, understanding one’s
reaction to particular challenges, and having the ability to
79

suppress negative thoughts are all necessary traits that serve
to make one mentally tough when facing life-threatening
situations. The operator or individual who possesses these
traits will also possess the will to survive.
Resilience: Can the Will to Survive Be Learned? —by
John Bruce Jessen, Ph.D
Survival experiences span a multitude of settings. Climbers
poised for a summit assault on a high alpine peak could be
pinned down by severe weather, exhaust their supplies, and
be faced with a survival experience. A tourist traveling
through a vast desert might be accidentally left at a roadside
stop, wander off to seek help, and become lost. The
exhilaration of a pleasant afternoon sailing trip might tempt
novice sailors into waters too demanding for their abilities. A
military pilot flying a routine peace-keeping mission could be
unexpectedly shot down, forced to make a sudden and
shocking transition from a pilot secure in the cockpit to an
evader in hostile territory. This same pilot could now find
himself a captive facing exploitation and the threat of death.
Some survival experiences are entered into almost voluntarily
and some are thrust upon us. This spectrum of environmental
variables is further complicated, if not largely determined, by
the human element—the survivor.
Survivors vary with the same infinite randomness as do
survival experiences. Environmental and human variables
produce an incredible array of survival experiences. No
matter how survival experiences vary, they all appear to share
one critical element—the sense of individual loss of control.
The degree of control loss will roughly determine the
magnitude of the survivor’s perceived distress. The conditions
80

of one person’s survival experience could very well produce
merely an exciting adventure for another. An excellent
example of this is the first unsupported crossing of the
Antarctic Continent by the Pentland South Pole Expedition.
This expedition was led by Sir Ranulph Fiennes. For Sir
Ranulph, navigating the high Antarctic plateau while pulling
incredibly heavy sled loads in the extreme cold of catabolic
winds was a seriously challenging and extremely rewarding
exploration. However, if I were thrust into these same
circumstances,
it
would
be
a
survival
experience
of
catastrophic proportions.
This comparison points to another constant in survival
experiences. Individuals define survival experiences based on
their own perceptual appraisal of the challenge they face. The
ability to predict the eventual outcome of a survival situation
is
critical.
It
accounts
for
vast
differences
in
human
perception and performance. Prior to his expedition, Sir
Ranulph read volumes of research on clothing, equipment,
climatic conditions, and accounts of previous Antarctic
explorers. He engaged in field trials which tested his
equipment and tempered his physical and psychological
strength. To that end, the majority of the peril he and his
companion encountered, though very severe, was relatively
predictable to him. Because I would never voluntarily
participate in such a terrifying effort, I would not amass the
qualitative life experiences and preparation necessary to cope
effectively. I would feel frightened and inadequate. Each new
and cruel circumstance
would increase
my feeling
of
vulnerability and helplessness. Sir Ranulph met each new
challenge with measured optimism. His preparation and life
experiences gave him realistic self-confidence. This unique
will to persist and survive is known as resilience.
81

Sir Ranulph’s genuine and hard-won confidence produced a
healthy, optimistic approach to the challenges he faced.
Though
he
experienced
disappointment
and
fear,
his
optimism always won out. He was able to realistically predict
a positive outcome for these challenges. For him, survival
challenges served as cues which triggered his prepared mind
and body to react in an adaptive and ultimately successful
manner. The individual who is properly prepared enjoys a
sense of control or composure. This realistic composure
allows one to predict what will happen with a high degree of
accuracy.
The
self-confidence
which
results
yields
an
optimism that sustains the individual through disappointments
and difficult times. This process produces resilience.
I have often heard survival instructors tell their students that
survivors must have the “will to survive.” They emphasize
that survivors must “never give up;” that if they persist, they
can survive. There are numerous stories of successful survival
against the greatest of odds because survivors possessed the
requisite resilience. However, there are also too many
accounts of individuals relatively immobilized by a survival
experience because they lacked adequate resilience. These
individuals sat helplessly until rescued or released. In some
unfortunate cases, they succumbed before rescue or release
could be effected. In a significant number of these cases, it
has been determined individuals possessed adequate means to
endure and sustain life but lost “the will to survive” and
perished. How do we account for these differences? Why do
some individuals possess the necessary resilience to survive
and others do not?
82

Norway - Navy Special Warfare reserve component
sailors from SEAL team 18 maintain security during a
direct
action
mission
with
the
German
Kommando
Spezialkrafte (KSK) during cold response. cold response
is a Norwegian exercise open to all NATO nations for
winter warfare and joint coalition training.
83

Virginia Beach, Va—A Navy SEAL platoon performs a
land warfare exercise during a capabilities demonstration
at Joint Expeditionary Base Little Creek, Va. The Naval
Special Warfare community event was part of the 41st
UDT/SEAL East Coast reunion celebration.
This contradiction provokes several critical questions, which I
will address. The answers lead to a proven, scientific solution
to this paradox, and a challenge to those engaged in the
profession of survival and resistance training. I will use
84

captivity as the survival experience on which to focus this
examination.
What
reactions
do
captives
typically
experience?
Individuals who are thrust into captivity share universal
reactions which include initial startle or panic, disbelief,
denial of the reality of the situation, and a deep sense of
vulnerability and helplessness. As the experience progresses
from moments, to hours, and then days, captives experience
anger and depression, asking themselves the pervasive
question—“why me?” They often engage in bargaining,
thinking to themselves, “If I get out of here, I will be a better
person,” or “I will dedicate my life to a noble cause,” etc. As
time wears on, their self-esteem erodes as the captive
struggles with a devastating sense of loss of control. In
prolonged
captivity,
usually
more
than
six
months,
resignation and acceptance develop as anger and depression
become less extreme. The captive attempts to structure life
into surviving one day at a time. The magnitude of reactions
captives experience is influenced by: (1) culture of the captor,
(2) duration of captivity, (3) harshness of captivity, (4)
support received from others if held with other captives, (5)
innate predispositions, (6) commitment to the ideology or task
which placed them in jeopardy initially, (7) maturity, (8)
personal value systems, and (9) satisfaction with family
relations during the precapture period. As these predictable
reactions unfold, captives are urgently drawing upon their
individual resources to meet this survival threat.
In what coping behaviors do most captives engage?
Information from numerous captivity debriefs and firsthand
accounts from survivors identify the most commonly used
coping behaviors. Immediately upon captivity, individuals
85

strive
to
counteract
the
shock
and
disbelief
they
are
experiencing by reassuring themselves the experience will
end soon. They disassociate themselves from their condition
by sleeping or daydreaming. Most individuals engage in
“magical thinking” related to rescues. They imagine some
miraculous rescue occurring and “it all being over.” They
often fantasize their captors will realize it was all a mistake
and release them. As hours turn into days, survivors work to
establish some sense of control and predictability. They
engage
in
communication
efforts
with
other
captives,
establish physical fitness routines, and follow cleaning and
personal hygiene rituals. They rely heavily on religious
beliefs, prayer, and close family ties. When held together,
captives develop a strong sense of group. Belonging to a
pre-captivity group which is the object of their captors’
exploitation often gives survivors a sense of being part of a
“righteous” cause.
In further attempts to establish some control over their
situation,
captives
engage
in
precaptivity
life
roles.
Regardless of the degree of modification necessary, they
think about or do things which remind them of their value as a
person. They may repeatedly and neatly fold objects as
perfectly
as
they
can
or
offer
first-aid
or
consoling
companionship
to
other
captives.
They
organize
daily
schedules, mentally construct “dream homes,” and review
past academic efforts as they strive for a sense of control and
personal value. Reminiscing about past pleasant activities is
typical. Most captives learn not to allow this to freely occur
regarding family and loved ones because of the debilitating
emotional effects. Rather, they restrict family reminiscences
to a specific time and duration.
86

As survivors struggle to cope with captivity, they must
constantly deal with waves of apprehension and fear.
Apprehension and fear feed on a sense of uncontrollability.
The less effective the captive perceives his coping efforts to
be, the more the captive senses a loss of control. Captives
strive to establish control by attempting to model remembered
and
present
behavior
of
others
who
do
not
appear
apprehensive or fearful. They create distractions from the
dreadful reality of captivity. They try to dispute negative
thoughts which persistently invade their thinking. The best
defense in settings which produce apprehension and fear has
proven to be repeated past experiences with anxiety and
fear-producing settings similar to the present stressor, which
were successfully overcome. Unfortunately, captivity is a
stressor which doesn’t come in gradual doses over time.
Although coping attempts are quite universal in their initial
application, captives meet with varying degrees of success in
applying them. Some individuals become overwhelmed
almost immediately and show little or no optimism regarding
their survival options. They seem unable to muster the
necessary energy to continue coping. Others demonstrate
initial energy in applying coping behaviors only to have this
energy rapidly dissipate as survival demands increase. Others
rebound quickly from their initial capture shock and persist in
efforts to overcome new difficulties. These individuals
demonstrate an ability to increase their coping skills and
confidence over time to a highly resilient level. Research
indicates almost all captives initially engage in similar coping
behaviors; however, their resilience in continuing to do so as
stress increases and novel threats arise varies greatly.
87

Given
that
individuals
do
not
respond
with
equal
effectiveness in captivity survival, what accounts for these
varying
degrees
of
resilience?
A
seemingly
logical
conclusion is that resilience is inborn, a result of genetic
endowment. If this were true, those who were born with “the
resilience gene” would be effective survivors and those
without it would not. While there is evidence that some
equally naive individuals do adapt to novel situations more
quickly and effectively than others, sound scientific research
shows that resilience is not the sole province of heredity.
Fortunately, it can be acquired or learned. In order to
understand how this learning takes place, we must first
examine some important underlying dynamics. Studies have
identified three elements which are necessary to produce
resilience. None of the three alone is sufficient to produce the
desired result, but when properly combined, they yield
optimum resilience. The first element is talent. Talent is the
basic raw material of intelligence and creativity which allows
the survivor to conceive of and apply coping strategies. An
average amount of talent is sufficient. The second element is
desire or motivation. Once individuals recognize they are
confronted with a survival situation, the desire to avoid or
escape it is quite spontaneous. The third element is optimism.
Survivors can have the desire to escape or avoid the situation
and a basic idea of how to approach this, but if they lack
optimism, their desire and talent alone will not result in the
confidence and persistence necessary for resilient survival
behavior. We know individuals possess varying levels of
optimism and pessimism; still, the degree of optimism or
pessimism a survivor demonstrates is significantly affected by
learned behavior.
88

In order to understand the essential role optimism plays in
resilience, it is necessary to contrast it with its opposite—
pessimism. The prototypical pessimist believes bad events
will last a long time. The pessimist believes bad events will
undermine everything one does and are the result of some
internal fault. Pessimists all have a normal endowment of
talent and do not like aversive situations any more than
optimists. However, hundreds of studies show pessimists give
up easily when confronted with aversive situations which
demand persistence to overcome. Prototypical optimists, on
the other hand, believe bad events will be limited to a specific
time and will affect only the specific situation in which they
occur. Optimists also do not believe bad events are their fault.
They view them as the result of external factors. In other
words, optimists find temporary and specific causes for
misfortune and do not blame themselves for their occurrence.
This optimism, along with desire and talent, produces hope,
confidence, and resilience.
The key variables in predicting whether a survivor will
demonstrate
optimism
or
pessimism
are
control
and
predictability. For the survivor, a sense of control yields
predictability, which reduces stress, builds confidence, and
allows the survivor to manage fear and anxiety. In scientific
terms, we would say a sense of control yields less anticipatory
arousal to potentially aversive stimuli. If the survivor cannot,
to
a
reasonable
degree,
predict
the
outcome
of
the
circumstances with which confronted, the survivor will
become more and more pessimistic about a personal ability to
cope. This pessimism will increase a sense of loss of control
and undermine the survivor’s ability to contend with the
situation. As a result, a feeling of helplessness will develop.
This helplessness,
in turn, can become
pervasive
and
89

effectively exclude present and even future coping behaviors
from occurring.
This learned helplessness was demonstrated in a wide variety
of animal studies. One such study was conducted on wild rats
by Curt Richter at Johns Hopkins University. The rats were
originally placed in a small metal cage. A sliding door was
opened and the rat would see a dark opening (actually a black
opaque bag). The rat would shoot through the opening, with
retreat immediately cut off. The rat would then be gently
pushed toward the end of the bag and simply held, through
the walls of the bag, in the hand of the experimenter. Over
2,000 rats were held in this way and, despite their fierce and
aggressive nature, none ever made an attempt to bite the
experimenter through the bag. Many died simply from this
restraint. Those that did not were placed in a large glass
cylinder filled with water and forced to sink or swim. All died
promptly on immersion in contrast to usual laboratory rats
under the same circumstances who swam for incredible
periods until eventually rescued. Electrocardiograph records
were taken during this second phase and, contrary to the usual
response of accelerated heart rate due to stress, which is
consistent with a coping response, rats succumbing promptly
had an immediate slowing of the heart rate. The implication
that when fight or flight are not available, hopelessness and
resignation follow with major psychophysiological responses
that adversely affect survival. In this experiment, it was found
that if wild rats were repeatedly held for just a few seconds
and then released from this state, or if immersed in the
cylinder of water very briefly and then “rescued,” they
showed no signs of giving up during later immersion. Instead,
they continued swimming as long as domestic rats. A
subsequent study with laboratory rats by John Wittrig and
90

colleagues revealed that rats subjected to various kinds of
stress in early life swam more than twice as long as a control
group in which no stress was present during the same period
of time.
Stennis
Space
Center,
Miss—A
Navy
SEAL
communicates with teammates during immediate action
drills at the John C. Stennis Space Center. The drills are a
part of the SEALs pre-deployment training. Navy SEALs
are the maritime component of U.S. Special Operations
Command and are trained to conduct a variety of
operations from the sea, air, and land.
91

As a result of these and many other studies, experimenters
concluded that subjects who are permitted to survive an
overwhelming
situation
develop
an
“immunity”
to
the
“hopelessness”
response.
In
numerous
similar
studies
conducted on human subjects, the same effects occurred.
Individuals who perceived they were helpless, because no
amount of effort would effect a solution, ceased to cope. In
contrast, those who were optimistic in their ability to
eventually prevail persisted. This research evidence illustrates
the difference between ineffective and effective resilient
coping behaviors. When confronted by difficulties, those who
have learned to be optimistic apply that optimism to their
talent and desire and, consequently, persist in coping. Those
who lack adequate experience or preparation, despite their
talent and desire, are overcome, learn to be helpless, and
cease coping. This learned helplessness effectively eliminates
the confidence to persist in the face of adversity.
How does one acquire optimum survival resilience? There
are two primary methods for acquiring resilience. First, it can
be
acquired
through
a
process
of
naturally
occurring
education and graded exposures. I am confident it occurred in
Sir Ranulph Fiennes’ case. Allow me to extrapolate from Sir
Ranulph’s writings and describe how I conceive his learning
occurred. His resilience was the result of an extremely
thorough and comprehensive training process which occurred
as a natural evolution of his life’s pursuit of exploration. At
some early stage in his life, he solidified the commitment to
pursue exploration as his passion and profession. He read
accounts of famous explorations. He talked to individuals
who had participated in these harrowing adventures and
gained insight from their experiences. He imagined what it
would be like to experience these same kinds of adventure
92

and accomplish similar conquests; he embarked upon initial,
small-scale explorative forays of his own. These first efforts
could have been in a local park or wilderness area close by.
These initial efforts began to build a realistic, but not
overwhelming, perspective of what exploration would be like,
as well as the kind of training and equipment he would need.
He honed his raw talent until it was well suited to his pursuit.
His desire increased with each new successful conquest. He
used this experience to begin a critical assessment of the
magnitude of stresses and challenges he would be capable of
confronting in the future. With this framework fixed in his
mind, he embarked on only the most rigorous and demanding
exploration challenges. He identified the limits of his
endurance, his strong points, and areas where he needed
improvement. He learned to distinguish conditions he could
manipulate and those he could not change. He became
extremely
skillful
in
preparing
for
and
conducting
expeditions,
confronting
these
stressful
situations
with
optimism, regrouping when plans did not work out as well as
he had hoped, and using those experiences to further refine
skills. Eventually he was ready for “the ultimate test.” This
long sought-after exploration was fraught with the most
severe of climatic conditions. He encountered extremely
difficult and often unplanned physical and psychological
obstacles. When these stressors occurred, he rebounded from
their initial shock, gathered his confidence, and persisted with
his quest to its eventual hard-won conclusion. Because of his
desire, talent, careful preparation, confidence, and realistic
optimism,
he
was
eminently
successful.
His
years
of
meticulous
preparation
provided
him
with
incredible
resilience.
His
optimum
survival
behavior
led
to
his
consummate
performance
on
the
Pentland
South
Pole
Expedition.
93

If we return to our original vignette, where I, totally lacking
Sir Ranulph’s skill and excellent preparation, was to be thrust
into similar Antarctic conditions, the results would be
categorically different. I would be completely undone. I
would have the desire to extricate myself. I have talent and
some applied skills I could borrow from mountaineering;
however, no doubt my optimism would fade fast and I would
feel
overwhelmed
and
helpless.
Sir
Ranulph
met
the
challenge with a lifetime of preparation. For me, it would be
an
unplanned,
unpredictable,
and
staggering
survival
experience.
Both methods for acquiring resilience have proven to be
highly effective and systematic; both contain the same
developmental process. If a survival experience cannot be
predicted, or if it involves a setting which does not lend itself
to a natural development of situation-specific immunity, the
second method is indicated. Where the first method is
accomplished spontaneously over an extended period of time,
the second can be implemented at any time, requiring
relatively little time to complete, but still producing highly
effective
results.
The
second
method
is
a
specialized
adaptation of stress inoculation training. Stress inoculation
training is divided into three phases which approximate and
greatly accelerate the natural development of the first method.
94

95

Special Warfare Combatant uses a red fare to signal an
aircraft for a personnel recovery mission during a
training exercise at Marine Corps Auxiliary Landing
Field Bogue, N.C.
In the first or Conceptualization Phase, individuals develop a
comprehensive understanding and reliable mental picture of
the situation for which they are preparing. This is done by
studying interviews and narrative accounts. Individuals are
given a realistic, but not over-whelming, exposure to the
situation which provides them an accurate assessment of the
upcoming stressors. Then, based on this mental or cognitive
picture, they conduct situational assessments and behavioral
observations which build a sense of control and predictability.
They learn which behaviors are productive and which will not
be useful in coping with the identified stressor. They learn
they are capable of enduring significant amounts of stress and
how to handle the feeling of being overwhelmed when things
do not go as planned.
Phase two is the Skills Acquisition and Rehearsal Phase. In
this phase, individuals work on problem-focused solutions;
they practice problem-solving activities by using coping
behaviors in simulated and manageable realistic settings.
Emotion-focused, palliative coping skills are also practiced,
especially when the individual has to deal with unchangeable
and uncontrollable external stressors like captivity. An
extensive repertoire of coping responses are acquired and
mastered gradually through multiple trials. When the mastery
of effective coping skills has reached a proficient level,
individuals engage in behavioral rehearsal, which is where
effective self-regulated coping responses are demonstrated.
96

In phase three, the Application and Follow-Through Phase,
individuals are exposed to more and more stressful situations
where they apply their coping skills. Through these graded
exposures, individuals reach a confidence level where, when
placed in realistic “in-vivo” settings, they persist in optimum,
resilient coping behavior.
This
training
has
been
empirically
validated
through
numerous studies and is the training regimen of choice for
preparing individuals to perform optimally in high-demand,
stressful situations. It is easily adapted to a multitude of
settings and produces the critical results we have been
addressing. It is analogous to the traditional process of
medical inoculation for the prevention of disease. This basic
immunization inoculation rationale should be familiar to all of
us. When I was young, polio was a severe physical threat to
the health of our nation. We all had to receive an inoculation
to hopefully prevent its devastating effects. We were injected
with a carefully measured amount of polio vaccine. This
amount of vaccine was calculated to cause our immune
systems to react and recognize the antigen, but not become
over-whelmed. The effect would be to simulate an attack
from polio at a level which our immune system could react
successfully and persist in the buildup of an ultimately
protective capability. Once this was accomplished, should we
become exposed to the full impact of the disease in the future,
we would not be overwhelmed and helpless to it ravaging
effects. Stress inoculation training produces analogous results
for individuals confronting stressful life events. This training
is remarkably adaptable to survival resistance training.
The ideal plan for incorporating stress inoculation training
into resistance training is to utilize the Biderman resistance
97

training model. This training model was originally designed
in 1956 at the direction of US Department of Defense (DoD).
At that time, the DoD tasked a working group of military
experts, former POWs, and the most prominent behavioral
scientists of the day to develop an ideal resistance training
plan.
Today,
with
minor,
but
significant
scientific
modifications, this model remains the state-of-the-art program
for captivity and resistance training. This program was
recently re-validated by four of the world’s most eminent
behavioral scientists (Joseph Mattarazzo, Ph.D., Charles
Speilberger, Ph.D., Richard Lazarus, Ph.D., and Albert
Bandera, Ph.D.). These highly respected authorities were
unanimous in their evaluation of the Biderman model as
being a superior learning process when compared to other
more traditional DoD training models. The Bideman model
has five components or interrelated phases of training:
1. Pre-Academic Captivity Exposure
2. Pre-Academic Captivity Exposure Debrief
3. Academics and Role-Play Laboratory
4. Post-Academic Detention
5. Post-Training Debrief
These training programs combine seamlessly to form an ideal
resistance survival training program.
98

Who should receive this special application of stress
inoculation training? Of all possible groups, this training is
particularly applicable and easily adaptable to military
organizations involved in survival resistance training. Over
the past six years, this training method has proven to be
extremely effective in real-world captivity incidents for the
United
States,
Department
of
Defense,
Joint
Special
Operations Command high-risk operators. Most recently, Dr.
Jim Mitchell, Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape
(SERE) Psychologist at the US Air Force Survival School,
compared a specialized application of stress inoculation
resistance training with a more traditional resistance training
approach on aircrew members. The results of his research
show consistently higher levels of confidence in perceived
ability to adhere to the Code of Conduct (in captivity) for
aircrews receiving stress inoculation training as compared to
aircrews who were trained by the more traditional method.
Captivity occurs with great regularity for military personnel
as compared with individuals in the civilian population. This
is particularly the case for certain high-risk units. Because
captivity is a fortuitous event, it is unrealistic to assume these
high-risk operators will be exposed to the first naturalistic
method of acquiring resilience.
Captivity is not a naturally occurring life event. Unlike
exploration and high adventure wilderness sports, which tend
99

to prepare participants for their unique potential survival
difficulties, captivity is not a sought-after endeavor. It would
be an extremely unfortunate person whose life had prepared
him thoroughly for captivity. Nonetheless, military men and
women consistently become captives. We have examined the
consequences
of
thrusting
unprepared
individuals
into
extreme survival settings. We know that ideal levels of
resilience in survival experiences are not inborn; they are
situation-specific; if not acquired in a naturally-occurring
manner, resilience must be learned. If resilience is not learned
prior to captivity, resistance behavior will be much less
effective or possibly inadequate. The consequences of this
lack of resilience can be devastating to the captive, the
captive’s government, and comrades. Without resistance
training, captives must endure one of the most extreme
survival circumstances possible with little or no relevant
knowledge, skills, or realistic confidence. With proper
training, captivity survival can be proactive. Captives will be
more capable of protecting information and themselves. They
will survive in a manner which preserves their ability to fight
again effectively instead of rendering them less prepared for
future conflict as a result of learned helplessness.
The military services of many nations recognize the need to
prepare their high-risk operators for the possibility of
captivity and provide training for them. I have participated in
several of these training programs and, without question, they
are staffed with talented instructors who provide excellent
training. All of these training programs strive to give the best
possible preparation to their students. Those who are placed
in harm’s way in the service of their nations must be
prepared. With minimal modification and staff training, these
excellent programs can be even more effective. Those of us
100

involved in the profession of survival training should
constantly seek ways to improve students’ preparation.
Incorporating
these
empirically
proven
principals
in
a
resistance-specific application of stress inoculation training
will significantly improve a captive’s ability to survive. The
result will be optimum survival resilience.
101

THE ELEMENTS OF SURVIVAL
102

3
“We shall draw from the heart of suffering itself the means of
inspiration and survival.”
—Winston Churchill
103

Tiger
104

Boa constrictor
105

Jungle snake
106

Mosquito
107

Jaguar
108

Poison dart frogs
Jungles, or rain forests, are lush, green areas teeming with life
of all shapes and sizes. Although they only cover about two
percent of the earth’s surface, they’re home to fifty percent of
all plants and animals. If that doesn’t describe how vital they
are, consider this: A four-square-mile (ten-square-kilometer)
area of a rainforest can contain as many as 1,500 plants, 750
species of trees, 400 species of birds, and 150 species of
butterflies.
109

The good news about the jungle is that water and food are
plentiful. The bad news is twofold:
1. The jungle’s thick overhead canopy makes it nearly
impossible for anyone to spot you.
2. There are lots of things that can kill you, including
mosquitoes carrying malaria, small brightly colored poison
dart frogs, snakes, poisonous plants, and even jaguars and
tigers.
Stay or move away from snakes, particularly boa constrictors,
coral snakes, and fer-de-lances. Try to avoid insects. They can
cause serious allergic reactions. Learn from the natives, who
rub garlic on themselves to ward off bugs and snakes.
If you encounter a jaguar, never run from it. Walk toward it
while shouting and clapping.
Types of Jungles
Tropical areas can be described as:
• Secondary jungles
• Tropical rain forests
• Semi-evergreen seasonal and monsoon forests
• Tropical scrub and thorn forests
• Tropical savannas
110

• Saltwater swamps
• Freshwater swamps
Secondary Jungles
Similar to rain forests. The difference is that sunlight does
penetrate to the jungle floor in secondary jungles. Such
growth is typical along riverbanks, on jungle fringes, and
where people have cleared the rain forest.
Tropical Rain Forests
Found across the equator in the Amazon and Congo basins,
parts of Indonesia, and several Pacific islands. Rain forests
are characterized by their climate, which includes about three
and one half meters of rainfall throughout the year, and
temperatures ranging from about 90 degrees Fahrenheit
during the day to 70 degrees Fahrenheit at night.
Rain forests typically have five layers of vegetation:
1. Jungle trees rise from buttress roots to heights of sixty
meters.
2. Smaller trees produce a canopy so thick that little light
reaches the jungle floor.
3. Seedlings struggle beneath them to reach light and masses
of vines and lianas twist up to the sun.
4. Ferns, mosses, and herbaceous plants push through a thick
carpet of leaves.
111

5. A large variety of fungi grow on leaves and fallen tree
trunks.
Since little light reaches the jungle floor, there is little
undergrowth to hamper movement. But dense growth limits
visibility to about fifty meters, making it easy to lose your
sense of direction. And the thick canopy makes it extremely
difficult to be spotted by aircraft.
Semi-Evergreen Seasonal and Monsoon Forests
Found in parts of Columbia, Venezuela, and the Amazon
basin in South America; in portions of coastal southeast
Kenya,
Tanzania,
and
Mozambique
in
Africa;
and
in
northeastern India, much of Burma (Republic of the Union of
Myanmar), Thailand, Indochina, Java, and parts of other
Indonesian islands.
These forests are characterized by two stories of tree strata.
Those in the upper story average eighteen to twenty-four
meters while those in the lower story average seven to
thirteen meters. The diameter of both strata of trees averages
one-half meter, and their leaves fall during seasonal droughts.
With the exception of sago, nipa, and coconut palms, the
same edible plants grow in these areas as in the tropical rain
forests.
112

Jungle trees
Tropical Scrub and Thorn Forests
Found on the west coast of Mexico, Yucatan peninsula,
Venezuela, and Brazil; on the northwest coast and central
parts of Africa; and in Asia, Turkestan and India. They have
five main characteristics:
113

1. There is a clearly defined dry season.
2. Trees are leafless during the dry season.
3. Fires occur frequently during the dry season.
4. The ground is bare except for a few tufted plants in
bunches; grasses are uncommon.
4. Plants with thorns predominate.
When traveling through these areas, keep in mind that while
plants are abundant during the rainy season, you will find it
hard to obtain food plants during the dry season.
Tropical Savannas
Found within the tropical zones in South America and Africa,
including parts of Venezuela, Brazil, and the Guianas in
South America; and the southern Sahara (north-central
Cameroon, Gabon, and southern Sudan), Benin, Togo, most
of Nigeria, northeastern Zaire, northern Uganda, western
Kenya, part of Malawi, part of Tanzania, southern Zimbabwe,
Mozambique, and western Madagascar in Africa. They looks
like broad, grassy meadows with trees spaced at wide
intervals.
Saltwater Swamps
Found in West Africa, Madagascar, Malaysia, the Pacific
islands, Central and South America, and at the mouth of the
Ganges River in India. Common in coastal areas subject to
tidal flooding, saltwater swamps have tides that can vary as
114

much as twelve meters and have a large variety of hostile
creatures, from leeches and insects to crocodiles and caimans.
Avoid these swamps if possible.
Mangrove trees thrive in these swamps, and can reach heights
of twelve meters. Their tangled roots are an obstacle to
movement. Visibility in this type of swamp is poor.
Freshwater Swamps
Found in low-lying inland areas and characterized by masses
of thorny undergrowth, reeds, grasses, and occasional short
palms that reduce visibility and make travel difficult. There
are often islands that dot these swamps, allowing you to get
out of the water. Wildlife is abundant.
Familiarize Yourself with Your Environment
Knowledge of field skills, the ability to improvise, and the
application of the principles of survival will increase your
prospects of survival. Don’t be afraid of being alone in the
jungle, as fear can lead to panic. And panic can lead to
exhaustion and decrease your odds of survival.
One of the worst aspects of a jungle is the density of the
vegetation, which makes it difficult to navigate. To get a
better viewpoint of your surroundings, look for a high area
that is not obstructed or climb a tree and get above the
canopy. If you see depressions in the jungle where one side is
higher than the other, that could be a river, which means
civilization may be nearby.
115

Nature will provide water, food, and plenty of materials for
building shelters.
Everything in the jungle thrives, including disease germs and
parasites that breed at an alarming rate.
Indigenous peoples have lived for hundreds of years by
hunting and gathering. However, it will take a non-native
significant time to get used to the conditions and activity of
tropical survival.
Weather
Weather in a jungle environment can be harsh. High
temperatures,
heavy
rainfall,
and
oppressive
humidity
characterize equatorial and subtropical regions, except at high
altitudes. At low altitudes, temperature variation is seldom
less than 50 degrees Fahrenheit and is often more than 95
degrees Fahrenheit. At altitudes over 1,500 meters, ice often
forms at night. The rain has a cooling effect but when it stops,
the temperature soars.
Rainfall can be heavy, depending on the season, often
accompanied by thunder and lightning. Sudden rain beats on
the tree canopy, turning trickles into raging torrents and
causing rivers to rise. Jut as suddenly, the rain stops. Violent
storms may occur, usually toward the end of the summer
months.
Hurricanes, cyclones, and typhoons develop over the sea and
rush inland, causing tidal waves and devastation ashore. In
choosing bivy sites, make sure you’re located above potential
flooding. Prevailing winds vary between winter and summer.
116

During the dry season rains falls only once a day, while the
monsoon season has continuous rain.
Tropical days and nights are of equal length. Darkness falls
quickly and daybreak is just as sudden.
Immediate Considerations
Because of the thick canopy found in most jungle areas, it’s
unlikely you’ll be spotted from the air and rescued. You’ll
probably have to travel to reach safety.
If you’re the victim of an aircraft crash, the most important
items to take with you from the crash site are a machete,
compass, first-aid kit, and a parachute or other material for
use as mosquito netting and shelter.
1.
Take
shelter
from
tropical
rain,
sun,
and
insects.
Malaria-carrying mosquitoes and other insects are immediate
dangers.
2. Do not leave the crash area immediately, as rescuers may
be looking for you. If you do decide to leave, don’t do so
without carefully marking your route. Use your compass and
know what direction you are taking.
3. In the tropics, even the smallest scratch can quickly
become dangerously infected. Promptly treat any wound, no
matter how minor.
117

A water-purifying table at a FARC (Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarios de Columbia) camp. Members of this
notorious terrorist group throw river water on top of a
sand-base and charcoal-topped bed that funnels into large
plastic containers held below. This is how they purify
water! This pic was taken at a hostage-holding camp
somewhere in the jungles of Colombia
Water
118

The good news is that if you’re trapped in a tropical
environment, the chances are that water is abundant—in the
form of springs, rivers, and lakes. But initially you may have
trouble finding it. Often you can get nearly clear water from
muddy streams or lakes by digging a hole in sandy soil about
one meter from the bank. Water will seep into the hole. Make
sure to purify any water obtained in this manner.
Animals as Signs of Water
Grazing animals such as deer are rarely far from water and
usually drink at dawn and dusk. Look for converging game
trails, which will often lead to water.
Grain-eating birds, such as finches and pigeons, are never far
from water. They also drink at dawn and dusk. When they fly
straight and low, they are heading for water. When returning
from water, they are full and will fly from tree to tree, resting
frequently. Do not rely on water birds, or hawks, eagles, and
other birds of prey. Water birds fly long distances without
stopping, and birds of prey get liquids from their victims.
Insects, especially bees, are often good indicators of water.
Bees seldom range more than six kilometers from their nests
or hives and usually will have a water source in this range.
Ants also need water. A column of ants marching up a tree is
going to a small reservoir of trapped water. Most flies stay
within one hundred meters of water, especially the European
mason fly, easily recognized by its iridescent-green body.
Human tracks will usually lead to a well, borehole, or soak.
Scrub or rocks may cover it to reduce evaporation. Replace
the cover after use.
119

Water from Plants
1. Vines with rough bark and shoots about five centimeters
thick can be a useful source of water. The poisonous ones
yield a sticky, milky sap when cut. Nonpoisonous vines will
give a clear fluid. Some vines cause a skin irritation on
contact; therefore, let the liquid drip into your mouth, rather
than put your mouth to the vine. Preferably, use some type of
container.
2. Roots. The water tree, desert oak, and bloodwood have
roots that grow near the surface. Pry them out of the ground
and cut them into thirty-centimeter lengths. Remove the bark
and suck out the moisture, or shave the root to a pulp and
squeeze it over your mouth.
3. Palm Trees. Buri, coconut, and nipa palms all contain a
sugary fluid that is very good to drink. To obtain the liquid,
bend a flowering stalk downward and cut off its tip. If you cut
a thin slice off the stalk every twelve hours, the flow will
renew, making it possible to collect up to a liter per day. Nipa
palm shoots grow from the base, so you can work at ground
level. On grown trees of other species, you may have to climb
them to reach a flowering stalk. Coconut milk has a large
water content but may contain a strong laxative in ripe nuts.
Drinking too much of this milk may cause you to lose more
fluid than you drink.
Water from Condensation
Sometimes, rather than digging for roots, it’s easier to let a
plant produce water for you in the form of condensation. If
you tie a clear plastic bag around a green, leafy branch, water
120

in the leaves will evaporate and condense in the bag. You can
get the same result from placing cut vegetation in a plastic
bag.
A FARC kitchen in the jungle
121

Banana tree
122

Breadfruit
Food
In the jungle, it may not be worth wasting energy hunting
animals or setting traps since there are typically plenty of
plants to eat. Take the time to familiarize yourself with edible
plants of the region in which you are traveling before you set
out on a trip. But if you’re in the jungle and not sure a
particular plant is edible or not, avoid it! Many plants in the
jungle are poisonous.
Tropical Zone Food Plants
123

Unless you can positively identify edible plants, it’s safer to
begin with palms, bamboos, and common fruits. The list
below identifies some of the most common foods:
• Bael fruit (Aegle marmelos)
• Bamboo (various species)
• Banana or plantain (Musa species)
• Bignay (Anti esma bunius)
• Breadfruit (Artrocarpus incisa)
• Coconut palm (Cocos nucifera)
• Fishtail palm (Caryota urens)
• Horseradish tree (Moringa pterygosperma)
• Lotus (Nelumbo species)
• Mango (Mangifera indica)
• Manioc (Manihot utillissima)
• Nipa palm (Nipa fruticans)
• Papaya (Carica papaya)
• Persimmon (Diospyros virginiana)
• Rattan palm (Calamus species)
124

• Sago palm (Metroxylon sagu)
• Sterculia (Sterculia foetida)
• Sugarcane (Saccharum offcinarum)
• Sugar palm (Arenga pinnata)
• Sweetsop (Annona squamosa)
• Taro (Colocasia and Alocasia species)
• Water lily (Nymphaea odorata)
• Wild fig (Ficus species)
• Wild rice (Zizania aquatica)
• Wild yam (Dioscorea species)
125

Lotus
126

127

Mangos
Papaya tree
128

Persimmons
129

130

Palm tree
Sugarcane
131

Taro
Figs
132

Rice
Rain forests are also full of biologically active compounds,
many of which you can use for food or medicine. You can eat
edible tubers such as potato, yucca, and boniato, but be sure
you can distinguish edible tubers from poisonous ones.
Shelter
Local weather and predators will determine your shelter
needs. Do you need warmth or just a roof? Are there animals
or insects that you need avoid? Falling trees and branches are
the biggest killers of people in the jungle, so if you have to
make a bivy or a camp, find clear ground.
The Maya use cohune palm fronds to build thatched roofs on
their huts. These roofs will withstand rain and wind and can
last up to fifteen years.
Navigation
Trekking in the jungle can be hazardous. Watch where you
tread. Step over a log or grab a vine without looking, and you
could get stung or bitten.
133

Palm frond hut
134

A meeting place set up in the Amazon jungle
135

136

Jungle canopy view
With practice, movement through thick undergrowth and
jungle can be done efficiently. Always wear long sleeves and
long pants to avoid sunburn, rashes, cuts, and scratches.
To move easily, you must develop “jungle eye,” which means
that you shouldn’t concentrate on the pattern of bushes and
trees immediately in front of you. Instead, focus on the jungle
further out and find natural breaks in the foliage. Try looking
through the jungle, not at it. Stop occasionally to examine the
jungle floor. Look for game trails that you can follow.
Stay alert and move slowly and steadily through dense forest
or jungle. Stop periodically to listen and gain your bearings. If
available, use a machete to cut through dense vegetation, but
don’t cut unnecessarily or you’ll quickly wear yourself out. If
using a machete, stroke upward when cutting vines to reduce
noise, since sound carries long distances in the jungle. Use a
stick to part the vegetation. A stick will also help dislodge
biting ants, spiders, or snakes. Do not grasp at brush or vines
when climbing slopes. They may contain irritating spines,
black palm, or sharp thorns.
Many jungle and forest animals follow game trails. These
trails wind and cross but frequently lead to water or clearings.
Use them if they lead in the general direction that you want to
go.
In many countries, electric and telephone lines run for miles
through sparsely inhabited areas. Usually, the right-of-way is
clear enough to facilitate relatively easy travel. When
137

traveling along these lines, be careful as you approach
transformer and relay stations.
The sun and stars are always reliable navigational tools
Protect Your Clothing—by Wade Chapple
If you find yourself in a life or death struggle for survival and
you do not have your second or third line gear with you, it is
likely that you’re wearing your only available clothing. In the
jungle, understand that your clothing will wear out quickly, so
take time to preserve the clothing available to you. Once it’s
gone, you’ll become more exposed to the elements and thus
more susceptible to injuries and disease.
Main Items:
T-shirts/undershirts: If you have one of these, I recommend
you take it off and stow it away during daytime movement.
You can remove your outer shirt and put on the t-shirt/
undershirt
once
you’ve
finished
moving
for
the
day.
Changing out of sweaty outerwear and into a t-shirt or
undershirt
will
be
refreshing
while
affording
you
an
opportunity to wash and dry your outer shirt.
Underwear: Don’t wear underwear in the jungle, as they
cause chaffing and rashes. If you do have underwear, wash it
at the first opportunity and stow it away except to use as a
washrag or bandage for blistered feet, lacerations, infected
insect bites/stings, and so on. A clean pair thrown over your
head at night might just prevent the mosquitoes from stinging
your face, ears, and neck.
138

Outer clothing: If you find yourself alone in the jungle,
hopefully you’re already dressed appropriately for facing
possible survival situations. Your pants and shirt should be
loose fitting and have multiple cargo pockets where you can
stow needed items (first line gear) such as a compass, GPS,
signal mirror, and so on. Outer clothing will protect you from
the vines, thorns, rocks, insects, sun, and other things you
might brush against or face while moving through the jungle.
Conversely, it is your outer clothing that is most subject to
damage. Therefore, you must take the time to inspect and care
for your outer clothing, ideally once a day. If your clothing
rips, take the time to repair it as soon as possible; if you wait
too long, that tear might become a significant rip that will
ultimately turn your outerwear into a non-wearable rag!
Try to wash your outerwear at least once every two days.
Simply immerse your outerwear in a water source and gently
wring out the water. Repeat this a few times to rid the
outerwear of caked-on dirt, sweat, and body salt. Dry your
outerwear in the shade by laying the items on the ground or
by hanging them on limbs or vines. Never dry clothing in
direct sunlight, as doing this will weaken the fabric.
Boots: Leather footwear rots quickly in the jungle. Modern
military-issue boots tend to hold up better than the old-style
jungle boots, but the fabric on them still begins to weaken in a
jungle environment. In order to take care of your boots,
immerse them in water at least once every two days,
preferably in the late afternoon when you have stopped
moving for the day. To prevent inadvertent punctures or rips,
rub your boots only with your hands to remove caked-on
mud. While washing your boots, keep the laces laced and the
insoles inside of the boots. After gently washing your boots,
139

inspect them for damage, and then remove the laces and
insoles to dry these separately. It’s best to place two sticks
into the ground and hang your boots upside down, one on
each stick (the stick goes inside of the boot). Hang your
bootlaces above the ground to air-dry and wring out your
insoles before hanging these to air out and dry. Again, don’t
dry your boots and accessories in direct sunlight! Before
moving the next day, reassemble each boot and rub moist
mud all around the outside fabric in order to give the boots a
protective covering. Finally, if you have animal fat in your
possession, you can rub some of this fat into the fabric of
your boots as well in order to prevent them from drying out
and cracking.
140

Jungle knives
Socks: If your situation allows, wash and dry them every day
when you’ve finished walking. Your socks need to be washed
and aired out daily to reduce the effects of flesh-eating
fungus. In time, your socks won’t have much fabric left on
them, but don’t worry. They can be used as sweat bands while
141

walking. While your socks are drying, try to air out/dry out
your feet as well.
Hats: Wash out dirt, grease, and salt daily by immersing your
hat in water and gently wringing it out. Repeat the process as
necessary. Hang in the shade to dry. Your hat will protect you
from prolonged exposure to sunlight and consequential burns.
If you wear a brimmed jungle or “floppy” hat, pin about a
half-dozen safety pins on the brim for emergency use. You
can also affix fishing hooks for use in emergency situations.
Remember, the clothes you have on you may be all you have.
When they’re gone or unusable, your suffering will increase.
So take care of what you have in a survival situation.
142

Thai jungle knives: They’re made of high-carbon steel
that really holds an edge. They have a bit of weight to it,
too, so when you put this on the end of a stick and swing
it, you can really cut through stuff.
Tropical Jungle Survival Kits—by Dave Williams
When traveling in, around, or over jungle areas, ensure that
your survival kit contains the following essential items:
143

• Water purification tablets (iodine)
• Plastic sheet (for building water stills)
• Non-lubricated condoms (water storage)
• Fire starters
• Butane or similar lighter
• Metal match (magnesium fire stick)
• Waterproof matches (in waterproof container)
• Kindling (Vaseline-coated cotton balls, pre-charred cotton
material, natural materials)
• Small magnifying lens
• Knife (sturdy fixed-blade knife with a four-to six-inch
blade)
• A smaller knife for more delicate work (folding multitool,
but
be
selective.
Most
tools
are
useless
for
survival
situations.)
• Snare wire
• Signaling mirror
• Compass
• Fish hooks and line
144

• Tetracycline tablets for diarrhea or infection
• Antibacterial ointment packets
• Solar blanket
• Surgical blades
• Butterfly sutures
• Insect repellent
• Needles and thread
• A mobile phone + extra battery, though larger and certainly
more expensive, satellite phones have better coverage
• An EpiPen if you’re allergic to insect stings
• Life-sustaining personal medication
Tropical
Coastal
(but
not
lost
at
sea)
Survival
Kit—Add-On Essentials
• Solar still material
• Additional fishing gear
• Heavier fishing line (Braided line is very strong, but visible.
Bring monofilament also.)
• Lead or other metal weights
• Lures (jig and spoon-type lures pack well)
145

• Large bandana or piece of cloth for sun protection
• Collapsible sunglasses
• Lip balm with high SPF rating
Optional Coastal Kit Items—Space-permitting
• Hand-operated emergency desalination water pump
• Strobe light
• Signaling flares
Optional Land and Coastal Kit Items—Space-permitting
• Small water-purification pump
• Candle (“trick” birthday candles work well)
• GPS with mapping
• Whistle
• Tube tent or light hammock
• Lightweight poncho
• Aluminum foil
• Small flashlight and extra batteries
• Food bars/energy bars
146

• Parachute cord (550 cord)
• Sun protection
• Cooking kit
• Additional first-aid material
• Frog/fishing spear head
• Surgical tubing and slingshot pouch
• Assorted cable ties (many uses, from repairing broken gear
to make-shift lashing)
147

148

Quintana Roo, Mexico jungle
What You Don’t Need
• Rambo-style knife
• Multitools with everything imaginable
• Hatchet
• Knife-sharpening stone (nature provides plenty of natural
stones that work just fine)
• A shovel
• Toilet paper
Anytime you venture off into the jungle or rain forest, you
should carry the essentials: fire-making tools, a knife, a few
water purification tablets and since you’re probably going to
be around water, some fishing line, sinkers, hooks, and maybe
a lure and a map and compass.
How to Carry a Jungle Survival Kit
Waist packs work well. You carry your knife on the belt, too.
Any-thing that can be destroyed by getting wet should be
carried in a waterproof container. Look for one of several
brands of waist packs that are waterproof already. Naturally,
fire-making tools (lighters, matches, kindling, etc.) should be
kept completely dry. Double-packing fire material is always a
good idea. Even in wet conditions, if you have dry kindling
and can locate somewhat dry tender, you can start a fire.
149

If you’re on the sea or in a river, you can often carry most of
your survival kit in your PFD (personal flotation device, i.e.,
life jacket) pockets. The remainder can be in a waist pack.
Teddy Roosevelt’s Amazon Adventure
Theodore Roosevelt has the distinction of being the only
president who became an Amazon explorer.
In 1913 Teddy and his son, Kermit, set off to Brazil to
explore a recently discovered river deep in the Amazon
jungle.
Their
adventure
became
known
as
the
Roosevelt-Rondon Scientific Expedition.
The
expedition
encountered
problems
from
the
start.
Disease-bearing insects attacked members of the group,
leaving them in a constant state of sickness, with festering
wounds and high fevers. The heavy dug-out canoes provided
were unsuitable to the constant rapids and were often lost,
requiring days to build new ones. The food provisions were
ill-conceived, forcing the team on starvation diets. Native
Indian cannibals (the Cinta Large) shadowed the expedition
and were a constant concern. Also, one of the local guides
murdered another; a third was killed in the rapids.
150

A satellite image of part of the Amazon river.
Teddy almost died from a wounded leg that became infected.
His death five years later was blamed in part on health
problems he developed during the expedition. But he survived
151

and accomplished his goal of reaching the newly discovered
river, which was later named after him.
Knives with hollow handles are popular for carrying survival
gear, but they present two problems. First, the hollow handle
offers a limited amount of space. Second, hollow handles are
weaker. And you’re going to want a survival knife that is
extremely sturdy. That doesn’t mean that it has to be heavy or
a massive Rambo style knife, but it should be well made.
If you have the means to cut, pry, or split wood, coconuts, or
whatever without using your knife, do it. Save your knife for
those times when you truly need it.
To use your survival knife as a hatchet, hammer the back of
the blade with a club-like piece of wood. This is much more
efficient than hacking at the wood. When splitting bamboo,
this method works wonderfully. In fact, there’s no better way
to do it.
Crossing Jungle Rivers—by Wade Chapple
One of the most difficult problems you’ll encounter when
you’re moving under reduced visibility is what to do when
you encounter rivers. Piranhas, electric eels, crocodiles, and
various other harmful creatures not-withstanding, the winding
nature of jungle rivers can cause emotional stress, frustration
and exhaustion to the already stressed person who is simply
trying to survive and make it back to civilization.
Imagine slogging your way through the jungle and finding a
roaring river in your path. You summon your strength and
courage, and you cross it. Now you’re on the other side,
152

elated and exhausted. You move on. Five hundred meters
later you run into what appears to be the same roaring river
again!
Now repeat this process several times in the course of a day,
then multiply it with several days of movement.
Having to cross a particular jungle river once is difficult
enough. But having to cross the same river multiple times can
prove to be more than a frustrating. However, if you
understand the nature of jungle rivers and accept the fact that
you are going to remain wet during most of your survival
experience, there are ways to minimize the risks and
emotional
frustrations
of
jungle
survival
and
onward
movement.
153

Jungle terrain
There are three basic characteristics of jungle rivers:
1. Jungle rivers never run in a straight line. Instead, they
generally wind back and forth like a snake.
2. What seems to be a principal river may be nothing more
than an estuary or offshoot of the water’s main body. Getting
154

caught in the middle of these can be a frustrating and even
life-threatening endeavor.
3. Although it may seem that a jungle river frequently
reverses its course, it is actually moving in one general
direction, which is downhill and toward the sea.
Quintana Roo, Mexico river
155

Follow these three basic rules:
Determine which direction you need to travel to reach
civilization. Your choices are: with the current (downhill) or
against
it
(uphill).
Remember,
rivers
originate
in
the
mountains and flow downhill toward the sea.
1. Estimate the general direction that the river is flowing. You
can do this by walking parallel to the river and taking
frequent azimuth recordings (as you would when navigating
at every bend in the river) to learn the river’s general
direction. In fact, you should repeat this process often during
your trek. Make sure you’re already traveling in the direction
you’ve chosen to take (upriver or downriver).
2. Once you have figured out the river’s general direction,
move away from one of the river’s bends and turn to continue
walking
in
the
general
direction
you
have
previously
determined—upriver or down. If the river is situated to your
left, always keep the river to that side of you. If the river is to
your right, keep it to your right. If you continue to run into the
river, move farther away from it, then proceed in the general
direction you were going before. If you keep the river to one
side of you, you can always “steer” on an angle toward it to
reestablish contact with the river if you need to do so.
3. Finally, don’t let your frustrations undermine you. Be
patient. Remember, adjusting your direction of travel along
winding jungle rivers is really a process of trial and error and
your main source of sustaining life—water—will always be
nearby.
How to Survive Quicksand
156

First of all, don’t panic. Despite what you might have seen in
movies, it’s impossible for a person to become completely
submerged because the human body is less dense than
quicksand—which is a mixture of sand, clay, and saltwater.
The worst that can happen is that you’ll sink in to just above
your waist.
When people die in quicksand, they don’t suffocate. Instead
their feet become wedged in the densely packed sand at the
bottom, and they die of thirst or starvation, or, if they’re near
a coast, they drown in high tide.
If you fall into quicksand (which is usually found around
marshes and tidal pools), resist the natural instinct to kick
your way out. All that does is separate the sand from the
water, forming a very dense layer of sediment at bottom
where your feet are. Instead, stay calm and lean back so you
get as much of your body surface on the water as possible.
Once you start to float, move your feet—not in a thrashing
motion—but in small circles. You want to push more water
down into the thick sediment where your feet are. As you get
more of your body on the water’s surface, you should be able
to float free and paddle your way to solid ground.
157

Dense jungle in northern Bali
Amazon Survival
—As Told to Andrew Taber
Two
Frenchmen
traveled
to
the
Amazon
to
hike
an
approximately seventy-eight–mile section of virgin forest that
was supposed to take them from their drop point on the
Approuague River to Saül, an isolated former mining town at
the geographical center of French Guiana.
They brought with them enough food for the eleven days they
had budgeted for the trek, along with a compass, a machete, a
sixty-square-foot tarp, and two hammocks.
158

Some days went smoothly, and they seemed to be on track.
But on other days it would take several hours of hacking
through vines to hike just one mile. On the morning of the
twelfth day, they realized they were in trouble. Saül is in a
small valley, but the route ahead of them kept rising.
Exhausted and out of food, they had no idea where they were
in terms of their destination. Were they two days from Saül?
Two weeks?
They figured a search would be organized to find them, so
they decided to stay put. They used the tarp to create a roof,
and divided the tasks. One man was in charge of food, the
second tended the fire. Since they had only one lighter, they
kept the fire burning constantly.
Tapping into their survival instincts, they became very primal.
Since it was the rainy season, water wasn’t a problem. If they
thought a plant was edible, one of the two Frenchman would
try it. If he was okay the next day, they’d both eat the plant.
They also ate beetles, bugs, and large, hairy mygale spiders
(tarantulas), which they cooked until the venom burned off.
Still, they were starving. So they chewed just to chew.
Psychologically, they felt it helped.
Occasionally, they’d hear helicopters, which they couldn’t see
through the thick canopy. Nor could the helicopters see them.
Eventually the helicopters stopped passing and they started to
panic.
They learned later that rescue missions did stop forty days
after they had started their trek.
159

Around that same time, they decided that they weren’t going
to be found and they abandoned their camp. Using the stars,
they calculated which way was west, toward Saül, and started
walking. A week later, they caught a seven-pound turtle.
Since it was their first meat in five weeks, they ate absolutely
everything—skin, claws, scales. They even heated the blood
over the fire and drank it. They claimed later that it tasted
fantastic.
The following day, one of the Frenchman caught another
spider. But he put it in his mouth before he’d cooked off all
the venom. By the time he spit the spider out, pain engulfed
the entire left side of his tongue and his lips turned numb. He
tried to keep going in spite of the excruciating pain, but he
was too weak. By this time he’d lost fifty-seven pounds and
his partner had lost thirty-seven pounds.
The healthier of the two made a final trek into the jungle in
search of help. A day and a half later, a search and rescue
(SAR) helicopter came and hovered above the treetops. A
SAR gendarme rappelled 150 feet to the ground and took the
frail, sick Frenchman in his arms. They soon tracked down
the other survivor and after fifty-one days in the jungle, their
ordeal was over.
The two men learned later that they had walked seventy-five
miles, but had stopped two and a half miles from Saül. They
were furious with them-selves.
And they had also been foolish. The Frenchmen had gone into
the jungle with no local guide and had planned to travel seven
miles a day. Anyone with jungle experience will tell you that
seven miles a day in a virgin forest is ambitious.
160

The two Frenchman were also badly equipped, with only one
lighter between them and no communications kit. Had they
been carrying an Iridium 9505A satellite phone, they could
have been tracked online. They should have also carried flares
or tethered location-maker balloons that weigh about four
pounds and have a chemical that inflates when mixed with
water.
A simple fishing kit would have kept them supplied with
readily available, protein-rich food.
In the end it was their will to survive that got them through.
161

JUNGLE SURVIVAL
162

4
“It is not the mountains we conquer, it is ourselves.”
—Sir Edmund Hillary
Being at high altitudes under adverse condition creates unique
issues for all aspects of survival, from movement to health to
dealing with injuries.
163

164

Robert Edwin Peary, Sr. , an American explorer who
claimed to have led the first expedition, on April 6, 1909,
to reach the geographic North Pole Peary’s claim was
widely credited for most of the 20th century, though it was
criticized even in its own day and is today widely doubted.
Peary with dogs on deck of Roosevelt
Before you set out, familiarize yourself with some of the
unique challenges you might encounter:
Mountain Injuries and Illnesses
The best way to deal with injuries and sicknesses is to take
measures to prevent them from happening in the first place.
But it’s important to treat any injury or sickness that occurs as
soon as possible to prevent it from worsening. The knowledge
of signs and symptoms are critical in maintaining health.
Hypothermia
165

Hypothermia occurs when an individual’s body temperature
lowers at a rate faster than it can produce heat. The initial
symptom is shivering. Hypothermia begins when the body’s
core temperature falls to about ninety-six degrees Fahrenheit.
When the core temperature reaches ninety-five to ninety
degrees Fahrenheit, sluggish thinking, irrational reasoning,
and a false feeling of warmth may occur. Core temperatures
of ninety to eight-six degrees Fahrenheit and below result in
muscle rigidity, unconsciousness, and barely detectable signs
of
life.
If
the
victim’s
core
temperature
falls
below
seventy-seven degrees Fahrenheit, death is almost certain.
To treat hypothermia, rewarm the entire body. If there are
means available, rewarm the person by first immersing the
trunk area only in warm water of one 100 to 110 ten degrees
Fahrenheit. Never rewarm the entire body in a warm bath, as
this can result in cardiac arrest and rewarming shock.
One of the quickest ways to get heat to a person’s inner core
is to administer warm water enemas. But such action may not
be possible in a survival situation. Another method is to wrap
the victim in a warmed sleeping bag with another person who
is already warm; both should be naked.
If the individual suffering from hypothermia is still conscious,
feed him hot, sweetened fluids. One of the best sources of
calories is honey or dextrose; if unavailable, use sugar, cocoa,
or a similar soluble sweetener. Never force an unconscious
person to drink.
The two dangers of treating hypothermia are:
166

1. Rewarming too rapidly. This can cause circulatory
problems, resulting in heart failure.
2. “After drop.” After drop is the sharp body core temperature
drop that occurs when you remove the victim from the warm
water. Warming the core area and stimulating peripheral
circulation will lessen the effects of after drop. Immerse the
individual’s torso in a warm bath, if possible.
Frostbite
Frostbite is a constant danger to anyone exposed to subzero
temperatures. Because it isn’t painful, frostbite often goes
unnoticed.
Therefore,
when
operating
in
subzero
temperatures, you need to frequently examine your face,
hands, and feet.
Frostbite can occur on exposed skin:
•
within thirty minutes below minus 22 degrees F
•
within one minute below minus 60 degrees F
•
within thirty seconds below minus 74 degrees F
Feet, hands, ears, and exposed facial areas are particularly
vulnerable. Skin that becomes dullish white in pallor is an
indicator of light frostbite. Deep frostbite extends to a depth
below the skin.
The best way to prevent frostbite when you are with others is
to use the buddy system. Check your buddy’s face often and
make sure that he checks yours. If you are alone, periodically
167

cover your nose and lower part of your face with your
mittened hand.
The following pointers will aid you in keeping warm and
preventing frostbite when it is extremely cold or when you
have less than adequate clothing:
Frostbite hands
•
Face. Maintain circulation by twitching and wrinkling the
skin on your face. Warm with your hands.
168

•
Ears. Wiggle and move your ears if you can. Warm with
your hands.
•
Hands. Move your hands inside your gloves. Warm by
placing your hands close to your body.
•
Feet. Move your feet and wiggle your toes inside your
boots.
Loss of feeling in your hands and feet is an indicator of
frostbite. If you have lost feeling for only a short time, the
frostbite is probably light. Otherwise, assume the frostbite is
deep.
To rewarm a light frostbite, use your hands or mittens to
warm your face and ears. Place your hands under your
armpits. Place your feet next to your buddy’s stomach. A
deep frostbite injury, if thawed and refrozen, will cause
severe damage.
Case of trench foot suffered by unidentified soldier
during World War I
169

An old remedy for frostbite called for rubbing ice or snow
into the affected part, but this will only lower the temperature
even more and risk removing the outer layer of skin. As with
most types of cold injuries, the best solution is to warm the
affected part gradually. Don’t rub the spot. Even the gentlest
massage can do a great deal of harm, as mentioned earlier. If
frostbite appears on your face, warm it by pressing your warm
fingers against it. If a wrist is frozen, warm it by grasping it
with the other hand. Frozen hands and fingers can be thawed
by holding them against your chest or under your armpits
inside your clothes.
Frozen feet are particularly serious because there’s a high risk
of losing toes. Keep your feet from freezing by using warm,
insulated footwear. If you suspect your feet are frostbitten,
take care of them immediately. Change to warm, dry footgear
if you can, or wrap them in cloth until they thaw. Warm them
gradually. Don’t put them close to a heater or a fire. A
burning sensation will follow the warming and thawing of a
frozen part, and can be extremely painful. After frostbite,
there may be blistering and peeling of the skin, as in sunburn,
because the extreme cold has “burned” your skin.
Trench Foot and Immersion Foot
Both conditions can result from hours or days of exposure to
wet or damp conditions at a temperature just above freezing.
Initial symptoms are a sensation of pins and needles, tingling,
numbness, and then pain. The skin will appear wet, soggy,
white, and shriveled.
If untreated, the skin will take on a red and then a bluish or
black discoloration. The feet will become cold, swollen, and
170

have a waxy appearance. Walking will be difficult as the feet
will feel heavy and numb. The nerves and muscles sustain the
main damage, but gangrene can occur. In extreme cases, the
flesh dies and it may become necessary to have the foot or leg
amputated
The best prevention is to keep your feet dry. Carry extra socks
with you in a waterproof packet. Dry wet socks against your
torso (back or chest). Wash your feet and put on dry socks
daily.
Dehydration
When you’re bundled up in many layers of clothing during
cold weather, you may be unaware that you are losing body
moisture. Heavy clothing absorbs the moisture that evaporates
in the air. It’s necessary to drink water to replace this loss of
fluid. Your need for water is as great in a cold environment as
it is in a warm environment.
One way to check to see if you’re becoming dehydrated is to
observe the color of your urine on snow. If your urine makes
the snow dark yellow, you’re becoming dehydrated and need
to replace body fluids. If it makes the snow light yellow to no
color, your body fluids have a more normal balance.
Cold Diuresis
Exposure to cold actually increases urine output, which
means that those body fluids need to be replaced.
Sunburn
171

Exposure to the sun results in sunburn more quickly at high
altitudes
than
at
low
altitudes.
When
in
a
mountain
environment, the sun’s rays also reflect at all angles from
snow, ice, and water, hitting sensitive areas of skin—lips,
nostrils, and eyelids. Always apply sunburn cream or lip
salve, if available, to your face when in the sun.
Snow Blindness
This can result from the reflection of the sun’s ultraviolet rays
off a snow-covered area. The symptoms of snow blindness
are a sensation of grit in the eyes, pain in and over the eyes
that increases with eyeball movement, red and teary eyes, and
a headache that intensifies with continued exposure to light.
Prolonged exposure can result in permanent eye damage. To
treat snow blindness, bandage your eyes until the symptoms
disappear.
Snow blindness can be prevented by wearing sunglasses or,
better yet, glacier glasses. If you don’t have either, improvise.
Cut slits in a piece of cardboard, thin wood, tree bark, or other
available material. By placing soot under your eyes, you will
help reduce shine and glare.
Even brief exposure to the sun on a relatively overcast day
can result in snow blindness, so take precautions.
Constipation
It is important to relieve yourself when needed, even in
extremely cold conditions. Eating dehydrated foods, drinking
too little liquid, and irregular eating habits can cause you to
become constipated. Although not disabling, constipation can
172

cause discomfort. Increase your fluid intake to at least two
liters above your normal two-to three-liter daily intake and, if
available, eat fruit and other foods that will loosen the stool.
Glacier glasses
173

Black Canyon, Colorado
174

Stages of Altitude Sickness
There are a variety of illnesses that can afflict poorly
acclimated individuals, usually occurring within the first
several days of ascending too quickly to altitudes greater than
8,000 feet. These are caused by low atmospheric pressure,
ascending too quickly, high activity levels, dehydration,
excessive consumption of alcohol, poor diet, and/or the use of
over-the-counter sleeping medications.
175

1. Mild Acute Mountain Sickness (AMS) Individuals with
AMS have headaches, shortness of breath when exercising,
loss of appetite, insomnia, weariness, and fatigue. (Similar to
an alcohol hangover.)
Treatment: Wait for improvement before ascending further!
Take either aspirin or acetaminophen to treat headaches. The
prescription drug acetazolamide (Diamox) may reduce the
incidence
and
the
severity
of
AMS.
Increase
water
consumption and eat more carbohydrates. Symptoms will
usually clear up within twenty-four to forty-eight hours.
Those experiencing mild AMS should consider it a warning
and take time to acclimatize before continuing. Those that do
not acclimatize well should descend to lower altitudes.
176

Franz Josef Glacier, New Zealand
2. Moderate Acute Mountain Sickness. The symptoms of
mild AMS have progressed to the point that the victim is very
uncomfortable. Severe headaches that are only partially
relieved with aspirin (if at all), weakness, weariness, fatigue,
nausea, breathlessness at rest, and lack of coordination are
common symptoms.
177

Treatment:
Persons
with
moderate
AMS
must
stop
ascending and, if the condition does not improve, must
descend to lower altitudes. Failing to recognize what is
happening and not descending quickly can result in a life
threatening
medical
emergency—either
High
Altitude
Pulmonary Edema (HAPE) or High Altitude Cerebral Edema
(HACE), which occur within hours and can result in the death
of the victim.
178

Norway—U.S. Navy SEALS and German forces free-fall
parachute onto a frozen a lake in northern Norway during
exercise
cold
response.
Cold
response
is
a
Norwegian-sponsored multinational invitational exercise,
with more than 9,000 military personnel from fourteen
countries
focused
on
cold
weather
maritime
and
amphibious operations.
3. High Altitude Pulmonary Edema (HAPE). HAPE
progresses to life-threatening seriousness in only a matter of
hours. Early signs include marked breathlessness on exertion,
breathlessness at rest, decreased exercise capacity, increased
respiratory and heart rate. In moderate to severe HAPE, there
is marked weakness and fatigue, bluish discoloration of the
skin, a dry raspy cough, and gurgling sounds in the chest. As
HAPE worsens, a productive cough develops.
Treatment: Immediate descent to lower altitudes is essential.
Descend 2,000 to 4,000 feet—get below 8,000 feet if
possible. Keep the victim warm. Exert the patient as little as
possible. Advanced treatment may consist of administering
acetazolamide in mild cases of HAPE and nifedipine in
moderate to severe cases.
How to Prevent HAPE
— Climb slowly—the faster the rate of ascent, the more
likely it is that symptoms will occur.
— Lay over at intermediate altitudes before ascending to the
final altitude.
— Avoid overexertion.
179

— Increase consumption of water.
— Avoid alcohol.
— Don’t use over-the-counter sleeping aids.
— Eat more carbohydrates.
— Sleep at lower altitudes.
— If you know you are susceptible, consult your doctor
about appropriate medications.
4. High Altitude Cerebral Edema (HACE). HACE is the
result of swelling of brain tissue from fluid leakage and
almost always begins as acute mountain sickness (AMS).
Symptoms usually include those of AMS (nausea/vomiting,
insomnia, weakness, and/or dizziness) plus headache, loss of
coordination (ataxia), and decreasing levels of consciousness
including disorientation, loss of memory, hallucinations,
irrational behavior, and coma.
180

Author
and
his
climbing
partner
at
19,500
feet
descending a route in the Andes
Treatment:
Oxygen
administration
and
medications
(dexamethasone) may temporarily alleviate symptoms and
facilitate descent, which is the necessary life-saving measure.
Hyperbaric bags are highly effective in conjunction with
dexamethasone and are relatively inexpensive and lightweight
(fifteen pounds). Evacuated patients should go to a medical
facility for follow-up treatment.
181

Denali—snow wall built around tent for wind barrier
Mountain Weather
Mountain weather can change quickly and dramatically. And
severe bad weather can strike unexpectedly. Suddenly you
can become blinded by snow and so numb with cold that you
can lose feeling in your outer extremities. The best way to
182

deal with it is to prepare ahead of time by packing the right
gear and learning how to predict and deal with severe weather
conditions.
WindChill Factor
The windchill factor is the temperature you feel on your
exposed skin because the wind affects how quickly we lose
heat from our bodies. In arctic environments, where altitude
and wind speed can be high combined with a low air
temperature, windchill can be very dangerous.
The importance of the windchill index is as an indicator of
how to dress properly for winter weather. In dressing for cold
weather, an important factor to remember is that entrapped
insulating air warmed by body heat is the best protection
against
the
cold.
Consequently,
wear
loose-fitting,
lightweight, warm clothing in several layers. Outer garments
should be tightly woven, water-repellant, and hooded. Mittens
that are snug at the wrist are better protection than fingered
gloves.
To use the following chart, find the approximate temperature
on the top of the chart. Read down until you are opposite the
appropriate wind speed. The number which appears at the
intersection of the temperature and wind speed is the
windchill index.
183

Chart and facts courtesy of National Weather Service
184

Avalanches
185

186

Avalanches
Avalanches are always a big threat in the mountains. They
kill approximately fifty-eight skiers every year in North
America alone. When traveling to an avalanche risk area,
carry a beacon that, when activated, will transmit a signal that
the rescue services will follow if you get lost or buried in the
snow.
The key to avoiding avalanches is to read the snow. Use a ski
pole to test the snow to see if it’s compacted or in layers. If
it’s consistent when you push in the snow, it’s probably okay.
If it suddenly drops off, that indicates it’s in layers and
dangerous.
What to do if You’re Hit by an Avalanche
Immediately after you’re swept away, fight like hell to stay
on the surface of the slide. But once you’re engulfed, most
avalanche experts now agree that “swimming” won’t help you
rise to the surface. Worse, after the snow slams to a stop, all
that arm waving will have left you without an air pocket. The
safer bet: Keep your hands near your face while you’re
tumbling. And, if possible, try to stick one hand above the
surface. (Your chances of being found increase exponentially
if a part of you is visible.)
An Avalanche Story
The first avalanche hit at midnight. Seconds later the walls of
two ultra-light tents that four American climbers were
sleeping in collapsed. They awoke to ice and snow squeezing
them in the darkness.
187

Mount St. Helens looking south directly toward the
bulge. Numerous rock avalanches were triggered by
earthquakes.
It was late September, and the four climbers were deep in the
Kumaon region of the Indian Himalayas to climb 22,510-foot
Nanda Kot.
During their first attempt on the peak, they had been hit by a
severe north-blowing storm that killed more than a dozen
people.
Temperatures dropped to below zero, and heavy clouds
dumped more than six inches of snow per hour. They took
shelter by chiseling their tents inside a crevasse that sloped
downward into a seemingly bottomless pit. The orientation of
the opening protected them from the full force of the
avalanche that followed, but the snow still poured in fast and
deep.
188

As the cement-like mass pushed them farther into the
crevasse, the four American climbers fought to keep an air
space in front of their mouths while tearing through the tent
and pulling up frantically. When the slope finally settled, one
of the three male climbers ended up with his head and one
arm above the surface. He immediately started digging and
found the sole female climber trapped near his knees. He
burrowed through the snow and ice until her hand grabbed
his. Upon hearing the roar of the approaching avalanche, a
second male climber grabbed an anchor they had set in the
crevasse wall. He caught the other male climber’s arm just as
their tent was crushed. Miraculously, all four climbers
survived.
189

K2
Using the light from a headlamp, they began digging for their
boots in the ten feet of debris. They knew they needed them if
they wanted to make it off the mountain. After six hours of
digging, they had dislodged everyone’s boots, their ice tools,
a stove, and four canisters of fuel. As the sun started to rise,
they cooked some dehydrated noodle soup and were sitting on
their shredded tents when a second avalanche hit. The four
climbers braced. It was 6:30 am, but suddenly it turned dark
again.
190

One headlamp popped on, then another. The climbers saw
that they were trapped in a ten-by twenty-foot space. Two of
them dug a fifteen-foot-long tunnel through the wall and
poked their heads out into a raging storm. They knew
immediately that there was no way they could have survived
out there. So they decided to stay in the chamber until they
either ran out of fuel or the storm surrendered. They figured
that their chances were thin. The crevasse’s unstable wall
looked like it might collapse under the weight of the
avalanche debris and new snow. And they were unroped. A
fall into the abyss below would be fatal.
191

Crevasse
On the second day, the four climbers came up with ways to
distract themselves—building chairs out of snow and playing
twenty-one questions. But by the third day, they couldn’t
escape the reality of their situation: They were going to die
there if they didn’t get out soon. Luckily for them, the storm
lifted on the fourth day and the slopes began to stabilize. They
192

tunneled out and spent the next twelve hours rappelling down
6,000 feet.
The crevasse probably saved their lives. Most climbers are
taught to avoid crevasses in a potential avalanche situation
since they’re considered terrain traps. These four climbers
were extremely lucky.
Steps to Take if You Find yourself Abandoned on a Snowy
Mountain:
•
Keep your extremities as warm as possible and watch for
signs of frostbite—waxy, red-black skin.
•
Glaciers are a good landmark. If you follow them down,
they’ll lead you out of the mountains.
•
If you need to find your bearings on a sunny day, you can
find north, east, south, and west by using the shadow and
stick method. Find a stick, insert it into the ground, and you’ll
see that it casts a nice shadow. Mark where the end of the
shadow is and leave the stick for fifteen minutes. Mark the
next point and that will create an east-west line.
•
Often dew will collect on leaves and pine needles
overnight, so if you’re desperately in need of water, this can
be a lifesaver.
•
If you are lucky enough to successfully hunt food to cook,
remember to dispose of any leftovers or else you’re at risk of
black bears in the area coming for your leftovers.
193

Glacier National Park, Montana. Crevasses near the
terminus of Grinnell Glacier.
Keizo Funatsu—Lost Overnight in a Hurricane-Force
Blizzard
Keizo Funatsu was the sole Japanese member of the six-man
International Trans-Antarctic Expedition of 1989-1990 that
had successfully dog-sledded 3,725 miles across Antarctica.
They were sixteen miles from their destination—Russia’s
194

Mirnyy base—when Keizo Funatsu vanished in a raging
blizzard.
He’d gone outside at four-thirty in the afternoon to feed the
sled dogs. At that time snow had stated falling and it was
about minus twenty-five degrees F. Within minutes the wind
picked up dramatically, and visibility became problematic.
Keizo, who was wearing only Gore-Tex boots, a wind parka,
and wind pants, long underwear, and wool socks, couldn’t
find his second ski, even though he’d planted his ski poles
upright in the snow to serve as guideposts.
195

Testing snow conditions at Cascade Mountains
He waited ten minutes for the visibility to improve without
any luck. When he tried to move back toward his first ski, he
found it almost impossible to walk straight ahead into the
wind. He tried moving left, then right, and realized that
because of the lack of visibility, he wouldn’t be able to find
anything even though his skis were, at most, a few feet away.
196

He tried shouting, “I’m here. I’m here. Come on.” Frustrated
by the fact that he wasn’t far from the camp, he tried pushing
through the wind. Initially the cold didn’t bother him because
the adrenaline in his body was keeping him warm. But Keizo
was worried about his toes, which were getting cold.
He spotted some dog excrement and a faint sled trail of a sled,
which he tried to follow. It quickly disappeared. The sled trail
meant that Keizo was positioned behind the camp, so he
stopped.
Using a pair of pliers he carried in his pocket to help unfreeze
dog collars and fix broken ones, Keizo started to dig into the
icy surface and scooped out a shallow ditch about two and a
half feet deep. He put his feet in and allowed the storm to
bury him just as he’d watched the sled dogs do to protect
them from the elements.
The blowing snow covered him in seconds. Now, he was
completely covered and breathing through an air hole close to
his body. Unfortunately he wasn’t wearing much and the
snow, which was heavy, pressed down on his wind jacket, so
his clothes touched his skin. That left no room for a layer of
warm air to form.
As time wore on, Keizo realized that he’d probably have to
spend the night in the snow ditch since the storm hadn’t let up
and there was probably zero chance of his teammates finding
him in the dark.
He was cold and worried about losing energy. He didn’t know
if he should lie still or move around to try to warm his body.
He kicked his feet to keep the blood circulating. Every twenty
197

or thirty minutes he pulled himself out of the snow ditch,
jumped up and down, and rubbed his arms. At first, he tried
shouting but realized that he couldn’t be heard through the
raging wind.
The wind was so strong, in fact, that it pushed him away from
the snow ditch. He had to crawl on his stomach to find it.
Cleverly, he’d spread everything he had in his in pockets
around it as guides—pliers, headband, lip cream, compass,
pocket knife.
Keizo tried to think positively, saying to himself: “Very few
people have had this kind of experience, lost in a blizzard.
Settle down, and try and enjoy this.” With the snow and quiet
covering him, he felt as though he was back in his mother’s
womb. His life seemed infinitesimally small in comparison to
the vastness of Antarctica.
Keizo started to feel shame. Alone in the snow ditch, he
thought about the responsibility he had to the rest of the team
and the trouble he would cause them if he died sixteen miles
away from their destination—Mirnyy.
The sky above him started to lighten around five o’clock in
the morning. Keizo climbed out of the snow ditch and tried to
locate the sled trail again, but fresh snow covered everything.
He was concerned about his feet, which weren’t cold, but felt
like they were swelling. This was a sign of frostbite. He was
afraid to take his socks off and rub them because then his feet
would get wet.
Returning to the snow ditch, Keizo thought he heard
somebody yelling faintly outside, “Keizo! Keizo!” The storm
198

hadn’t let up, so he figured it must be the wind playing tricks
on him. He’d been hearing things all night, and had learned
how the wind could sound very much like a human voice.
Still, he jumped out of the ditch to look. He heard the voice
again and yelled back, “I’m here. I’m here!”
He couldn’t see anything through the falling snow. Finally he
heard a voice close by and screamed, “I’m here. I’m here!”
He made out team leader Will Steger’s silhouette through the
blanket of white. Leaving his pliers and everything else
behind, he ran toward him.
Keizo saw that the rest of the six-member team was out in the
blizzard looking for him—walking in a giant circle, linked by
a three-hundred-forty-foot rope. They were thrilled to find
him. Some of them had tears in their eyes. He cried, too.
199

200

Maintain proficiency in rescue training
Dr. Beck Weathers—Surviving Mt. Everest
Plagued by depression, a turbulent home life, and seeking
adventure, Dr. Seaborn Beck Weathers of Texas set off in
1996 with nine mountain climbers to tackle mighty Everest.
Dr. Weather’s trouble on the mountain began when he lost his
vision at about 27,500 feet, caused by the effects of high
altitude on his eyes, which had been altered by radial
keratotomy surgery. After discussing this disability with his
guide, Rob Hall, Weathers decided to remain on the balcony
of the summit ridge until the other climbers descended back
to him.
But that afternoon a ferocious blizzard blew in from the
south. Hall and the other climbers became trapped and were
unable to descend. He and five others died.
Weathers, meanwhile, spent the night in an open bivouac in
subzero temperatures, blind, and with both hands and his face
exposed. When the surviving climbers reached him, they said
that his frozen hands and nose looked and felt as though they
were made out of porcelain. Seeing that he was in a deep
hypothermic coma, they left him for dead.
201

Mt. Everest
Miraculously, Weathers survived another freezing night alone
in a tent unable to drink, eat, or keep himself covered. His
cries for help couldn’t be heard through the blizzard even
though his companions were bivouacked in another tent
nearby. They were shocked to find him alive and coherent the
following day.
Weathers recovered enough to walk unassisted to the nearby
camp. From there he continued on his frozen feet to a lower
camp, where he was rescued by helicopter.
202

Weathers had his right arm amputated halfway between the
elbow and wrist. All four fingers and the thumb on his left
hand
were
removed.
His
nose
was
amputated
and
reconstructed with tissue from his ear and fore-head. And, he
lost parts of both feet.
Despite these disabilities, Weathers returned to working
full-time as an anatomic pathologist. He said that his ordeal
made him a better, happier, more spiritual person.
Survival in the Andes
On October 12, 1972, a chartered military plane carrying an
amateur rugby team (known as the Old Christians) and some
members of their families left Montevideo, Uruguay, for
Santiago, Chile. Because of bad weather conditions over the
Andes, the plane was forced to land in Mendoza, Argentina,
where they waited two days for the weather to improve.
The mood aboard the plane was festive as the group finally
took off again. But as they approached Santiago, they hit
more bad weather. The inexperienced pilots of the Fairchild
F-227 lost control of the plane causing it to crash into the side
of a mountain and lose both wings and the tail. The aircraft
then slid on its belly into a step valley surrounded by snow
and mountains.
Because the roof the aircraft had been painted white, it was
almost impossible to spot by air rescue. Chilean, Argentine,
and Uruguayan military and civilian teams searched for more
than a week but couldn’t find any sign of the wrecked aircraft.
203

Thirty-two of the forty-five passengers survived the initial
crash. Within days, without adequate medical attention, the
most severely injured died in the harsh subzero conditions.
None of the survivors were prepared to face the severe cold,
and their provisions were limited to some alcohol, candy, and
a few miscellaneous items like crackers and jam. As the
survivors grew weaker and weaker, they realized that the only
way to survive was to eat the flesh of their dead colleagues.
On the seventeenth day they were hit by an avalanche, and
thirteen more people died. The remaining survivors realized
that the only way to make it out alive was to climb out of the
steep valley and find help.
After ten days of trekking through some of the highest
mountains in the world, Nando Parrado and Roberto Canessa
came across a Chilean peasant who was tending his animals
in a remote valley in the Andes. Initially, the peasant ignored
them when they tried to get his attention, fearing they might
be terrorists. But Parrado and Canessa persisted, and threw a
piece of paper and a pen wrapped in a handkerchief to him.
The paper read, “I come from a plane that fell in the
mountains. I am Uruguayan . . .”
On
Thursday,
December
21st—seventy
days
after
the
crash—sixteen survivors were finally led out of the remote
valley and taken back to civilization in what became known
as “the Christmas Miracle.”
The ordeal was especially tragic for twenty-one-year-old
Fernando (Nando) Parrado, who had to bury his mother and
204

sister, who had accompanied him on the trip, in an arid,
freezing glacier.
Nando Parrado said later that he learned some important
lessons about survival:
1. Making quick decisions is a great virtue. Those who don’t
decide, die. “If I make the wrong decision I have time to
correct,” Parrado explained. “It’s far better to decide and
make mistakes, than not making decisions, because there is
always time to go back.”
2. Although democratic decision-making is good at certain
moments, sometimes a leader has to step forward to make
decisions because it’s not always easy for a group to reach a
consensus.
3. Leaders aren’t born; they develop their skills with their
actions. In other words, leaders are those who achieve good
results.
4. Obsessive focus on objectives and results will keep you
alive.
5. Creativity is needed to find solutions. Parrado explained
how he and others made plates out of pieces of aluminum that
were used to melt the snow into potable water. “Snow was
more important than food,” he said, “because the human body
dehydrates five times faster at 11,500 feet than it does at sea
level.”
6. Define which things are important and which ones are not.
He explained, “A hundred percent of the people who were
205

trapped with me in the Andes wanted to go back to their
families, not to their contracts, studies, or money. In fact, we
burned all the money on the plane ($7,000) to keep warm.”
Andes Mountains, Peru
206

207

Fernando Parrado and Roberto Canessa next to the
cattle driver who discovered them.
Author with his climbing partner descending Cotopaxi
(17,750 feet) in an attempt to beat the oncoming storm.
208

Author climbing in the Andes Mountains.
Arctic Survival
Arctic conditions extend into Alaska, Canada, Greenland,
Iceland, and much of northern Scandinavia and Russia. The
Arctic has no land mass but is a floating sheet of permanently
frozen ice. The Antarctic, on the other hand, consists of a
large land mass covered by a permanent ice layer, which in
some places is more than 1,000 feet thick.
209

Both regions have two seasons—long winters featuring days
with twenty-four hours of darkness, and short summers with
days that can have twenty-four hours of daylight. Summer
temperatures in the Arctic can rise to sixty-five F, except on
glaciers and frozen seas. During winter they fall to as low as
minus eighty-one F and are never above freezing.
Antarctic temperatures can dip even lower. The combination
of extremely cold air temperatures, high altitudes, and high
winds produce the most hostile environment known to man.
The average altitude in Antarctica is 2,300 meters (7,540
feet), with the highest point at around 4,000 meters (13,100
feet). Antarctic winds as high as 177 kilometers (110 miles
per hour) have been recorded. Winter winds sometimes reach
hurricane force and can whip snow thirty meters (100 feet)
into the air, giving the impression of a blizzard even when it
isn’t snowing.
210

Author and his climbing partner trying to warm up in an
ice cave
The polar regions of both areas are devoid of large flora
species. On the other hand, aquatic animals such as the walrus
and seal (as well as whales and birds, including the penguin
found in the Antarctic) have adapted to the extremely low
temperatures. The North Pole is home to the world’s largest
land carnivore, the polar bear, which is one of the few
animals that will actively hunt humans.
211

Located south of the North Pole are large expanses of tundra,
where plant life is limited because roots can’t penetrate the
frozen ground. The only plants that grow are reindeer moss,
which is low, bushy, coral-like lichen that grows on the
ground common throughout northern Canada, and lichens,
which must be thoroughly boiled or soaked in water for
several hours before being eaten.
South of the tundra is a vast area of coniferous forest, called
the boreal forest, that extends to the temperate zone. In
Russia, this forest is known as Taiga and covers the areas
along the Siberian rivers northwards into the Arctic Circle.
Coniferous forests, which are also found in northern Canada,
contain a great deal of wildlife including bears, elk, reindeer,
lynx, wolf, sable, wolverine, and lemmings.
Hunting
Local tribes, people such as the Inuit of northern Canada and
Alaska and the Sami of northern Finland, have survived by
being skillful hunters. The Sami also domesticate reindeer,
whose milk is nutritious but low in yield, and whose venison
has a rich flavor. It’s also fairly lean, which isn’t ideal in the
cold temperatures where fat is needed to help the body
generate heat.
Musk ox has a strong flavor but is very high in fat. The Arctic
hare is very low in fat, so a diet consisting mostly of hares
will not be sustaining. Various parts of caribou can be eaten,
especially meat from the head, neck, shoulder, hindquarters,
heart, liver, brisket, ribs, backbone and pelvis. In the unlikely
event that you kill a polar bear, you’ll find that the meat is
tough and stringy. Some claim that it’s more tender eaten raw.
212

Polar bear livers are poisonous, however, so don’t eat them.
Seals are also edible.
Certain arctic birds—such as ducks, geese, and swans—have
a high fat content. During summer, many of these water birds
are unable to fly for two to three weeks while they’re molting
and can make easy prey. Snow partridge, gull, and tern
colonies can supply a good amount of eggs but are usually
hard to get to because they are usually located on small
islands or high on cliffs.
213

214

Checking climbing gear in a muddy cavern
A tent can be quickly buried in a snow storm. Be sure to
get up every hour during a storm to remove snow from
tent and tent entrance.
215

216

Cascade Mountains—using sled to protect gear from
snow.
Environmental Hazards
Arctic areas are some of the most inhospitable areas on the
planet. In tundra areas, expect travel to be difficult because of
deep snow and dense forests. The locals often use the frozen
rivers as highways, as these are generally wide and free of
obstructions. Of course, in spring these rivers can rapidly
thaw and become extremely dangerous. Also be aware that
it’s rare for large rivers to freeze completely, so don’t be
alarmed if you’re walking on a foot of ice and can still hear
water running under your feet.
If you’re lost, it’s usually best to follow rivers downstream, as
this will usually lead to some form of civilization. The
exception to this general rule is in Siberia, where many rivers
flow north and away from any inhabited areas.
Wind Chill and Breathing
In addition to the extremely low temperatures, upland areas in
particular can be subject to very strong arctic winds. Inhaling
cold air can actually burn the lungs and cause hemorrhaging.
To reduce the risk of this happening, learn to control your
breathing by exhaling completely but inhaling slowly and
shallowly at first until your lungs build up some resistance to
the cold. Controlling your breathing can also help you focus
and remain calm during stressful conditions. Remember that a
rapid intake of subzero air can cause considerable damage to
your lungs.
217

218

Alaska—author and his team breaking down camp
219

MOUNTAIN AND ARCTIC SURVIVAL
220

5
“A desert is a place without expectation.”
—Nadine Gordimer
Deserts are one of the most hostile human environments on
the planet. The extreme heat and aridness make desert
survival extremely challenging. Add other factors, both
physical and psychological, and conditions can be unbearable.
A desert is an area that receives almost no precipitation (rain,
snow, moisture), with an annual precipitation of no greater
than twenty-five centimeters per year. Surprisingly, the
world’s largest deserts are Antarctica and the Arctic in that
order, followed in turn by the best known hot desert, the
Sahara.
The world’s ten largest deserts, in size order:
•
Antarctic
•
Arctic
•
Sahara
•
Arabian
•
Gobi
221

•
Kalahari
•
Patagonian
•
Great Victoria Desert
•
Syrian Desert
222

Desert outback
Dry desert sand
Natural Hazards
Most deserts are featureless (or have repeating patterns of
sand dunes), making terrain navigation difficult, and have
virtually no vegetation. The majority of desert animals are
nocturnal and remain hidden underground during the day to
223

conserve water and regulate body temperature. These include
coyotes, kangaroo rats, and jackrabbits.
A wide variety of insects and reptiles can also be found, but
many of these are poisonous either to eat or have poisonous
bites or stings. These include scorpions, which have a
tendency to lurk in footwear. So it’s important to make sure
that footwear is hung upside down or checked in the morning
before putting on.
Heat exhaustion is the most common problem caused by loss
of salt and fluid. The signs include weakness, headaches, pale
clammy skin, and mental confusion. Heat stroke has the same
causes but can be fatal if not treated quickly. Symptoms
normally include hot dry skin (unlike heat exhaustion),
headache, vomiting, a fast pulse rate, and a confused mental
state, which usually precedes unconsciousness and death.
Heat cramps are a result of loss of salt and are muscle cramps
that start in the limbs and can spread throughout the body,
eventually preventing any physical activity.
Sandstorms can last days and make navigation and travel
extremely difficult. They also can clog vehicle filters and get
into equipment, doing damage to everything from vehicles to
communications equipment. Keep a scarf or a piece of cloth
over your mouth and nose, and wear goggles or at least
sunglasses during a sandstorm.
The best advice for most people lost in the desert is to get into
the shade immediately and wait to be rescued. Obviously this
rule does not apply during desert warfare training or during
desert operations.
224

Heat
Desert heat can reach over 100 degrees F and can incapacitate
and kill you in a matter of hours. In the night, the
temperatures can drop to near freezing. Do everything you
can to keep cool and stay out of the sun.
Look for an outcrop of rock, the shady side of a gully or
streambed, or any shade you can find. Keep in mind that
you’re searching for an emergency shelter for a few hours,
perhaps, not a long-term one. You’ll have time to construct a
better shelter after the sun goes down. The critical thing is to
get out of the sun and into the shade as soon as possible.
Keep your whole body covered if you can. Keep your sleeves
rolled down and never remove your boots, socks, or any piece
of clothing while in the direct sunlight. Additionally, cover
the back of your neck to protect it from the sun. If you’re
wearing a T-shirt, remove it and use it as a scarf. Push one
end of the shirt up under your cap, and allow the other end to
hang over the neck. The most important part of your body to
keep cool is your head. Always wear a hat and, if for some
reason you do not have one, make a headdress out of
light-colored material. Regardless of the technique you use,
remember to keep your neck covered at all times. It reduces
water loss through sweating and it also prevents sunburn.
Most desert survival experts agree that in the 120 degree-plus
heat of a desert, if you rest and do nothing, you may live for a
couple of days. If you go moving into the desert, you’ll most
likely cover less than five miles. If you wait until after the sun
sets, you may be able to cover up to twenty-five miles or so.
225

So, if the sun is out, stop and rest. Go no farther and seek
shade immediately!
Once you’re in the shade, continue to try to establish
communications with your support assets. They should know
where you are, how long you intend to be there, and the exact
time and date you planned to return. Be sure to communicate
any changes to your plans. There’s nothing more frustrating
to rescue teams than to be searching for someone who is not
where he’s supposed to be.
226

Sunburn
While in the shade, inventory the equipment and the survival
kit you have on hand.
Heat Acclimation
227

It takes approximately two weeks to fully acclimate to hot
environments. Your body will eventually adjust to the
following physiological changes:
•
Sweat rate increases
•
Sweat is more diluted
•
Heart rate decreases
•
Body temperature increases
Your body’s core temperature rises during exercise and hard
work in a hot environment. This causes your heart rate to
increase, your skin temperature to increase, and your sweat to
become more profuse. And this all causes your heart to have
to work harder. Your body pumps blood to the surface of your
skin to cool; it is pumped to the heart and muscles. As your
body heats up, it has to work harder to cool your blood and
keep your muscles working.
Your body also loses fluid when you sweat, and you can
easily become dehydrated. If you lose more than two percent
of your body weight through dehydration, you will start
losing your ability to perform physically.
It is VERY common to underestimate how much fluid you
lose when you sweat. Drink fluids early and often. Don’t wait
until you are thirsty to take a drink.
228

Desert landscape
Desert Survival Tips:
•
Drink more water and fluids per hour than you think you
need (one liter per hour or more as needed during hard work
or exercise).
229

•
Consume potassium-rich foods such as bananas, parsley,
dried apricots, dried milk, chocolate, various nuts (especially
almonds and pistachios), potatoes, bamboo shoots, avocados,
soybeans, and bran, Potassium is also present in sufficient
quantities in most fruits, vegetables, meat, and fish.
•
Add salt to your diet to help your body store water more
efficiently.
•
Cover your skin with light-colored, lightweight, loose long
sleeves and pants when appropriate.
•
Wear a hat to keep the sun off of your head and face.
•
Splash cool water on your head or wet your hat during
workouts to cool your core temperature.
•
Wear sunglasses to protect your eyes.
•
Avoid the hottest part of the day (10—4 PM) if possible.
Desert Recommended Gear
Your mission, mode of travel, and expected length of
operation will determine the equipment you will carry.
When traveling by vehicle—be it a Humvee, ATV, truck, or
Jeep—you have the space, so pack gear such as shovels,
picks, and heavy rope.
Every SEAL, every experienced operator who trains and
operates in the desert, will typically carry a well thought-out
survival or E&E (escape and evade) kit to suit their
230

operational and personal needs. They will learn to use it and
will practice with each item before a mission.
Below is a list of equipment often found in many survival and
E&E kits.
Trekking in Death Valley
231

Southwest Desert Survival Gear Checklist —by Tony
Nester
A quality survival kit is your life insurance policy during a
backcountry emergency. Your kit should take care of the “Big
5” survival priorities of shelter, water, fire, signaling, and
first-aid. I carry my own preselected items rather than using
commercial kits. Here’s a breakdown of my gear:
Knife—A knife is a critical survival tool, and I carry two
blades: a Mora knife, which holds a good edge and can take a
beating, plus a small, backup Cold Steel lockblade.
Fire Starters—Carry three, such as REI Stormproof matches,
a spark magnesium rod, and a lighter. Fire = Life in the wilds
under survival conditions, so carry these with you in your
pockets and become proficient at making fire under any
condition.
Tinder—Cotton balls smeared with Vaseline will practically
allow you to make fire underwater. Make a half-dozen at
232

home and place them in a film canister or an Altoid type
container.
Emergency Blanket—These have grommets and will enable
you to rig up a quickie shelter. An Army poncho works well
too. Avoid the worthless Mylar blankets, as these will shred
apart like tinsel in no time.
Water—Carry two to six quarts or more, depending on the
time of year and length of hike. I like Nalgene bottles, which
hold up to punishment on the trail. I also carry five gallons
per person per day minimum in my truck.
Electrolyte replacement powder or capsules.
Water Purification Tablets-I use either Potable Aqua iodine
or chlorine dioxide. Make sure to give it a taste test
beforehand and follow the manufacturer’s directions.
First Aid—A quality first-aid kit by either Adventure
Medical Kits or Atwater Carey is essential. Add an ACE
Wrap, Fastmelt Benadryl for insect bites, Imodium, and
ibuprofen, and you will be ahead of the game if injury befalls
you.
Signal Mirror—We have tested out glass signal mirrors in
the desert and gotten reflections from twenty-six miles away.
They are far safer, to you and the environment, than a risky
signal fire.
Duct
Tape—Imagine
what
our
ancestors
would
have
accomplished
with
this
multiuse
item.
It’s
good
for
everything from patching up a torn pack to wrapping a blister
233

to fixing a damaged boot sole. Wrap a few passes around your
water bottle for quick access.
Flashlight—Get a quality LED headlamp for hands-free
work when rigging up an emergency shelter in the dark or
alerting searchers to your location.
Sunglasses/Sunscreen/Shemagh/Gloves/Brimmed
hat—Enough said!
Jerky/Snacks/Chow—Yeah, you can survive without snacks,
but it sure isn’t fun.
Lastly, don’t forget about that survival tool between your
ears, and remember to leave a travel plan with someone back
home so searchers know exactly where to look. That plan will
be your safety net in the event that you run into Murphy’s
Law on the trail.
Desert Vehicle Recommended Equipment List
Moving in the Desert
234

When you’re in the desert, learn to become nocturnal. Once
the sun goes down, begin your activities.
Your first priority is to construct a shelter. Consider the type
of shelter design you want to use, look the area over for
possible sources of water, and determine how much water you
have on hand. Do all of this from the shade of your temporary
shelter.
Use your space blanket, casualty blanket, Tyvek, or poncho
and some 550 cord to make a simple lean-to type of shelter. A
casualty blanket, which is basically a quality NASA-designed
space blanket, works especially well as shelter construction or
for sleeping. To build a shelter, simply secure one end of the
material to the ground using stakes or heavy stones, and angle
the other end of the material upward in a manner that protects
you from the sun.
Make the angled end no higher than four feet off the ground
and secure it to bushes, stakes, or rocks. Then, place five or
six pieces of light brush on the material and cover the entire
shelter with material once more. Use Tyvek or a casualty
blanket for the first layer of material and a space blanket as
the top layer with the fluorescent orange side up to act as an
emergency signal.
This type of “sandwich” shelter forms a dead air space
between you and the sun. The insulation keeps the shelter
cooler than a single-layered shelter. Construct this shelter in
the cool of the evening and not during the heat of the day.
235

Desert cave
236

Desert shelter
237

Vehicles
Traveling through the desert can be done successfully if a few
simple precautions are taken. Be sure the vehicle(s) are in
good working order, that fuel tanks and radiators are filled,
that the batteries are well charged, and that all engine belts are
in satisfactory condition. Also take a moment to inspect the
238

tires and make sure they are inflated properly, and do not
have abnormal wear spots.
Do not attempt to negotiate washes without first checking the
footing and clearances, as high centers can rupture the oil pan.
If you get stuck, do not spin the wheels in an attempt to gain
motion. Instead, apply power very slowly to prevent the
wheels from digging in. When driving in sand, traction can be
increased by partially deflating tires. Start, stop, and turn
gradually; sudden motions will cause the wheels to dig in. Be
sure to carry all tool and equipment requirements. (See the
recommended desert survival items listed in this chapter.)
Roadway signs indicate civilization. So, if you find a road and
it is safe to do so, stay on it.
If tactically safe, stay near your vehicle if it breaks down.
Raise the hood and trunk lid to indicate that “help is needed.”
If you leave the vehicle, leave a note for rescuers with the
time you left and the direction taken.
When not on the move, use any available shade or erect some
shade from tarps or other material to protect yourself from the
direct rays of the sun.
Know where you are at all times. When planning on entering
unfamiliar
country,
always
thoroughly
study
a
map
beforehand. Take special note of terrain features, the road
structure, the direction to the nearest habitation, the location
of water, and so on.
239

Upon arrival at your destination, look for landmarks and
orient yourself with the prominent ones. As you move
through the country, check your back trails often. Terrain
always looks different when you are coming at it from the
opposite direction.
Trekking
There are special rules and techniques for trekking in the
desert. By moving slowly and resting ten minutes every hour
or so, someone who is not injured and is in good physical
condition can cover fifteen to twenty miles per day—less
after becoming fatigued or suffering from lack of food or
water. In the hot desert, it’s best to travel in early morning or
late afternoon into the evening, in whatever shade is
available.
During your map study, select the easiest and safest route. Go
around obstacles, not over them. Instead of going up or down
steep slopes, zigzag to prevent undue exertion. Go around
gullies and canyons instead of through them. When trekking
with teammates, adjust the rate to the slowest member, who is
often the one carrying the most gear or the injured.
On breaks, sit down in the shade and prop your feet up (to
help reduce painful swelling), remove your shoes, and either
change your socks (only if you’re in the shade) or straighten
out the ones you are wearing to reduce the chance of
developing blisters.
If you get lost, sit down, survey the area, and take stock of the
situation. Do not sit or lie on the ground because, in sunlight,
the ground usually is thirty degrees F hotter than the air. Try
240

to remember the last time when you knew exactly where you
were. Decide on a course of action. It may be best to stay
where you are and let your teammates or support assets come
to you. This is especially true if you have access to water,
fuel, or, in winter, some means of shelter.
If you feel you can retrace your course, do so. If safe to do so,
mark your spot or leave a note before moving on. Look for
your tracks; you may be able to backtrack and find the way to
familiar ground. Be leery about taking shortcuts, as they may
cause more confusion. If possible, go to a high point and look
for distinguishable landmarks.
To avoid poisonous creatures, place your hands and feet only
where you can see.
Footwear for Desert Hiking—by Tony Nester
Which footwear you choose depends on the desert. Three of
our four deserts in North America are blanketed with cacti
and other flora that can Chihuahuan deserts, I only wear
lightweight leather boots. These allow me to avoid the spines
of cacti, agave, and other succulents that can pierce. Sandals
are out, except for walking around base camp at the end of the
day.
The desert can be an unforgiving landscape if you’re
unprepared with the proper footwear. Geronimo and his
Apache warriors had to mend their buckskin moccasin soles
every three days or 100 miles of travel!
241

I have worn the Original S.W.A.T. brand boots on all of my
desert treks and they have proven extremely reliable and
affordable. I have also had good luck with the Hi-Tec brand.
If I’m going hiking in the Great Basin Desert amidst
sagebrush then I would consider wearing lightweight hiking
shoes. I currently have a pair of Merrells that have held up
well.
With either boots or shoes, leather will hold up better than
Corduratype materials. Just remember to avoid black! I also
carry a small comb in my pack, which can be handy for lifting
out cactus and cholla spines in the boots rather than using my
fingers, especially necessary if you hike with your dog.
Signals
One of the most effective signals is a free—either a smoky
one during daytime or a bright one at night. The signal mirror
is also an excellent device for attracting attention, particularly
aircraft. On a clear day, ground signals can be visible for up
to ten miles; signals to aircraft can be seen at even greater
distances.
If you decide to stay where you are and wait for rescue, it’s a
good idea to establish some type of ground-to-air signal, such
as a large “X,” “SOS,” or the word “HELP.” Use any
available
material
to make this display (rocks, brush,
clothing). It can even be scraped into the ground. The
important thing is to change the terrain and attract attention to
your location.
242

Signal sounds tend to be the least effective. Three sounds
universally signifies “distress.” A “thunder” whistle is
recommended as an easy way to make loud noise. If you have
a firearm, and it is tactically safe to do so, shoot once, wait
ten seconds, then fire twice more, about five seconds apart.
The first sound will hopefully attract attention, and the second
and third will give direction.
243

Desert terrain
Heat Disorders
Sunburn
Redness and pain. In severe cases—swelling of skin, blisters,
fever, headaches. Use ointments on mild sunburns. If blisters
appear, do not break them. If breakage occurs, apply dry
sterile dressing.
Heat Cramps
These are painful spasms that usually occur in the muscles of
your legs and abdomen. Sometimes they’re accompanied by
heavy sweating. Apply firm pressure on cramping muscles, or
gently massage to relieve the spasms. Take sips of salt water
(one teaspoon per glass) every fifteen minutes for one hour;
better yet, take electrolytes.
Heat Exhaustion
Characterized by heavy sweating, weakness, and dizziness.
The skin will feel cold, pale, and clammy. Pulse is usually
steady and temperature normal. Sometimes accompanied by
fainting and vomiting. Get the victim out of the sun, lie victim
down, loosen clothing, apply cool wet cloths, and fan.
Administer sips of salt water (one teaspoon per glass) every
fifteen minutes for one hour or take electrolytes. If vomiting,
do not give fluids or anything by mouth.
Heat Stroke
244

Symptoms include a body temperature of 106 degrees F or
higher; hot, red, dry skin; rapid and strong pulse; and possible
unconsciousness. Heat stroke should be considered a severe
medical emergency. Seek medical attention ASAP, as delay
can be fatal. Move victim into a cooler environment, reduce
body temperature with iced bath or sponging.
Cactus
Water
245

Do not ration water. Rationing water at high temperatures can
be an invitation to disaster, because small amounts will not
prevent dehydration. In the hot desert, a person needs about a
gallon of water a day. Loss of efficiency and collapse always
follows severe dehydration. It is the water in your body that
maintains life—not the water in your water containers.
If you drink more water than you actually need, it will pass in
the form of urine. When you urinate, check the color and
amount. Dark-colored urine indicates you need to increase
your
water
intake.
Many
survival
experts
recommend
drinking at least one quart of water for every two lost. But
less fluid will not result in less sweat. In extreme heat, you
may not even feel yourself perspire because the sweat
evaporates so quickly.
Ration Sweat—Not Water
Keep your clothing on, including your shirt and hat, because
it will help slow sweat evaporation and prolong cooling. It
also keeps out the hot desert air and reflects the heat of the
sun.
When day movement is necessary, travel slowly and steadily.
Keep your mouth closed and breathe through your nose to
reduce water loss and drying of mucous membranes. Avoid
conversation for the same reasons.
Alcohol in any form is to be avoided, as it will accelerate
dehydration. Food intake should be kept to a minimum if
sufficient water is not available.
Dehydration
246

Body temperature in a healthy person can be raised to the
danger point by either absorbing heat or generating it. Heat
can be absorbed from the ground, by reflection, or direct
contact. Work or exercise will also increase body heat. An
increase in body temperature of six to eight degrees above
normal (98.6F) for any extended period can cause death.
The body gets rid of excess heat and attempts to keep the
temperature normal by sweating, but sweating causes the
body to lose water and dehydration results. This water must
be replaced.
Drink cool or warm water as fast as you want, but cold water
may cause distress and cramps.
It’s
important
to
recognize
the
initial
symptoms
of
dehydration. These include thirst and discomfort, slow
motion, no appetite, and, later, nausea, drowsiness, and high
temperatures. If dehydration reaches six to ten percent,
symptoms may include dizziness, headaches, dry mouth,
difficulty in breathing, tingling in arms and legs, bluish color,
indistinct speech, and, finally, an inability to walk.
Thirst is not an accurate indicator of the amount of water that
your body needs. If you drink only enough to satisfy your
thirst, you can still dehydrate. Drink plenty of water,
especially at meal times and during the cooler early morning
hours. A pebble or small coin placed in the mouth will help to
alleviate the sensation of thirst, but it is obviously not a
substitute for water and will not aid in keeping your body
temperature normal.
Water Procurement in the Desert
247

If you’re near water, remain there and signal for rescuers. If
water is not immediately available, look for it by following
these leads:
•
Look for desert trails—following them may lead to water
or civilization, particularly if several such trails join and point
toward a specific location.
•
Look for flocks of birds—they sometimes circle over
water holes. Listen for their chirping in the morning and
evening, and you may be able to locate their watering spot.
Pigeons or doves only exist near clear water.
•
Look for animal tracks—they sometimes lead to water.
•
Look for plants that only grow near water—cottonwoods,
sycamores, willows, hackberry, salt cedar, cattails, and arrow
weed. You may have to dig to find this water.
•
Keep on the lookout for windmills and water tanks built
by ranchers.
•
An old Bedouin trick is to turn over half-buried stones in
the desert just before sun up. Their coolness causes dew to
form on their surface.
•
Desert grass will also form dew in the predawn. It can be
soaked up with a cloth and wrung out into a container.
•
Where sand dunes meet the sea, digging above the high
tide mark might reveal a thin layer of fresh water sitting atop
a heavier layer of salt water.
248

•
Flies and mosquitoes indicate a water source.
•
Bees fly in a straight line to and from water up to 1,000
meters away.
•
Water seepage in canyons, small pockets of water in
sandstone rock formations, and digs at the base of rocks and
mountains can produce water.
Methods of Purifying Water
Even contaminated water has its uses. It can be used to soak
your clothing and reduce water loss from perspiration.
Dirty water should be filtered through several layers of cloth
or allowed to settle. This does not purify the water, even
though it may look clean. Purification to kill germs must be
done by one of the following methods:
Boiling is the safest of available water disinfection methods.
It kills Giardia, Cryptosporidium, bacteria, and viruses. At
sea level, boiling water for one minute effectively eliminates
these hazards, although vigorous boiling for two to five
minutes is generally recommended for Crypto sporidium. At
higher elevations, water boils at lower temperatures and
longer boiling times should be observed (e.g., fifteen minutes
at 10,000 feet).
Chemical Disinfection, usually with either chlorine or
iodine, is another method of preventing infection from
Giardia and most other microorganisms. Cryptosporidium
parasites are highly resistant to most chemical disinfectants,
however, and can only be neutralized by boiling or filtration.
249

The table below lists the various disinfectants available and
the recommended dosage per quart of water. The use of
saturated iodine (made by dissolving iodine crystals in water)
is not recommended because it does not kill all of the Giardia
organisms
in
cold
water.
None
of
the
below-listed
disinfectants are considered to be effective against Crypto
sporidium.
WATER DISINFECTION METHODS
When using tablets, the waiting time begins after the tablets
are dissolved. *Use 4 drops if water is cloudy or turbid
Using Bleach to Purify Water
Bleach is an oxidant, and it will react with and kill pretty
much any microscopic cellular life (including viruses) that it
comes in contact with. When it reacts, the bleach is actually
consumed in the process.
Because killing microorganisms also consumes the bleach,
the scent test tells you whether or not there’s anything left to
kill. If there’s no chlorine odor, then all of the bleach was
used up, meaning there could still be living organisms. If
there is a chlorine odor after thirty minutes, it tells you that all
250

of the bacteria and viruses are dead, and the bleach has done
its job.
Most laundry bleaches have five and one-half percent Sodium
hypochlorite, a suitable purification chemical for water.
Bleach in a suitable container with an eyedropper dispenser
makes a nice addition to any survival kit. Do not use
powdered, scented, or other non-pure bleaches.
Prior to adding the bleach, remove all suspended material by
filtration through a cotton cloth or by simply allowing
sediment to settle to the bottom.
Add eight drops of bleach per gallon of water (or two drops
per quart). If the water has already been filtered, shake it up
for even dispersal of the bleach, and wait fifteen minutes. If it
has sediment at the bottom, don’t shake it up. Instead, allow
the treated water to stand for thirty minutes.
Properly treated water should have a very slight chlorine
odor. If you can’t smell chlorine, repeat the dosage and allow
the water to stand another fifteen minutes.
For cloudy, green, or really foul water (i.e.: swamp water),
start with sixteen drops of bleach per gallon of water (or four
drops per quart). As detailed above, smell the water. If there’s
a faint odor of chlorine, the water is drinkable. If not, then
repeat the treatment.
Treating Larger Quantities of Water
•
A teaspoon of bleach will treat about 7 ½ gallons of clear
water or four gallons of dirty water.
251

•
A tablespoon of bleach will treat about twenty gallons of
clear water or about ten gallons of dirty water.
•
A quarter cup of bleach treats about ninety gallons of clear
water or forty-five gallons of dirty water.
Warning—Water from Natural Sources
During the past several years, increasing numbers of people
have been stricken with waterborne diseases due to drinking
water straight from natural sources—streams, springs ponds,
or lakes. Even though the water appears to be sparkling clean
and pure, it may contain microorganisms which cause disease.
Two organisms found in many water sources are Giardia
lamblia and Cryptosporidium parvum. These parasites have
been found in many wild and domestic animals and can be
present even in very remote areas with no sign of human life.
These organisms are transferred between animals and humans
by means of excreted fecal material.
Drinking
water
containing
these
parasites
can
cause
Giardiasis
or
Cryptosporidiosis.
Both
are
severe
gastrointestinal disorders, which can result in diarrhea,
headache, abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, and fever.
People with degraded immune systems should be aware that a
Cryptosporidium infection can be life-threatening.
To prevent infection from Giardia or Cryptosporidium, do
not drink naturally occurring water before you disinfect it.
Either drink the water you carry in or disinfect all water from
natural sources before drinking.
252

The minimum water consumption rate is two gallons a day
per person in the 110-to 120-degree summer temperatures. In
such extreme heat, I’d say that survival time without water
would be limited to around two days, maybe less, depending
on the variables mentioned above.
When it comes to water sources, don’t assume that the creek,
spring, or water hole you noticed on the map is going to even
exist, especially during a season of drought. Talk to the folks
who are out on the land all the time— the locals in the
area—and find out what the water conditions are really like in
the backcountry.
On an extended desert trip, and certainly in a survival
situation, it’s important to know how to locate water.
Being able to read the nuances of the land is a skill of visual
acuity. You’re searching for subtle clues written across the
terrain that may indicate water. This is a skill that comes with
experience.
Places to Look for Water
•
Shady areas at the base of cliffs
•
Rock pockets and depressions
•
Tree cavities and hollows
•
Undercut banks in dry riverbeds
253

•
Where insect life abounds
•
Animal tracks and bird signs
•
Where vegetation abounds: willows, palm trees, and
cottonwood trees are water-loving trees found in proximity to
either surface or subterranean water.
Remember, a hike to a suspected water source is going to cost
you, in terms of your own precious sweat, so staying put
might be a better option if rescuers are on their way.
Hyponatremia or Water Poisoning
When you’re sucking up quarts of water each hour in the
intense heat, you have to account for lost electrolytes. Most
people are familiar with the dangers of heat exhaustion but
not familiar with hyponatremia, which results when you are
technically hydrated but essentially flushing the electrolytes
from your system every time you urinate. This is something
that afflicts many novice desert trekkers.
For every thirty minutes of activity in the intense heat, take a
shade break, rehydrate, and get in some type of electrolyte
replacement.
The Problem with Solar Stills—by Tony Nester
In my opinion, solar stills are not a good way to procure water
in the desert.
On every desert survival course, we construct a solar still just
to show the futility of this method. After digging a
254

three-foot-deep hole that is three feet in diameter (and we all
carry shovels in our packs), we line the pit with succulent,
nontoxic plants (grasses, cacti, and so on) to boost the output,
place a cup in the bottom, and then seal it up with an inverted
six-foot by six-foot sheet of clear plastic. When possible, we
construct the still in the damp soil of an arroyo or canyon
floor that has recently seen rain. The next day, after the still
has had twenty-four hours to work in the sun, we pull back
the plastic cover and voila!—there’s about a half quart of
clear fluid! Wow! Then we remember back to the previous
day when we burned off a gallon of sweat making the still.
The single best method I know for staying hydrated in the
desert is to be prepared and carry water with you.
The question often arises, “If I run out of water, should I push
on in search of more or should I stay put and go without
water?” There will be a tremendous physiological cost if you
tax your heat-stressed body further by searching for water,
especially during the peak hours between 10 AM to 4 PM.
If you finish your water, it very well might make sense to
hole up in the shade like a coyote, all the while staying
clothed to reduce evaporative sweat loss, and traveling, if
necessary, only during the cooler hours of the morning or
evening—if at all. There have been survivors lost in the
desert, without water, who have endured up to two days in
triple-digit heat by doing the above. There have also been
those who perished from heat stroke in three to four hours
while hiking in search of water. You really have to weigh the
situation at hand to determine if staying put or hiking on is
required. In most cases you will want to stay put to extend
your survival time.
255

(For more about water, see Chapter 8, page 131.)
El Centro, Calif—Water is the most vital resource for
surviving in the desert. Students in Desert Environmental
Survival Training (DEST) use a water procurement
method of evaporation to extract drinkable water from
saltwater. The saltwater in the hole evaporates leaving the
salt at the bottom, but with a plastic cover over the hole,
the water has nowhere to go and drops back down into the
jar as potable water.
256

Desert Food
If you don’t have enough water, you shouldn’t be eating.
When your body processes food into waste, fluids from your
body are used. So, if you don’t have enough water in you, you
can actually speed up dehydration by eating. Most people can
go for significant periods of time without eating. Water is
your primary concern in the desert—not food.
Edible Plants—All cactus fruits are safe to eat, but other
plants and legumes (bean-bearing plants) can be poisonous
depending on the season and habitat. (There are more than
700 poisonous plants in the United States and Canada alone.)
The best advice is that, unless you’re an expert on plants in a
particular area, don’t consume them. Remember that you
must have water, but you can go without food for days
without harmful effects.
In a survival situation, where use of strange plants for food is
necessary, follow these rules:
* Avoid plants with milky sap.
* Avoid all red beans.
* If possible, boil plants that are questionable.
* To test a cooked plant, hold a small quantity in your mouth
for a few moments. If the taste is disagreeable (very bitter,
nauseating, burning), don’t eat it.
257

258

Prickly pear cactus
259

260

Yucca
Edible Plants in the Southwest—by Tony Nester
There are wild plants that are truly “palatable” (these were the
good-tasting staples used by native cultures) and then there
are the “edible” plants (these were survival foods used in lean
times and that have a considerable gag factor).
In the southwestern United States, the Hopi Indians have
identified 150 plants, of which roughly twenty-nine are
suitable for eating, and another forty can serve some
medicinal purpose.
When it comes to harvesting wild plants, be certain you know
what you are picking and putting in your mouth.
The fishhook barrel (Ferocactus wislizenii) contains water,
but I would hardly call the nasty fluid extracted from its
innards “water.” It’s high in alkaloids and has a considerable
gag factor, and there are four other barrel cacti that are toxic.
The few times I have tried choking down barrel cactus fluid,
it made my stomach churn like a cement mixer and required a
meditative concentration not to regurgitate.
Piñon Pine Nuts (Pinus edulis)—During a good fall season,
the pinon pine can yield a significant amount of protein-rich
nuts. Whether you roast them or eat them raw, you will want
to remove the delicate shell to liberate the sweet meat inside.
One study found that a single pound of pine nuts will yield
3,000 calories, so this is a very worthwhile food source.
261

Prickly Pear (Opuntia spp.)—The bright green, spineless pads
are collected in the spring and sautéed, boiled, or steamed. I
like to gather them when they are the size of a silver dollar, as
larger ones become too stringy. The red fruits in late summer
can be collected once the tiny stickers or glochids are
removed by peeling the skin off or lightly charring the fruits
for a few minutes in the hot coals of a campfire. These fruits
are sweet but heavy with seeds. For preserving the fruits, cut
them in half and dry in the sun over a few days to make
cactus fruit jerky.
Yucca (Yucca baccata)—The large fruits from banana yuccas
can be collected when ripe in late summer and roasted on
coals for an hour. The modern-day forager can simply wrap
them in foil to bake in a conventional oven at 400 degrees
until cooked through like a potato. If it tastes like you’re
eating a bar of soap, then you collected the fruits too early in
the season.
Pine Needle Tea—superhigh in vitamin C, this tea was used
by the mountain men to treat scurvy. Simmer a handful of
diced, green needles in a cup of water for twenty minutes. Do
not boil as that will destroy the vitamin content. This tea can
taste like pine sap.
Insects—Generally you can eat bugs. Do not eat scorpions,
centipedes, or brightly colored insects.
Spiders—Avoid eating any kind of spider.
Snakes—Snakes can provide a filing meal. The sheer amount
of bones to sort through in a snake makes for a lengthy meal,
however. Trying to kill a snake is a last-ditch survival effort
262

and one that I don’t recommend. Food is not a short-term
survival priority and many have gone thirty to forty days
without food in the desert.
It’s non-venomous snakes that a survivor would want to
ideally procure. This is best done with what I call the Grady
Gaston Method. Grady was a member of a B-24 bomber in
WWII that crashed in Australia after returning from a
bombing run against the Japanese in New Guinea. He
survived more than 130 days, most of it solo, while living on
snake meat that he obtained by hurling large rocks on the
creatures. By the way, he didn’t have the means to make fire,
so he consumed these raw! In the end, it was his sheer
willpower, sense of optimism, and serpentine diet that
enabled him to endure one of the most epic tales of survival in
recent times.
Beware of rattlesnakes, as they can still bite you after they’re
dead due to a reflexive action of the nervous system. Lopping
the head off, burying it, and then skinning and cleaning the
snake are the recommended methods. Once skinned and
cleaned, the meat can be boiled up in a stew with any other
tasty tidbits or edible plants, or placed on sticks and cooked
shish kebab style over the coals.
263

Pine needles
264

265

Cricket
Timber rattlesnake
266

267

Brown recluse spider
Black widow spider
Venomous Creatures
268

Carefully inspect all clothing and bedding before use,
especially items that have been on or near the ground during
the night. Dampness attracts these creatures. During summer
evenings, scorpions travel over the desert floor and up the
branches of trees and bushes looking for food. Bedding on the
ground will provide them a hiding place toward morning.
Spiders—Deserts have many kinds of spiders, but most of
them aren’t venomous. The two to watch out for are the
brown recluse and black widow.
Brown recluses are light brown, about a quarter inch in
length, and have a violin-shaped marking on the head and
back. They are most active at night. If you’re bitten by a
recluse and don’t get medical attention, it could be very
serious. The bite causes severe tissue destruction that may
take weeks to months heal. In extreme cases, the bite can be
fatal.
The female black widow spider is the most poisonous spider
in North America. It is easy to recognize) by the red hourglass
shape on the underneath part of her abdomen. She has a shiny
black body with various types of red markings on the top,
depending on the species. There are about five species of
black widow spiders in North America. They are usually
found in the dark corners of sheds and outbuildings, under
logs, and in rock piles. Will bite if provoked. The bite can be
dangerous but is seldom fatal. Pain spreads throughout the
body, accompanied by headache, dizziness, and nausea.
Extremities become cramped, the abdomen becomes rigid,
pupils dilate, and spasms may occur after several hours.
269

Lizards—There are two that are venomous—the Mexican
beaded lizard and the Gila monster. The Mexican Beaded is
only found in the deserts of Mexico and Guatemala. Gilas are
found in the Sonoran Desert of the United States and northern
Mexico.
The Mexican Beaded has white to yellow spots and stripes on
round, raised scales and is about a foot long. Gilas can be as
large as two feet and have round, raised scales. They’re short,
stout, and have a thick tail. While both are venomous, neither
is considered fatal.
Treatment for Bites and Stings:
•
Seek shade.
•
Sit down and try not to move the affected limb.
•
Wash the bite with soap and water.
•
Elevate the affected area above your heart level.
•
Do not lance the bite or attempt to suck out the venom.
•
Remove any jewelry near the bite and loosen tight
clothing.
•
Tie a light constricting band around the affected body part
about three inches above the point of contact. Keep it loose
enough to fit a finger between the band and your skin (to
prevent it from becoming a tourniquet).
270

Honeybees—There are more deaths annually in the U.S. from
honeybee stings than from all other poisonous creatures
combined. Honeybee stingers are barbed at the tip and will
remain in the victim. The venom sacs are torn from the bee’s
body and remain attached to the stinger. Don’t try to pull out
stingers, as pinching them injects additional venom. Scrape
stingers out with a knife or other thin edge.
Gila monster
271

Non-venomous lizard
272

Bee
273

274

Scorpion
Africanized Honey Bees or “Killer Bees”—They resemble
U.S.
and
common
European
honeybees,
but
differ
in
temperament. Africanized honey bees defend their colonies
more vigorously and in greater numbers. They may respond
with minimal or no provocation, but their venom is no more
harmful than that of domestic honeybees. If you see a lot of
bees flying in and out of a small opening, a nest is probably
located inside. The best strategy is to leave them alone and do
not disturb them. If attacked, run away as fast as you can. If
far from shelter, try running through tall brush. This will
confuse and slow them while you make your way out of the
area. Do not flail or attempt to swat the bees. Bees target your
head and eyes; therefore, try to cover your head as much as
possible without slowing your progress. If someone else is
stung by honeybees, help them out of the area as quickly as
possible.
Rock or Bark Scorpion—These are small, very slim, and
light straw colored. The stinger in the tip of the tail injects a
minute amount of powerful venom. There will be pain at the
site, numbness, restlessness, fever, fast pulse, and breathing
difficulty. The sting can be fatal.
If bitten or stung:
•
Sit down in the shade and relax.
•
Wash the area with soap and water.
•
Apply a cool compress to the bite or sting.
275

•
Elevate the area above your heart level.
•
Take an over-the-counter pain reliever.
•
Tie a light constricting band around the affected body part
about three inches above the point of contact. Use a
bandanna, a shoestring, some gauze, or anything else that
isn’t too heavy. Again, it should be loose enough to get a
finger between your skin and the wrap.
Rattlesnakes—In the desert, rattlesnakes are generally sandy
colored with a broad arrow-shaped head, blunt tipped-up
nose, and rattles on the tail. Look for them mostly where
food, water, and protection are available— around abandoned
structures, irrigation ditches, water holes, brush, and rock
piles. They don’t always warn by rattling, nor do they always
strike if someone is close. Usually they are not aggressive and
will not “chase” people. If you are bitten, the strike results in
immediate
pain
accompanied
by
swelling.
The
venom
primarily causes local and internal tissue destruction and
nerve damage. If traveling in areas where rattlers may be
found, wear protective footgear and watch where you put
your hands and feet. The general rule of thumb is if you hear
one, stop and try to locate it, then move slowly away from the
sound and leave it alone. Most strikes occur when people
attempt to catch, kill, or play with the snake.
Coral Snakes—Rarely more than twenty inches long with a
small blunt, black head, and tapering tail. A very attractive
snake with wide red and black bands, separated by narrower
yellow or white bands that completely encircle the snake.
There are many nonpoisonous species that resemble the coral
snake. Remember “if red (band) touches yellow—kill a
276

fellow; if red touches blackvenom lack.” They’re sometimes
seen in the day in spring (March, April, and May) and are
nocturnal during the summer. They live under objects, in
burrows, and are shy and timid. Corals must chew rather than
strike to introduce venom, but due to the very small mouth are
unable to bite any but the smallest extremities. They attack
only under severe provocation or accidental contact. Their
venom affects the nervous system, causing failure of the heart
and respiratory muscles.
Treatment of Poisonous Snakebites
•
Elevate the limb that has been bitten and immobilize it.
•
Apply a light constricting band above the bite location (be
able to insert two fingers under band). Don’t release the band
unless it becomes too tight from swelling.
•
Identify the snake and relate this information to the
medical responders.
Flash Floods—by Tony Nester
The key to avoiding an intimate encounter with a flash flood
is to plan ahead so you don’t get caught in one in the first
place. Most research indicates that eighty percent of flash
floods happen between noon and 8 PM during the monsoon
seasons. Try to avoid narrow canyons during this time
altogether or, if you must hike in them, check the weather
first and then make movement during the early morning hours
before the afternoon thermals reel in the moisture and
thunderheads.
277

Flash floods, and the thunderstorms that cause them, are
deceiving. You may be trekking in a canyon with blue skies
above while there’s a storm cell ten miles up canyon dumping
its energy. Now you have not only a huge wall (five-plus feet
or higher) of water headed your way, but also silt, rocks, logs,
and other debris that has built in the canyon since the last
rainfall, which could have been years or even decades ago. I
have seen van-sized boulders tumbling down canyons like
marbles during flash floods. Flash floods are the number one
weather-related killer of people in the desert the world over.
278

Coral snake
A Short Survival Exercise with SERE/CSAR—by Tony
Nester
It was nearing 106 degrees F at noon when we headed out for
an E&E exercise in the Arizona desert. This was the final
phase of a desert training course that I was conducting for a
group of SERE and CSAR personnel.
A route five miles ahead was selected and the UTM
coordinates were locked in on everyone’s GPS units. We
would split into two teams and rendezvous at a lone rock
pinnacle at the five-mile mark, while each team attempted to
reduce signs of their passage with evasion shelters previously
taught.
The men were carrying their normal packs and combat vests,
which together came to around sixty-five pounds with water
(four liters each). Food rations consisted of three survival bars
a day (1,200 calories total a day).
As we began, we were all silently grateful the sky was
growing overcast and cooling things down as an impending
storm to the south was brewing.
After
resting,
rehydrating,
and
checking
everyone
for
heat-related injuries, we pushed on another three miles. The
storm that was at our backs on the trek in was now in full
force behind us and brought in 40 MPH winds that created a
sandstorm. Out came the goggles and shemaghs. With little
respite from the wind and with the swirling sand obscuring
distant landmarks, we navigated in short increments from one
279

boulder outcropping to another, resting every mile or so.
During
rest
breaks,
out
came
the
rations
and
the
sodium-replacement drinks (premixed into the water earlier).
Lightning was in the distance as we pushed on, and each man
was told to spread out thirty feet from the next person in
observance of lightning safety.
By 4 pm, our destination was reached and we holed up in a
large boulder-strewn region out of the wind. Water was
procured from nearby tinajas or sandstone depressions in a
nearby arroyo. A test shelter in the ground was dug and
covered with a Mylar blanket. Everyone slept that night near
or under a rock overhang in the boulders. The storm cleared
out near sundown and the wind calmed. Night time temps
were in the midforties. Any colder and a fire would have been
necessary—a difficult prospect in so barren a region.
One student awoke to find a large rattlesnake on the other
side of his pack. His startled demeanor scared the snake away.
It was time to head back, debrief on the survival gear tested,
and wash the sand out of our ears. Not a cloud in the sky
today—it’s going to be a furnace again!
Lessons Learned
Combat vests were shed after two miles and stowed in the
rucksacks. Detailed water consumption records were kept and
each man went through approximately six liters during
daylight hours of activity. The allotted food rations were
sufficient for the two-day time frame, but everyone noticed
slight gastrointestinal stress after the first day of consuming
only survival rations and water.
280

Footwear was a definite weak link, with each man suffering
considerable blisters and bruised soles from inadequate
(issued) boots. Desert footwear for this group needs to be
improved. Danner Desert boots or Original S.W.A.T. boots,
used by our instructor cadre with good results over the years,
were recommended.
The Mylar-type blankets were also inadequate and shredded
after only a few hours’ use. An Emergency Blanket, poncho
liner, or camo poncho would be far more useful and durable
enough to withstand the repeated rigors of survival on the
move while not adding significant weight.
Other questions to consider: How will my current issued gear
hold up if I have to escape and evade over rough terrain for a
few days or more? Have you tested, under actual field
conditions, the limitations of the survival items that you are
issued? How far can you run/hike in the sand with a full ruc
before needing to shed gear, and what essential gear can you
absolutely NOT live without for survival in the desert? Do
you know some of the basic techniques for covering your
tracks and gaining distance from pursuers? Do you know how
to make a smokeless, concealed fire? Have you lived
exclusively on your issued survival rations in the field before
to test out their usefulness in maintaining? How does your
present footwear hold up over rough, rocky terrain?
Survival in the Outback
In April 2006, Mark Clifford, a farm manager on a remote
property in Australia’s Northern Territory, thought he was
seeing a walking skeleton coming toward him. It turned out to
281

be a 35-year-old man named Ricky Megee, who had been lost
in the outback for an incredible ten weeks.
Apparently drugged and left for dead by a hitchhiker he’d
picked up, Megee, who had nothing but the clothes on his
back, survived by staying close to a dam and eating leeches,
grasshoppers, and frogs.
While police and the public had doubts about the story
because of Megee’s previous minor drug convictions, there’s
no question that he had been lost in the outback, for whatever
reason, and was damn lucky to have survived.
Wandering for weeks, he eventually found a water hole,
where he spent the remainder of his time. Baked in the day
and frozen at night, he survived at first by eating frogs.
“Meat of any description was the substance I craved,” Megee
explained later. “I was prepared to do whatever was required.
But without that opportunity of a carnivorous feast always
available to me, I sure ate a lot of vegetation. Edible plants
didn’t stand a chance with me around. “Crickets were the first
really crunchy things that I tried, but definitely not the last.”
According to Megee, they made a nice change from the
softness of the mushy vegetation he’d become accustomed to.
He’d pull off their heads and chew the rest down as fast as he
could so he didn’t have to dwell on what he was actually
eating.
“Grasshoppers were pretty crunchy as well,” Ricky said. “I
didn’t really appreciate the sensation of the legs and wings
tickling the insides of my cheeks—they were too spindly for
282

my liking. To counter that, I pulled off their limbs and just ate
the body, which made them more palatable.”
Megee decided to try any type of food that didn’t look or
smell like it could kill him. Leeches surprised him, because he
found them easier to eat than he had expected. “For anyone
who hasn’t tried leeches, they are some of the sweetest tucker
you’re ever likely to find when lost in the outback,” he
explained. “I’d heartily recommend them, as long as you
learn how to chew fast.”
He discovered that his mind-set was important. “If I
complained about anything,” Ricky said after this ordeal was
over, “suddenly the frogs and leeches wouldn’t want to know
about me. But if I praised God for giving me nothing, then all
the luck seemed to come my way the next morning.” Food,
water, and shelter were his basic requirements for survival.
But as the days wore on and Megee grew weaker, he had to
look for eating alternatives that didn’t require expending so
much valuable energy.
He even tried to eat one of the cockroaches that had invaded
the little mud shelter he’d constructed. “Just bringing that
putrid, disgusting thing near my mouth created a smell strong
enough to make me want to spew,” Ricky explained later.
“But there was still the remote possibility they tasted like
peaches—I had to go through with it.”Ignoring the stench, he
shoved the cockroach headfirst into his mouth. But even a
starving man has his limits.
“I’m not sure if it was the stomach-churning taste or the smell
that got me in the end,” Megee said. “However, the result was
putrid enough to have me hurling uncontrollably out of the
283

end of my shelter within two seconds. I didn’t even manage to
chew on him in the end—he was spat out before he sucked his
last breath.”
Despite eventually losing half of his body weight, Ricky
Megee survived an incredible ten weeks. He did so by
instinctively solving the basic requirements of water, food,
and shelter—and adopting a survival mind-set that pulled him
through.
Desert sunset
284

DESERT SURVIVAL
285

6
“Success is not final, failure is not fatal. It is the courage to
continue that counts.”
—Winston Churchill
Water covers approximately seventy-five percent of the
earth’s surface. Seventy percent of that is made up of seas and
oceans. Assuming you will cross these vast expanses of water
in your lifetime, there’s always a chance that a crippled boat
or aircraft will make you lost at sea.
Survival at sea is especially challenging and will depend on
the rations and equipment you have available, your ingenuity,
and your will to survive. You can expect to face waves, high
winds, and possibly extremes of heat and cold.
Learn How to Use Available Survival Equipment
Whether traveling by boat or plane, take time to familiarize
yourself with the survival equipment on board. Find out
where it’s stowed and what it contains. Ask yourself: How
many life preservers, lifeboats, and rafts are there? Where are
they located? Are they stocked with food and medical
equipment? Familiarize yourself with exits and escape routes.
Aircraft
286

If you’re in an aircraft that goes down at sea, get clear and
upwind of the aircraft as soon as possible. Stay in the vicinity
of the aircraft until it sinks, but clear of any fuel-covered
water in case it catches fire.
Look for other survivors. If they’re in the water and you’re in
a lifeboat or raft, throw them a life preserver attached to a
line, or send a rescuer from the raft with a line secured to a
flotation device that will support the rescuer’s weight (and
help that person conserve energy). It’s very important that the
rescuer always wear a life preserver.
Be careful how you approach a panic-stricken person. Try to
approach any survivor who needs to be rescued from behind.
If possible, grab the back strap of the survivor’s life preserver
and pull that person to the closest available lifeboat or raft by
swimming sidestroke.
If you’re alone in the water and no rafts are available, find a
large piece of floating debris and try clinging to it or even
using it as a raft.
Understand that floating on your back expends the least
amount of energy. Spread your arms and legs, arch your back,
and lie down in the water. Your body’s natural buoyancy will
keep the top of your head above the water. If you relax and
breathe evenly in and out, you can keep your face above
water and even sleep in this position for short periods of time.
If you’re unable to float on your back or the sea is too rough,
float facedown in the water.
287

Get to a raft or lifeboat as quickly as possible.
Once you’re in a raft or lifeboat:
1. Give self aid and first-aid if necessary to others onboard.
2. Take seasickness pills, if available, by placing them under
your tongue and letting them dissolve. Remember that
288

vomiting caused by seasickness increases the danger of
dehydration.
3.
Salvage
all
floating
equipment,
including
rations,
containers, clothing, seat cushions, parachutes, or anything
else that can be useful. But make sure that these items contain
no sharp edges that can damage or puncture your lifeboat or
raft.
4. If you’re in the vicinity of other rafts or lifeboats, lash them
together so that they’re approximately 7 ½ meters apart. That
makes it easier for an aircrew to spot you.
5. Use all electronic and visual signaling devices to make
contact with rescuers.
6. Check to see if there’s an emergency radio or other
signaling devices onboard. If so, activate it immediately. If
you’re in enemy territory, use these devices only when you
think friendly aircraft are nearby.
7. Wipe away all fuel that might have spilled on the raft
because petroleum will weaken the raft and erode its glued
joints.
8. Check the inflation of your raft regularly. Chambers should
be full, but not tight. Remember that air expands in heat. So
on hot days, air might have to be released, and the chambers
inflated in cooler weather.
9. Try to stay close to the crash site so that you’re easier to
locate by rescuers. You can do this by throwing out the sea
anchor or by improving a drag with a bailing bucket or a roll
289

of clothing. When you deploy the sea anchor, make sure that
it’s open because a closed anchor will form a pocket that will
help propel the raft with the current.
10. Wrap the anchor rope with cloth so it doesn’t chaff the
raft.
11. Keep your raft as dry as possible, with everyone seated,
and the heaviest passenger in the center.
12. Waterproof items that might be affected by saltwater—
i.e., watches, compasses, matches, and lighters.
13. Ration food and water.
14. Together with the other survivors, take stock of your
situation and supplies, and plan for what it’s going to take to
survive.
15. Assign duties to each person—i.e., water collector,
lookout, radio operator, bailer.
16. If you’re in unfriendly waters, wait until nightfall before
paddling or hoisting a sail. Be sure aircraft are friendly before
trying to signal and get their attention.
17. If you’re in a cold climate, rig a windbreak, spray shield,
and canopy. Stay dry and insulate your body as much as
possible, including protecting yourself from the cold bottom
of the raft. Huddle with others to stay warm. Remember that
hypothermia occurs rapidly when you’re immersed in cold
water because of the decreased insulating value of wet
clothing.
290

18. If you’re in a hot climate, rig a sunshade or canopy,
leaving room for ventilation. Cover your exposed skin and
protect it with sunscreen if available.
Gingerroot settles the stomach and can help with sea
sickness.
Boat
If you have a supply of food, fishing equipment, and fresh
water, you can survive for a long time in a boat. If you don’t
have enough fresh water, make a rainwater collection system
with a tarp or raincoat that runs into a container. Or simply
place collection containers on the deck during rainy weather.
291

Drink at least a liter of fresh water a day, fish a little, and try
to relax.
Life raft
Life Raft
Life rafts are a lot like boats but have a greater chance of
sinking due to punctures, leaks, rips, or defects. Modern life
292

rafts are durable and come well-equipped for emergencies.
They can range from a one-man raft to larger 25-man rafts.
They’re usually equipped with some combination of the
following:
• Covered deck
• Paddles
• Insulated flooring
• Bailing buckets
• Ladders
• Flares
• Water collection pouches
• Signaling mirrors
• Reflective tape
• Fishing kits
In the Water
If you’re in the water without a boat or raft, you have your
work cut out for you. Wear an inflatable safety vest, if
available. It will keep you floating. If you’re in cold water,
pull your knees to your chest, which will help your body
retain heat and resist hypothermia.
293

If you can’t swim well but need to cross a large body of
water, use your pants as a flotation device. Simply remove
your pants, tie off the legs, then allow them to fill them with
air (a skill often taught in U.S. military boot camp—all
services). Raise the pants over your head in the water and
they’ll act like a life jacket.
Drinking Water
Drinking water is vital to your survival. With it alone, you
can survive for ten days or more. When you consume it, wet
your lips, tongue, and throat before swallowing.
Protect your freshwater supplies from saltwater contamination
and use it efficiently. Calculate daily water rations by
measuring the amount of fresh water you have, the output of
solar stills and any desalting kit, and the number and physical
condition of the people on your lifeboat or raft.
If you run out of fresh water, don’t eat. Do not drink seawater
or urine!
To reduce water loss through perspiration, soak your clothes
in seawater and wring them out before putting them on again.
But do this only when necessary because you can develop
saltwater boils and rashes from wet clothes.
Keep a clean tarpaulin ready to catch water from showers. A
small amount of seawater mixed with the rainwater you catch
is not a cause for concern. The water will still be safe to drink
and won’t cause a physical reaction.
294

At night, hang the tarpaulin like a sunshade and turn up the
edges to collect dew. Dew can also be collected from the
sides of the lifeboat or raft using a sponge.
If solar stills are available, set up the stills immediately.
If you have desalting kits in addition to solar stills, save the
desalting kits for overcast periods when you can’t use solar
stills, or catch rainwater.
In arctic areas, old sea ice, which is bluish, has rounded
corners and splinters easily, is nearly salt free, and can be
used as a source of water. Avoid new ice, which is gray,
milky looking, and hard. Water from icebergs is fresh, but
should only be used in case of an emergency. Icebergs are
extremely dangerous.
If you run out of fresh water, you can drink the aqueous fluids
found along the spine and in the eyes of large fish. Cut the
fish in half to get to the fluid along the spine, and suck the
fluid of the eye. Avoid any other fish fluids, as these are rich
in fat and protein and will use up more water during digestion
than they will supply.
Sleep and rest are the best ways to endure periods with little
or no food and water.
Food
When at sea, fish will be your main source of food. With a
few exceptions, fish caught out of sight of land are safe to eat.
Fish nearer to shore are more likely to be poisonous. Some
295

fish
that
are
normally
edible—like
red
snapper
and
barracuda—are poisonous when caught in atolls and reefs.
When fishing with a line, avoid handling it with bare hands or
tying the line to your lifeboat or raft. Use gloves, if available,
or a cloth to handle fish.
Don’t eat fish that have pale, shiny gills; sunken eyes; flabby
skin; or an unpleasant odor. Good fish smell like saltwater.
Cut fish that you don’t eat immediately into long, thin strips
and hang them to dry. Dried fish will remain edible for
several days. Fish that hasn’t been cleaned or dried will spoil
in half a day. In warm areas, gut and clean fish immediately
after catching them.
The heart, blood, intestinal wall, and liver of most fish are
edible. Also edible are the partly digested smaller fish that
you may find in the stomachs of large fish. Sea turtles, eels,
and sea snakes are edible. But be careful when handling sea
snakes because their bites are poisonous.
All
shark
meat
is
edible—either
raw,
dried,
or
cooked—except for the Greenland shark, which contains high
levels of vitamin A. Shark meat spoils rapidly, so bleed it
immediately and soak it in several changes of water.
Fishing
Fishing
line
can
be
made
from
shoelaces,
parachute
suspension line, or pieces of thread that have begun to unravel
from tarpaulin or canvas. Simply tie them together until you
have a usable fishing line.
296

If you have a grapple, or can improvise one out of available
materials, use it to hook seaweed, which can contain crabs,
shrimp, and even small fish. Seaweed itself is edible but
contains salt. Only eat it if you have sufficient drinking water.
Use small fish remains and the guts from birds as bait. A net
improvised from cloth can be used to catch small fish.
Be careful not to puncture your lifeboat or raft with hooks or
sharp instruments. And be careful not to capsize by trying to
catch large fish.
Don’t fish when you see large sharks. If you see a large
school of fish, try to move closer to them.
At night, light attracts fish. So if you have a light, try fishing
at night.
During the day, fish are attracted to shady areas. You might
find them under your lifeboat, raft, or floating seaweed.
A spear made out of a knife tied to an oar blade can be used
to spear large fish. Tie the knife tightly so that you don’t lose
it, and get large fish into your craft quickly so that they don’t
slip off the blade.
Birds
All birds are edible. Try towing a bright piece of metal behind
you to attract birds. It’s possible to catch birds with your
hands or with a noose. Bait the noose in the center with a
piece of fish if available, and wait for the bird’s feet to enter
before you pull it tight.
297

All parts of a bird are usable. The feathers can provide
insulation, and the entrails and feet can be used as bait.
Shoelaces could be used in place of fishing line.
Health Issues and Hazards
Seasickness
298

The motion of your lifeboat or raft can result in nausea and
vomiting, which in turn can lead to dehydration, exhaustion,
and loss of will.
Treat seasickness by not eating food until the nausea is gone.
Lie down and rest and take seasickness pills if available.
Some survivors have reported that erecting a canopy or using
the horizon as a focal point has helped them overcome
seasickness.
Saltwater Sores
These are caused by a break in skin that has been exposed to
saltwater for an extended period of time. If scabs and pus
form, do not open or drain. Flush the sore with fresh water
and allow to dry. Apply an antiseptic if you have one.
299

Shark
300

Sunburn
Try to stay in the shade and keep your head and skin covered.
Especially vulnerable are backs of ears, the skin under your
chin, and eyelids. Remember that sunlight reflects off the
water, so you get sunburn not only from above but from
below.
If glare from the water causes your eyes to become bloodshot
and inflamed, bandage them lightly.
301

Constipation
Do not take a laxative, as this will cause further dehydration.
Exercise as much as possible and drink water.
Sharks
Sharks will present the greatest danger. Whales, stingrays,
and porpoises might appear threatening, but they pose little
danger in the open sea.
Consider any shark more than one meter long to the
dangerous. But keep in mind that out of hundreds of shark
species, only about twenty of them are known to attack man.
Those that are dangerous include the great white shark,
hammerhead, mako, tiger, gray, lemon, sand, nurse, bull, and
oceanic whitetip shark.
Sharks found in tropical and subtropical waters are more
likely to be aggressive. They possess an acute sense of smell
and become excited by the smell of blood. They’re also very
sensitive to vibrations in the water.
Sharks feed all day and night, but most attacks on humans
have occurred during daylight
and especially
the late
afternoon.
When you’re in the water, stay with other swimmers, watch
for sharks, and avoid urinating, defecating, and vomiting in
the water.
302

If you’re in the water and feel that a shark attack is imminent,
splash and yell to try to keep the shark at bay. If you’re
attacked, kick and strike the shark on the gills or eyes.
If you’re in a raft or lifeboat and see sharks, stop fishing,
don’t throw garbage overboard, keep quiet and stop moving
around.
If a shark attacks your raft, hit it with anything you have
except your hands.
Hypothermia
Body thermal conductivity in water is twenty-six times faster
than when exposed to air. If you have a life raft, board as
soon as possible.
The use of an immersion suit or other buoyant thermal
protective device will greatly enhance survival time. (This
chart is for general reference only.)
Detecting Land
Deep water is dark green or dark blue. Shallow water—which
might mean that land is nearby—is usually lighter in color.
In the tropics, reflected sunlight off shallow lagoons or coral
reefs often gives a greenish tint to the sky. In the arctic,
303

light-colored reflections on clouds often indicate ice fields or
snow-covered land.
If you see a fixed cumulous cloud in a clear sky or in a sky
where other clouds are moving, it’s often hovering over or
downwind of an island.
Birds are another indicator that land is nearby. The direction
that flocks of birds fly at sunrise or dusk may indicate the
location of land.
Nighttime fog, mist, or rain may carry with it the smells and
sounds of land.
Approaching Land
Rafting ashore in strong surf can be dangerous. If you have a
choice, avoid a nighttime beach landing.
Try to land on the leeward side of an island or on a point of
land that juts into the water. Look for gaps in the surf line and
steer toward them. Avoid coral reefs, rocky areas, rip
currents, and strong tidal currents.
If you’re approaching the shore through surf, take down the
mast (if you have one), put on clothes and shoes, and inflate
your life vest. Trail the sea anchor using as much line as you
have, and use the oars or paddles to adjust the anchor to keep
its line taut. This will kept the raft pointed toward shore and
prevent the current from pushing the stern forward and
capsizing you.
304

Steer to the sea side of large waves, which will help ride you
in. If you’re facing strong winds and heavy surf, you have to
move the craft rapidly through the oncoming crest to avoid
being turned broadside or thrown end over end. Try to avoid
meeting large waves at the moment they break. If the surf is
medium with no wind or an offshore wind, keep the craft
from passing over the waves too rapidly so it doesn’t drop
suddenly after topping the crest.
When you near the beach, ride in the crest of a wave and
paddle in as far as you can. Don’t get out of the craft until it
has grounded. Then jump out quickly and beach it.
In the unlikely event you feel conditions make it impossible
to make it ashore via craft, jump out of the boat and
sidestroke or breaststroke ashore wearing your shoes and
clothing. In moderate surf, you can ride in on the back of a
small wave by swimming forward with it. If the surf is strong,
swim toward shore in the trough between waves. When you
see a new wave approaching, face it, sink to the bottom, and
wait for it to pass. Then push to the surface and swim forward
until the next wave approaches.
Try to stay away from rocky shores. If you have to land on
one, avoid the locations where waves hit high. Watch out for
the white spray (an indicator of high-hitting waves). Instead,
look for places where the waves roll up the rocks and
approach slowly. Also, look for heavy growths of seaweed
because the water will be quieter there. Instead of trying to
swim through the seaweed, crawl over the top of it with
overhand movements.
305

When you reach the shore, let a wave carry you in. Face the
shore with your feet in front of you, three feet lower than your
head. This way your feet will absorb the shock. Keep your
hands ready to grab onto the rocks and hold on.
If you fail the first time, swim with your hands only, and as
the next wave approaches assume the sitting position again
with your feet facing forward.
Rescue
When you see a rescue craft approach, whether it’s a ship or
aircraft, immediately clear all lines and gear that could get in
the way. Secure all loose items and take down canopies and
sails. Fully inflate your life preserver and stay in the raft until
you’re instructed to leave. It’s important to follow all
instructions given by rescue personnel.
In the case of an unassisted helicopter rescue, first secure all
loose equipment in the craft, then deploy the sea anchor. With
an inflated craft, partially deflate it, then grasp the handhold
and roll out. Allow the recovery device from the helicopter to
reach the water’s surface; while holding onto the raft
handhold with one hand, grasp the recovery device with the
other. Climb onto the device, secure yourself, then signal the
hoist operator that you’re ready to go up.
Coastal Rescue
In cases where your craft isn’t sighted by rescuers, you might
have to land along the coast before you’re rescued. To
maximize your chances of being rescued, it’s better to remain
306

close to the shore instead of going inland. But during
wartime, the enemy is likely to patrol most coastlines
Coastal Health Hazards
When surviving along a coastline, you’ll need to look out for
coral, poisonous and aggressive fish, crocodiles, sea urchins,
sea biscuits, sponges, anemones, and tides and undertow.
307

Life preserver
Life vests
Coral
Coral can inflict painful cuts that have to be cleaned
thoroughly to prevent infection. DO NOT use iodine to
disinfect any coral cuts because some coral polyps feed on
iodine, and the application of iodine can cause them to grow
inside your flesh.
308

Poisonous Fish
Many reef fish contain poisons that are present in all parts of
the fish, but especially in the liver, intestines, and eggs. Since
fish toxins are water soluble, no amount of cooking will
neutralize them. Also, birds are much less susceptible to the
poisons. So don’t think it’s safe for you to eat to eat a certain
type of fish just because you see a bird eat it.
Fish toxins produce numbness of the lips, tongue, toes, and
tips of the fingers; severe itching, nausea, vomiting, loss of
speech, dizziness, and a paralysis that can eventually result in
death.
Certain species of coastal fish are dangerous to even touch.
Stonefish and toadfish have venomous spines that can cause
agonizing pain but are seldom fatal. Some jellyfish can inflict
a very painful sting if they touch you with their tenteacles
Many stingrays have a poisonous barb in their tail. Other reef
fish can deliver electric shocks.
309

Barracuda
310

Jellyfish
311

Crocodiles
312

Sea urchin
Aggressive Fish
Avoid sharks, barracuda, sea bass, moray eels, and sea
snakes. All of them will bite if disturbed. Barracuda have
been known to attack swimmers and divers wearing shiny
objects.
Crocodiles
313

Crocodiles
inhabit
tropical
saltwater
bays
and
mangrove-bordered estuaries and range up to sixty-five
kilometers into the open sea. They’re commonly found in the
remote areas of the East Indies and Southeast Asia. Consider
any crocodile over one meter long to be dangerous, especially
females guarding their nests. Crocodile meat is an excellent
source of protein, if you can trap or kill one.
Sea Urchins, Sea Biscuits, Sponges, and Anemones
These creatures—which are usually found in shallow tropical
water near coral formations—can cause extreme pain but are
rarely fatal. If stepped on, they slip fine needles of lime or
silica into the skin, where they break off and fester. If
possible, remove the spines and treat the injury for infection.
Tides and Undertow
If caught in a large wave’s undertow, push off the bottom or
swim to the surface and proceed shoreward in a trough
between waves. Do not fight against the pull of the undertow.
Swim with it or perpendicular to it until it loses strength; then
swim for shore.
Coastal Food
Obtaining food along a coastline is generally not a problem.
There are many types of seaweed and animal life that are easy
to find and safe to eat.
Mollusks
314

You can eat mussels, limpets, clams, sea snails, octopuses,
squids, and sea slugs. Avoid the blue-ringed octopus and cone
shells. Also beware of “red tides” (algal blooms) that make
mollusks poisonous.
Mussels
315

Cuttlefish
316

317

Barnacles
Worms
Coastal worms are generally edible but are better used as fish
bait. Avoid bristle worms that look like fuzzy caterpillars and
tube worms that have sharp-edged tubes. Arrowworms, found
in the sand, are edible either fresh or dried.
Crabs, Lobsters, and Barnacles
They are seldom dangerous and are excellent sources of
protein. Look out for the pincers of larger crabs or lobsters, as
they can crush a man’s finger. Many species also have spines
on their shells, so it’s advisable to wear gloves when catching
them. Barnacles can cause scrapes or cuts and are difficult to
detach from their anchor, but the larger species especially are
an excellent food source.
Sea Urchins
Although they’re a good source of food, they can cause
painful injuries when stepped on or touched. Handle them
with gloves, and remove all spines.
Sea Cucumbers
These are an important food source in the Indo-Pacific
regions. Remove the five muscular strips that run the length
of the body, and eat them smoked, pickled, or cooked.
Sea Survival Stories
318

San Blas Fishermen
Four Mexican fishermen—Salvador Ordonez, Jesus Vindaña,
Lucio Rendón, and a man called El Farsero—and the owner
of a small fishing boat, Juan David, left the fishing village of
San Blas on October 28, 2005, on a shark fishing expedition.
Heavy currents caught the boat and carried it nearly 5,000
miles out to sea. Three of the five men survived and claimed
that they stayed alive by catching and eating fish and
seabirds. They weathered storms, and staved off thirst by
collecting rainwater. A Taiwanese fishing boat rescued the
men on August 9, 2006, near the Marshall Islands, nine
months and nine days after they left shore, making their feat
of survival one of the longest on record.
Mr. Ordóñez, a thirty-seven-year-old native of Oaxaca who
was known in San Blas for carrying a Bible everywhere and
getting into the occasional bar fight, said he worried at the
start of the trip because the boat’s owner had not packed
enough provisions for the usual shark-fishing trip, which lasts
from three days to a week.
Once disaster struck and the men found themselves being
sucked out into the Pacific Ocean, they turned to what they
knew best: fishing. Having some knives and other equipment
aboard, they fashioned hooks from engine parts and lines
from cables. Mr. Ordóñez, who had taken a course on
surviving at sea a year before, earned the nickname “the cat”
for his ability to sneak up on seabirds.
The men survived on fish, birds, and fish blood. But the
boat’s owner, Juan David, and El Farscero had trouble
digesting the raw food, and became sick and started vomiting
319

blood. They both died after three months and, according to
the three survivors, had to be thrown overboard. As they
drifted for months Ordonez, Vindaña, and Rendón passed the
time singing ballads, dancing, pretending to play guitar, and
reading aloud to each other from the Bible. Little things took
on tremendous importance. They kept track of time with Mr.
Rendón’s wristwatch.
The worst part of the voyage came in December and January,
when several large storms hit and the men could catch few
fish. “We were afraid we would sink,” Mr. Vidaña said. “The
longest we went without food was about thirteen days, when
we had only one seabird to eat.”
Poon Lim
Born in China in 1917, Poon Lim was working as a second
steward on the British merchant ship SS Ben Lomond when it
was intercepted and torpedoed by a German U-boat on
November 23, 1942. As the ship was sinking in the Atlantic
Ocean off the southern coast of Africa, Poon Lim grabbed a
life jacket and jumped overboard before the ship’s boilers
exploded. After approximately two hours in the water, he
noticed an empty life raft and climbed into it. The raft
contained a couple of tins of biscuits, a ten-gallon jug of
water, some flares, and an electric torch.
Poon Lim kept himself alive by drinking only a few swallows
of water and taking two biscuits a day. He kept himself in
shape by swimming around the raft twice a day. He took a
wire from the electric torch and made it into a fish hook and
used a hemp rope as a fishing line. When he captured a fish,
he cut it open with the edge of a biscuit tin and used half of it
320

for bait. Later he captured seagulls for food. He used the
canvas of the life jacket to collect rainwater.
Twice other vessels passed nearby—a freighter and U.S.
Navy patrol planes—but they didn’t notice him. Poon Lim
counted the days with notches on the side of the raft. On April
5, 1943, he saw a sail on the horizon and managed to attract
attention. Three Brazilian fishermen rescued him and took
him to Belem three days later.
During his four-month ordeal Poon Lim had lost twenty
pounds, but he was able to walk unaided. He later found out
that only eleven of the ship’s 55-man crew had been rescued.
King George VI honored him with a British Empire Medal
and the British Navy used his tale in its manuals of survival
techniques. His employers gave him a gold watch.
Titanic lifeboats on way to Carpathia
The Titanic
The “unsinkable” RMS Titanic was the biggest and most
luxurious passenger liner of her time. On April 10, 1912, the
321

Titanic left England on its maiden voyage with about 2,200
people onboard, including many of the world’s rich and
famous. Four days later, a lookout spotted an iceberg directly
ahead. Titanic reversed her engines and tried to turn away, but
it was too late. The Titanic hit the iceberg, which gouged out
250 feet (eighty-three yards) of hull and popped out at least
six rivets below the waterline. Water poured through the holes
from
the
rivets
and
flooded
the
first
five
watertight
compartments at the front of the ship. The weight of the
flooded compartments pulled Titanic headfirst into the ocean.
Over the next two hours, the Titanic broke into at least two
pieces and sunk.
Even though she carried more lifeboats than were required by
law, there were only enough to accommodate about half of
the passengers onboard. And in the panic, most of the
available lifeboats were launched only half or a quarter full.
Only two out of the eighteen launched lifeboats returned to
rescue passengers from the water after the wreck.
More than 1,500 people died. Many went down with the ship
or died of hypothermia after jumping overboard into the frigid
water. There was another ship in the vicinity, but her wireless
operator had already left his post for the night, so he didn’t
pick up Titanic’s calls for help. Fewer than 700 people
survived.
The Whale ship Essex
In 1820, when the Essex set sail from Nantucket Island, off
Rhode Island, on a routine whale hunt, the crew of twenty
men had no idea that fifteen months later they would find
themselves adrift in the vast Pacific at the mercy of the
322

elements and their own human failings. But like the classic
novel it inspired—Herman Melville’s Moby Dick—the Essex
was hit by an enraged sperm whale that struck just beneath
the anchor.
Vessels prepared for water rescue
323

According to the account of crew member Owen Chase: “I
turned around and saw him about one hundred rods (550
yards) directly ahead of us, coming down with twice his
ordinary speed [around twenty-four knots or forty-four kph],
and it appeared with tenfold fury and vengeance in his aspect.
The surf flew in all directions about him with the continual
violent thrashing of his tail. His head about half out of the
water, and in that way he came upon us, and again struck the
ship.”
The whale crushed the bow and drove the 283-ton vessel
backwards into the ocean. Then it disengaged its head from
the shattered timbers and swam off, never to be seen again.
Able to salvage only three small harpoon boats and a few
meager supplies, the crew made the fateful choice to sail back
east to South America rather than west to any of several
Pacific islands. With an innate fear of cannibalism rumored to
exist among native tribes, they preferred to brave the
familiarity of the ocean. For the next ninety-three days they
would come to question the wisdom of that decision as the
trade winds and storms blew them farther and farther from
their destination. The sad irony is that many times during
their 3,000-mile ordeal of hunger, thirst, and death they would
have been within reach of a lifesaving island if they had only
turned west.
As members of the crew began to die of thirst, the three
harpoon
boats
landed
on
uninhabited
Henderson
Island—roughly 1,350 miles south-southeast of Tahiti and
4,100 miles west of Panama—within the British territory of
the Pitcairn Islands. There the men found fresh water and
324

gorged themselves on birds, fish, and vegetation. Within a
week they had exhausted the island’s resources.
Three men—William Wright, Seth Weeks, and Thomas
Chapple—opted to stay behind on Henderson. The remaining
Essex crewmen resumed their journey, but within three days
had exhausted the fish and birds they had collected for the
voyage, leaving only a small reserve of bread salvaged from
the Essex. One by one, the men began to die.
By the time the last of the eight survivors were rescued on
April 5, 1821, the corpses of seven fellow sailors had been
consumed. All eight returned to the sea within months of their
return to Nantucket.
325

SURVIVAL AT SEA
326

7
“If hope is out there, hope can get you through.”
—NASA
Astronaut
Jerry
Linenger,
who
spent
months
stranded on the Russian Space Station
Main Tips to Remember
The only person you can ultimately count on is yourself.
No one else can give you the mental will, physical stamina,
and common sense that you’re going to need to survive. So
don’t depend on others—you may be alone! Make your plans,
pack your own survival kit, and if something unplanned
happens when you are on your own in the wild, be prepared
to take care of your own needs as well as the needs of your
teammates.
This
self-sufficient
attitude
is
empowering
in
itself.
Remember that your life depends on what you do, not on the
chance that a teammate will be there to do for you what you
can’t do for yourself.
Always leave behind detailed plans and timetables with a
trusted person.
That way, if you’re missing, a search party is likely to be sent
out sooner than later if you fail to arrive back when expected.
327

Prepare for the six contingencies.
1. Becoming lost. It’s not enough to rely on your good sense
of direction. Always carry at least one compass, a map, and
GPS and a SPOT or locating device.
2. Darkness. With darkness we shift from relying primarily on
seeing
to
relying
primarily
on
hearing.
This
is
an
uncomfortable change for some people. Remember that
darkness can be your friend. Treat it with respect, and don’t
move into areas where you could get hurt by your inability to
see.
3. Being stranded. There are countless contingencies under
which you could be stuck in the wilderness for an extended
period of time. Anticipate that this could happen and plan for
ways to alert others and make your way to safety.
4. Illness or injury. Any time you go into the wilderness,
there’s always the possibility that you can become injured or
ill. Practice and develop your own wilderness first-aid skills.
5. Extreme weather. There is no such thing as bad weather,
just different types of weather. Always be prepared. Snow,
rain, or extreme heat or cold can impact your ability to
survive. Before heading out, make sure you have the proper
clothing, water, and the ability to shelter yourself for
extended periods of time.
If lost, stop and do a map study.
Don’t move unless you know where you are and where you
are going. Many very experienced point men and navigators
328

have become lost or disoriented in the wild. Remember that
the consequences of panic can be fatal. Take a break, do a
good map study, reevaluate your situation, and allow the
adrenaline that has flooded your system and put you in fight
or flight mode to subside.
Assess your situation as objectively as you can.
1. Treat any injuries—yours or your teammates. Self aid and
buddy aid. Your health is most important for survival.
2. What needs to be done to assure your safety? Do you need
to move to a safer area?
3. Observe the area of your location. What are the hazards?
Are there enemy or friendly forces in the immediate area?
What are the advantages? Is there water nearby? What can
you take advantage of to help you survive?
4. Plan your next move carefully. Work out a plan in your
head first. If you’re satisfied with it, proceed. If not, give
yourself time to come up with a better alternative.
Take stock of your supplies and immediate needs.
A healthy man can survive for several weeks without food
and several days without water. So water is your most
important requirement. Under normal circumstances, the
human body requires two quarts of water daily to maintain
adequate hydration.
Don’t ration the water you have to last for many days. Drink
what you need. It’s better to have water in your body than in a
329

bottle or canteen. Conserve water lost through sweating by
wearing a hat, sitting in the shade, moving only at night, and
so on.
In most terrain, you will eventually find water when moving
downhill. Watch animals, or follow their tracks. They’ll
usually lead to water. Birds tend to congregate near water,
too. Remember that water from streams and ponds should be
boiled before drinking or purified by other means—tablets,
straw, filter, boiling etc.
Signal.
Always carry a whistle, mirror, and matches to start a fire.
Smoke is visible from far away in the day.
330

Maps
331

Raccoon footprints
Find food.
Food isn’t an immediate concern unless you’re reasonably
sure that rescue is many days or weeks off. As a general rule,
avoid plant life unless you know for a fact that something is
edible. If it walks, swims, flies, slithers, or crawls, it’s
332

probably safe to eat. All fur-bearing animals are edible. All
birds are edible. Grubs found in rotten logs are edible, as are
almost all insects.
Fire requires three elements:
Oxygen, fuel, and a source of heat. Is your fuel thin and dry
enough? Is your heat source hot enough to light the tinder? Is
there enough oxygen reaching the point where the heat meets
the fuel? Identify the problem and proceed.
Survival is the ability and the desire to stay alive,
sometimes alone and under adverse circumstances.
Understand and master each part of this definition.
1. Ability. Be proficient at building shelter, starting a fire,
signaling for help, and staying hydrated.
2. Desire. Regardless of how bad the situation might be, never
lose the will to survive and always maintain a positive
attitude.
3.
Stay
alive.
Your
ability
to
effectively
deal
with
life-threatening medical situations is of the highest priority.
Stay current with your emergency medical skills.
4. Under adverse conditions. The more you know about your
environment ahead of time, the greater your advantage.
5. Alone. Never count on the help of others. Be self-proficient
since you may end up alone.
333

6. Until rescued, be patient. It’s your job to keep yourself and
your teammates alive.
Learn to deal with the enemies of survival.
1. Pain
2. Cold and/or Heat
3. Thirst
4. Hunger
5. Fatigue
The Rule of Threes
A human being can survive:
•
three minutes without air
•
three hours without a regulated body temperature
•
three days without water
•
three weeks without food
In summary, here is a list of common-sense survival tips:
1. Always carry a map, at least one compass, a GPS and a
SPOT or something similar.
2. Dress using layers to avoid overheating.
334

3. Carry water and water purification tablets or filter when
possible. During the map studies, always identify alternate
water sources.
4. Carry high-calorie energy food such as protein bars in your
second and third line gear.
Compass
335

The Case of Aron Ralston
Can you imagine amputating your arm with a blunt knife? As
excruciatingly painful and inconceivable as it sounds, that
turned out to be the only option left to 28-year-old Aron
Ralston after an 800-pound boulder fell on his arm, pinning it
to a canyon wall.
From midday Saturday, April 26, 2003, until midday
Thursday, May 1, Ralston was stuck in a remote area of
Canyonlands National Park in Utah alone and unable to free
himself. He had little food and water. No one would even
wonder where he was until he didn’t show up for work on
Tuesday. Unable to sit, lie down, use his right arm, or sleep,
he knew that he was in for an excruciatingly difficult time.
Those 120 hours of what he calls “uninterrupted experience”
tested to the fullest his physical, mental, emotional, and
spiritual being.
Finally, on May 1, 2003, he did the unthinkable, first using
the boulder to leverage his arm until the bones snapped and
then sawing away at muscle and tendon with his pocketknife.
He then rappelled down a sixty-five-foot wall and was later
found by hikers as he walked back to his car.
He survived, wrote a best-selling book about his experience
(Between a Rock and a Hard Place), and continues to climb.
He later admitted that his big mistake was not telling anyone
where he was going.
336

Canyonlands National Park, Utah
337

BASIC SURVIVAL TIPS
338

8
“Water is the driving force of all nature.”
—Leonardo Da Vinci
339

340

Pond
Getting lost or stranded in the wild is something that can
happen to anyone, whether you’re a Navy SEAL, experienced
outdoorsmen, hiker, tourist, or just someone out for a
weekend drive. Anybody can be forced to deal with
circumstances beyond their control, alone and lost, with only
their wits to rely on for survival.
341

The human body is composed of up to seventy-eight percent
water. So it’s no surprise that the single-most important thing
you need to live is not food; it’s water. The good news is that
if you’re resourceful and know where to look, you can find or
collect good drinking water in just about any environment on
earth.
The Institute of Medicine currently recommends a daily
intake of approximately 2 to 2 ½ quarts of water to replace
the water lost through normal body functions—urination,
defecation, breathing, and sweating. All of the chemical and
electrical activities that take place in the human body take
place in a water environment; when water is in short supply,
these activities begin to malfunction.
It’s important to understand that many people begin their
survival already dehydrated due to stress and other factors.
They often continue to dehydrate further when water supplies
are limited and the quality of any available water is suspect.
People needing water, but fearful that it is contaminated with
Giardia, Cryptosporidium, or other harmful pathogens, often
put off drinking or choose not to use the water at all.
In North America, as a general rule, it is better to drink
available fresh water.
If the water contains harmful pathogens, the onset of
symptoms will usually be days, if not weeks away. By then
the individual will hopefully have access to medical care.
The one exception to this rule is that certain lakes mainly
found
in
the
western
United
States
contain
high
concentrations of calcium carbonate and calcium bicarbonate.
342

This water is not potable. Lakes containing these substances
are usually easy to identify because the calcium salts leached
from the soil are deposited in the form of white powder
around the shorelines. This water tastes terrible and should
not be consumed unless there is absolutely no other water
source available.
In
other
parts
of
the
world,
especially
developing
countries, drinking water that has not been disinfected is
NOT recommended.
Viruses such as hepatitis, not commonly found in North
American waters, are prevalent here and can quickly cause
incapacitating illness.
Finding Water
Throughout much of North America, fresh water can usually
be found in open sources such as lakes, ponds, rivers, and
streams. In most cases, it can be obtained fairly easily.
Remember that water always seeks the lowest level possible
and that, if present, some form of vegetation will most likely
grow nearby.
The best way to locate water is from a vantage point that
allows you to scan the surrounding countryside. Slowly and
methodically look for indicators such as green vegetation,
flocks of birds, trails left by domestic and wild animals, and
even large formations of rock that can contain natural springs.
Check
for
low-lying
areas—such
as
depressions
or
sinks—where rainfall or melting snow is likely to collect.
Water can often be found in these areas long after the last
precipitation, especially if they are shaded.
343

Water sources like these should be checked carefully since
they’re often contaminated with debris that has been washed
into the drainage. Finding the remains of animals that have
died nearby or in the water and other similar contaminants
will necessitate boiling the water, the use of halogens (iodine
or chlorine), or the use of a mechanical purification pump.
The quantity of water produced by seeps and springs tends to
vary greatly. Some of them produce no more than a few
teaspoons of water per hour. In other cases, gallons of water
can flow from the ground in minutes. Where the output is
slow and small, use the flat edge of the mouth on a plastic bag
to scoop up the water from a shallow source; if it is flowing,
use it to collect the water as it runs into the bag. A short piece
of vinyl aquarium hose also works well for sucking up water
from shallow collections or to recover water from narrow
cracks in the rocks.
Also, keep an eye out for man-made sources of water such as
windmills,
wells,
tanks,
dams,
and
irrigation
canals.
Windmills are common in parts of North America, especially
in areas where little surface water exists. In most cases, the
water pumped to the surface is collected in a nearby tank or
pumped directly into a trough from which livestock can drink.
Where an open source is not available, it may be necessary to
dismantle the piping associated with the windmill to gain
access to the water.
344

Mountain lake
If you find an abandoned well where the rope and bucket
typically used to lift water from these wells is missing,
improvise a means to lower a container down into the well to
retrieve the water. If you don’t have a container, an item of
clothing can be lowered into the water to serve as a sponge.
In arid areas, particularly in the western and southwestern
United States, many state wildlife agencies and conservation
organizations
have
installed
rainwater
collectors
called
“guzzlers.” These are designed to gather precipitation and
345

feed it into a holding tank, where it remains until it is either
consumed by animals or evaporates.
Just because there’s no water visible on the surface of the
ground, that doesn’t mean that it’s not present in the soil in
sufficient quantity to be collected. Locate low-lying areas
where water is most likely to have accumulated and dig down
until damp layers of soil are found. The hole should be about
a foot in diameter. Over time, water may seep into the hole
where it can be collected. If no indicators of subsurface water
are present, dig a hole in the outside bend of a dry riverbed.
Look for a location where the centrifugal force of flowing
water has eroded the outer bend, creating a depression where
the last remnants of water flowing downriver will have
accumulated.
Groundwater collected this way is likely to be muddy, but
straining it through cloth will clean it and will get you by in
the short term. It’s important to remember that you’re taking a
risk anytime you drink ground water without purifying it.
Rain is a great source of drinking water and in most rural
areas can be consumed without risk of disease or illness. If
you have a poncho or some plastic sheeting, spread it out and
tie the corners to trees a few feet off the ground. Find a
container and tie the plastic on a slant so that the rainwater
can drain into it. If you can’t find a container, devise a
makeshift water bag by tying the plastic level on all four
corners but letting it sag in the middle so that the rainwater
can collect there. If the rainwater tastes different than what
you’re used to, it’s because it lacks the minerals that are
found in groundwater and in streams. If you don’t have a
poncho, rain gear, or piece of plastic, remember that water
346

will collect on the upper surfaces of any material (it doesn’t
have to be waterproof) and drain to the lowest point, where it
can be collected in a bucket or other container.
Melt snow before you consume it because if you eat it frozen,
you’ll reduce your body temperature, which can lead to
dehydration. The best technique to convert snow into water is
by using what military survival schools call a water machine.
Make a bag out of any available porous fabric (you can use a
T-shirt), fill it with snow, and hang it near (but not directly
over) a fire. Place a container under the bag to collect the
water. By continually filling the bag with snow you’ll keep it
from burning.
If your circumstances don’t allow you to make a fire, you can
melt snow with the heat of your body. But the process is slow.
Put several cups of snow in any available waterproof
container (preferably a soft plastic water bag, locking
sandwich bag, or something similar) and place it between
layers of your clothing or in your sleeping bag. Since the
amount of heat needed to convert snow to water is large and
the amount of body heat available is finite, only small
quantities can be melted at a time.
347

Water droplets collecting on leaf
Collecting Water
Heavy dew can be a good source of potable water. Before the
sun rises, tie absorbent cloth around your shins and walk
through high grass. This way you might be able to collect
enough water for an early morning drink.
348

Bamboo
Fruits, coconuts, cacti, vines, palm trees, and bamboo can also
be good sources of liquid sustenance. Bend the top of a green
bamboo stalk down about a foot off the ground and tie it off.
Cut a few inches off the tip, put a container underneath, and
leave it overnight. The next day, you’re likely to find a nice
amount of clear, drinkable water.
Vines
Water-producing vines varying in size from the diameter of a
pencil up to the thickness of a man’s forearm can be found
throughout much of the southeastern United States. The
thicker the vine, the more water it is capable of producing.
Select the thickest one first.
Use a sharp knife or a machete to sever the tough, woody
vine. Vines that exude a white latex sap or those that produce
a colored or foul-smelling sap should be avoided. If no sap is
observed, or if the sap that is observed is clear and without
aroma, remove a twenty-four-inch section, severing the
higher end first and then the lower end. If the lower end is cut
first, the water contained within the vine is drawn up by
capillary action and far less water will drain out by the time
the upper end is severed.
349

A Drinking water out of bamboo
350

Bamboo
351

Drinking water out of a vine
352

353

Tropical vines
354

355

Cactus
Once removed, hold the section of vine vertically and the
water in it will drain into a container (or a cupped hand),
where it should be evaluated. Any liquid that is colored
should not be consumed. Liquid that has an unpleasant aroma
other than a faint “woody” smell should not be consumed but
can be used to satisfy any hygiene needs. Taste a small
amount of the water. Water that has a disagreeable flavor
other than a slightly “earthy” or “woody” taste should not be
utilized for drinking. Hold a small amount of water in your
mouth for a few moments to determine if there is any burning
or other disagreeable sensation. If any irritation occurs, the
water should be discarded. Liquid that looks like water,
smells like water, and tastes like water is water and can be
safely
consumed
in
large
quantities
without
further
purification.
Cactus
Cactus as a source of water is often overrated. But if you
decide to approach one, use caution, as the thorns usually
cause infections. Use sharp sticks or knifes to handle cactus
safely. Any injury from a cactus plant should be treated
immediately to reduce the risk of infection.
Although all cacti can be used for gaining additional
moisture, it can take a great deal of work to open a full-sized
barrow cactus and fight with the spiny thorns that protect it. If
you decide to take on a cactus, do it in the cool of the
evening. Using caution, remove the top of the barrow cactus.
Once the top is off, you will find a white substance that
resembles watermelon meat inside (this is a liquid-filled inner
356

tissue). Using your knife, cut out hand-size chunks and
squeeze the moisture from them.
Prickly pears are easier to collect and prepare. Use a large
sharp stick and a good knife. Stab the round prickly pear with
the stick, and then cut it off with the knife. Next, use a fire to
burn the thorns off of the cactus. Make sure you sear the
cactus well to remove even the smallest thorns.
Once the thorns are removed, peel the green-or purple-colored
outer substance off, and eat the inside. Prickly pear meat
tastes so good that in Arizona and New Mexico people make
jellies and candies from it. Chew the moisture-filled inner
tissue, not the rough outer “bark.”
Getting Water from Plants
The use of clear plastic bags to enclose living vegetation and
capture the moisture transpired by the leaves can be an
effective method of collecting water. A plant’s survival is
dependent on its ability to gather water from the soil. This
water is passed up through the plant’s roots, stems, and
branches, and is finally released back to the atmosphere
through pores in the leaves as water vapor—a process called
evapotranspiration.
This water vapor can be collected with a clear plastic bag. It
works best when the vegetation is high enough to be off the
ground. Shake the vegetation to remove any insects, bird
droppings, or other materials that might contaminate the
water. Insert the limb or bush just like you would a hand into
a mitten. Then, tie the open end of the bag around the tree or
bush and seal the opening shut with a cord or duct tape. At the
357

closed end of the bag, tie a rock so the bag is weighted and
forms a collection point for the water.
Within a short period of time, water will begin to condense on
the inner surface of the bag, collect into water droplets, and
drain to the lowest point of the bag. The quantity of water
obtained in this manner is dependent on the amount of water
in the ground and the type of vegetation used. Other factors
that will determine water production include the amount of
sunlight available (it doesn’t work at night), the clarity of the
plastic bag, and the length of time the process is allowed to
work. It is not uncommon to find that two or three cups of
water, and sometimes much more, have accumulated over a
six-to eight-hour daylight period.
The best way to remove the water without disturbing the bag
is to insert a length of vinyl aquarium hose through the neck
of the bag down to the lowest point where water will collect.
The water can then be sucked out or siphoned into a
container. When enclosing vegetation in the plastic bag, it is
advisable to place a small stone in the lower corner where the
water will collect. The weight of the stone creates a
separation between the enclosed plant life and the water and
will keep plant saps from contaminating the water.
Similarly, leaves and small branches can be cut and placed in
a clear plastic bag. In this method, heat from the sun causes
the liquids in the foliage to be extracted and collect in the bag.
However, this method may produce water containing unsafe
toxins. Taste it first. If the water is bitter, do not drink it.
Solar Stills
358

The quantity of water produced by a solar still depends on the
amount of water contained in the ground. Because of this,
solar stills are not reliable for obtaining water in arid areas
since desert soils tend to hold little or no water. The amount
that a survivor is likely to obtain via this method must be
balanced against the amount of sweat lost while constructing
the device. However, in other types of climates, a solar still
can be very effective way of capturing water.
359

Solar still
To build a solar still, dig a hole approximately one meter
across and two feet deep. Dig a smaller hole, or slump, in the
middle of the hole. Place a container in the slump to collect
the water. Then, cover the hole with a plastic sheet and secure
the edges of the sheet with sand and rocks. Finally, place a
rock in the center of the sheet, so it sags.
During daylight hours the temperature in the hole will rise
due to the heat of the sun, thereby creating heat vapors which
will condensate on the inside of the plastic sheet and run
down. It then drops into the container in the sump hole.
You should never drink the following:
• Blood
• Urine
• Saltwater
• Alcohol
• Fresh sea ice
Fresh sea ice is milky or grey, has sharp edges, does not break
easily, and is extremely salty. Older sea ice is usually
salt-free, has a blue or black tint and rounded edges, and
breaks easily. Melted old sea ice is usually safe to drink, but
should be purified first, if possible.
Waterborne Contaminants
360

In most parts of the world, surface water is seldom pure.
There are five basic waterborne contaminants that you should
be particularly aware of: turbidity, toxic chemicals, bacteria,
viruses, and parasitic worms.
Turbidity
A measure of the cloudiness of water, or more specifically a
measure of the extent to which the intensity of light passing
through water is reduced by suspended matter in the water.
The sources of turbidity can be attributable to suspended and
colloidal material, and may be caused by several factors such
as: microorganisms and organic detritus, silica and other
sands and substances including zinc, iron and manganese
compounds, clay or silt, the result of natural processes of
erosion and/or as waste from various industries.
Toxic Chemicals
Dangerous and toxic chemicals include, among others,
pesticides, her-bicides, fertilizers from agricultural land and
runoff from household and industrial chemicals.
Bacteria, Viruses, Parasitic Worms
Giardia lamblia is a parasite that lives in the intestines of
humans and animals. It’s expelled from the body in feces, and
is found worldwide and in every region of the United States.
It causes giardiasis, which produces cramping, nausea, and
diarrhea. Symptoms may not show up for two weeks, and
once present can last as long as six weeks. If infected, get
medical attention as soon as possible.
361

Cryptosporidiosis is another waterborne illness caused by
parasites found in feces. The same symptoms as giardiasis can
be expected, but more severe. Both of these parasites can be
found in soil and vegetation as well, so wash anything you
plan on eating in purified water and remember: To give
your-self the best chance at survival, always boil your water,
even if it looks clean.
Giardia
Water Purification and Disinfection
362

To be safe to drink, water must be disinfected so that all
harmful micro-organisms are removed. To do this water must
be boiled, treated with chemicals, or filtered. “Disinfection”
of water should not be confused with “purification” of water.
Some of the methods used to purify water may not remove or
kill enough of the pathogens to ensure your safety. Make sure
the water you drink is disinfected.
The first step to disinfecting water is to select the cleanest,
clearest source of water available. Inorganic and organic
materials such as clay, silt, plankton, plant debris, and other
microscopic organisms will reduce the effectiveness of either
chemical or filtration disinfection. Chemicals used to disinfect
water will clump to any particulate in the water, thus reducing
its ability to disinfect the water. And water containing a lot of
material will quickly clog a filtration system. For the best
results, collect water from below the surface but not off the
bottom. When collecting murky water, allow it to settle and
then filter it through your shirttail, bandanna, or other piece of
cloth.
Remember:
Filtering water doesn’t always purify it, but it does reduce
particles and sediment and make the water taste better.
However, there are microbial purification filters on the
market that not only remove parasites such as Giardia, but
also kill waterborne bacteria and viruses. These types of
filters are optimal.
• Boiling is the best way of killing all microorganisms.
Boiling will not neutralize chemical pollutants.
363

• To purify water with chemicals, use water purification
tablets.
364

365

Boiling water
Boiling
Bringing water to a boil kills any organisms in it. In most
cases, water does not have to be boiled for a specific length of
time. The time it takes to bring water to a boil and the
temperature of the water when it boils is sufficient to kill
Giardia,
Cryptosporidium,
and
any
other
waterborne
pathogens. While the boiling point of water decreases as you
climb higher, the temperature at which the water boils is still
hot enough to kill those organisms that might make you sick.
Continuing to boil the water wastes fuel, evaporates the
water, and delays consumption.
Overseas, especially in developing countries where river
systems are still a frequent method of sewage disposal,
boiling for a longer period of time (one or two minutes) is
advisable.
Chemical Purification
Chemicals that have the ability to disinfect water are known
as
halogens,
and
include
iodine
and
chlorine.
The
effectiveness
of
halogens
is
directly
related
to
their
concentration, the amount of time they are left in contact with
the water, and the temperature of the water—the colder the
water the longer the contact time.
Iodine
366

Comes in tablet and liquid forms. I recommend the tablets
because liquid iodine is messy and the containers are prone to
leaking. Potable Aqua tablets (which contain iodine) are used
by the U.S. military and many disaster relief agencies.
Iodine kills harmful bacteria, viruses, and most protozoan
cysts found in untreated water. (It is NOT effective on
Cryptosporidium.) The recommend dosage of two tablets per
quart or liter of water is sufficient to kill organisms such as
Giardia. Once the tablets are placed in the water, they should
be allowed to sit for at least thirty minutes (even longer if the
water is very cold), and then shaken so that the iodine and
water mix thoroughly. The dissolved tablets will leave a slight
iodine taste in the water, which some find disagreeable.
Lemon juice, lemonade, Kool-Aid, or Gatorade powder can
be added to neutralize the iodine flavor.
Iodine tablets are commonly packaged with a second bottle of
ascorbic acid (PA Plus) tablets that deactivate the iodine,
making the water pleasant to drink. One tablet is usually
enough to reduce the iodine taste.
Iodine tablets deteriorate on exposure to heat, humidity, or
moisture. Over time, opening and closing the cap to remove
tablets results in the normally gray-colored tablets changing
to green or yellow. Once they have changed color, they have
lost their effectiveness and shouldn’t be used. Avoid using the
military iodine tablets that are sometimes found in military
surplus stores. The military got rid of them because their shelf
life has expired.
Advantage of iodine tablets:
367

• Easy to use
• Lightweight
• Inexpensive
Disadvantages:
• Not effective against Cryptosporidium cysts
• Some people are allergic to iodine
• People with known thyroid problems should not use iodine
• Iodine should not be used as a long-term (more than six
weeks) method of purifying water due to its potential harmful
effects on the thyroid.
Chlorine
An effective agent against bacteria, viruses, and, unlike
iodine, cysts such as Cryptosporidium. Another advantage of
using chlorine is that it leaves no aftertaste. On the downside,
a significant disadvantage of using chlorine tablets is that you
have to wait for four hours after adding a tablet before you
can drink the water.
Advantages of Chlorine tablets:
• No aftertaste
• Chlorine kills Cryptosporidium
368

Disadvantages:
• Four-hour contact time
Almost all laundry bleaches, including Clorox, contain five
and one-half percent sodium hypoclorite, which is a suitable
purification chemical for water. Put a small amount in a bottle
with an eyedropper dispenser and add it to your E&E kit.
Make sure you do not use powdered, scented, or other
non-pure bleaches.
LifeStraw
Before adding bleach to the water you want to purify, remove
all suspended material by filtration (through a cotton cloth,
improvised sand filter, or other means) or by simply allowing
sediment to settle to the bottom.
Add eight drops of bleach per gallon of water (or two drops
per quart). If the water was filtered, then shake it up to evenly
dispense the bleach, and wait fifteen minutes. If the water has
sediment on the bottom, don’t shake it up. Instead, allow the
treated water to stand for thirty minutes.
369

Because killing microorganisms also consumes the bleach,
you can tell by smelling whether or not there’s anything left
to kill. If there’s no chlorine odor then all of the bleach was
used up, meaning there could still be living organisms. Repeat
the dosage and allow the water to stand for another fifteen
minutes. If there is any chlorine odor, however faint, after
thirty minutes, all of the bacteria, viruses, and other
microorganisms are dead, and the bleach has done its job with
some to spare.
When treating cloudy, green, or really nasty water (swamp
water, for example), start with sixteen drops of bleach per
gallon of water (or four drops per quart). Smell the water. If
there’s a faint odor of chlorine, the water is drinkable. If not,
then repeat the treatment.
Treating Larger Quantities of Water
A teaspoon of bleach treats about 7 ½ gallons of clear water
or about four gallons of dirty water. Therefore, a tablespoon
of bleach treats about twenty gallons of clear water or about
ten gallons of dirty water. A quarter cup of bleach will purify
about ninety gallons of clear water or forty-five gallons of
dirty water.
LifeStraw
The LifeStraw is a portable filtration device that enables you
to safely drink directly from any fresh water source. The
straw itself is about eleven inches long, less than one inch
around, and looks like a jumbo drinking straw. One end has
the narrow mouthpiece; the other goes directly into the water
370

source. Each LifeStraw lasts for 185 gallons, roughly the
amount of water needed for one person per year.
The filter is designed to eliminate 100 percent of waterborne
bacteria, almost ninety-nine percent of viruses, and particles
as small as fifteen microns.
371

WATER
372

9
“On the occasion of every accident that befalls you,
remember to turn to yourself and inquire what power you
have for turning it to use.”
—Epictetus
Shelters
A healthy human can survive for several weeks without food
and several days without water, but in many cases only
several hours without proper shelter from the elements. After
water, shelter is a critical need in terms of your survival.
From keeping you protected from the elements to providing a
place to rest, wilderness shelters serve a key role in survival
situations. Not only do they provide for physical needs, but
they also help create a sense of home in the wilderness.
Your environment and the equipment you carry with you will
determine the type of shelter you’re able to build. Before you
head out, evaluate the weather in the area you’re going to be
in and to what extremes it is likely to reach. Shelters can be
built in wooded areas, barren plains, jungles, deserts, and
snow-covered mountains. Several items found in a decent
survival kit—such as a Tyvex and a survival blanket—will
help immensely. Wooded areas provide timber for shelter
373

construction, fuel for fire, concealment from observation, and
protection from the wind.
Be careful not to damage your waterproof gear. Instead of
poking holes in a tarp to tie it off, push a small pebble up
from under the tarp, and tie off around it. Try using rocks
instead of stakes to hold down corners.
Size and Location
The key to making a successful wilderness shelter is choosing
a good location. In most cases, higher elevations are exposed
to much more wind than valleys and lower areas. And don’t
be fooled by the air temperature. While a thermometer might
indicate that the air temperature has increased several degrees
by moving to higher ground, the temperature as far as your
body is concerned is likely to have dropped twenty to thirty
degrees because of the windchill factor.
A good location for building a wilderness shelter is one that
1) provides easy access to ample building materials, including
dead sticks, leaves, and grasses; and is 2) away from major
hazards such falling branches, avalanche zones, pooling
water, and insect nests. You also want a location that has a
large enough flat area to allow you to lie down and sleep
comfortably.
A common mistake people make when building wilderness
survival shelters is that they make them too large. Not only
does this require more materials, effort, and time to construct,
but it often ends up being cold due to the amount of space on
the inside. As a general rule, build your shelter so that it’s not
much bigger than you are and gives you just enough room to
374

lie down. This will allow your body heat to keep it warmer
than the ambient temperature.
All shelters should be constructed with safety in mind. Large,
strong branches can provide the initial framework for many
types of survival shelters. Typically, they should be strong
enough to easily support the weight of an adult. This is
especially important when constructing lean-to and debris
hut-style shelters.
Whether you’re in a hot and sunny environment, a cold and
wet forest, or on a snow-covered mountain, insulation and
cover can keep you protected from the elements. Use leaves,
grasses, small sticks, ferns, and pine needles to provide
insulation. Pile on as much as you can. Add bark or soil to the
top and sides of your shelter to create a barrier from cold
wind and rain.
In cool and cold environments, the primary purpose of your
shelter should be to help you stay warm and avoid
hypothermia. With wilderness survival shelters, there are
typically two heat sources: your body heat (and that from
others with you), or fire. Wilderness shelters that rely on body
heat as the primary heat source (such as a debris hut), need to
be small on the inside and have lots of extra insulating debris.
If you plan on using a fire inside your shelter, carefully plan
how to tend it throughout night, and be sure to collect a full
night’s worth of firewood before last light.
Never sleep directly on the ground. Make a mattress from
pine boughs, grass, leaves, or other insulating material to keep
the ground from absorbing your body heat. And never fall
asleep before turning off your lamp or stove.
375

Carbon Monoxide Poisoning
Carbon monoxide poisoning is colorful, odorless, can be
deadly, and can result from a fire burning in an unventilated
shelter. Remember that any open flame will generate carbon
monoxide. Always double-check your ventilation. Even in a
ventilated shelter, smoldering embers can cause carbon
monoxide poisoning. In most cases, there are no symptoms.
Unconsciousness and death can occur without warning.
Sometimes, however, pressure at the temples, burning of the
eyes, headache, pounding pulse, drowsiness, or nausea may
occur. The one characteristic, visible sign of carbon monoxide
poisoning is a cherry-red coloring in the tissues of the lips,
mouth, and inside of the eyelids. Get into fresh air at once if
you experience any of these symptoms.
376

Tarp shelter
377

Bamboo hut
Shelter Types
There are many types of field-expedient shelters to consider,
including natural ones such as caves, hollow stumps and logs,
and those that are relatively easy to build, including debris
huts, lean-tos, scout pits, and snow shelters.
Debris Huts
These are often the easiest and most practical types of shelter
to build in any type of environment.
378

1. Find a long, sturdy pole to serve as the main beam of your
hut. It should be 1 ½ to 2 times your height. You can also use
a fallen tree. Look for something—a rock, tree stump, or tree
with a forked branch— that’s strong enough to hold the main
beam off the ground. It should be a little taller than you are
when sitting.
2. Lean smaller poles or branches against both sides of your
main beam at a forty-five-degree angle. Place them close
together and fill in the space between them with smaller twigs
and branches.
3. Cover this framework with dead leaves, dry ferns,
evergreen branches, grass, or whatever other materials you
can find. Keep piling on insulation materials until the sides of
your shelter are at least three feet thick.
4. Place another layer of small, light branches over the outside
of the hut to prevent your insulation from blowing away.
5. Put a one-foot layer of debris inside your shelter, and
choose materials that will be soft enough to sleep on.
6. At the entrance to your shelter, which should face away
from the prevailing wind, build a pile of insulating material
that you can drag in place once you are inside and can serve
as a door. You can also build a door out of other types of
material in the vicinity. You can, for example, make a door by
gathering finger-sized pieces of wood and lashing them into a
grid pattern. Make two grids, then place debris between them.
Lash the grids together and you have an insulated door.
379

Grass and log hut
Lean-Tos
These are easy to build, suitable to most types of terrain, and
should always be built with their back toward the wind.
380

1. Insert two Y-shaped sticks into the ground, about one foot
deep. Each should stand about three feet high.
2. Take a long branch, about six feet long, and use it as a
ridgepole. Lay the ridgepole between the two forks.
3. Fill in the roof area with other straight sticks, with one end
tied at the top and the other buried into the ground. You now
have the skeleton of the shelter.
4. Cover the skeleton with whatever material is available: for
example, spruce twigs, grass, bracken fern, and large leaves.
Always start at the bottom of the shelter and work upwards
when thatching so that if it rains, the water will run over the
joints and will not leak through onto you. Try to make life as
easy as possible by using any standing or fallen timber, or a
wall, as one side of the shelter.
5. If heat is needed, build a fire in front of your shelter.
381

Tarp lean-to
382

Subterranean shelter covered with a tarp.
Scout Pits
There are unlimited variations of scout pits. Some can be
constructed as hybrids with other shelters, and some partially
above ground. Utilizing natural pits can significantly reduce
the dig time. You can, for example, use a pit created where a
tree has fallen over and pulled out the earth with its roots.
1. Find a flat, dry piece of land and dig a rectangular coffin
shape that’s a little wider and longer than your body. Preserve
the top six inches of soil to serve as the ceiling.
2. Dig down to the length of your hips.
3. Dig a wider six-inch-deep ledge around the top to hold the
roof in place.
4. Create a ceiling made of logs that at are a minimum of
three inches in diameter. Leave a small entrance hole.
5. Cover the logs with soil and leaves.
383

Snow cave
Ice and Snow Shelters
A snow cave, hut, or igloo can provide vital warmth and
shelter in the snow.
Snow Cave
384

Find a wind swale, or cornice face, that allows you to dig
horizontally. This will save you the time of digging down and
then sideways.
If you find a good semivertical face, test to see if you can cut
uniform blocks of snow with your shovel. If so, start with a
fairly large opening, and enlarge into your sleeping chamber
as soon as practical. When the cave is dug, wall the opening
back
up
with
the
blocks
of
snow,
leaving
a
small
entranceway.
Be sure your sleeping chamber is higher than the door so that
it can trap warm air from your body.
Before starting work, strip off all nonessential clothing so it
stays dry, especially any down gear. If you have hardshell
layers, wear them over nearly nothing while you’re working.
Once you’re digging inside the entrance tunnel and beyond,
you’ll be amazed at how warm you become.
Once you are in the cave for the night, place your dry clothing
next to your skin and your damp clothing away from your
body. Use your backpack as a seat. Keep your boots on but
loosen them as much as possible. If you feel your feet getting
cold, take the liners out of the boots and store them under
your clothing. DO NOT leave your liners in your boots, as
you may be borderline hypothermic in the morning, and
placing your cold feet in frozen boots could cause frostbite.
If you have a stove, you need a ceiling vent in your cave to
prevent carbon monoxide poisoning. If you don’t have a stove
and your cave is large with an open doorway you probably
don’t need a vent, but consider a small one anyhow to keep
385

the air drier and fresher. You can always plug it with a spare
piece of clothing or with snow.
Improvised Snow Trench
If you’re short on time and you have skis with you, simply
dig a trench, lay your skis over it, and cover the skis with
snow blocks. Keep the trench as small as possible so you can
plug the end with a backpack or snow blocks once you’re
inside. The trench works better if you have a ground cover
and sleeping bags, while the snow cave works better if you’re
short on gear. The main problem with building a snow cave is
getting wet. If you’re short on clothing, this is a major
concern.
Note: In extreme cold, DO NOT use metal, such as an aircraft
fuselage, for shelter. The metal will conduct away from the
shelter what little heat you can generate.
Snow Shelter
1. Clear a circular area in the snow about seven or eight feet
across.
2. Use a shovel or other digging tool to mix up the snow in
the clearing, making sure to bring snow from bottom layers
up
higher
and
vice
versa.
Mixing
snow
of
different
temperatures will facilitate the hardening process, which is
called sintering.
3. Make a six-foot-high pile of snow on top of the clearing
and shape it into a dome. The snow should be heaped, not
packed.
386

4. Allow the mound to sinter for one to three hours depending
on the weather and snow composition.
5. Begin to hollow out the mound once it has hardened. Dig
straight in to create your initial opening; then dig at an
upward angle in order to make an elevated sleeping area. This
will allow cold air from inside to flow down and out of the
shelter.
6. Use the snow you dig out to make a windbreak in front of
the entrance, or heap it onto the exterior of the shelter to
thicken its walls and increase the available interior space.
7. Smooth out the interior walls and ceiling when the
hollowed area is large enough. The walls of your shelter
should be at least one-to two-feet thick.
8. Poke a ventilation hole through the top of the dome using a
ski pole or long stick. Make sure this hole stays clear of ice
and snow.
9. Use a ski pole, sticks, or other large clearly visible item to
mark the outside of the entrance in case it gets covered up
while you’re away. Keep your shovel inside while you sleep
in case you need to dig your way out in the morning.
10. Use your pack to block the entrance of the shelter, but
leave space for air to flow in and out.
11. Don’t cook inside your shelter. This can cause a lethal
buildup of carbon monoxide, even with a ventilation hole.
387

12. Building a shelter is hard work, so expect to sweat. This
can cause hypothermia. If you have an extra set of dry
clothes, change into them after you’ve finished building your
shelter.
Matches
The Importance of Insulation
Knowing how to insulate yourself with layers of material can
mean the difference between life and death. What you want to
388

do is trap air between your body and outside. Fibrous plants,
grasses, layers of bark, pine needles, leaves, wood, and even
snow are types of materials that you can use to insulate
yourself and your shelter.
To insulate your shelter, use the materials to build a thick
layer over and inside your dwelling. Layering the materials
will help trap air and keep more heat inside your shelter.
Make sure you also use a thick layer of insulating materials
inside your makeshift mattress. Doing so will insulate your
body from the cold ground.
Urban Insulation
Urban environments contain numerous types of materials that
you can use to keep warm—including cardboard, foam,
cloths, plastic, bedding materials, and so on. In an emergency
you can use these to turn a small room or closet into an
insulted fortress. Couch cushions, blankets, towels, and
mattresses can all be used to add extra insulation to your little
area. Line your clothing with crumpled newspapers, paper
towels, or any other insulating materials that you can find.
Fire Starting
Knowing how to build a fire is an essential survival skill. Fire
is good for:
1. Keeping warm
2. Boiling water
3. Drying wet clothes
389

4. Keeping insects and some animals away
5. To signal your position
6. Cooking
Always have at least two methods of starting a fire with you
at all times.
Building a Fire
To build a typical campfire, you’ll need three types of fuel:
tinder, kindling, and logs. Always have twice as much of each
as you think you’ll need ready before you ever strike a match.
The most difficult part is getting the first flame to take to your
tinder. Once you have a nice little pile of tinder material
burning, it’s relatively easy to get the rest of the fire
going—first with kindling (big sticks), then with logs.
390

A Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE)
instructor with the Center for Security Forces builds a
fire for the students to sit around during a fire building
lesson at a training site in Warner Springs, Calif.
391

Leaves
392

393

A Logs and sticks
Logs
Collect dry wood. Start by looking for the dead branches at
the very bottom of evergreen trees. Take the smallest
branches and shred them with a knife or your fingers to use as
tinder. Anything that will ignite quickly is a good source of
394

tinder—dead grass, dried moss or fern, leaves, or a strip of
cloth from the tail of your shirt.
Place your tinder in the center and then build a teepee of
small dry twigs around it. Once this is burning, slowly feed
your fire with larger and larger pieces of wood. Always make
sure the fire is burning freely before you progress to a larger
piece of wood. Once this fire is burning, do not let it go out.
Aside from providing heat and protection, it can also act as a
signal to anyone who is searching for you.
395

Wood chips
396

Grass
Tinder
Sources of good tinder include a multitude of mosses, grasses,
and other thin and fibrous materials that can be easily ignited.
They need to be dry. When walking along in the woods,
collect wispy looking materials and put them in a shirt pocket,
as body heat dries them out in a hurry. Here are some great
sources of tinder that will light in just about any conditions:
397

• Cat-o’-nine tails. The large bulb at the top of this plant has
enough “fluff” to start a LOT of fires.
• The large, black, lumpy growths on the sides of birch trees
are caused by a type of fungus that burns very well. Each
lump is orange to brownish on the inside and can be ignited
with a spark to form a very nice coal. This material can also
be used to transport fire from place to place.
• Low-lying, gnarly pine shrubs and trees (common in sandy
soils) build up amazing amounts of sap. The wood becomes
infused with it and is very flammable. Dead branches, in
particular, are loaded with sap, and you should use these, as
even a small piece can be used to start many fires. Shavings
from this type of wood will ignite with nothing but a good
spark. A little goes a long way.
• Pocket lint is very flammable. It only takes a spark.
There are several types of tinder that are easy to prepare and
will serve you well if you find yourself trapped in the
wilderness. Dryer lint and cotton balls, for example, both
work well, especially when they’re mixed with Vaseline. Heat
the Vaseline (either in a microwave or in a pan on the stove)
until it turns to liquid, then mash as much dryer lint or cotton
balls as will fit and soak up the liquid. These can be kept in a
plastic bag, aluminum foil, Altoids type container, or any
other small container until ready to use.
398

Moss
399

400

Cattails
401

402

Chaga mushroom on birch tree
Bush
403

Shrub
404

Rangely, Maine—A student at the Navy Survival,
Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) school breaks
birch bark to start a fire.
Image
Building a Fire in the Snow
This can be a little tricky, but you’ll be successful if you
follow these basic rules.
405

• Most fires will quickly heat the surrounding area, but when
wind is present, most of the heat will be carried off. A fire in
the wind is also going to consume about twice as much wood.
Make sure you find a place to build your fire that’s sheltered
from the wind and elements.
• Gather all of your wood first and then organize it by size so
you’ll be able to find the right piece when you need it.
• Just because wood is buried under snow, that doesn’t mean
it’s not dry enough to burn, especially if the snow is light and
fluffy, which means it has less moisture content.
• Break a stick to see if it’s dry inside. If it cracks, it most
likely is. But if you’re hiking after a winter rain, that
crackling snap could be ice. If that’s the case, you’ll need to
look for dry wood in protected areas, like under thick
vegetation or in the hollow of an old tree stump.
• Sample wood from different places around your site. Keep
track of what wood you found where, so you’ll know where
to return for more of the good stuff.
• Wet or damp wood can take a long time to get started.
That’s why you should always take some kind of fire starter
with you. You’ll find fire starters at most outdoor sports
stores, army-navy stores, or at convenience stores in many
rural areas. Look for tubes of fire ribbon, balls of wax mixed
with sawdust, or tablets made of petroleum.
• You can also prepare your own tinder out of laundry lint or
cotton balls as described above.
406

• Don’t bother using toilet paper for tinder, as it burns for
only a second.
• Pine needles and birch bark are great fire starters. Look for
downed stumps.
• Stove fuel can give your fire the kick it needs to get going.
Put the fuel on the fire before you light it, never after. Then
toss in a match—and stand back!
• If the snow isn’t too deep, dig a hole to make the fire on
solid ground. If the ground is completely covered with very
deep snow, tamp down the snow so it forms a slight
depression with a solid, hard platform in the middle. Then put
a layer of wood down on the snow, and build your fire on top
of that. Otherwise, your fire will sink into the snow and go
out before it gets going.
• When the fire is roaring, place damp wood around it so the
heat from the fire will dry it out. Now you’ll have a stash of
dry wood for later.
407

408

Rangely, Maine—A student at the Navy Survival,
Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) school builds a
fire.
Collect fine twigs and then ignite the bundle off the
ground.
409

Winter cooking fire
410

Types of Fires
Lazy Man Fire
Maintaining a fire is just as important as starting one. If
you’re in a survival situation, you always want to save
energy. Don’t spend your time chopping firewood. Instead,
feed large branches and logs into the fire, and let the fire do
all the work. As the logs burn, move each farther into the fire.
It’s amazing how much wood you can gather when you’re not
wasting time chopping or sawing.
411

Teepee Fire
Build it with standing lengths of wood with tinder and
kindling in the middle. The teepee fire provides a steady, hot
heat source required for a reflecting oven. It requires a steady
supply of medium-sized pieces of wood.
Pinwheel Fire
Lay one-to two-inch-diameter pieces of wood in a pinwheel
pattern with tinder and kindling in the middle. This is an ideal
fire for cooking with a fry pan. Build it inside a ring of rocks
to hold your fry pan.
Log Cabin Fire
Stack
four-to
six-inch
diameter
pieces
of
wood
in
a
crosshatch pattern. Provides lots of air circulation and results
in quick supply of cooking coals for roasting or grilling meat.
Keyhole Fire
The keyhole is a great multipurpose fire when you have a
larger group of survivors. Construct a rock fire pit in the
shape of a keyhole. Next, build a teepee fire in the round part.
At the end, build a log cabin fire. The tall flames of the teepee
fire will provide light and heat once the coals of the log cabin
fire die down.
Dakota Pit Fire
This is an efficient fire that uses very little fuel and can warm
you and your food easily. Having it contained in a hole makes
412

it is easy to hunch over for warmth or to place food or water
over it for cooking. The second hole is to allow oxygen to get
to the fire, thus preventing it from being easily smothered.
The scale of the fire depends solely on the size of the pits you
dig.
Note: This type of fire does not throw off much light and is
primarily used for warmth.
Having selected a likely area in which to dig the fire hole,
first remove a plug of soil and plant roots in the form of a
circle about ten or twelve inches in diameter. Continue
digging straight down to a depth of about one foot, being sure
to save the plug and the soil you removed for replacement
later on.
1. Extend the base of the fire chamber outward a couple of
inches in all directions so that it can accommodate longer
pieces of firewood. This saves time and energy in breaking up
firewood into suitable lengths, and also has the effect of
allowing larger and therefore hotter fires.
2. Starting about a foot away from the edge of the fire pit, dig
a six-inch diameter air tunnel at an angle so that it intersects
with the base of the fire pit. The effect is a jug-shaped hole at
the base of which you place firewood. The neck of the jug
will serve as a chimney of sorts, the function of which is to
increase the draft and concentrate the heat of the fire into the
small opening.
3. Now it’s time to make the fire hole airway. First determine
the general direction of the wind, as you want to construct the
airway on the side of the hole that faces the wind.
413

4. Dig your six-inch-diameter airway tunnel starting about
one foot away from the edge of the fire hole. Angle its
construction so that the tunnel intersects with the base of the
fire chamber. Be sure to save the plug containing the
vegetation and roots as well as the loose soil that you remove.
5. Partially fill the fire pit chamber with dry combustible
kindling materials and light the fire. Gradually add sticks so
that a strong hot fire is maintained.
Students in the Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape
(SERE) course dig holes to make Dakota fire pits as part
414

of the food preparation lesson at a training site in Warner
Springs, Calif.
Pit fire
415

SHELTER AND FIRE
416

10
“Luck favors the prepared mind.”
—Louis Pasteur
Since food ranks third on the basic survival skills priorities
list, don’t worry about looking for food until you have a good
water source and adequate shelter.
Although you can live three weeks or so without food, you’ll
need an adequate amount to stay healthy. Without food, your
mental and physical capabilities will deteriorate and you’ll
become weak. Food replenishes the substances that your body
burns and provides energy, vitamins, minerals, salts, and
other elements essential to good health.
The average person needs approximately 2,000 calories per
day to function at a minimum level. To varying degrees both
plant and animals (including fish) will provide the calories,
carbohydrates, fats, and proteins needed for normal daily
body functions.
Most natural environments are filled with a variety of items
that can meet our nutritional needs. Wild plants often provide
the most readily available foods, though insects and small
wild game can also support dietary needs in a survival
situation.
417

Meat and fish are good sources of protein and fat and provide
virtually
everything
a
long-term
survivor
would
need.
However, at the first stage of a survival situation, edible
plants are the most appropriate diet as plants are easily
accessible and contain the necessary carbohydrates.
In a survival situation, take advantage of the food sources
available. Try to vary your diet to make sure you get the
appropriate
proportions
of
fat,
protein,
carbohydrates,
minerals, and vitamins.
Seek the more abundant and more easily obtained wildlife,
such as insects, crustaceans, mollusks, fish, and reptiles,
while you are preparing traps and snares for larger game.
Basic Food Survival Rules:
1. If it walks, crawls, swims, or flies, it is most likely safe to
eat and will provide the nutrition and energy your body
requires.
2. ALL fur-bearing mammals are safe to eat and will provide
you with nutrients and calories.
3. ALL six-legged insects are safe to eat and will provide you
with nutrients and calories.
4. DO NOT eat spiders.
5. Almost all freshwater fish and birds are safe to eat and will
provide you with nutrients and calories.
418

6. Use EXTREME CAUTION with plants. Don’t eat them
unless you know they’re safe.
7. DO NOT eat mushrooms, unless you are absolutely certain
it is nontoxic, or any plant that has a milky sap.
Food Tips
A single emergency food bar can contain up to 3,600 calories
and is designed to provide enough nutrition to last up to three
days. Stash a few of these in your E&E kit, your second line
gear, or in your go-bag.
Also easy to carry and useful are beef and chicken bouillon
cubes. On a cold night out in the wild, a cup of hot broth will
warm you up nicely.
Hard candy, i.e., Jolly Ranchers, offers a quick hit of sugar,
which can be very helpful.
Edible Insects
Most insects are rich in protein and fat, the two most vital
nutritional needs for survival. Ants, grubs, grasshoppers,
dragonflies, worms, and centipedes are edible.
Some aren’t the most appetizing and some taste pretty good.
A good way to get over your natural resistance to eating
insects is to dry them by the fire and add them to whatever
you cook. I recommend that all insects be boiled or roasted to
kill parasites.
419

Insects with bright colors should be avoided, as they might be
toxic.
Any of the creatures listed below, once cooked, can be served
with soy sauce or salt or mixed into a stir-fry or stew made of
plants.
Grasshoppers
According to entomologists, a single large grasshopper is
comprised of sixty percent protein and 6.1 grams of fat.
Eating a handful of them roasted (not raw) is nearly the
equivalent of consuming a hamburger. Crickets are second
best. Remove the legs and wings, then roast them on a rock
slab in the center of your fire for twenty minutes until crispy.
Boiling for five minutes is another good way of cooking
them. To catch them in the wild, use a three-foot section from
a flexible, green willow shoot and swat them like you would a
fly.
Ants
Boil the pupae (whitish eggs found in the nest) to make a
hearty stew. The best way to collect pupae in large numbers is
by carefully digging into the top layer of an anthill during the
early morning. Make sure to avoid fire-ant mounds! One or
two scrapes off a small section of the hill should expose the
egg chamber. After collecting the eggs, cover the mound back
up with dirt so the colony can recover.
420

Hard candy
421

Flame skimmer dragonfly
422

Grasshopper on a flower
423

Ant
424

Grubs
425

Pine cones: About twenty species of pine trees grow pine
cones that have seeds large enough to be food for humans.
426

Place the pine cone next to a fire so it opens up. Then the
seeds can be harvested easily and eaten.
Puffball mushroom
Grubs, larva, worms
427

Earthworms can be dried like jerky and added to stew. Also,
grubs found under or in rotten logs are relatively easy to
collect, and can be added to a stew. Grubs, worms, and larva
can also serve as excellent fishing bait.
Plants
Plants, roots, and green vegetables can provide carbohydrates
and enough protein to keep the body functioning at normal
efficiency, even in the arctic. Nuts and seeds are also an
excellent source of proteins and natural oils.
Edible Plants
Be careful and don’t eat any plant that you’re not sure is safe.
Some plants will poison you on contact, ingestion, or by
absorption or inhalation. Also, many edible plants have
deadly relatives and look-alikes.
As a general rule, before you head out into the wild, know at
least three edible plants in the area that you are traveling.
Learn them by their leaves, stalks/stems, and roots, as all
three are part of the plant, might have use, and will confirm
identity of the plants. Take into account the seasons when
they grow and soils where they grow, and any relative plants
that are around that might lead you to them.
I also recommend knowing at least three plants that are
medicinal in some significant way and that are easily
identified, readily available, and most useful based on your
needs.
428

Nettle
429

Acacia
430

Agave
Common edible plants include cattail roots, acorns, clover,
dandelions, almost all grasses that are seed bearing, and the
inner bark of trees such as poplar, willows, birches and
conifers.
431

Common and Abundant Plant Food Sources in North
America
A manzanita bush is a great food source in the wild. The
Mono Indians used them for their fruit, which they dried or
used for drinks. If you come across the bush, chew the outer
bit of the fruit, then spit out the hard seeds. The fruit is high in
vitamin C.
Cattails are known as the “supermarket of the swamp.” No
matter the season, there are always edible parts available on
the cattail plant. The roots, shoots, and pollen heads can all be
eaten.
The inner bark of conifer trees, known as the cambium layer,
is full of sugars, starches, and calories. It can be eaten on
most evergreen, conebearing trees except for yews, which are
all poisonous and are identified by red berries). The inner
bark should be scraped out and cooked to convert the fibers
into a more digestible form.
All grasses are edible. The leaves can be chewed and the
juices swallowed—though be sure to spit out any indigestible
fibers.
All acorns—the nuts produced by oak trees—can be leached
of their bitter tannic acids and eaten, providing an excellent
source of protein, fats, and calories. To rid the acorns of
tannins, place them in a net bag in a stream for a day, or put
them into several changes of boiling water. White oaks have
the least amount of tannins and therefore the best flavor.
432

Again, be sure to properly identify any plant you plan on
consuming. Many plants can be difficult to identify and some
edible plants have deadly poisonous look-alikes. If you
cannot identify the plant, DO NOT eat it.
433

434

Amaranth
Chicory
435

Acorns
436

Dandelions
437

Poplar trees
Edibility Test
The best way to determine what is and is not safe to eat in the
wild is to develop a sound knowledge of the plant families
that grow in the region you’re traveling in.
Some parts of a plant may be safe to eat and other parts of the
same plant may be poisonous. Be sure to treat different plant
parts as separate entities. For example, common fruits such as
apple, tomato, and mango are edible, while parts of the plants
they grow on are toxic.
438

Plants growing in water may have Giardia on them. If you
have a very sensitive digestion, you should avoid using wild
plants as food.
Be especially cautious of any plant that has a bean pod or
looks like a tomato, potato, or morning glory. And avoid any
plant or plant part that smells like almonds or root beer, or
which may have developed mold.
If you’re stuck in the wild, are not familiar with the plants in
the environment, and have no other available sources of food,
follow this procedure for testing plant sources before you
consume them.
1. Test only one part of a potential food plant at a time.
Separate the plant into its basic components—leaves, stems,
roots, buds, and flowers.
2. Smell the plant part for strong or acidic odors. Remember
that smell alone does not indicate whether a plant is edible or
inedible.
3. Do not eat for eight hours before starting the test.
4. During the eight hours you abstain from eating, test for
contact poisoning by placing a piece of the plant part you are
testing on the inside of your elbow or wrist. If your body does
have a reaction, it will usually occur within fifteen minutes.
5. During the test period, take nothing by mouth except
purified water and the plant part you are testing.
439

440

Fir trees
Willow tree
441

442

Birch tree bark
6. Select a small portion of a single part and prepare it the
way you plan to eat it.
7. Before placing the prepared plant part in your mouth, touch
a small portion to the outer surface of your lip to test for
burning or itching.
8. If there’s no reaction on your lip after three minutes, place
the plant part on your tongue, holding it there for fifteen
minutes.
9. If there is no reaction after fifteen minutes, thoroughly
chew a pinch and hold it in your mouth for fifteen minutes.
Do not swallow.
10. If no burning, itching, numbing, stinging, or other
irritation occurs during the fifteen minutes it’s in your mouth,
swallow the food.
11. Wait for eight hours. If any ill effects occur during this
period, induce vomiting and drink a lot of water.
12. If no ill effects occur, eat a quarter of a cup of the same
plant part prepared the same way. Wait another eight hours. If
no ill effects occur, you can consider the plant part as
prepared safe to eat.
Make sure you have other options.
Flood, fire, and droughts could all pose a serious risk to plant
life. You need to have a backup plan for those times when
443

eating plants may become impossible. Make sure you have a
good emergency food supply and a way to fish, hunt, and trap
game.
Animal Foods
Meat contains more protein than plant food and might even be
more readily available in some places. But to acquire meat,
you need to know the habits of, and how to capture, the
various wildlife.
444

Aleutian cackling goose
A male and female pair of Northern bobwhite quail
445

Seagull
446

Turkey toms
Birds
All birds are edible. Game birds such as grouse and pheasants
can be captured using snares or hunting implements such as a
throwing stick, though it can be difficult if you’re not familiar
with the proper techniques.
Bird Eggs
447

In the spring, bird eggs are an excellent source of survival
food. Not only are they high in nutritional value, they’re also
convenient and safe. Eggs can be boiled, baked, fried, or, if
need be, raw. The obvious place to look for them is in a bird
nest. However, not all birds build a nest. Some lay their eggs
directly on the ground or in a hole.
Small Mammals
Small mammals including squirrels, rabbits and mice can be
captured with practice. Traps and snares are often most
effective, though a throwing stick can be used too.
Jackrabbit
448

Mouse
449

Bats
450

451

Prairie dogs
Rabbit
452

453

Squirrel
Raccoon
Hunting and Gathering
454

Hunting for food in the wilderness is an important and often
misunderstood skill that was second nature to our ancestors,
but has been largely lost by modern man as he’s evolved. The
good news is that all of us are born with the senses and
abilities to be good hunters.
Trapping and wild game procurement are not skills that can
be acquired in the comforts of your backyard. They come
with trial and error and plenty of practice out in the
wilderness.
Those who take the time to learn and practice hunting and
gathering
skills
will
come
to
realize
that
wilderness
landscapes that once seemed inhospitable are in reality
generous lands that will sustain those who know where and,
most important, how to look.
If you want to be able to feed yourself reasonably well in the
backcountry, focus on developing the following basic skills:
1. Proficiency with a firearm
2. Fishing methods such as angling and using cast nets and
trotlines
3. Knowledge of common edible plants in your region of
travel
4. How to use traps and snares
Living Off the Land
455

The initial emphasis for a survivor should be on small game
and not big game animals such as elk, moose, and deer. On
any given day in the wild, you are going to come across a
greater
concentration
of rabbits,
squirrels,
woodchucks,
marmots, raccoons, and other smaller critters than you will
big game. For the survivor, these animals will provide
sustenance until you can procure larger game.
Fish with worm
456

Carp in net
457

Gaur
458

Macaque
459

Red muntjac deer
460

Sambar
Trapping
Trapping is time-intensive in the beginning, but the payoff is
well worth it if you know what you’re doing. Once learned, it
is one of the most efficient means of feeding yourself in the
wild.
Trapping is a numbers game. The more traps you set, the
better off you will be.
461

Set out as many traps as you are physically capable of.
There’s
no
such
thing,
under
survival
conditions,
as
overdoing it. If you set up a primitive trap line for survival
purposes, make sure it contains anywhere from ten to twenty
or more traps (snares, deadfalls, and so on.).
Deadfalls and Snares
Snaring and deadfall traps are both excellent means of
procuring meat— whether small game or large animals such
as deer. Deadfalls work by crushing your intended prey while
they attempt to eat the bait that you have placed on the trap
mechanism. They are very effective for squirrels, chipmunks,
and pack rats. In ancient Europe, hunters even used large
deadfalls to bring down wolves and bears!
There are four things to consider when setting a deadfall trap:
1. Carving a precision trap and then finding the proper rock or
log.
2. Knowledge of both the behavior and tracks of your
intended prey.
3. Setting the trap in the correct area for your intended prey.
4. Using a bait or lure that will appeal to as many of the
animal’s senses as possible.
Primitive deadfalls for small game require willow, tamarisk,
or other straight stalks. You can even use juniper logs that are
split out into straight timber. The best way to carve deadfalls
is to cut three dozen willow shoots and then spend the
462

evening whittling twenty or more traps. Don’t worry about
placement or rigging these up in the field. Just sit and practice
carving so you ingrain the moves in your head and hands.
Widget deadfall. This is a variation on the fgure-4.
The next step is to practice setting up your traps under
nonsurvival conditions. You want to create a stable trap with
a figure-4 trigger that will cause the trap to collapse, even to
the slightest touch. As a weight, use a heavy log or rock,
which should be two to three times the body weight of the
animal you intend to trap.
How to Make a Figure-4 Trigger:
1. Rest a rock, log, or other weight on the end of a diagonal
stick. The weight will supply downward pressure to the end
of the stick.
2. The diagonal stick should rest and pivot on the vertical
stick. This will keep the diagonal stick from slipping to the
left.
463

3. The diagonal stick is also held in place by having the end
rest in a notch.
4. The pressure of the diagonal stick will pull the horizontal
stick toward the left.
5. The horizontal stick is held in place by the notches, which
is where the actual trigger mechanism is located.
6. Please your bait at the end of the horizontal stick so it is
directly under the weight.
When the animal takes the bait at the end of the horizontal
stick, the trigger will release. This will cause the horizontal
stick to fall to the ground, and the diagonal stick to flip up and
out in a counterclockwise arc so that the weight will come
crashing down on the animal, killing it instantly.
Make sure the vertical stick rests on a hard surface, such as a
flat stone. Otherwise it may dig into the ground and won’t fall
out of the way when the trap is triggered. I also recommend
putting something hard on the ground under the whole trap or
placing the trap on rock. Otherwise, the deadfall, when it
falls, may only injure the animal by pressing it into the soft
ground.
Paiute Deadfall
The Paiute deadfall is the fastest deadfall you will find, and
used throughout the American Southwest and Africa for
catching or killing small game. If you use this type of trap
with a box or crate instead of a deadfall, you can trap animals
rather than kill them.
464

Unlike the figure-4 trigger, the Paiute deadfall uses cordage.
Materials required:
•
A small length of cord.
•
Two sticks equal in diameter, one roughly eight inches
long, the other roughly 6 ½ inches long.
•
A long skinny trigger stick (you can trim it to fit).
•
A three-inch toggle stick (which should be a little thicker
than your trigger stick).
•
A deadfall (rock or heavy log) or a box or crate.
1. Attach the cord to one end of the 6 ½-inch-long support
stick, and the other end of the cord to the middle of the
three-inch toggle stick.
2. Find a place to set up your deadfall trap, one where you
think your prey is likely to be found. Make sure the trap is set
up on hard ground. Push your eight-inch-long upright stick
about two inches into the ground and lean it slightly in the
direction of the deadfall.
3. Set your trap with bait. Since you want your prey to pull
down on the trigger stick, either rub your bait into the trigger
stick or attach it to a piece of string that is tied to the trigger
stick. Take your support stick and place the end without the
cord on top of the upright stick. Then place the edge of your
deadfall on the other end of the support stick. Hold the cord
465

tight so that the support stick doesn’t let the deadfall down.
Then bring the cord around the upright and hold it there.
4. Placing the trigger stick can be frustrating. Be patient.
Place one end of the trigger stick against the toggle so that the
toggle cannot unwrap from around the upright. Now take the
other end of the trigger stick and fit it into the underside of
the deadfall. If you need to, trim the trigger stick so that it fits
perfectly between the toggle and deadfall. Now you’re ready
to catch game.
Survival Snares
Snares are the simplest means of procuring small animals like
rabbits and squirrels, and can also be used to catch larger
game. A snare consists of a loop (noose) of cord or wire
placed across an animal trail, a trigger mechanism, and a
spring stick of some sort that will quickly jerk the animal up
into the air when triggered.
There are two basic types of snares. The first (holding snare)
holds the animal at ground level and may or may not strangle
the victim. The second (flip snare) design will flip the animal
into the air and cause it to be strangled. While both are easy to
make, each design has strengths and weaknesses.
466

A flip-up snare that yanks the critter of the ground and
enables a quick, humane kill.
Both designs require a loop made of wire, cord, string, or vine
to tighten and hold the animal. The loop should have some
freedom of movement to allow it to tighten as the animal
struggles or moves forward into the snare.
With both types of snares, make sure to set the loop diameter
for the type of animal you hope to catch.
•
For rabbit, the loop should be about four inches in
diameter and placed about two inches above the trail.
•
For squirrels, the loop should be about three inches in
diameter and two to three inches above the trail.
467

•
For beavers, make the loop about five inches in diameter
and place it about one to two inches off the ground.
When making a holding snare, you have to secure the end of
the snare wire (the end opposite the loop) to a bush, stake, or
other stationary object. Make sure the snare is secure, and try
to use brush, logs or other debris to funnel the animal toward
your snare. The animal’s head will enter the loop and, as it
continues to move forward, the loop will slide and tighten
until the animal can’t escape.
With a flip-up snare, you also want to funnel animals toward
your trap. The difference in this case it that when the animal’s
head enters the snare, it will eventually pull the wire far
enough to trigger the flip-up part of the trap. At that point the
animal will be flipped into the air and strangled. The diameter
of the loop and the distances off the ground remain the same
in this snare as in the other.
To make a trip snare, you need a flexible limb or bush, snare
wire, a trigger, and a method to hold the trigger. I recommend
a supple sapling. When bent over and secured with a
triggering device, it will provide power to your snare. Select a
hardwood sapling along the trail, and remove all branches and
foliage if you can (as this will allow it spring faster). Use two
forked sticks, each with a long and short leg. Bend the sapling
or branch and mark the place where it meets the trail. Drive
the long leg of one forked stick firmly into the ground at that
point. Make sure the cut on the short leg of this stick is
parallel to the ground. Tie the long leg of the remaining
forked stick to a piece of cord secured to the sapling or
branch. Cut the short leg so that it catches on the short leg of
the other forked stick. Extend a noose over the trail. Set the
468

trap by bending the sapling or branch and engaging the short
legs of the forked sticks. When an animal catches its head in
the noose, it pulls the forked sticks apart, allowing the
twitch-up to spring up and hang the prey.
Baiting Your Traps
If you are out in the wilderness without bait, then use
something exotic and uncommon to the area. If you are trying
to trap a rabbit, don’t use the raspberries off the bush near its
burrow. Choose some succulent cattail roots from a nearby
swamp. This will spark much greater interest than the greens
it is surrounded by on a daily basis. Look inside your
pack—any bagels or apples? The key here is to use something
“exotic” from outside the animal’s home region.
Prehistoric Trap Systems of Northern Arizona —by Tony
Nester
The ability to procure food in a demanding landscape like the
desert was possible for those who knew where and how to
look and had a wealth of hunting and trapping skills. I believe
trapping
played
a
significant
role
in
the
menu
of
hunter-gatherers in the desert, though archeological site
reports tend to focus on larger fauna and hunting implements
such as the atlatl and bow.
Despite ranking low in the overall archeological interpretation
of the Southwest, deadfalls and snares have been found in
quantity at Basketmaker sites in Arizona and Utah and were
used (and still are in some regions) at places like Hopi and
Supai.
469

As experienced primitive trappers know, the use of deadfalls
and snares is a very calorie-efficient method for obtaining
wild game from the landscape.
Bird Snares
“We little boys made snares of horse-hair to catch birds. I
learned to catch bluebirds with a hair from a horse’s tail set as
a snare on the upper stem of a sunflower stalk, with a worm
for bait,” said Hopi elder Don C. Talayesva in his biography
Sun Chief.
I made a trap using a branch of willow with several (human
and horse hair) snares attached. This trap was placed on the
ground where invasive Eurasian doves land frequently to feast
upon wild sunflower seeds.
Upon initial testing, I set the trap down in the evening and
secured it with a line of yucca attached to a grapefruit-sized
rock to prevent any airborne theft of the trap by a particularly
pugnacious dove. At sunrise, my dogs informed me that there
was a visitor in the trap. A groggy stumble outside revealed a
large pigeon with one foot in the snare and the other foot
attempting a wave to his freedom-loving pals above. The trap
had worked and the pigeon was released unharmed by
snipping the cordage near his foot.
Given the snare’s low-tech nature and ease of construction,
setting a few of these in heavily trafficked areas that birds
frequent would provide a hunter with an easy meal with a
minimum of energy expenditure. If one doesn’t have access to
birdseed (wild or otherwise) for bait, then placing the snares
470

alongside water holes, where bird tracks have been found,
would be the next best setup.
Another invention that doesn’t show up in the ethnographic
literature on the Hopi very often is an upright bird snare
perched on a sunflower stalk. The setup is a miniature version
of an Ojibwa bird snare from Canada and is used mainly for
catching small birds such as bluebirds and sparrows, for their
feathers and not their meat.
In DuPont Cave in Utah, a cache of 137 bird snares was
found, while fifty-five bird snares were uncovered in a cave
in Adugegi Canyon in Arizona; both were Basketmaker sites.
In my research I found that “snares consist of a stick
measuring 50 to 60 cm. long by 0.5 to 0.75 cm. in diameter to
which lengths of human hair or vegetable cordage have been
secured at the distal end of each length of cordage is a small
slip noose. Variation is restricted to the number of cords
(from one to six) attached to the snare sticks.” In my own
fieldwork, bird snares that I have had success with each had
five to eight cords attached.
In the western Grand Canyon, on Hualapai tribal land, there
was an even simpler design in which “wild pigeons were
caught in a snare, onu’k. This was a running noose of yucca
twine. It was tied to a bush and would tighten up on the bird’s
leg” (from Walapai Ethnography by A.L. Kroeber).
Paiute Deadfall
471

“The Walapai have a deadfall trap, kweo’ne, in which they
catch rabbits, rats, mice, and even snakes and lizards.” The
Paiute deadfall was used by the Supai in the Grand Canyon.
Traps are placed on the rodent trails in the fields to catch the
squirrels and rats. Snakes and birds are sometimes found in
these devices, but no attempt is made to trap or snare large
game. It is baited with dried peaches or mescal pulp tied
firmly to the trigger.
“The old people showed us how to make deadfalls to catch
kangaroo rats, prairie dogs, porcupines, badgers, chipmunks,
squirrels, and turtledoves. The men used heavy rock deadfalls
for trapping coyotes, foxes, wildcats, and other large animals”
(Hopi elder Don C. Talayesva in his biography Sun Chief).
472

473

Lizard
Promontory Peg Deadfall
In Danger Cave, located two miles east of Wendover, Utah,
archeologists uncovered more than sixty Promontory Peg
components made from willow, milkwort, rabbitbrush, and
other materials. One specimen even had a slice of prickly pear
still impaled on the bait stick!
The Danger Cave specimens exhibited signs of spiral cuts on
the platforms which might, as one researcher noted, have
been to increase surface friction or create “threads” to allow
for a better union between the two pieces.
On a twelve-day desert survival course I taught for the
military, students made two Paiutes and two Promontory Peg
deadfalls each. These were baited and placed among the
rocky ledges in a canyon not far from our camp. The trap
design that was initially successful, and which scored pack
rats, was the Promontory Peg. After refinement (and more
in-field application) during the following week, students
experienced a more balanced success rate between the two
trap systems. This was largely due, I believe, to continual
practice with the delicate Paiute trigger system as well as
more field experience with reading animal signs, which
ensured better trap placement.
The Great Pack Rat Roundup
Every fall, during our annual five-week program in traditional
skills, we spend a great deal of time on the area of food
procurement, particularly teaching a variety of primitive
474

traps. This season, we had the opportunity to test out a
large-scale primitive trapline (in this case aimed at rodents).
The
region
consists
of
forty
acres
of
high-desert,
pinyon-juniper at an elevation of 6,000 feet.
Three hogans and numerous wickiups on site had been
infested with pack rats and we decided to have students set
individual
traps
consisting
of
two
Paiutes
and
two
Promontory Peg deadfalls per person. Traps were baited with
local flora such as currants, prickly pear fruit, and wild
sunflowers. All traps were fenced in with twigs of juniper,
save a small entrance. We agreed that, assuming the animals
caught were healthy, we would utilize the meat in our stews
and jerk any surplus. An adult pack rat doesn’t weigh a lot, so
there wasn’t exactly enough for a juicy rat-burger.
There were six participants and we spread our traps over an
area of approximately twenty acres. Care was made not to
disturb any nests or droppings and everyone got a lecture on
the dangers of zoonotic diseases such as hantavirus from deer
mice droppings and bubonic plague from flea bites.
We determined that there were roughly six pack rats per acre,
or approximately 120 rats over twenty acres. Add in the other
small critters, such as rock squirrels, prairie dogs, cottontails,
and jackrabbits, and a prehistoric trapper would be able to fill
his stew pot using traps.
Traps were set in the afternoon and checked once before
everyone went to sleep and once upon rising in the morning.
The students had been practicing their trap skills for the past
week, since the program began, and were already familiar
with how to fine-tune their deadfall triggers.
475

Here are the results based on twenty-four deadfalls (two of
each type) set out during a twelve-hour period (overnight):
Traps Set: 24
Traps Sprung (but without game): 7
Traps Sprung (with game): 4
Traps Unsprung: 13
Of the traps that were unsprung, some had bait that was
missing while others were untouched. The traps that were
sprung but without game (no kill) had the bait missing;
several bait sticks were completely missing from the scene.
The traps that were sprung with game all had flattened rats.
Two of the latter traps were set inside the hogans that had the
most rodent traffic. The remaining two traps that had game
were set outside: one near the entrance of a large hogan and
the other adjacent to a rock pile near an old wickiup.
Regarding which traps were more successful in this very brief
experiment, the Paiute deadfall accounted for three rats and
the Promontory Peg accounted for one rat. The bait that was
favored was fresh prickly pear fruit that had been gathered
previously from outside the area.
After
students
collected
rats
from
their
traps,
they
immediately tossed each rat on the coals of the fire to burn off
the fleas. We then divided up the rats and had one of these
skinned and boiled up in a stew pot while the other two were
tossed back on the coals to bake the meat in its skin,
Hopi-style. After removing the latter group of rats, the
crunchy, blackened carcasses were gutted to remove the
476

innards and the meat consumed by picking past the skin. One
rat was dried, skeleton and all, to show how to make jerky
from small critters.
Again, be warned that pack rats and other rodents carry fleas
and should be treated by immediately singing off the hair in
the fire or by immersing the carcass underwater in a stream
for thirty minutes.
Skinning and Gutting Your Kill
A “gut hook” or “belly zipper” is the curved hook that’s
located on the back of many hunting knives. Use this to hook
under the skin and “unzip” the pelt without snagging on
internal organs. If you don’t have one on your knife, be very
careful when opening any animal so as to not cut into the
intestines or stomach and contaminate the meat.
You should have a basic understanding of the general location
of a mammal’s internal organs. Since all internal organs are
connected at the throat and anus, by cutting at those two
points you should be able to remove all of them in one big
mass.
477

Mammal anatomy diagram
478

479

Skinning a rodent
•
Esophagus—Connects the mouth and the stomach.
Because it contains a lot of cartilage and gristle, it’s not really
worth eating.
•
Stomach—Contains
harsh acids along with partly
digested food. Unless properly prepared, don’t eat it.
•
Lungs—They’re edible, but most people find them hard
to eat.
•
Heart—Solid muscle and good to eat if tenderized or
boiled first.
•
Kidneys—Good to eat.
•
Small intestine—Contains a lot of harsh acids and partly
digested food. Don’t eat it unless properly cleaned, prepared,
and cooked.
•
Liver—Packed with vitamins and minerals and good to
eat unless there are any discolorations or spots on it. If you
find spots or discolorations, discard.
•
Large intestine—Don’t eat it.
Possible methods for catching a nonvenomous snake:
•
Distract the snake with a stick. Grasp its tail and lift the
snake upwards, leaving the front part of its body on the
ground.
480

•
Lay a large container on its side. Sweep snake in with a
branch or a stick.
•
Use a large bushy stick. Allow the snake to “hide” in your
makeshift “bush.” Tease the snake with another stick or by
wiggling the bushy stick. The snake will often curl around the
branches and twigs. Move your stick to where you want the
snake to go and leave it there. The snake will leave when it
feels safe.
•
Look for an area that has shade and bugs. When you see
the snake, slowly and very, very carefully, pick it up by the
head. Bring it over to the bag or container.
•
Grab the snake by the tail if possible, keeping the rest of
your body as far away as you can. Pin the snake down by
placing the stick directly behind its head and applying
pressure to keep it from moving its head. Drop the tail and
grab the pinned snake by the neck as close to the head as
possible. Use your other hand to support the snake’s body and
keep it from thrashing about. A large snake can easily free
itself from your grip if you let it thrash.
Prepare a Snake for Eating
Snakes can be quite tasty and are a staple of protein, much
like duck, pheasants, turkeys, and rabbits.
Instructions:
481

Black snake
1. Remove the snake’s head and neck up to three inches,
clean with knife;
2. Slit the snake lengthwise up the middle and remove the
insides.
3. Rinse and clean the inner part of the snake.
482

4. Remove the skin. Start where the neck was and slowly peel
back.
5. Remove the tenderloins of the reptile. You do this by
laying the snake belly down (like you would fillet a fish) and
cutting the meat away from the back and ribs.
6. Place the meat in a bowl of fresh water with about one
tablespoon of salt. Let this sit until you are ready to grill or
fry.
Survival Fishing
Fish are a valuable food source, and all freshwater fish in
North America are edible. In a survival situation, there a
several ways to catch fish, including using a sharpened stick
as a fish spear, or making a fish net for small minnows out of
a T-shirt.
Angling
Angling is the method of catching fish that people are familiar
with. You’ll need a hook, line, rod, and a small weight to take
the hook down. You’ll also need a float to keep the bait off
the lake or pond bottom. You can use any small floating
object as a bobber, including a small piece of bark. You don’t
need a float in streams and flowing water.
483

Carp
484

Large dip net made from a hefty oak branch and the
inner strands of 550 cord.
485

High-altitude cooking
You should have a line and hook as part of your survival kit.
Hooks can also be improvised from other kinds of materials
such as safety pins, thorns, bones, and wood. In order to be
successful at fishing, you need to know something about the
behavior of the fish you’re after. In general, the best time to
486

catch fish is just before dawn, just after dusk, or when bad
weather is imminent.
Like most all other living creatures, fish choose those places
where they are most comfortable and where they can most
easily find their prey. If it’s hot and the water is low, deep
shaded water is probably where you should look. In cooler
weather, you probably will find your catch in a shallow place
where the sun warms the water. Fish like to shelter under
banks and below rocks or deadfalls.
Fish are more likely to take bait native to their water, so try to
figure out what they eat. For example, insects and worms can
be used as bait in practically any water. If one type of bait
isn’t successful, change to another.
Survival Fishing with a Spear
Spear fishing takes time, patience, and practice. For best
results, use a forked spear and look for shallow water where
your catch is visible. Slowly move the spear as close as
possible to your catch, and spear it quickly.
Fishing Nets
In a survival situation, an improvised net can prove extremely
effective. For instance, use an undershirt and a y-shaped
branch to make a landing net. T-shirts and other pieces of
fabric can also be used as nets to catch small fish.
Survival Cooking
487

Cooking is an important skill for those who spend time in the
wilderness. Cooking not only makes many foods more
appetizing to taste, but also ensures that parasites and bacteria
are killed. The last thing you want is to get sick from food
poisoning.
While it’s certainly convenient to carry a compact camping
stove in the wilderness, in many situations a cooking fire is
more practical and allows a wider variety of cooking
opportunities.
Hot Stone Cooking
This cooking method is ideal for fish, thin slices of meat, and
eggs. Simply light a fire above a bed of nonporous stones.
Don’t use soft, porous stones with high moisture content
because they might explode on heating.
Let the fire burn for an hour or more, then brush away fire
and embers with a stick or a handful of long grass. Cook your
food directly on the rocks, the way you would using a frying
pan.
Hot Stone Pit
This alternative acts as a primitive oven.
Dig a pit about two feet deep and two feet in diameter. Pack
the pit bottom and walls and cover the bottom with hot
fist-sized stones. Then add a thin layer of soil. Wrap your
meat in fresh green plant leaves or moss. Add another thin
layer of soil and more hot stones. Cover with earth or sand.
488

Fish fillets skewered with green willow sticks bake near
the coals.
A Modern Hunter-Gatherer’s Outdoor Calendar from
Northern Arizona—by Tony Nester
In Arizona there are many life zones and a range of
environments, from low desert at 1,200 feet to alpine at
10,000 feet. With such a range of elevations and life zones,
there are unique opportunities to forage and hunt.
Each region of the country presents its own challenges and
optimal times for harvesting, so you will have to look into
what is available where you live and travel and create your
own calendar. Below is an example of my personal calendar
for hunting and foraging in northern and central Arizona by
season.
Spring
Collect young cattail and bulrush shoots from riverbanks and
riparian areas
Gather young amaranth, dandelion, curly dock, and goosefoot
leaves for salads
489

Collect wild onions before flowering
Fish for trout and panfish
Hunt rabbits and raccoons
Summer
Gather currant berries and raspberries
Collect cattail pollen for making bread
Harvest purslane for salads
Collect medicinal plant leaves for drying
Collect crayfish
Fish for catfish and panfish
Hunt rabbits
Gather puffball mushrooms
Pick banana yucca fruits
Fall
Gather large quantities of gambel oak acorns and piñon pine
nuts
490

Bow hunt deer and any other large game in the area
Hunt squirrels, rabbits, and raccoons
Collect medicinal plant roots for drying
Gather mesquite pods for grinding into flour
Harvest apples from local orchards
Winter
Hunt rabbits
Bow hunt deer (during late archery season)
Harvest willow for teaching trap-making and making fish
baskets
Process dried acorns (from the fall) into flour
Refine skills, do research on mammals/trapping/plants, and
wait for spring
As you can see, summer and fall offer a bounty of resources,
especially in terms of nuts, acorns, and plant resources
compared with winter and spring. I would encourage you to
formulate your own region-specific calendar.
491

As your skills progress and you become more proficient at
hunting and gathering, you will realize that what seems, at
first glance, to be an inhospitable landscape is in reality a
generous land that will sustain those who know where and,
most important, how to look.
492

FOOD AND HUNTING
493

11
“Everybody talks about the weather, but no one does anything
about it.”
—Charles Dudley Warner
Whether we realize it or not, most of us subconsciously
“forecast” the weather. Say you look outside and see dark
clouds approaching. Chances are you’ll grab your rain gear as
you walk out the door. If you’re out on a trail run and are
suddenly hit by a gust of wind, you’re likely to glance up at
the sky to look for other signs of ominous weather.
There are better ways to forecast the weather than relying on
“subconscious forecasting” alone. In the mountains, desert,
jungle, or at sea, an understanding of weather patterns is
critical. The ability to accurately forecast and plan for
changes in the weather could save your life.
Mountain Weather
Mountain weather can be extremely erratic and harder to read
than in other areas. Conditions vary with altitude, latitude,
and exposure to atmospheric winds and air masses.
The weather there can vary from stormy winds to calm, and
from extreme cold to heat within a short time or with just a
minor shift in locality. The severity and variance of the
494

weather can have a major impact on your survival in the
mountains.
Considerations for Planning
Mountain weather can work in your favor or become a
dangerous obstacle to survival, depending on how well you
understand it and to what extent you take advantage of its
unique characteristics.
The clouds that often cover the tops of mountains and the
fogs that cover valleys are excellent means of concealing
movements that normally are made during darkness or in
smoke. Tactically, limited visibility can be used to your
advantage. Darkness can be your friend.
The safety or danger of almost all high mountain regions,
especially in winter, depends upon a change of just a few
degrees of temperature above or below the freezing point.
Ease and speed of travel depend mainly on the weather.
Terrain that can be crossed swiftly and safely one day may
become impassable or highly dangerous the next due to
snowfall, rainfall, or a rise in temperature. The reverse can
happen just as quickly. The prevalence of avalanches depends
on terrain, snow conditions, and weather factors.
Some mountains, such as those found in desert regions, are
dry and barren with temperatures ranging from extreme heat
in summer to extreme cold in winter. In tropical regions, lush
jungles with heavy seasonal rains and little temperature
variation often cover mountains. High rocky crags with
glaciated peaks can be found in mountain ranges at most
latitudes along the western portion of the Americas and Asia.
495

Severe weather can dramatically lower morale and intensify
basic survival issues. Problems can be minimized if you’ve
been trained to accept the weather and are properly equipped.
Mountain Air
High mountain air is typically dry, especially in winter, when
cold air has a reduced capacity to hold water vapor. Because
of this increased dryness, equipment does not rust as quickly
and organic material decomposes slowly. The dry air also
requires that you increase your consumption of water. That’s
because reduced water vapor in the air causes an increase in
evaporation of moisture from the skin as well as a loss of
water through transpiration in the respiratory system. Cold air
tends to subconsciously discourage people from drinking
enough liquids; always keep this in mind, and make a
conscious effort to increase your fluid intake.
Pressure is low in mountainous areas because of the altitude.
The barometer usually drops 2 ½ centimeters for every
thousand feet gained in elevation (three percent).
The sun’s rays are absorbed or reflected in part by the
molecular content of the atmosphere. Rays are reflected at a
greater rate at lower altitudes. At higher altitudes, the thinner,
drier air has a reduced molecular content and, consequently,
doesn’t filter the sun’s rays nearly as much.
As such, the intensity of both visible and ultraviolet rays is
greater with increased altitude. These conditions increase the
chance of sunburn, especially when combined with a snow
cover that reflects the rays upward.
496

Weather Characteristics
The earth is surrounded by an atmosphere that’s divided into
layers. The world’s weather systems occur in the lowest of
these layers, the “troposphere,” which reaches as high as
40,000 feet. Weather is produced by several factors: the
atmosphere, oceans, land masses, unequal heating and cooling
from the sun, and the earth’s rotation. The weather found in
any one location depends on factors such as the air
temperature,
humidity
(moisture
content),
air
pressure
(barometric pressure), how that air is being moved, and if it is
being lifted or not.
Air pressure is defined as the “weight” of the atmosphere at
any given place. The higher the pressure, the better the
weather will be. Conversely, the lower the air pressure, the
more likely the weather will be problematic. The average air
pressure at sea level is 29.92 inches of mercury (hg) or 1,013
millibars (mb). The higher the altitude, the lower the pressure.
497

Barometer
High Pressure: The characteristics of a high-pressure area are
as follow:
•
The airflow is clockwise and out, otherwise known as an
“anticyclone.”
•
Is associated with clear skies.
•
Generally the winds will be mild.
498

•
Depicted as a blue “H” on most weather maps.
Low Pressure: The characteristics of a low-pressure area are
as follow:
•
The air flows counterclockwise and in, otherwise known
as a “cyclone.”
•
Is associated with bad weather.
•
Depicted as a red “L” on most weather maps.
Air from a high-pressure area is trying to flow out and
equalize its pressure with the surrounding air. Low pressure,
on the other hand, builds up vertically by pulling air in from
outside itself, which causes atmospheric instability, resulting
in bad weather.
On a weather map, these differences in pressure are depicted
as isobars, which resemble contour lines and are measured in
either millibars or inches of mercury. Areas of high pressure
are called “ridges” and lows are called “troughs.”
Wind
The ridges and passes found in high mountains are seldom
calm. Inversely, strong winds in protected valleys are rare.
Normally, wind speed increases with altitude since the earth’s
frictional drag is strongest near the ground. This effect is
intensified by mountainous terrain because winds accelerate
when they converge through mountain passes and canyons.
This funneling effect can cause the wind to blast with great
499

intensity on an exposed mountainside or summit. Usually, the
local wind direction is controlled by topography.
The force of wind quadruples each time wind speed doubles.
So a wind that blows at forty knots pushes four times harder
than a wind blowing at twenty knots. As wind strength
increases, gusts become more important and may be fifty
percent higher than the average wind speed. When wind
strength increases to a hurricane force of sixty-four knots or
more, you should lay on the ground during gusts to avoid
injury and continue moving during lulls. If a hurricane-force
wind blows where there is sand or snow, dense clouds will fill
the air. Rocky debris or chunks of snow crust will be hurled
near the surface. In winter, or at high altitudes, you need to be
constantly aware of the wind-chill factor and associated
cold-weather injuries (see chapter 4).
500

Weather map
Winds are the result of the uneven heating of the air by the
sun and rotation of the earth. Much of the world’s weather
depends on a system of winds that blow in a set direction.
Above hot surfaces, air expands and moves to colder areas
where it cools, becomes denser, and sinks to the earth’s
surface. The results are a circulation of air from the poles
501

along the surface of the earth to the equator, where air rises
and moves to the poles again.
This heating and cooling dynamic, coupled with the rotation
of
the
earth,
causes
surface
winds.
In
the
Northern
Hemisphere, the three prevailing winds are:
1. Polar Easterlies—winds from the polar region moving from
the east. This is air that has cooled and settled at the poles.
2. Prevailing Westerlies—winds that originate from the west.
This is where prematurely cooled air, due to the earth’s
rotation, settles to the surface.
3. Northeast Tradewinds—winds that originate from the north
and/or from the northeast.
The jet stream is a long, meandering current of high-speed
wind often exceeding 250 knots that flows in the transition
zone between the troposphere and the stratosphere—known
as the tropopause. These winds generally blow from a
westerly direction, and dip down and pick up air masses from
the tropical regions, then move north and pull air down from
the polar regions.
Air, which makes up wind and moves in parcels is called “air
masses.” These air masses can vary from the size of a small
town to as large as a country. They’re named according to
their area of origin:
1. Maritime—over water.
2. Continental—over land.
502

3. Polar—north of sixty degrees north latitude.
4. Tropical—south of sixty degrees north latitude.
When
you
combine
these
parcels
of
air
with
their
descriptions, you get the four types of air masses:
1. Continental Polar—a cold, dry air mass.
2. Maritime Polar—a cold, wet air mass.
3. Maritime Tropical—a warm, wet air mass.
4. Continental Tropical—a warm, dry air mass.
Two types of winds are found in mountain environments.
1. Anabatic Winds (valley winds)—These are winds that
blow up mountain valleys to replace rising warm air. They’re
usually light.
2. Katabatic Winds (mountain winds)—Winds that blow
down mountain valley slopes caused by the cooling of air.
They can be strong.
Humidity
Humidity is defined as the amount of moisture in the air. All
air holds water vapor even when it can’t be seen. But air can
hold only a limited amount of vapor. The warmer the air, the
more moisture it can hold. When a body of air reaches its
capacity to hold moisture, that air is “saturated” or has 100
percent relative humidity.
503

When air is cooled beyond its saturation point, it releases the
moisture it’s holding in the form of clouds, fog, dew, rain,
snow, and so on. The temperature at which this happens is
called the “condensation point.” The condensation point
varies depending on the amount of water vapor in the air and
the temperature of that air. If a body of air contains a great
deal of water, condensation can occur at sixty-eight degrees
Fahrenheit, but if the air is dry and does not hold much
moisture, condensation may not form until the temperature
drops to thirty-two degrees or below.
Frontal lifting
504

505

Convective lifting: Altocumulus. Mid-level layered heap
cloud with many convective cells. These clouds are a result
of slow lifting that is common ahead of an advancing cold
front. The thinner regions between the cells correspond to
sinking air with the thick regions to rising air.
The adiabatic lapse rate is the rate at which air cools as it rises
or warms as it descends. This rate varies depending on the
moisture content of the air. Saturated (moist) air will warm
and cool approximately 3.2 degrees Fahrenheit per 1,000 feet
of elevation. Dry air will warm and cool approximately 5.5
degrees Fahrenheit per 1,000 feet of elevation gained or lost.
Cloud Formation
Clouds
are
excellent
indicators
of
prevailing
weather
conditions. Their shapes and patterns can be used to forecast
weather with little need for additional equipment such as a
barometer, wind meter, and thermometer. When air is lifted or
cooled beyond its saturation point (100 percent relative
humidity), clouds form. There are four ways that air is lifted
and cooled beyond its saturation point. They are:
506

Cyclonic lifting
1.Convective Lifting—This occurs when the sun’s heat
radiating off the earth’s surface causes air currents (thermals)
to rise straight up and lift air to a point of saturation.
2. Frontal Lifting—A front is formed when two air masses of
differing moisture content and temperatures collide. Since air
masses will not mix, warmer air is forced aloft over the colder
507

air mass. There it’s cooled and can reach its saturation point.
Frontal lifting creates the majority of precipitation.
Orographic lifting
508

Nimbostratus clouds
509

Stratus clouds
510

Cumulus clouds
511

512

Stratocumulus clouds
513

Cloud chart
3. Cyclonic Lifting—An area of low pressure pulls air into its
center in a counterclockwise direction. Once this outside air
reaches the center of the low pressure, it has nowhere to go
but up. The air continues to lift until it reaches the saturation
point.
4. Orographic Lifting—This occurs when an air mass is
pushed up and over a block of higher ground such as a
mountain. Air is cooled due to the adiabatic lapse rate until
the air’s saturation point is reached.
Types of Clouds
Clouds are signposts of the weather. They can be classified by
height or appearance, or even by the amount of area covered
514

vertically or horizontally. Clouds fall into five categories:
low-, mid-, and high-level clouds; vertically developed
clouds; and less common clouds.
Low-Level Clouds
Low-level clouds (0 to 6,500 feet) are either cumulus or
stratus. Low-level clouds are mostly composed of water
droplets since their bases lie below 6,500 feet. When
temperatures are cold enough, these clouds may also contain
ice particles and snow.
Precipitating low-level clouds are either nimbostratus or
stratocumulus Nimbostratus clouds are dark, low-level clouds
accompanied by light to moderate precipitation. They block
visibility of the sun or moon, which distinguishes them from
mid-level altostratus clouds. Because of the fog and falling
precipitation
commonly
found
beneath
and
around
nimbostratus clouds, the cloud base is typically extremely
diffuse and difficult to accurately define.
Stratocumulus clouds generally appear as a low, lumpy layer
of
clouds
that
is
sometimes
accompanied
by
weak
precipitation. Stratocumulus vary in color from dark gray to
light gray and may appear as rounded masses with breaks of
clear sky in between.
Low-level clouds can be identified by their height above
nearby
surrounding
relief
of
known
elevation.
Most
precipitation originates from low-level clouds, because rain or
snow from higher clouds usually evaporates before it reaches
the ground. Low-level clouds usually indicate impending
precipitation, especially if the cloud is more than 3,000 feet
515

thick. Clouds that appear dark at their bases are more than
3,000 feet thick.
Mid-Level Clouds
Mid-level clouds (between 6,500 to 20,000 feet) are identified
by the prefix “alto.” Because of their elevated height, middle
clouds appear less distinct than low clouds. Alto clouds with
sharp edges are warmer because they are composed mainly of
water droplets. Cold clouds, composed mainly of ice crystals
and usually colder than minus 30 degrees F, have distinct
edges that grade gradually into the surrounding sky. Middle
clouds usually indicate fair weather, especially if they rise
over time. Middle clouds that are descending indicate
potential storms, though they are usually hours away. There
are two types of mid-level clouds, altocumulus and altostratus
clouds.
Altocumulus clouds can appear as parallel bands or rounded
masses. Typically a portion of an altocumulus cloud is
shaded, a characteristic that distinguishes it from a high-level
cirrocumulus. Altocumulus clouds usually form in advance of
a cold front. The presence of altocumulus clouds on a warm
humid summer morning suggests that thunderstorms are
likely to form later in the day. Altocumulus clouds that are
scattered rather than even in a blue sky are called “fair
weather” cumulus and indicate the arrival of high pressure
and clear skies.
Altostratus clouds are often confused with cirrostratus. The
one distinguishing feature is that a halo is not observed
around the sun or moon. With altostratus, the sun or moon is
516

only vaguely visible and appears as if it were shining through
frosted glass.
Altocumulus clouds
517

Altostratus clouds
518

Cirrus clouds
519

Cirrostratus
High-Level Clouds
High-level clouds (more than 20,000 feet above ground level)
are usually frozen, indicating air temperatures below minus
thirty degrees Fahrenheit, with a fibrous structure and blurred
outlines. The sky is often covered with a thin veil of cirrus
that partly obscures the sun or, at night, produces a ring of
light around the moon. The arrival of cirrus indicates moisture
aloft and the approach of a traveling storm system—which
means that precipitation is often twenty-four to thirty-six
520

hours away. As the storm approaches, the cirrus thickens and
lowers,
becoming
altostratus
and
eventually
stratus.
Temperatures are warm, humidity rises, and winds become
southerly or southeasterly. The two types of high-level clouds
are cirrus and cirrostratus.
Cirrus clouds, typically found at altitudes greater than 20,000
feet, are the most common high-level clouds. They’re
composed of ice crystals that form when supercooled water
droplets freeze. Cirrus clouds generally occur in fair weather
and point in the direction of air movement at their elevation.
They can form a variety of shapes and sizes from nearly
straight to comma-like to all tangled together. Extensive
cirrus clouds indicate an approaching warm front.
Cirrostratus clouds are sheet-like, high-level clouds composed
of ice crystals. They’re relatively transparent, can cover the
entire sky, and be up to several thousand feet thick. The sun
or moon can be seen through cirrostratus. Sometimes the only
indication of cirrostratus clouds is a halo around the sun or
moon. Cirrostratus clouds tend to thicken as a warm front
approaches, signifying an increased production of ice crystals.
As a result, the halo gradually disappears and the sun or moon
becomes less visible.
Vertical-Development Clouds
Clouds with vertical development can grow to heights in
excess of 39,000 feet and release incredible amounts of
energy. The two types of clouds with vertical development
are fair-weather cumulus and cumulonimbus.
521

Fair-weather cumulus clouds have the appearance of floating
cotton balls and have a lifespan of five to forty minutes.
Known for their flat bases and distinct outlines, fair-weather
cumulus exhibit only slight vertical growth, with the cloud
tops designating the limit of the rising air. Given suitable
conditions, however, these clouds can develop into towering
cumulonimbus
clouds
associated
with
powerful
thunderstorms. Fair-weather cumulus clouds are fueled by
bubbles of buoyant air known as “thermals” that rise from the
earth’s surface. As the air ascends, the water vapor contained
with it cools and condenses forming droplets.
Young fair-weather cumulus clouds have sharply defined
edges and bases while the edges of older clouds appear more
ragged because of erosion. Evaporation along the cloud edges
cools the surrounding air, making it heavier and producing a
sinking motion outside the cloud. This down-ward motion
inhibits further convection and growth of additional thermals
from below, which is why fair-weather cumulus typically
have expanses of clear sky between them. Without a
continued supply of rising air, the cloud begins to erode and
eventually disappears.
Cumulonimbus clouds are much larger and more vertically
developed than fair-weather cumulus. They can exist as
individual towers or form a line of towers called a squall line.
Fueled
by
vigorous
convective
updrafts,
the
tops
of
cumulonimbus clouds can reach 39,000 feet or higher. Lower
levels of cumulonimbus clouds consist mostly of water
droplets. At higher elevations, where the temperatures are
well below freezing, ice crystals dominate the composition.
Under favorable conditions, harmless fair-weather cumulus
clouds
can
quickly
develop
into
large
cumulonimbus
522

associated with powerful thunderstorms known as supercells.
Supercells are large thunderstorms with deep rotating updrafts
and can have a lifetime of several hours. Supercells produce
frequent lightning, large hail, damaging winds, and tornadoes.
These storms tend to develop during the afternoon and early
evening when the effects of the sun’s heat are strongest.
Other Cloud Types
Clouds that don’t fit into the previous four groups include
orographic clouds, lenticulars, and contrails.
Orographic clouds develop when air is forced upward by the
earth’s topography. When stable air encounters a mountain,
it’s lifted upward and cools. If that air cools to its saturation
temperature during this process, the water vapor within
condenses and becomes visible as a cloud. Upon reaching the
mountaintop, this heavy air will sink down the other side,
warming as it descends. Once the air returns to its original
height, it has the same buoyancy as the surrounding air.
However, the air does not stop immediately because it still
has momentum carrying it downward. With continued
descent, the air becomes warmer, causing the surrounding air
to accelerate back upwards towards its original height,
creating lenticular clouds.
Lenticular clouds are cloud caps that often form above
pinnacles and peaks, and usually indicate higher winds aloft.
Cloud caps with a shape similar to a flying saucer indicate
extremely high winds (more than forty knots). Lenticulars
should always be watched with caution. If they grow and
descend, expect bad weather.
523

Contrails are clouds that are formed by water vapor being
inserted into the upper atmosphere by the exhaust of jet
engines. Contrails evaporate rapidly in fair weather. If it takes
longer than two hours for contrails to evaporate, that indicates
impending bad weather (usually about twenty-four hours
prior to a front).
Orographic clouds
524

Lenticulars
525

Contrails
526

Lightning
Cloud Interpretation
Cloud cover always appears greater on or near the horizon,
especially if the sky is covered with cumulus clouds, since the
observer is looking more at the sides of the clouds rather than
between them. Cloud cover estimates should be restricted to
527

sky areas more than forty degrees above the horizon— in
other words, to the local sky.
Fronts
Fronts occur when two air masses of differing moisture
content
and
temperature
meet.
One
indicator
of
an
approaching front is the progression of the clouds. There are
four types of fronts: warm, cold, occluded, and stationary.
A warm front occurs when warm air moves into and over a
slower or stationary cold air mass. Because warm air is less
dense, it will rise up and over the cooler air. The cloud types
seen when a warm front approaches are cirrus, cirrostratus,
nimbostratus
(producing
rain),
and
fog.
Occasionally,
cumulonimbus clouds will be seen during the summer
months.
A cold front occurs when a cold air mass overtakes a slower
or stationary warm air mass. Cold air, because it’s denser,
forces the warm air up. Clouds observed include cirrus,
cumulus, and then cumulonimbus producing a short period of
showers.
Cold fronts generally move faster than warm fronts. When
they over-take a warm front, warm air is progressively lifted
from the surface. Typically the cloud progression will be
cirrus, cirrostratus, altostratus, and nimbostratus. Precipitation
can be from light to heavy.
A stationary front is a zone with no significant air movement.
When a warm or cold front stops moving, it becomes a
stationary front. Once this boundary starts moving forward, it
528

becomes either a warm or cold front. When crossing from one
side of a stationary front to the other, one will typically
experience a noticeable change in temperature and shift in
wind direction. Weather is usually clear to partly cloudy
along a stationary front.
Temperature
Normally, the temperature drops three to five degrees
Fahrenheit for every 1,000 feet gain in altitude when the air is
motionless.
But
when
air
is
moving
up
a
mountain
accompanied by condensation (clouds, fog, or precipitation),
the temperature of the air will drop 3.2 degrees Fahrenheit for
every 1,000 feet of elevation. If air is moving up a mountain
and no clouds are forming, the temperature of the air will
drop 5.5 degrees Fahrenheit for every 1,000 feet of elevation.
On
cold,
clear,
calm
mornings,
air
temperatures
will
sometimes rise as you climb. This phenomenon is called
temperature inversion. Temperature inversions are caused
when mountain air is cooled by ice, snow, and the heat loss of
thermal radiation. Cooler, denser air settles into the valleys
and low areas. The inversion continues until the sun warms
the surface of the earth or a moderate wind causes a mixing of
the warm and cold layers. Temperature inversions are
common in the mountainous regions of the arctic, subarctic,
and mid-latitudes.
At high altitudes, solar heating creates the greatest contrasts
in temperature. Since the altitude becomes thinner the higher
you go, more direct heat is received than at lower levels,
where solar radiation is absorbed and reflected by dust and
water vapor. Differences of forty to fifty degrees Fahrenheit
529

can occur between surface temperatures in the shade and
surface temperatures in the sun. At sea level this variance is
normally
seven
degrees
Fahrenheit.
Therefore,
at
high
elevations special care should be taken to avoid sunburn and
snow blindness. The clear air at high altitudes also favors
rapid cooling at night. Much of the chilled air drains
downward due to convection currents so that the differences
between day and night temperatures are greater in valleys
than on slopes.
Air is cooled on the windward side of the mountain as it gains
altitude. This cooling effect (3.2 degrees Fahrenheit per 1,000
feet) occurs more slowly if clouds form due to heat release
when water vapor becomes liquid. On the leeward side of the
mountain, this heat gained from the condensation on the
windward side combines with the normal heating that occurs
as the air descends and air pressure increases. Therefore, air
and winds on the leeward slope are considerably warmer than
on the windward slope. It’s important to consider these
heating and cooling patterns when planning for mountain
travel.
Heat Index Charts
The heat index combines air temperature and relative
humidity in an attempt to determine the human-perceived
equivalent temperature—how hot it feels, termed the “felt” air
temperature.
To use the heat index charts, find the appropriate temperature
at the top of the chart. Read down until you are opposite the
humidity/dew point. The number which appears at the
530

intersection of the temperature and humidity/dew point is the
heat index.
Source: Meteorology for Scientists and Engineers, 2nd edition
by Roland B. Stull
Weather Forecasting
Portable aneroid barometers, thermometers, wind meters, and
hygrometers are useful in making local weather forecasts.
Reports from any weather service, including USAF, USN, or
the National Weather Bureau, are also helpful. But weather
reports should be used in conjunction with the locally
observable current condition to forecast future weather.
Remember that weather at various elevations may be quite
different due to cloud height, temperature, and barometric
pressure. Rainy overcast conditions may occur in a lower
area, while warmer, clear weather affects the mountains.
531

The method a forecaster chooses will depend upon the
forecaster’s experience, the amount of data available, and the
level of difficulty that the forecast situation presents.
The five methods of forecasting weather are:
1. Persistence Method. The simplest way of predicting the
weather assumes that “today equals tomorrow.” If today was
hot and dry, the persistence method predicts that tomorrow
will be the same.
2. Trends Method. “Nowcasting” involves determining the
speed and direction of fronts, high-and low-pressure centers,
and clouds and precipitation. For example, if a cold front
moves 300 miles during a twenty-four-hour period, we can
predict that it will travel 300 miles in another twenty-four
hours.
532

Combined air velocity and air temperature meter,
thermal
anemometer.
The
telescope
probe
has
a
maximum length of 101 cm, suitable for measurements at
difficult to reach locations.
3. Climatology Method. This method averages weather
statistics accumulated over many years. This only works
effectively when weather patterns are similar from one year to
the next.
4. Analog Method. This method examines a particular day’s
forecast and recalls a day in the past when the weather looked
similar. This method is problematic because finding a perfect
analogy is difficult.
5.
Numerical
Weather
Prediction.
This
method
uses
computers to analyze all weather conditions and is the most
accurate of the five methods.
Recording Data
An accurate observation is essential in noting trends in
weather patterns. A minor shift in the winds may signal an
approaching storm. Establish wind direction as a magnetic
direction from which the wind is blowing. Measure wind
speed in knots. Use the chart below to determine how fast the
wind is blowing.
Speed
(kph)Effects of Wind
533

0-1
Calm. No wind; smoke rises straight up.
1-3
Light Air. Smoke moves sideways a little.
4-7
Light Breeze. Wind felt on face; leaves rustle; wind
vanes move.
8-12 Gentle Breeze. Leaves and twigs in constant motion;
wind moves
small flags.
13-18Moderate Breeze. Wind raises dust and loose paper;
small branches
move.
19-24Fresh Breeze. Small trees begin to sway; very small
waves on lakes.
25-31Strong Breeze. Large branches in motion; telephone
wires whis-
tling.
534

32-38Moderate Gale. Whole trees are in motion; hard to
walk against
wind.
39-46Fresh Gale. Wind breaks twigs off trees; cannot walk
in wind.
47-54Strong Gale. Wind damages some houses; awnings
blown away.
55-63Whole Gale. Rarely experienced; trees uprooted; major
damage to
homes.
64-72Storm. Lots of damage.
73+
Hurricane. Very rare; lots of damage.
If an anemometer is available, assess speed to the nearest
knot. If no anemometer is available, estimate wind speed
according to the way objects such as trees, bushes, and tents
are affected.
Observe the farthest visible major terrain or man-made
feature and determine the distance using any available map.
535

Include any precipitation or obscuring weather. The following
are examples of present weather:
•
Rain—continuous and steady precipitation that lasts at
least one hour.
•
Rain
showers—short-term
and
potentially
heavy
downpours
that
rarely
last
more
than
one
hour.
•
Snow—continuous and steady frozen precipitation that lasts
at least one hour.
•
Snow showers—short-term and potentially heavy frozen
downpours that rarely last more than one hour.
•
Fog, haze—obstructs visibility of ground objects.
•
Thunderstorms—potentially
dangerous
storms.
Thunderstorms will produce lightning, heavy downpours,
colder temperatures, tornadoes, hail, and strong gusty winds
at the surface and aloft. Winds commonly exceed thirty-five
knots.
Measure total cloud cover in eighths. Divide the sky into
eight different sections measuring from horizon to horizon.
Count the sections with cloud cover and record the total cloud
cover in eighths. (For example, if half of the sections are
covered with clouds, total cloud cover is 4/8.) Estimate where
the cloud base intersects elevated terrain. If clouds aren’t
touching terrain, then estimate to the best of your ability.
Assess temperature with or without a thermometer. With a
thermometer, if measurement in temperature is in degrees
Celsius, you can convert Fahrenheit to Celsius: C = F minus
536

32 times 0.55. To convert Celsius to Fahrenheit: F = 1.8 times
C plus 32.
Example: 41 degrees F-32 x .55 = 5 degrees C
5 degrees C x 1.8 + 32 = 41 degrees F
Without a thermometer, estimate temperature as above or
below freezing (0°C), and as close to the actual temperature
as possible.
With a barometer or altimeter, measure pressure trend. A high
pressure moving in will cause altimeters to indicate lower
elevation. A low pressure moving in will cause altimeters to
indicate higher elevation.
Note changes or trends in weather conditions.
Deteriorating trends include:
•
Marked shifts in wind direction
•
Marked wind speed increases
•
Changes in obstructions to visibility
•
Increasing cloud coverage
•
Increased precipitation
•
Lowering cloud ceilings
•
Marked cooler temperature changes, which could indicate
that a cold front is passing through
537

•
Marked increase in humidity
•
Decreasing barometric pressure, which indicates a lower
pressure system is moving through the area
Improving trends include:
•
Steady wind direction, which indicates no change in
weather systems in the area
•
Decreasing wind speeds
•
Clearing of obstructions to visibility
•
Decreasing or ending precipitation
•
Decreasing cloud coverage
•
Increasing height of cloud ceilings
•
Temperature changes slowly warmer
•
Humidity decreases
•
Increasing barometric pressure
538

WEATHER
539

12
“Not until we are lost do we understand ourselves.”
—Henry Thoreau
540

Mt. Laguna, Calif—Students from Basic Underwater
Demolition/SEAL (BUD/S) class 284 participate in a land
navigation training exercise. Land navigation familiarizes
students with map and compass navigation in the third
and final phase of BUD/S training.
A Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE)
instructor from the Center For Security Forces teaches
students to identify which direction to travel using a map
and compass during the land navigation training at a
training site in Warner Springs, Calif.
541

Whether you’re a SEAL on a mission or just trekking through
the wild, it’s always important to plan a primary and a
secondary route in to and out of the area. When you plan, be
sure to plan for contingencies. Consider the fitness levels and
the condition of the people with you as well as the possible
problems you might encounter.
Route Planning
Write down the route you plan to take, broken down into
stages, and the time you expect to return. The more detailed
the better. Leave this information with a trusted person who
will be able to contact help if you do not return when planned.
Keep in mind that your speed of travel will depend of several
things:
1. Fitness level (the team can only move as fast as the slowest
person)
2. Amount of weight the team is carrying
3. Weather conditions
4. Terrain. A large group will always travel more slowly than
one or two people.
Nasmith’s Rule
W. Nasmith was a Scottish mountaineer in the late nineteenth
century who came up with a formula for estimating the time
needed to hike in the mountains that is still used today.
According to Nasmith’s Rule, you should allow one hour for
542

every five kilometers (three miles) and add thirty minutes for
every 1,000 feet (three hundred meters) you gain in height.
The rule assumes that you’re a fit, experienced climber and
doesn’t allow for rests, bad weather, or descents. Keep in
mind that steep descents can slow you down.
Escape Routes
When planning difficult climbs or treks, always plan your
escape routes—in other words, an easy way off a mountain,
out of the desert or jungle, or to nearby shelter or SAFE (safe
area for evacuation) area. Your escape route should be easy to
follow even in bad weather and should not be too steep or
difficult in case someone in your party is injured.
Survival Navigation
Stay proficient with your map and compass training. Too
many people rely solely on a GPS and don’t know how to
navigate using a map and compass. Everything mechanical
will eventually break, and being under a triple canopy in a
jungle or not being able to reach a satellite can cause you
serious problems.
Global Positioning Systems (GPS)
There’s a big difference between the GPS device you might
have mounted in your car and a handheld wilderness GPS.
Trip GPS devices are great for urban navigation, supplying
alternate routes as well as food, accommodations, and activity
options.
543

Wilderness GPSs units are portable handheld devices that go
where you go and are intended for off-road use. Portable
handheld GPS devices are designed to help users track routes
and find their way out of difficult situations not found on
standard maps. Some handhelds even include a two-way
radio. Others include removable memory cards for the easy
download of multiple destination maps.
All GPS receivers measure three things: your position, your
speed, and the current time. (More expensive receivers
sometimes include a true magnetic compass and barometric
altimeter, but these are completely separate instruments that
don’t use GPS to make their measurements.) All the other
features—things like distance, bearing, map location, and
even such vital details as sunrise and sunset or the best fishing
times—are just calculations your receiver makes from those
three measurements.
There are four basic things you should know regarding how to
travel with a GPS:
1. Know how to store your current location in GPS memory.
This is known as marking a waypoint.
2. Know how to get back to that stored location from
wherever you might be.
3. Know how to program into your GPS receiver the
coordinates of locations you want to go to. This is known as
entering a waypoint.
544

4. Know how to navigate from one stored waypoint to the
next in succession until you get to your destination. This is
known as following a route.
If you know how to do those four things, you’ll be able to get
where you want to go and return safely using a GPS.
Students in the Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape
(SERE) course plot their bearing and range to navigate en
route to a location at a training site in Warner Springs,
Calif.
545

Compass
546

Map and GPS
547

548

SPOT GPS
EPIRBs
Before you purchase a GPS, you should do some research and
learn the features and technologies of the different models.
Some such as the McMurdo Fastfind GPS Personal Location
Beacon emit an EPIRB (Emergency Position Indicating Radio
Beacon). Once activated by the user (or immersed in water
for some marine models), the beacon sends a signal to a
satellite above the earth with your specific beacon code. A
monitoring site will identify the owner and attempt to contact
the emergency numbers provided and also contact the U.S.
Coast Guard if near water, and local authorities if on land.
SPOT
Once activated, Spot Satellite GPS Messenger with GPS
tracking will acquire your exact coordinates from the GPS
network, and send that location along with a distress message
to a GEOS International Emergency Response Center every
five minutes until cancelled.
GEOS is an entire ecosystem of best-of-breed services that
encompass security, safety, and reliable communications for
those anywhere in the world. The GEOS programs are
delivered through a fusion of state-of-the-art technology with
the unparalleled experience of the very best and most
respected specialists in the fields of international, personal,
and
corporate
protection;
communications;
international
search
and
rescue
(SAR);
and
worldwide
emergency
response.
549

SPOT’s
Emergency
Response
Center
next
notifies
the
appropriate emergency responders based on your location and
personal information— which may include local police,
highway patrol, the Coast Guard, your country’s embassy or
consulate, or other emergency response or search and rescue
teams—as well as notifying your emergency contact persons
about the receipt of a distress signal.
SPOT also offers a software package that allows you to set up
your personal SPOT profile, which can be managed from a
personal computer. After registering your device, you can
configure specific alerts and send out three different types of
messages: check-in messages, help requests, and emergency/
911 alerts. Each message is sent with information to help find
your location, including your latitude and longitude, your
device number, the nearest town and how far away it is, and a
link to a Google Map with your position located on the map.
TRACMe
A third device available to the public is the TRACMe, which
is light-weight and easily activated. When activated, the
device transmits a “HELP— EMERGENCY” message every
fifteen seconds using Channel 1 of the Family Radio Service
radio
frequency
band
(the
same
frequency
used
by
walkie-talkie radios). The effectiveness of this piece of
equipment depends on others knowing that you carry a
TRACMe and monitoring your location with an FRS radio.
Also, unlike the previous two devices where the signals are
received and retransmitted by satellite, the TRACMe issues a
line-of-site signal that is unlikely to be detected on the ground
much
beyond
one
mile,
perhaps
two
to
three
miles
ground-to-air.
550

TracMe
551

Map and Compass
Modern technology is great. But what happens if you’re in the
wilderness and you don’t have a GPS, EPIRB, SPOT, or a
TRACMe? Or if you have an electronic navigational device
and the batteries have run out, or it doesn’t work? Always
have a map and compass and remain proficient at using them
together. It is a perishable skill that must be practiced.
Man in water with GPS
552

No GPS, No Compass, No Map!
Don’t panic. Your situation calls for an innovative
approach. With a little cunning, you’ll be able to find your
way.
The first thing you’ll need is an improvised compass. This
can be done with a ferrous metal object such as a needle, pin,
nail file, razor blade, metal rod, or something similar, and a
suspension system (made with a piece of string or long hair).
Magnetize or polarize the metal by slowly stroking it in one
direction on a piece of silk or by carefully pulling it through
your hair.
Another way to polarize metal is to stroke it repeatedly at one
end with a magnet. Always rub in one direction only.
If you have a battery and a piece of electric wire, you can
polarize the metal electrically. The battery must be a
minimum of two volts. Form a coil with the electric wire and
touch its ends to the battery’s terminals. If the wire isn’t
insulated, wrap the metal object in a single, thin strip of paper
to prevent contact. Repeatedly insert one end of the metal
object in and out of the coil.
Once your needle is magnetized, suspend it from a piece of
nonmetallic string, or float it on a small piece of wood in
water. The needle will automatically align itself on a
north-south line.
If you have a sewing needle or another thin metal object, a
nonmetallic container and the silver tip of a pen, you can
construct a more elaborate improvised compass. Cut out the
553

center of the container’s lid. Then take your sewing needle
and break it in half. One half will form your direction pointer
and the other will act as the pivot point. Push the portion used
as the pivot point through the bottom center of your container
so that it’s flush with the bottom and doesn’t interfere with
the lid. Attach the center of the other portion of the needle on
the pen’s silver tip using glue, tree sap, or melted plastic.
Magnetize one end of the pointer and rest it on the pivot
point.
554

555

A student in the Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape
(SERE) course uses a small fashlight to read his map and
compass during a night navigation lesson at a training site
in Warner Springs, Calif.
Needles and thread
556

Hiker heading east into the sunrise
Using the Sun and Shadows
You can also use the earth’s relationship to the sun to
determine direction. The direction of the rising and setting
sun (east and west) is not always accurate due to seasonal
variations. But in the Northern Hemisphere, the sun will
always appear at due south when at its highest point in the sky
557

or when an object casts no appreciable shadow. And shadows
will move clockwise.
In the Southern Hemisphere, the noonday sun will mark due
north. And shadows will move counterclockwise in the
Southern Hemisphere.
You can also use shadows to determine both direction and
time of day with the shadow-tip and watch methods.
Shadow-Tip Method
1. Place a straight, one-meter-long stick on a level spot, into
the ground that’s free of brush, and onto which the stick will
cast a definite shadow.
2. Mark the shadow’s tip with a stone or other means. This
first shadow mark is always west, everywhere on earth.
3. Wait fifteen minutes until the shadow tip moves a few
inches. Mark the shadow tip’s new position the same way as
you did the first.
4. Draw a straight line through the two marks to create an
approximate east-west axis.
5. Now stand with the first mark (west) to your left and the
second mark (east) to your right. You are now facing north no
matter where you are on earth.
Here’s a second shadow-tip method that is more accurate
but requires more time:
558

1. Set up your shadow stick (as you did in the first method)
and mark the first shadow in the morning.
2. Use a piece of string to draw an arc through this mark and
around the stick.
3. At midday, the shadow will shrink and disappear. In the
afternoon, it will lengthen again. Make a second mark at the
point where it touches the arc. Draw a line through the two
marks to create an accurate eastwest line.
559

Sun casting shadows through the trees
The Watch Method
You can also determine direction using a watch. In the
Northern Hemisphere, hold the watch horizontal and point the
hour hand at the sun. Bisect the angle between the hour hand
and the twelve o’clock mark to determine the north-south
560

line. If you have any doubt as to which end of the line is
north, remember that the sun rises in the east, sets in the west,
and is due south at noon (in the Northern Hemisphere).
This direction will be accurate if you are using true local time,
without any changes for daylight savings time. If your watch
is set on daylight savings time, use the midway point between
the hour hand and one o’clock to determine the north-south
line.
If you only have a digital watch, draw a watch on a circle of
paper with the correct time on it and use it to determine your
direction at that time.
The Moon Method
The moon reflects the sun’s light. As it orbits the earth on a
twenty-eight-day circuit, the shape of the light it reflects
varies according to its position. What we call a new moon, or
no moon, is when the moon is positioned on the opposite side
of the earth from the sun. As it moves away from the earth’s
shadow, it begins to reflect light from its right side and waxes
to become a full moon before waning, or losing shape, to
appear as a sliver on the left side.
If the moon rises before the sun has set, the illuminated side
will be the west. If the moon rises after midnight, the
illuminated side will be the east. This will provide you with a
rough east-west reference during the night.
Here is a rhyme to help you remember if the moon is waxing
or waning:
561

If you see the Moon at the end of the day, A bright Full Moon
is on its way. If you see the Moon in the early dawn, Look
real quick, it will soon be gone.
Another way to identify a waxing or waning moon is to
determine which side is incomplete. When the moon is
illuminated in such a way that the side facing west is
incomplete, the moon is waning or getting smaller. If the side
to the east is incomplete, the moon is waxing.
Using the Stars
Depending on whether you’re located in the Northern or
Southern Hemisphere, you will use different constellations to
determine your direction north or south.
The Northern Sky
It’s important to learn how to identify the constellations Ursa
Major (a.k.a., the Big Dipper) and Cassiopeia, which are
always visible on a clear night. Use them to locate Polaris,
also known as the North Star. The Big Dipper and Cassiopeia
are
always
directly
opposite
each
other
and
rotate
counterclockwise around Polaris, with Polaris in the center.
The two stars forming the outer lip of the Big Dipper always
point directly to the North Star. Mentally draw a line from the
outer bottom star to the outer top star of the Big Dipper’s
bucket. Extend this line about five times the distance between
the pointer stars to find the Polaris (the North Star). Polaris
forms part of the constellation Little Dipper.
You can also locate the North Star using the constellation
Cassiopeia, which is made up of five stars that form a W-like
562

shape on its side. Extend a line from Cassiopeia’s center star
to find the North Star. Draw an imaginary line directly to the
earth to locate true north.
The Southern Sky
Use a constellation known as the Southern Cross, consisting
of five stars, to determine the direction south. The four
brightest stars in this constellation form a cross that tilts to
one side. The two stars that make up the cross’s long axis are
the pointer stars. Imagine a distance five times the distance
between these stars. The point where this imaginary line ends
is in the general direction of south.
563

Full moon
564

Waning moon
565

Waxing moon
Other Methods of Determining Direction
• Trees. Growth will be fuller on the side of the tree facing
the south in the Northern Hemisphere, and vice versa in the
Southern Hemisphere. If you’re able to locate several felled
trees, look at the stumps. Growth will be more vigorous on
the side toward the equator and the tree growth rings will be
more widely spaced. On the other hand, the tree growth rings
will be closer together on the side toward the poles.
• Wind. Wind direction can be helpful where there are
prevailing directions and you know what kind they are. (See
Chapter 11—Weather).
• Slopes. In the Northern Hemisphere, north-facing slopes
receive less sun than south-facing slopes and are therefore
cooler and damper. In the summer, north-facing slopes retain
patches of snow. In the winter, the trees and open areas on
south-facing slopes are the first to lose their snow, and the
ground snowpack is shallower.
566

Northern constellations: March
TYVEC Survival Maps —by Wade Chapple
567

If you can get your hands on a survival map produced by the
Joint Personnel Recovery Agency (JPRA), hold on to it.
These maps are not only useful for navigation, but each sheet
also contains a wealth of survival information and, as a bonus,
they are printed on a special type of rip-resistant and
waterproof paper called Tyvec. Unfortunately, the small scale
of these maps requires you to carry several sheets if you
expect country-wide coverage, and that simply isn’t feasible
to do on patrol (carry numerous map sheets). So, here’s what
I recommend you do before heading out:
Select a map sheet that coincides with the principal area in
which you will operate, so you are carrying only one map and
not the entire (and bulky) series.
Soak the map in a bucket of water and laundry detergent for
twenty-four hours or cycle it through a washing machine
several times to make the map more pliable and to dampen
the noise of the paper in case you’re trying to use it in a
tactical situation. If you’re using the washing machine
technique, it takes about four or five cycles to be effective.
Take your survival map to the sewing shop and have
grommets installed on all four corners and the centers of all
four borders. You can also purchase grommet tools (and
grommets) online or at local craft store and do this yourself.
Ensure there is at least three-quarters of an inch space
between the grommets and the borders of the map.
Optional: Sew in a small square or rectangular-shaped piece
of “glint” (reflective) tape for the purpose of emergency
signaling.
568

Lay the map out in the sun to dry or place it in a dryer on low
heat. Once the map is dry, you can fold it to your liking and
place it in a pants leg cargo pocket or in one of the outer
pouches of your backpack.
If you find yourself in a survival situation, take the map out
and read it. You’ll find valuable information on edible plants,
dangerous animals and insects commonly found in the
operational area, instructions for signaling and applying first
aid, building fires, preparing food, procuring water, and so on.
If it’s raining or if you need shade, simply string up the map
and sit or lie down underneath it, exactly as you would sit or
lie down underneath a poncho. Of course, you can always use
the map for its principal purpose, which is navigation!
569

Southern constellations
570

Cassiopeia
Methods of Evading Trackers
571

Evading pursuit involves a combination of speed and
misdirection. Your general aim is to put as much distance as
possible
between
you
and
any
pursuit
while
using
misdirection to obscure any tracks you leave.
Tracking a human over rough ground is not easy. But always
assume that your pursuers have a massive advantage in man
power and resources, with trained dogs, vehicles, and
possibly airborne assets to aid in your capture.
Brushing Out Tracks
This is one of the oldest tricks in the book but usually a waste
of time. The marks left by brushing away your tracks will tell
your pursuers that you’re on to them, and use up time and
energy. It will also take very little time for a good tracker to
rediscover your direction of travel. If the tracker has dogs, it
may not slow them at all.
Stream Running
In some cases, running in streams can slow you down; plus,
running through even shallow water can sap reserves of
strength. In dryer, warmer areas you’re more than likely to
leave a drip trail. And in tropical areas, it’s almost impossible
to avoid breaking vegetable as your leave a stream.
If you find a stream that is going in the direction you want, is
deep enough for you to float in, and is flowing faster than
your walking pace, use it to your advantage. Float feet first
and beware of rapids and waterfalls.
Rock to Rock
572

You can avoid leaving tracks and slow a tracker by jumping
from rock to rock. It requires hard stony ground with large
rocks that won’t shift dangerously when you tread on
them—usually found alongside a stream or river—but it can
be slow and involves risking a twisted ankle or a fall. Clean
the soles of your shoes first to avoid leaving smudges on the
rocks as you travel.
Jumping off
This is a technique often taught in the military. Members of
the group will jump clear off a trail to circle round and
ambush a pursuer.
Backtracking
This involves walking backwards in your own footprints and
can be useful when combined with other techniques. A good
tracker, however, will notice that as you stride backwards
your stride is shorter, your feet farther apart, and your prints
deeper and better defined. This works best near a stream or
rocks where tracks are harder to follow. Your tracker might
not notice when your trail stops, buying you time to get away.
Corner Cutting
This technique works best when you’re approaching a road or
stream. When you get with 100 meters, alter your course by
forty-five degrees (left or right) and continue until you reach
the road or stream. Then turn in the same direction again,
making sure that your trail leads to the road or stream. Now
backtrack to the spot where you met the road or stream and
continue along it, trying not to leave any trail. Then leave the
573

road or stream and continue on your way. The idea is to
confuse your pursuers and make them think that you saw the
road or stream and decided to cut the corner to avoid it.
Evading Dogs
A dog tracks by using its nose, so the way to deal with a dog
is to confuse its sense of smell. One way to do that is by
dragging a decomposing animal behind you on a length of
rope. If you’re in an urban area, seek out large groups and
strong smells—butcher shops, perfume counters, and so on.
Another trick is to get hold of some pepper and pour it behind
you.
In rural areas, look for patches of garlic, ransom, and mint.
You might try covering a small item of your clothing with
stinging nettles. Heavy rain will disperse your scent quickly.
If possible, keep downwind of your pursuers.
574

Ground pepper
575

Peppermint
576

Garlic
577

NAVIGATION
578

13
“A cheerful heart is good medicine, but a crushed spirit dries
up the bones.”
—Proverbs 17:22
It goes without saying that medical problems can severely
impact your ability to survive in the wilderness. There’s
nothing more discouraging than being in a survival situation
and not having the supplies or, more importantly, the
knowledge to be able to treat yourself or a teammate.
That’s why it’s imperative that basic medical supplies be
included in your survival kit, and that you go into the
wilderness armed with the understanding of how to maintain
optimum health, and recognize and treat certain common
medical problems when they appear.
One person with a fair amount of basic medical knowledge
can make the difference in many lives. Don’t depend on
anyone else to have it. If you travel in remote wilderness or
dangerous areas, you need to know basic survival medicine.
579

First aid kit
Survival Requirements for Health Maintenance
580

To survive, you need water, shelter, food, and some degree of
personal hygiene.
Water
Your body loses water constantly during breathing, sweating,
urination, and defecation. On average, an adult in an
atmospheric temperature of sixty-eight degrees Fahrenheit
will lose up to two to three quarts of water a day. Factors such
as heat, intense activity, high altitude, and illness can cause
the body to lose additional water. All this water must be
replaced.
If water isn’t replaced, our bodies become dehydrated, which
decreases efficiency and increases susceptibility to shock.
The most common signs and symptoms of dehydration
are:
• Thirst. (You’re at least two percent dehydrated by the time
you are thirsty.)
• Dark urine with a strong odor
• Low urine output
• Dark, sunken eyes
• Fatigue
• Emotional instability
• Loss of skin elasticity
581

• Trench line down center of tongue
• Dry skin and/or lips
Lose five percent of your body’s fluid and you will start to
feel:
• Thirst
• Nausea
• Weakness
• Anxiety
• Increase in pulse
Lose ten percent of your fluid and you will experience:
• Headaches
• Pins and needles feeling or tingling
• Loss of ability to walk and speak clearly
Lose fifteen percent and you will experience:
• Impaired vision
• Delirium
Lose more than fifteen percent and chances are you will
die.
582

Replace water as you lose it. Even if you don’t feel thirsty,
drink small amounts of water at regular intervals. When
you’re under physical or mental stress, you should drink more
water.
General guidelines:
• Always drink water when eating. You need water as part of
the digestion process.
• Conserve sweat not water. Try to limit sweat-producing
activities.
• Ration water sensibly until you find a suitable source.
• To prevent water loss, rest, keep cool, stay in the shade, and
seek shelter.
• Do not wait until you run out of water before you look for
more.
Salt
Salt is also essential for survival. Not getting enough salt can
cause muscle cramps, dizziness, nausea, and fatigue. Having
salt tablets or electrolytes in your medical or survival kit can
be a big help in a survival situation.
Where to find salt in the wild:
Seawater—Seawater can be diluted with plenty of fresh water
to get the salt your body needs. (Never drink pure sea water;
doing so can be dangerous to your kidneys.)
583

Plants—In the United States you can get salt from the root of
a hickory tree. You can boil the roots until it evaporates and
salt crystals are left.
Foods that naturally have salt—Seafood, carrots, beets,
poultry, and most animals.
Salt Licks—A salt lick is a salt deposit that animals lick to get
their intake of salt. You can also find them in farming areas
set out for cattle.
Food
You can live without food for several weeks, but you will
need an adequate supply to prevent your mental and physical
abilities from deteriorating. Food replenishes the substances
that your body burns and provides energy, vitamins, minerals,
salts, and other elements essential to good health.
The two basic sources of food are plants and animals
(including fish). In varying degrees both provide the calories,
carbohydrates, fats, and proteins needed for normal daily
body functions. The average person needs 2,000 calories per
day to function at a minimum level.
Plants
A number of plant foods, including nuts and seeds, will
provide you with enough protein and oils to function
efficiently. Roots, green vegetables, and plants containing
natural sugar provide calories and carbohydrates that give the
body natural energy.
584

• Dry plants by wind, air, sun, or fire to retard spoilage so
that you can store plant food for when it’s needed.
• Plants are easier to obtain than meat.
Animals
Meat provides more protein than plant food. To satisfy your
immediate needs, first look for more easily obtained wildlife
like as insects, crustaceans, mollusks, fish, and reptiles. These
can satisfy your immediate hunger while you prepare traps
and snares for larger game.
Personal Hygiene
Cleanliness is an important factor in preventing infection and
disease. Poor hygiene can actually reduce your chances of
survival.
If possible use a cloth and soapy water to wash yourself daily.
Pay special attention to your feet, armpits, crotch, hands, and
hair, as these are prime areas for infestation and infection. If
you don’t have soap, you can either make some yourself, or
use ashes or sand. To make your own soap:
1. Cut animal fat into small pieces and cook it in a pot to
extract the grease.
2. Add enough water to the pot to keep the fat from sticking,
and cook slowly, stirring frequently.
3. After the fat has melted, pour it into a container to harden.
585

4. Put ashes into a second container with a spout cut near the
bottom.
5. Pour water over the ashes and collect the liquid that drips
out. This is potash or lye.
6. In your pot mix two parts grease to one part lye.
7. Cook over a fire and boil until the mixture thickens.
8. The result is soap. After it cools, you can use it as a
semi-liquid directly from the pot, or pour it into a pan, allow
it to harden, and cut it into bars.
If you can’t spare water, remove as much of your clothing as
is practical and take an air bath by exposing your body to the
sun and air for an hour. Watch out for sunburn.
Keep Your Hands Clean
To prevent infection and spread of germs, wash your hands
after urinating, defecating, treating the sick and injured, and
before handling food, food utensils, or drinking water. Keep
your fingernails closely trimmed and clean.
Keep Your Hair Clean
Your hair can become a haven for bacteria, lice, and parasites.
Keep Your Clothing Clean
Clean clothing and bedding will reduce your chances of
developing a skin infection. If water is scarce, air clean your
586

clothing by shaking, airing, and sunning it for two hours. If
you’re using a sleeping bag, turn it inside out after each use
and air it out.
Keep Your Teeth Clean
Thoroughly clean your mouth and teeth at least once a day. If
you don’t have a toothbrush, you can use a chewing stick.
Chew one end of the stick to separate the fibers. You can also
wrap a clean strip of cloth around your fingers and rub your
teeth with it to wipe away food particles. If you don’t have
toothpaste, brush your teeth with small amounts of sand,
baking soda, salt, or soap. Then rinse your mouth with water,
saltwater, or willow bark tea.
You can make temporary fillings for cavities by placing
candle wax, tobacco, aspirin, hot pepper, toothpaste or
powder, or portions of a gingerroot into the cavity. Make sure
you clean the cavity thoroughly first.
Take Care of Your Feet
Always break in new shoes before venturing into the
wilderness. If you develop a small blister, don’t open it.
Apply padding around the blister to relieve pressure and
reduce friction. If the blister bursts, treat it as an open wound.
Clean and dress it daily and pad around it.
587

Blisters
If you develop a large blister, use a sewing-type needle and a
piece of clean thread. Clean the outside of the blister, then run
the needle and thread through the blister. Detach the needle
and leave both ends of the thread hanging out of the blister.
The thread will absorb the liquid inside and ensure that the
588

hole doesn’t close up so the blister can dry out and heal. Pad
around it.
Get Sufficient Rest
It’s important to learn how to make yourself comfortable
under less than ideal conditions. Take regular rest breaks
during your daily activities.
Survival First Aid
In case of an accident or injury, perform a rapid physical
exam. Look for the cause of the injury and follow the ABCs
of first aid.
A-Airway
Any one of the following can cause airway obstruction,
resulting in stopped breathing:
• Foreign matter in mouth or throat that obstructs the opening
to the trachea, such as blood, mucous, vomit, broken bones or
teeth.
• Face or neck injuries.
• Inflammation and swelling of mouth and throat caused by
inhaling smoke, flames, and irritating vapors or by an allergic
reaction.
• “Kink” in the throat (caused by the neck bent forward so
that the chin rests upon the chest) may block the passage of
air.
589

• Tongue
blocks
passage
of
air
to
the
lungs
upon
unconsciousness. When an individual is unconscious, the
muscles of the lower jaw and tongue relax as the neck drops
forward, causing the lower jaw to sag and the tongue to drop
back and block the passage of air.
ABC: Airway, Breathing, Circulation
Open an airway and maintain it by using the following steps:
Step 1. Check if the victim has a partial or complete airway
obstruction. If he can cough or speak, allow him to clear the
obstruction naturally. Stand by, reassure the victim, and be
ready to clear his airway and perform mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation should he become unconscious. If his airway is
completely obstructed, administer abdominal thrusts until the
obstruction is cleared.
Step 2. Using a finger, quickly sweep the victim’s mouth
clear of any foreign objects, broken teeth, dentures, and so on.
Step 3. Using the jaw thrust method, grasp the angles of the
victim’s lower jaw and lift with both hands, one on each side,
moving the jaw forward. For stability, rest your elbows on the
surface on which the victim is lying. If his lips are closed,
gently open the lower lip with your thumb.
590

Step 4. With the victim’s airway open, pinch his nose closed
with your thumb and forefinger and blow two complete
breaths into his lungs. Allow the lungs to deflate after the
second inflation and:
• Look for his chest to rise and fall.
• Listen for escaping air during exhalation.
• Feel for flow of air on your cheek.
Step 5. If the forced breaths do not stimulate spontaneous
breathing, maintain the victim’s breathing by performing
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
Step 6. There is danger of the victim vomiting during
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. Check the victim’s mouth
periodically for vomit and clear as needed.
B-Breathing
Look, listen, and feel for breathing. Normal breathing rates
are between twelve and sixteen breaths per minute.
C-Circulation
Once oxygen can be delivered to the lungs by a clear airway
and efficient breathing, there needs to be blood circulation to
deliver it to the rest of the body. In case of severe injury,
check the patient for bleeding. Severe bleeding from any
major blood vessel in the body is extremely dangerous. The
loss of less than one quart of blood will produce moderate
symptoms of shock. The loss of two quarts will produce a
591

severe state of shock that places the body in extreme danger.
The loss of three can be fatal.
First aid kit, closed
592

593

First aid kit, open
For other cases of severe bleeding:
1. Have the injured person lie down and cover the person
to prevent loss of body heat. If possible, position the
person’s head slightly lower than the trunk or elevate the legs
and elevate the site of bleeding.
2. Remove any obvious dirt or debris from the wound.
Don’t remove large or more deeply embedded objects. Your
principal concern is to stop the bleeding.
3. Apply pressure directly on the wound until the bleeding
stops. Use a sterile bandage or clean cloth and hold
continuous pressure for at least twenty minutes. Maintain
pressure by binding the wound tightly with a bandage or clean
cloth and adhesive tape. Use your hands if nothing else is
available.
4. Don’t remove the gauze or bandage. If the bleeding
continues and seeps through the gauze or other material you
are holding on the wound, don’t remove it. Instead, add more
absorbent material on top of it.
5. If the bleeding doesn’t stop with direct pressure, apply
pressure to the artery delivering blood to the area.
Pressure points of the arm are on the inside of the arm just
above the elbow and just below the armpit. Pressure points of
the leg are just behind the knee and in the groin. Squeeze the
main artery in these areas against the bone. Keep your fingers
flat. With your other hand, continue to exert pressure on the
wound itself.
594

6. Immobilize the injured body part once the bleeding has
stopped. Leave the bandages in place and get the injured
person to a hospital as soon as possible.
7. If the wound is abdominal and organs have been
displaced, don’t try to push them back into place—cover
the wound with a dressing.
595

Jungle leg splint
Mosquito
Insect Stings
Every country in the world, unless nearly permanently below
zero degrees F, has its quota of biting/stinging insects. In
596

some areas, such as tropical rain forests and deserts, the
amount of such pests can be staggering.
Insect stings can cause problems in several ways:
1. They can cause high levels of pain, discomfort, and
irritation, which can lead to infection.
2. Many insects can be carriers for infectious disease such as
malaria, which is on the increase in many countries.
3. Insect bites or stings can cause an allergic reaction through
anaphylaxis (anaphylactic shock) or through a toxic overload
due to the shear amount of venom, as with many bee or wasp
stings. This can result in the airway closing or in respiratory
failure.
4. Some insects produce considerable levels of blood loss as
they inject a natural anticlotting agent into the bite to keep the
blood flowing freely. This can continue after the creature has
stopped feeding, since some insects also use a local anesthetic
that makes the victim unaware that he is bleeding, as can be
the case with the rather unpleasant camel spider. This can be a
serious problem if the victim has suffered multiple bites while
sleeping.
Treatment
If you’re aware that you or a teammate has a serious allergy
to insect bites, you should always carry an EpiPen injector
(which contains a measured dose of epinephrine made from
adrenaline). If an EpiPen injector isn’t available, the best you
can do is to carefully remove any stinger (or the head and
597

jaws in the case of bulldog ants) left in the wound using
tweezers. Be careful to grip the stinger below the poison sack
so that extra venom isn’t injected into the wound. Then clean
the area to prevent infection and apply a cold compress to
reduce swelling and any bleeding.
Ticks
Ticks are small blood-sucking insects common in many parts
of the world, especially around livestock or grazing animals.
The best way to protect yourself is to make sure you are well
covered with clothing. After walking through grassy or
woodland areas, check your skin and clothing.
If bitten, the risk of infection is high. To remove ticks try to
grip the head, which will be very close to the skin, and lever it
out with a gentle rocking motion. If parts are left in the
wound, remove them and clean the wound carefully and cover
to prevent infection.
Leeches
These blood-sucking worm-like creatures can be found in
most countries and like moist, humid, and wet conditions
commonly found in the jungle. They attach themselves to
their victims by sliding off vegetation or floating in water. As
they feed, leeches swell in size as they become bloated with
blood. In tropical areas, it’s best to check for leeches daily, as
they can attach to the backs of legs and knees and other hard
to reach places.
Leeches cannot be pulled off like ticks because their mouths
have a serrated set of teeth. To remove, touch them with a lit
598

or smoldering stick or sprinkle with salt, and they will shrivel
and drop off. Once this is done, clean the wound carefully.
Tick
599

Roundworm: Rats and rodents are primarily responsible
for maintaining the endemicity of this infection. Animals,
such as pigs or bears, feed on infected rodents or meat
from other animals. Humans are accidentally infected
when
eating
improperly
processed
meat
of
these
carnivorous animals (or eating food contaminated with
such meat).
600

Hookworm: A hookworm infection is also known as
“ground itch.” Usually the first sign of infection is itching
and a rash at the site where skin touched contaminated
soil or sand, which occurs when the larvae penetrate the
skin, followed by anemia, abdominal pain, diarrhea, loss
of appetite, and weight loss.
Worm Parasites
A wide variety of parasites are common in the poorer areas of
the world. Infection is usually caused by swimming in water
601

which has been polluted with sewage. If left untreated, worm
parasites can cause great discomfort and reduce strength and
stamina.
Roundworm
A pink or white worm, which can grow up to thirty
centimeters (twelve inches) in length, and is spread by contact
with feces. Early signs can include coughing with some blood
as the young worms travel through the blood stream to the
lungs, stomach pains, and constipation. People infected with
roundworm
are
usually
treated
with
drugs
containing
mebendazole or piperazine. If these medications aren’t
available, mix equal amounts of papaya milk, sugar, and
honey, and drink daily.
Threadworm
These one-centimeter-long worms gather around the anus and
cause itching. As the victim scratches, these worms travel
under the fingernails and into the digestive system via the
mouth either directly by hand-to-mouth contact or via food.
They’re also treated with mebendazole or pip-erazine, but can
be eliminated by drinking garlic crushed into hot water once a
day for several weeks.
Hookworm
Hookworm is a particularly nasty worm about one centimeter
long that can enter the body in a variety of ways—through
infected water or by boring through the skin, especially the
soft skin around the feet. Once in the blood stream they travel
to the lungs and stomach. Hookworms are a very dangerous
602

because they drain strength and stamina and leave their
victims vulnerable to pneumonia. To get rid of them
completely, you will need medical treatment. But in the short
term, iron-rich foods such as red meat and iron tablets will
help.
603

Tapeworm: Humans become infected by ingesting raw
or undercooked infected meat. The tapeworm can survive
for years, attaching to and residing in the small intestine.
Tapeworm
The tapeworm can reach several meters in length inside the
body and normally infects its victim through poorly cooked
meat. The effects are generally mild and sometimes go
undetected. But pork tapeworms can cause serious damage to
the victim’s brain and result in death. Infection is usually
detected when a small part of worm is found in the victim’s
clothes or feces. Treatment requires medical attention.
Blood Flukes
Blood flukes are worm-like creatures that enter the body
through broken skin or contaminated water. Some can cause
bilharzia disease, which results in blood in the urine or
diarrhea and is treated with metrifonate or oxamniquine. An
estimated 200 million people become infected with blood
flukes each year. They’re common throughout all of Africa,
some islands in the Caribbean, Southeast Asia, and South
America.
Amoeba
Amoebas are microscopic organisms that enter the body
through infected drinking water. They’re so small that few
filters are effective in eliminating them. Boiling and other
methods of treating drinking water are recommended. They
cause amoebic dysentery, which is bad diarrhea with periods
604

of constipation and blood loss. With all cases of diarrhea, it’s
important to stay hydrated and reduce physical activity.
Rabies
Rabies is a deadly viral disease that is fatal in humans unless
the victim receives prompt medical attention. Fortunately, it’s
fairly rare in the United States. The rabies virus is transmitted
through the saliva of infected animals. This happens most
often from a bite, although it can also occur from a scratch.
Very rarely is it transmitted from saliva contact with broken
skin or mucous membranes or from inhalation of aerosolized
bat feces. Although the rabies virus can infect just about any
mammal, it is most frequently found in raccoons, skunks,
bats, foxes and coyotes, and occasionally in cattle and
unvaccinated cats and dogs.
If you are bitten or scratched by an animal that you suspect
may be rabid, immediately cleanse the wound thoroughly to
flush out the virus. Capture the animal if you can do so safely
to have it tested for rabies by your local health department.
Try not to damage the head since the brain has to be tested for
the presence of the rabies virus.
Snake Bites
In most cases, snakes will hear you coming and will move
away before you ever know they’re around. Also, twenty-five
percent of snake bites are dry—which means that the snake
hasn’t had enough time to load its venom. So even though a
bite may draw blood, it does not mean that venom has been
injected.
605

In the event of a poisonous snake bite, an immediate burning
pain will spread up the arm or leg that is bitten and swelling
will begin within a few minutes to a couple of hours. The
affected area may remain swollen, stiff, and bruised for
weeks.
Treatment
Elevate the bite if it is on a leg, or use a sling for an arm bite.
Seek medical attention as soon as possible; don’t panic.
Antivenin can be administered as much as twenty-four hours
after a bite. Remember what the snake looked like to help
identify the right antivenin.
606

SURVIVAL MEDICINE
607

14
“Luck is where the crossroads of preparation and opportunity
meet.”
—Seneca
What to pack in your survival kit when your life might
depend on it? The answer to this question depends on several
contingencies—where you’re going, the terrain, climate, the
amount you can comfortably carry, and the expected length of
the trip.
As you put together your survival kit, consider the different
types of products on the market. Know how to use everything
in the kit.
U.S. Military Survival Kits
The U.S. military has several types of basic survival kits,
which are issued primarily to aviators. There are kits for cold
climates, hot climates, and overwater. There is also an
individual survival kit that contains a general packet and a
medical packet. The cold climate, hot climate, and overwater
kits are held in carrying bags and normally stowed in the
aircraft’s cargo/ passenger area. The army’s survival kits
contain the following:
Cold Climate Kit
608

•
Attaching strap
•
Compressed trioxane fuel
•
Ejector snap
•
First aid kit
•
Food packets
•
Frying pan
•
Illuminating candles
•
Insect head net
Fishing hook
609

•
Kit, inner case
•
Kit, outer case
•
MC-1 magnetic compass
•
Packing list
•
Plastic spoon
•
Pocket knife
610

•
Poncho
•
Saw/knife blade
•
Saw-knife-shovel handle
•
Shovel water bag
•
Signaling mirror
•
Sleeping bag
•
Smoke, illumination signals
•
Snare wire
•
Survival fishing kit
•
Survival Manual (AFM 64-5)
•
Survival Utensils
•
Waterproof matchbox
•
Wood matches
Utensils
611

612

Hot Climate Kit
•
Attaching strap
•
Canned drinking water
•
Compressed trioxane fuel
•
Ejector snap
•
First aid kit
•
Fishing tackle kit
•
Food packets
•
Frying pan
•
Kit, inner case
•
Kit, outer case
•
Kit, packing list
•
Insect head net
•
MC-1 magnetic compass
•
Plastic spoon
•
Plastic water bag
•
Plastic whistle
613

•
Pocket knife
•
Reversible sun hat
•
Signaling mirror
Compact survival saw
•
Smoke, illumination signals
•
Snare wire
•
Sunburn preventive cream
•
Survival manual (AFM 64-5)
614

•
Tarpaulin
•
Tool kit
•
Waterproof matchbox
•
Wood matches
Overwater Kit
•
Boat bailer
•
Compressed trioxane fuel
•
First aid kit
•
Fishing tackle kit
•
Fluorescent sea marker
•
Food packets
•
Frying pan
•
Insect head net
•
Kit, packing list
•
MC-1 magnetic compass
•
Plastic spoon
•
Pocket knife
615

•
Raft boat paddle
•
Raft repair kit
•
Reversible sun hat
•
Seawater desalter kit
•
Signaling mirror
•
Smoke, illumination signals
•
Sponge
•
Sunburn preventive cream
•
Survival manual (AFM 64-5)
•
Waterproof matchbox
•
Water storage bag
•
Wood matches
616

Waterproof bag with signal mirror, fire starter, and
whistle
617

The Basic Navy SEAL “Layout”
U.S. Navy SEALs separate their gear into three categories, or
lines. The gear list changes according to area of operation,
terrain, climate, enemy situation, support assets, and so on.
First line gear contains the everyday essentials needed for
immediate short-term survival. SEALs do not go anywhere
without their first line gear. Cammies, weapons, maps,
compass, knife, 550 cord, and watches are all typically
included in first line gear. If the second and third lines of
618

equipment are abandoned, the first line gear will give the
operator enough gear for short-term survival.
Second
line
gear
contains
necessary
extras
carried
in
load-bearing equipment (LBE) or tactical vests. It’s gear that
is quickly available should the need arise. Equipment such as
ammunition, grenades, water and purification tablets, and
medical supplies are all considered part of second line gear.
Second line gear is always carried or worn when working
(operating).
Third line gear is made up of supplies needed for a mission
that aren’t as critical for immediate use. Radios and batteries,
claymore mines, ponchos, water filters, and night vision
goggles are all included in third line gear. Corpsmen fit their
medical gear into this category. A SEAL is never too far away
from his third line gear. In urban areas, it may be kept in a
rucksack in the trunk of a vehicle; while berthing, it may be at
the foot of the cot or bed.
Ideally a SEAL is never in a situation where he does not have
all of his gear. However, if he is caught in a situation when he
must travel light, he may leave behind his third line gear.
Pliers
619

Examples of first line gear:
•
Wrist compass
•
Small LED (red) flashlight
•
Surefire (or other compact & bright light)
•
Swiss Army knife
•
Leg holster
620

•
Sidearm
•
Two spare magazines
•
Small water container
•
Large knife on leg holster (opposite side)
•
Compact survival kit
•
Fishing hooks, line, sinkers
•
Fire starter and waterproof matches (inside waterproof
container)
•
Water purification tablets
•
Parachute cord
•
Signal mirror
•
Whistle
Pocket knife
621

Leg holster
622

623

Survival knife with compass top
Examples of second line gear
•
Assault rifle
•
Four spare magazines
•
Flares
•
Carabiners
624

•
Spare flashlight batteries (enough for twenty-four hours)
•
Water container
•
Binoculars
•
Body warmer (air-activated pad)
•
Poncho with liner
•
Several pouches of freeze-dried food
•
QuikClot (powder that quickly clots blood)
•
Large gauze compress
•
Duct tape
•
Snakebite kit
•
Maps
•
Compass
•
Fire starter (cotton smeared in Vaseline inside of a pill
bottle)
•
Lighter
Flares
625

626

Dehydrated meal
Warmers
627

Examples of third line gear
•
Fifty feet of parachute cord/550 cord
•
Large water container
•
Water purifier
•
Sleeping bag or bivy sack
•
Extra socks
628

•
Ten full freeze-dried meals
•
Rain gear
•
Batteries (twenty-four-pack per device)
•
Flashlight
•
Extra ammo (usually 300 rounds per weapon)
•
Extra pair of gloves Customize your gear to fit your
personal/operational needs. Your survival kit should be:
•
Lightweight and compact
•
With you when you need it
•
Packed with equipment you can rely on
•
Adjusted for the season and expected weather Be sure to:
•
Periodically check the serviceability of all survival kit
components.
•
Check that each person in your group carries his own
survival kit.
•
Build your own survival kit, since commercial kits
compromise the quality of the components in order to keep
the overall price of the kit down—it’s better to build your
own.
Basic Survival Kit Considerations
629

Water
•
Water-purifying straw. Good for twenty to twenty-five
gallons of water (depending on how contaminated it is). It’s
not just a filter, but actually treats water with antibacterials.
•
Water purification tablets. Each tablet can purify one or
two quarts of water, depending on how dirty the water is. You
can also crush one water purification tablet and add about a
teaspoon of water to make a strong iodine topical solution for
treating injuries.
•
One-hundred ounce reservoir filled with water
•
Five feet of plastic tubing, i.e., fish tank tubing
•
Bottle ORS
•
aluminum canteen cup
Shelter/Bivy Material
•
Tent
•
Bivy sack
•
Sleeping bag
•
Large, heavy-duty orange plastic or Mylar survival bags
•
Kydex/painter’s tarp (nine feet by seven feet). This thin
plastic sheet can be used for a variety of purposes—making a
630

shelter, waterproofing a roof, collecting rainwater, or used as
a solar still. It tears easily, so you might want to pack two.
•
Survival
blanket.
Made
of
durable,
tear-resistant
polyethylene, these blankets reflect back body heat to keep
you warm. Make a frame out of sticks, and stretch the blanket
over it; you can also use it as a very large signaling mirror.
Also
works
for
waterproofing
your
shelter,
collecting
rainwater, or wrapping around yourself as a poncho or shawl.
•
Plastic or fabric tube tents
•
Sheet plastic
•
550 cord
Fire-Starting Material
•
Windproof lighter
•
Survival matches
•
Metal match with a scraper
•
Magnifying glass
•
Magnesium/flint bar fire starter. Shave the magnesium
with a knife; collect all the shavings into a pile about the size
of a dime. The magnesium ignites with a flame like a blow
torch and will burn for several seconds.
•
Tinders
631

•
Thirty-six hour candle in a can
•
Survival saw
632

633

Water purifier tablets
Survival bivy sack
Survival blanket
634

635

Fire starter, whistle, matches, signal mirror
636

Waterproof matches, tape, fire starter sticks
Signaling Equipment
•
Whistle with lanyard
•
Signal mirror
•
Fluorescent plastic surveyor’s tape
•
Brightly colored fabric
•
Fire starting material
•
Light sticks or chemical lights
637

•
Rugged LED strobe/flashlight
Personal Protection
•
Whistle with lanyard
•
Emergency foil bag/space blanket
•
Body warmers
•
Additional clothing, including rain gear—for warmth and
protection from wind and wet
•
Polypropylene balaclava
•
Insect head net
•
Bug spray
•
Sunscreen and sunglasses
First Aid Kit
•
Sunscreen and sunglasses
•
Wound prep pads
•
Soap towelettes
•
One-by three-inch adhesive bandages
•
Butterfly bandages
•
Two-by four-inch flex bandages
638

•
Knuckle bandage
•
Eye patch
•
two-by-three-inch nonstick pads
•
Hydrocortisone cream
•
Triple antibiotic ointment
•
Burn ointment
•
Motrin
•
Tylenol
•
NoDoz
•
Imodium AD
•
Safety pins
•
Lip balm SPF 15
•
Roll one-half-inch medical tape
•
Tweezers
•
Waterproof pouch, five by seven inches
Medical Trauma Gear
•
Trauma dressings
639

•
High-absorbency gauzes
•
Tourniquet
•
Snakebite kit
Headlamp with spare bulbs and batteries
LED flashlight with spare batteries and bulbs. I recommend a
mini LED flashlight with either a white, yellow, green, or
blue light. They’re great when you need to locate items in the
dark, and can also be used for signaling at night. Pack extra
batteries, as they take up very little space and last a long time.
I recommend putting some electrical tape between each to
keep them from discharging. As each battery is about the size
of a dime, this takes very little space in the kit. If your light
requires a tool to change the batteries, make sure you have
one with you.
Food Supplies
•
Hard candies
•
Nuts and seeds
•
Bouillon cubes
•
High calorie emergency rations (such as energy bars high
in carbohydrates)
•
Commercial dried packaged food
•
MREs
640

•
Eating utensils/cup/spork
•
Thirty feet of fifteen-pound test fishing line, fifty feet of
eighty-pound
test
fishing
line,
and
six
fishhooks
for
fifteen-pound test line Use the lighter line for fishing in rivers
and streams. The heavier line is as tough as nails and has
thousands of uses—including shelter building, snare making,
and for unattended fishing purposes.
•
Hooks
•
Fishing flies
•
Snares
Navigation
•
Maps in waterproof containers
•
Compass
•
GPS
•
Five feet orange flag tape (for marking your position)
Miscellaneous Gear
•
Knife and/or multitool
•
Sewing kit
•
Croc-Lock™ clips
641

•
Five feet duct tape wrapped around water containers.
Makes it possible for you to repair just about anything—patch
holes in tarps, bandage cuts, fix a point to an arrow or spear,
and so on.
•
550 paracord (twenty feet). The uses of paracord in a
survival situation are almost too numerous to list. Use it for
shelter, whether for tying frame members together or for
stringing up a tarp between trees. It also works for snares and
building other weapons. True paracord is constructed of an
outer sheath, which contains seven inner strands. Each inner
strand is fifty-pound test, while the outer sheathing is rated at
about 200 pounds. If you need more string in an emergency
situation, you can remove the inner strands. The outer
sheathing can serve well as shoelaces.
•
Safety pins. For quick repairs of clothing and other gear.
Can also be fashioned into emergency fishhooks.
•
Zip ties. Use them for setting up your emergency shelter,
among other purposes.
•
Ziploc freezer bags. Use as canteens, waterproof storage,
and so on.
•
Scalpel blades. Come in sterile wrapping, are extremely
small, and have a multitude of uses, from medical to skinning
and gutting game to whittling.
•
MilSpec snare wire. Has a multitude of uses, from snaring
to trip wire to hanging food items over a fire for cooking.
642

•
Fifty dollars cash in local currency (or even an extra
credit card).
Familiarity with Survival Equipment—by Wade Chapple
Being on your own in a life or death struggle for survival is
not the time to familiarize with your equipment, nor is it the
time to pull out a handheld GPS only to find it without
batteries or with the batteries depleted. It goes without saying
that special operators are always intimately familiar with and
can effectively maintain the weapons systems they carry.
Unfortunately, I have found that these same special operators
do not always have a good understanding of how to operate or
maintain the survival equipment packed into their “go” bags.
For
that
matter,
unfamiliarity
with
survival
aids
and
equipment is a common trend I find with all of our clients,
both U.S. and foreign.
For example, we were once called to assist in the search for
two missing crew members who had ejected from their fighter
jet over the mountains of Colombia. We collectively managed
to safely recover the two crew members, but during our
post-incident analysis, we discovered that the pilot was
actually carrying a survival radio with a 406MHz emergency
distress beacon, and he did not activate it at all. If he had
activated the survival radio, we would have located his
position very quickly and reduced his exposure to the
elements and to the enemy who was also searching for him.
After questioning the pilot, I learned that he had never
received any training on how to operate or maintain the
survival radio and that the radio’s battery was dead because
643

he had never checked or tested it before flying. The crew
members were very fortunate in this particular example, but
their plight would definitely have been shortened if the pilot
knew how to operate and maintain his survival radio before
becoming isolated.
Whatever it is you decide to pack for use during a survival
situation, the following guidelines will ensure that those items
are useful to you in a time of need:
•
Learn how to operate or use all of the survival gear that
you pack. If it requires batteries, make sure the batteries are
fresh before going to the field and pack extra (sealed)
batteries in order to extend the use of battery-operated items
during
survival
situations.
While
training
for
survival
situations, use the equipment you are carrying to ensure
proficiency with the same.
•
Before going out to the field, inspect all of your survival
gear. Turn on and conduct a function test of anything that is
battery operated.
•
Try to acquire equipment with common batteries (if a
flashlight uses AA batteries, for example, try to acquire a
GPS and strobe light that also use AA batteries).
•
Swap out items that are damaged.
•
Organize your survival gear so you don’t have to fumble
around at night looking for the item that you need.
•
I have found that battery-operated chemlights are better
for survival situations than the disposable, one-time-use
644

chemlights. However, I also pack a couple of infrared
chemlights that are one-time use but very good for tactical
signaling.
645

SURVIVAL KITS
646

15
“We had suffered, starved and triumphed, groveled down yet
grasped at glory . . .
We had reached the naked soul of man.”
—Sir Ernest Shackleton
Juliane Koepcke
On Christmas Eve 1971, a quiet seventeen-year-old high
school senior named Juliane Koepcke and her mother boarded
LANSA airline Flight 508 from Lima, Peru, to the Amazon
jungle city of Pucallpa. She was on her way to meet her
father, who ran a research station in the jungle. Twenty-five
minutes into the flight, the Lockheed Electra turboprop ran
into bad weather. “We ran into heavy clouds and the plane
started shaking,” Juliane recalled. “Then, to our right, we saw
a bright flash and the plane went into a nose dive.”
Accident investigators later determined that one the of the
plane’s fuel tanks was struck by a bolt of lightning.
“Christmas presents were flying around the cabin and I could
hear people screaming,” Juliane said. The plane then broke
into pieces, and Juliane passed out. When she gained
consciousness, she was still strapped to her seat and alive
despite the fact that she had fallen two miles into the jungle
canopy.
647

“Maybe it was the fact that I was still attached to a whole row
of seats,” she explained later. “I was rotating much like a
helicopter and that might have slowed the fall. Also, the place
I landed had very thick foliage and that might have lessened
the impact.” The other ninety-one people aboard Flight 508
died.
Juliane’s injuries were relatively minor—she had a broken
collarbone, her right eye was swollen shut, she had a
concussion, plus she had large gashes on her arms and legs.
But she had lost her eyeglasses, and she was alone deep in the
Amazon jungle with the thick canopy above her preventing
her from signaling for help. Juliane had no food, no tools, no
compass, no map, and no means to make a fire. Just herself,
surrounded by thousands of species, including some of the
most venomous creatures on earth.
But Juliane didn’t give up. Instead, she searched through the
plane’s wreckage, grabbed a few pieces of candy and cake,
and started walking through the jungle. She had visited her
father’s jungle research station before and knew that if she
followed water downstream it would likely lead to some form
of civilization. The day after the crash, she found a creek and
started to follow it downstream. When the creek ran into a
larger body of water, she followed that. When the vegetation
on the river bank grew too thick, she waded knee-deep
through
the
piranha
and
candiru-infested
water
(the
murderous candiru fish swims up its victim’s urethra and
feasts on the internal organs). The going was tough.
648

649

Candiru fish
Maggots
650

“I had a cut in my arm, and after a few days I could feel that
there was something in it,” Juliane remembered. “I took a
look in the hole and saw that a fly had laid her eggs in the
hole. It was full of maggots. I was afraid I would lose my
arm.”
Farther downstream she discovered more wreckage of the
plane. “I found another row of victims, with three dead
women strapped in. They had landed head-first and the
impact must have been so hard that they were buried two feet
into the ground.”
But she still didn’t give up. Instead, she continued to fight her
way through snarls of vegetation, swarms of insects, and
leeches. She drank the river water, foraged for whatever
scraps of food she could find, and waded through streams
infested
with
crocodiles,
piranhas,
and
devil
rays.
“Some-times I would see a crocodile on the bank and it would
start into the water towards me, but I was not afraid,” she
said. “I knew that crocodiles don’t tend to attack humans.”
Starved and exhausted, after ten days of trekking through the
jungle Juliane came upon a small boat and a hut. She stayed
there, and the next day was discovered by a group of Peruvian
lumberjacks. They loaded her into their canoe and paddled
seven hours to the nearest town, where a local pilot flew her
to a hospital for treatment. Doctors discovered more than fifty
maggots in her arm.
She went on to earn a PhD in zoology and now works at the
Zoological Center in Munich, Germany. Her survival story
remains one of the most amazing feats of human endurance
I’ve ever heard.
651

652

Juliane Koepcke, who claims that she isn’t a spiritual person,
has said that she looks at “logical” reasons for why she
survived. Others who have found themselves in similarly
harrowing survival situations, however, have attributed their
ability to come out alive to other factors.
Frank Smyth
Take British explorer Frank Smyth. In 1933, he almost
reached the summit of Mount Everest, which would have
made him the first person to do so. The situation was
horrendous: freezing temperatures, powerful winds, and
blinding, swirling snow. While the rest of his hiking party fell
back, Smyth continued to press ahead, coming within 1,000
feet of his goal.
Later, writing in his diary, Smyth remembered how at one
point during the ascent, he reached into his pocket, pulled out
a slab of Kendel Mint Cake, broke it in half, and turned to
give the other half to a companion. But there was no one
there. “All the time that I was climbing alone, I had a strong
feeling that I was accompanied by a second person,” he
wrote. “The feeling was so strong that it completely
eliminated all loneliness I might otherwise have felt.”
653

Sir Ernest Shackleton and wife
Sir Ernest Shackleton
The Third Man Syndrome
This is an example of what is known as “The Third Man
Syndrome.” Also described as the Third Man Factor, it refers
to documented cases where an unseen presence or spirit has
provided comfort and support in a traumatic situation. In
recent
years,
well-known
adventurers
such
as
climber
Reinhold Messner and polar explorers Peter Hillary and Ann
Bancroft
have
reported
having
experiencing
this
phenomenon. In 2009, John G. Geiger wrote a book called
The Third Man Factor: Surviving the Impossible (Weinstein
Books), which documents many examples.
Sir Ernest Shackleton
One of my greatest sources of inspiration is Sir Ernest
Shackleton, the legendary Anglo-Irish explorer. I can’t tell
you how many times I’ve thought back to his incredible story,
654

his fortitude, and his never-give-in attitude. He once said,
“Never for me the lowered banner, never the last endeavor.”
Shackleton’s Antarctic expedition of 1914—during which he
and his crew endeavored to cross the continent from sea to
sea—ultimately failed, but the story of how he and the men
with him fought against incredible odds won them many
accolades and honors.
After their ship Endurance became trapped in ice, Shackleton
and his men were forced to make a grueling journey across
ice floes, then in lifeboats to Elephant Island, where for six
month the main group subsisted on seal meat and blubber.
Shackleton took five men around the island to the north and
then across 800 miles of treacherous ocean to South Georgia
Island. He then hiked and climbed with two others for
thirty-six hours across the island’s uncharted interior to a
whaling station, with another three months to go before he
could safely reach the crew back on Elephant Island.
Shackleton later wrote: “I know that during that long and
racking
march
of
thirty-six
hours
over
the
unnamed
mountains and glaciers, it seemed to me often that we were
four, not three.”
Years later, the poet T.S. Eliot read Shackleton’s account of a
mysterious “fourth” man and included it in his famous poem,
The Waste Land. Using poetic license he turned Shackleton’s
fourth into a third, which is where the phenomenon gets its
name.
Who is the third who walks always beside you?
655

When I count, there are only you and I together
But when I look ahead up the white road
There is always another one walking beside you
Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded
I do not know whether a man or a woman
But who is that on the other side of you?
Over the years, the Third Man experience has occurred over
and over to people on the edge of death—including 9/11
survivors, mountaineers, divers, polar explorers, prisoners of
war, solo sailors, aviators, and astronauts. All have escaped
traumatic events only to tell strikingly similar stories of
having experienced the close presence of a helper or guardian.
656

Ron DiFrancesco
At 8:46 AM on September 11, 2001, thirty-seven-year-old
Canadian money-market broker Ron DiFrancesco was sitting
at his desk on the eighty-fourth floor of the South Tower of
the World Trade Center in New York, when a plane struck the
North Tower. The world around him changed immediately.
As the lights in his office flickered on and off, he saw gray
657

smoke pouring from the North Tower. He watched as people
in offices trapped above the ninety-first floor on the North
Tower waved desperately for help. Most his fellow workers at
Euro Broker started to evacuate the building. Then an
announcement came over the South Tower PA system, which
stated: “Building Two (the South Tower) is secure. There is
no need to evacuate Building Two. If you are in the midst of
evacuation, you may return to your office by using the reentry
doors on the reentry floors and the elevators to return to your
office. Repeat, Building Two is secure . . . .”
DiFrancesco telephoned his wife, Mary, to tell her that he was
fine and intended to stay at work. “It was Tower One that was
hit,” he assured her. “I’m in Tower Two.”
Then a friend from Toronto called and told him, “Get the hell
out.” DiFrancesco decided to heed his friend’s warning and
started walking toward a bank of elevators when United
Airlines Flight 175, traveling at 595 miles an hour, slammed
into the South Tower, hitting the building between the
seventy-seventh and eighty-fifth floors.
DiFrancesco was thrown against a wall and showered with
ceiling panels and other debris. With the building swaying
and the fire from over 11,000 pounds of jet fuel spreading,
DiFrancesco entered Stairway A. He and others started to
descend through the smoke-filled stairwell, lit only by a
flashlight carried by a colleague and executive vice-president
at Euro Brokers, Brian Clark.
Three flights down, they ran into a heavy woman and a man
who were on their way up. “You’ve got to go up. You can’t
658

go down,” the woman insisted. “There’s too much smoke and
flames below.”
While Clark and DiFrancesco debated whether to climb to the
roof or descend, they heard someone screaming for help. The
two men entered the eighty-first floor to try to locate the
distressed man, but DiFrancesco was quickly overcome with
smoke. He reentered the stairwell and started to climb. But
the further he climbed, the more clogged with people the
stair-well became. And the emergency fire doors on the
landings were locked.
By the time he reached the ninety-first floor landing,
DiFrancesco started to panic. He had a wife and two young
children who needed him. He had to get out of the building
alive. With only one other option, DiFrancesco decided to
turn around and go back down. But as he approached the
impact zone, the smoke grew thicker and more astringent. At
the landing of the eightieth floor, he found that a collapsed
wall and flames blocked his descent. He got down on the
floor with about a dozen other desperate people and started
gasping for air. Some were crying. Others were slipping into
unconsciousness. It seemed like he was about to die with
them in the stairway, when he heard a voice address him by
his first name and say, “Get up, Ron! You can do this!”
He later said that he felt he was being guided by a physical
presence that led him down the stairs. After fighting his way
through drywall and other debris, he wanted to turn back, but
the presence urged him to continue. So Ron DiFrancesco
covered his head with his forearms and ran down through
three stories of flames. Singed by the flames and in pain, he
kept descending. Upon reaching the ground floor, he started
659

to exit when a security guard stopped him and pointed to
another, safer exit near Church Street.
Fifty-six minutes after the second plane hit, the floors of the
South
Tower
began
to
pancake
down.
DiFrancecso
remembered hearing an “ungodly roar” as he approached the
exit. He turned and saw an enormous fireball headed toward
him, but can’t recall what happened next. Days later he awoke
in
St.
Vincent’s
Hospital
in
Greenwich
Village
with
lacerations on his head, burns all over his body, and a broken
back.
660

World Trade Center
9/11 survivors
661

9/11 destruction
By all accounts, he was the last person to escape the South
Tower of the World Trade Center before it came down at 9:59
AM, and one of only four people to escape the building from
above
the
eighty-first
floor.
Ron
DiFrancesco
doesn’t
understand why he lived and others didn’t. But he has no
doubt that it was “an angel” who guided and urged him
through the impact zone to safety.
662

Angel or Hallucination?
Fabled climber Reinhold Messner, who has experienced more
than one encounter with the Third Man, believes it’s a natural
phenomenon produced by the brain. “I think all human beings
would have the same or similar feelings if they would expose
themselves to such precarious situations,” he explained. “The
body is inventing ways to let the person survive.”
Whether you believe that the Third Man is an angel or some
sort of hallucination produced by the mind under extreme
stress, there’s no doubt that Ron DiFrancesco, Frank Smyth,
Sir
Ernest
Shackelton,
Reinhold
Messner,
and
Juliane
Koepcke had one thing in common—an indomitable will to
survive.
663

664

THE MYSTERY OF SURVIVAL
665

As a Training Officer in the Navy SEAL Teams I had the
responsibility and great fortune of instructing SEALs in
Desert Survival, Jungle Survival, Arctic Survival, Mountain
Survival, Sea Survival and Urban Survival. In the SEAL
teams, we not only trained ourselves, but quite often would
reach out to other professionals, such as the individuals listed
below to instruct us.
In The Navy SEAL Survival Handbook I not only included
much of the survival information that I instructed in the
SEAL teams, but I also reached out to the professionals who
live and breathe “survival” on a daily basis. I am truly
indebted to these world renowned survival experts who
contributed a wealth of information to this book.
Dr. Bruce Jessen
Dr. Jessen, a former leading Psychologist for the Joint
Services Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE)
Course at Fairchild AFB,WA. He is a world renown, leading
authority on the topic of survival during captivity. Dr. Jessen
contributed his paper on RESILIENCE: CAN THE WILL TO
SURVIVE BE LEARNED? Dr. Jessen spent most of his
professional career better preparing our military with skills
and techniques on how to survive in governmental or
non-governmental captivity.
Tony Nester
http://www.apathways.com/media/course-picts/index.html
666

Tony owns and instructs at Ancient Pathways in Desert
Wilderness Survival, Primitive Skills, and Bush-craft, and is a
regular contributor to Outside Magazine. Tony has shared his
wealth of knowledge with civilians, the Navy SEAL Teams,
other members of the Special Operations community, and
with many other military organizations. He is the most sought
after Desert Survival instructor in North America. Tony
provided us with a great deal of information on desert
survival issues such as water procurement, flash floods, edible
plants, trapping, recommended clothing and foot wear, food
procurement and survival kit lists.
David Ayres
www.tate-inc.com
President - TATE, Incorporated
TATE is a leading provider of SERE and personnel recovery
training for the US government.
Wade R. Chapple
www.tate-inc.com
As the Managing Director for Latin America at TATE
Incorporated,
Wade
was
very
helpful
in
providing
information in Survival Evasion, Resistance and Escape
training in jungle environments, including creating survival
maps, crossing jungle rivers, and protecting clothing from the
elements.
667

Dave Williams, Director of Paddle Asia
http://paddleasia.com
Dave teaches Jungle Survival in Thailand and is a world
renowned expert in jungle survival, including edible plants,
trapping, survival kits, water procurement, starting fires,
cooking, weather, building shelters and navigation.
Additionally, this book would not have been possible without
the hard work and determination of Jay Cassell and his
professional team at Skyhorse Publishing.
I was very fortunate to collaborate with my very talented
co-author
and
friend
Ralph
Pezzullo
[www.RalphPezzullo.com],
as
well
as
Erika
Hokanson
[www.RefreshMediaResources.com] who collected, sorted
and acquired permission to publish photos that added such
great value to this project.
668

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
669

X: (TL) U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist
1st Class Matthew D. Leistikow; (BL) U.S. Navy photo by
Mass Communication Specialist 1st Class Roger S. Duncan;
(BR) MC3 Blake Midnight; • 2: (TL) DoD photo by Mass
Communication Specialist 2nd Class Kyle D. Gahlau, U.S.
Navy; (BL) U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication
Specialist Seaman Michael Lindsey; (BR) U.S. Navy photo
by Mass Com- munication Specialist 2nd Class Kyle D.
Gahlau; • 3: U.S. Navy photo by Photographer’s Mate 3rd
Class John DeCoursey; • 4: (TL) U.S. Navy photo by
Photographer’s Mate 2nd Class Eric S. Logsdon; (BL) U.S.
Navy Photo by Senior Chief Mass Communication Specialist
Scott
Williams;
(BR)
U.S.
Navy
Photo
by
Mass
Communication Specialist 2nd Class Erika N. Manzano; • 5:
U.S. Air Force photo by Tech. Sgt. Laura K. Smith; • 6: (L)
U.S. Air Force Photo by Airman 1st Class Chad Strohmeyer;
(R) U.S. Air Force photo by Senior Airman Jonathan Snyder;
• 7: (T) MC2 Shauntae Hinkle-Lymas; (B) U.S. Air Force
photo by Senior Airman Zachary Wolf;
8: (T) U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist
1st Class Matthew D. Leistikow; (B) U.S. Navy photo by
Mass Communication Specialist 1st Class Roger S. Duncan; •
10: U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist 2nd
Class Dominique M. Lasco; • 13: U.S. Coast Guard photo by
Petty Officer 1st Class Nyxo Lyno Cangemi;
14: Spc. Michael Vanpool; • 15: U.S. Navy photo by Mass
Communication Specialist 2nd Class Michelle Kapica; • 31:
U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist 2nd
Class Ashley Myers; • 32: U.S. Navy photo by Chief Mass
Communication Specialist Robert Fluegel; • 35: U.S. Navy
670

photo by Mass Communication Specialist 2nd Class John
Scorza; • 38: Cpl. James Cline; • 44: (Top, L-R) Kenn W.
Kiser/ aka click; Paulabflat; Ardelfin; Serious fun; (C)
jdurham; (B) Attis1979/Cliff; • 45: clconroy; • 48: Wade R.
Chapple; • 50: (TL-BR) Wade R. Chapple; roym; zionstudio;
athitha; asifthebes; vasantdave; ettina82; • 51: (TL-BR)
Benjipie; xenia; Samuel Cheney; plom; Satty4u; shona; Wade
R. Chapple; • 52: Clarita; • 54: (All) Dave Williams/
paddleasia.com;
56: ardelfin; • 57: NASA; • 58: (T) dave; (B) ardelfin; • 60:
Eastop; • 64: (T) Bain Collection, Prints & Photographs
Division, Library of Congress, LC-USZC4-7507; (B) Bain
Collection,
Prints
&
Photographs
Division,
Library
of
Congress, LC-DIG-ggbain-04200;
65: Neil Winkelmann; • 66: Library and Archives Canada/
PA-149311; • 67: xandert; Photo Credits
68: (T) Avanzero; (B) Kevin Connors; • 69: U.S. Navy photo
by Mass Communication Specialist 2nd Class Matt Daniels; •
70: (All) Don Mann; • 71: (TL) National Weather Service;
(TR) U.S. Federal Gov.; (BR) phestus; • 72: (T) Figure 31,
U.S. Geological Survey; (B) Maria Ly/Skimble.com; • 73: (T)
Serious fun; (B) U.S. Geological Survey;
74: Don Mann; • 75: Dr. Becky Abell; • 76: Steve Evans; •
77:
(T)
Robespierre;
(C)
Kevin
Connors;
(B)
Héctor
Maffuche, Revista Argentina “Gente y la actualidad” 1974
78: (All) Don Mann; • 79: Dr. Becky Abell; • 80: (All) Don
Mann; • 82: (T) Kevin Connors; (B) Scott M. Liddell; • 83:
671

Phil Kates; • 84: ricorocks; • 85: Thomasie; • 87: (All) Tony
Nester;
90: Tony Nester; • 91: xandert; • 97: U.S. Navy photo by All
Hands Photographer’s Mate 1st Class Michael Larson; • 98:
(T) Kcd88; (B) xandert; • 99: (T) D3designs; (C) Ben
Earwicker; (B) dustie; • 100: (T) Paul David Lewin; (B)
cohdra; • 101: (L) xandert; (R) dieraecherin; • 102: (T)
Kittenpuff1; (B) jeltovski; • 103: Luther C. Goldman/U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service; • 107: rebeca; • 110: Gilmartin
Owen; • 111: Jeff1980; • 112: Imageafter; • 115: cohdra; •
116: (T) Modern Touch Photography; (B) natashaw; • 119:
(T) A_kartha; (B) beanworks; • 120: (T-B) hamletnc; John
Sarvis/U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; Delboysafa; clarita; •
121: (T) sveres; (C) Cx_ed; (B) kkiser; • 123: Bain
Collection, Prints & Pho- tographs Division, Library of
Congress, LC-USZ62-33430; • 124: Imageafter; • 127:
xandert; • 128: Holder; • 129: (T) duboix; (B) United States
Department of Agriculture;
132: (T) U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist
1st Class Matthew D. Leistikow; (B) wadehjb; • 133:
Matthew Hull; • 135: (T) ppdigital; (C) Paddleasia.com (B)
Kevin Rosseel; • 136: (T) Paddleasia.com; (C) shirleybnz; (B)
ToOw1r3d; • 138: Tony Nester; • 139: CDC/Janice Haney
Carr; • 140: Imageafter; • 142: Vestergaard Frandsen;
146: (TL) Tony Nester; (TR) Paddleasia.com; (BL) Tony
Nester; • 147: (All) Tony Nester;
148: Serious Fun; • 150: (T) Jochanan Wahjudi; (B) MC1
Matthew D. Leistikow
672

151: (TL-BR) Homero chapa; alvimann; Imageafter; pickle;
Matthew Hull;
152: (BL-TR) U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication
Specialist 1st Class Roger S. Duncan; Georgina DeBurca;
seemann; bobby; Charl de Mille-Isles; US National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration; • 153: (T) U.S. Navy photo
by Mass Communication Specialist 1st Class Roger S.
Duncan; (c) Tony Nester; (B) Amejzing; • 154: dantada; •
155: (T) U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist
1st Class Matthew D. Leistikow; (B) Chris Palmer; • 159: (T)
Prototype 7; (B) Cyndi Souza/U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service;
• 160: (BL-TR) mzacha; mzacha; U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service; blackbird; keithcr; • 161: (TL-BR) jppi; heyjude;
emenel; stock.xchg; cyanocorax; • 162: (T) blackbird; (BL)
Alfi007; (BR) Dan McKay; • 163: (L) Kevin Rosseel; (C)
acrylicartist;
(R)
MEJones;
•
164:
(T,L-R)
Donna
A.
Dewhurst; Steve Maslowski/U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service;
jak; Steve Maslowski/U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; (BL)
DSchaeffer; (BR) gracey; • 165: (TL-BR) Paddleasia.com;
Katman1972; Floppy2009; Gittins; clconroy; Matthew Hull;
Jimdaly98; Paddleasia.com; • 166: (All) Paddleasia.com; •
167: Tony Nester; • 169: Tony Nester; • 171: Barry
Glickman; • 174: (T) Ruth Lawson/Otago Polytechnic; (3BL)
Tony Nester; • 175: (T) schick; (B) mcleod; • 176: (T) Tony
Nester; (B) Don Mann; • 177: Tony Nester; • 181:
johninportland; • 183: NOAA; • 185: (TL-BR) NOAA;
NOAA; For Spacious Skies/John A. Day; NASA; NASA; •
186: (TL-TR) Ralph F. Kresge/NOAA’s National Weather
Service
(NWS)
Collection;
Ralph
F.
Kresge/NOAA’s
National
Weather
Service
(NWS)
Collection;
Dave;
alvimann; (C) NOAA; (B) JASON Mission Center; • 187: (T)
Ralph F. Kresge/NOAA’s National Weather Service (NWS)
673

Collection; (B) NASA; • 188: (T) bosela; (B) NASA; • 189:
(T) NASA; (C) NASA; (B) NOAA; • 190: ostephy; • 193:
Harke; • 198: (T) U.S. Navy photo by Seaman Stephen M.
Fields; (B) U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication
Specialist 1st Class Matthew D. Leistikow; • 199: (T) U.S.
Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist 1st Class
Matthew D. Leistikow; (B) Earl53; • 200: (T) rsvstks; (B)
SPOT; • 201: (T) TracMe; (C) ACR Cobham Beacon
Solutions; (B) U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication
Specialist 1st Class Matthew D. Leistikow; • 202: (T) cohdra;
(B) iotdfi; • 203: EmmiP; • 204: (T) Irish_Eyes; (C)
Livelovelaugh1; (B) Dimitri_c; • 205: (All) NASA; • 206:
NASA; • 208: (T) shuttermon; (C) Hainee; (B) hotblack; •
210: wallyir; • 214: (T) Berkeley; (B) Air Force; • 215: (All)
Dino Brown; • 216: (T) Dr. Becky Abell; (B) James Gathany;
• 217: Serge8228; • 218: (All) CDC; • 219: CDC; • 222:
jeltovski; • 223: Sarej; • 224: Dino Brown; • 225: Dino
Brown; • 228: jusben; • 229: (All) Dino Brown; • 231: (All)
Dino Brown; • 232: (All) Dino Brown; • 238: (T) ASchaeffer;
(C) Dylan Ellis; (B) Jelle80nl; • 239: hconfer; • 240: (T) Bain
Collection,
Prints
&
Photographs
Division,
Library
of
Congress, LC-DIG-ggbain-04779; (C) Bain Collection, Prints
&
Photographs
Division,
Library
of
Congress,
LC-DIG-ggbain-31994; (B) aameris; • 241: barry; • 243: (3T)
Courtesy of the Prints and Photographs Division, Library of
Congress; (BR) clarita
674

PHOTO CREDITS
675

