Robert Hoekman, Jr.
Become a Trusted, Respected 
& Reputable Leader
The New 
Manager Mindset

Robert Hoekman, Jr.
The New Manager Mindset
Become a Trusted, Respected,
and Reputable Leader
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-95976-3
LSI
The New Manager Mindset
by Robert Hoekman, Jr.
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media Inc.. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Laurel Ruma
Production Editor: Nicole Shelby
Copyeditor: Octal Publishing
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
June 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-05-27: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. The New Manager
Mindset, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media,
Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
1. Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
A Note About How I Learned                                                            2
2. The Daily Practices of Leadership. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
Being Collaborative                                                                             7
Steady As You Go                                                                                 8
Eyes On the Road                                                                                 9
Speaking Up                                                                                        11
Institutionalized                                                                                 11
Snap Out of It                                                                                     12
Taking Criticism                                                                                12
Giving Credit Away                                                                           13
Managing Things Away from People                                              14
Creating Opportunities for Others                                                 15
3. Learning as a Habit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
Leaving Your Ego Out of It                                                               20
Learning to Succeed, Not to Embrace Failure                               21
Repeated Failure Gets You Nowhere                                               22
4. Skill Equals Perspective. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
Upside of Overlap                                                                              26
Be Replaceable                                                                                    27
T-Shaped People                                                                                28
5. The What Over the How. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
Tools, Not Processes                                                                          32
iii

Improvising                                                                                        33
Public Perception                                                                               35
6. Saying It with Purpose. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37
Framework for Thinking                                                                  38
On Writing Well                                                                                 39
Enabling Comprehension                                                                 41
Mapping Your Message to Their Concerns                                    41
7. Becoming Convincing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
Listening                                                                                              45
Asking                                                                                                  46
Restating                                                                                              47
Educating                                                                                            47
Presenting                                                                                           48
8. Being Unreasonable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  53
The Advantage of High Standards                                                  54
9. The Philosophy It All Adds Up To. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  59
iv 
| 
Table of Contents

CHAPTER 1
Introduction
So you’re a manager now. (Or you’d like to be.)
Odds are, you got here by being good at something other than man‐
aging. Odds are, you’re a little nervous now about whether you’ll be
as great at this as you were at that other thing. Odds are, you’re
already getting tired of platitudes and generic business advice and
op-eds about leadership and you’re hoping this time things will be
different.
It is. It is different.
Leadership advice is cheap. It’s also loose and vague—just vague
enough that you can project whatever you want into it. If you want
to hear that it’s all going to be okay and that if you just lean in and
finally learn to use your project management software, you’ll be well
on your way to success in no time. You can find someone to say that.
Probably a lot of people, in fact. You can find studies to tell you how
to deal with Millennials. You can learn how to be a Millennial who’s
also a manager. You can read up on the latest stats and thinking on
employee retention and positive feedback loops and opportunity for
growth. You can find a hundred books on all of the aspects of lead‐
ership you can imagine, written by every current and former leader
you’ve never heard of. You can do all that, sure.
I don’t think you want to do all that.
I think you want to turn off the “Complicator” switch. I think you
want to simplify the whole thing and learn how to Zen-out about
management and be the kind of manager you wish you had, or like
1

that one you really admired once a few years back; the one who was
really great and who inspired you to become good at whatever it was
you were good at before you became a manager yourself. I think you
want to develop a mindset that will help you navigate all the situa‐
tions, not just this one or that one. I don’t think you want tactics. I
think you want a belief system. One that makes you feel calm, confi‐
dent, controlled.
I’ll say that again: I think you want a belief system.
You want a set of guiding principles for good managers. A collection
of truths you can latch onto and use as your North Star. You don’t
want a solution; you want an approach to solutions. One you can use
all the time, every time.
Okay then. Let’s do that.
A Note About How I Learned
Like you, I began my career in subordinate roles and dealt with
more than my fair share of bad bosses with remarkably few great
ones along the way. Eventually, I worked my way into the Director
chair at a good-sized company, where I remained for a while until I’d
built up enough consulting work to become self-employed full time.
After eight or so years of that, I joined a startup for a few months as
a Director, and then returned to consulting work (I didn’t want to
relocate).
It’s a very different thing to be a consultant than to be an in-house
manager, I know. Before we get too far, I want to acknowledge that.
Whereas I can usually get in, do my work, and get out without get‐
ting mired down in the daily life of it all, for example, in-house staff‐
ers have to deal with internal politics long term, working with the
same people, the same constraints, the same internal issues and
roadblocks for months and years. My projects haven’t worked that
way. When someone has bothered me, I could take comfort in
knowing I wouldn’t need to deal with that person for very long. On
the flip side, internal staff members get to stick around to see the
long-range outcomes they’ve spent so much energy trying to ach‐
ieve, whereas I’m off on another project. When—if—I’ve heard
about the results of my work a year after the fact, it’s because I
remembered to get back in touch with the client and ask.
2 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction

What all this did for me, though, was something that can help you.
It put me in a position to watch hundreds, if not thousands, of peo‐
ple wing their way through projects in all kinds of situations, in all
kinds of companies, in all kinds of team setups. It put me in a posi‐
tion in which I could study what made the successful ones success‐
ful. What made the struggling ones struggle. Who did well, who
didn’t, why they could or couldn’t navigate their way to a good out‐
come, and what they did, said, and thought that got them there,
whether positive, negative, or somewhere between.
It put me in a position to develop an approach to management that
could, did, and had to work in every situation.
During my nine combined years as a consultant, most of my work
involved serving as the ad hoc strategy consultant and project man‐
ager for teams ranging in size from single-person startups to For‐
tune 500 companies. I did this for dozens of companies on hundreds
of projects, temporarily running projects and teams, sometimes for
a few days, other times for months on end. Basically, I spent a lot of
time being a person who had to walk into unknown situations, take
charge of them, and get things done. And I spent a lot of time look‐
ing at leadership from all angles—studying the qualities and actions
and behaviors that made people effective, trusted, and respected.
I’ve been able to watch these skills play out in every direction.
In client situations, I rarely had more than a day or two for getting
to know people, building rapport, earning trust. If I didn’t do this
well, projects could go wrong. If I did do this well, I had the chance
to leave lasting guidelines in place that could shape a product or
team for months or years to come.
So over time, I learned to forge a path from the first day I showed up
—to position myself as a leader and get others to go with me down
that path. I learned to do this well, and I learned to do this fast. I
learned how to consistently walk into a situation, no matter how dif‐
ferent it might be from the last or all the others before it, and lead it
wherever it needed to go.
I had to. My job was to be a leader.
In each and every situation, the approaches I discuss herein have
been crucial to success, and not just mine. They are the things I’ve
seen make other people effective, too—the in-house people, whether
VPs, PMs, or lowly team members with barely six months under
A Note About How I Learned 
| 
3

their belts working just to be heard. These are the qualities and
actions and behaviors that have made people successful across the
board, regardless of their situations, regardless of their roles.
I offer them here as lessons and approaches for new managers and
those who aspire to become managers.
While all of them contribute to being a good leader and to helping
you build credibility and trust, a few skills, I think, are also specific
to leaders—to those already in leadership roles.
I’m betting you’ve spotted most of these qualities in people who
weren’t bosses a few times yourself. I’m betting you’ve really liked
working with them. I’m betting you’ve wished the people who are
your bosses were more like them.
If you were lucky enough to work with one, I’m betting you stayed.
If you left, I’m betting it’s because you learned so much from this
person that you felt it was time to hold yourself to the standard to
which that person held you.
If you’re reading this now, I’m betting it’s because you’d like to learn
what made them great. How to become great yourself.
You can do that.
Here’s how to get from here to there.
4 
| 
Chapter 1: Introduction

CHAPTER 2
The Daily Practices of Leadership
There are two kinds of managers.
“And only two,” said a project manager once, responding to my quip.
A client meeting had just ended. I was finishing up some notes. The
client’s PM had stayed behind. Someone else on the client team had
told a funny story a few minutes earlier about an old boss, and the
PM and I were still chuckling over it. He knew what I meant when I
said there were only two kinds of managers. He filled in the rest for
me.
“The kind who want to control everything, and the kind who hire
smart people and get out of the way.”
I’d first heard this from an old boss of my own. It stuck with me for a
long time, and I sometimes found myself dropping every boss I’d
ever had into one box or the other. It wasn’t hard to do. I don’t think
I’d ever thought about it until my old boss had said it. Once I’d heard
it, there was no escaping it. Every manager fell to one side or the
other.
Not because it was true, but because someone had said it was true.
In truth, there are more than just two buckets.
There does seem to be a bucket that can be easily filled with people
who want to micromanage everything. You know the type. They
dish out strict instructions. They disappear for long periods of time
while you work out all the details (there’s not enough time to micro‐
manage you and everything else). Then they do drive-by manage‐
5

ment to tell you how wrong all your decisions were and how they
would’ve done it all differently. Let’s face it; those people suck.
But the ones who manage well? They come in a million varieties and
have a million different techniques and traits. And none of them
simply “get out of the way.” Leaders tend to do a whole bunch of
things that make us all want to follow their lead in the first place.
Some of their skills are complicated and take a long time to develop,
and they help push the entire organization forward with intelligence
and quiet persistence. Some are basic, everyday practices that keep
teams united and moving and bonded to each other. Practices that
nurture an environment of respect and dignity and possibility on a
daily basis.
I want you to want to be the second kind of leader. Your team will
want that, too. If you want to be a micromanager, you might as well
toss out this report right now. It’s not going to do you any good. If
you want to be the right kind of leader, stick around.
This report is full of observations about that kind of leader as well as
approaches I’ve picked up myself over the years that have helped me
be successful in these roles. For good measure, I also include the
insights of a couple of very knowledgeable friends.
I occasionally make a reference to design work and design teams,
particularly in a web context. This is because I spent most of my
professional life working in various design roles, especially that of a
User Experience (UX) Strategist. (This means I helped web compa‐
nies figure out what their products should do, why, and how to ach‐
ieve those objectives.) This report, in fact, spills many of the same
points and stories as a book I wrote for UX professionals called
Experience Required: How to Become a UX Leader Regardless of Your
Role (New Riders 2015). (If you want advice specific to leadership in
the design profession, you can find it in that book.)
The takeaways, though, can be applied to any professional environ‐
ment. I’ve seen them hold true and work in all variety of professions.
They aren’t industry skills, they’re human skills. They’re principles.
They’re a mindset.
This is not about how to do managerial tasks. It’s not about which
meetings to hold and how often and how to run them. It’s not about
how to hire, fire, or promote. This is about the human skills that can
help you become trusted, respected, and reputable as a leader.
6 
| 
Chapter 2: The Daily Practices of Leadership

Before we get into the more involved concepts—the ones that
require long-term focus and that develop over time—I want to hand
you a set of daily must-haves you can use for years to come regard‐
less of what else is happening. So that on your worst day, you can
rely on these few practices and still trust that you’ve kept yourself
from getting carried away in the tide of internal politics and obsta‐
cles and objections and managed to somehow still do better as a
manager than 90 percent of the rest of the world on their best day.
These take commitment, as well—I don’t mean to imply they don’t.
But they are simple in concept, and, if you can stick to them, they
will make up a base that will serve you and your team well every sin‐
gle day of your tenure.
Whereas much of what we talk about later are things that will help
you manage out and up—things that will help you initiate and push
your company forward—this chapter is for the things that will help
you manage your team.
These are the things people who work under you will thank you for
when you leave.
I highly recommend printing them as a list and then stapling it to
your forehead. It’s a small amount of pain for a whole lot of benefit.
Being Collaborative
One of the first things a lot of new managers want to do is manage.
They want to begin inserting themselves as decision-makers,
experts, masters of their domains.
Don ’t do that. It’s a mistake. Collaboration has a lot of benefits. You
likely experienced most of them prior to becoming a manager.
First, everyone in a group can benefit from everyone else’s knowl‐
edge and talent. Teams have backup skills, overlapping know-how,
people with specialties that you don’t have yourself.
Second, working in groups, with their close working relationships
and their innate knowledge of who knows what and who’s good at
what, invariably makes individuals better than they could be on
their own.
Third, rock-star employees are rare. Though a legitimate master
within a profession can do some great things while working alone,
Being Collaborative 
| 
7

teams are far more often the better way to go. Members can help
each other out in all sorts of ways.
Rock stars can also be destructive. Pretty much no one wants to be
excluded from a project because the rock star on the team can do it
all alone. If you want your entire team to look good, no single per‐
son can stand out as the lone master without damaging morale and
quite likely the product you’re all working to create.
Besides all that, collaborating is often fun. If you have the chance to
bounce ideas off other people, take it. Even if the ideas to come out
of it rarely surprise you, they will sometimes surprise you. That
alone makes collaboration worth trying.
There is, however, a trick to making it work well: keep the team on
the small side.
A study showed that larger teams perform better than small teams
despite the fact that individuals on small teams performed better
than individuals on large teams.
On large teams, people don’t know each other as well. When a per‐
son on a large team needs help or additional information, she is less
likely to know who to talk to. But because a larger team has more
people on it, it will perform better than the small team overall. An
individual on a small team, on the other hand, is more likely to
know who to go to for extra information. Team members are also
more likely to have better relationships with each other, because
they’ve worked together more closely than they would on a larger
team.
Steady As You Go
I found the first great manager I ever knew in an unlikely place: a
video store I worked at in my twenties. Her name was Kim. I learned
something from her I still believe in today, and have seen in count‐
less other good managers since.
When Kim asked people to do things around the store, she’d stand
slightly turned, one foot ahead of the other, with her forward shoul‐
der tilted down and her head down. Then she’d look directly at you
and say something like, “When you get a chance, can you please
clear that shelf and put out the new releases?” She did the same
thing when asking you to complete a task, when she asked how your
8 
| 
Chapter 2: The Daily Practices of Leadership

life was going, when she mentioned something her family had done
last week, when she asked how the event was that you went to last
night. She was never condescending or cold, never angry or harsh.
When making a request, she was only mildly commanding. It felt
like she was telling you a secret.
To Kim, nothing was worth anxiety. Nothing was worth worry, or
urgency, or panic. Kim was as even-keeled as a person can be. Deliv‐
eries would arrive, customers would ask questions, lines would get
long. Her voice never rose. Kim simply did not believe in freaking
out.
And everyone loved her for it. Everyone happily did what she asked.
For the most part, the staff remained as calm as she did. We looked
at and treated her with all the respect we had, because she earned it,
every day.
What I learned from Kim is this:
We teach other people how to treat us.
Overreactions teach people to be nervous about approaching us.
Anxiety teaches people to avoid us. Pushing things off teaches peo‐
ple they can’t trust us. Expressing frustration at a CEO’s request to
put something fun on hold so you can catch up on lagging projects
teaches the CEO to treat you like a nuisance rather than a leader.
When you are calm and consistent, with few exceptions, you teach
people you can be relied upon. That you are capable of handling any
challenge. That you can be trusted as a leader.
The way you act and react affects the way everyone else will see you
the next time they need you to act or react. Stay calm in all situa‐
tions, and you will have all the respect you’ll ever need to get things
done when the chance comes.
Yes, this will be hard to do sometimes. Remind yourself. The long-
term payoff of staff loyalty and trust and endearment is worth far
more than any satisfaction you could derive from spouting off, even
just once.
Eyes On the Road
Learning to achieve work Zen can take a while.
Eyes On the Road 
| 
9

Years ago, a few months into my first director-level role, I began to
notice a disturbing trend: meeting overload. No matter the day, no
matter the workload, I was dragged away from my desk more fre‐
quently than I was able to plant myself at it and get things done. It
ate at me for a month or so, then another month, and then another,
until I found myself angry at every meeting invitation to hit my
inbox. I was even resentful of every invite I created myself. I started
scheduling them for shorter time slots. I walked in with agendas and
skipped the small talk. I made it a requirement to walk out of every
meeting with a decision—a takeaway of some kind.
It didn’t help. I was still frustrated. The work at my desk was still sit‐
ting there undone.
A few months of that and I was decidedly over it.
Then I realized something.
Perhaps because there was no real alternative, or perhaps because I
convinced myself to believe it, I had the thought that changed my
experience for the duration of my spell at this particular company:
Meetings are my work.
I don’t mean that my job was to have meetings (though, that was
certainly part of the revelation). I mean that my job was bigger than
a job—it was a mission, a purpose, a goal. I didn’t go there to com‐
plete tasks, I went there to form and shape and execute on a larger
vision. The work I did at my desk was part of it. The meetings I was
pulled into were part of it. The daily interruptions by coworkers and
questions and emergencies were part of it. Everything I did was part
of that mission. It all contributed. It all could be tied back in some
way to what I was there to achieve.
Many days came and went after that. Other jobs at other companies
did, too. I’ve been just as frustrated by meetings and other distrac‐
tions at other times as I was back then. But since the revelation, I’ve
been able to remind myself of something:
There are distractions and meetings and demands and questions
and emergencies in literally every kind of work, every week, no mat‐
ter what you do.
They are not distractions. They are part of how you will one day
achieve whatever it is you’re so focused on. And not one of them
matters.
10 
| 
Chapter 2: The Daily Practices of Leadership

Keep your eyes on the road. Every white stripe that flies by on your
left side is another mark in the asphalt, another block of time,
another stretch of mileage that will get you there.
Internalizing this—owning this—will all but eliminate your frustra‐
tion. It’ll make you easier to approach, less anxious, and more pro‐
ductive.
It’ll make you the Buddha of your office.
Speaking Up
When you were called in for the interview, you were nervous, but
you knew you were qualified—you knew you could do this manager
thing. When you met with the people who would hire you, you were
humble and gracious and not at all tough, but you knew you had
opinions and beliefs about how to be a good manager and what
made your last bad manager so bad. When you were offered the job,
you knew you’d be on a big learning curve for a while. (Or maybe
you didn’t. Maybe you thought the fact that you were hired meant
you had it all figured out already and that’s why they hired you for
the spot.)
Then you started, and something changed. Not immediately—not
on day one—but soon, and one day at a time. You began to see more
of the puzzle pieces that make up your company’s decisions. You
became one of the voices in the room whose job it was to recognize
the constraints and the challenges and to navigate them, to measure
priorities against time, resources against abilities. Over a few
months, you grew knowledgable.
Great. But you also became something else (or you’re about to):
Institutionalized
Yes, you learned to focus on the big picture, how to map out projects
and divvy up the talent pool to the right places, and to get things
done and to know that things must sometimes move slowly. Yes, you
did all that. But in the process, you unlearned the things that made
you want to be a manager in the first place. Like how important it is
to watch over the quality of the product, the business, the work
you’re all doing. You unlearned how to be critical of the thing you
Speaking Up 
| 
11

came there to do. In its place, you learned to sacrifice this for that,
and that for another thing.
Snap Out of It
Your staff cares about quality. They all want to go home and feel
good about themselves and their work. They want to believe in what
the company that employed them is doing and how well it’s doing it.
They’d really love it if you did, too. If you weren’t just another lowly
manager trying to appease the higher-up managers—another cog in
the machine.
Just like questioning a government is one of the most patriotic
things a citizen can do, at some point, the only way to truly care
about the product your company puts out is to focus on the end
result. To them, the product is all that matters. They don’t care that
Gianni calls in sick a lot or that Sheila isn’t that great of a designer or
that your boss wanted you to spend your time elsewhere for a while.
They definitely don’t care about your budget constraints. All your
customers care about is whether or not the work you’ve done was
worth doing—whether it or not made their lives better.
Believe in your product, whatever your “product” is. Speak up about
it. They hired you because you were good at something. Remember
to be good at that. Remember to care about that.
Taking Criticism
There’s this Neil Gaiman quote I like to use a lot:
When people tell you something’s wrong or doesn’t work for them,
they are almost always right. When they tell you exactly what they
think is wrong and how to fix it, they are almost always wrong.
Right now, let’s focus on the first part of that thought.
When people tell us something is wrong or that something is both‐
ering them, most people react as if it were a criticism.
Don ’t be one of them. React as if it were a test.
Think of everything you say as a first draft of some brilliant future
speech. Think of everything you write as the shoot-from-the-hip
version of some yet-to-be-polished manuscript full of typos and
unclear assertions. Then, when you send them out into the world—
12 
| 
Chapter 2: The Daily Practices of Leadership

these statements and words, designs and lines of code, products and
mantras—think of them as a test. Then think of what you get back
as data that tells you whether or not the thing you put out into the
world did its job.
Your job as a manager is to manage as well as possible, which is
likely far better than you can manage now. Especially in the early
days, there’s little likelihood you are anywhere near as good as you
could be. Criticism is the only way to get better. You have to listen to
it. You have to think about it. You have to consider what it is that’s
bothering other people about how you’re doing it.
Did someone react badly to something you said? It could be that you
said it poorly. Did a department react badly to a new policy you’ve
implemented? It could be that you didn’t communicate its value, or
include them in the decision-making process, or even collect their
input in the first place. Is a customer complaining about a flaw in
your product you don’t believe exists? It could be that the customer
doesn’t understand what was intended.
Criticism is how you learn. Learn to hear it as the result of a test of
your work, not as an assault on your work.
Besides all that, if you ever want to be able to offer criticism, you
must first learn how to accept it. You have to teach other people that
you can accept it.
Giving Credit Away
It’s supposed to be a good thing when you get credit for good work.
I knew a man once who was fired for doing so. Mostly because the
credit he took was for work he had done as part of a team, and the
people around him who had done the rest of it were justifiably
unhappy with his credit-grabby hands. One week, he was on the
cover of a magazine. The next, he was looking for work.
Around that same time, a manager I knew was telling a story about
a work success and how she’d been nominated for an award quite
ironically after having pinned all the good work on a project to her
staff. She claimed, basically, that stepping out of the credit race was
the key to her success.
“It’s amazing what you can get done when you don’t care who gets
credit,” she said.
Giving Credit Away 
| 
13

I believed her. I began doing it myself. Here’s what I’ve learned:
First, giving credit away is gigantic for morale. It helps newer staff
members feel good about their progress, and it helps existing team
members keep a healthy and positive outlook about their roles
within the team and their contributions to the company.
Second, because it makes the entire team look good and not just you
alone. Your team becomes a powerhouse. An individual can have a
great reputation, sure, but the result is often that the individual
becomes overloaded with work because everyone wants to work
with that person. When an entire team has a good reputation, the
rest of the company wants to work with it, the team as a whole
builds a ton of clout that can be used to sway future projects, and
when it comes time to hire more people, you can often have you
pick of internal candidates.
And third, just like the manager who’d first suggested the power of
giving credit away, I soon found that when the team was thanked for
its work by the higher-ups in the company, its members tended to
point to the team as their foundation. No one person tried to hoard
credit. Quite the opposite; they wanted to give it to each other.
Rather than claim credit for my team’s greatness, my team’s work
made us all look great.
Managing Things Away from People
The word “manage” has a lot of implications, a lot of social baggage.
It’s an ugly word many people associate either with a bad boss, the
act of maintaining the status quo, or pushing papers around a desk
while the minions do all the real work. And there’s some truth to
that perception. When managers manage, they do tend to manage
people.
It’s a mistake, of course. Few people want to be managed. To be
handled.
To the contrary, most people want to be able to go home at night
feeling halfway decent about themselves—to hold up some level of
pride over their work, to feel a sense of purpose, to satisfy their own
internal instinct and drive to be worthy contributors.
We don’t need to manage that. It’s human nature.
14 
| 
Chapter 2: The Daily Practices of Leadership

What we do need to manage is their ability to do it. And that means
something else entirely.
It’s not about allocating resources and handing out assignments and
filling in the spreadsheets. Sure, that’s part of the job, but it’s neither
why you signed up nor what anyone really needs you to do for them.
What your team wants is for you to keep stupid crap off their desks.
Needless email, hijacked priorities, demands from people with no
skin in the game, shifts in strategy that come out of the blue and can
undo weeks of work.
Keep it off their desks.
As much as possible, be the person who fends off the relentless frus‐
trations of professional life.
Stop managing people. Start managing distraction.
Creating Opportunities for Others
Once in a while, someone wants to break out of the usual and do
something exciting.
You know what that’s like. So, let them.
Helping others on your team become as well-rounded and skilled as
they want to be is a great way to strengthen your team and keep peo‐
ple motivated.
Here’s a story about this from my book, Experience Required:
I once had a junior designer on my team who desperately wanted to
do more strategy work. He’d told me so at least three times while
the team was in the midst of a Herculean effort to rid itself of tech‐
nical debt. He was at his least challenged, design-wise. He wanted
to push himself.
I understood. This isn’t what any of us had signed up for. I was just
as eager to get back to doing rather than redoing.
A couple of weeks later, a project I’d been pushing for came to fru‐
ition. It was something I had been planning for a few weeks and
had spent a good amount of time convincing the relevant stake‐
holders to take on. It was a project I really wanted to work on
myself.
Strategy came first. My wheelhouse. My favorite part. But some‐
thing was gnawing at me.
Creating Opportunities for Others 
| 
15

This designer was really talented. He showed up every day. He slog‐
ged through the projects that had kept us all from any kind of for‐
ward motion. He did stellar work no matter how tedious the
project. From the moment I’d joined the company, I’d wanted to see
how far he could go, and here he was, stuck in the mud, not getting
anywhere. He wanted very much to do more strategic work, and I
very much wanted to give him the chance.
I had to do it. I gave the project to him. I told him I’d be there for
guidance and to answer questions if he needed, but that the project
was all his.
Secretly, I also committed to asking him loads of questions along
the way that would allude to the kinds of things he should be think‐
ing about. But I swore to myself I would give him some distance.
Remember: Good ideas come from all kinds of places. We all
needed to see what he could do, most of all him. He needed room
to step out. To step up.
And so he did.
He did great work on that project. He proved himself to a bunch of
people in a bunch of ways. And he learned some things in the pro‐
cess that enabled me to go to him later as a strategic thinker.
Again, people in the web industry already want to do great work.
They want to learn more, take on more, build more, design more,
ship more. They’ re hungry.
So feed them.
When someone wants the chance to improve at something, find
ways to let them. The next time a project comes up that appeals to
that person, hand it off, even if you really want to do it yourself.
Nine times out of ten, that person will step up. And both of you will
be better off for it.
Even if you’re not in the position to decide which people belong to
which projects, you can always find little ways to involve others. If
they’re interested in the thing you’re working on, invite them over
to see what you can do together.
A little advice, though, if you’re on the other side of this scenario—
if you are the person who wants more opportunities: Do something
to earn them.
I once invited onto a project of mine a designer who’d been pretty
well known for his talents. He had worked at a local agency for a
long time and had recently gone out on his own to become a con‐
sultant. He’d said to me a few weeks earlier that he, too, wanted to
get more into strategic work. So when a project popped up that
would involve a lot of it, I asked him to join the client and me for a
two-day kickoff session. He accepted. We holed up for a couple of
16 
| 
Chapter 2: The Daily Practices of Leadership

days in a conference room and cranked out a bunch of ideas, and
then planned to refine them over the next week or so. During those
two days, he was great. He was full of ideas, we worked well
together, the client liked him, and we got a lot done. His next job
was to go create a more complete version of the strategy, make sure
our initial design ideas supported it, and put together some more
refined screens. We’d have a meeting about it the next Monday.
He never showed up to the meeting on Monday. And days later,
when we pressed to see what he’d done, he sent us a digital version
of a single sketch we’d done on a whiteboard the week earlier.
I haven’t invited him into a project since. I’m sure you can see why.
If you want people to include you, be there when the invitation
comes. Be present. Be reliable. Be engaged. The only way to get bet‐
ter is to drown a little bit. Be ready to jump in the pool.
Creating Opportunities for Others 
| 
17


CHAPTER 3
Learning as a Habit
As you likely know by now, to the people on a team, managers aren’t
peers. They’re usually the people the rest of the team points to as the
ones doing everything wrong, the ones holding progress back.
There’s some truth to that.
Managers become managers by previously having been good at
something else. Our hierarchical professional structures all but guar‐
antee the “Peter Principle ”—that we tend to rise to the level of our
own incompetence. We get good at one thing after another until we
end up managing—a skill that presumably has almost nothing to do
with whatever we were good at before, a brand new skill for which
you have no prior experience.
Congratulations. As a new manager, you’ve just risen to the level of
your incompetence.
Don ’t stay that way.
The Peter Principle might be entirely accurate, but it excludes all
talk of the idea that we are, in fact, built to improve. Ambition isn’t
an inherent evil; it just tends to advance us to higher and higher
positions until we reach one for which we have zero skill. This ach‐
ievement doesn’t render us incapable of learning. We can still learn.
We can still do better. We can figure out how to be managers. Then
we can figure out how to be great ones.
Likewise, we can learn to be better craftsmen at whatever craft it is
we were originally hired to practice. We can help push our profes‐
19

sions forward by poking holes in standards and digging for better
options. We can remember that it’s more fun to get better than it is
to stagnate. Not only will it help you feel more fulfilled, this leading-
by-example approach will motivate your entire team.
Learning as a habit means to consistently aim for something better
than the present. Whether your skill level, your ability to manage
distractions, your sense of empathy or respect for your coworkers,
or something else, age and experience and self-examination will
almost always eventually present a different perspective than you
have now.
Good thing, too. Because if you’d never adopted a strategy of
advancing past your current state, you’d have never arrived at where
you are now. Keep that strategy and you could lead yourself into any
variety of great situations later on.
Besides that, learning simply helps satisfy your own internal drive to
be good at what you do. On a long enough timeline, every job turns
boring and routine. Learning new things about it makes your work
more fun and interesting. It makes you more useful and beneficial to
your team. It gives you the best chance of advancing your own
career. Not just your job, but your career.
Leaving Your Ego Out of It
There’s a trick to it, though. You must learn to get your ego out of
the way.
As a designer, part of my job was to have people try out my work via
usability tests, the goal of this being to find issues in the design that
would keep users from successfully completing tasks and being
happy with the product we were producing for them. I wasn’t
designing printed works, after all—I was designing functionality.
Usability tests are a tough thing the first times.
Strangers come to the office, sit down in a little room with a com‐
puter and a microphone and a video camera. You ask them to try to
complete various tasks—really important things that everyone
should be able to do with your product. They push buttons and click
things and talk about what their guesses are how they’re making
their decisions. They muddle their way through something you’ve
spent a couple of weeks developing into what you think is a pretty
20 
| 
Chapter 3: Learning as a Habit

good design. Something you’re confident about. They stumble and
trip and get lost. Then, someone gets completely stuck on a page
and abandons a task you were so sure was simple and clear. They tell
you how hard of a time they’re having. And you can’t believe it. And
you go home feeling lousy.
But then you get some sleep, and you wake up a little less anxious.
You play back the video from the day before and you try to see what
they saw. And slowly, you begin to understand how their interpreta‐
tion was so different from your own.
And you learn from it.
Do this enough times and you realize something vital: they’re not
attacking your design; they’re telling you what they need in order to
understand it the same way you do. They’re telling you how you can
help them. They’re giving you the chance to learn something, to do
something better than you did before. They’re telling how to reach a
point in the future when you can make better guesses in the first
place and end up with fewer problems in your work than you have
now.
They’re teaching you to take your ego out of the equation.
It can take a long time to teach yourself that it’s nothing personal.
That it’s not about being right or not, or being perfect or terrible on
the first try. It’s about learning.
To do that well, you have let your ego be crushed, and then focus on
what you can learn rather than how you feel about having been
humbled.
Learning to Succeed, Not to Embrace Failure
All that said, the mindset you have about learning is key.
An idea has been going around the business world for the past few
years that failure is a good thing. Failure, so the idea goes, means
you’re making the good attempt to break past the typical and ach‐
ieve something more. If you’re not failing, you’re not trying hard
enough. “Fail early, fail often,” they say.
It’s a lot like the aforementioned Peter Principle, in fact—rising to
the level of your incompetence.
Learning to Succeed, Not to Embrace Failure 
| 
21

But I have a problem with this notion of failure as a positive goal.
Not so much with the idea behind it—you’d have never become a
manager had you not been willing to push yourself. My problem is
with the phrasing.
Repetition is a core tenet of the persuasion industry. Say something
over and over again, according to some strategies, and people often
begin to believe it, regardless of whether it has any merit. For exam‐
ple, we’ve all heard for years now that pit bulls are lethal, and we’ve
learned to accept it as truth whether the notion has any real merit or
not (hint: statistically, it really doesn’t).
You can use this for positive purposes, like building enthusiasm for a
product vision for the team of people responsible for building it. But
repetition also reinforces your own beliefs. The more you say some‐
thing, the harder it is to change your own mind about it later.
Failing is a negative idea. Even if you know that the intent of “fail
early, fail often” is the opposite of its wording, having the word
“fail ” sitting in your head all day can be outright self-destructive.
Your brain is hardwired to feel negatively about negative words.
It’s far better to set a goal you want to achieve.
Like succeeding.
Rather than fail early and often, try examining every situation for
what good can come out of it, what insight can be gleaned from it.
Focus on the wins, and celebrate them.
Repeated Failure Gets You Nowhere
Besides that, failing only teaches you how to fail. Success teaches
you how to succeed.
When startup entrepreneurs succeed once, they are more likely to
succeed again. When they fail, however, they are just as likely to fail
the next time around as they were the first time. This is what ven‐
ture capitalists have found to be true, anyway.
Some people believe you can learn as much from failing as you can
from succeeding. This is just not true. There are a billion ways to do
both, but only one of these outcomes is desirable. You’re not trying
to learn how to fail. That’s absurdly easy to do. There’s nothing to
learn there. You’re trying to learn to succeed.
22 
| 
Chapter 3: Learning as a Habit

Fail once and you’ve learned one way to fail. But succeed once and
you’ve learn at least one way to succeed. And if you learn to succeed
one way, your odds go up for learning to do it another way. Because
in the process of succeeding, you pick up a few skills necessary for
doing it again. You learn how to shift strategies. How to prioritize.
How to rethink. How to sit back and stare at the rafters for a minute
to reimagine how you’ll achieve the goal. You learn how to push
through the obstacles. How to align the variables that will give you a
positive outcome.
Most of all, you learn that success is possible, which is essential to
believing it can happen again.
Repeated Failure Gets You Nowhere 
| 
23


CHAPTER 4
Skill Equals Perspective
One of the most significant things you can do for your staff as a
manager is to know their work—to understand what they do, how
they do it, and what it means to them to be tasked with those partic‐
ular demands on a daily and yearly basis.
First, and perhaps most obviously, this helps you to build rapport
with your staff, but this isn’t because it means you can now chat
about it over drinks at the company happy hour. Rather, it’s because
understanding their work helps you respect their work. The difficul‐
ties, the constraints, the sophistication, the basic knowledge it takes
to do the job.
Meet my friend Christina Wodtke.
Christina has been the GM of Social at MySpace, Principal Product
Manager at LinkedIn, GM at Zynga, and publisher of revered web
magazine Boxes and Arrows. She has also been involved with count‐
less startups as a Silicon Valley veteran. She points to a lack of
respect as one of the biggest mistakes a team member can make.
“I would say the one thing that I really badly want,” she says, “and I
hate to say it’s rare, but it is, and it kills me that it’s rare, is genuine
respect for other disciplines.”
Big companies, especially, tend to have multiple people in the same
roles, and when that happens, they tend to stick together and forget
to consider all the other aspects of the projects they’re working on.
She says she meets a lot of people who simply don’t understand or
care what that other people on their team do, or what their manag‐
25

ers do, or what the general manager does, or what Marketing does.
And Christina notes that these people who spend their time ignor‐
ing everyone else’s contributions are, ironically, the same people
who most often say, “How do I get people to respect me?”
She says the key is to not only to be respectable, then, but also to
respect others.
Very often, she points out, people who have similar jobs tend to
stick together. “They all go to lunch together, and they all sit
together, they all leave at the same time.”
This keeps them from gaining solidarity with the rest of the people
on their projects—the ones doing all the other jobs necessary for
successful execution.
I’ve seen this myself. A lot.
Understanding the work others do helps build chemistry, rapport,
respect. As a manager, these things will change your life.
Second, understanding your team’s skills is essential when it comes
to planning, work allocation, and strategic improvement. This much
is obvious: if you don’t know what the people on your team do all
day, you can’t possibly plan a project around them. Instead, you’ll
end up making assumptions about ability levels, time considera‐
tions, and all sorts of other aspects of a project that will only lead it
to a point of failure. At the very least, you should be able to identify
which people can pick up where others leave off—where you have
overlap.
Finally, to make yourself even more useful as a manager, you can
actually gain some of those same skills. There are major benefits to
overlap.
Upside of Overlap
That small teams are more effective than individuals is common
knowledge. No individual can think of everything, do everything,
know everything. Teams make people better. When the people on
those teams share skills, they collectively have the benefit of shared
interest. They read different articles, different books, go to different
conferences and local events. You bring those insights back to the
group and share them. You learn from each other. You change each
26 
| 
Chapter 4: Skill Equals Perspective

other’s minds. You get the benefit of multiple perspectives. You get
the benefit of debate.
This is great for a company. It’s great for the products you’re work‐
ing on. And it’s fantastic for users because it’s not a single-minded
effort that brings a product into their lives, but a collaborative, con‐
sidered, deliberate effort managed by a group of people who come
up with more ideas, poke holes in more arguments, anticipate more
problems, and solve more issues before they get out into the world.
As a manager, your own ability to overlap skills with the people on
your team means that you can get something you’re going to need a
lot: extra help. Individuals—especially the stronger performers on a
team—invariably become maxed-out at one time or another. Bring‐
ing your own skill to the table, you can contribute to a project
directly when the team needs some extra hands. This gives you
more credibility, too—it means the team can trust that you under‐
stand everyone’s work.
Likewise, anything you can do to encourage overlap among your
team members will only help you in the long run. Does your com‐
pany offer ongoing education benefits? Are there workshops and
conferences around that would be useful for helping your team
build new skills? Odds are, at least some of the people on your team
already want to delve into new subjects and further their skillsets.
You won’t need to convince them. Wherever you find this drive,
nurture it. Figure out how to get your company to pay for these
mind-expanding opportunities and make them happen for your
team.
When one person needs help, others will be there.
Be Replaceable
Before we move on, let’s talk about something that probably popped
into your head while reading the last section: namely, the fear that
redundancy on a team makes it sound like you’re replaceable.
You are. You should be. To elaborate on this, here’s a quick snippet
from Experience Required:
No matter how good you are or how well you fill a niche, or how
useful you are in whatever situation comes up in a day, you are
replaceable.
This should comfort you. You need to be replaceable.
Be Replaceable 
| 
27

If you’re absolutely perfect for one thing, you’re less perfect for a
bunch of other things. It’ll be harder for you to find the perfect job.
It’ll be hard to find any job. If you’re replaceable, you’re hirable.
Besides that, you want to be able to move on at some point. Test out
your other skills. Develop new ones. Work on a different product
you care about more than this one. If you’re replaceable, a company
won’t trap you into staying by throwing more and more money at
you until it’s impossible for you to leave. Every job eventually turns
into the wrong situation, whether because the job changes or
because you do. The web industry isn’t built for lifers. It’s built for
people with an endless sense of adventure. An incessant will to take
on the next project. The next challenge. When that feeling strikes,
you need to be able to leave. Don’t get trapped by money. Make too
much cash in one place for that perfect thing you do, and your
desire to get out will drive you mad.
There’s also the reality of emergencies. You’re a human being, and
you’re going to experience a few of them. A health emergency. A
car accident on a day full of deadlines. A death in the family. Sick
kid. You name it. You need to be able to take a day off, a week, three
weeks, and not spend that time worrying about what you’re not get‐
ting done. Let them get done by someone else. No UX project will
ever be more important than your life.
Be replaceable.
T-Shaped People
All that said, there’s a problem with generalists, and because of it, I
hope you’ll consider attempting to go beyond a basic level of skill.
Here’s my case:
The hard work of professions far and wide has been distilled and
reduced and simplified into how-to articles and videos and work‐
shops that are now absurdly easy to find online. If you follow any‐
one in your professional circles on social media, it’s hard to even
look at your phone without tripping over another “5 Ways to Do
This, That, or Something Else” article.
Great. This is something the Internet is supposed to be good at—
enabling people to empower themselves to learn more. And it’s
doing a bang-up job.
That information, though—those insights, all that “thought leader‐
ship”—has to come from somewhere. It has to be dug up, made
meaningful, turned into teachable, lasting content the rest of us can
use to get moving more quickly. Your profession probably became
28 
| 
Chapter 4: Skill Equals Perspective

accessible by way of the people who spent years and decades shaping
it. The experts. It seems easy now because it’s been simplified, com‐
municated, learned, and then interpreted and repeated.
Again: great. Our ability to stand on the shoulders of giants means
we can more readily change careers, enhance our current skillsets,
and do all kinds of other things a lot more easily than we used to.
It also means that if you were to become one of the experts, you
could help move your profession forward. There’s still opportunity
to improve on what you know, what you’ve learned, what’s been
taught and perpetuated by the old experts. There’s always time to
challenge the norms and help make your profession better.
Expertise is like bird food. Someone needs to go get it and bring it
back to the others. When everyone’s a generalist, there’ s no exper‐
tise.
Because of this, I highly recommend deep-diving into some aspect
of your work to find out how it can be improved—to find out how
the current standards were established and see if there’s a better way.
If there is a better way, try it out. If it works, talk about it. If people
listen, maybe write some articles or even a book. Help the people
who will come after you.
There are a couple of key reasons to do this.
First, most work is short-lived. The effects of what any one of us
does in a day rarely outlast the year. But improving the profession as
a whole? That leaves a mark. Few things are more rewarding than
knowing you were able to contribute to potentially decades worth of
effects by digging into your profession and helping to raise its prov‐
erbial bar.
Second, and arguably more important, mastering a skill means
finally understanding how deep everyone else’s professions might
go, as well. You can gain sympathy for what everyone else faces in
their roles. Everyone thinks they know something well enough until
they go headlong into it with all their might and discover just how
little they knew before.
As a result of all this digging, you gain a perspective not a lot of peo‐
ple these days have: what it’s like to have both a breadth and a depth
of knowledge.
T-Shaped People 
| 
29

When you can stack expertise in one area on top of a whole bunch
of general knowledge in others, you become a T-shaped person. This
is just what it sounds like. The horizontal top line of the “T” is a set
of skills in which you have reasonable understanding and knowl‐
edge, and the vertical center line is a single skill in which you have
significant depth.
This is intrinsically rewarding; although a great many people can do
a great many things, few of them are great at anything until they spe‐
cialize in something. It’s also extrinsically valuable; specialization in
at least one subject makes you incredibly useful to your team, and
later on, it makes you incredibly employable. When companies need
deep knowledge, they need to have some specialists around to bring
it. If you can demonstrate that you know your stuff, you can become
the go-to for your subject.
Besides all that, being well-rounded means never getting to a point of
greatness, never seeing what you can do at your best.
But even without all these benefits, expertise makes you useful to
your team, and a manager who is as useful as another team member
is a lot easier to respect than one who just manages.
30 
| 
Chapter 4: Skill Equals Perspective

CHAPTER 5
The What Over the How
A lot of industries have passionate professionals. A lot of those pro‐
fessionals like to hang around in discussion groups, asking for
advice, offering it (frequently without even being asked), bouncing
ideas off each other, and debating the ins and outs of a hundred dif‐
ferent aspects of the job, whatever the job might be.
A lot of those debates—a lot—end up being about process. They end
up being about the way you do things, what order you do them in,
and how it all turns out at the end. Process, a lot of people say, is the
key to success. To do anything well on a consistent basis, you must
be able to repeat what you did well previously. If you can do some‐
thing well twice, the thinking seems to go, you should write it down,
wrap it up, send it off to the textbook writers, the authorities, the
experts, and record it in the annals of history. You, after all, now
have it all tied up in a pretty red bow. You’ve mastered process.
Trouble is, nothing about the success of process is provable. Not in
soft-skill-focused professional work, that is. Not in office life, where
projects come with so many variables it’s nearly impossible to find
two that are even all that much alike. The number of people, the
people themselves, their skillsets, everyone’s time constraints, the
budget, the deadline, the reason for the deadline, vacations, health
emergencies, holidays, technology, you name it—every last detail of
a project is as variable as the last one.
In a couple of decades worth of projects, I’ve never seen a “repeata‐
ble process” that could truly be repeated, let alone to the same effect.
31

The only two things consistently in common are the two principal
constraints of time and money.
Also, this process thing has been studied. Turns out, it’s not success‐
ful at all.
Tools, Not Processes
Boxer Mike Tyson once said, “Everyone’s got a plan ‘til they get
punched in the mouth.”
This is exactly what it’s like to work under tight deadlines and tight
budgets. It’s like getting punched in the mouth. And when time and
money rear their ugly heads, process is the first thing to go. People
pick and choose what and how something will work, and they do it
quickly. Forget process, they say. I have things to do.
Instead, they look around, pick up their proverbial tools, and start
hacking away in whatever approach makes sense at the time. They
take their tools, and they do something really cool with them.
A respected designer and design manager colleague of mine, Stepha‐
nie Troeth, saw this firsthand while working for several years with
an otherwise very smart and talented team who couldn’t seem to
avoid the pitfalls of process.
“Sadly, they made one major mistake,”she said. “They tried to put in
layers and layers of formalized process. When you have a roomful of
smart people, you have to acknowledge that they might be able to
short circuit the process and arrive at a different way of working.”
I wrote about this in an article for UXPin called “When the Best UX
Design Process Isn’t A Process At All”. Here’s a snippet:
Jared Spool has done some research on this. You know the guy—
he’s the one who’s been running a design research company and
think tank since the ‘90s called UIE. Few people have spent more
time talking to designers and companies than Jared.
Know what process he’s learned is the one employed by the most
consistently successful design teams? It’s the same one I find every
time I walk into one of those conference rooms with a great team.
The improvised process. The one defined specifically for that
project, and often not defined at all.
As it turns out, the teams that do measurably good work on a regu‐
lar basis, with the fewest issues and the fewest failures, are the ones
32 
| 
Chapter 5: The What Over the How

without a de facto process. They’re teams which devise a custom
process for every project, and frequently go into a project without
one at all. Conversely, the teams which most consistently accom‐
plish the mediocre—that dirty, awful word—are the ones who live
and die by their processes.
I know. It’s nuts. But is it? Think it through.
The teams who succeed the most are the teams full of people who
work well together—who communicate well together—and who
have a broad range of skills and tools they can apply at any given
moment. They approach problem-solving in a way that works with
the constraints of the situation. They have all the UX tools you can
find—strategy definition, user research, UI design, prototyping,
usability testing, data analysis, and on and on. To do their work,
they pull out what they need, when they need it.
• At the beginning of a project, gather around and decide
together what design activities will be appropriate for the sit‐
uation, whether thorough user research combined with rapid
usability testing with paper prototypes or some other combi‐
nation of things that will give you the best insights.
• At every point of the project, hold design brainstorms and
reviews so that everyone can continually keep each other in
check with regard to the goals of the project and how well the
team’s ideas support those goals.
• Ensure that everyone knows who has final design decision-
making power, and that this person relies heavily on evidence
and solid rhetoric rather than whim.
Improvising
All that said, the incredible willingness of teams to forego formality
and begin scrapping their way through a project is far from the best
reason to let your team focus on tools rather than process.
The best reason is that it gives them autonomy, and teams need
autonomy to feel good about their work. It’s crucial to a person’s
sense of intrinsic motivation.
Daniel Pink talked about this in depth in his book, Drive (Riverhead
Books, 2011). In it, he posits that autonomy is one of the three
things needed for a person to feel fulfilled and motivated by a job or
task, besides mastery and a sense of purpose (seeing how one’s work
maps to the company’s larger intentions). The ability to make deci‐
Improvising 
| 
33

sions—to choose how to approach a challenge, and to execute on it
with a hand in the decision-making process, is key. Minus
autonomy, people are just following orders. And that’s not fun for
anyone.
Autonomy makes people better, which makes outcomes better. Nur‐
turing this approach within your team can mean better results and a
happier staff. Orders are for drive-thru fast food joints. If you want
great work from a team, the people on it need the autonomy to use
their tools in whatever way they see fit to achieve success.
Of course, this right to improvise has other benefits, too.
It means your team will be able to invent new ways to get things
done, which goes right along with your new mission of finding ways
to improve your profession (see the section about T-shaped people
in the previous chapter).
I wrote about this in Experience Required:
Improvisation can get you more resources out of a slim budget. It
can get you impromptu coding tests to validate someone’s guess‐
work. It can get you through a usability test with a crashed laptop
by sketching screens on napkins and stepping through a task flow
anyway.
Your ability to improvise doesn’t just help you. It helps the other
people involved trust you. Depend on you. It makes them come to
you when they can’t think up what to do next.
Psychological studies have shown it’s more difficult to have good
ideas and make good decisions when you’re under stress. Staying
aloof to a certain extent can give you the brain space you need to
bust out a good idea under bad circumstances. Being able to impro‐
vise shows you can keep a clear head when a project goes wrong,
and approach situations with a level of calm not everyone has.
It also gives the impression of experience, even if you don’t have
any. So many designers leap to solutions devised in a panic. An
experienced designer stays calm, shuts up for a minute, thinks
through the angles and asks questions about the constraints and
looks around for anything that might help in the moment, then
pitches something no one else has been able to think up.
I worked with a programmer once who could do this.
I’ve always thought it takes a certain kind of mind to be a brilliant
engineer. This guy was the poster child for it. When people got
stuck, he’d sit next to them, stare at their screens for a few minutes,
ask some questions, and then tell you to do something that soun‐
34 
| 
Chapter 5: The What Over the How

ded like it’d come out of left field and which worked on the first try.
It was virtually the opposite of everything you’d tried. You’d spent
five hours on the effort only to realize you’d been approaching it the
same way the whole time and that your approach wasn’t going to
get you anywhere. (Granted, I was a mediocre programmer. But
even if I’d tacked up five more years of experience, I’m pretty sure
he’d still have been faster than I was in situations like that.)
It was downright satisfying to watch someone do this. It still is. It’s
the kind of thing that makes you sit back and ask, “How did you do
that?”
After a bunch of years of experience, people might start asking you
that question. In the meantime, you can fake it. And faking it will
help you learn how to do it.
Improvisation shows competence. It shows situational awareness. It
shows intelligence. It shows you truly have a grasp on a bunch of
different concepts and skills, and are able to pluck them out of the
sky at will, rearrange them, and make them into something new. It
means you understand concepts over prescribed actions and can
apply them to any situation, dire or stable. You’re not the kind of
person who sees one way to build a table and runs to Home Depot
as soon as it goes awry. You’re the kind of person who walks back
into the shop, picks up a screwdriver, a piece of scrap wood, and
some glue, and sorts it out.
You’re the one who gets things done.
This makes you especially useful when deadlines are tight. Which is
most of the time.
Public Perception
There is one other reason to focus on what you do over how it gets
done. It’s this:
What gets done is the only thing anyone really cares about.
In other words, there’s a public perception—the perception of the
higher level managers, the execs, the customers, the shareholders,
and everyone else—that matters far more than how you do some‐
thing, and that’s simply that you did something. That you are
actively doing something now. That you will do more in the future.
This is what people who sign checks care about. And as a new man‐
ager, it’s a great way to show them you’re focused on the business,
not just whatever skill you’d gained competency in before leveling
up. Now that you’re a manager, your job is to think about how the
Public Perception 
| 
35

things your team does now will help the company later. Once the
team does those things, your job is to go tell someone about what
was done.
It’s rare that someone will argue against your methods for having
achieved said outcome. If they even ask, it’s usually out of curiosity.
Everyone else is winging it, too. They just want to know if you came
up with something cool that they can try out on their own teams.
Odds are, absolutely no one is watching your every move to make
sure you followed some strict process letter by letter. They have their
own problems, their own work to get done, their own anxieties
about whether or not they’re doing it well. All you need to worry
about is being able to say you got the thing done. That’s what will
demonstrate your team’s abilities. That’s what will earn you suc‐
cesses. That’s what will earn you the respect you want so that you
can get in on more interesting projects later.
36 
| 
Chapter 5: The What Over the How

CHAPTER 6
Saying It with Purpose
I can practically guarantee that you do more writing in a day than
you do design work. You do more talking. You do more pitching.
More wondering aloud with coworkers and peers. More speculating.
More defending and convincing. So few of these moments, in my
experience, are seized with the same vigor for clean communication
that you put into a design. So few of them are planned for their pur‐
pose, considered for their effectiveness, or evaluated for their results.
I have to be honest: Most people suck at communicating. (Not all of
them, of course, but yeah, most.) And remarkably few people know
how much it’s affecting their ability to lead.
This happens because people tend to be bad at the thing at the very
core of good communication: clear thinking. The human brain just
isn’t very good at turning off all the noise of the day so it can focus
on a concise, clear message. It’s just not an easy thing to do.
But failing to communicate well leads to countless problems. Daily
problems. Financial problems. PR problems. An unclear message
results in an inaccurate interpretation, that leads to guesswork, and
next thing you know, you’re wasting hours and hours trying to clar‐
ify details that you thought should have been understood from the
beginning.
That’s why it’s so important to master communication. To learn to
say things with purpose—a purpose of clarity, concision, and com‐
pleteness.
And you do that by using tools.
37

This chapters covers tricks to good communication.
Framework for Thinking
The first thing you get when thinking about pretty much anything is
a bunch of scattered thoughts that threaten to ramble and confuse
anyone who would hear them. These are not the thoughts you want
to put out into the universe. If they’re rambling to you, they’ll be
insufferable to anyone else.
First drafts are notoriously bad. The better communication is the
one several drafts further down the road. Sadly, most people stop at
the first draft.
Clear thinking comes from applying some structure to those
thoughts. You achieve coherent communication by applying a sort
of framework to your otherwise disorganized, stream-of-
consciousness-style internal monologue.
The framework is like a college essay—the kind with a thesis and
supporting statements.
Set a direction
Decide on a main point you’d like to get across and state it right
away. If information is like a hand-drawn map, this initiating
idea is like the part where you take out the paper and write
“North” at the top.
Go there
Spell out all the ideas that lead to the takeaway. If your direction
is that you think the company should consider fixing a backlog
of problems with a current product, here is where you explain
what the problems are, how much they cost the company, how
much facing them could make the company later on, and how
long it all might take.
Tie it all up
You opened with a direction; now you’ve reached it. Restate
your main idea and either end with a call to action or a ques‐
tion. Or simply stop talking. (That one’s really difficult to do for
a lot of people.)
Not everything that needs to be communicated is this complicated.
When it is, however, such as when you’re initiating a project,
describing a plan or approach, or pitching an idea, this clarity in
38 
| 
Chapter 6: Saying It with Purpose

thought is crucial. Knowing your destination makes your communi‐
cations deliberate.
I asked Christina Wodtke what she thought were the most valuable
skills a designer could have that were also the least represented in
the design industry. On her list:
“Communication—verbal and written communication—is incredi‐
bly high and remarkably rare,” she said, “and I’m not sure why. If
you want your work to go live, you have to present it, and I’m
amazed at how poor presentation skills are—setting people up, tell‐
ing them what kind of feedback you want, explaining your choices,
bringing them on the journey.”
What she’s talking about is the idea of pointing your design skills at
yourself. Learning to apply your design chops to your own day-to-
day communication.
Christina continued:
“It’s just a matter of saying, ‘You know all that stuff I just did with
the interface?’—or whatever you’re working on—‘Now let me apply
it to my own personal interface.’ Let’s try to be clear. Let’s give a clear
call to action. Let’s be user friendly. Many designers aren’t as user-
friendly as they should be.”
On Writing Well
Despite this being an era in which we use the written word to com‐
municate more than at any point in human history, people seem to
have worse writing skills than ever. But it has so many advantages
that we should all take it more seriously.
First, writing is a thinking exercise. Many, if not most, professional
writers consider writing to be the tool they use to develop ideas, not
just relay them. They write to find out what they think. Writing
forces you to have complete thoughts. It forces you to stay on a sub‐
ject, to think through it completely. Then it allows you to see your
whole idea in front of you where you can revise it. Improve it.
Here’s my advice from Experience Required:
If writing is something you struggle with, consider ways to improve
at it. Simply getting a handle on the basic tools of writing can sig‐
nificantly affect every project you work on. Sentence structure,
grammar, punctuation, organization—all of that helps you be
On Writing Well 
| 
39

clearer with your colleagues about project details. To be more per‐
suasive. To be more deliberate.
Look at writing classes at a local community college. Check out
writing courses online, like those offered in the Gotham Writers’
Professional Development section. Find writers you like and study
the ways they write, the same way you study great designers. Dig up
some books on the subject.
My personal favorites are:
• The Elements of Style, by William Strunk Jr. and E.B. White
(Longman): Even if you just got out of a college English course
—especially if—start here. This is a classic book that gets you
cutting down on the flourish and passive voice they so appre‐
ciate in academia and truck commercials, and get you writing
straight, clean, functional sentences that cut to the chase. But
be warned: If you stop with this book alone, you’ll regret it.
• On Writing Well, by William Zinsser (Harper Perennial):
Everyone has a book that changed their lives. This is one of
mine. It focuses on the principles, methods, and forms of non‐
fiction writing, and even breaks down what’s specific to vari‐
ous types of nonfiction.
• How to Write a Sentence: And How to Read One, by Stanley
Fish (Harper Paperbacks): If you hated Strunk and White’s The
Elements of Style, this book offers a nice counter to it, tossing
out the standard arguments for sheer minimalism and looking
into structures and styles that can make your writing not only
functional and purposeful but beautiful.
• Several Short Sentences About Writing, by Verlyn Klinkenborg
(Vintage): If you get into writing at all—even if you don’t—
nothing will blow your mind more than this one. Nothing will
make you a more concise and elegant communicator. Every
sentence begins on a new line, a fact that illustrates at every
step the effect of a sentence standing on its own. Each one is as
pure as can be. It not only teaches you how to write with mas‐
tery, it leads by example. (If you’ve read my tiny tome The Tao
of User Experience, know that I wrote it immediately after
reading Several Short Sentences About Writing. I haven’t been
the same since.)
The books in this list offer a superior, and very quick, education on
how to get your ideas across, and how to form them well in the first
place.
40 
| 
Chapter 6: Saying It with Purpose

Enabling Comprehension
After you practice all these things for a while, with any luck you’ll
notice a couple of interesting benefits. The first is that you’ll learn to
better enable comprehension for your recipient. (Of course, their
willingness and ability to read for comprehension are beyond your
control.)
You’ll notice two things in particular:
• The most understandable sentences are the short ones—the
ones with a single subject, a single verb, a single point.
• Lengthy sentences are more difficult to track. Often, by the time
you get to the end of one, you’ve forgotten what happened at the
beginning. People do this a lot when they’re trying to demon‐
strate they’re good communicators. They use sentences so dense
with facts and big words that everyone struggles to read them.
It’s ironic and sad.
Ernest Hemingway wrote at a fourth-grade reading level. Not
because he read at a fourth-grade level, but because simplicity begets
understanding. In fact, very few well-known writers write above an
eighth-grade reading level. When the point is to be clear, short sen‐
tence containing plain language and straightforward information
always does the job better than flowery, complicated sentences jam‐
med full of information that would be best split out into multiple
sentences.
Once you notice this fact as a recipient of information, you can
employ it as a conveyor of information. Learning to read and listen
for comprehension teaches you to write and speak for comprehen‐
sion.
Mapping Your Message to Their Concerns
One key to saying something with purpose is making the recipient
more eager to hear your message. And the best way to do that is to
map what you’re talking about to what they want to hear.
I’m not suggesting you learn to pander—to simply tell people what‐
ever will appease them the most handily. I’m suggesting you find the
connection between what you need to know or to get done and the
concerns and cares your recipient is most likely to have. The CEO of
Enabling Comprehension 
| 
41

a company larger than a startup rarely cares about the specifics of a
design, for example. Rather, that kind of CEO cares about how the
design will draw in new customers and retain existing customers.
When you talk about a design to the CEO, then, spend very little
time on how it works, and more time on the data and other insights
that brought you to the conclusion that it will help the company and
on precisely how it will help. Likewise, if you’re trying to talk the
CEO out of a bad idea, focus on demonstrating how the idea might
negatively affect dollar signs later on.
As a manager, this mind set will help you justify your recommenda‐
tions to both your team and to your own bosses. It will give you the
power to get more things done.
This will take some diligence. It’s not something you can remember
from time to time. It’s a practice. (Arguably, it should’ve been
included in Chapter 2. But it makes more sense here in context of
discussing communication.) I say this because it’s the kind of behav‐
ior that helps you exponentially. Over time, the more you stick to
this mind set, the more people will inherently trust your recommen‐
dations. The more they’ll know you are worth listening to. The more
they’ll know you are a person they want at the meeting, at the table,
on the project, out in front.
Do yourself a huge favor:
Once you get the hang of this approach to communication, teach the
rest of your team how to do it, too. Everyone needs to be able to
speak the language of the other roles in the company, and doing so
is yet another thing that will build your team’ s reputation.
42 
| 
Chapter 6: Saying It with Purpose

CHAPTER 7
Becoming Convincing
One of the best things you can do for yourself as a manager is
become convincing. Higher-ups, team members, other departments,
customers—you name it, you’re going to be spending a lot of your
time either pitching ideas, defending them, or trying to demonstrate
the value of a decision.
Ironically, this is just the kind of thing they don’t teach you in
school. So I thought I’d offer a little assistance.
First, a quick story I told in Experience Required that demonstrates
why this matters:
In 2005, I was running a UX team and in need of another designer
or two. I wrote up a job description, handed it off to HR to post to
the company website, and waited for the fantastic candidates to
come running, résumés in hand. The first one I got was from a guy
on one of the product development teams—a programmer who
had recently become enthralled by design and wanted a chance to
dig in. Seemed he’d been hovering around the Jobs section of the
company site waiting for just such an occasion. As soon as it
showed up, he clicked the button.
I’m the type who hires from all directions. The way I see it, a person
can be better at the more readily learnable aspects of UX as long as
that person has the intense curiosity and other qualities so crucial
for a good designer. That same year, for example, I hired someone
with fairly poor design chops, but who was hooked on it like a drug
and who had a cognitive psychology degree—a combination that’s
pretty hard to find. I’m not afraid, in other words, to teach some‐
one who has the built-in gusto and smarts. A designer can always
43

get better. They can’t always grow more brain cells or become more
naturally ambitious.
Besides that, I was a programmer once (a three-year case of
designer, interrupted). I could identify with a guy who wanted to
break out and challenge himself.
So I scheduled the interview.
He got through some of the questions well enough, albeit a bit
nervously. He clearly had no design experience, but he’d been read‐
ing books and had become somewhat awestruck by the complexi‐
ties of form design and the notion of making everything simpler.
He was at that point where we all start—the one where he would
see bad things and point them out to other people and complain
about them. When you don’t know what happens next, that’s what
you do—complain. It was fine. I could work with that as long as he
cared.
After a while, I said to him that a lot of design was about being able
to demonstrate that your recommendations are worth considering,
and I asked how he approached convincing people of the merits of
his ideas. He was a programmer, after all—surely he’d had to do this
before.
Part of his response was a sentence that’s stuck in my memory ever
since:
“Well, I’m usually pretty good at waving my arms around and
screaming until I get people listen to me.”
He waved his arms around while saying it as if to prove he could.
And indeed, he seemed capable of some perfectly suitable arm-
waving.
I didn’t hire him, though. The arm-waving just wasn’t as compelling
as I wanted it to be. It wasn’t the fluidity or style so much. It was the
sheer lack of rhetoric in his response that his arm-waving was try‐
ing to keep me from noticing. If his rhetoric was a total non-starter
in an interview—where he was supposed to be presenting an argu‐
ment for why I should hire him—it’s unlikely he’d be able to help
me convince the massive engineering team at this company that
design mattered.
Why has this story been stuck in my head for so long?
Because for all the ridiculousness of this story, I haven’t met many
managers who could’ve answered the question any better.
Each of the following sections discusses a piece of what I consider
effective tools for persuading others of your recommendations.
They lack any hint of deception. To the contrary, they’re pretty
44 
| 
Chapter 7: Becoming Convincing

straightforward and honest, and simply need to be remembered and
considered and practiced.
Before we move on, I should mention there’s a pretty great resource
on the subject of rhetoric that goes well beyond what I can do here.
It’s the book Thank You for Arguing, by Jay Heinrich (Three Rivers
Press, 2007). It’s a quick read that introduces all the basics, and in it,
the author references conversations with his kids a few times as real-
life examples of rhetoric, which makes the whole thing personable,
too. Highly recommended.
Listening
I worked with a design agency once that had a client who sold fenc‐
ing. The client wanted the agency to design a new website that
would basically serve as a brochure for the fencing company. About
Us, Contact—the usual.
When I spoke to the client directly, however, I asked for a general
rundown of what it was they wanted—to make sure we all agreed on
what was going to happen. I asked about the client’s goals for the
site. That’s when the person on the other end of the call said some‐
thing a little incongruent with the agency’s assessment of the situa‐
tion:
“We want to use the site to replace the brochures we use now when
we’re walking around the yard with customers.”
My next question was something like, “I’m sorry, what?”
The client didn’t want a simple website. They wanted to replace the
paper brochures their salespeople used with customers. They
wanted salespeople to be able to walk around the yard with iPads
and going over all the options a customer could ever dream about,
and have the option to order things right away.
I called the account manager at the design agency.
“Did you know the client wants to put its entire brochure online and
enable its salespeople to use iPads to put together estimates and sub‐
mit orders?”
“Um, no, ” he said. “That would be a much bigger project than what
they told us before.”
Listening 
| 
45

Actually, no. It wasn’t a bigger project. It was the same project the
client had wanted all along. The agency just hadn’t heard it before.
The guy at the fencing company hadn’t known how to communicate
what he needed, and the account manager at the agency hadn’t really
heard what the fencing company was after.
It was a major lesson for the agency in the value of listening. In this
case, it was actual, quantifiable value. The agency had won a much
bigger, far more lucrative project than they’d thought. It was thou‐
sands of dollars more valuable.
Before you can make a case for any kind of solution on a project,
you need to know what the problem is. And that means listening.
Listening helps you to determine what the constraints of a project
really are. What the client’s concerns and goals really are. It helps
you see whether or not you already have the right argument in hand
or if it needs revising.
Asking
Part of listening requires drawing out the right information. And
that means asking questions. One of the key ways, in fact, to spot the
most curious person in the room—the one most likely to subse‐
quently do great work on a project—is to look for the person asking
all the best questions, whether in interviews, conference rooms, or
by email and phone.
Why?
First, because people who ask questions get the most information,
and they get the best information. People rarely know which details
of an idea or situation are going to be most relevant when trying to
pass it along to someone else. A computer programmer, for exam‐
ple, who is intimately familiar with the programming languages
used within a company can easily forget what it’s like to not know
how they work. In a discussion about “technical debt” (old problems
that need attention), the programmer can end up making all kinds
of assumptions, leaving the other person in the dust. Asking ques‐
tions means drawing out more and more of the facts that will lead to
a complete, knowledgeable, useful, meaningful understanding of
what’s really being discussed.
46 
| 
Chapter 7: Becoming Convincing

Second, asking questions helps the person being questioned think
through all the details. Let’s say, for example, that a marketing per‐
son is debriefing a designer about a new campaign concept. The
marketing person has one understanding, the design another. The
marketing person knows the purpose of the campaign, and some
basic details, but not necessarily where it will be targeted, what pre‐
cisely it will try to communicate to potential customers, or when it
needs to be done in order to get all the necessary approvals before
launching it. A designer who asks questions can determine that all
this pretty important information is missing. One who goes without
asking questions will just run off and start designing, potentially cre‐
ating work that completely misses the point of the campaign and
shows up a week late.
Finally, asking questions is key to being persuasive because it dem‐
onstrates to the other person that you’re focused on the details. And
because when there are gaps in those details, you can suggest your
own solutions and help push the idea along. And once you have skin
in the game, you have more opportunity to influence the outcome.
Restating
Some quick advice to take full advantage of the answers you get:
Restate them. As in, out loud. For several reasons.
• It helps the person answering your question know you’ve heard
them correctly.
• It ensures you understand the answer.
• Restating the answer can cause the person who provided the
answer to rethink it. Simply hearing it said back forces the per‐
son to recognize some flaw in the logic they couldn’t hear when
the answer was still hidden away inside their own
Educating
Whether you’re recommending a project to your boss, a change to
your team’s structure, or something else, taking the time to educate
people around you on the rationale for the recommendation can
make all the difference in how it’s received.
Restating 
| 
47

Yes, it takes time to explain things like this. It can take even more
time to educate yourself well enough to know what recommenda‐
tion to make. But it’s always worth it. It buys you respect, and it
shows the people around you that you respect them, because what
they hear is that you care enough to explain your rationale. It also
demonstrates that you have a rationale —a deep, considered ration‐
ale—for everything you do. It builds trust.
In all, educating your clients and coworkers and stakeholders with
every recommendation you make has several major effects.
• It guarantees you have a reason for your recommendation. If
you can explain it, you’ve thought it through.
• It gives everyone else a good reason for the recommendation.
(Often, they just need to know there is a reason.)
• It has a great long-term effect: It teaches people to think about
design. To think like a designer. To think like a user. It teaches
them that every decision has an impact on a user’s experience
and therefore should be considered. Do this well, and over time
you won’t need to form an argument for your recommendations
nearly as often. The people around you will have learned to
make better design decisions in the first place.
Sometimes, your best arguments don’t mean a thing. Your clients,
coworkers, and other stakeholders want to do what they want to do
no matter how potent your case is for doing it another way. Your
research goes wasted. Your evidence goes limp in the face of whim
and obstinacy.
This is usually a timing problem (see the section “Not Just What, but
When” later in this chapter). Generally, though, taking the time to
explain your rationale will settle any nerves a stakeholder might
have.
The benefits of education are far more valuable than the time it
takes to do the educating.
Presenting
In your career, you’ll get plenty of chances to explain your work—to
present it—whether to your team or to other managers or depart‐
ments. You might be in a conference room full of stakeholders who
need to hear your proposed solutions. You might be on stage at a
48 
| 
Chapter 7: Becoming Convincing

web conference. You might be in a meeting with a lone design man‐
ager who just wants to see how a project is developing. No matter.
You should seize every one of these chances. If you’re not presenting
your work, you’re throwing it over the proverbial wall where other
people get to misinterpret it and decide on their own that it’s terri‐
ble. Be proactive; present it so that it is communicated on your
terms.
If you can present your case well and do it up front, you don’t need
to argue about it or defend it later on. Your narrative will address
every concern before it even comes up.
First, remember what I said in the chapter “Saying It With Purpose”:
It helps to apply an essay-like structure to your communication.
When you’re presenting work or ideas to someone, that college essay
structure can be pure gold. Besides giving you a template to follow,
it’s a template that works well. It’s time-tested. Its structure of thesis–
support–conclusion tells a story to the recipient.
To learn more about a timeless storytelling technique that can help
you structure all kinds of presentations, check out Christina
Wodtke’s blog post, “The Shape of Story”.
Holding the Questions
A lot of times, your audience—likely a small group in a conference
room—will want to ask questions along the way. This is fine if it’s a
minor question with a quick answer. But there’s always the risk
they’ll nail you with something you need to think about or that a
bunch of other people have an opinion about. When that happens,
you can find yourself in the weeds in no time. There is no quicker
way to derail a coherent argument than to let something like this
throw you off.
The tip is pretty simple:
Ask people to hold their questions until the end.
Tell them to write their questions down so they can remember to ask
them later, and that you’ll get to them at the end. Tell them you’ve
planned for that. Then stick to your promise; leave plenty of time for
them to ask.
In many cases, especially if you’ve done your job well of anticipating
what questions they’ll have, you’ll end up answering most of the
Presenting 
| 
49

obvious questions as part of your presentation, making their ques‐
tions a moot point. Even then, it’s practically a guarantee that some‐
one will ask you something you haven’t yet considered. This is what
Q&A is for.
If your meeting is an hour, leave 10 minutes at the end for questions.
If you’re running more of a feedback or review session, leave more
time.
Whatever the case, leave time. Questions are the only way you’ll
know what you’ve missed.
Backing It Up
One of the most convincing things you can bring to a conversation
is evidence.
It can come from a lot of places. It can be a study you read. It can be
personal observation (which becomes more credible the more expe‐
rienced you get). It can be the results of a study. It can be data you
recalled from a previous project that involved a similar situation as
the one you’re facing now. It doesn’t really matter where it came
from as long as it’s credible, its conclusions are relevant, and you can
connect the dots between the evidence and your current project.
Evidence has, of course, several major benefits. For starters, it means
you can make a case to yourself.
More from Experience Required:
It can become really easy over time to accept your previously
learned lessons as standing truths. Not only that, but universal
truths. You think that thing you leaned five years ago is not only
still true, it’s true in every situation. Let’s say, for example, you once
witnessed five people in a row ignore a line of instructions on a
form. It’s easy to believe it will keep happening. But as you work
through more and more projects, you’ll need to test this notion
many times. A line of instructive text isn’t just a line of instructive
text. It’ s a font. It ’s a color. It’s something a user can skip past, stuf‐
fed between two fields in light gray and a 6pt font.
It’s a visual element as much as it is text. A user’s bypassing of it is
no sign of universal truth. Moved to a different spot, given a differ‐
ent color, its font size bumped up a notch or two, it could be just
what the user needs. Displayed inside a big purple box right next to
the form as the user clicks the field it relates to, it could be impossi‐
ble to ignore. In a different application—one where the information
50 
| 
Chapter 7: Becoming Convincing

the form asks for is complicated and needs to be looked up—it
could be consistently sought out. Every standard has exceptions.
Designers tend to think users avoid reading while they’re perform‐
ing tasks. But it’s certainly not always true. And if you’re working
on such a project, ignoring this fact could be a major detriment.
Gathering some data on your assumptions early on can mean big
differences in your design’s effectiveness.
No matter how much you believe something, data can prove you
wrong. Every suspicion, every assumption, every guess can be vali‐
dated or debunked with a little research. And the last thing you
want is to recommend a false truth. When you feel like you know
you’re right, take some time to make sure. See if the studies covered
in articles online still back you up. See if the data you have access to
can verify your belief.
I can’t tell you how many times—especially early on in my career—I
learned something only to unlearn it later. The older I’ve gotten, the
more I’ve recognized that there are no hard and fast answers. Every
decision you make is a guess. Your job is to mitigate the risk of that
guess as much as you can. If you’re unsure about something—if you
are sure about something—find evidence to prove it out, one way
or another. This will give you a great deal of confidence about your
recommendations. All you have to do to convince someone after
that is relay the facts.
Hence, my second point:
Data helps you make the case for your recommendation to every‐
one else, especially after you’ve vetted it yourself. Remember: This
book is about how to lead as a UX professional. If you’re out front
with all the facts in your hand, and you’ve considered your recom‐
mendations, and you can demonstrate their validity, people will
believe you. They’ll believe in you.
Finally, putting evidence up for examination with every recommen‐
dation you make will build your reputation over time. It’ll become
easier and easier to get past whatever obstacles you face now. The
objections. The politics. People will learn they have a trustworthy
source of reliable, accurate information in their midst, and they’ll
come to rely on it rather than their guesses.
This will take a long time. But if you stick to it, it will work.
Always point to evidence. Always have evidence to point to.
Do What You Can
Communication is always incomplete. Short of climbing inside a
person’s brain, you’ll never get all of what they mean to say, nor will
you ever be able to fully predict all of what you need to say to be 100
Presenting 
| 
51

percent understood. But holding yourself accountable for as much
of it as you can will certainly change the nature of your conversa‐
tions. If you walk into every interaction with the idea that it is your
job to be complete, your job to understand the recipient’s needs as
well as your own, and your job to receive information as well as you
deliver it, you will put yourself in a position to lead.
Don’t take this lightly. Every business depends on communication.
To be good at anything, you’ll need to be good at this.
If you can think clearly, you can communicate clearly. And if you
can communicate clearly, you can lead. Because communicating well
buys you something you can’t get in any other design deliverable:
Trust.
52 
| 
Chapter 7: Becoming Convincing

CHAPTER 8
Being Unreasonable
I want to wrap up here with an idea that’s not just about being a
good manager, but about being a good human. It starts with this
quote:
The reasonable man adapts himself to the world. The unreasonable
one persists in trying to adapt the world to himself. Therefore all
progress depends on the unreasonable man.
—George Bernard Shaw
The version of reasonableness Shaw is talking about here isn’t the
kind that refers to getting along with people or respecting your cow‐
orkers or handling the daily challenge of internal politics and bosses.
He’s not suggesting you become unreasonable to all of those people.
You need to keep working with them. It would be a huge mistake.
Shaw is suggesting, quite logically, that achieving something better—
a better product, a better team environment, a better company—
means setting a much higher bar than the bar you have now and
then relentlessly working toward it.
There’s a certain amount of stubbornness in the idea, and necessarily
so, but I doubt Shaw is suggesting you become difficult to work
with, the kind of person who digs your heels in and clenches your
face muscles and glares at people, refusing to budge. I think he’s sug‐
gesting we sort out how to make other people want to get to the new
place as much as we want to get there ourselves.
53

This isn’t about being difficult. It’s about believing in something and
striving for it, even when—especially when—no one else can imag‐
ine it.
This is how companies are born. It’s how products are invented. It’s
how laws are enacted. It’s what allows teams to do great work. A
bold vision for a better future and an unreasonable dedication to
achieving it is how all real progress is made.
Without this kind of dedication to worthwhile beliefs, we wouldn’t
have the Internet. We wouldn’t have space shuttles. We wouldn’t
have seat belts. The United States wouldn’t exist; it was formed, after
all, in resistance to British rule. Few things demonstrate more
unreasonableness than forming an entirely new country in pursuit
of better government.
On a day-to-day level, as managers, unreasonableness is what can
drive us to form, run, and treat our teams with a higher regard than
a mere schedule-pusher, task-assigner, project-runner. It’s what can
make us better.
It also happens to have a few great benefits. Because being unreason‐
able means having high standards, and high standards make all sorts
of things happen.
The Advantage of High Standards
One of the biggest obstacles to great work—the kind you can be
proud of, the kind that actually does let you go home feeling good
about yourself—is low standards. It’s easy to be run-of-the-mill. To
be mediocre. To do just enough. And when you do all that, you
never really achieve great work.
Mediocrity is nothing you want to put your name on, nothing you’ll
be remembered for achieving.
High standards, on the other hand, help you to get past obstacles,
like people and politics (more on this in a minute). They help drive
you to become better. They help drive you to the people who can
help get you into better situations and projects.
This happens in three simple ways.
54 
| 
Chapter 8: Being Unreasonable

High Standards Lead to Prowess
Earlier, I described the benefits of skill overlap, and the benefits of
having some level of expertise in at least one subject. I described
how this helps your team and how it helps them respect you as a
manager.
Assuming you’ve internalized this idea and now want to make it a
goal of yours, high standards are the trick to getting there. The rea‐
son?
A devotion to high standards is a powerful force. It will push you
past the typical lessons and drive you to relearn the meaning of
quality.
It works in a process.
Early in your career, everything is new and interesting, so anything
that even resembles your view of quality looks like something you
should aspire to. And achieving that level of quality is really difficult,
because you have little skill, little knowledge. You’re a long ways off
from being able to do the great work that inspires you about other
people.
Slowly, you learn more, you do more, and you gain context, and
insight, and start to form opinions. You also start to see that what
you thought was amazing before is in fact fairly routine and typical,
and the really great stuff is actually much more advanced and
requires much more skill and experience. In other words, your tar‐
get for greatness moves further away. Rather than leaving you dis‐
heartened, though, this fact motivates you.
As you build up skill and gain experience, you slowly become com‐
petent. Perhaps not much more than that for a while, but at least
competent. If you have a certain knack for whatever it is you’re
doing, maybe you evolve more quickly. Still, it takes time to gain any
level of real mastery. (Malcolm Gladwell, in his book Blink (Back
Bay Books, 2007), posits that mastery takes something around
10,000 hours. Talent can speed that along, I think, but it’s not as
common as you’d think; talent is often another word for years of
practice.)
Eventually, your standards go way up. And up again.
Assuming you care about the work you’re doing, the target will keep
moving, but each time, your commitment to quality will move you
The Advantage of High Standards 
| 
55

forward. It will be the thing that gets you to ask questions, to envi‐
sion something better, to try to achieve it.
As a result of all this, while you aren’t even looking, you’ll gain more
skill than you ever thought you’d have. At each step, you’ll have
learned more, done more, and become more adept. High standards
lead to prowess.
As a human and as a manager, you’ll feel better about yourself and
your work, and your team will recognize both.
High Standards Make You More Persuasive
Another way high standards help is by making you more persuasive.
Internal politics can bury you on any project, and politics can come
in so many forms that you don’t always even know which direction
they’re coming from. You might need to deal with a stakeholder
who’s always trying to “manage up” to his boss. You might encounter
an exec whose whims are treated as more important than good,
well-researched decisions. You might encounter a peer trying to take
over one of your projects and introducing a lot of bad ideas in the
process.
Sticking to your guns—committing to high standards—means you’ll
find ways to work through the situation. Having such standards will
compel you to ask more questions, do more research, and show
more evidence, all in the interest of producing a better outcome.
Couple that drive with the advice in the Debate School chapter, and
you’ll become a driving force, able to take any great idea from con‐
cept to completion.
High Standards Lead to People
And finally.
You know those people who are really great at their work and who
inspire you with their intelligence, cunning, insight, all that great
stuff?
High standards lead you to them. And this is arguably the most
exciting effect of being unreasonable.
In the beginning of your career (presumably long before becoming a
manager), your high standards can hinder you. The tendency for a
56 
| 
Chapter 8: Being Unreasonable

lot of people is to see what’s possible but have no idea how to ach‐
ieve it other than to wave their arms and complain a lot. This doesn’t
get anyone anywhere. If anything, it just makes people resent you. I
can’t begin to count how many managers I’ve met who’ve uttered the
words, “Bring me solutions, not problems.” They say this because
they’ve all met more than their share of newbie professionals who
only know how to complain. It takes a while to sort out how to have
high standards and lead people to pursue them along with you
rather than getting grouchy when they don’t. It takes experience and
skill and knowledge. As you gain those things, high standards start
to become a positive.
Eventually, you start to have good ideas. You start to share them, to
learn to speak up without stepping on toes, to work toward solu‐
tions.
Eventually, people start to ask for your opinions more frequently.
You become the person whose thoughts matter most on a particular
subject, someone who knows the most about it and has a track
record for handling it well.
Keep that up and you’ll get recommended for things.
Those people you respect will hear about you on their own. You’ll
end up working with them. You’ll become one of them.
This happened in my career. I started as a complainer, a guy who
could spot a design problem from a mile away, but who had no idea
how to make it better. As I learned, I built up a record of successes. I
began to write about them. This led me to conferences, which led
me to all the people I respected and admired most. In the years that
followed, I got to work with many of the best minds in my industry.
I got to have long conversations with them about their approaches
and their experiences and their insights.
It’s that simple. High standards move you toward other people with
high standards, and they attract people who have high standards
right back to you.
Can you see why this would matter in a managerial context?
Passion like this is contagious. Your belief in better can make people
want to come along with you, to be part of the better.
The Advantage of High Standards 
| 
57

When they are part of the better, they feel more motivated. When
they are more motivated, they do better work. When they do better
work, they feel better about their lives and their work.
This is what it means to lead by example.
Have passion, get passion.
Long-term, this will put you and your team in high demand. It will
make you successful.
Embrace the highest standard you can imagine and aim for it. If you
do, your career could be wilder than you ever expected.
58 
| 
Chapter 8: Being Unreasonable

CHAPTER 9
The Philosophy It All Adds Up To
I’ve hit on a lot of themes in the preceding chapters. To close out, I’d
like to take a moment to extrapolate those themes and piece them
together into the philosophy I promised you in the introduction.
It has just as few major tenets:
1. Be the same person as manager that you were when you aspired
to become one—the hungry kind, the kind who collaborated
and always wanted to learn more and get more involved.
2. Don’t manage people, manage things away from people. Don’t
ask people to do good work; they already want to do good work.
Clear the path so that they can. Don’t tell them what you need;
ask what they need from you.
3. Communicate well (and frequently). Listen, ask questions, clar‐
ify, restate, absorb, and contribute. And when it’s time to talk,
present your ideas rather than leaving them open to
interpretation.
4. Always consider and be able to explain how today’s actions map
to tomorrow’s outcomes. This shows higher-ups that you’re
thinking about the business, and it lets your team keep the over‐
arching vision in mind so that they can contribute in a mean‐
ingful way. It helps your team connect their work to the
company’s goals, which is a major factor in feeling like they have
purpose. It will also help you stay calm and measured as a man‐
ager; your eye for the long-term reduces the frustration of dis‐
tractions.
59

5. Don’t just get out of the way. Lead. Work with people to estab‐
lish direction, communicate that direction (frequently), and
then support everyone’s efforts to get there.
60 
| 
Chapter 9: The Philosophy It All Adds Up To

About the Author
Robert Hoekman Jr. has authored several books and dozens of arti‐
cles for a range of publications, including Fast Company magazine’s
“Co.Design” blog. He is a columnist for the revered motorcycle cul‐
ture and lifestyle magazine Iron & Air, where he is also a contribu‐
ting editor. He has spoken to packed rooms at dozens of events all
over the world.
Robert’s talents for questioning and challenging conventional wis‐
dom have earned him success in a myriad of professional interests,
including design, product strategy consulting, freelance writing,
editing, and public speaking. As a veteran of the web industry, he
was among the few who practiced User Experience before it became
a household term, and is widely considered to have written several
of the profession’s defining guidebooks.
Learn more about Robert at rhjr.net.

