 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By Martdin Jenkins 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
The Insane Sharecash Guide 
1 
Copyright 2010 (Written by Martin Jenkins) 
What is Sharecash? 
 
Sharecash is an online file hosting service (such as 
Rapidshare or Megaupload). Yet Sharecash.org has 
something that Rapidshare or Megaupload don’t offer: they 
pay you every time someone downloads your file! It sounds 
truly amazing doesn’t it? But then how does Sharecash 
make money? Well there is a tiny catch: every time someone 
wants to download your file they must fill in a survey. If that 
person doesn’t want to do that, they can buy a premium 
account and they get to skip the surveys. 
 
How much do I earn? 
 
Sharecash.org will pay you at least $0.40 for every download 
within the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, or 
Australia. For international downloads you will receive at 
least $0.25 per download. 
 
Some of you may think: WOW! 40 cents every time 
someone downloads a file! 
And others may think: Hmmm 40 cents? That’s quite little… 
 
For starters 40 cents is the MINIMUM you will get for a 
download within the above mentioned countries. Second of 
all in comparison to other sites that’s quite amazing! Most 
sites similar to Sharecash will pay $10 for 1000 downloads. 
Which means: 
-$10/1000 = 1 cent per download 
-You will not even get your money until the 1000th download 
is made. 

 
 
 
 
 
The Insane Sharecash Guide 
2 
Copyright 2010 (Written by Martin Jenkins) 
 
The above shows you how great Sharecash really is. But 
now let’s turn the above stats into a scenario in which you’re 
using Sharecash. 
-1000 downloads = 1000 x $0.40 = $400!  
-You can cashout anything above $10, so you get your 
money when you want! 
 
Now the above is how much you earn from downloads. 
There are 2 more ways you can make money with 
sharecash! 
 
When someone buys a premium account (after using your 
link) you will get 30% of the money they spent on it! But that 
is not necessarily a good thing (more on why that is later)! 
 
The third way for you to make money is referring people to 
sharecash. When you refer someone you will get 10% of 
what they earn (that does not mean they will get 90% of the 
profits, it means that you as a referrer will get a bonus of 
10% of whatever your referred user earns!) So the more you 
refer the more money you get!  
 
To conclude, there are 3 ways to make money using 
sharecash.org: -Downloads 
-Premium Accounts 
-Affiliates 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
The Insane Sharecash Guide 
3 
Copyright 2010 (Written by Martin Jenkins) 
 
 
 
 
Lets start making insane money! 
 
Firstly you need to set up an account! Remember when I 
said that if I were to refer someone I would get a 10% bonus 
of what ever that person earned? Well why not implement 
this now! Using the link below sign up for a Sharecash.Org 
account:
             
   
               http://sharecash.org/index.php?ref=396338
 
Yes, I know it is a referral link, but this is the least you can do
to help me out because I am providing you great information
with my awesome eBook. 
 
 
When clicking the above link you will be taken to the 
sharecash home page where the register link is located (look 
fig 1). Click register and you will be taken to the signup page. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
The Insane Sharecash Guide 
4 
Copyright 2010 (Written by Martin Jenkins) 
 
 
 
 
 
Once you have signed up and confirmed all that you need to 
confirm it’s time to have a look at your control panel: 
 
Fig 1 
 
To register click the register here button. 
 
Remember to check if you’re using my 
affiliate link so I can check up on your 
progress and so that we can communicate! 
 
Please not that using my link is a great 
advantage as it costs you nothing and I can 
personally help you if you are having 
problems! 
 
 
 
Fig 2 
 
Fill in all the fields with real info!  
 
This shows sharecash you are a 
serious member and they will not 
ever consider holding your payment 
or anything like that! 
 

 
 
 
 
 
The Insane Sharecash Guide 
5 
Copyright 2010 (Written by Martin Jenkins) 
 
 
Fig 3 tells you briefly where every link takes you. From the 
above the most important are: statistics, upload manager, 
affiliates. 
 
 
You are now ready and set to make money! 
 
Techniques 
 
In this e-book we will be looking at 5 top techniques to make 
insane money with Sharecash. 
 
The first technique is called the “torrent trick” and it is very 
simple yet probably the most effective. This method is called 
the torrent trick not because we are tricking people into a 
fake download: we are tricking people legally: 
Fig 3: Sharecash control panel with labels. 

 
 
 
 
 
The Insane Sharecash Guide 
6 
Copyright 2010 (Written by Martin Jenkins) 
 
The fundamental idea of this strategy is to make P2P users 
download torrents NOT with the file they are looking for but 
with a text file with your Sharecash download link to the file 
they are looking for.  
 
This method is limited to files that are no larger than 200 mb 
(which is the maximum file size on sharecash). But the 
restriction is not bad, as the user must therefore download 2 
parts of the file earning you 2 times as much. Some may 
argue that the person will not want to fill in 2 surveys but 
there is a way to trick the person into doing that. All you have 
to do is put the download link to the second part of the file in 
an archive with the first file part and inform the downloader 
that there is a second part only after he downloaded the first 
part: as the person already downloaded half the file they 
may as well do the other half. 
 
This is how you execute this method: first find a popular file 
on a torrent website (such as www.thepiratebay.org) and 
download it. Then upload it to your sharecash and get the 
download link. After you have done that place the download 
link (and password if you want) in a .txt file. Then create a 
torrent for your txt file and upload it to the torrent site. If you 
are not sure how to create a torrent please visit 
 
http://www.sharecashguide.com/torrent.php . 
 
One you have done that upload your torrent to your 
preferred torrent site and watch the money flow into your 
sharecash account! 
 

 
 
 
 
 
The Insane Sharecash Guide 
7 
Copyright 2010 (Written by Martin Jenkins) 
The second method is called the forum method. It is also 
insanely amazing but with this method, the more you work 
on it the more you will earn. The idea behind this is not to 
spam your link on forums and hope for downloads, that 
never works. People will only download your file if they want 
it. This technique has two sub techniques to it. The first way 
is to find highly populated forums and post something very 
related.  
 
Here is an example: lets say we have a highly populated 
guitar forum. The idea is to offer a download to a file that 
everyone on the forum can use. Every guitarist can use 
some tips. Google “guitar tips e-book” and find something 
you like. Then upload it to sharecash and start a thread on 
the forum. You have to mention its free and mention that it’s 
a must have even for professionals. And that’s it! Watch how 
many people download your file! It’s insane! 
 
The other sub technique may cost you a few bucks but is far 
more effective. Lets have an example: we’re still on our 
guitar forum and there is a user with 20,000 posts. This 
means his posts are basically ALL over the forum. Every 
user has a signature which is a set picture/text at the bottom 
of every of the users posts. All you have to do is offer that 
user for example $20/month to rent his signature space. In 
that signature space you will have a few of your sharecash 
download links with related downloads (such as the 
mentioned guitar tips) that will be displayed under every one 
of that users posts. That means that your download links are 
everywhere for everyone to see, click and make you money. 
This is the most profitable technique but it may cost you a 
little to rent the signature space. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
The Insane Sharecash Guide 
8 
Copyright 2010 (Written by Martin Jenkins) 
The third way to make insane money is free advertising of 
your links using for eg. Youtube. 
 
There are many ways you can attempt this. One way is to 
literally take a real advert of a product (that you have 
uploaded to sharecash of course) and just put your 
download link in the description. This is very effective 
especially if your video is the only one there for that product 
(but that is extremely rare). 
 
Another way to take advantage of youtube is to make your 
own advert for something your supplying a download link for. 
You can either review the product or film your own (if its 
funny it helps) advert for the product and just supply the link.  
 
A third way to advertise your links via youtube is to reply to 
videos. Find videos that have something to do with your 
download and just comment on the videos posting your 
download link. 
 
A fourth way is similar to the second forum method. Pay 
someone who has a popular video to post your download 
link in his or her video. If that video happens to have 
something to do with your download this option is a must!  
 
The fourth technique is 18+.  The most downloaded thing on 
the Internet is porn. All you have to do is download a set of 
pornography pictures or a video and upload it to sharecash 
and just post the link on forums or message boards. 
Remember not to call the file something obviously 
pornographical as sharecash doesn’t always like porn!  
The fifth technique is a bit of a gamble but if it works that’s 
your best shot. I personally use this technique many times at 

 
 
 
 
 
The Insane Sharecash Guide 
9 
Copyright 2010 (Written by Martin Jenkins) 
once. The idea behind this is to buy traffic that will then earn 
you more money than you spend on traffic. Let’s say you buy 
a 10,000 traffic package on Full Traffic: 
 
http://www.sharecashguide.com/Full_Traffic.php 
 
for $15. Lets say every click downloads your file, that’s 10 
000 x 40 cents = 400 000 cents = $4000! So you make 
$4000-$15= $3985. Now that is some profit!  
 
 
Tips 
 
NEVER violate sharecash rules. If you do one thing wrong 
and they ban your account you will lose all your profits! This 
also applies to trying to cheat their system with proxies etc. 
This does not work as it has been patched a while back. 
Sharecash has also invested in a fraud detection system so 
beware! 
 
IMPORTANT: You may think that when someone buys a 
premium account you make great money and it’s good. Well 
unfortunately that’s not true… When someone buys a 
premium for eg. $10 you get a rubbish $1. Which is the cost 
of 2.5 downloads. If the downloader has a premium account 
you DO NOT get paid for the download! So if you’re 
assuming that that specific person will download only once, 
its good to try to make him get a premium account (from 
your link) as you get $1. But if that person is going to be 
downloading many of your files and he buys a premium, 
you’re actually getting less as you get the $1 when you could 
be getting $0.40 per download. Think about that! 

 
 
 
 
 
The Insane Sharecash Guide 
10 
Copyright 2010 (Written by Martin Jenkins) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You are now ready to make insane 
money with Sharecash! 
 
Good Luck! 
 
 

