
The Right to Die

Recent Titles in the 
CONTEMPORARY WORLD ISSUES
Series
Obesity: A Reference Handbook, second edition
Judith S. Stern and Alexandra Kazaks
Solar Energy: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Prescription Drug Abuse: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
The Minimum Wage: A Reference Handbook
Oren M. Levin-Waldman
Juvenile Justice: A Reference Handbook, second edition
Donald J. Shoemaker and Timothy W. Wolfe
The Global Water Crisis: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Youth Substance Abuse: A Reference Handbook
David E. Newton
Global Pandemic Threats: A Reference Handbook
Michael C. LeMay
Same-Sex Marriage: A Reference Handbook, second edition
David E. Newton
DNA Technology: A Reference Handbook, second edition
David E. Newton
Modern Sport Ethics: A Reference Handbook, second edition
Angela Lumpkin
Marijuana: A Reference Handbook, second edition
David E. Newton
Gun Control in the United States: A Reference Handbook, second edition
Gregg Lee Carter

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up to date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, schol-
ars, and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary 
source material, a forum of authoritative perspective essays, 
annotated lists of print and non-print resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series 
will find the information they need in order to have a better 
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and eco-
nomic issues facing the world today.


SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND MEDICINE
The Right to Die
A REFERENCE HANDBOOK
Howard Ball
CONTEMPORARY WORLD ISSUES

Copyright © 2017 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by 
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or 
otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, 
without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Ball, Howard, 1937– author.
Title: The right to die : a reference handbook / Howard Ball.
Description: Santa Barbara, California : ABC-CLIO, LLC,  
[2017] | Series: Contemporary world issues | Includes 
bibliographical references.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016042041 (print) | LCCN 2016045321 
(ebook) | ISBN 9781440843112 (alk. paper) | ISBN 
9781440843129 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Right to die—United States. | Euthanasia—
United States.
Classification: LCC R726 .B255 2017 (print) | LCC R726  
(ebook) | DDC 179.7—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016042041
ISBN: 978-1-4408-4311-2
EISBN: 978-1-4408-4312-9
21  20  19  18  17    1  2  3  4  5
This book is also available as an eBook.
ABC-CLIO 
An Imprint of ABC-CLIO, LLC
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116–1911
www.abc-clio.com
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America

For two persons who keep me from going off  the rails:  
Michael Bukanc and Jeffrey Rubman.


ix
Contents
Preface, xvii
Acknowledgments, xxi
1	
Background and History, 1
Introduction, 1
Changes in How We Die, 2
The Changing Doctor-Patient Relationship, 4
The First Efforts to Pass Euthanasia Bills in America, 5
The Medicalization of Death, 14
The Basic Arguments Supporting and  
Opposing PAD, 19
The Arguments of Supporters of PAD, 20
The Major Groups Supporting PAD, 23
Doctors as “Indiscriminate Zealots”, 23
The Conventional Physician/Supporter of PAD, 25
Professional Medical Groups Supportive  
of PAD, 27
Nonmedical Groups Supporting PAD, 27
The Two Major PAD Pressure Groups, 28

x	
Contents
The Alternatives Available to Terminally Ill Patients 
if PAD Is Not Legal, 30
Becoming a “Death Tourist,” 33
The Arguments in Opposition to PAD, 33
Religious Groups Opposed to PAD, 36
Medical Groups Opposed to PAD, 37
Vulnerable Groups’ Opposition to PAD, 39
Not Dead Yet: The Disabled Community’s Vocal 
Advocate, 43
Conclusion, 47
References, 50
2	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 57
Introduction, 57
The Right to Die Battle in the Courts, 59
The PVS Cases: The Initial Judicial Foray into the 
Contemporary Right to Die Controversy, 60
The Central Role of the U.S. Supreme Court in the 
Right to Die Controversy, 80
Efforts to Pass Right to Die Legislation: 1990–2016, 93
The Oregon Story, 1994–2006, 96
The Unsuccessful State Efforts after 1997, 102
Washington State’s Battles to Pass a PAD Initiative, 
1991–2008, 104
The Vermont Effort to Pass a PAD Law, 2003–
2015, 105
California’s Odyssey to the Passage of the End of 
Life Option Act, 1992–2015, 109
The Role of State Courts in the Right to Die 
Controversy, 116

	
Contents	
xi
Baxter v. Montana (2009), 116 
Morris v. New Mexico (2014–2016), 118 
Some Unresolved Problems Linked with Aid  
in Dying, 125
Fears, 125
The Patient–Doctor Relationship, 128
Trust and Mistrust in the Health  
Care System, 130
The Semantic Problem, 134
The Supreme Court and the Constitution, 135
The “To Be Terminal, or Not to Be ‘Terminal’ ” 
Problem: An Example of the Slippery Slope?, 136
The Right to Die Dilemma: Is There a Solution?, 140
The Resolvable Problems, 141
The Unbending Problem, 144
References, 145
3	
Perspectives, 155
Is There a Right to Die? by Robert D. Orr, 155
My Life Is Mine by Stanley Greenberg and  
Kay Stambler, 159
The Campaign to Pass the Patient Choice at End of Life 
Bill in Vermont by Dick and Ginny Walters, 163
Why Disability Rights Advocates Oppose Assisted 
Suicide by Diane Coleman, 166
The Canadian Journey to Medical Assistance in Dying 
by Sister Nuala Patricia Kenny, 171
Physician-Assisted Death as a Legally Available Last 
Resort Option by Timothy E. Quill, 174

xii	
Contents
Death with Dignity, 2016 by E. James Lieberman, 181
Medical Futility, Then and Now by Barron H. Lerner, 182
4	
Profiles, 189
Introduction, 189
Individuals Supporting Death with Dignity Laws, 189
Marcia Angell, 189
Margaret P. Battin, 190
Gerald Dworkin, 191
Linda Ganzini, 191
Booth Gardner, 192
Stephen Hawking, 192
Derek Humphry, 193
Jack Kevorkian, 193
Barbara Coombs Lee, 194
Barron H. Lerner, 195
Brittany Maynard, 195
Philip Nitschke, 196
Timothy E. Quill, 196
Eli D. Stutsman, 198
Katheryn L. Tucker, 198
Dick and Ginny Walters, 199
Samuel D. Williams, 200
Individuals Opposed to Death with Dignity Laws, 201
John Ashcroft, 201
Sissela Bok, 202
Diane Coleman, 202

	
Contents	
xiii
Ezekiel J. Emanuel, 203
Atul Gawande, 204
Jyl Gentzler, 205
Herbert Hendin, 205
Sister Nuala Kenny, 206
Vicki D. Lachman, 207
Joanne Lynn, 208
Robert D. Orr, 208
Frank A. Pavone, 209
Pope Pius XII, Pope John Paul II, and  
Pope Francis, 210
William H. Rehnquist, 211
Cicely Saunders, 212
Antonin Scalia, 213
Joni E. Tada, 215
Florence S. Wald, 215
Organizations Supporting Death with  
Dignity Laws, 217
American Medical Students Association, 217
American Medical Women’s Association, 217
American Pharmacists Association, 217
American Psychological Association, 218
American Public Health Association, 218
Compassion & Choices, 219
Compassion in Dying Federation, 220
Death with Dignity National Center, 220
Final Exit Network, 221
Gray Panthers, 221

xiv	
Contents
Hemlock Society, 221
Lambda Legal Defense and Educational Fund, 222
Organizations Opposed to Death with  
Dignity Laws, 223
American Academy of Hospice and Palliative 
Medicine, 223
American Association of People with  
Disabilities, 223
American Geriatrics Society, 224
American Medical Association, 225
American Nurses Association, 226
Autistic Self-Advocacy Network, 226
Disability Rights Education and  
Defense Fund, Inc., 227
National Disability Rights Network, 228
National Hospice and Palliative Care  
Organization, 229
National Spinal Cord Injury Association, 229
Not Dead Yet, 230
Operation Rescue, 231
Priests for Life, 232
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, 233
References, 233
5	
Data and Documents, 237
Introduction, 237
Data, 238
Top 10 Causes of Death in America  
(1850–2015), 238

	
Contents	
xv
Legislation on Assisting Suicide (2015), 238
National Public Opinion Polls on Death with 
Dignity (2014), 241
Characteristics of Those Who Used the ODWDA 
in 2015, 243
Characteristics of Oregon Patients Using 
ODWDA: Cumulative Data (1998–2014), 244
Family Members’ Views on Why Patients 
Requested Physician-Assisted Death (2004–
2006), 251
Documents, 252
Summary of the 1994 Oregon Death with Dignity 
Act (ODWDA): Requirements, 252
Janet Reno’s Statement about ODWDA and the 
CSA (1998), 254
John Ashcroft’s Memorandum Regarding 
Dispensing of Controlled Substances to Assist 
Suicide (2001), 256
Pope John Paul II’s Address, “Life-Sustaining 
Treatments and Vegetative State: Scientific 
Advances and Ethical Dilemmas” (2004), 258
President George W. Bush’s Signing Statement on 
the Terri Schiavo Case (2005), 260
Pope Francis’s Address “False Compassion”  
(2014), 261
Excerpt from “Dear Brittany”: Letter from a 
Terminal Brain Cancer Patient (2014), 262
Brittany Maynard’s Farewell Facebook Message 
(2014), 265
Edmond G. Brown’s Letter Supporting the End of 
Life Options Act (2015), 266

xvi	
Contents
Excerpts from the U.S. Constitution, 267
Cases Impacting the Right to Die (Excerpts), 268
6	
Resources, 287
Introduction, 287
Books, 287
Articles, 304
Right to Die Legislation, 320
Reports, 322
Some Organizations Supporting Right to Die 
Legislation, 326
Some Organizations Opposing Right to Die  
Legislation, 327
7	
Chronology, 331
Glossary, 341
Index, 357
About the Author, 369

xvii
Preface
If we allow medicine to prolong life, should we also allow 
it to shorten life for the terminally ill?
Nora Zamichow and Ken Murray, 2014
It is necessary that [advocates on both sides] will need to 
work together and listen more closely to [each other’s] 
concerns about end-of-life cases.
Alicia Ouellette, 2013
Whatever the limits and travails we face, we want to retain 
the autonomy—the freedom—to be the authors of our 
lives. This is the very marrow of being human.
Atul Gawande, 2014
Not one of us decided the time or manner in which we 
come into the world. Our life is a sacred gift from God, 
and only He can give it. It is therefore His right alone to 
take us out of the world.
Father Frank A. Pavone, 2014
The Right to Die: A Reference Handbook examines the issue as it 
has evolved over the past century, giving prominence to the last 

xviii	
Preface
50 years because of these decades’ impact on how we die due 
to the exponential acceleration of scientific research and medi-
cal technological breakthroughs. As a result, Americans have 
been living much longer and, due to changes in how the medi-
cal community responds to accidents and illness, dying much 
more slowly and, frequently, in great pain. It is an examina-
tion that considers how these scientific-technological-medical 
advances impact the dying process.
Chapter One examines the beliefs, values, and fears of all 
the participants in these ongoing ethical, medical, social, legal, 
and political battles about how we live and if and how we can 
determine how we will die. At its core, this book is about the 
hardnosed battles between those who believe that a person has 
a constitutionally protected liberty to die with the assistance of 
a physician and their opponents, who maintain that a host of 
ethical, religious, legal, and medical principles bar such medi-
cal aid to help a terminally ill patient to die.
The first chapter examines these battles from these two 
ardently opposed positions, providing readers with a clear 
understanding of the reasons for such profound disagreements. 
It will also provide the reader with the historical context within 
which are located the roots of this contentious issue in the 21st 
century.
Chapter One underlines the importance of constitutional 
rights and liberties in the nation’s history, especially the ways in 
which fundamental human rights have been expanded through 
interpretations of the idea of “liberty” found in the U.S. and 
state constitutions. It took judicial decisions, legislative enact-
ments, and presidential powers to enlarge the scope of “liberty” 
to include blacks, women, ethnic and religious minorities, the 
poor, and the gay and lesbian communities. The Civil War 
amendments (Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth, added in 
1865, 1866, and 1868); the Nineteenth Amendment (1919); 
the Civil (1964) and Voting (1965) Rights Acts; and U.S. 
Supreme Court decisions in the areas of women’s rights, marital 

	
Preface	
xix
privacy, marriage, and free speech are but a few examples of 
how the Constitution has evolved over two-plus centuries to 
expand the meaning of individual rights and liberties.
The clashes surrounding whether there is a right to die pro-
tected by the Constitution and by laws passed by government 
are discussed in general terms in Chapter One. Democracy 
works, in great part, because of these figurative battles between 
opposing groups over how we live and die. Votes, not bullets, 
determine the outcome of such battles. But it is an outcome 
that will be challenged—again and again—by the losers. That 
is the core of a democracy. On any issue of public concern, 
groups—religious, social, economic, professional, political, and 
moral—are created to push for rights allegedly denied them.
As the right to die clashes illustrate, a defeat in court, or 
at the ballot box, does not end the fight. The victors know, 
too well, that the defeated opposition will rise, phoenix-like, to 
continue their efforts to change the public policy they believe 
is unconstitutional, and criminal, and immoral. Both sides in a 
policy dispute generally win some and lose some. Groups sup-
porting the constitutional right of an autonomous person to 
choose to die with physician assistance have worked decades to 
achieve victories in five states. However, the opposing groups 
who believe that the right to die with a doctor’s help is sacri-
lege, a criminal act, or a violation of medical codes of conduct, 
have won many more times when their efforts defeated right to 
die bills or petitions to judges.
The first chapter examines the beliefs and values of these 
two sets of individuals and organizations so that the specific 
confrontations that are discussed in Chapter Two are thor-
oughly understood by the reader. Chapter Two’s focus is on 
the controversies that have taken place in America about the 
place of the right to die in the pantheon of citizen rights. The 
clashes revolve around the essential question the issue raises: is 
there, in the Constitution, a “liberty” enjoyed by terminally ill 
patients to hasten death with the assistance of their physician?

xx	
Preface
Can—should—the meaning of the Constitution’s words 
evolve in order to address issues that were not present in 1787? 
Or are they to be read as the founders “originally” used them 
to convey ideas? Do the words of the 1787 Constitution allow 
Congress to pass a law that protects voting rights? Or does the 
18th-century language not extend to legitimize such a bill? 
(The consequence: a legal judgment that the challenged bill is 
unconstitutional.) Can a state prohibit—in its criminal code—
a doctor from aiding a terminally ill patient to hasten death? 
Or does “liberty” in the Constitution’s due process clause per-
mit a dying person to hasten death by receiving a prescription 
from a doctor for a lethal drug?
These are the general questions raised in American courts, 
especially the U.S. Supreme Court—regarding all important 
policy differences—since the beginning of the Republic. These 
are but a few of the difficult questions both sides argue over in 
the right to die battles. Chapter Two will examine specific right 
to die clashes that began in the 1970s and are still largely unre-
solved in 2016. They have taken place in state legislatures and 
state and federal courts, in the political arena, in the health care 
system, in the media, in churches and synagogues, on Twitter 
and Facebook, and around the dinner table.
After discussing the ebb and flow of the continuing battles 
over the right to die, Chapter Two will examine the problems 
that still hang over the issue and whether there are meaningful, 
realistic solutions to the major unresolved questions regarding 
the right to die.
The Right to Die is not an “advocacy” book; my task, as edu-
cator and writer, is to inform readers about the very different 
views Americans have expressed about “the morality, legality, 
and practicality of physician-assisted suicide (Washington v. 
Glucksberg, 1997) in the 21st century. My hope is that this 
book will inform and educate so that the right to die debates, 
regardless of their outcome, continue to reflect the virtues of 
reasonable and educated citizens in our Republic.

xxi
Acknowledgments
A number of persons have graciously assisted me in the prepa-
ration of this book. My editor at ABC-CLIO, Robin Tutt, has 
worked with me in the past and, once again, has enabled me 
to overcome obstacles that appeared during the writing of The 
Right to Die. Furthermore, Robin was extremely gentle when 
my “luddite” behavior kicked in as I confronted yet another 
digital dilemma. (Where were my grandkids when I needed 
them?) I also appreciate the help the librarians gave me at the 
Richmond Free Library in Vermont and at the Oro Valley, Ari-
zona Library, over these past years. Also, a special thank you 
to my IT “maven” at the Oro Valley library, Eric Strong. He is 
there three times a week and I have reserved a seat next to his 
work station. He helps all of us with our computer problems, 
because, as snowbirds, we cannot draw upon the expertise of 
our grandkids. The two of them, Robin and Eric, have kept me 
sane as I wrote the book.
I must also thank all my political science students—from the 
University of Vermont, Dartmouth College, and the University 
of Szeged, Hungary—who took my class “Death and Dying.” 
Their intense interest in the subject matter, their insightful 
questions, and their substantive discussions and debates about 
how we die never ceased to amaze—and educate—me. I must 
also thank the university pathologists at the Vermont and 
Dartmouth medical schools who provided my students with 

xxii	
Acknowledgments
clinical information about the major causes of death in the 21st 
century—complete with slide shows of these “killers.”
My sister, Carol Teplin, and I (along with our two other 
sisters, Brenda Levy and Sarah Ball), experienced the pain and 
sadness of watching our mother, Fay, succumb—very slowly—
to dementia. During those years, and afterward, Carol and 
I  discussed the right to die and the options available to us 
when we face the time—that all mortals face—when “breath 
becomes air” (Kalanithi 2016).
When I first began researching, teaching, and writing about 
physician assistance in dying, nearly two decades ago, my 
daughters were very insightful and shared their thoughts with 
me. Like my students, they had questions and observations 
about the subject. My oldest, Susan, continually suggested 
that the title for my book must be “My Life, My Choice.” 
It reflected her fundamental take on the right to die. Sheryl 
and Melissa harped on the importance of all persons writing 
their medical care wishes (DNR documents, advanced direc-
tives, instructions for guardians to follow) if they survive a 
catastrophic injury or when confronted with a terminal illness. 
These wishes are guidelines for family, judges, doctors, nurses, 
and others to follow. Carol, my wife for more than 50 years, 
also expressed her views on the issue—quite clearly: even if you 
can’t keep going, keep going.
All the cohorts I acknowledged above—editors, librarians, 
IT specialists, students, doctors, and family—are very aware of 
the problems, the controversies, and the finality of this issue. 
Given the visibility of the clash of opposing groups over phy-
sician assisted death and euthanasia, the question of reason-
ableness is ever-present. I take comfort in the fact that all my 
discussions about death and dying with colleagues, students, 
health care professionals, friends, and family were grounded in 
rational engagement; they understand the criticality of reasoned 
debate, especially when discussions focus on controversial sub-
jects such as abortion, the right to die, and the right to privacy. 
My hope is that such conversations increase exponentially in 

	
Acknowledgments	
xxiii
America, that some compromises can be discovered in these 
hotly contested social problems, thereby avoiding the rending 
of our society. Finally, any factual errors are solely my fault.
References
Gawande, Atul. 2014. Being Mortal: Medicine and What 
Matters in the End. New York: Metropolitan Books.
Kalanithi, Paul. 2016. When Breath Becomes Air. New York: 
Random House.
Ouellette, Alicia. 2014. “Context Matters: Disability, the End 
of Life, and Why the Conversation Is Still So Difficult.” 
New York Law School Review, 58:371, 2013–2014.
Pavone, Father Frank A. 2014. “Freedom to Die?” Euthanasia. 
http://www.priestsforlife.org/euthanasia/index.htm
Zamichow, Nora, and Ken Murray. 2014. “The Hippocratic 
Oath and the Terminally Ill.” Los Angeles Times, 
December 26.


1
1	
Background and History
A 15th-16th century illustration of a man on his death bed. Through the 
middle of the 20th century, death generally occurred at home, with the 
dying person surrounded by family, clergy, and a physician. With the in-
crease in medicalization that occurred in the 1950s, the hospital has become 
the primary place of death, with the dying patient surrounded by doctors, 
nurses, technicians, and a variety of machines and devices that artificially 
sustain life. (Maarten de Vos, National Library of Medicine)
Introduction
We all die. Why has the way Americans die become so contro-
versial in the 21st century? To answer this question, one must 
understand some very basic historical realities about—and 
major themes of—the right to die controversy. The following 
five topics lead unerringly to an understanding of why the right 
to die with the assistance of a physician has become a signifi-
cant question.
1.	 The noteworthy changes in how we die in America over the 
past century.
2.	 The shifting doctor-patient relationship over this time.
With these two sets of topics as foundation blocks, we may
3.	 examine and place in context the late-19th-century-to-
early-20th-century political debates and votes, articles in 
the press and professional journals, and public lectures 
about euthanasia (mercy killings, where the physician 
injects a lethal medication to a dying patient) and about 

2	
The Right to Die
the initial efforts to pass state bills legitimizing the practice 
of euthanizing suffering patients, leading, nearly a century 
later, to bills introduced in state legislatures allowing physi-
cian-assisted dying (PAD).
It is also necessary to be familiar with
4.	 the emergence, beginning in the mid-20th century and 
continuing into the 21st century, of the culture of “medical-
ization of death” and its dramatic impact on all discussions 
about dying, physician assistance in dying, the training 
of physicians, their relationship with patients, the health 
care system, and the right to die in the 21st century. This 
contemporary culture, some believe, has “subjected dying 
patients to too many treatments, denying them a peaceful 
death” (Lerner 2014, p. A26).
5.	 Finally, understanding the contours of the right to die bat-
tles requires that we know (1) the arguments put forth by 
advocates for PAD, (2) the various methods, other than 
PAD, available in the 21st century to competent, termi-
nally ill patients who are in relentless pain and suffering 
but PAD is prohibited in their state (1 of 45 that bans its 
practice), (3) the arguments that have surfaced opposing 
PAD, and (4) the major groups aligned on both sides of 
this major societal issue.
The controversy surrounding the question of whether a 
dying person has a right to choose to die and who can provide 
assistance to the patient is one that has grown dramatically in 
the 21st century.
Changes in How We Die
In 1900, the 10 major causes of Americans dying were largely 
infectious diseases such as pneumonia, bronchitis, and, the 
number one killer, tuberculosis. (While cancer and stroke 
appeared near the bottom of the list, tuberculosis accounted 
for triple the number of deaths than cancer.)

	
Background and History	
3
After the onset of these illnesses, death came quickly because 
of the inability of the medical profession to treat and save peo-
ple who succumbed to these illnesses. In the absence of antibi-
otics to treat the illness and morphine to relieve the pain, the 
malady rapidly became terminal—generally a matter of weeks 
to months between the onset of the illness and death. A doctor 
could do very little for the patient except prescribe bed rest, 
fresh air, sunshine, and nutrition! Consequently, Americans 
did not live very long; the average life expectancy in 1900 was 
47 years.
In 1900, the overwhelming majority of people died in their 
homes, surrounded by friends, family, and clergy. The grieving 
process following death was one that reflected the family’s and 
the community’s social and religious norms. The health of per-
sons in industrial societies slowly improved with the invention 
of vaccines, antibiotics, diagnostic equipment; the elimination 
of horrendous working conditions that adversely affected the 
health of the vast majority of laborers, especially women and 
children; better nourishment; improved sanitation; and, in the 
second half of the 19th century through the first third of the 
20th century, improvement in the safety of industrial workers 
on the job, as well as the increased use of morphine and other 
analgesics that enabled doctors to dramatically lessen a patient’s 
pain and suffering after an accident. In addition, the develop-
ment of state-funded public health service agencies focusing on 
prevention of disease and the promotion of good community 
health practices greatly enhanced the lives of persons.
As a consequence, in the 21st century, Americans are liv-
ing longer—the average life expectancy in 2015 is nearly 
80  years—and how we are dying has changed significantly. 
Longevity enables protracted illnesses to emerge in the popula-
tion, and they have become the major killers. In 2015, 7 out 
of 10 lived long enough to die from chronic conditions like 
heart disease, stroke, emphysema, dementia, diabetes, cancer, 
and kidney failure (Butler 2015).
A century earlier, most of us did not live long enough to 
contract chronic illnesses such as cancer or heart disease. 

4	
The Right to Die
A look at the 21st century’s top 10 causes of death accord-
ing to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC 
2015) presents a very different portrait of the major causes of 
death: heart disease is the number one cause of death (30%), 
followed, in order, by cancer (23%), stroke (7%), and chronic 
lower respiratory disease (5%). Pneumonia and influenza com-
bined account for less than 3 percent of annual deaths, and 
tuberculosis is not on the list at all! One looks in vain, however, 
for the third of the top causes of death; the CDC does not list 
it because it is caused by doctors. “Few things are deadlier than 
doctors’ screw-ups. . . . Medical error kills between 210,000 
and 440,000 Americans each year. Only heart disease and can-
cer have a higher body count” (Lieber, 2016).
In the 21st century, for the majority of the dying, the end is 
slow in coming, and in many instances, escorted by relentless 
pain and varieties of suffering. Death in the 21st century gen-
erally takes place in the modern hospital, not the home. These 
changes in how we die signal a fundamental change in the role 
and function of the physician in the dying process and how the 
relationship between doctor and patient has evolved.
The Changing Doctor-Patient Relationship
In 1900, the doctor’s function in caring for patients was mini-
mal: comforting the patient while participating in a ritual 
death watch along with the dying patient’s family, friends, and 
clergy in the home, not in a hospital. There was little a doctor 
could do to halt a patient’s march to death; moreover, many 
doctors did not have the use of drugs—morphine and other 
anesthetics—to manage the pain and suffering of the disabled 
and dying. Diagnostic instruments and devices to artificially 
prolong a life were nonexistent in 1900; there were very few 
medical laboratories that could assist the doctor by providing a 
scientific diagnosis to better care for a sick patient.
However, over the past century, there have been dramatic 
changes in the doctor-patient relationship. This has come about 

	
Background and History	
5
because of the cojoining of the changing reality of when and 
how we die with dramatic, exciting scientific, diagnostic, and 
technological breakthroughs in how we treat the major 21st-
century maladies and how managing death has clearly become 
the province of the medical professionals, not the priest, imam, 
or rabbi—and, in many instances, not even the dying patient 
and family members.
The setting for these major transformations is no longer 
the private home of the patient. There has been a dramatic—
indeed, profound—transformation in how and where people 
die and how dying rituals have changed that reflect these 
changes. During this time, the hospital has evolved from a 
kind of poorhouse where impoverished persons came to die, 
prayed over by clergy, to a modern institution where medical 
researchers deconstruct the etiology of disease using space-age 
technological and diagnostic equipment, where medical pro-
fessionals bring their sick and dying patients to be treated and 
released in much improved health, and where death generally 
occurs.
Most deaths occurred in the home at the beginning of the 
20th century. By 1950, nearly half of all deaths took place in 
hospitals and nursing homes; in the 1990s, over 80 percent 
of patients (mostly elderly) died in a hospital’s intensive care 
ward. In 2015, nearly all deaths occur in a hospital, nursing 
home, or hospice, not at home. In America, this is an especially 
impactful change. Americans in the 21st century have “lost 
loss. Death as a community event, and mourning as a com-
munal practice, has been steadily killed off” (Schillace 2016).
The First Efforts to Pass Euthanasia Bills in America
In 1997, Chief Justice William Rehnquist, writing for a unani-
mous Supreme Court in Washington v. Glucksberg, concluded 
that euthanasia, also tagged as physician-assisted death, was 
alien to the “history, legal traditions, and practices” of the 
United States. However, the justices and all 17 amicus curiae 

6	
The Right to Die
groups filing briefs opposing a terminal patient’s right to die 
with medical assistance ignored the nation’s historical reality.
For nearly 150  years there have been political, legal, and 
social acts and the creation of pressure groups in America’s his-
tory that championed changes in the way we think about death 
and dying. As early as 1870, in Alabama, Samuel Williams 
began his decades-long journey to convince educators, doctors, 
and legislators that euthanasia, “mercy killing” or “merciful 
death,” be permitted “in all cases of hopeless and painful illness 
[to bring about] a quick and painless death” (Emanuel 1997).
Williams’s views emerged in response to two events that dra-
matically impacted society: the invention and growing use of 
morphine and other analgesics to relieve pain in gravely injured 
and terminally ill patients, and the brutal reality of the indus-
trial revolution. The new drugs relieved pain, wrote Williams, 
and could also “painlessly induce death.”
The mechanization of manufacturing, the expansion of coal 
mining and iron and steel mills, and the increased use of railroads 
to transport these goods—as well as the inordinate number of 
hours men, women, and children worked weekly in the factories, 
in the mines, and on the trains—led to terrible accidents that 
maimed, burned, and left many who did not die in unbelievable 
agony. In the decades after the discovery of morphine, it was 
used largely to alleviate the injured person’s overwhelming pain.
Williams’s proposal was a call for euthanasia, where the 
physician deliberately injects morphine in sufficient quantity 
to relieve the pain but also end the life of the gravely injured 
and suffering or terminally ill patient. It was neither a new 
nor a novel strategy for ending the tormented, painful life of 
a severely injured patient. The ancient Greeks and Romans 
accepted the merits of euthanasia, abortions, and suicide.
The Hippocratic Oath, taken by doctors, instructed them 
to do no harm when treating patients. However, few ancient 
Greek and Roman physicians followed this behavioral rule. 
“Throughout classical antiquity, there was widespread sup-
port for voluntary death as opposed to prolonged agony, and 

	
Background and History	
7
physicians complied by often giving their patients the poison 
they requested” (Dowbiggin 2003). (Interestingly, among the 
newspapers that condemned the 1906 euthanasia bills, The 
Philadelphia Inquirer editorialized that Williams “spoke like a 
Greek and not a human being.”)
The euthanasia debates initiated by Williams in 1870 and 
continuing during the two decades prior to World War I, how-
ever, were fundamentally different from those surrounding 
the right to die and PAD today (Appel 2004). Unlike today’s 
battles between the “sanctity of life” groups and the “personal 
autonomy” and “individual liberty” organizations, the earlier 
debates, legislative acts, news reports, editorials, and articles in 
medical journals focused on the question of whether euthana-
sia was an idea that would benefit the “collective welfare” of 
society in the industrial era.
“Humanity should not suffer,” editorialized The Washing-
ton Post; use morphine to humanely end a tortured existence 
for the many severely injured and crippled patients across the 
nation. The early euthanasia clashes were fought only over 
whether or not the practice would benefit society. At the turn 
of the 20th century, the dominant attitude toward relations 
between individuals and the state was axiomatic: “One’s life 
is not one’s own. One’s life belongs to society” (Appel 2004). 
Consequently, the “right to die” was never mentioned in these 
early discussions of euthanasia.
Euthanasia struck a chord with Americans across the nation. 
They knew of the ghastly aftermath of the accidents brought 
on in this new age of “gilded wealth.” Over the next three 
decades (1870–1900) Williams’s ideas were reprinted in popu-
lar magazines and books, discussed in the pages of prominent 
literary and political journals, and debated at the meetings of 
American medical societies and nonmedical professional asso-
ciations (Emanuel 1997). Euthanasia, advanced as a remedy 
by Williams and others in the late 19th century to deal with 
painful consequences of industrialism, was a natural outcome 
of the immense popularity of eugenics in America.

8	
The Right to Die
The eugenics (“good birth” or “wellborn”) movement was 
a radical late-19th-to-early-20th-century social movement 
that applied Charles Darwin’s theories of natural selection to 
account for the evolution—and improvement—of human soci-
eties. Darwin found in his examinations of plants and animals 
how evolution occurred—through natural selection. In 1883, 
Darwin’s half-cousin Francis Galton transplanted the theory 
of natural selection into a “science of eugenics,” which would 
eventually eradicate the lower class, that is, all those impure 
residents—untermenschen—living in society.
This class—“imbeciles,” feeble minded, criminals, and 
other unfit persons—was a plague on society. They had to be 
removed through the activation of eugenics policies and laws 
by the states which would improve the human species through 
selective breeding. In America, eugenics became the zeitgeist 
of the Progressive era. Leading figures in politics (Theodore 
Roosevelt), commerce (Alexander Graham Bell, John D. 
Rockefeller), and law (Oliver Wendell Holmes) were ardent 
supporters of this method of improving society. The science of 
eugenics became a popular major in colleges, universities, and 
law schools. It was supported by naturalists and the ministry. 
And, quite quickly, laws were passed that would, according to 
Galton, lead to the emergence of a virile, moral, and a domi-
nant society. Thirty-two states passed such laws in the 20th 
century; between 60,000 and 70,000 men and women were 
sterilized, including, in the 21st century, hundreds of female 
prisoners in California.
The primary method chosen by the states was forced ster-
ilization of these social undesirables. Sterilization became an 
integral part of the legal machinery; criminals convicted of a 
third offence were, at a prosecutor’s discretion, sterilized. Slow-
witted, retarded persons, residents of insane asylums, and pros-
titutes were prime candidates for sterilization. In 1927, the 
U.S. Supreme Court, in an 8-1 decision written by Justice Oli-
ver Wendell Holmes (Buck v. Bell), concluded that a Virginia 
sterilization bill was constitutional because “three generations 

	
Background and History	
9
of imbeciles is enough.” (The case has never been overturned. 
It was cited as precedent by the defense at the 1946 Nurem-
berg War Crimes Tribunal and more recently in a 2001 case.) 
Eugenics legislation would quickly, in the words of one of its 
early enthusiasts, “dry up the springs that feed the torrent of 
defective and degenerate protoplasm” (Cohen 2016).
Euthanasia was linked to the eugenics movement during 
the first decade of the 20th century, when, in 1906, radical 
euthanasia bills were introduced in two Midwestern states. 
For the first time in American history, bills were introduced in 
Iowa and Ohio—with accompanying intense debates in, and 
beyond, the legislative bodies—to legalize euthanasia so that 
doctors could “painlessly induce death” without fear of sub-
sequent criminal indictment by the state. The “beneficiaries” 
covered by legalizing euthanasia included grievously injured 
workers as well as “those suffering hopelessly from paralysis, 
cancer, and imbecility” (Appel 2004).
In Ohio, the bill was labeled “an Act Concerning the Admin-
istration of Drugs, etc. to Mortally Injured and Diseased Per-
sons” (Ohio H.B. 145, 1906). It provided that
any person of lawful age and of sound mind, who is fatally 
injured or is so ill of disease that recovery is impossible, or 
who is suffering great physical pain or torture, may be 
treated by a physician, not a relative or interested in his or 
her estate, and in the presence of three witnesses he may 
ask the patient if he or she cared to be put to death 
according to law. Should the patient’s answer be in the 
affirmative then three reputable physicians are to be called 
in, and if they concur—that is, if they decide there is no 
chance for a recovery—then an anesthetic is administered 
until death ensues.
In Iowa, the euthanasia proposal was called “A Bill for an Act 
Requiring Physicians to Take Human Life” (Iowa House File 
No. 367, March 1906). It was a much more radical proposal 

10	
The Right to Die
than the Ohio bill. “It shall be the duty of such physician” if 
the diagnosis was that it was impossible “to avert the patient’s 
death” and “that extreme physical pain must characterize the 
remainder of said patient’s natural life,” then the “duty” of the 
physician was to “administer an anesthetic until death shall 
have ensued.”
Reflecting, in part, the strength of the emergent and growing-
in-popularity eugenics movement, the euthanasia bill “allowed 
parents to ask physicians to end the lives of their offspring in 
order to prevent ‘the rearing of children who are hideously 
deformed or hopelessly idiotic,’ and permitted guardians of 
sick and mentally ‘unsound’ individuals to request euthanasia 
on their behalf.”
The initial euthanasia advocates joined humane euthaniz-
ing of terribly injured workers and incurably ill patients with 
involuntary euthanizing of the physically disabled, the men-
tally handicapped, “lunatics and idiots,” and other state depen-
dents. As one of the sponsors of the Iowa bill said during the 
debates: “Many of the hideously deformed were better off out 
of this world than in it. If at birth they could have been legally 
removed, they would have been better off” (Appel 2004, 629).
The most radical feature of the Iowa bill was the imposi-
tion of an affirmative duty on physicians. If asked by a patient, 
and the diagnosis was death, a physician had the duty to eutha-
nize the person. The bill enumerated the penalty imposed on 
doctors and coroners for rebuffing such aid: if the doctor fails 
or refuses to perform euthanasia, and is convicted, he “shall 
be adjudged guilty of a misdemeanor and imprisoned in the 
county jail not less than six months or more than one year, and 
fined not less than $200 dollars or more than $1000 dollars” 
(“Physicians May Take Human Life” 1906).
Unlike the sponsors of the Ohio bill, who were nonmedical 
social advocates for the humane final treatment of people suf-
fering from a terminal illness or were in great agony, the three 
Iowa cosponsors “were among the most prominent physicians 
in the region” (Appel 2004). They were rebels for a cause—the 

	
Background and History	
11
eugenics/euthanasia movement—that went counter to the 
position of their own professional organization, the American 
Medical Association (AMA)!
The proposals were fervently debated. There was, in 1906 and 
remains so over a century later, cacophonous shouting between 
the opposing sides. Some supporters of the 1906 euthanasia 
bills wanted a more draconian law, one that allowed ending 
the lives of the “hopelessly insane in padded cells.” Other sup-
porters argued for a narrower bill that would allow euthana-
sia only when the patient consented to the action. Opponents 
were similarly unable to agree on a focused argument for reject-
ing the bill. There were concerns that passage would adversely 
impact—ethically and legally—the medical profession; that 
physicians, because of the shortcomings of medical diagnosis, 
could never be certain that an ill person was terminal; that there 
might be opportunities for doctors to abuse the use of euthana-
sia; or that “a cunning murderer” would take sinister advantage 
of a euthanasia bill to evade homicide statutes. Unlike the con-
temporary right to die battles, the early-20th-century contro-
versy “featured practical men and women negotiating desirable 
social policy. ‘God’s will’ and ‘individual rights’ did little to 
shape the terms of the debate during this period” (Appel 2004).
A most revealing argument against the bill was that, if it 
became law, one of the legislators said, “the world would lose 
the ‘exhibitions of heroism’ and the ‘inspiration that a society 
gains’ from watching the dying man bravely endure his death-
bed.” Missing from the opposition to euthanasia bills in 1906 
were the representatives from religious organizations, especially 
the Roman Catholic Church. These groups play a major role 
in their contemporary battles against personal autonomy, the 
right to die, and physician-assisted death.
Although there were angry words and equally heated retorts 
in the legislative chambers, both proposals failed to garner sup-
port for their passage. However, the debates and discussions 
about eugenics and euthanasia—its rightness and who would 
be euthanized—continued. For decades, there were essays 

12	
The Right to Die
about the issue in a variety of medical, nursing, political, and 
philosophical journals and magazines. The issue was viewed by 
editors and publishers as above-the-fold-page-one newsworthy 
in newspapers, both national (The New York Times, New York 
Herald, Washington Post, Boston Herald, Philadelphia Inquirer, 
San Francisco Chronicle, Chicago Tribune, among others) and in 
state and local media. The early-20th-century euthanasia bills 
and the ensuing debates continued a national discussion about  
death and dying that began in the 1870s, one that still remains an 
animated part of the public’s social agenda in the 21st century— 
although with very different foundation values in play.
The organization representing the medical profession was 
one of the initial opponents of euthanasia. In 1885, reacting 
to the continuing glut of articles and debates about euthanasia, 
and fearful of the adverse impact of this idea on the practice 
and the ethics of the medical profession, the AMA forcefully 
opposed the notion. Since then, the AMA has not changed its 
position opposing legalizing euthanasia and its modern incar-
nation: physician-assisted death. It is curious that one of the 
first organizations to endorse legalizing euthanasia was a medi-
cal group, the American Association of Progressive Medicine. 
In 1917, by a vote of 87–24, the association, rebuffing the 
AMA, approved the legalization of euthanasia.
Although the focus of the debates has shifted because of tec-
tonic changes in how we live and die, and on the primacy of 
the community over the individual, the right to die continues 
to be read and discussed and voted on and litigated over for 
almost 150 years. Justices and judges, from the county courts 
to the U.S. Supreme Court, “should no longer . . . ignore or 
dismiss the heritage of 1906” (Appel 2004, 634). Euthanasia, 
physician assistance in dying, and public policy battles over the 
right to die have been a substantial—and controversial—part 
of America’s social, religious, political, and medical histories for 
a century and a half.
By the 20th century, punishing a person for attempting sui-
cide was no longer prohibited in any state. By the century’s 

	
Background and History	
13
end, euthanasia was prohibited in every state. However, pas-
sively assisting a person to end his life is another story, one that 
continues to agitate people and groups across the nation in the 
21st century. As early as 1828, the first state law prohibiting 
assisting suicide was passed in New York State. By 1865, that 
state’s criminal code was expanded to provide punishment for 
a person “aiding a suicide, furnishing another person with any 
deadly weapon or poisonous drug, knowing that such person 
intends to use such weapon or drug in taking his own life” 
(Appel 2004). Other state legislators mimicked New York’s pro-
hibition against abetting a suicide.
By the sixth decade of the 20th century, a physician assisting 
a terminally ill patient to die was committing a criminal offense 
in every state. At this time, there was seen and heard a chorus 
of demands and actions, across the nation, from discriminated 
and marginalized groups living in America, including the dis-
abled, blacks, Hispanics, women, gays and lesbians, criminal 
defendants, Native Americans, and anti–Vietnam War protest-
ers. Their complaints had been simmering, without redress, for 
more than 100 years. They crested and boiled over beginning 
in the 1960s. These angry citizens demanded the return of 
basic, inalienable rights guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution 
but denied to them: liberty, due process, justice, and freedom 
from discrimination—fundamental rights presumably guaran-
teed to all persons in America in the Fourteenth Amendment.
Their pleas and their protests, over time, were heard by influ-
ential political decision makers, and changes were made in the 
laws and customs that had been responsible for the discrimina-
tion and inequality that existed. These watershed actions were 
taken in court opinions (Brown v. Board of Education, 1954), 
in congressional legislation (1964 Civil Rights Act; 1965 Vot-
ing Rights Act), and in executive actions (broadening of the 
Department of Justice to deal with discrimination, issuance of 
executive orders integrating the military services).
In this era, in the beginning called by many the “Age of 
Camelot”—John F. Kennedy’s presidency (1961–1963)—the 

14	
The Right to Die
emerging primacy of constitutional rights and liberties gave 
sustenance to the earliest advocates of physician assistance in 
dying groups. The mantra of these years was clear: individual 
rights and liberties is the bedrock of a viable democracy. The 
other critical societal change that led to the emergence of the 
right to die groups was the changing, and quite controversial, 
dynamics of the relationship between doctors and patients: the 
medicalization of death paradigm.
The Medicalization of Death
These changes in the manner of how and where people die are 
linked segments in a new, quite controversial health paradigm 
that explains how society manages death in the 21st century 
and accounts for a number of major questions about the doc-
tor-patient relationship: the medicalization of death.
Medicalization of death reflects the change from dying as a 
private, communal event managed by the patient, family, and 
clergy in the home to, now, a dying event primarily involving 
the aggressive actions of doctors and other medical personnel 
in hospitals utilizing the latest medical technologies to forestall 
death because they can do so and, to date, for some doctors, 
without too much concern for the patients they are treating.
When these new technologies—the innovative emergency 
treatment tactics used on patients who suffered an acute injury, 
or inventions such as dialysis machines, respirators, and feed-
ing tubes—and new drugs were introduced around the middle 
of the 20th century, the responses were elated. Lives were saved 
by transplanting hearts and kidneys; by CPR and other tactics 
employed by emergency department responders; and by new 
discoveries that eradicated polio and managed heart failure, 
some cancers (childhood leukemia), diabetes, and other once-
deadly illnesses.
There was an infectious excitement in the medical com-
munity, one that dramatically changed the physician’s percep-
tions of death and dying. The medicalization of death standard 

	
Background and History	
15
ushered in the profound belief that the physician could cure 
the patient and put off death for an indeterminate length of 
time. And the physician-as-healer became the super person 
who could save the world—one patient at a time.
These events, however, illuminated an emergent problem: In 
the 1960s, the education of the new doctors did not include 
any courses—medical, along with social psychology and pal-
liative care coursework—on how to help a dying patient cope 
with death. Medical students lacked any mentoring or on-the-
job experience with how to counsel patients about end-of-life 
choices. “Dying was hardly mentioned in med school or train-
ing programs, except as a failure of treatment. It was rarely 
spoken of to families, let alone patients, who were never to be 
denied hope for a recovery, no matter how dire the prognosis” 
(Angell 2012). Young physicians were expected to do all they 
could to save a life. A patient who died after aggressive medical 
work was seen as a medical failure.
There were, however, some physicians who abhorred such 
behavior. For these, generally senior, physicians, many involved 
in the medical futility movement (Heft et al. 2000), the medi-
calization of death standard dehumanized patients: “[they] had 
become things that needed to be treated” (Lerner 2014). One 
doctor, mirroring the final scene in the powerful movie Wit, 
“covered [his] newly dead patient—who had been hospitalized 
for months and was in constant agony—to stop his colleagues 
from trying to revive her” (Lerner 2014).
These physicians were not the only people upset with the new 
medical standard. Families of dying patients were bewildered 
and then angry with the behavior of their doctors in this new 
medical era. Chris Bohjalian is a novelist who has written nearly 
one dozen best-selling novels in the past two decades. Recently, 
in one of his final weekly columns, “Idyll Banter,” in Vermont’s 
largest daily newspaper, he spoke about his father’s last days in 
an assisted living facility, fighting “that good fight against aging 
and death.” For his father, the new devices and surgical and 
pharmaceutical inventions employed in the management of 

16	
The Right to Die
death confounded and angered him. “Technology prolongs our 
lives,” wrote Bohjalian (2015), “but it now moves so quickly 
and changes so fast that my father . . . felt humiliated and [cap-
tured] by [medicine’s] new ‘gadgets.’ ”
Theresa Brown, an experienced clinical oncology and hos-
pice nurse, provides a frank clinical definition of Bohjalian’s 
father’s frustration: “Pursuing the most aggressive treatment is 
far and away the [medical] norm. . . . The reigning presump-
tion in our health care system is that treatment, no matter how 
hopeless or torturous, must be pursued, and that life, no matter 
how compromised, must be preserved” (T. Brown 2015).
There is also a second terrible result of physicians apply-
ing every new technological change onto seriously ill patients: 
most of the time they do not make the person treated live lon-
ger or feel better! Dr. Gawande wrote in his diary, after a futile 
eight-hour surgery on a dying cancer patient, that although the 
operation was a “technical success,” it did not help the man at 
all. “The chances that he would return to anything like the life 
he had even a few weeks earlier were zero. But admitting this 
and helping him cope with it seemed beyond us. We offered 
no acknowledgement or comfort or guidance. We just had 
another treatment he could undergo. Maybe something very 
good would result” (Gawande 2014).
Sadly, death has become a technical event—a medical  
experience—one that sees the aggressive implementation by 
physicians of new techniques that prolong a dying patient’s life. 
And for too many patients and their family caregivers and legal 
surrogates, this generally fruitless prolongation of life by the 
medical doctors is not what they wanted.
The medicalization of death phenomenon is premised on 
the principle of doctors applying aggressive healing protocols 
to patients who are close to death, even though these new 
cutting-edge procedures used to prolong life also impair life 
afterward—if the patient survives the procedure. Too many 
times, especially with cancer patients, the aftermath of the life-
saving surgery or radiation or chemotherapy (usually all three 

	
Background and History	
17
strategies are employed) leaves a patient in far greater pain than 
experienced before the operation.
The 2015 findings of a major research center reviewing 
the impact of using chemotherapy to help end-stage cancer 
patients underscore medical reality in this new age. The Center 
for Research on End-of-Life Care at the Weill Cornell Medical 
College in New York “found no evidence that chemo improved 
[terminally ill] patients’ quality of life. . . . Of those receiv-
ing chemotherapy, 56% were reported to have lower quality 
of life in their last week, compared with 31% of those who 
did not have chemotherapy. [A director of the research center 
said,] ‘The real kicker is it’s the people who are performing well, 
who are thinking they’re going to benefit, that didn’t’ ” (Szabo 
2015). Indeed, for the healthiest of the dying cancer patients, 
the quality of life “actually got worse after chemo” (Belluck 
2015).
This medicalization of death paradigm has been the pre-
eminent standard of health care since the middle of the last 
century. However, it has come under increasing attack and 
has been condemned by many physicians who offer another 
view of how sick and dying patients should be cared for. They 
believe that when healing a patient is no longer possible, “when 
death is imminent and patients find their suffering unbearable, 
then the physician’s role should shift from healing to relieving 
suffering in accord with the patient’s wishes” (Angell 2012).
This respectful alternative concept of a patient-centered care 
system rather than a system grounded in the physician’s med-
icalizing care has been accompanied by two major events in 
how a society should care for its sick and dying: the emergence 
of the hospice and palliative care movements and the advent of 
state court decisions addressing the futility of the applicability 
of medicalization of death innovations in every treatment of a 
dying patient.
The first significant occurrence was the re-introduction in 
our time of the ideas of “hospice” and “palliative care.” Dur-
ing “medieval times [11th century], [hospice] referred to a 

18	
The Right to Die
place of shelter and rest for weary or ill travelers on a long 
journey” (History of Hospice Care 2016). It entered the medi-
cal comfort care lexicon due to the singular efforts of a British 
medical doctor, Dame Cicely Saunders, who began her work 
with terminally ill patients in 1948. From the very beginning 
of her medical practice, she focused on what was, for her, 
the essence of hospice in the 20th century: a team-oriented 
approach (including physicians, nurses, and specialists provid-
ing emotional, psychological, and spiritual support tailored to 
the patient’s needs) to “compassionately caring, not curing,” 
terminally ill patients in the patient’s home, or in free-standing 
hospice wings in hospitals, and in other long-term care facili-
ties (History of Hospice Care 2016).
Dr. Saunders eventually created a model of the hospice sys-
tem of specialized care for dying patients. She was able, by 
1967, to establish the first modern hospice—St. Christopher’s 
Hospice—in London. She introduced the hospice care con-
cept in America when she visited Yale University’s School of 
Nursing in 1963. Her talks led to the launching of the hos-
pice movement in America. By 1974, Professor Florence Wald, 
Dean of the Yale School of Nursing, and Dr. Saunders’ col-
league, founded the first American hospice, Connecticut Hos-
pice in Branford, Connecticut.
By the first decade of the 21st century, over 40 percent of 
deaths occurred in hospice and palliative care centers (Ball 
2012). Hospice was supported by palliative care physicians 
working in palliative care centers treating seriously ill patients 
in great pain but not yet dying. (When a patient in pallia-
tive care is diagnosed as terminally ill, then that person can 
be admitted to hospice.) Hospice, palliative care, and PAD all 
share the belief that seriously ill and dying patients must be 
compassionately cared for and treated as sentient, unique, and 
autonomous human beings; their questions and fears must not 
be ignored by their doctors.
The second event that had a major impact on the right to 
die issue took place in the New Jersey state Supreme Court 

	
Background and History	
19
where, for the first time since 1906, a case gave “explicit atten-
tion to whether and how to bring about an earlier death in 
permanently unconscious patients or in patients who were suf-
fering unbearably at the end of life” (Angell 2012). The case, In 
Re Quinlan (1976), was a landmark judicial decision allowing 
guardians of an unconscious patient in a permanent vegeta-
tive state (PVS) to have all life-sustaining procedures removed 
in order to hasten death; it became the opening round of the 
four decades-long-and-still-counting PAD movement’s effort 
to establish the right to die as a fundamental liberty owned by 
all persons living in America.
The public was made vividly aware of the issue after Quin-
lan, when new cases raising that issue were litigated in state 
courts across America. Beginning in that decade, the media 
latched onto these cases and American listeners, readers, and 
viewers were bombarded with heartbreaking human interest 
stories about the tragedies that befell families when a daughter, 
a wife, or a husband suffered a devastating injury that left the 
individual unconscious, with medical devices artificially pro-
viding the person with oxygen, nutrition, and hydration.
Since then, the media has not stopped covering these right 
to die clashes. Given the breadth, the speed with which the 
stories are covered, written, and published, and the number 
of reporters covering the news since the 1970s, a considerable 
number of these stories regularly flood the eyes and ears of the 
people in the nation and beyond. It was the post-1906 press 
coverage of the euthanasia bills, but with one thousand times 
more coverage by the press, on radio and television, in news 
weeklies and journals, on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram, 
and in books, and has continued since then.
The Basic Arguments Supporting and Opposing PAD
Physician aid in dying has become an intensely felt issue, from 
the Quinlan case to the present time, forcing Americans to pick 
a side in the clash. One either uncompromisingly supports 

20	
The Right to Die
PAD or ferociously opposes all efforts to legalize PAD. There is 
no middle ground; there is, to date, no possibility of develop-
ing a compromise. This issue has been, since the 1970s, a take-
no-prisoners battle between true believers. It joined abortion, 
stem cell, and other controversial issues associated with privacy, 
autonomy, sanctity of life, and “do no harm.”
The Arguments of Supporters of PAD
The essence of the advocate’s attachment to PAD is the deeply 
held view that a terminally ill, competent person has the 
unconditional right to choose when, how, and where to die. It 
is my life; it is, therefore, my choice how I end it! The American 
Psychological Association’s mission statement reflects this view: 
“No person should have to endure terminal suffering that is 
unremitting, unbearable, or prolonged. . . . When the circum-
stances are not remediable, the dying person should be able to 
ask for and receive help in [PAD]” (Working Group Report, 
2000).
A small number of PAD advocates, early on, included vol-
untary euthanasia in their drafts of PAD bills. Most right to 
die believers, however, support passive physician assistance in 
dying that is the basis of PAD legislation (and court orders) 
in six states: the physician provides the terminally ill patient 
with a prescription for the lethal drug which the patient self-
administers (or not). If that path is not taken, the person dies 
of the underlying disease.
There are a number of reasons that amplify a dying person’s 
right to choose death:
1.	 Respect for autonomy: The choice of PAD is a personal 
one, and the autonomous individual who is dying has the 
liberty to make such a choice. Competent, terminally ill 
people have an inalienable right—constitutional or com-
mon law—to choose the time, place, and manner of death.
2.	 Justice: Justice requires that we treat like cases alike. The 
Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection clause, which 

	
Background and History	
21
says that state actions that “deny any person within its 
jurisdiction of the equal protection of the laws” are uncon-
stitutional, has been employed by PAD advocates in legal 
battles. Their argument: terminally ill competent patients 
who have no life-sustaining artificial medical devices they 
can have withdrawn in order to die are denied “equal pro-
tection” unless the state allows them to choose PAD. With-
drawing or withholding artificial means that sustains the 
life of a dying patient is the same as a terminally ill patient 
not on such a life-maintaining device requesting physician-
aid-in-dying. Distinguishing these situations is a violation 
of the equal protection clause.
3.	 Compassion: A  dying patient’s suffering is more than 
physical pain; there are also mental, emotional, social, and 
psychological infirmities, such as the loss of independence, 
the loss of sense of self-hood, and an intolerable quality of 
life, all incapacities that devastate the dignity of some dying 
patients. PAD is a compassionate response to unremitting 
pain and suffering of a terminally ill patient.
4.	 The individual’s liberty to die outweighs a state inter-
est in preserving life: When a competent, terminally ill 
patient’s pain and suffering is intolerable, using PAD 
trumps the state’s interest in preserving that patient’s life. 
The state’s commitment to preserving the life of a dying 
resident is secondary to that person’s liberty to use PAD. 
Such a state police power unconstitutionally deprives a per-
son of the right to PAD.
5.	 PAD—Patient choice, not coercion: Every PAD bill that 
has become law provides the terminally ill patient with a 
critically important option after the person receives a pre-
scription and fills it: she does not have to take the lethal pill! 
The Oregon PAD law has been in effect since late 1997. 
Statistics through 2014 show that doctors in Oregon have 
written 1,173 prescriptions. However, choices were made 
by every one of the terminal patients—to take the lethal 

22	
The Right to Die
medication or not to take it and let nature take its course. 
Of the 1,173 persons, 752 chose to use the medication to 
end their lives; but 421 terminally ill patients chose not to 
hasten their death.
In the states that allow PAD, with the Oregon law serving 
as a template, the law underscores the basic principle of self-
autonomy: all competent patients who meet the requirements 
can legally obtain lethal medication; it provides a great deal of 
comfort for a patient to know that if the pain and suffering is 
unbearable, he can choose to use the medication. As Governor 
Jerry Brown said to the California Assembly members explain-
ing his decision to sign California’s PAD law: “I do not know 
what I would do if I were dying in prolonged and excruciat-
ing pain. I am certain, however, that it would be a comfort 
to be able to consider the options afforded by this bill. And 
I wouldn’t deny that right to others” (E. Brown, 2015).
6.	 Countering the opposition’s slippery slope argument: The 
supporters of PAD have confronted this argument from the 
very beginning of their efforts to legitimize PAD through 
legislation or court interpretations of the language found in 
state laws or the U.S. Constitution. They maintain that the 
PAD model, which has been the archetype in the five states 
allowing it through the political process—the Oregon Death 
with Dignity Act—has a set of stringent protections built 
into the act that prevent intentional or unintentional acts 
of euthanasia. They point to the statistics compiled annu-
ally by the PAD states’ health departments illustrating the 
fact that the constraints are working and that there is no evi-
dence of the existence of the slippery slope. In Montana, the 
state Supreme Court interpret the Montana Constitution to 
immunize doctors from criminal indictment if they assisted 
a patient to hasten death. The state legislature, however, has 
not moved to pass a right to die law.
7.	 Other benefits of PAD: The legalization of PAD would 
encourage open discussion and may promote better 

	
Background and History	
23
end-of-life care as patient and MD could more directly talk 
about concerns and options available to the patient. Also, 
public awareness of PAD can lead to more people writ-
ing “advanced directives” describing the medical treatment 
they want—and do not want—in the event they are inca-
pacitated and no longer able to provide “informed con-
sent” to their physician and their loved ones.
The Major Groups Supporting PAD
The primary advocates of PAD are doctors who believe that 
the fundamental ethical norm of the profession—the “first, do 
no harm” mantra in the Hippocratic Oath (created in the fifth 
century BCE.)—is not violated when they assist a terminally 
ill patient to die. Indeed, they maintain the doctor does harm 
when she does nothing to help, thereby allowing the dying 
patient to live with agonizing pain and suffering. If the patient’s 
malady is beyond curing, the doctor must then care for that 
person. And if the patient asks for physician assistance to die 
the doctor’s duty is to act to alleviate further pain and suffering.
While the major group representing physicians, the AMA, 
continues to reject PAD, it does not speak for a majority of doc-
tors. Only a bit more than 30 percent of practitioners are mem-
bers of the AMA (Angell 2012), and some of them disagree 
with the organization’s position on PAD. There are two PAD 
physician types: the zealots and the conventional physicians.
Doctors as “Indiscriminate Zealots”
There are PAD doctors who are called indiscriminate zealots. 
Some act spontaneously to alleviate the pain and suffering of a 
patient; others support PAD but see it as a means to achieving 
their ultimate goal: legitimizing euthanasia. Examples of these 
PAD physicians follow.
In 1988, The Journal of the American Medical Association 
(JAMA) published a short essay “It’s Over Debbie,” written 
by an anonymous doctor on duty at a large, private hospi-
tal (Anonymous, 1988). While on call in the middle of the 

24	
The Right to Die
night, the gynecology intern was awakened by a nurse’s call. He 
was asked to see a young female patient in the gynecological- 
oncology unit. She was not the doctor’s patient, and the ward 
she was in was not his “usual duty station.”
The doctor responded and noted that the 20-year-old 
patient, whose name was Debbie, was dying of ovarian cancer. 
“She was sitting in bed suffering . . . the room seemed filled 
with the patient’s desperate effort to survive. . . . It was a gal-
lows scene, a cruel mockery of her youth and unfulfilled poten-
tial. Her only words to me were, ‘Let’s get this over with.’ ” 
After “retreating with [his] thoughts” to the nurse’s station, he 
asked the nurse “to draw 20 mg of morphine sulfate into a 
syringe. Enough, I thought, to do the job.” He joined Debbie 
and an older woman and told them he was “going to give Deb-
bie something that would let her rest and to say good-bye.”
He injected the morphine intravenously, and he and the 
visitor waited and watched for the inevitable result: Debbie’s 
breathing soon ceased. The visitor, holding Debbie’s hand until 
she died, “stood erect and seemed relieved. It’s over, Debbie.” 
The short two-page essay appeared in The JAMA in 1988 and 
sparked a national firestorm of outrage from medical and nurs-
ing associations, religious groups, spokespersons for the dis-
abled, and many of the general public.
For some time the “Debbie” essay, which had instantly been 
reprinted in many media outlets, was talked about in editorials, 
in letters to the editor, in talk shows, and by persons gathered 
around the water fountain. The local prosecutor spent many 
months, ultimately unsuccessful, trying to uncover the name 
of the anonymous intern who killed Debbie so that criminal 
charges could be filed by the state. It became the signal event 
in the opening up of an issue that had never been discussed 
publicly until this period of American history: PAD.
The Michigan pathologist who characterized these medi-
cal zealots was Dr. Jack Kevorkian (called “Dr. Death” in the 
media although he labeled himself a “death consultant”). He 
was an uncompromising believer in the morality of active 

	
Background and History	
25
voluntary euthanasia by doctors. In 1990, he began assisting 
people to die. He invented a traveling death-inducing machine 
and installed it in his vintage VW van. Kevorkian purchased 
newspaper ads in Michigan papers and solicited persons who 
were in pain and who wished to die with his assistance (Kev-
orkian 1991).
For nearly a decade, he traveled in his VW, assisting more 
than 130 people to enter his van and, after hooking themselves 
up to his machine, to die—a majority of them not terminally ill. 
His continuing actions and state criminal court trials received 
national and international attention; since his first appearance as 
Dr. Death in 1990, Kevorkian remains an icon for some in the 
right to die clashes—although he died in 2011. Books, movies, 
television documentaries, news reports, and segments on shows 
such as 60 Minutes provided the public with new and, for many, 
disturbing information about his belief in active voluntary 
euthanasia and how he was putting his values to work. He was, 
in 1999, after acquittals or mistrials in earlier trials, convicted of 
2nd degree murder and sentenced to 10 to 25 years in prison.
Other intensely committed PAD/euthanasia advocates who 
founded organizations to publicize their beliefs were Derek 
Humphry, who created the Hemlock Society, and, in New 
Zealand, Dr. Philip Nitschke, the founder of the international 
Final Exit Network. Nitschke’s group’s “guiding principles and 
mission” holds that mentally competent adults who are not 
terminally ill, who suffer “intractable physical pain, or [suf-
fer] from a constellation of chronic, progressive physical dis-
abilities, have a basic human right to choose to end their lives 
when they judge the quality of life to be unacceptable” (Mis-
sion 2016). It is the only organization functioning in America 
that provides help to non-terminally-ill patients.
The Conventional Physician/Supporter of PAD
The second type of physician believes in PAD but, unlike 
Kevorkian, is a respected member of the profession because 
of the compassionate care and counseling practiced by him 

26	
The Right to Die
in interactions with patients. This type is exemplified by the 
behavior of Dr. Timothy Quill. He differs from Kevorkian 
and other “enthusiasts” in three ways: he cares for his patients, 
many he has known for years; he does not advertise in newspa-
pers or television for dying patients; and, because he believes 
that physicians should always engage in “comfort care,” Quill 
presents PAD as one option among others for physicians to 
discuss with their dying patients.
Quill became familiar to the public in 1991 after an essay 
he wrote about one of his patients came to the attention of 
the medical community, the district attorney’s office, and the 
public. It appeared in The New England Journal of Medicine and 
it too, like the Kevorkian stories in the press at the same time, 
angered and informed the public about how we die when it 
became public. His account, “Diane” (Quill 1991), described 
why he gave a prescription of lethal drugs to a leukemia patient.
Diane was Dr. Quill’s patient. He had been her doctor for 
nearly a decade when acute myelomonocytic leukemia was 
discovered in Diane by the doctors. After Quill provided her 
with a bleak assessment of the outcome of a series of painful, 
dangerous, and debilitating proposed treatments for her cancer 
(25% chance of survival after the series of two treatments and 
a bone marrow transplantation ended), she told Quill that she 
would rather die at home—at a time of her choosing—by self-
medicating a lethal dose of a drug. She believed it was better 
than dying alone, in a hospital room, hooked up to medical 
devices that were not making her pain and suffering better.
After many tear-producing conversations with Diane about 
her choices, Quill gave her a prescription for a lethal dose of 
barbiturates. To avoid possible criminal action against him for 
assisting her to die, Quill prescribed the medicine for Diane to 
use for sleeping and cautioned her to avoid taking too many 
pills lest she unintentionally commit suicide.
She picked up the medication and, at a time of her choosing 
because of the unremitting pain, took the pills and died alone 
in her own bed. (To avoid her family from possible charges of 

	
Background and History	
27
assisting a suicide, Diane chose to die alone. Before she took 
the lethal dose, however, she spent many hours with friends 
and family sharing memories of their lives together.)
The ensuing uproar over these doctor-patient conversations 
and Diane’s final act triggered (unsuccessfully) efforts to take 
away Quill’s license to practice in New York State as well as the 
possibility of Quill facing a criminal indictment. It also made 
the public, once again, acutely aware of the consequence of 
chronic illness’s impact on the dying process and on the new 
type of doctor-patient relationship.
Professional Medical Groups Supportive of PAD
There have been a number of health care groups that have sup-
ported a dying patient’s right to die. In taking this position in 
the controversy, the members are at odds with the major pro-
fessional medical organization, the AMA. They believe that the 
compassionate care and counseling exhibited by Dr. Quill is 
the hallmark of how doctors must act in physician assistance to 
their dying patient. These groups include the American Medical 
Students Association (30,000 members), the American Medi-
cal Women’s Association (4,000 members), the American Asso-
ciation of Hospice and Palliative Medicine (5,000 members), 
the American Pharmacists Association (62,000 members), the 
American College of Legal Medicine (1,000 members), and a 
number of state chapters of the AMA, for example, the Califor-
nia Medical Association (40,000 members) and the American 
Public Health Association (50,000 members).
Nonmedical Groups Supporting PAD
A wide variety of nonmedical groups supporting physician-
assisted-dying legislation can be identified by simply viewing 
the amicus curiae petitions supporting PAD filed in litigation in 
state and federal courts. For example, in the critically important 
Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals decision, Compassion in 
Dying v. State of Washington (1996), there were AIDS support 
groups, gay and lesbian groups, women’s groups, senior citizens 

28	
The Right to Die
groups, legal groups, humanistic and religious groups, euthana-
sia organizations, as well as labor unions and groups that acted 
to defend the rights of all persons found in the Bill of Rights.
These support organizations included the Americans for 
Death with Dignity; Euthanasia Research and Guidance Orga-
nization; the ACLU of Washington; Seattle Chapter; Japanese 
American Citizens League; Northwest Women’s Law Center; 
Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund (a gay rights sup-
port group); AIDS Action Council; Northwest AIDS Foun-
dation; Seattle AIDS Support Group; Grey Panthers Project 
Fund; Older Women’s League; Seattle Chapter of National 
Organization for Women; The American Humanist Associa-
tion; Temple De Hirsch Sinai; Unitarian Universalist Associa-
tion; National Lawyers Guild; and Local 6, Service Employees 
International Union.
The Two Major PAD Pressure Groups
For the past three decades, two major national organizations 
(joined by affiliated state chapters) have been involved in all 
the right to die battles, in state legislatures and in state and fed-
eral courts: Compassion and Choices and Death with Dignity 
National Center.
Compassion and Choices
Compassion and Choices is one of the earliest groups advocat-
ing euthanasia for terminally ill patients. Initially, the group, 
founded in 1980 by Derek Humphry, was called the Hemlock 
Society. Its mission was to provide information about how to 
die to terminally ill patients and others and supporting legisla-
tion that would legitimize physician-assisted dying. Hemlock 
Society members supported the initial—unsuccessful—efforts 
in California, Washington, Michigan, and Maine to pass right 
to die bills in the early 1990s. Humphry’s intense fervor about 
the essentiality of voluntary euthanasia, however, led to his 
hasty removal (by the leaders of the PAD movement) from any 
public forum whose subject was a proposed right to die bill. 

	
Background and History	
29
(Supporting the idea of a physician administering a lethal dose 
of medicine to a dying patient who asked for that action was, 
and remains, a kiss of death for any proposed legislation to 
legitimatize the right to die.)
At the time of its first name change in 2002 (to End of 
Life Choices), the organization had nearly 90 chapters across  
America with close to 50,000 members. In 2003, it merged with 
the Compassion in Dying Federation to become the national 
Compassion and Choices organization. Its motto is its mission: 
“Expanding Choices and Improving Care at the End of Life.” 
Mirroring the primary functions of the Hemlock Society, the 
merged advocacy organization—working with state chapters—
participates in preparing legal briefs for PAD plaintiffs in state 
and federal courts. It is also a major advocacy group working 
with PAD groups in dozens of states in the continuous effort 
to pass right to die bills.
It also provides end-of-life help to terminally ill patients and 
their families through conversations with them and with clergy, 
with palliative care professionals, and through providing books 
and articles that enable the patient to continue to explore the 
options available at this critical stage of life. Trained client sup-
port volunteers provide counsel and information to the patients 
and their family: advanced directives, living will, and Do Not 
Resuscitate documents; help with admission to a hospice; link-
ing the patient with illness-specific support groups; providing 
information to the patient and family members on the legal 
options available to assist in dying; and other services.
Since the merger, Compassion and Choices’ main office is 
in Denver, Colorado. It has a smaller number of staff in other 
states, including California, Colorado, the District of Colum-
bia, Washington State, Oregon, Connecticut, Massachusetts, 
Montana, New Mexico, New York, and Vermont.
Death with Dignity National Center
The Death with Dignity National Center, initially partnered with 
the Oregon Death with Dignity Legal Defense and Education 

30	
The Right to Die
Center in 1997, began life in Oregon in 1993 as Oregon Right to 
Die, a political action committee. Its mission was, and remains in 
2016, “to promote Death and Dignity laws based on our model 
legislation, the Oregon Death with Dignity Act, both to pro-
vide an option for dying individuals and to stimulate nationwide 
improvements in end-of-life care.”
Its members actually drafted and then led the fight to pass 
the nation’s first PAD bill, the 1994 Oregon Death with Dig-
nity Law (which was a ballot initiative, not a bill passed by the 
legislature).
The mission statement also underscores the symbiotic rela-
tionship between PAD organizations and the important and 
growing hospice and palliative care movements in America. (A 
major group, the National Hospice and Palliative Care Orga-
nization, passed a resolution in 2005 opposing all efforts to 
legitimize physician-assisted dying.) Generally, terminally ill 
patients who have legally received PAD were in palliative care 
centers in hospital and then in hospice care in a hospital or at 
home once they were diagnosed as terminal.
In 2004, the Oregon Death with Dignity and the Oregon 
Death with Dignity Legal Defense and Educational Council 
merged to become the nonprofit Death with Dignity National 
Center (DDNC) and the Oregon Death with Dignity Politi-
cal Action Fund. In the first decade of the 21st century, the 
DDNC began working with DDNC groups in Maine (2000), 
Hawaii (2002), Vermont (2001–2013), California (2002–
2015), Washington State (2006–2008), Massachusetts (2012), 
and other states to plan strategy for passing PAD legislation in 
these states. These organizations, along with Compassion and 
Choices, are the primary national groups leading the battles—
state by state—for PAD legislation.
The Alternatives Available to Terminally Ill  
Patients if PAD Is Not Legal
Before—and after—the advent of the right to die in six states, 
there were a number of alternative actions, taken by doctors, 

	
Background and History	
31
nurses, and other medical professionals, that addressed the 
needs of terminally ill patients. None of these paths to compas-
sionate care of dying patients excluded the use of PAD where 
it was legally available. Some of them were also supported by 
groups that were absolutely opposed to PAD. The Catholic 
Church’s acceptance of the double effect alternative, and the 
distinctions it draws between ordinary means to extend a life 
(which must be used) and extraordinary means to save the 
dying patient (which must not be employed), is one example.
Withholding/withdrawing life-sustaining remedies and 
refusing life support treatments: This alternative, useful only 
when a patient either is on a device or could be placed on a 
device that would extend life (but not the pain and suffering), 
became another possibility only after new innovative tech-
niques (CPR) and devices (ventilators, defibrillators, dialysis 
machines) became available in the 20th century. Patients on 
dialysis, for example, at some point in their cycle of life-saving 
care on the machine, can request withdrawal of the treatment. 
Death occurs within a week because of that choice. A compe-
tent patient can also refuse to begin dialysis.
Courts, both state and federal, accept the right of a com-
petent patient to withdraw, withhold, or refuse to use such 
devices even though death would follow. Religious institutions 
and other anti-PAD groups accepted the validity of such a 
choice, because the disease is the direct cause of death, not the 
physician.
Double effect: This is an alternative that has been used by 
physicians and nurses for centuries. It was written about by 
Catholic theologian Thomas Aquinas in the 13th century. He 
wrote, in Summa Theologica, that “nothing hinders one act 
from having two effects, one of which is intended, while the 
other is beside the intention.” Essentially, it is the use of medi-
cations in a sufficient quantity to relieve the pain and suffering 
of a patient whose death is imminent. The large amount of 
medication will relieve the pain but might indirectly lead to the 
death of the terminally ill patient. The double effect protocol 

32	
The Right to Die
directly treats the patient’s pain and suffering, while at the same 
time it indirectly causes the patient to die from the cancer, or 
from AIDS, and so on.
A wink and a nod: A secular corollary to the double effect 
convention is the wink and a nod practice. In Vacco v. Quill, 
one of the two major 1997 U.S. Supreme Court decisions 
addressing PAD, Associate Justice Ruth Bader Ginsberg 
spoke of this alternative to PAD. “Sometimes,” she wrote, “a 
covert dialogue takes place between doctor and patient that 
result[s] in an unspoken agreement. . . . A doctor will tell a 
nurse, ‘start the morphine and go ahead and be generous, if 
you know what I mean” (Schwartz 2005). This practice, very 
familiar to the medical community, consists of “veiled con-
versations between medical professionals and overwhelmed 
families. Doctors and nurses want to help but also want 
to avoid prosecution, so they speak carefully, parsing their 
words” (Dembosky 2015).
Palliative sedation: This option is used by physicians to 
“relieve the burden of otherwise intolerable suffering for ter-
minally ill patients pain by sedating [the patient] and to do so 
in such a manner so as to preserve the moral sensibilities of the 
patient” (Cherny 2016). It is generally initiated by the patient 
because of intense pain and discomfort. Palliative sedation is 
employed to induce a state of decreased awareness or absent 
awareness (unconsciousness). It leads to patient unconscious-
ness for a short time (until pain is lessened). Indirectly, it may 
lead to death. There is also the controversial variant, terminal 
sedation.
Terminal sedation: It is used in cases involving dying 
patients “where normal medical treatments cannot relieve 
severe symptoms such as pain and agitation, and no option is 
left but to take away the perception of these symptoms.” Death 
of the terminally ill patient is the purpose of this protocol. This 
extreme alternative to PAD has been “the subject of fierce ethi-
cal debates.” The central claim of the critics is that it is a “slow 
euthanasia [requested by the patient]; it is not a good palliative 
intervention” (van Delden 2007).

	
Background and History	
33
Palliative care and hospice care: These have been, since the 
opening of the first hospice in America in 1974, team-oriented 
ways of providing compassionate, comfort care for severely 
ill or terminally ill patients. One difference between them is 
that hospice care is available—either inpatient (hospital) or 
home care (the venue of more than 80% of patients)—only 
after a team of physicians has estimated that the patient has 
six months or less left to live, and the doctor and patient have 
“decided to move from active curative treatment to a regimen 
more focused on quality of life” (Stages of Hospice Care 2016). 
Palliative care, now a medical sub-specialty taught in many 
medical schools, is not triggered by an estimate of a patient’s 
time of death. It is available to all patients who are in pain, and 
while care is the primary goal, curative medical treatments can 
continue if the patient wishes. A seriously ill patient in a pal-
liative care hospital wing must leave that wing when there is a 
terminal diagnosis. The now-terminal patient can be admitted 
into a hospice program and, if a resident in one of the five PAD 
states, can ask for PAD while in hospice.
Becoming a “Death Tourist”
Although Switzerland has had an “assisted suicide” law (for altru-
istic reasons) since 1937, other countries that allow PAD and 
euthanasia passed their laws in recent decades. The “death tourist” 
method of dying has been allowed in Europe. (Belgium [2002], 
Luxembourg [2009], and the Netherlands [2002] permit PAD 
and voluntary euthanasia.) In North America, Canada (2015) 
and five states in the United States allow PAD, while Columbia 
in South America authorized PAD in 1997; in 2015, euthanasia 
was made part of Columbia’s law. When a society legalizes PAD 
or euthanasia, dying people who live in states or countries where 
PAD is illegal can travel to that location, meet residency require-
ments and medical requirements, and then receive PAD.
The Arguments in Opposition to PAD
Countering the supporters of PAD are individuals and organi-
zations who base their condemnation of PAD and euthanasia 

34	
The Right to Die
on medical, ethical, and religious values. The medical commu-
nity’s oath of medical ethics calls on physicians to preserve life 
and to do no harm. PAD is fundamentally incompatible with 
the physician’s role as healer. The major religious denomina-
tions renounce PAD because of rock-solid belief in the central 
maxim of all religion: Life is a gift of God. It must not be pre-
maturely and criminally shortened by PAD; that’s the Creator’s 
decision. Following are the basic beliefs and values of those 
who believe that PAD is unconstitutional and/or criminal, 
immoral, or an unethical medical practice.
Religious belief in the sanctity of life: Organized religion 
disdains PAD and euthanasia; they are sins against the sanc-
tity of life, against God. Pope Francis, the leader of the world’s 
Roman Catholics, denounced the right to die movement, say-
ing it is “a false sense of compassion to consider euthanasia as 
an act of dignity when in fact it’s a sin against God and cre-
ation” (Pope Says 2014). The most powerful arguments against 
PAD and euthanasia “come from the religious beliefs that life 
is sacred and that humans are the stewards and not the absolute 
masters of life,” noted a Catholic physician/nun working in 
Canada (Kenny 2015).
Medical arguments against PAD: There are a number of 
reasons why the medical establishment opposes physician-
assisted death and euthanasia. First, there is the problem all 
humans face: fallibilism—the reality of physician misdiagnosis 
of the patient’s medical problem, an erroneous prognosis, or an 
incorrect treatment. The lack of information about new cura-
tive approaches/treatments to help the patient is also a possibil-
ity; it can lead to dire consequences if the patient is told that 
the malady is terminal and incurable. We are all fallible, even 
doctors; PAD ignores this basic human condition.
There are also ethical reasons that lead physicians to oppose 
PAD. The right to die is fundamentally at odds with the ethical 
norm that pervades the medical community: the doctor’s role is 
curative; he is a healer. And one piece of the Hippocratic Oath 
is an essential barrier to a physician’s assisting a patient to die: 

	
Background and History	
35
“I will neither give a deadly drug to anybody if asked for it, nor 
will I make a suggestion to this effect.”
The AMA’s modern version of the Hippocratic Oath, the 
Code of Medical Ethics, published in 1994, absolutely prohibits 
PAD and euthanasia. Opinion E-2.21 states that “allowing phy-
sicians to participate in assisted suicide would cause more harm 
than good. Physician assisted suicide is fundamentally incom-
patible with the physician’s role as healer, would be difficult or 
impossible to control, and would pose serious societal risks.”
Distinguishing Passive “Letting Die” from Active “Killing”
Critics of PAD distinguish between passive and active actions 
or inactions of a physician working with a terminally ill patient. 
They maintain that there is a major difference between jus-
tifiable “letting die” (e.g., at the behest of the dying patient, 
withholding/withdrawing life-sustaining treatment or stop-
ping dialysis treatment) and non-justifiable active “killing” of 
the patient by PAD or euthanasia. The physician who assists 
a terminal patient to die is killing that patient and should be 
subjected to criminal prosecution and loss of license to practice 
medicine.
Potential for abuse: There is a fear held by opponents of 
PAD that a seriously ill patient who is in one of society’s vulner-
able groups (disabled, poor, women, the aged, and minorities), 
and without the ability to pay for health care, may be pushed 
into PAD. More generally, regardless of socio-economic status, 
given the “secular, death-denying, death-defying culture,” 
legalizing PAD will “cause pressure on [all] terminal patients 
who fear their illness is burdensome—physically, emotionally, 
or financially—to their families and caregivers” (Lagay 2001).
Personal integrity: There are, accompanying the historical 
ethical traditions associated with oaths and codes, concerns 
about the professional integrity of the medical community if 
physicians participate in assisting patients to die. The AMA 
and the American Geriatrics Society, for example, oppose link-
ing medicine with PAD and euthanasia because the linkage 

36	
The Right to Die
would harm both the integrity of the profession and the pub-
lic’s image of the profession.
The slippery slope: This is a major concern—and deep 
fear—of all the individuals and groups that oppose PAD. 
Beyond the medical, ethical, and religious arguments, there 
is the belief that there are no procedural protections prevent-
ing the society from moving—inexorably—from PAD to vol-
untary euthanasia and then to involuntary euthanasia carried 
out by agents of the government. The slide-to-eugenics argu-
ment is a strategic part of the anti-PAD strategy presented 
by the opposition. They point to the Nazi regime’s actions 
euthanizing all those the state thought unfit to live as the final 
end for a society that adopts a policy that, in the beginning, 
allows PAD.
Religious Groups Opposed to PAD
The Pew Research Center annually presents its findings about 
the beliefs and values of the mainstream religions functioning 
in America (Pew Research Center 2014). With but two excep-
tions, all the religious organizations participating in the survey 
reject PAD and euthanasia. “God is the sole giver of life and 
only God is the taker of life,” summarizes their opposition. 
These religious bodies also believe that it’s morally accept-
able for a dying patient not to take extraordinary measures to 
preserve life. Allowing a terminal patient to die from natural 
causes is not euthanasia or PAD. Allowing is vastly different 
from actively speeding up death.
The following religions, featured in annual Pew Research 
surveys, agree on these two general principles: Assemblies of 
God, Buddhism, Catholicism, Evangelical Lutheran Church 
America, Episcopal Church, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Mor-
monism, National Baptist Convention, Presbyterian Church 
U.S.A., Seventh-day Adventist Church, Southern Baptist Con-
vention, and the United Methodist Church.
However, the most active of all these religious institutions 
in the battles to defeat legislative efforts to pass PAD as well as 

	
Background and History	
37
present legal briefs that argue against the constitutionality of 
PAD when the issue is litigated is the Roman Catholic Church. 
Leaders, including the pope, condemn PAD. Their messages 
are transmitted to the faithful through state Catholic organiza-
tions, the national Catholic Church, and the Vatican. They use 
the Church’s professional organizers, media experts, and mil-
lions of dollars of church funds to defeat every effort made by 
PAD advocates to advance their cause.
As noted earlier, the sanctity of life principle is the central 
motivating norm, whether the Church is battling abortion, the 
death penalty, suicide, euthanasia, or PAD. “Life should not be 
prematurely shortened because it is a gift of God. We don’t have 
the authority to take into our hands when life will end. That’s 
the Creator’s decision” (Pew Research Center 2013). Death “is 
not an unmitigated evil, nor is it the enemy. Rather it is but a 
stage in the pilgrimage of life.” Suicide, PAD, and euthanasia 
are all violations of “God’s Dominion. [They] are the ultimate 
act of defiance—the assertion of self over divine sovereignty” 
(Paris and Moreland 1998).
Medical Groups Opposed to PAD
The AMA was founded in 1847 and, although membership has 
declined in the past decade since its high in 2002 (278,000), 
there is an upward swing of new membership (2011–2015). In 
2016, the AMA still remains the largest association of doctors 
in the nation (about 226,000 members).
The AMA’s Code of Medical Ethics, written in 1847, stands 
as the organization’s moral foundation regarding medical eth-
ics and standards for a physician’s ethical behavior. The prime 
duty of care for the doctor (which persists until the death of 
a patient) is to provide the patient with “specialty consulta-
tion, hospice care, pastoral support, family counseling, and 
other modalities. Patients near the end of life must continue 
to receive emotional support, comfort care, adequate pain con-
trol, respect . . . and good communication” (AMA Code of 
Medical Ethics, Opinion E 2.21).

38	
The Right to Die
As the world’s largest medical professional association, the 
AMA’s policies and budgets have supported its motto: “Help-
ing Doctors Helping Patients.” Its professional lobbyists spend 
many millions of dollars annually to work in the halls of Con-
gress, in the halls of all state legislative chambers, and in state 
and federal courtrooms to advance the interests of medical stu-
dents, physicians, and their patients.
Their activities are in controversial policy areas relating to 
the medical profession. The AMA was an aggressive oppo-
nent of Medicare until its emergence in the mid-1960s as a 
national policy. It has championed Medicare and Medicaid 
since then. It also supported President Barack Obama’s (2009–
2017) extremely controversial Patient Protection and Afford-
able Care Act (Obamacare). A portion of its political activities 
and expenditures is used annually to pay for the organization’s 
clashes with PAD movements across the nation.
The American Nurses Association (ANA) is the major orga-
nization representing registered nurses in America, through its 
54 local and state member associations. In 2015, the ANA rep-
resented nearly 175,000 members. Like the AMA, the ANA 
has a Code of Ethics for Nurses with Interpretive Statements 
(Code) (2001), and it prohibits PAD and euthanasia. Its revised 
Position Statement on Euthanasia, Assisted Suicide, and Aid in 
Dying, dated April 24, 2013, states that the organization “pro-
hibits nurses’ participation in assisted suicide and euthanasia 
because these acts are in direct violation of the Code, the ethi-
cal traditions and goals of the profession, and its covenant with 
society.”
Nurses have an obligation to provide humane, 
comprehensive, and compassionate care that respects the 
rights of patients but upholds the standards of the 
profession in the presence of chronic, debilitating illness 
and at end-of-life. . . . Nurses may not act with the sole 
intent of ending a patient’s life even though such action 
may be motivated by compassion, respect for autonomy 

	
Background and History	
39
and quality of life considerations. (American Nurses 
Association, 2015)
For the ANA, palliative care and hospice are the avenues 
that should be suggested by nurses when a patient initiates 
a conversation about end-of-life choices. Palliative care and 
hospice “provide individualized, comprehensive, holistic care 
to meet patient and family needs predicated on goals of care 
from the time of diagnosis, through death.” The Code states 
that such care “affirms life and neither hastens nor postpones 
death.” The primary responsibility of the nurse, when a termi-
nal patient requests aid in dying, is to “create environments 
where patients feel comfortable to express thoughts, feelings, 
conflict, and despair. . . . It is crucial to listen to and acknowl-
edge the patient’s expressions of suffering, hopelessness, and 
sadness” (ANA Code, 2013).
Subsequently, the nurses, along with the patient, the patient’s 
family, palliative care doctors, can develop a plan of care “initi-
ated to address the patient’s physical and emotional needs” (ANA 
Code, 2013). One study found that, on the basis of inputs from 
nurses who work with terminally ill patients, these caregivers 
“used similar, established palliative care strategies to lessen suffer-
ing in this ethically troubling situation. . . . [The study concluded 
that] nurses’ support of patient autonomy did not necessarily 
mean they were supportive of euthanasia” (Lachman 2010).
Vulnerable Groups’ Opposition to PAD
Another cohort of groups and individuals opposed to the legal-
ization of PAD are generally incorporated under the phrase vul-
nerable. These include the poor, the frail, the ill, the elderly, the 
disabled, black Americans, and other racial and ethnic minori-
ties living in America. They “worry that if PAD becomes widely 
available they will be viewed as ‘throwaway people.’ They fear 
coercion, stigmatization, and discrimination, understandingly 
believing that the societal indifference prevalent throughout 
their lives will also infect their end-of-life care” (King 2012).

40	
The Right to Die
Study after study about the attitudes of these politically pow-
erless groups concludes that a major concern all these groups 
share is that their “rights are not valued in society; they fear 
they will not have access to life-prolonging treatment or pal-
liative care that for them represents death with dignity” (King 
2012). Members of these groups have been treated with disre-
spect, with disdain, with derision, and as inferior members of 
the society all their lives.
In 1989, illustrating this reality, the U.S. Civil Rights Com-
mission published a 153-page report entitled “Medical Dis-
crimination against Children with Disabilities.” The report, in 
part, described an experiment conducted from 1977 to 1982 
in the Children’s Hospital, Oklahoma:
Doctors there developed a “quality of life” formula for 
babies with spina bifida [“split spine,” the most common 
permanently disabling birth defect in the United States], 
taking into account the socioeconomic status of the baby’s 
family to determine what to advise families about a simple 
but life-and-death procedure. Better-off families were 
provided a realistic and optimistic picture of their child’s 
potential. Poor families were provided a pessimistic picture. 
All the families who were given an optimistic picture asked 
for medical care for their children. Conversely, four out of 
five poor families agreed not to treat their children, and 
twenty four babies died. (Coleman n.d.)
The report concluded that the doctors’ “projection of a neg-
ative quality of life . . . based on the difficulties society will 
cause, rather than tackling the difficulties themselves, is unac-
ceptable” (Coleman n.d.).
For advocates for vulnerable populations, this behavior, 
unfortunately, is the norm when medical professionals “coun-
sel” the patients and their families. Nonverbal discomfort and 
implicit biases are regrettably present in these physician con-
sultations with a vulnerable patient—whether the person is 

	
Background and History	
41
ill, dying, or just fine at that moment—but who are on the 
“wrong side” of the lines of race, ethnicity, and class. For most 
of America’s history they have been powerless.
Blacks, especially, must view “the legalization of PAD with 
suspicion. Rather than see it as an opportunity to exercise their 
autonomy at the end of life, African Americans . . . sense that 
this is another way through which less valued African Ameri-
can lives can be eliminated” (King and Wolf 1998).
Their history—from slavery, to Jim Crow, to lynching, to 
discrimination, to substandard public health care, and to pub-
lic health agencies using them as guinea pigs for questionable 
medical trials—certainly does not give a great many blacks 
confidence that PAD will give them a death with dignity.
The Tuskegee, Alabama, syphilis “research” project, which 
lasted 40 years, is an arch example of blacks being unknow-
ing medical specimens. In 1932, the U.S. Public Health Ser-
vice, working with the Tuskegee Institute, in Alabama, began 
what turned out to be a 40-year study of 600 black men, 400 
with syphilis, and 200 men who did not have the disease. It 
was called the “Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the 
Negro Male” and was an effort to examine syphilis’s patho-
genesis in an effort to develop a treatment program. The men 
did not give their consent to the research; they were told that 
they were being treated for “bad blood.” They did not receive 
proper treatment (penicillin) but received free medical exams, 
free meals, and burial insurance (Jones 1993). These cruel 
experiences felt by blacks “have fostered distrust of physicians 
and the health care system.” These “racial disparities in health 
care persist, and they exist in the broader context of historical 
and contemporary social and economic inequalities in Ameri-
can life” (King 2012).
All black community members have to do is look at the sad 
state of health care for them and other minorities in America 
in the second decade of the 21st century. Sadly, there is still—
because of both attitude and practice—a social and medical 
devaluation of the lives of vulnerable cohorts. In 1998, The 

42	
The Right to Die
JAMA published the results of a study, involving over 13,000 
cancer patients. “People of color” were treated as second-class 
citizens: they were “significantly less likely to receive pain med-
ication than whites, even aspirin” (Coleman n.d.).
In 1997, the American Bar Association’s Commission on the 
Legal Problems of the Elderly introduced a resolution to the 
organization’s members, which was passed, that addressed this 
issue. The American Bar Association wanted to “ensure that 
information and reporting systems are established to achieve 
close monitoring of the impact of physician-assisted death, 
especially with respect to vulnerable populations who may be 
particularly at risk if PAD is authorized” (Francis 1998).
Another organization representing the elderly population is 
the American Geriatrics Society (AGS). The AGS is a national 
organization of geriatrics health care professionals, research 
scientists, and others dedicated to “improving the health, 
independence and quality of life of all older people” (Ameri-
can Geriatrics Society n.d.). A general concern of the elderly 
addresses the impact of the primacy of personal autonomy in 
the decision to use PAD.
At the heart of this group’s trepidation about PAD lies the 
following question: does it take into account the vulnerabilities 
of the elderly? These, at a minimum, must include physical dis-
ability; reduced independence; the loss of loved ones (including 
pets); economic insecurity (having to choose between medi-
cine or food); moving into new, smaller, quarters; and leaving 
the comfort of an old neighborhood and friends. These fac-
tors, separate or combined, all account for the onset of chronic 
depression. And depression is the major cause of elderly sui-
cide (Francis 1998). Decriminalizing PAD and euthanasia is a 
frightening development for elderly advocates who are strug-
gling with the general problem of suicide.
In late 2002, the AGS issued a position paper on PAD and 
voluntary active euthanasia. It set out the position of the AGS 
with regard to the question: “should euthanasia or physician-
assisted suicide be legal?” The answer was a resounding no. 

	
Background and History	
43
Introducing these options creates unmanageable problems for 
the elderly (American Geriatrics Society 2007).
For the AGS, the traditional, essential goal of the physician 
“has been to comfort and to cure [the patient]. To change the 
physician’s role to one in which comfort includes the inten-
tional termination of life is to alter this alliance and could 
undermine the trust between physician and patient” (Ameri-
can Geriatrics Society 2007). The existence of PAD “encour-
ages the elderly to accept death prematurely rather than burden 
society and family.”
The AGS strongly believes that the elderly would overwhelm-
ingly want to receive quality palliative care so that they would 
be comfortable—“which might require sedation”—and “poten-
tially could find meaning in the last phase of life. . . . Most 
would choose to live if they had full confidence that the care 
system would serve them well” (American Geriatrics Society 
2007). Because of the sorry history of society’s treatment of 
them, the elderly population, with few exceptions, lacks the 
certainty that they will be treated equitably.
Not Dead Yet: The Disabled Community’s Vocal Advocate
“Disabled persons have been historically victimized by stereo-
typical attitudes about their abilities and worth, coupled with a 
paternalism that has undercut their right to self-determination” 
(Bickenbach 1998). Retired Judge Ted Knuck, the father of a 
40-year-old developmentally disabled woman, put it tersely: 
“Those of us who are not disabled tend to impose our way of 
thinking on people who are disabled” (Machelor 2015).
The most visible group representing the interests of the dis-
abled is the Not Dead Yet (NDY) organization. It is a national 
disability rights group, founded in early 1996, that opposes 
the legalization of PAD and euthanasia as deadly forms of dis-
crimination. (Ironically, the immensely popular 1975 satiric 
film Monty Python and the Holy Grail gave the group its name. 
In the film, plague victims are thrown into a burial cart; how-
ever, one of the “corpses” protests that he is “not dead yet”!) 

44	
The Right to Die
Since 1996, about one dozen other disability rights groups 
have joined NDY in the battles against PAD and euthanasia 
in state legislatures and in state and federal courts. Some of 
them are the Disability Rights Center, Justice for All, the Autis-
tic Self-Advocacy Group, the National Council on Disability, 
the National Spinal Cord Injury Association, the World Asso-
ciation of Persons with Disabilities, Second Thoughts, and the 
United Spinal Association.
For NDY, PAD’s claim that it is a compassionate way to 
exit life is categorically false. “This is not compassion, it’s con-
tempt. Legalized medical killing is really about a deadly double 
standard for people with severe disabilities, including both 
conditions that are labeled terminal and those that are not” 
(Coleman, 1999).
This observation underscores a cruel “catch-22” for those 
disabled terminally ill patients living in PAD states who want 
to use the process. These persons, although dying, are barred 
from PAD if they are unable to end their lives without assis-
tance. And help is, by definition, voluntary euthanasia—an 
action prohibited by PAD strictures. There is a huge gap in 
the Oregon model used in the United States. Unlike Canada’s 
2016 assisted suicide bill, which allows doctors to assist such 
patients to die, in America these “paraplegic or completely 
paralyzed [patients] unable to control their hands, unable to 
self-administer the lethal cocktails that licensed physicians may 
not administer legally,” face a despairing existence (Lief 2016).
The severely handicapped terminally ill patient is “legally 
prevented from pursuing a legal option [PAD] on the basis of 
physical disability” (Bickenbach 1998). This is discriminatory 
state action, arguably a violation of the Fourteenth Amend-
ment’s Equal Protection Clause. But this is only the very tip 
of the iceberg of inequitable health care services for this group 
of vulnerable persons—and others as well. NDY’s actions and 
broadsides on their behalf expose a bitterness about “normal 
society”; it is based on a fundamental historical reality faced 
by the disabled in America: They have been marginalized, 

	
Background and History	
45
stigmatized, and discriminated against in—and outside of—
the health care system throughout their lives. The disabled have 
“good reason to distrust the health care system in the United 
States and until the system is perceived as more fair and trust-
worthy they will continue to find inadequate the argument 
that procedures safeguard against abuse” (Ouellette 2014).
Many disabled patients view the contemporary doctor’s 
office and the hospital as dangerous places. “Most people with a 
disability fear even the most routine hospitalization. We do not 
fear any of the commonplace indignities those without a dis-
ability worry about when hospitalized. Our fear is primal—will 
our lives be considered devoid of value?” (Peace 2012).
In May 2012, a disability rights organization, the National 
Disability Rights Network, published a searing report that 
detailed the two major ways “in which the U.S. health care 
system fails to recognize the value of life with disability” (Carl-
son, Smith, and Wilker 2012). There are “controversial medical 
innovations,” devices, and protocols, used for treating illness 
and providing curative health services to patients, that make 
disabled patients either very uncomfortable or, because of the 
physical nature of the person’s disability, unable to benefit from 
the use of the new, life-prolonging devices. Conversely, because 
of the doctor’s perceived bias, there is a dismissive valuation of 
disabled patients; the new devices are not discussed with the 
patient and family, are not used, or are withdrawn from dis-
abled children and adults.
Beyond the discriminatory employment of these innova-
tions, the report indicated that the disabled community is 
“even more troubled by the day-to-day dehumanizing experi-
ence of persons with disabilities in the health care system. They 
experience significant health care [attitudinal] disparities and 
[medical equipment] barriers to care. This inequality extends 
to all vulnerable groups” (Carlson, Smith, and Wilker 2012).
Whether one is disabled, black, Hispanic, old, poor, 
demented, or feeble, that patient is more likely to go without 
needed care; such patients make more preventable emergency 

46	
The Right to Die
room visits and hospitalizations; they experience a significantly 
higher prevalence of secondary conditions; they get less preven-
tive care—fewer pelvic exams, fewer pap smears, fewer prostate 
exams, less prenatal care; they are not as likely to be weighed 
when they go to the doctor; and they have poor health out-
comes (see, for example, Matthew 2005).
These historical barriers to quality health care for the dis-
abled community are the context from which emerges the vig-
orous rejection of PAD by all these vulnerable groups. When 
there is a deathly fear of any routine visit to a hospital because 
the person does not trust the health care personnel and the 
system itself, can any disabled person believe that death with 
dignity laws “are not targeted at them”? (Ouellette 2014).
For the protectors of the disabled, there has to be a systemic 
change in the health care system’s weaknesses, including the 
explosive rise in the cost of health care. The negative perception 
of quality health care these vulnerable groups possess will not 
diminish until visible and substantive changes are made that 
address these problems. And this health care reality has been 
a major concern of NDY. What choices are left for a severely 
disabled person who must continually deal with the systemic 
problems in the health care system?
Stephen Hawkins is an internationally recognized scientific 
genius who is severely disabled with ALS. He revealed his des-
peration with the health care system when, in 2013, he spoke 
to a BBC reporter. Previously, he was opposed to PAD and 
suicide for persons confronting their medical condition. He 
said, in 2007, that killing oneself “would be a great mistake. 
However bad life may seem, there is always something you can 
do. While there’s life, there’s hope” (“Feature” 2006). In 2013 
Hawking changed his mind and “offered his unqualified sup-
port to those who feel their life is no longer tolerable.”
I think those who have a terminal illness and are in great 
pain should have the right to choose to end their lives and 
those that help them should be free from prosecution. We 

	
Background and History	
47
don’t let animals suffer, so why humans? There must be 
safeguards that the person concerned genuinely wants to 
end their life and they are not being pressured into it or 
have it done without their knowledge or consent as would 
have been the case with me. We should not take away the 
freedom of the individual to choose to die. I believe one 
should have control of one’s life, including its ending. 
(Boseley 2013)
Hawking and other disabled persons understand, because 
of their poor, personal experiences with physicians, the critical 
importance of proper and rigorous safeguards to protect them 
when they enter the public health system—and what can hap-
pen if these safeguards are not present.
Improper, discriminatory treatment of vulnerable groups 
lies at the core of the fears expressed by NDY advocates. How-
ever, PAD advocates are equally ardent when they assert that 
the PAD policy has the necessary safeguards to prevent such 
unasked-for final actions. There is no doubt that how physi-
cians—and the health care system itself—treat their vulnerable 
patients is a key element in the generally negative perception of 
PAD by these individuals..
Conclusion
The foregoing examination of the organizations on both sides 
of the right to die issue touches only a small number of indi-
viduals and associations. There are, across the nation, in every 
state, many dozens of local, state, and national groups of com-
mitted persons continuously working to achieve their goals in 
this legal, political, ethical, religious, and medical quandary. 
Chapter Two examines these activities and actions that began 
in the 1970s and continue into the present century.
These events saw a re-awakening, aided and abetted by edi-
tors, publishers, and social media participants, of readers’ inter-
est in the issue of how we die and what options do we have 

48	
The Right to Die
about confronting death. Since 1990 there has been a major 
expansion of media coverage of all events that touch on a per-
son’s right to choose to die with passive assistance by a doctor. 
The public has been exposed to books and articles about the 
political, ethical, legal, and religious clashes that occurred on 
the floors of legislative chambers and in courtrooms; writers 
produced human interest stories focusing on the tragic, heart-
rending stories about patients and their families facing cruel 
choices about living or dying. The expected consequence was 
sensational headlines feeding peoples’ imagination and provid-
ing grist for their dinner table conversations
The creation of PAD pressure groups began in earnest in the 
1980s and was fully covered in the news. Important events in 
the U.S. Supreme Court, in state politics, in Congress were 
occurring and the need for organizations to work for—and 
against—the passage of right to die legislation grew quickly. 
The absence of Advanced Directive planning in people’s lives 
became newsworthy when, in 1990, the U.S. Congress passed 
the Patient Self-Determination Act.
That same year, the nation read about the politics surround-
ing Washington State’s Initiative 119, the first ever voter refer-
endum which, if passed, would have made physician assistance 
in dying a legal right that protected the participants from any 
criminal action in the state. (It did not pass in 1990; another 
version was passed by the voters in 2008.)
Needless to say, these right to die incidents, cases, and per-
sonalities were written about at length and in depth; they were 
discussed by doctors, nurses, ethicists, clergy, politicians, talk-
ing heads on radio and television, magazines, and the general 
public for many years. Hollywood has played a significant role 
in further exposing the general public to pervasive issues associ-
ated with death and dying. Some of the most well-known are 
about leukemia (Love Story [1970], Dying Young [1991]); can-
cer (Brian’s Song [1971], Wit [2001]); disability (Whose Life Is 
It Anyway [1981]); Alzheimer’s disease (Do You Remember Love 

	
Background and History	
49
[1985], Still Alice [2014]); PAD (Million Dollar Baby [2004]); 
and Dr. Kevorkian (You Don’t Know Jack [2010]).
These books, films, and plays are integral to the opening 
up of needed discussions of death, sensitizing Americans to 
the realities of growing old in the 21st century. We have been 
forced to think about, for the first time in generations, the 
watershed changes in how and why we are living longer but 
dying much more slowly, often with accompanying pain and 
suffering. Most important, Americans are, for the first time, 
thinking about how they will want to die.
For nearly a half century (1970–present), contemporary 
Americans have been made increasingly aware of the emotion-
ally charged questions surrounding society’s beliefs and efforts 
about how to cope with terminal illness. Attitudinal changes 
have taken place in the nation, but they are incremental and 
somewhat irregular. Viewing annual polls about how Ameri-
cans respond to moral issues shows these changes at play in the 
society. The Gallup poll concluded in May 2015 that “Ameri-
cans are more likely now than in the early 2000s to find a vari-
ety of behaviors morally acceptable . . . at a record-high level” 
(Newport 2015). The poll annually tracks the ebb and flow of 
Americans’ attitudes on more than a dozen key moral issues, 
including whether doctor-assisted suicide is morally accept-
able. In 2001, the response to that question was 49 percent 
who believed PAD was morally acceptable; by 2011, however, 
the response dropped to 45 percent; however, in 2015, Gal-
lup pollsters found that 56 percent of the persons thought that 
physician-assisted suicide was morally acceptable.
How does one explain these fluctuations, especially the 
upsurge of support for PAD? In October  2014, there was 
extensive media coverage of Brittany Maynard’s decision to 
move from California to Oregon, where PAD is legal, in order 
to die because of her inoperable brain cancer. In the latter part 
of 2014, across the globe, the story—with videos made by the 
young woman explaining her decision—was continuous on 

50	
The Right to Die
Facebook, Twitter, television, radio, newspapers, magazines—
all with haunting photographs of the 29-year-old recently 
married woman who received physician assistance to die by 
moving to a PAD state. In less than one year, the publicity 
and the public outcry over Brittany’s final months of life had 
much to do with the passage—and signing by the governor—
of California’s End of Life Options Act. This substantive policy 
created in California, after nearly two decades of being rejected 
by state legislators, is the result of a “decades-long evolution in 
public attitudes toward how we die” (Angell 2012).
Chapter Two examines the ongoing hard-nosed battles sur-
rounding the constitutionality of laws punishing any person 
assisting another to end her life. Chapter Two also addresses 
the problems confronting the participants in these political 
fights, as well as some new wrinkles about the controversy that 
have arisen in recent years. Finally, and the most difficult ques-
tion of all, is whether there is a solution to this divisive issue.
References
American Geriatrics Society. 2002. Position Statement: 
Physician-Assisted Suicide and Voluntary Active Euthanasia. 
New York: American Geriatrics Society.
American Geriatrics Society. 2007. Position Paper: Physician 
Assisted Suicide and Voluntary Active Euthanasia. New York: 
American Geriatrics Society. November 2002, revised 
2007.
American Geriatrics Society. n.d. “Who We Are.” http://www.
americangeriatrics.org/about_us/who_we_are/
American Nurses Association. 2015. Code of Ethics for Nurses. 
http://nursingworld.org/DocumentVault/Ethics-1/Code-
of-Ethics-for-Nurses.html
American Psychological Association. 2000, May. “On 
Assisted Suicide and End of Life Decisions.” Working 
Group Report. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.

	
Background and History	
51
Angell, Marcia. 2012. “May Doctors Help You to Die?” New 
York Review of Books, October 11.
Anonymous. 1988. “It’s Over Debbie.” JAMA. January 8,  
Vol. 259, No. 2:272.
Appel, Jacob M. 2004. “A Duty to Kill? A Duty to Die? 
Rethinking the Euthanasia Controversy of 1906.” Bulletin 
of the History of Medicine, 78:3, 610–634.
Ball, Howard. 2012. At Liberty to Die: The Battle for Death with 
Dignity in America. New York: New York University Press.
Belluck, Pam. 2015. “Benefit of End Stage Chemotherapy Is 
Questioned.” The New York Times, July 23, p. A15.
Bickenbach, Jerome E. 1998. “Disability and Life-Ending 
Decisions.” In Physician Assisted Suicide: Expanding the 
Debate, edited by Margaret P. Battin, Rosamond Rhodes, 
and Anita Silvers, 123–132. New York: Routledge.
Bohjalian, Chris. 2015. “A Little Too Much Like Life.” 
Burlington Free Press, August 16, p. 2C.
Boseley, Sarah. 2013. “Professor Stephen Hawking Backs 
Right to Die for the Terminally Ill.” The Guardian, 
September 17. www.guardian.org.
Brown, Edmond G., Jr. 2015. Letter to Members of the 
California State Assembly, October 5. https://www.gov.
ca.gov/docs/ABX2_15_Signing_Message.pdf
Brown, Theresa. 2015. “Choosing How We Die.” The New 
York Times, July 24.
Butler, Katy. 2015. “Aid in Dying Laws Are Just a Start.” The 
New York Times, July 12, SR2.
Carlson, David, Cindy Smith, and Nachama Wilker. 
2012. “Devaluing People with Disabilities: Medical 
Procedures That Violate Civil Rights. National Disability 
Rights Network.” http://www.disabilityrightswa.org/
devaluing-people-disabilities
Cherny, Nathan. 2016. “Palliative Sedation.” UpToDate. 
http://www.uptodate.com/contents/palliative-sedation

52	
The Right to Die
Code of Ethics for Nurses With Interpretive Statements. 
2013. www.nursingworld,org
Cohen, Adam. 2016. Imbeciles: The Supreme Court, American 
Eugenics, and the Sterilization of Carrie Buck. New York: 
Penguin Press.
Coleman, Diane. 1999. “Deadly Tactics: It’s Not 
Compassion, It’s Contempt.” Chicago Tribune, March 17. 
www.chicagotribune.com
Coleman, Diane. n.d. “Assisted Suicide and Disability: 
Another Perspective.” Disability Rights Education & 
Defense Fund. http://dredf.org/public-policy/
assisted-suicide/assisted-suicide-and-disability/
Dembosky, April. 2015. “Doctors’ Secret Language for 
Assisted Suicide.” The Atlantic, May 27.
Dowbiggin, Ian. 2003. A Merciful End: The Euthanasia Movement 
in Modern America. New York: Oxford University Press.
Emanuel, Ezekiel J. 1997. “Whose Right to Die?” The 
Atlantic, March.
“Feature: There’s Life, There’s Hope: Stephen Hawking.” 
2006. Xinhua, June 14. http://en.people.cn/200606/14/
eng20060614_273839.html
Francis, Leslie P. 1998. “Assisted Suicide: Are the Elderly a 
Special Case?” In Physician Assisted Suicide: Expanding the 
Debate, edited by Margaret P. Battin, Rosamond Rhodes, 
and Anita Silvers, 75–90. New York: Routledge.
Gawande, Atul. 2014. Being Mortal: Medicine and What 
Matters in the End. New York: Metropolitan Books.
Heft, P.R., M. Siegler, and J. Lantos. 2000. “The Rise and 
Fall of the Futility Movement.” New England Journal of 
Medicine, 343, 293–296.
History of Hospice Care. 2016. National Hospice and 
Palliative Care Organization. http://www.nhpco.org/
history-hospice-care

	
Background and History	
53
Jones, James H. 1993. Bad Blood: The Tuskegee Syphilis 
Experiment. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Kenny, Nuala. 2015. “Physician Assisted Suicide: 
Medicalization of Suffering and Death.” Canadian 
Bioethics, February.
Kevorkian, Jack. 1991. Prescription Medicide: The Goodness of 
Planned Death. Buffalo: Prometheus Books.
King, Patricia A. 2012. “Address Inequalities before Legalizing 
Assisted Suicide.” The New York Times, April 10.
King, Patricia A., and Leslie E. Wolf. 1998. “Lessons for 
Physician-Assisted Suicide from the African-American 
Experience.” In Physician Assisted Suicide: Expanding the 
Debate, edited by Margaret P. Battin, Rosamond Rhodes, 
and Anita Silvers, 123–132. New York: Routledge.
Lachman, Vicki. 2010. “Physician Assisted Suicide: 
Compassionate Liberation or Murder?” MEDSURG 
Nursing, 19:2, 124, March/April.
Lagay, Faith. 2001. “Physician-Assisted Suicide: What’s Legal 
and What’s Professional?” Virtual Mentor, 3:1, 1.
Lerner, Barron H. 2014. “When Medicine Is Futile,” The New 
York Times, September 18.
Lieber, James E. 2016. “How to Make Hospitals Less Deadly.” 
The Wall Street Journal, May 18.
Lief, Donald W. 2016. “Aid in Dying.” Letter to the Editor. 
The New York Times, April 30.
Machelor, Patty. 2015. “Retired Judge Warns against Forcing 
Integrated Work Settings on the Disabled.” Arizona Daily 
Star, November 8.
Matthew, Dayna Bowen. 2005. Just Medicine: A Cure for 
Racial Inequality in American Health Care. New York: New 
York University Press.
Mission. 2016. Final Exit Network. http://www.
finalexitnetwork.org/Mission.html

54	
The Right to Die
Newport, Frank. 2015. “Americans Continue to Shift Left 
of Key Moral Issues.” Gallup, May 26. http://www.gallup.
com/poll/183413/americans-continue-shift-left-key-moral-
issues.aspx
Ouellette, Alicia. 2014. “Context Matters: Disability, the End 
of Life, and Why the Conversation Is Still So Difficult.” 
New York Law School Review, 58:371, 2013–2044.
Paris, John J. and Michael P. Moreland. 1998. “A Catholic 
Perspective on Physician-Assisted Suicide.” In Physician 
Assisted Suicide: Expanding the Debate, edited by Margaret 
P. Battin, Rosamond Rhodes, and Anita Silvers, 123–132. 
New York: Routledge.
Peace, William J. 2012. “Disability Discrimination: The 
Author Responds.” Hastings Bioethics Forum, July 27. 
http://www.thehastingscenter.org/Bioethicsforum/Post.
aspx?id=5935&blogid=140
Pew Research Center. 2013. Religious Groups’ Views on End-
of-Life Issues. http://www.pewforum.org/2013/11/21/
religious-groups-views-on-end-of-life-issues/
Pew Research Center. 2014. Religious 
Landscape Study. http://www.pewforum.org/
about-the-religious-landscape-study/
“Physicians May Take Human Life.” 1906. Des Moines 
Register and Leader, March 11, p. 1.
“Pope Says Assisted Suicide Is a ‘Sin Against God.’ ” 2014. 
Associated Press, November 15. www.ap.com
Quill, Timothy E. 1991. “Death and Dignity: A Case of 
Individualized Decision Making.” New England Journal of 
Medicine, 324:10, 691–694.
Schillace, Brandy. 2016. Death’s Summer Coat: What the 
History of Death and Dying Teach Us about Life And Living. 
New York: Pegasus Books.
Schwartz, John. 2005. “New Openness in Deciding When 
and How to Die.” The New York Times, March 21.

	
Background and History	
55
Stages of Hospice Care. 2016. Center for Hospice Care 
Southeast Connecticut. https://www.hospicesect.org/
hospice-and-palliative-care/stages-of-hospice-care
Szabo, Liz. 2015. “Chemo Won’t Help End Stage Cancer.” 
USA Today, July 24.
van Delden, Johannes J.M. 2007. “Terminal Sedation: Source 
of a Restless Ethical Debate.” Journal of Medical Ethics, 
33:4, 187–188.

56

57
2	
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
The Rev. Patrick Mahoney, director of the Christian Defense Coalition, 
holds up a picture of Terri Schiavo in front of the U.S. Supreme Court 
building to commemorate her death. Schiavo was a Florida resident who 
suffered a catastrophic medical event in 1990 that left her near brain dead, 
and in a permanent vegetative state. Until her death in March 2005, Terri’s 
tragedy was a political and legal battleground for two contradictory prin-
ciples: the sacredness of life and the right of her surrogate to end her life by 
withdrawing her feeding tube. (AP Photo/Haraz N. Ghanbari)
Introduction
Can a competent, terminally ill, nonclinically depressed per-
son, in pain—or not—and suffering, end life with the pas-
sive assistance of a physician? This is the central substantive 
issue examined in this chapter. It begins by examining the 
ongoing hard-nosed battles surrounding the legal efforts by  
physician-assisted dying (PAD) supporters—in state and fed-
eral courts—that challenged the constitutionality of state laws 
that criminally punish any person assisting another to end his 
life. There was, in 2015, a total of 45 states and the District of 
Columbia that considered PAD illegal: 38 have laws prohibit-
ing PAD; 3 states (Alabama, Massachusetts, and West Virginia) 
and the District of Columbia prohibit PAD by common law; 
and 4 states (Nevada, North Carolina, Utah, and Wyoming) 
have no laws prohibiting PAD, may not recognize common 
law, and are unclear on the legality of PAD (“State-by-State 

58	
The Right to Die
Guide” 2015). The chapter then investigates political efforts 
by PAD pressure groups to convince state legislators to pass 
legislation permitting physician aid to terminally ill patients. 
These two venues—the legal and the political—are the only 
roads available to groups who seek to change social policy in 
America. Beginning in the late 1980s, PAD advocates’ efforts 
have brought every group on both sides into the right to die 
firestorm.
This battle has continued, unabated, since then. The latest 
data regarding the legislative battles in America show that a 
majority of states face continuing efforts by pro-PAD legis-
lators to introduce Oregon-style death with dignity laws. In 
every instance, in the courts and in the legislatures, the groups 
opposing PAD, religious institutions—especially the Catho-
lic Church—disabled groups, and the medical, nursing, and 
health care establishments, challenge the PAD supporters.
This right to die battle in the states is a national war between 
groups of proponents and objectors; it continues to roil the 
society with no sign of let-up, fatigue, or armistice. In addition 
to the 6 states that allow PAD as of 2017, another 25 state leg-
islatures are continuing to debate the merits of a PAD bill, 15 
of them examining the issue for the very first time during their 
2015 legislative session. The expectation is that most if not all 
states will eventually become battlegrounds in the struggles 
surrounding the right to die.
The right to die conflagration joined the on-going politi-
cal-religious-social fights over another very impassioned strug-
gle: the still-continuing battle over the constitutionality of a 
woman’s right to have an abortion. The abortion confrontation 
began with the Supreme Court’s Roe v. Wade decision in 1973 
and continues into the second decade of the 21st century. By 
a 7-2 majority, the justices concluded that a woman had a per-
sonal “liberty” interest, a right to privacy (found in the U.S. 
Constitution’s Fourteenth Amendment’s due process clause) to 
choose—or not—to have an abortion. Justice Harry A. Black-
mun, for the majority opinion, wrote that “this right of pri-
vacy, . . . founded in the Fourteenth Amendment’s concept of 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
59
personal liberty and restrictions upon state action, as we feel it 
is, is broad enough to encompass a woman’s decision whether 
or not to terminate her pregnancy.” (In 1992, in another case 
involving the scope of a woman’s liberty interest to have an 
abortion, Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. 
Casey, the judgment noted that “at the heart of liberty” is a per-
son’s right to “define one’s own concept of existence . . . and of 
the mystery of human life.” This comment was cited as a viable 
precedent by the PAD plaintiffs’ lawyers in the watershed right 
to die cases before the U.S. Supreme Court in 1997: Vacco v. 
Quill and Washington v. Glucksberg.)
Both issues—abortion and the right to die—engage the 
same individuals and organizations in the battles. The moral 
themes—the sanctity of life versus the autonomous person’s 
liberty to choose—are identical in these two social-religious-
political clashes. The examination of these legal and political 
venues, where the right to die is the focus, underscores the 
unremitting harshness of both sides.
This chapter also investigates the continuing right to die 
problems that emerge from the disputes, as well as focusing on 
the general society’s responses to the changes in how we die in 
this new century. Finally, the most difficult question of all is 
whether there are solutions to these problems or whether, like 
the abortion controversy, there is no resolution.
The Right to Die Battle in the Courts
The right to die controversy, like the abortion issue, began in 
earnest in the state and federal courts. Ultimately, the U.S. 
Supreme Court played a major role in addressing both issues. 
The right to die became a very public issue in America in the 
1970s because of massive media coverage of a number of highly 
unusual medical cases. What was so singular about these initial 
cases were the patients at the center of the stories. They were 
not terminally ill, aging persons in great pain, suffering in a 
number of ways. These cases generally had once-vibrant pri-
marily young (twenties to thirties) females at the center of the 

60	
The Right to Die
litigation. They became headline news stories because of their 
medical condition after they experienced a catastrophic injury. 
They were unconscious and incompetent, diagnosed as being 
in a persistent, then permanent vegetative state (PVS).
The PVS Cases: The Initial Judicial Foray into the 
Contemporary Right to Die Controversy
These cases involved individuals who barely survived a cata-
strophic medical event, but, because of a lack of oxygen to the 
brain for more than six to eight minutes, lost nearly all cogni-
tive capacity, were comatose, and were diagnosed to be in a 
PVS. Almost every day Americans read, heard, and watched 
the news reports—accompanied by photographs of these 
poor souls—describing their plight. The despair of their fami-
lies became a part of these human interest stories. Husbands, 
wives, parents, siblings, and family members couldn’t do any-
thing but watch, hope, and pray for some utterance or move-
ment or tears that would indicate improvement in the health 
of their loved ones.
The injured were vibrant one day and, the next day, after 
cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) performed by EMTs 
rescued them from death, were left unconscious, blind, unable 
to communicate, and in desperate need of medical devices that 
artificially breathed and provided hydration and nutrition for 
them. A patient in a PVS, after a year with no change or, more 
likely, with a further deterioration of her medical condition, is 
diagnosed to be in a permanent vegetative state.
The doctors share this dire prognosis with the immediate 
family. It is grim because there is no medical treatment that will 
improve the patient’s existence. A person in such a state simply 
exists; there is no quality of life. The PVS patient is in a twilight 
zone, not biologically dead yet, but without life. And, as the 
cases below indicate, the patients had been in a PVS for years; 
in one of the cases, In Re Schiavo, the patient remained in a 
PVS for 15 years (1990–2005) until the hydration and feeding 
tube was withdrawn from her body and she died.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
61
If the patient prepared an advanced directive (or a do-not-
resuscitate order) that laid out his or her feelings about being 
kept alive by artificial breathing, drinking, and eating, then 
action could be taken by medical professionals to honor the 
patient’s known wishes. However, preparing such documenta-
tion was and still remains an action few people take, especially 
while they are young and healthy. Every case state and federal 
judges have had to adjudicate featured a basic set of facts: a 
patient in a deteriorating PVS for many years, with no writ-
ten instructions, and a guardian (generally the spouse or the 
parents) who asks the court for permission to end the PVS 
patient’s life.
These cases became the opening clash of opposing forces in 
the movement to legitimize a terminally ill patient’s right to 
die with physician assistance. Because of them, society became 
acutely aware of the emotionally draining conflicts over life and 
death decisions, taken by doctors, parents, husbands, legisla-
tures, and courts, in New Jersey (Quinlan), Virginia (Gilmour), 
Missouri (Cruzan), Florida (Schiavo), and other states regard-
ing the care of persons in a PVS.
Three years before Quinlan, Roe v. Wade had been decided. 
Roe was a major turning point in the right to die controversy 
for two basic reasons: (1) The opposing forces in the abortion 
battles since the Roe decision was announced, the religious 
and conservative “sanctity of life” groups, pitted against those 
coalitions that maintain that an autonomous individual has 
the “liberty” to “define one’s own concept of existence,” are 
the very same organizations clashing in the right to die battles 
since Quinlan. (2) The legal and political arguments used by 
the adversaries in the abortion and right to die confrontations 
are interchangeable. A news story published in 1998 illustrates 
this reality quite clearly.
After standing for an hour in a local abortion protest with 
her Catholic parish, Nancy Supples went straight to a 
nursing home 1½ miles away, where a feeding tube had 

62	
The Right to Die
just been withdrawn [from a patient in a PVS]. She found 
herself leading a prayer vigil—and, through that peaceful 
picket line, bringing home . . . a slice of a powerful social 
movement that is starting to sweep the nation. (Goldstein 
1998)
Quinlan was the first case to lay open to the public the right 
to die issue in the modern era. Twenty-one-year-old Karen Ann 
Quinlan, in mid-April 1975, came home from a party where 
she had some drinks. She had taken prescription medicine 
before the partying began. Karen collapsed, stopped breathing, 
and fell into a coma. EMTs and then emergency room doctors 
saved her life, but, because she had sustained two respiratory 
arrests and lacked oxygen (anoxia) for about 15 minutes each 
time, Karen suffered severe brain damage and remained coma-
tose. She was, after one month, diagnosed to be in a PVS by 
her physicians. She was kept alive by a mechanical breathing 
device and a feeding tube.
After three months spent with Karen every day, coping with 
the somber medical prognosis that she would never regain “any 
level of cognitive function” (Clark 2006), discussing the hope-
lessness of Karen’s existence with their parish priest (the family 
was Catholic), and reviewing the Vatican’s position regarding 
the care of PVS patients, her parents made a decision that 
opened the still-continuing right to die controversy.
They were heartbroken because of the social death of their 
child; while she was physically “alive” because of the tubes, 
she was no longer living. Her mother wrote that “by late 
May 1975, I faced the reality that there was no medical help for 
Karen” (Quinlan 2005). They, as Karen’s co-guardians, signed a 
statement prepared by their lawyer instructing the doctors “to 
discontinue all extraordinary measures, including the use of a 
respirator for our daughter Karen Quinlan” (Quinlan 2005). 
The instant the document was given to the hospital admin-
istrators, the right to die issue became a part of the national, 
and then, international, conversation. Hospital administrators 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
63
and the doctors, however, refused to accede to the request after 
being notified by the local prosecutor that homicide charges 
could be brought against them if the respirator was removed. 
The only option available to the parents was to go into state 
court to get an order to force the hospital to remove the device 
and allow Karen Ann to die.
After a lower court judge rejected the petition, the case came 
to the New Jersey Supreme Court in 1976. The judges took the 
unusual step of taking the case before the intermediate appel-
late court could hear and decide the issue. Oral arguments were 
heard in late January 1975; two months later the unanimous 
decision was announced.
The judges explained their unusual decision to take the case: 
Quinlan was “a matter of transcendent importance,”
involv[ing] questions related to the definition and 
existence of death, the prolongation of life through 
artificial means developed by medical technology 
undreamed of in past generations of the practice of the 
healing arts; [and] the impact of such durationally 
indeterminate and artificial life prolongation on the rights 
of the incompetent, her family, and society in general. (In 
Re Quinlan, 355 A. 2nd 647, at 652)
The judges ordered the hospital to remove the respirator. The 
Court relied on the Roe precedent, particularly “what has been 
called the rights of ‘personality’ ” for its decision. These person-
ality rights, they concluded, “were paramount against the state’s 
right to preserve life. [They were] broad enough to encompass 
a patient’s decision to decline medical treatment under certain 
circumstances in much the same way as it is broad enough to 
encompass a woman’s decision to terminate pregnancy.”
The judges, however, emphatically stated that “the case is 
not to be considered euthanasia in any way; that would never 
be licit. [Furthermore, in cases such as Quinlan’s], the interrup-
tion of attempts at resuscitation, even when it causes the arrest 

64	
The Right to Die
of circulation, is no more than an indirect cause of the cessa-
tion of life.” This comment mirrored the dogma of the Catho-
lic Church in this matter. In a 1957 address to an international 
gathering of anesthesiologists by Pope Pius XII, he uttered 
words that have been a part of the right to death debates since 
Quinlan. He told the gathering that
the doctor . . . has no separate or independent right where 
the patient is concerned. [He can act] only if the patient 
explicitly or implicitly, directly or indirectly, gives him 
permission. . . . Using a ventilator, however, is an extraordinary 
means of preserving life. . . . There is no [moral] obligation 
to use it or to give the doctor permission to use it. Since 
these forms of treatment go beyond the ordinary means to 
which one is bound, it cannot be held that there is an 
obligation to use them or not, consequently, that one is 
bound to give the doctor permission to use them. (Pope 
Pius XII 1957)
If the patient is incompetent, Karen’s legal co-guardians, 
based on their understanding of her view of living, could stop 
the use of extraordinary means to keep her alive. The pope’s 
address, however, indicated that nutrition and hydration tubes 
were “ordinary means” of caring for a severely disabled person, 
and that Catholics were bound to always use such conventional 
medical aids. To withdraw these devices was both immoral and 
an act of murder subject to action in criminal court.
Following the court’s opinion, the doctor withdrew the 
breathing apparatus from Karen Ann. However, because nutri-
tion and hydration were ordinary means of assisting a patient 
diagnosed with PVS, they were never withdrawn. After the 
respirator was disconnected, she breathed on her own; Karen 
lived in a nursing home for another nine years. She died of 
pneumonia in 1985. She never regained consciousness. An 
autopsy of her brain indicated that it had lost 50 percent of its 
size since 1975.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
65
The Quinlan decision remains a milestone in the history of 
the right to die movement. For the first time in America, a 
court (unanimously) concluded that there are constitutionally 
protected personality rights; that is, the right to privacy encom-
passed an individual’s (or guardian’s) decision to decline medi-
cal treatment, even if it led to death.
However forward looking Quinlan was, it was law only in 
New Jersey. No other state is bound by it. They could modify 
their state laws—or not—to allow guardians to withdraw the 
medical devices; they were not required to do so. The initial 
response by other states was to do nothing. For centuries, the 
“sanctity of life” principle was—and still remains—a corner-
stone of a state’s constitutionally protected “police powers.” 
Unless prohibited by the U.S. Constitution itself, a state can 
pass all laws its lawmakers thought would protect the life, liberty, 
and pursuit of happiness of all persons within its jurisdiction.
From 1976 on, however, because of the media coverage 
of these tragedies, millions of families became very familiar 
with the plight of the New Jersey “sleeping beauty” (Quinlan 
2005) and how that story ended. When they faced a similar 
medical catastrophe, many requested doctors to withdraw 
medical devices from the body of their sleeping princesses. 
These demands meant that guardians of an incompetent PVS 
patient—a mother, father, husband, son, daughter, or grand-
daughter—had to petition their state court for the right to dis-
connect the device.
After Quinlan, because of the increase in the number of per-
sons who, because of a catastrophic injury, lost oxygen for more 
than six to eight minutes but were kept alive in a PVS, there 
were many petitions to state courts to allow guardians to have 
artificial means of life support withdrawn. A 1988 case from 
Virginia reflects the right to die issue prior to the U.S. Supreme 
Court’s entry into the issue two years later.
James Gilmore III v. Hugh Finn is an example of how a 
state judiciary responded to a Quinlan-like petition—and 
how quickly the case entered the political arena. (Virginia’s 

66	
The Right to Die
Republican governor, Jim Gilmore III, inserted himself in the 
matter in an attempt to protect the life of Hugh Finn, the inca-
pacitated PVS patient.)
In early March 1995, 44-year-old Hugh Finn, a well-known 
news reporter, barely survived a car crash near his home in Lou-
isville, Kentucky. Although EMT technicians and emergency 
department doctors saved his life, because his aorta ruptured 
and Finn was without oxygen to his brain, he was diagnosed as 
being in a PVS. A nutrition and hydration tube was inserted.
Because his parents and siblings lived in Virginia, in Febru-
ary 1996 his wife Michele Finn moved her comatose husband 
to a nursing home in Manassas, Virginia, to enable them to 
visit Hugh. After more than three years in a PVS, and after 
doctors once again informed Michele that there would prob-
ably be no improvement in Hugh’s condition, she decided to 
have the physician withdraw his life-sustaining apparatus and 
tubes.
Hugh’s parents, siblings, and family and friends initially dis-
agreed with her decision and entered the circuit court seeking 
a court order blocking the removal of the tubes. Judge Frank 
A. Hoss heard argument in July and, on August  31, 1996, 
announced his ruling: the devices could be removed in 21 
days. The judge concluded, on the basis of Hugh’s wife’s and 
his attorney’s testimony, that “clear and convincing evidence” 
was provided by them that Finn “would not wish to have his 
life artificially prolonged.” Virginia law allowed guardians of 
terminally ill patients or patients in a PVS to request such 
withdrawal if doctors, “to a reasonable degree of medical prob-
ability,” believed recovery was impossible.
However, three days before the tube removal, a nurse with 
the Virginia Department of Medical Assistance Services visited 
the patient to check his condition. According to an affidavit 
filed with the court by Virginia Attorney General Mark Earley’s 
office, Finn said “hi” to the nurse when she entered the room 
and “mumbled what appeared to be words” to her. Responding 
to the document on September 21, the judge postponed his 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
67
order for nine days in order for the family to appeal, although 
he didn’t believe the nurse’s statement “added anything sub-
stantially new” to the case (Masters 1998a).
The family decided not to appeal the court order to the state 
Supreme Court. They concluded, Hugh’s brother said, that 
“even if we kept Hugh alive, we don’t think his quality of life 
would ever be anything to speak of” (Masters 1998b). However, 
Finn’s sister asked Governor James Gilmore to intervene on the 
family’s behalf to stop the withdrawal process. On October 1, 
the governor filed an appeal to the state Supreme Court, asking 
for a temporary restraining order. He said: “My job as governor 
and my role is to protect those people who are most frail in soci-
ety and cannot necessarily protect themselves” (Masters 1998c). 
Gilmore told reporters that he “holds a longstanding belief that 
people who are in those types of frail medical conditions ought 
to have the best possible review of their cases by the courts. I’ve 
always felt very strongly about that” (Masters 1998c).
The next day the county judge rejected Gilmore’s appeal. He 
concluded that state law allows the removal of hydration and 
nutrition tubes from a patient with a terminal illness or one in 
a PVS “from which, to a reasonable degree of medical prob-
ability, there can be no recovery” (Melton and Masters 1998). 
Two days later, the Virginia Supreme Court upheld the judge’s 
decision. In a short, three-paragraph decision, the judges said 
the “withdrawal merely permits the natural process of dying” 
(Melton and Masters 1998). Hugh Finn died on October 9, 
1998, eight days after the final court order.
This, however, was not the final act in the Finn sorrows. Less 
than one month later, November 5, 1998, Michele Finn filed a 
lawsuit asking for compensation for her court costs and puni-
tive sanctions against the governor, the attorney general, and 
other state officials. Gilmore’s emergency petition to the state 
Supreme Court, she claimed in her petition, was “ill-advised, 
improvident, and spurious.” The governor, she claimed, was 
motivated by purely political reasons and did not even have 
“standing” to bring the emergency appeal to the court.

68	
The Right to Die
In late November Judge Hoss of Circuit Court of Prince 
William County, Virginia, ruled against Gilmore. He wrote 
that the governor’s action “was not warranted by existing law.” 
If Gilmore did not like the Virginia law allowing withdrawal of 
tubes from PVS patients, then the governor should remember 
a basic political fact of life: the separation of powers principle 
in the Constitution! Changes in laws are “made in the political 
arena and not in the court, certainly not in the manner that 
it was done in this case.” Hoss awarded Finn $13,124.20 for 
court costs but did not award punitive damages.
This time Hoss was overturned by the state Supreme Court. 
They ruled—unanimously—that the governor “had a duty to 
intervene if he has a reasonable, good faith legal basis for sus-
pecting that a citizen’s rights may be threatened.” Because they 
concluded that Gilmore had a legitimate reason for filing suit, 
he was not liable for Finn’s court costs.
Coinciding with the Finn decision was the U.S. Supreme 
Court’s initial entry into the right to die controversy. The case 
was another terrible PVS situation involving a young woman’s 
near-fatal automobile accident in Missouri: Cruzan v. Director, 
Missouri Department of Health. In Cruzan, the Justices strug-
gled—for the first time in right to die appeals—with medical, 
moral, and constitutional questions raised in the briefs filed in 
the Court.
With this decision, the Court majority moved the right 
to die issue further into the public arena by “enhancing” the 
Quinlan precedent in two ways: (1) the decision impacted all 
state judicial proceedings, and (2) the Court, by enabling each 
state to create guidelines and definitions regarding withdrawal 
of or preventing insertion of medical aids in PVS cases, indi-
rectly rejected the division of medical technology into ordinary 
means (e.g., nutrition and hydration tubes) and extraordinary 
means (e.g., respirator) used to save lives.
Cruzan obliterated the distinction. After 1990, PVS guide-
lines were determined by an individual state; in many states, 
including Missouri, a competent adult, or (when a patient was 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
69
incompetent) a guardian, could request that all aids to continu-
ing life be withheld or withdrawn.
In January 1983, 27-year-old Nancy Cruzan lost control of 
her car and was thrown into a ditch. She suffered cardiac and 
respiratory arrest. When EMTs arrived, she had no vital signs 
but, with CPR, was resuscitated. She sustained severe, trau-
matic brain damage. Her brain was deprived of oxygen for over 
14 minutes; she was unresponsive and in a coma. At the hos-
pital, a gastrostomy tube was inserted to provide nutrition and 
hydration. She was, almost immediately, in an “unconscious 
state”; a CT scan of her brain when she entered the emergency 
department showed severe brain damage—“a nearly flat back-
ground.” (A “flat” reading is a clear indication of brain death.) 
After a month the family and medical staff noted that Nancy’s 
arms and legs “had started to stiffen and atrophy, drawing in 
slowly toward her trunk. The doctors and nurses called this 
stiffening ‘contractures’ ” (Colby 2002). The medical diagnosis 
was very grim: no possibility of improvement. She was being 
kept alive by a feeding tube and round-the-clock medical care 
by hospital staff. Her parents, as Nancy’s co-guardians, acting 
in their daughter’s “best interest,” signed a do-not-resuscitate 
form in the event her breathing stopped.
Inexorably, four years later, in May  1987, Mary Cruzan’s 
parents, seeing no change in their daughter’s condition, autho-
rized the hospital to “discontinue the life support system” keep-
ing her alive. The administrators refused to withdraw the tube 
because of a state law that categorically prohibited stopping 
the use of a feeding tube in these medical situations. Missouri 
legislators, in 1985, had passed a “living will” statute enabling 
a person to list the medical equipment that were not to be 
used if he or she faced a catastrophic health event and was 
unconscious.
The law, however, targeted a medical action that was forbid-
den even if the “living will” document listed it as one that was 
not to be used to resuscitate the person: “feeding tubes were 
not considered medical equipment in Missouri, and a person 

70	
The Right to Die
could not list feeding tube as a treatment to forgo in a Missouri 
living will” (Colby 2002). The prohibition, the Cruzan’s law-
yer noted later, “was the exact medical procedure our lawsuit 
would seek to withdraw” (Colby 2002).
They had to go into probate court to seek an order allow-
ing doctors to discontinue use of the tube. Because Nancy was 
comatose and had not prepared a “living will” document, her 
parents had to present to the court “clear and convincing evi-
dence” that the withdrawal reflected Nancy’s wish. Friends of 
Nancy prepared statements attesting to her views about life and 
whether she would want to live in a PVS. The probate judge, 
balancing the right of the state to maintain life against the lib-
erty of an “individual to refuse or direct the withdrawal of arti-
ficial death prolonging procedures,” directed the hospital and 
the Missouri Department of Health to “cause the request . . . 
to be carried out” (Colby 2002).
Bypassing the lower appeals court, the hospital and Health 
Department lawyers asked the Missouri Supreme Court to 
review and overturn the judge’s order. The Court accepted the 
petition and, in late September 1988, heard oral arguments in 
the case. On December 15, 1988, the opinion was announced. 
By a 4-3 vote, it reversed the probate judge’s order, concluding 
that state law prohibited the co-guardians request. “In the face 
of this State’s strongly stated policy in favor of life, we choose to 
err on the side of life, respecting the rights of severely incompe-
tent persons who may wish to live despite a severely diminished 
quality of life” (Colby 2002).
The dissenting judges sided with the parents and the probate 
judge: “I am not persuaded that the State is a better decision-
maker than Nancy’s parents,” said one. Another wrote that the 
probate judge’s opinion “was a courageous voyage in an area 
not previously charted by Missouri courts” (Colby 2002).
The Cruzans, in March 1989, filed a petition for a writ of 
certiorari with the U.S. Supreme Court. It was granted and the 
Justices prepared to read the briefs and hear oral arguments 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
71
during the Court’s 1989 term. The Cruzans’ brief asked the 
Justices to consider the following:
Whether a State may, consistently with the due process 
clause, require clear and convincing evidence that an 
incompetent person would want life-supporting medical 
procedures withdrawn before it approves the termination 
of such procedures. (Cruzan v. Director, Missouri 
Department of Health)
After reading briefs, listening to oral arguments, and deliber-
ating in chambers, the U.S. Supreme Court handed down the 
Cruzan opinion on the very last day of its 1989 term. It was, as 
so many Court opinions since the 1980s have been, a divided 
5-4 vote to affirm the judgment of the Missouri Supreme 
Court. While all nine justices agreed that a competent person 
has a “liberty interest” under the due process clause to refuse 
all unwanted medical treatment—even if such a refusal led to 
the patient’s death—they disagreed on the questions of law in 
the case.
The division came about because Nancy Cruzan was uncon-
scious, was incompetent, and did not have a living will, and 
co-guardians acted for her. For the five-person majority, stating 
that a person has a liberty interest “does not end the inquiry; 
whether Cruzan’s constitutional rights have been violated must 
be determined by balancing his [sic] liberty interests against 
the relevant state interests.” The dissenting justices disagreed: 
Nancy Cruzan “has a fundamental right to be free of unwanted 
artificial nutrition and hydration, which right is not outweighed 
by any interests of the State.”
Was Missouri’s “clear and convincing evidence” standard a 
reasonable use of the state’s police powers was the second issue 
dividing the Court. The majority said that the Missouri pro-
cedural safeguard was a “reasonably designed” one. Use of the 
challenged safeguard is a “permissible” exercise of the State’s 

72	
The Right to Die
police powers. The dissenters had a different view of the “clear 
and convincing evidence” standard. It was an “improperly 
biased procedural obstacle which impermissibly burdens the 
right.”
Justice Antonin Scalia’s concurring opinion reflected the 
dramatic, complex, and frustrating questions raised in these 
cases—and of the Supreme Court’s discomfort when answer-
ing them.
The various opinions in this case [six] portray quite clearly 
the difficult, indeed agonizing questions that are presented 
by the constantly increasing power of science to keep the 
human body alive for longer than any reasonable person 
would want to inhabit it.  .  .  . The answers to these 
heartbreaking questions are neither set forth in the 
Constitution nor known to the nine Justices of this Court 
any better than they are known to nine people picked at 
random from the Kansas City telephone directory.
After Cruzan came down on June 25, 1990, the case returned 
to Missouri. Cruzan’s lawyer had to present “clear and convinc-
ing evidence” to the probate judge that the co-guardians’ request 
was what Nancy Cruzan would have wanted. On November 1, 
1990, her relatives, her parents, and her friends presented evi-
dence that Nancy did not want to “live” with the aid of medical 
devices and tubes.
After hearing and reading these testimonies about Nancy’s 
state of mind while competent, and reviewing the most recent 
medical reports that clearly showed continued “worsening” 
deterioration of her health, on December 13, 1990, the judge 
ordered the nutrition and hydration tube withdrawn from 
Nancy’s body.
There was, he wrote, “clear and convincing evidence” pre-
sented to the court that the “intent of our ward, if mentally able, 
would be to terminate her nutrition and hydration” (Colby 
2002). Nancy’s feeding tube was removed on December 14, 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
73
1990; she died 11 days later in the hospital’s hospice ward. 
There was no reference to the notion of restraining doctors 
from withdrawing ordinary means used to keep a patient in a 
PVS alive.
The Cruzan family tragedy, however, did not end then. The 
parents and their lawyer had to immediately respond to a new 
controversy: the actions of pro-life groups to stop the tube 
withdrawal. The Missouri Citizens for Life group immediately 
asked the governor, conservative Republican John Ashcroft, to 
order the state’s attorney general to ask the court for a writ of 
prohibition. (If a court grants such an “extraordinary writ of 
equity,” the judge’s order would be rescinded and the doctors 
would have to reinsert the feeding tube.) The Missouri attorney 
general, however, did not appeal the probate judge’s order. Ash-
croft, who became President George W. Bush’s attorney general 
in 2001, had an aide call the hospital administrators to request 
that doctors reinsert the tube. The attending doctor refused to 
act: “The tube’s already out and there’s no medical reason to put 
it back in.” When the administrator reiterated the governor’s 
“request,” the doctor showed him the court order, said, “I have 
a court order,” and walked away (Colby 2002). After another 
state-wide effort by the Citizens for Life group to stop the with-
drawal failed, Nancy died. She was quietly buried. Her grave 
marker had three dates inscribed on it: “Born: July 20, 1957; 
Departed: January 11, 1983; At Peace: December 26, 1990.”
Justice Sandra Day O’Connor’s concurring opinion offered a 
suggestion regarding the benchmarks needed by judges tasked 
with the responsibility of making choices that could lead to 
withdrawal of all life support devices followed by death. It 
was an idea that the U.S. Supreme Court repeated in 1997, 
when the justices responded to arguments concerning the 
constitutionality of PAD. “Today,” she wrote, “we decide only 
that one State’s practice does not violate the Constitution; the 
more challenging task of crafting appropriate procedures for 
safeguarding incompetents’ liberty interests is entrusted to the 
‘laboratory’ of the States, in the first instance.”

74	
The Right to Die
O’Connor’s concurring opinion stressed the value of a fed-
eral system: every state has police powers that enable it to create 
a standard that reflects the cultural, moral, religious, and philo-
sophical values of the state’s residents. Each state’s exploration 
of what principle was needed for a judge to make life or death 
decisions for incapacitated patients in a PVS is the essence of 
governance in a democracy. Elected officials work in a “labora-
tory” in which policies are crafted to address problems in their 
community.
When a law is challenged by persons who claim it is uncon-
stitutional, the duty of the judge is to defer to the judgment of 
the policy makers. This lowest level of scrutiny, the “rational 
basis” test, is generally applied by the judges in PVS cases. The 
party bringing the petition to the court has the burden of proof 
to show that there is no governmental interest in making the 
policy or that there is no reasonable link between that govern-
mental interest and the challenged law. If the burden of proof 
is not shown, the law stands.
However, there are exceptions that call for a higher degree of 
appraisal. If the litigation raises the question of whether the chal-
lenged bill or governmental action significantly abridges (1) a 
fundamental right protected by the Constitution or (2) involves 
a suspect classification, then all judges—state and federal— 
must employ the highest, most thorough form of analysis—
strict scrutiny—to determine the law’s constitutionality. To 
pass the strict scrutiny test, the state has the burden of show-
ing that the law was passed to further a “compelling govern-
mental interest” and is “narrowly tailored” to accomplish that 
interest.
The four Cruzan dissenters argued that Cruzan involved 
fundamental rights and therefore the state of Missouri had to 
meet the strict scrutiny standard. The five-person majority did 
not see a fundamental right at play in the facts; they applied the 
least strenuous “reasonableness” test and validated the Missouri 
statute. And, when the Supreme Court votes, five votes always 
trump four!

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
75
After Cruzan, states passed laws that established the neces-
sary guidelines needed by judges adjudicating PVS cases. At 
least three such standards were developed by the states to be 
applied when a state court judge was asked to allow removal 
of a medical device used to artificially maintain the life of a 
patient in a PVS. Each state chose one of these guidelines: 
either (1) pursue the “clear and convincing evidence” standard; 
or (2) determine whether the “substituted judgement” of the 
guardians was acceptable; or (3) decide whether “the best inter-
ests of the PVS patient” were conclusively presented by the 
guardian’s lawyers.
During this seminal year, 1990, a number of events hap-
pened that moved the right to die controversy to center stage 
in America’s ongoing polarized social, religious, medical, 
and political wars. Efforts were made in a number of states, 
beginning in Washington State in 1990, to pass legislation 
that would permit PAD for terminally ill patients; pressure 
groups on both sides of the right to die controversy began 
to operate across the nation; stories began to appear in the 
media about doctors who assisted in providing terminally 
ill patients with the means to die. These activities contin-
ued to parade before the public, courtesy of the media. 
They have become a part of the national news with some 
degree of regularity. They still remain in the national—and 
international—news.
The event that captured the hearts and minds of hundreds 
of millions of Americans and countless millions watching 
and reading about it in other nations—from its beginning in 
1990 to its final chapter in 2005—was a Florida case involv-
ing another patient-in-a-PVS whose guardian (her husband) 
requested that the medical devices keeping her alive be with-
drawn: In Re Theresa Marie (Terri) Schiavo. As Cal Thomas said 
of the case: “[It] will be the beginning or the continuation on 
the line of death that began in the womb in 1973 with Roe v. 
Wade and will now quickly advance toward the ‘retirement‘ vil-
lages (Thomas 2005).

76	
The Right to Die
This polarizing, bitter battle began on February 25, 1990, 
just months before Nancy Cruzan died. Terri Schiavo, a 
27-year-old married woman, suffered a major cardiac arrest 
in her home due to a potassium imbalance. Her husband, 
Michael Schiavo, immediately called 911 for help. Like other 
PVS case histories, EMTs arrived and, using CPR, restored 
her heart beat. However, Terri had been without oxygen to her 
brain for more than 12 minutes, “nearly twice as long as is gen-
erally necessary to cause profound, irreversible brain damage” 
(Caplan 2006).
Terri was taken to the hospital by the EMTs and a hydration 
and nutrition tube was inserted; she never regained conscious-
ness. After observing her nonresponsiveness for many months 
and after reviewing a host of clinical physical examination 
results, her doctors informed the family that she was in a PVS.
Michael, her guardian (initially with Terri’s parents’ assent), 
after eight years, petitioned the Circuit Court of Pinellas 
County, Florida, to authorize the removal of his wife’s feeding 
tube. Unlike the position of the guardians in Quinlan, Cruzan, 
and Finn, Terri’s parents, Robert and Mary Schindler, abso-
lutely rejected his decision. That led to seven years of bitter 
enmity between the husband and the Schindler family. They 
“reviled” Michael (Goodnough 2005), regularly accusing him 
of assaulting Teresa before her collapse; they charged him with 
murder, calling him a “wife abuser,” and accused him of refus-
ing their requests for rehab for Terri, as well as refusing their 
insistent requests for their own medical doctors to examine 
their daughter. They never changed their minds about seeing 
improvements in their daughter and about their utter disdain 
for her husband.
Devout Catholics, they believed that their daughter’s death 
had to come about naturally, one that occurred with God’s 
grace. And, they maintained, Terri shared their religious beliefs 
and would not want the tube withdrawn. In addition, through-
out the entire 15-year travail, they noted a variety of semicon-
scious actions by Terri, indicating that she heard, cried, saw, 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
77
and attempted to speak to them and others. They continued 
to insist that rehabilitation specialists visit their daughter to 
improve her mobility.
The litigation began in Florida’s courts in 1998. Before it 
ended seven years later (2005), the case saw dozens of deci-
sions taken by more than 30 judges and justices sitting in the 
Florida county circuit court (almost 30 separate rulings by the 
same judge), the Florida district court of appeals (nearly one 
dozen rulings), the Florida Supreme Court (over one dozen 
orders were issued, all declined review), the U.S. District Court 
(MD-FL), the Eleventh U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, and the 
U.S. Supreme Court (more than one dozen appeals to these 
federal courts, with the Supreme Court declining to review any 
of them).
The lower trial and appellate federal courts refused to 
overturn the state judge’s orders. The trial judge rejected the 
Schindlers’ argument that Terri was denied due process of law. 
The Eleventh Circuit appeals court upheld his decision. In the 
opinion, the court “admonished President Bush and Congress 
for acting ‘in a manner demonstrably at odds with our found-
ing fathers’ blueprint for the governance of a free people.’ ” 
Three times the state circuit court judge ordered the removal of 
the nutrition and hydration tube; twice Florida’s district court 
of appeals directed the hospital to reinsert the tube.
With the exception of a handful of petitions presented by 
Terri’s husband, all the petitions to the courts were for the issu-
ance of an order either stopping the withdrawal of the tube or, 
if it had been removed, requiring the reinstalling of the tube 
into Terri. These requests came from two groups: Terri’s parents 
(the Schindlers) and siblings, and national conservative right to 
life groups, including Operation Rescue, the (Catholic) Priests 
for Life, and the hierarchy of the Roman Catholic Church 
from America and the Vatican.
Pope John Paul II, speaking in the Vatican on March 20, 2004, 
entered the Schiavo fray. He conveyed, to participants attending 
the International Congress on Life Sustaining Treatments and 

78	
The Right to Die
Vegetative State: Scientific Advances and Ethical Dilemmas, his 
deeply held beliefs about how society must care for a patients 
like Terri Schiavo.
He noted, first of all, a number of documented cases of 
patients in a vegetative state who showed “at least partial recov-
ery even after many years; . . . . Medical science, up until now, 
is still unable to predict with certainty who among patients 
in this condition will recover and who will not” (John Paul 
II 2004). The absence of medical certainty that a patient in 
a PVS will never recover was beside the point. Even if medi-
cal certainty was achieved, a moral person would not take the 
patient’s life by stopping medical actions that keep the person 
alive. The essential principle of Catholic theology was then laid 
out by the pope:
There are some who cast doubt on the persistence of the 
“human quality” itself [in a PVS patient, with] the 
adjective “vegetative”  .  .  . applied to the sick as such, 
actually demeaning their value and personal dignity. . . . 
In opposition to such [a] trend of thought, I feel the duty 
to reaffirm strongly that the intrinsic value and personal 
dignity of every human does not change, no matter what 
the concrete circumstances of his or her life. A man, even 
if seriously ill or disabled in the exercise of his highest 
functions, is and always will be a man, and he will never 
become a “vegetable” or an “animal.” (John Paul II 2004)
Pope John Paul II’s address is the hallmark not only of 
Catholic teaching and practice; all individuals and groups who 
believe in the sanctity of life share these beliefs. The defenders 
of the right to life insist that, as Pope John Paul II said, “the true 
task of medicine is ‘to cure if possible, always to care’ ” (John 
Paul II 2004). A doctor who assisted in withdrawal of a feeding 
tube was acting immorally and criminally. These organizations 
absolutely rejected the beliefs of those who maintained that 
withdrawal of a tube providing natural or ordinary sustenance 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
79
was what the person wanted and was in the best interests of the 
patient.
The Schiavo case witnessed the reemergence, in the 1990s, 
of the Catholic Church’s financial and strategic leadership 
position in the right to die battles—in courts and in state and 
national legislatures. The contentious case turned, in 2004, 
into a cacophonous political drama in Florida and Washington, 
D.C., legislative and executive meeting rooms. Conservative 
Republican Florida legislators, Florida’s Republican governor 
Jeb Bush, conservative “sanctity of life” members of both the 
U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate, and the 
conservative Republican president of the United States George 
W. Bush did all they could to keep Terri Schiavo alive after the 
judiciary’s messages were announced.
“Terri’s law” bills were passed in the Florida legislature and 
in the U.S. Congress. They were signed by the Bush brothers: 
Jeb in Florida and George in the White House. On March 21, 
2005, President Bush hurriedly flew into Washington, D.C., 
just to sign the bill. At the signing he said: “In cases like this 
one, where there are serious questions and substantial doubts, 
our society, our laws, and our courts should have a presump-
tion in favor of life. This presumption is especially critical for 
those like Terri Schiavo who live at the mercy of others” (Bush 
2005). On appeal to the state and federal courts, the bills were 
ruled unconstitutional because legislators could not constitu-
tionally instruct a court to reinsert Terri’s tube. The proposals 
violated the principle of separation of powers.
For many Republican conservatives in state and the national 
legislatures, however, the case fit perfectly into their political 
strategy for electoral victory. Just before the final chapter of the 
Schiavo tragedy in 2005, for example, the legal counsel to U.S. 
senator Mel Martinez (R-FL) told his boss that he authored 
a memorandum, sent to all Republican senators, “citing the 
political advantage to Republicans for intervening in the case 
of Terri Schiavo” (Allen 2005). It said, in part, that “this case is 
an important moral issue and the [party’s] pro-life base will be 

80	
The Right to Die
excited that the Senate is debating this important issue” (Allen 
2005).
While the 15-year Schiavo tragedy was unfolding, the U.S. 
Supreme Court decided to hear two cases in its 1997 term that 
challenged the constitutionality of state laws that prohibited 
“assisting in a suicide’: Washington v. Glucksberg and Vacco v. 
Quill.
The Central Role of the U.S. Supreme Court  
in the Right to Die Controversy
In 1997, a watershed event took place that swiftly led to a 
heightening of the debates, clashes, litigation, and legislation 
surrounding the question of whether a terminally ill patient 
has a constitutional right to die with the assistance of a doctor: 
the U.S. Supreme Court decisions in Washington v. Glucksberg 
and Vacco v. Quill. They came to the Supreme Court on appeal 
from lower federal appellate court decisions in New York and 
Washington State. Their laws that made PAD a crime (49 states 
and the District of Columbia had similar laws at the time) were 
overturned in the two states by federal appeals courts (Ninth 
U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington and the Second in Vacco). 
The laws ran afoul of a terminally ill person’s constitutionally 
protected “liberty” to seek the assistance of a doctor to die.
The liberty argument successfully employed by plaintiffs in 
the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals was based on the Con-
stitution’s Fourteenth Amendment’s due process clause. (“No 
person shall be denied life, liberty, or property without due 
process of law.”) Both courts also heard the “equal protection 
arguments of the PAD attorneys in both cases and concluded 
that the state statutes violated that guarantee in the Fourteenth 
Amendment as well.
The Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals heard an appeal 
from the state attorneys. They appealed the 1994 decision 
of a U.S. District Court judge, Barbara Rothstein, who was 
appointed by Democratic president Jimmy Carter in 1980. 
She had concluded that Washington’s anti-PAD statute was 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
81
unconstitutional on two grounds: they violated the due process 
and equal protection guarantees. She found “the reasoning in 
Casey highly instructive and almost prescriptive on the issue.” 
Both abortion and the right to die centrally touch on individual 
liberty; “they involve the most intimate and personal choices a 
person may make in a lifetime.” They constitute “choice[s] cen-
tral to personal dignity and autonomy” (quoting Casey).
Using the Cruzan case as precedent, the judge also ruled 
that the equal protection clause protection was violated by the 
anti-PAD criminal statute. There is no constitutional distinc-
tion between withdrawal of artificial life support which results 
in death (Cruzan) and the consequence when a terminally ill, 
competent patient—not on any life support mechanisms—
receives physician assistance to die. The state statute, she con-
cluded, constituted an unconstitutional “undue burden” on 
terminally ill patients who want to die.
The Ninth Circuit took the appeal and, following federal 
appellate court practice, a randomly selected three-judge panel 
heard the case. It voted 2-1 to overturn the district court deci-
sion. They determined that “the conclusion of the district court 
cannot be sustained.” Casey was incorrectly applied; it “should 
not be removed from the context in which it was used [abor-
tion].” Doing so “is to make an enormous leap . . . and to 
ignore the differences between the regulation of reproduction 
and the prevention of the promotion of killing a patient at his 
or her request.” The district court judge’s ruling was just the 
ranting of a judge who believed that the federal judiciary is “a 
floating constitutional convention.” They “invent a constitu-
tional right unknown to the past and antithetical to the defense 
of human life that has been a chief responsibility of our consti-
tutional government.”
The PAD lawyers took the step taken by the losing party 
in a three-judge panel: they asked the full Ninth Circuit to sit 
en banc to review the panel’s decision. Most such appeals are 
denied; in Glucksberg the full court took the case. The major-
ity opinion written by Judge Stephen Reinhardt, appointed by 

82	
The Right to Die
Democratic president Jimmy Carter in 1980, overturned the 
panel’s decision.
The majority answered the central question raised by the 
plaintiffs—and every group that supports PAD:
Is there a right to die? Because we hold that there is, we 
must then determine whether prohibiting physicians from 
prescribing life-ending medication for use by terminally ill 
patients who wish to die violates the patients’ due process 
right. . . . The Supreme Court has recognized that the 
Fourteenth Amendment affords constitutional protection 
to personal decisions. . . . We believe that two relatively 
recent decisions of the Court, Cruzan and Casey, are fully 
persuasive, and leave little doubt as to the final result. 
(Compassion in Dying v. State of Washington 1996)
While the state has a legitimate interest in preventing—but 
not punishing—suicide, that interest “is substantially dimin-
ished in the case of terminally ill, competent patients who wish 
to die.” The state “has comparatively little weight” in block-
ing such an action; further, a state’s “insistence on frustrating 
their wishes seems cruel indeed.” A “liberty interest exists in 
the choice of how and when one dies”; the statute “violates the 
Due Process Clause.”
Furthermore, the Ninth Circuit en banc majority concluded 
that the statute also violated the equal protection clause of the 
Fourteenth Amendment. “We see no ethical or constitutionally 
cognizable difference between a doctor’s pulling the plug on a 
respirator and his prescribing drugs which will permit a termi-
nally ill patient to end his own life.”
After this announcement, the Washington State lawyers had 
one more opportunity to argue their case: appeal of the cir-
cuit court decision to the U.S. Supreme Court. They filed a 
timely appeal in 1996. Such appeals, when the Supreme Court 
receives these petitions, are not automatically heard by the jus-
tices. The Court has near-total discretion to review them and it 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
83
takes a vote of four of the justices to grant a review—a grant of 
certiorari—to hear the case on the merits.
While the lawyers on both sides of the Washington right to 
die litigation were battling in the lower federal courts, a paral-
lel case from New York State was moving through the lower 
federal courts. Quill v. Vacco began in October 1994 in the 
U.S. District Court, Southern District, New York. The case 
was put forward by the plaintiffs, doctors, and terminally ill 
patients who argued that the state statute criminalizing PAD 
was unconstitutional and was identical to the arguments of 
their Washington State colleagues made seven months earlier: 
the statute violated the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process 
and equal protection clauses.
The U.S. District Court judge, Thomas P. Griesa, appointed 
to the bench in 1972 by Republican president Richard Nixon, 
handed down his decision on December 15, 1994, less than 
two months after receiving the petition. However, he reached 
the opposite conclusion rendered by Judge Rothstein in Wash-
ington State.
He categorically rejected the plaintiffs’ claim that the due 
process and equal protection clauses allowed a dying patient 
to seek physician assistance to hasten death. The “reasoning” 
behind the use of Cruzan and Casey as precedent for them, he 
said, “is too broad.” There is absolutely “no historic recogni-
tion” that PAD should be a fundamental right protected by the 
Constitution. It
has never been given any kind of sanction in our legal 
history which would help establish it as a constitutional 
right. The court holds that PAD does not involve a 
fundamental liberty interest protected by the Due Process 
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. (Quill v. Vacco 
1997)
Griesa set aside the plaintiffs’ equal protection argument as 
well. There are distinctions between PAD and withdrawal of 

84	
The Right to Die
life support systems. If a state presents “reasonable and ratio-
nal” arguments for an anti-PAD statute, there is no violation of 
the equal protection clause. He concluded: “It is hardly unrea-
sonable or irrational for the State to recognize [the] difference. 
The State has obvious legitimate interests in preserving life, and 
in protecting vulnerable persons.”
Dr. Quill and the other plaintiffs immediately appealed the 
decision to the Second Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals (CA2). The 
three-judge panel voted 3-0 to uphold only the due process seg-
ment of the Griesa decision. Judge Roger Miner, first appointed 
to the federal district court in 1981 and then elevated to the CA2 
in 1985 (both by Republican president Ronald Reagan), wrote 
the opinion affirming Griesa’s “due process” conclusion. PAD 
was not rooted in America’s history and therefore was not a “fun-
damental liberty” protected by the due process clause.
However, the panel accepted the equal protection argument 
of the plaintiffs: the New York anti-PAD law did violate the 
equal protection clause. Miner wrote that there was no differ-
ence between “allowing nature to take its course [and] inten-
tionally using an artificial death-producing device.”
It seems clear that New York does not treat similarly 
circumstanced persons alike. What interest can the state 
possibly have in requiring the prolongation of a life that is 
all but ended? What concept prompts the state to interfere 
with a mentally competent ‘right to define one’s own 
concept of existence, of meaning, of the universe and the 
meaning of life’ [Casey] when the patient seeks to have 
drugs prescribed to end life during the final stages of a 
terminal disease? None. (Quill v. Vacco 1997)
There was no en banc review by the CA2. And so, on Octo-
ber 1, 1996, after the attorneys general in both states appealed 
their Court of Appeals losses to the U.S. Supreme Court, 
certiorari was granted. Both cases were consolidated and oral 
arguments were joined by order of the Court.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
85
As already noted by the actions of the lower federal trial and 
appellate judges in these cases, there is a considerable division 
of views with respect to whether there is a constitutionally pro-
tected right to die. On one side are judges (most appointed 
by a Democratic president) who believe that PAD is a funda-
mental right protected by the due process and equal protec-
tion clauses of the Constitution. Standing on the other side 
are judges (all appointed by Republican presidents) who just 
as ardently argue that PAD is not a protected constitutional 
liberty and that a state can prohibit PAD. The justices of the 
U.S. Supreme Court are cut from the same cloth. Throughout 
the nation’s history every justice appointed to the high bench 
by the president was thought to be “his kind” of jurist. All jus-
tices have been involved in social and political life before their 
appointment to the Supreme Court; they were senators, state 
and federal attorneys general, mayors, state and federal judges, 
state lawmakers, governors, and president (William Howard 
Taft). And all the appointees to the Court had a connection to 
one of the major political parties of their era. Their values and 
their beliefs generally reflected the values and beliefs of the sit-
ting president.
Seven justices, in 1997, were appointed by Republican 
presidents Richard Nixon (William Rehnquist), Gerald Ford 
(John Paul Stevens), Ronald Reagan (Antonin Scalia, Sandra 
Day O’Connor, Anthony Kennedy), and George H.W. Bush 
(David Souter, Clarence Thomas). (Nearly all were conserva-
tive jurists.) Only two were appointed by Democratic presi-
dent William Clinton (Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer). 
On a number of controversial issues, including abortion, vot-
ing rights, and affirmative action, the conservative justices 
held a majority of the votes. (While there have been person-
nel changes in the Court’s makeup since 1996, in the second 
decade of the 21st century the Court, until the death of the 
conservative Justice Scalia, was sharply divided between five 
conservative and four moderate justices.) Since Scalia’s death 
in February 2016, the Court has functioned without a ninth 

86	
The Right to Die
justice because of the absolute refusal of the Republican major-
ity in the Senate to hold hearings and vote to confirm or reject 
Democratic President Obama’s nominee. The expectation is 
that the new president will nominate a person to replace Scalia 
after January 20, 2017.
All the lawyers participating in the 1997 litigation knew how 
the Court had acted in cases with controversial social issues at 
their core. The attorneys knew what arguments might work with 
each of the justices. This knowledge became the starting point 
for them when drafting their written briefs and then preparing 
for oral argument before the justices in 1997. Also, clearly, the 
lawyers for the PAD litigants knew that they faced a herculean 
task: arguing successfully before the Court where the majority 
showed no inclination to expand the meaning of the Consti-
tution’s language, especially the due process clause of the Four-
teenth Amendment. One only had to look—as lawyers across 
the nation did—at how a majority of six justices had truncated 
the Roe v. Wade precedent in the 1980s.
Justice Harry A. Blackmun, the author of the Roe majority 
opinion, was very concerned about that precedent’s future. The 
reason for his concern: the new personalities sitting alongside 
him in 1988 after certiorari was granted in Webster v. Reproduc-
tive Health Services. He said: “Will Roe v Wade go down the 
drain? I think there’s a very distinct possibility that it will, this 
term. You can count the votes” (“Justice Fears for Roe Rul-
ing” 1988). In the Webster case decided in 1989, the Court 
conservatives came one vote short of overturning Roe. (Justice 
O’Connor concurred in the Rehnquist opinion; she did not 
join it, thereby denying Rehnquist the necessary fifth vote to 
overturn Roe.)
The losers in both appellate courts, the petitioners, were 
again represented by the attorneys general of New York and 
Washington states. The winners, the respondents, were repre-
sented by lawyers for the physicians and their dying patients, 
and by the Compassion in Dying organization. The lawyers for 
the two sets of litigants essentially presented in their briefs the 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
87
arguments made in the lower courts. For Quill’s and Glucks-
berg’s lawyers, PAD was a fundamental right found in the due 
process clause of the Constitution. Denial of a person’s right 
to PAD while allowing another terminally ill person to with-
draw or withhold a device in order to die more quickly was a 
violation of the Constitution’s equal protection clause. For the 
attorneys general, PAD was never considered a fundamental 
right, and that practice was clearly distinguishable from a dying 
patient ordering the withdrawal of a life-extending machine. 
The Fourteenth Amendment did not prohibit any state action 
that punished the practice of PAD.
They were not the only attorneys plotting strategic argu-
ments that would be presented to the justices in written briefs. 
In addition, a total of 60 amicus curiae briefs were filed with 
the Court, of which 41 were by groups and institutions who 
opposed legitimation of PAD. Included in this set were briefs 
from Not Dead Yet, the National Hospice Association, medi-
cal and nursing associations, the Catholic Church, Agudath 
Israel of America, and one from the U.S. Justice Department, 
representing the Clinton administration. On the other side, 19 
groups were permitted to file briefs supporting the right to die 
with physician assistance. These groups included the American 
Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), 36 religious organizations, sur-
viving family members, and the American Medical Students 
Association.
Oral argument is the next phase of the Supreme Court’s 
decision-making process. Up to this point, there has been no 
airing of views about physician-assisted suicide among the nine 
justices. They have read the briefs as well as other important 
material their clerks provided to assist their “boss.” But the 
readings are done in private, in chambers or at home. Until 
oral argument, there is no conversation between the justices. 
Oral argument is the first time all the justices formally talk— 
essentially to each other—about the case before them, voice 
their concerns about the issue, listen to their colleagues’ argu-
ments, and ask the attorneys questions.

88	
The Right to Die
It also provides Court watchers—reporters and the legal 
community beyond the building—with information about 
what the justices are concerned about, and how they feel 
about the major questions of law raised by the case. While the 
remarks of the justices are not final, their questions and obser-
vations provide observers with what further discussion among 
the brethren might focus on.
In the oral arguments, nine attorneys presented their case. 
Time is a precious commodity and so each side, in important 
cases, is given little more than one hour to present their case. 
In these cases, the attorneys general lawyers, the U.S. solici-
tor general (Walter Dellinger), and noted private attorneys 
representing the respondents (Kathryn L. Tucker, represent-
ing Compassion in Dying and Dr. Glucksberg, and Laurence 
Tribe, for Dr. Quill) participated.
There were a host of questions asked, rooted in the justices’ 
understanding of how the Constitution must be treated, con-
cerns about unintended consequences of their decisions, fears 
about the possibility of the “slippery slope,” views of life and 
death, perceptions of what really takes place between doctor, 
nurse, and patient, among others.
Justice Souter, over and over again, voiced his fears—to all 
the attorneys facing him—about “abusing” PAD and the result-
ing “slippery slope” dilemma. “Will PAD,” he asked, “gravitate 
down to those who are not terminally ill. . . . And ultimately 
[will it] gravitate out of PAD into euthanasia?” Can the state 
provide “empirical evidence” of its presence in states or nations 
that allowed PAD? This primal fear of PAD was echoed by 
other justices as well.
Chief Justice Rehnquist asked the lawyers to address the equal 
protection argument for PAD. Justice Scalia’s most challenging 
questions to the respondents’ lawyers (Tucker and Tribe) were 
premised on his view that “the dying process of all of us has 
begun and is underway. And it seems to me that the patient who 
has ten years of agony to look forward to has a more appealing 
case than the patient who is at the threshold of death.”

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
89
Justice Ginsberg asked “General” Dellinger an interesting 
question: “Could you deal with the argument that’s been made 
about winks and nods, that [PAD] is a sham because PAD goes 
on for anybody who is sophisticated enough to want it?” Del-
linger was stumped and did not answer the question. Lawrence 
Tribe, however, answered Ginsberg’s question: winks and nods 
existed, “and relate to a [reality] that we all accept—the prin-
ciple of the double effect.” But Tribe also said that the double 
effect gives “dangerous authority” to the medical profession but 
that PAD took the “danger” away because of the stringent pro-
tections against misuse in the Oregon PAD legislation.
For Scalia, the argument of the respondents “is a lovely phi-
losophy. But you want us to frame a constitutional rule on the 
basis of that?” Justice O’Connor voiced her concern about the 
“increased flow of cases through the court system for Heaven 
knows how long” if the Court invalidated state laws prohibit-
ing PAD. Justice Kennedy agreed with her concern when he 
said to one of the respondents’ lawyers: “You’re asking us in 
effect to declare unconstitutional the laws in fifty states.”
The oral arguments exposed the concerns the justices had 
about the constitutionality of PAD. Heading into the final 
phase of Court activity—the actual decision-making events: 
discussing, voting, writing, circulating opinions, and announc-
ing the decision—the action shifts to private discussions in 
conference held on about two dozen Fridays during the term of 
the Court. In these discussions, a standard protocol is followed: 
The chief speaks first, giving his take on the case and his vote. 
The chief is followed by each of the associate justices, from the 
most senior to the “freshman” justice. Once the vote is tallied, 
if the chief is in the majority, he has the option of writing the 
opinion himself or assigning one of the other justices in the 
majority to write the opinion. If the chief is not in the major-
ity, the senior associate justice in the majority either writes or 
assigns the writing to another justice in the majority.
The U.S. Supreme Court, 9-0, overturned both Court of 
Appeals decisions. However, it was a byzantine set of decisions. 

90	
The Right to Die
There were six opinions. Only four justices joined Rehnquist’s 
opinion: Scalia, Thomas, Kennedy, and O’Connor (who was 
the needed fifth vote for Rehnquist’s “majority opinion,” but she 
also wrote a concurring opinion). Four other justices—Stevens, 
Souter, Breyer, and Ginsburg—wrote concurring opinions and 
probably would have voted differently—with O’Connor join-
ing them—if the terminally ill patient-petitioners in both cases 
had not died.
Because they all died, the two cases were technically “facial 
challenges” to the anti-PAD statutes, a very difficult situation 
for the respondents’ attorneys. In a facial challenge, the attor-
neys must establish that “no set of circumstances exists under 
which the act would be valid” (U.S. v. Salerno, 1987). Had 
they been alive when the Court heard the appeals, the cases 
would be heard as an “as applied challenge” to the statutes. This 
was an easier challenge because the attorneys had only to show 
that the two statutes were invalid “as applied” to the terminally 
ill plaintiffs.
Justice Rehnquist wrote both majority opinions. In Glucks-
berg he concluded that due process is not violated by reasonable 
anti-PAD statutes. He also rejected the constitutional claim of 
the respondents that the liberty to hasten dying with a doctor’s 
help was a “fundamental right” found in the Constitution. In 
his Vacco opinion, based on his understanding of the equal pro-
tection clause, he maintained that that clause in the Fourteenth 
Amendment did not create any substantive rights. It was a 
general rule: equals must be treated equally; unequals must be 
treated unequally. Because Rehnquist rejected the respondents’ 
claims that PAD and withdrawal of medical equipment from a 
patient were equal, there was no violation of the equal protec-
tion clause.
In her concurring opinion, joined in part by Ginsburg, 
O’Connor said that the matter might have been decided differ-
ently if the cases were “as applied” challenges to the anti-PAD 
statutes. In that circumstance, “there is no reason to think the 
democratic process will not strike the proper balance between 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
91
the interests of the terminally ill, mentally competent patients 
who seek to end their suffering and the State’s interest in pro-
tecting those who might seek to end life mistakenly or under 
pressure.”
Justice Breyer, while concurring, said that “he did not agree 
with the Court’s formulation of the [respondents] claimed ‘lib-
erty’ interest.”
The Court describes it as a “right to commit suicide with 
another’s assistance.” [He would use] a different 
formulation, for which our legal tradition may provide 
greater support. [I] would use words roughly like “a right 
to die with dignity.” . . . At its core would be personal 
control over the manner of death, professional medical 
assistance, and the avoidance of unnecessary and severe 
physical suffering—combined.
Breyer’s acute observation about the politics of semantics in 
the right to die battles remains a major fissure point separating 
the pro- and anti-PAD groups. He concluded by agreeing with 
Justice O’Connor’s observation that the Court might revisit its 
decisions in a future “as applied” challenge.
The senior associate justice, John Paul Stevens, also con-
curred but it was a harsh, critical assessment of Rehnquist’s 
opinions.
I write separately to make it clear that there is also room 
for further debate about the limits the Constitution places 
on the powers of the states to punish the practice [PAD]. 
Today, the Court decides [by applying the facial challenge 
standard]. . . . That holding, however, does not foreclose 
the possibility that some applications of the statute might 
well be invalid.
He also asserted that the dead patient-plaintiffs “may in fact have 
a liberty interest even stronger than Nancy Cruzan’s because, 

92	
The Right to Die
not only were they terminally ill, they were suffering constant 
and severe pain. “Avoiding intolerable pain and the indignity of 
living one’s final days incapacitated and in agony is certainly ‘at 
the heart of the liberty to define one’s own concept of existence, 
of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of human life’ ” 
(quoting from Casey).
Justice Souter concurred in order to voice his great fear 
about the possibility of the “slippery slope.” “The day may 
come when we can say with some assurance which side is right, 
but for now it is the substantiality of the factual disagreement, 
and the alternatives for resolving it, that matter. They are, for 
me, dispositive of the due process claim at this time.”
Rehnquist’s concluding words in Washington v. Glucksberg 
directed that all decisions—whether legalizing or continuing 
criminalization of PAD of terminally ill patients—come about 
after a full airing of all positions on the controversial issue:
Throughout the nation Americans are engaged in an earnest 
and profound debate about the morality, legality, and 
practicality of physician-assisted suicide. Our holding permits 
this debate to continue, as it should in a democratic society.
The two 1997 decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court ended 
the PAD advocates’ efforts to have the U.S. Supreme Court 
broaden the meaning of “liberty” in the Constitution. Until 
there is a major shift in the makeup of the Court, or the Court 
grants certiorari to a number of “as applied” challenges and a 
majority of the Court are persuaded to invalidate anti-PAD 
statutes, PAD advocates must take a different approach to 
achieve their goal. They had to enter the de jure environment 
of politics, the state legislature.
Without the U.S. Supreme Court providing a national PAD 
principle affecting all 50 states, the consequence—at best—is 
an incremental patchwork of legislatively structured PAD Acts, 
one state at a time. As the late Speaker of the House of Repre-
sentatives Tip O’Neill (D-Mass) said: “In America, all politics 
is local” (O’Neill and Hymel 1994).

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
93
Efforts to Pass Right to Die Legislation: 1990–2016
The essential question was very clear: does an individual’s liberty to 
choose death with the assistance of a doctor trump a state’s Tenth 
Amendment’s “police powers” to pass “assisting suicide” laws?
These disputes have evolved—differently in each state—
because of the mix of the following realities:
1.	 The strength of the values held by the state’s voters and, 
more importantly, the strength of the organizations 
involved in these battles
2.	 The impact of a state’s particular history on social issues
3.	 The state citizens’ religious affiliations and the dominant 
religious institutions
4.	 The participation of key political actors in the political pro-
cess that impacts the final result
5.	 The particular demographics—political, social, and eco-
nomic—in each state
These legislative activities began in the late 1980s. The major 
group pushing for laws protecting PAD was the controversial 
Hemlock Society, founded and led by its zealous euthanasia 
devotee Derek Humphry. In 1991, after getting the required 
signatures for an initiative ballot, the group placed before 
the voters the Washington Initiative, Ballot 119. Reflect-
ing Humphry’s impact, the proposal contained PAD as well 
as voluntary euthanasia. The question on the ballot called for 
a yes-or-no vote by the voters. They were asked: “Shall adult 
patients who are in a medically terminal condition be permit-
ted to request and receive from a physician aid-in-dying?” Aid-
in-dying was defined in the initiative as a
medical service, provided in person by a physician that 
will end the life of a conscious and mentally competent 
patient in a dignified, painless and humane manner, when 
requested voluntarily by the patient through a written 
directive. (Tucker 2008)

94	
The Right to Die
In 1992, California voters were presented with the Cali-
fornia Death with Dignity Act, Ballot Proposition 191. The 
Hemlock Society (now called Californians against Human 
Suffering) was, again, the primary organization, working with 
volunteers who toiled across both states to get the ballot to the 
voters. The California Proposition defined aid-in-dying very 
clearly, allowing euthanasia and PAD:
[Aid-in-dying] means a medical procedure that will 
terminate the life of the qualified patient in a painless, 
humane, dignified manner, whether administered by the 
physician at the patient’s choice  .  .  . or whether the 
physician provides means to the patient for self-
administration. (Tucker 2008)
Both proposed state PAD Acts were defeated by identical 54 
to 48 percent tallies. Even though public opinion polls showed 
that a solid majority of the two states’ populations supported 
the idea of terminally ill persons having the liberty to choose 
to die more quickly, the PAD supporters were overpowered by 
very organized opposition groups: the Washington and Cali-
fornia medical associations and the Roman Catholic Church.
Clearly, the Roman Catholic Church, whose members com-
prise the largest religious group in America (24% of the popu-
lation), has been the “primary political opponent” (Stutzman 
1998) of PAD in America and across the world. It has “played a 
preeminent role in the evolution of end-of-life decision-making 
policies” (Stutzman 1998). Both financially and organization-
ally, it worked to defeat both ballot initiatives. In Washington  
State, 65  percent of the funds ($750,000) used to defeat 
PAD—for radio and television spots, newspaper ads, flyers, 
special Sunday masses—came from Catholic Church funds. In 
California, 80 percent of the funding ($2.1 million) came from 
the Church.
The basic arguments against PAD presented by the medical 
associations, groups representing the disabled, and the Catholic 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
95
Church were as follows: the slippery slope; a strong defense of 
the state’s right to protect the sanctity of life of all its residents; 
and the fact that there were two humane alternatives to PAD 
that allowed dying patients to die without the assistance of a 
physician: palliative care and hospice.
Again and again since 1990, in every battle involving 
PAD—in the courts and in state legislatures—the dread of the 
slippery slope has been in the forefront of the largely success-
ful efforts of PAD opponents. Organizations representing the 
disabled and other vulnerable persons maintain that PAD will 
lead to involuntary euthanasia and these defenseless, powerless 
people—these “others”—will be the first to be euthanized by 
the state. All the groups opposing PAD had to do in both states 
was to run fear-inducing campaigns.
A number of conclusions may be drawn from these first two 
PAD act defeats. First, PAD organizers, after these losses, never 
again linked PAD with euthanasia in their proposals. Another con-
clusion pointed very clearly to the fact that well-financed and well-
organized professionals opposed to PAD, with sufficient funds and 
political “smarts,” can win a clash even though state public opinion 
polls indicated strong support for PAD. A third conclusion is that, 
while these battles involved local leaders, these state groups received 
support, financially and organizationally, nationally. Medical, nurs-
ing, disabled persons groups, and the Catholic Church, all fighting 
against the PAD initiatives, received money and volunteers from 
other state and national organizations. The PAD groups, essentially 
the Hemlock Society and local volunteers, were outspent and out- 
organized because of the organizational, political, fund-raising, 
and strategic skills of their opponents. It was nearly a decade 
before state PAD personnel in Washington and California recov-
ered from their defeats and renewed their efforts to pass PAD Acts.
By that time, 1999, the U.S. Supreme Court had handed 
down its decisions, national PAD organizations had been cre-
ated, other, smaller, support groups consolidated, and the 
public had become more aware of the right to die issue. After 
1997, only one state, Oregon, had passed a PAD initiative, 

96	
The Right to Die
the Oregon Death with Dignity Act (ODWDA). Voters sup-
ported the ODWDA twice, once in 1994 (51%–49%) and 
then again, after the Act was unsuccessfully challenged in state 
court, in 1997 when generally anti-PAD state legislators put the 
ODWDA before the voters as an initiative ballot (Measure 51) 
asking them to approve or repeal the ODWDA. Oregonians, by 
a huge majority, again voted to approve the Act, 60–40 percent.
The Oregon Story, 1994–2006
Hemlock Society members began their labors for a PAD Act 
in Oregon in 1992, a year after the defeat in California. Derek 
Humphry continued his zealous public advocacy of euthanasia. 
Just months before the November 1994 election, he publicly 
and repeatedly insisted that the ODWDA was only the first 
step and that “when people become comfortable with this form 
of assisted dying, we may be able to go to the second step, 
which is euthanasia.” He was championing his version of the 
aid in dying proposal even though the proposed Act, as it was 
written and passed, was a “prescribing only” PAD proposal: in 
Section 3, the ODWDA specifically rejected euthanasia.
His unrepentant speech forced the two PAD groups’ lead-
ers (the Hemlock Society was joined, in 1993, with the newly 
organized Oregon Compassionate Choices Group) to “ask him 
not to attend the deliberations between campaign strategists 
and wary community leaders.” Reluctantly, he “conceded that 
any level of lawful assisted suicide would be better than the 
status quo, so he agreed not to enter meetings without their 
permission” (Hillyard and Dombrink 2001).
Why did PAD succeed in both Oregon elections, even 
while being heavily outspent by the opposition (principally the 
Roman Catholic Church, which provided about $1 million, 
about 60% of the funds)? First, the supporters were dampen-
ing the fear of the slippery slope to mollify apprehensive voters.
Second, Oregon citizens have, historically, been open-
minded, politically independent voters. Most importantly, 
however, Oregon is “the most unchurched state in the nation,” 
wrote an Oregon journalist recently (Redden 2014). Nearly 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
97
70 percent of its residents are not affiliated with any religious 
institution. Many Roman Catholics, about 10 percent of the 
population, did not agree with the Church hierarchy (Hillyard 
and Dombrink 2001). And a majority of Oregon’s citizens dis-
liked religious pressure of any kind in the secular affairs of the 
state.
However, the anti-PAD groups were not finished. If the vot-
ers did not follow their arguments and when federal appeals 
court judges and the justices of the U.S. Supreme Court dis-
missed and denied certiorari to anti-PAD attorneys’ petitions 
asking that a permanent injunction be issued to block enforce-
ment of the ODWDA, they turned to the other two national 
political institutions, the U.S. Congress and the Executive 
Branch, to defeat the ODWDA.
This strategy was aggressively followed for nearly a decade, 
from the 1997 federal judiciary’s decisions in Lee to 2006, when 
the U.S. Supreme Court concluded 6–3 in Gonzales v. Oregon 
that the U.S. attorney general’s actions to prohibit physicians 
from implementing the ODWDA were unconstitutional.
These political efforts to destroy a right to die law were tak-
ing place at the same time when politically scandalous actions 
were occurring in Florida, between 1998 and 2005, regarding 
the issue of withdrawing life support devices from Terri Schi-
avo. Conservative Republicans—in the Florida legislature and 
in the U.S. Congress and the federal Executive Branch—joined 
by sanctity of life adherents, primarily the Roman Catholic 
Church, were battling to save Terri’s life. And, in both episodes, 
the federal courts played a decisive role in ending them in favor 
of the PAD supporters.
The post-1997 anti-ODWDA strategy was essentially a 
twofold one: (1) an expansion-by-interpretation of the 1970 
Controlled Substance Act (introduced by President Richard 
M. Nixon in 1970 in a national effort to deal with the emer-
gent illicit narcotics and dangerous drug problems) through 
actions by the U.S. attorney general that would enable the fed-
eral Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) to prosecute a physician 
who prescribed a lethal drug to a terminally ill patient because 

98	
The Right to Die
that action was not “a legitimate medical practice” and (2) pas-
sage of legislation that would expand the meaning of the Con-
trolled Substance Act.
From 1997 to the presidential election of Republican George 
W. Bush in 2001, efforts were directed at convincing the DEA 
to block the ODWDA. Powerful, conservative Republican 
senators Orrin Hatch (Utah) and John Ashcroft (Missouri) 
and Representative Henry Hyde (Illinois) joined to pressure, 
successfully, the DEA administrator to interpret the CSA to 
prohibit enforcement of the ODWDA because PAD was not 
a “legitimate medical practice.” In December  1997, a DEA 
“stop” order was issued. The U.S. attorney general, Janet Reno, 
appointed by Democratic president Bill Clinton, reviewed the 
entire matter and reversed the DEA order in June 1998.
There is no evidence that Congress, in the CSA, intended 
to displace the state as the primary regulators of the medical 
profession, or to override a state’s determination as to what 
constitutes “legitimate medical practice.” The CSA law 
does not authorize the DEA to prosecute, or to revoke 
DEA registration of, a physician who has assisted in a 
suicide in compliance with the Oregon law. (Reno 1998)
Undeterred, the congressional Republicans quickly intro-
duced (Hyde) and supported (Hatch and Ashcroft) the Lethal 
Drug Abuse and Prevention Act of 1998. This proposal would 
have Congress approve the expansion of DEA authority to pro-
hibit implementation of the ODWDA. It was not successful 
in part because of the possibility of a presidential veto; more 
importantly, the anti-PAD organizations, especially the medi-
cal professionals, objected to providing a federal agency with 
power to intrude on state matters affecting physicians.
The following year, the trio proposed in both houses of Con-
gress another piece of legislation to terminate the ODWDA: 
The Pain Relief Promotion Act of 1999. This bill’s primary 
purpose was to amend the CSA to promote enhanced pain 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
99
management research and to increase support for quality pal-
liative care, “without permitting PAD and euthanasia.”
Under the proposed law, physicians could use lethal, con-
trolled substances to relieve pain, even if it resulted in death 
(the double effect), but they were not allowed to prescribe the 
same medication to a dying patient. (The Senate version added 
the identical proposal as an amendment to the 1998 Omni-
bus Spending bill.) Both the AMA and the Roman Catholic 
Church supported this positive-sounding expansion of the law. 
However, President Clinton threatened to veto the bill. The 
proposal was withdrawn by the Republican sponsors.
The efforts to defeat the ODWDA got underway again, 
immediately after Republican George W. Bush became presi-
dent after the controversial 2000 presidential election. It began 
when the new president appointed U.S. senator John Ashcroft 
(R-Mo.), one of the three major conservative congressional 
leaders working to defeat the ODWDA since 1997, as the U.S. 
attorney general, succeeding Janet Reno.
In November 2001, Ashcroft issued the “Ashcroft Direc-
tive,” a November  6, 2001, memorandum to the new 
Republican administrator of the DEA, according to which 
prescribing a lethal substance to a terminally ill patient was 
a violation of the CSA: it is not a “legitimate medical prac-
tice, regardless of whether state law authorizes or permits 
such conduct by practitioners or others and regardless of the 
condition of the person whose suicide is assisted” (66 Fed. 
Reg. 56608 2001).
The Catholic Church, “culture of life” individuals, and 
groups representing vulnerable and disabled persons applauded 
this executive decision. The AMA, however, was in a quandary. 
While the medical organization opposed the ODWDA, it was 
equally opposed to Ashcroft’s Memo. He and the Bush admin-
istration, the organization said, were “motivated by ideology”; 
Ashcroft’s strategy was “an unprecedented attempt by the fed-
eral government to usurp the authority of the states to regulate 
medical practice” (Lowenstein and Wanzer 2002).

100	
The Right to Die
The very next day, the Ashcroft order was challenged in a 
federal District Court in Oregon by state officials, a physician, 
and a number of dying patients. Two days later, the judge, 
Robert Jones, appointed by President Clinton in 2000, issued 
a temporary restraining order against the DEA; it became a 
permanent restraining order in April 2002 when Judge Jones 
ruled that Attorney General Ashcroft lacked authority to over-
turn the ODWDA: while “AG Ashcroft fired the first shot in 
the battle between the state of Oregon and the federal govern-
ment over which government has the ultimate authority” to 
regulate medical practices, it was not the final salvo (Oregon v. 
Ashcroft 2002).
In late September 2002, Ashcroft appealed the ruling to the 
Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals. He maintained that the 
attorney general “has permissibly construed the CSA and its 
implementing regulations to prohibit the prescription of con-
trolled substances for suicide.” A physician acting in accordance 
with the ODWDA was not performing a “legitimate medical 
practice” and was thus subject to the penalties enumerated in 
the CSA regulations.
In March 2003, in Ashcroft v. Oregon, the three-judge panel 
ruled 2–1 that the Ashcroft Directive was “unlawful and unen-
forceable.” Judge Richard C. Tallman (appointed by Republi-
can president George H.W. Bush in 1990) said: “the Ashcroft 
directive is unlawful and unenforceable because it violates the 
plain language of the CSA, . . . which targets only conven-
tional drug abuse and excludes the AG from medical policy 
decisions, . . . contravenes Congress’ express legislative intent 
and oversteps the bounds of the AG’s statutory authority.”
The full Court of Appeals rejected the solicitor general’s en 
banc appeal request. And so, on November 9, 2004, Attorney 
General Ashcroft filed an amicus curiae petition in the U.S. 
Supreme Court. He was asking the justices to overturn the 
lower federal court rulings and restore the Ashcroft Directive. 
This was one of Ashcroft’s final actions as attorney general. He 
announced his retirement later that day.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
101
In February  2005 the Court granted certiorari in the 
newly named litigation, Gonzales v. Oregon. (Alberto Gonza-
les replaced Ashcroft as attorney general.) Eight months later, 
oral arguments were held in open court. In January 2006, the 
Court issued its opinion. By a surprising 6–3 vote, Justice Ken-
nedy’s majority opinion, joined by Justices O’Connor, Stevens, 
Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer, upheld the judgment of the 
Court of Appeals.
The question before the Court was, “Whether the AG has 
permissibly construed the CSA . . . to prohibit the distribution 
of federally controlled substances for the purpose of facilitat-
ing a person’s suicide, regardless of a state law purporting to 
authorize such distribution.” On January 17, 2006, the Court 
announced that the attorney general had overstepped his 
authority. The action taken by Ashcroft was “beyond his exper-
tise and incongruous with the statutory purposes and design 
[of the CSA. When Congress passed the Act], it did not have 
this far-reaching intent to alter the federal-state balance.” As 
for the question of “who decides whether a particular medical 
practice serves a ‘legitimate medical purpose,’ ” the answer was 
brief: “not the Attorney General.”
The three dissenters, recently appointed Chief Justice John 
Roberts, and Justices Scalia and Thomas, believed that, in cases 
involving administrative law, the federal courts, including the 
Supreme Court, must accede to administrative interpretations 
of the CSA. Ashcroft’s interpretation of the CSA language was 
“clearly valid, given the substantial deference we must accord it 
[under prior Court precedents]” (Auer v. Robbins 1997).
The Gonzales opinion of the Court “removed an obstacle to 
state efforts to authorize physician-assisted suicide” (Green-
house 2006). The New York Times editorialized that the six-
justice majority “rejected Mr.  Ashcroft’s attempt to impose 
his religiously conservative ideology on a state whose voters 
had decided differently” (Greenhouse 2006). There was one 
final effort by a Republican senator from Kansas, Sam Brown-
back, to defeat ODWDA. In early 2006, after Gonzales, he 

102	
The Right to Die
introduced the Assisted Suicide Prevention Act of 2006. Ore-
gon Democratic U.S. senator Ron Wyden announced that he 
would block the bill from advancing in the Senate. Brown-
back’s response: pull the proposal. Later in the year, the Demo-
crats won both houses of Congress and, for the time being, 
effectively ended political action to defeat death with dignity 
state legislation. When the Democratic presidential candidate 
Barack Obama won the 2008 election, it forced PAD oppo-
nents to continue the now-growing efforts by more organized 
pro-PAD organizations, the Death With Dignity National 
Center and the Compassionate Choices organizations, to pass 
ODWDA-model bills state by state.
The Unsuccessful State Efforts after 1997
These state actions to pass PAD initiatives began in earnest 
after 1997, the year Oregon voters, for the second time, sup-
ported the ODWDA. Bills and initiatives were introduced 
and debated in more than two dozen states between 1997 
and 2008. All these efforts to pass ODWDA-model bills—
through the initiative or through the legislative process—were 
defeated by the strong opposition to PAD, led primarily by 
the Catholic Church with its financial support and its politi-
cally-and-media savvy lobbyists, by the medical establishment, 
by groups representing the disabled, and by other vulnerable 
groups.
After 1997, dozens of states saw PAD supporters start the 
difficult process of organizing to begin the legislative struggle 
to legitimize PAD. Arizona, California, Connecticut, Hawaii, 
Maine, Michigan, Wisconsin, Vermont, Maryland, Massachu-
setts, Montana, New Hampshire, New Mexico, New York, 
Pennsylvania, and Wyoming were among a near-majority of 
states where the efforts led to legislation or initiatives support-
ing PAD. Many of these states have seen multiple efforts to 
pass the right to die laws fail, even though the public opin-
ion polls were hovering between 68 and 74 percent in favor of 
death with dignity legislation available for dying patients.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
103
In June  2015, the Death with Dignity National Center 
(DWDNC), in the face of seemingly nonrational voting behav-
ior in nearly all the states, issued its report that focused on these 
defeats and on the need to continue the push for PAD. In a 
pep talk the organization tried to rally its supporters across the 
nation.
Some consider it a failure most bills don’t end up becoming 
law, but we view these bills as a testament to the growing 
support of the Death with Dignity movement. (“Right-
to-Die Bill Allowing Doctor Prosecution” 2015)
After the ODWDA became law in 1997, in the four states 
that have since joined Oregon and passed ODWDA laws, the 
PAD supporters were engaged in pitched battles for at least a 
decade before events in their states enabled them to achieve 
political victory. California legislators passed a PAD law in 
2015, two decades the initial PAD law was defeated. In 1991 
Washington State was the site of the first defeat of a PAD initia-
tive proposed in America; 17 years later, in 2008, voters passed 
another initiative that legalized PAD. Vermont does not have 
an initiative ballot process.
PAD advocates had to convince the state’s legislators to sup-
port the right to die. In 2013, with a second sign-off by the 
governor ending the sunset provision, Vermont became the 
first state to have ODWDA-modeled PAD passed by state leg-
islators in 2015. However, it began its uphill battles in 2003, a 
dozen years before.
What accounts for the victories in Washington State, Ver-
mont, California and Colorado? (1) The appearance on the 
scene of key persons in each state, (2) the state’s demographic 
and political characteristics, (3) accompanied by the much 
improved organizational, tactical, and strategic abilities of the 
state’s PAD supporters, and (4) the advocates were joined in 
their efforts by the two much-strengthened national right to die 
organizations: Death with Dignity and Compassionate Choices.

104	
The Right to Die
Washington State’s Battles to Pass a PAD Initiative, 
1991–2008
In Washington State, the key actor who impacted passage of 
the Washington Death with Dignity Act in 2008 (Ballot Mea-
sure I-1000–2008, RCW 70.245–2009) was a much beloved 
former governor of the state, Booth Gardner. In January 2006, 
the first attempt to pass PAD legislation since 1991 was intro-
duced in the state Senate. It died in committee. One month 
after the death of the proposed PAD bill, Gardner, suffering 
from Parkinson’s disease since 1992, announced that he would 
head up a drive to present another PAD initiative before the 
state’s voters. He said, in the announcement, that “when the 
day comes when I no longer can keep busy, and I’m a burden 
to my wife and kids, I want to be able to control my exit” 
(Ostrum 2008).
Nearly two years later, in January 2008, Gardner filed with 
the secretary of state the Washington Death with Dignity Initia-
tive (Initiative 1000, or I-1000). By July 2008, the secretary of 
state received over 300,000 signatures, more than the 224,000 
signatures necessary to get I-1000 on the November ballot.
In the preparation for the November 2008 election battle, 
the bill’s advocates raised $1.9  million. The opposition, the 
Coalition against Assisted Suicide, was led by the Roman 
Catholic Church, and included groups such as Not Dead Yet, 
people of other faiths, hospice and palliative care workers, and 
nurses. While the state medical association was, in 2008, “pas-
sionately split” and “very much in disarray” over the issue, it 
ultimately joined the Coalition (Wilson 2008). However, for 
the very first time, the Coalition’s fund raising (essentially the 
Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Seattle) did not match that 
of the I-1000 supporters: $1,900,000 versus $509,000 as of 
September 2008. (The supporters ultimately spent $2 million 
in media advertisements while the Coalition spent $1 million.)
The major argument presented by the opposition was the 
“slippery slope’s” impact on disabled persons. The initiative, one 
of their pamphlets maintained, “pressures” these vulnerable, 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
105
disabled people and others “without adequate insurance or 
financial means to think they have no choice other than assisted 
suicide. It provides an incentive to health plans to cut costs by 
encouraging assisted suicide” (Wilson 2008).
A former governor, Barbara Roberts, publicly supported 
I-1000, and argued that it “is not a Slippery Slope . . . that 
threatens those with disabilities of any kind” (Roberts 2008). 
It was a vitriolic campaign, with untruths about the initiative’s 
impact presented by the Coalition and harsh attacks by its sup-
porters on a “small group of out-of-state religious leaders” for 
trying to impose their “zealous religious beliefs on all Washing-
tonians, and defeat the proposed WDWDA” (Ball 2012).
On Election Day, almost 85 percent of the voters in Wash-
ington State cast their ballots. Initiative 1000 won with 58 per-
cent of the voters (518,500) supporting it. The Coalition 
received 399,775 votes (42%). However, knowing that these 
battles never end when the ballots are counted, both sides 
began preparing for actions by the Coalition to overturn the 
result. Almost immediately, the Coalition issued a broadside: 
the WDWDA is “a first step toward, not only physician-assisted 
suicide, but ultimately euthanasia. And people shouldn’t be 
blind to that” (Iwasaki 2008). To date, there has been no overt 
action to challenge the law in the courts or in the legislature.
The Vermont Effort to Pass a PAD Law, 2003–2015
In February 2014, the Gallup Poll released the result of a sur-
vey identifying the most religious and least religious states in 
the United States (Newport 2014). Vermont, once again, is the 
state with the lowest percentage of “very religious” Americans: 
22 percent. Oregon is in fifth place with 31 percent; Washing-
ton is seventh place, with 32 percent “very religious” people. 
(Mississippi is the most religious state, with 61 percent of its 
residents identifying themselves as “very religious.”) Vermont, 
like all the states, has a Christian majority (54%), with Roman 
Catholics the largest subset (22%). Non-Christians account for 
8 percent, with Judaism the largest group (2%). The rest of the 

106	
The Right to Die
population (37%) is “unaffiliated” (atheistic, agnostic, nothing 
in particular, and don’t know). Furthermore, on controversial 
social issues agitating the nation, Vermont residents hold very 
progressive views. Seventy percent of Vermonters believe abor-
tion is a woman’s personal right to choose; 79 percent accept 
homosexuality; and 76 percent accept same-sex marriage (Pew 
Research Center 2015). Said one observer, “basically, if you live 
in New England and want to join a militia, then New Hamp-
shire is for you. But if you want to skip showering and listen to 
NPR, then head on up to Vermont” (Seelye 2016).
Vermont, in addition to these demographics, has been for 
decades a liberal Democratic Party state. Its national represen-
tatives, in 2016, are Democratic (Patrick Leahy, U.S. Senate; 
Peter Welsh, House) or Independent (Bernie Sanders, U.S. 
Senate, and, in 2016, a Democratic presidential candidate). 
During this same period, voters have generally elected Dem-
ocratic majorities to the state legislature. Finally, given the 
state’s historic, democratic “town meeting” setting for Vermont 
debates on all issues, throughout the year, there is a large con-
tingent of politically aware Vermonters who know what to do 
to affect public policies in the state.
This has been the case with regard to the right to die issue. 
From the beginning of the effort to pass PAD legislation, the 
small group of experienced—and committed—local advocates 
organized a state-wide group, Death with Dignity Vermont in 
2003 (later called Patient Choices Vermont). In their fight for 
PAD, they were joined by volunteers from the Vermont chap-
ter of the Hemlock Society. Their mission statement was clear 
and unambiguous.
Patient Choices Vermont is an advocacy organization that 
seeks to educate Vermonters about end-of-life options and 
to influence policy, regulations and practice that affect the 
terminally ill. PCV works to promote the best possible 
pain control, palliative and hospice care, and to enable 
terminally ill patients to direct their own end of life. 
(Patient Choice Vermont 2011)

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
107
Beginning in August 2002 there was—and still remains—
a very close relationship between the DWDNC and Patient 
Choices Vermont. The national organization’s political and 
legal leaders traveled regularly to Vermont to help with drafting 
the bills, participating in town meeting forums across the state, 
and meeting with stakeholders and elected officials.
Between 2003 and 2013, the DWDNC raised and donated 
more than $200,000 to the Vermont group for educational 
efforts, for constituent outreach, and for the many town 
forums held in that tumultuous decade. Both the national and 
the Vermont group developed and used electronic communi-
cations—emails, blogs, Facebook and Twitter posts—in their 
outreach educational efforts across the state.
Eli D. Stutsman, an Oregon lawyer who was the founder 
of DWDNC, was the prime author of both the Oregon and 
Washington State death with dignity (DWD) bills. During 
the first decade of the 21st century, he served as primary legal 
counsel for Patient Choices Vermont and helped draft the five 
DWD bills introduced in the Vermont legislature between 
2003 and 2013.
From the very beginning Patient Choices Vermont had the 
support of two extremely popular former Democratic gover-
nors, Madeleine Kunin and Phil Hoff, and the support of a 
highly respected former lieutenant governor, Republican Bar-
bara Snelling. Yet, with all these favorable signs and signals, it 
took more than a decade to achieve their objective.
The network of opposing groups included the “usual sus-
pects”: the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Vermont; a “sanc-
tity of life” organization, the Vermont Alliance for Ethical 
Healthcare, whose leader, Dr.  Robert Orr, was a long-time 
opponent of the abortion rights movement and was, for most 
of the time the PAD battles were occurring, affiliated with 
the University of Vermont Health Care Center; the disability 
rights groups Not Dead Yet; and the Vermont Medical Asso-
ciation, whose position on PAD was obvious: Vermont must 
not have a law allowing physicians to hasten a terminally ill 
patient’s death.

108	
The Right to Die
In a small state like Vermont (which has a little more than 
630,000 people living in the state in 2016), one of the major 
factors in the policy-making process is personal contact between 
interested persons and groups and their elected representatives: 
speaking with legislators regularly, at the state capital, in com-
mittee hearings, at public forums, or at home; sending letters 
calling for support; writing letters to the editors of the local 
media; and appearing on local news radio and television talk 
shows. Both sides continually debated in town meetings, a 
revered New England tradition. In Vermont the key to suc-
cess was staying in regular contact with their neighbors, espe-
cially those who were sitting in the House and the Senate, and 
convincing them that they should support—or oppose—the 
pending legislation.
Beginning in September  2003, a few months before the 
Vermont 2004 legislative session was to begin, the antagonists 
began a decade-long series of town meetings to openly debate 
the pluses and minuses of a DWD law. Through 2012, Ver-
monters saw legislators evade and avoid voting on the question 
of aid in dying. The governor, Republican Jim H. Douglas, 
continuously spoke against the prospect of physicians prescrib-
ing lethal drugs for a dying patient. Four PAD bills were dis-
cussed in House and Senate committees over the years but, 
although there was occasional support for the bills in commit-
tee, because of wary, cautious committee chairs, and the fear 
of losing the next election if they supported the bills, the bills 
were tabled, or died in committee, or one time, defeated on a 
full vote (January 2007).
The bill, H 044, focused on the core ideas of all proposed 
PAD laws: “patient choice and patient control at the end of 
life” (Schwartz and Estrin 2010). Two committees conducted 
hearings on the bill, the House Judiciary Committee and the 
House Human Services Committee, and both voted to support 
the bill. For the first time in Vermont, a vote on the merits of 
H 044 took place—but it was defeated 63–82.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
109
Dr. Orr was as surprised as the supporters of H 044. He 
said: “This is truly amazing! . . . a resonating rejection of this 
unneeded and dangerous bill” (Orr 2007). Things did not 
begin to change until 2011, when a Democratic politician, 
Peter Shumlin, took office as Vermont’s governor.
Although he was not a very popular leader, Shumlin was 
a key factor in the legislature passing the Patient Choice and 
Control at End of Life Act in 2013 and again in 2015, when it 
was strengthened. However, in Vermont, as in all the states that 
have passed DWD Acts, the battles continue. During the legis-
lative debates about the future of the sunset provisions that the 
2015 Act addressed, a number of House members attempted 
to repeal the entire 2013 Act. After a heated discussion, a vote 
was taken to repeal the law. It failed 60–83. The vote on not 
sunsetting the patient protections commenced. It passed. The 
message, however, was received by PAD supporters at the end 
of the long day: expect continuing efforts by opponents to 
overturn Vermont’s aid in dying law.
California’s Odyssey to the Passage of the End of Life 
Option Act, 1992–2015
In California, a major factor accounting for the passage of 
the End of Life Option Act in 2015 was the story of a young 
California wife, Brittany Maynard. Diagnosed with inoperable 
brain cancer, Brittany chose to self-administer lethal medica-
tion to avoid the painful death awaiting her. Oregon had a 
DWD law, so she and her husband moved there. As an Oregon 
resident, Brittany was able to apply for physician assistance in 
dying for terminally ill patients. Brittany met the bill’s crite-
ria and received the medicine that she took to end her life in 
November 2014 (Maynard 2014).
However, passage of the 2015 law, triggered by her heavily 
publicized death, was the pinnacle of a number of PAD actions 
that had begun in the state in the 1970s. These events included 
passage of the Natural Death Act in 1976, which protects 

110	
The Right to Die
doctors from being sued for failure to treat an incurable ill-
ness at the request of a competent patient; the founding of the 
Hemlock Society in 1980 and the Americans against Human 
Suffering (which became, in 1992, Americans for Death with 
Dignity).
The Hemlock group joined Compassion & Choices, a new 
PAD organization, to draft the initial California Death with 
Dignity Act, which was on the ballot in 1992 (and defeated, 
46%–54%). Work halted after the 1992 defeat; however, 
the supporters were elated when Oregon voters passed the 
ODWDA in 1994. In that year, one of the two national aid 
in dying organizations was founded, the California Death with 
Dignity National Center.
Oregon was, once again, the inspiration for PAD groups in 
California and other states. In 1997, PAD supporters won a re-
election battle for the ODWDA by a 60 to 40 percent margin, 
and began to implement the law in late 1997. In 1999, leg-
islation was introduced in the California Assembly. Although 
it passed the Judiciary and Appropriations committees, it was 
pulled from a full vote when the sponsors concluded that 
it would not be passed. The opposition was led by Califor-
nians against Assisted Suicide, made up of Roman Catholic 
Church leaders, groups representing vulnerable residents, Not 
Dead Yet and other groups speaking for the disabled popula-
tion, the California Medical Association, and other health care 
organizations.
In 2005, another physician aid in dying bill was introduced 
in the Assembly and was again approved by the Judiciary and 
Appropriations committees along party lines. The bill, AB 651, 
was scheduled for discussion and a vote in the Senate Judiciary 
Committee in March 2006. The committee voted 3–2 against 
the bill. The committee chair, Democratic senator Joe Dunn, 
switched sides after pressure from Coalition members who tes-
tified earlier in the week.
California’s religious demographics were different from Ver-
mont’s, Oregon’s, and Washington’s. Unlike California, the 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
111
three other PAD states were among 2014’s top ten “least reli-
gious” states (Newport 2014). In 2014, 45 percent of Califor-
nia’s residents affiliated with a religious organization; nearly 
30 percent of them were Roman Catholics, a higher percent-
age than the other PAD states (Pew Research Center 2015). 
Clearly, Democratic legislators from districts with a heavy 
Roman Catholic population were aware of this political real-
ity and the possible consequence for them if they voted for a 
PAD bill.
The following February (2007), another bill was introduced: 
AB  374, the California Compassionate Choices Act. Once 
again, voting 7–3 on party lines, the Judiciary Committee 
approved the legislation. At this point, the California Catho-
lic Conference (CCC) clergy, lay persons, and lobbyists began 
a barrage of letters, ads, Church “backgrounders,” daily fact 
sheets for Roman Catholic priests, and talking points for CCC 
members to use in their conversations with their elected rep-
resentatives. In March 2007, the Roman Catholic Blog com-
municated a Sunday special broadside urging Catholics “to be 
‘faithful citizens’ and participate [by talking to their legislators] 
in this important issue” (RomanCatholicBlog.com 2007). The 
opposition effort was successful. The sponsors of the legislation 
saw the shift in the Assembly and again, before the vote, pulled 
the bill.
Undeterred, the sponsors introduced another bill the fol-
lowing February when the new legislative session opened. 
AB 2747, the California Right to Know End of Life Options 
Act, did not mention PAD. It was a general bill that called on 
physicians and other health providers to offer information to 
terminally ill patients regarding end-of-life options—hospice 
and palliative care, withholding life-sustaining apparatus, palli-
ative sedation, and voluntarily stopping eating and drinking— 
available to them.
The CCC immediately began to campaign against this bill, 
calling AB 2747 “a stealth bill setting up a mechanism for has-
tened death” (California Catholic Conference 2008). However, 

112	
The Right to Die
because PAD was not included in the “options” language, the 
Act passed the Assembly and the Senate and, on September 3, 
2008, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger signed the bill. There 
was still no PAD bill that survived opposition strategy, tactics, 
and persuasion.
Sixteen years later, after these pitched battles between the 
forces arrayed on both sides of the issue led to four PAD bill 
defeats, and after the death of Brittany Maynard in Novem-
ber 2014, another bill was again debated in the legislature, 
SB  128, the End of Life Option Act. It was introduced in 
the state Senate on January 21, 2015, barely two months after 
Maynard’s death. In March the Senate Health Committee 
approved the bill 6–2, with one abstention. In April the Sen-
ate Judiciary Committee propitiously voted 5–2 for the bill, 
and on June 2, 2015, the full Senate approved SB 128 by a 
vote of 23–15.
About that time, the California Medical Association (CMA) 
took a surprising action, the first state medical association in 
America to do so. It changed its decades-old organizational 
policy of absolute opposition to PAD. Luther F. Cobb, CMA 
president, said:
Despite the remarkable medical breakthroughs we’ve 
made and the world-class hospice or palliative care we can 
provide, it isn’t always enough. The decision to participate 
in the End of Life Option Act is a very personal one 
between a doctor and their patient. . . . We believe it is up 
to the individual physician and their patient to decide 
voluntarily whether the End of Life Option Act is 
something in which they want to engage. Protecting that 
physician-patient relationship is essential. (California 
Medical Association 2015)
With that action, overturning an opposition policy approved in 
1987, the CMA became “officially neutral” on Senate Bill 128. 
It was no longer a member of the Coalition.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
113
After Senate passage of SB  128, the Coalition, especially 
the CCC, feared that the bill would be passed in the wake of 
Maynard’s death. They were keenly aware of the firestorm of 
affirmative media hype about PAD (including comments in a 
videotape made by Maynard herself, days before her death, call-
ing on legislators to pass a California death with dignity bill). 
They pulled out all the stops to block the Assembly from voting 
favorably on the Act. Their focus, given the time press on them, 
was to convince Assembly legislators—especially Democratic 
legislators from heavily populated Roman Catholic districts sit-
ting on the Assembly Health Committee—to vote against the 
Senate-passed bill.
Before the Assembly’s Health Committee could vote on 
the Act, the bill’s sponsors withdrew SB 128. Because the bill 
“lacked enough support to get through committees this year 
amid fierce religious opposition” (Nirappil 2015) their com-
ment to the press was brief: “we have chosen not to present 
SB 128 today in the Assembly Health Committee” (Monning 
2015). SB 128 was dead; supporters had to plot another effort 
to pass PAD, including an option to put the PAD bill on an 
initiative ballot for an up-or-down vote by California voters 
if the opposition continued their thus-far successful lobbying 
activities in the legislature.
However, California’s Democratic governor Jerry Brown 
took an interesting step. In August, he called for an extraor-
dinary legislative session to have the legislators deal with the 
state’s health care funding problems, especially funding for the 
state’s Medi-Cal program. As soon as the special session started, 
the SB 128 sponsors immediately changed the agenda: they 
reintroduced the bill in the Assembly, and it was accepted for 
debate and action.
There were immediate responses from opponents in the leg-
islature. Republicans, opposed to the bill on moral grounds, 
were the minority in both houses of the legislature and bitterly 
complained about using the special session to debate SB 128. 
They were rebuffed by the legislature’s Democratic leaders. 

114	
The Right to Die
One Republican lawmaker, Senator Bob Huff, angrily said to 
the press: “Let’s call this for what it really is: It’s not death with 
dignity. This is state-assisted death, physician-assisted death 
and relative-assisted death” (Pedroncelli 2015).
Very quickly the full Assembly passed the bill, 42–33, on Sep-
tember 8, 2015. All of the Assembly’s actions on the Act occurred 
in less than one month. The modifications Assembly legislators 
made to SB 128 meant that the revised bill had to return to the 
Senate for that body’s approval of the changes. Three days later, 
September 11, before the opposition even got started to try to 
block the bill, the Senate approved the bill, 23–14.
The CCC was livid. The bill should have been presented to 
legislators during the regular session. Tim Rosales, the group’s 
spokesman, said that the Act was immoral, that suicide and 
physician-assisted suicide were sins against God. The greatest 
fear of the group, however, was that the End of Life Options 
Act gives physicians “the power to prescribe lethal overdoses to 
[impoverished] patients” (Pedroncelli 2015).
SB 128 was immediately sent to liberal Democratic governor 
Brown for his signature. However, unlike former governors in 
Vermont and Washington states, and sitting Vermont governor 
Shumlin, who all publicly supported PAD efforts, the Califor-
nia governor had been noncommittal during the debates over 
SB 128.
Governor Brown brought to the decision table two personal 
issues: his health and his religious leanings. In the years imme-
diately preceding the special session, Brown had basal cell car-
cinoma removed from near his right ear in 2008; in 2011 he 
had a cancerous growth removed from his nose. A year later he 
was treated for early stage prostate cancer.
In his eighth decade, the governor said, in a May 2015 speech 
to a business group, that it was pointless to pursue perfect solu-
tions in an imperfect world: “It’s messy, there’s suffering, and 
in the end we all die. When you’re 77, by the way, that’s some-
thing that’s a little more imminent” (Pedroncelli 2015).
Further playing on his thoughts about the Act, Brown, a 
Roman Catholic, once studied for the priesthood at the Jesuit 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
115
Seminary at Los Gatos, California. Although he left his stud-
ies, Brown remained a devout church member. In his effort to 
reach his judgment, the governor discussed the pending legisla-
tion with doctors, including two of his personal physicians, his 
bishop, Brittany Maynard (three days before she died), Brit-
tany’s family, advocates for the disabled, retired South African 
Archbishop Desmond Tutu (who urged the governor to sign 
the bill), and “former classmates and friends who take varied, 
contradictory and nuanced positions. In the end I was left to 
reflect on what I would want in the face of my own death” 
(Brown 2015).
Almost a year after Maynard’s death, and after nearly a month 
of wrestling with the controversial issue, Governor Jerry Brown 
signed the End of Life Option Act on October 5, 2015. In his 
letter notifying the members of the California State Assembly 
of his decision, he wrote that “I do not know what I would do 
if I were dying in prolonged and excruciating pain. I am cer-
tain, however, that it would be a comfort to be able to consider 
the options afforded by this bill. And I wouldn’t deny that right 
to others” (Brown 2015).
Immediately, the pro-life opposition—led by Not Dead Yet 
and the Roman Catholic Church—launched a referendum 
drive to overturn the as-yet-not-implemented law. (Since the 
act was passed in an extraordinary legislative session, it took 
effect in November 2016].) Their target: get 365,000 signa-
tures, by January 3, 2016, from their supporters to get the ini-
tiative on the November 2016 ballot. On January 6, 2016, it 
was announced that they failed to collect enough signatures. 
All pro-life groups will continue to engage in political activi-
ties. In California, these groups will aggressively work in the 
political and in the state and federal courts to overturn the 
state’s assisted suicide law.
In the November 2016 election, Colorado voters approved 
the End of Life Options Act (65%–35%), making Colorado 
the 6th state to allow PAD. The D.C. Commission voted 11–2 
approving a Death with Dignity Law; it awaits only the May-
or’s approval.

116	
The Right to Die
The Role of State Courts in the Right  
to Die Controversy
Beside the near impossibility of the presently constituted U.S. 
Supreme Court changing its collective mind, or other states’ 
PAD organizations beginning decades-long struggles to get the 
legislature to debate, much less to pass a PAD statute, or con-
vince state voters to pass a PAD initiative, there is only one 
other road PAD supporters can take to reach their goal: per-
suade state judges that the state Constitution is the repository 
of a fundamental right of a dying patient to receive assistance 
from a physician to hasten imminent death.
To date, only the Montana state courts, including the Mon-
tana Supreme Court, have concluded that the state Constitu-
tion does not prohibit PAD. Since all the jurists based their 
decisions on their reading and interpretation of only the 
state Constitution, there was no “federal case or controversy” 
involved. Therefore, the judgment of the Montana Supreme 
Court could not be reviewed in any federal court.
Baxter v. Montana (2009)
In October 2007, Robert Baxter, a 75-year-old Billings, Mon-
tana, retired trucker, brought a petition into the county district 
court in Helena. For years, Baxter suffered from lymphocytic 
leukemia, a terminal-but-not-“six-months-or-less” terminal 
cancer and, his daughter said, “yearned for death” (Johnson 
2009). In his petition in his case, Baxter v. Montana, Baxter 
asked the court to prohibit Montana’s homicide statutes from 
being used to indict, arrest, and convict physicians who acted 
to assist terminally ill patients to die. His complaint: criminal-
izing PAD violated the Montana Constitution, in particular 
Article II, Declaration of Rights, Sections 3 (inalienable rights), 
4 (individual dignity), and 10 (right of privacy). Joining him 
in bringing the petition were four Montana doctors and the 
national PAD organization, Compassion & Choice. Montana’s 
attorney general argued that the state’s assisting suicide statutes 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
117
prohibited PAD action. Both parties asked the court to issue a 
summary judgment.
On December 5, 2008, the judge, Dorothy McCarter, issued 
a summary judgment in favor of the plaintiffs. She wrote that 
“the right to personal autonomy included in the state consti-
tutional right of privacy and the right to determine ‘the most 
fundamental question of life’ inherent in the state constitu-
tion’s right to dignity, mandate that a competent, terminally ill 
patient has the right to choose to end his or her life.” Physicians 
who assist the patient by providing a prescription are protected 
from criminal statutes because the dying patient “requires the 
assistance of [his or her] medical professional.”
On December 31, 2009, the state Supreme Court affirmed 
the ruling 5–2, but on statutory—not constitutional—grounds. 
The question the court addressed was “whether the consent 
of the patient to the physician’s aid in dying could constitute 
a statutory defense to a homicide charge.” One exception to 
Montana’s defense of consent argument was whether the con-
duct of the doctor and the dying patient was “conduct that 
disrupts public peace and physically endangers others.” After 
reviewing state precedents, the judges concluded that “every 
step in PAD is private. [The court found no parallel between 
PAD] and the bar brawler, prison fighter, BB gun shooter and 
domestic violence aggressor [all charged with disrupting ‘pub-
lic peace’].”
While the Montana Constitution did not protect a right to 
PAD, there was “nothing in [our] precedents or Montana stat-
utes that PAD is against public policy.” In reaching this con-
clusion, the judges drew upon Montana’s 1985 Rights of the 
Terminally Ill Act. That law indicated “legislative respect for a 
patient’s autonomous right to decide if and how he will receive 
medical treatment at the end of his life.” The Act immunized 
doctors from criminal prosecution because the physician was 
acting in accordance with the dying patient’s wishes. A physi-
cian who “must actively pull the plug or withhold treatment” 
from a terminally ill patient who wants to hasten death is not 

118	
The Right to Die
acting “against public policy.” Providing a prescription to a 
dying patient was analogous to a physician withholding treat-
ment from such a patient.
The Terminally Ill Act clearly prohibited mercy killing and 
euthanasia. The Montana judges concluded that “PAD is, by 
definition, neither of these. Neither is consent-based and nei-
ther involved a patient’s autonomous decision to self-administer  
drugs that will cause his own death.”
The decision did not go beyond that; there was no judicial 
discussion of necessary provisions and regulations for admin-
istering PAD and which state agency would be responsible for 
implementing these requirements. These issues form the pro-
cedural core of the Oregon, Washington, California, Vermont 
and Colorado PAD laws.
Montana’s Supreme Court left those provisions for the leg-
islature to create. To date, no legislative action has been taken. 
The Montana legislature adjourned in April  2015, without 
passing any PAD-related bills, including one that called for 
an ODWDA-type PAD bill and another bill making PAD a 
felony homicide. The state will not convene its next legislative 
session until 2017.
Until 2014, Montana was the only state that allowed PAD 
because of a state Supreme Court finding that the state’s laws 
and its Constitution allowed such private consensual action 
between patient and doctor. This unique reality changed some-
what when, that year, litigation was brought into the New 
Mexico state courts challenging that state’s prohibition of PAD.
Morris v. New Mexico (2014–2016)
In March 2012, two New Mexico oncologists, Dr. Katherine 
Morris and Dr. Aroop Mangalik, filed a petition in the Berna-
lillo County (population, 670,000) District Court in the Sec-
ond Judicial District Court of New Mexico. They were joined 
in the lawsuit by Compassion & Choices and the ACLU of 
New Mexico, whose lawyers represented the doctors, and, a 
few months later, by a uterine cancer patient, Aja Riggs. The 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
119
plaintiffs were seeking to have the New Mexico judiciary “clar-
ify the ability of mentally competent, terminally ill patients to 
obtain aid in dying from their physician if they find their dying 
process unbearable” (McCoy 2012).
One major element of their brief is the argument that there 
is a substantive difference between aid in dying and suicide; the 
former should be available to terminally ill patients without 
their doctors being prosecuted for “assisting a suicide.” In an 
amicus brief filed by the New Mexico Psychological Associa-
tion in the litigation, this difference was highlighted.
[We] recognize that aid in dying and suicide are 
fundamentally different psychological phenomena, and 
that these different categories of patients must be treated 
differently by the law. . . . Psychologists think of suicide as 
their greatest challenge, and they work tirelessly to prevent 
their patients from committing suicide. They also 
recognize that [aid in dying] involves almost no substantive 
theoretical overlap with suicide. (ACLU New Mexico 
2013)
The plaintiffs asked the court to declare that doctors who 
provide a prescription for lethal medication to dying patients 
are not subject to criminal prosecution under the existing New 
Mexico “assisted suicide” law. (NMSA Section  30-2-4 pro-
scribes assisting another to “commit suicide,” classifying it as 
a fourth-degree felony subject to an 18-month imprisonment 
and a $5,000 fine.)
A bench trial, before Second Judicial District Chief Judge 
Nan G. Nash, was scheduled on December 11 and 12, 2013. 
She heard testimony from patients, practitioners of PAD from 
Oregon, Washington State, and Vermont, and others. Briefs 
were filed by the plaintiffs and by Kari Brandenberg, the Ber-
nalillo County district attorney. Judge Nash returned to her 
chambers to review the arguments, the challenged law, and the 
state constitution’s precedents.

120	
The Right to Die
On January 13, 2014, in Morris v. Brandenberg, she issued 
a permanent injunction prohibiting the state from prosecut-
ing physicians assisting in a dying patient’s end-of-life request. 
PAD is not suicide; dying patients have a “fundamental” state 
constitutional right to obtain “aid in dying.” It is a “funda-
mental right under the substantive due process clause of the 
New Mexico Constitution.” The New Mexico Constitution 
“provides greater rights to New Mexico defendants than those 
rights provided in the federal constitution in many instances.” 
Furthermore
this court cannot envision a right more fundamental, 
more private or more integral to the liberty, safety and 
happiness of a New Mexican than the right of a competent, 
terminally ill patient to choose aid in dying. If decisions 
made in the shadow of one’s imminent death regarding 
how they and their loved ones will face that death are not 
fundamental  .  .  . then what decisions are? (Morris v. 
Brandenberg 2014)
The New Mexico Conference of Catholic Bishops bitterly 
disagreed with the ruling. Allen Sanchez, the executive direc-
tor, pointed out the survivability of illnesses: “As long as there 
is a chance for human error, we can’t have [PAD]. You can 
never reverse the decision you’ve made. It’s the finality of it” 
(New Mexico Judge Rules . . . 2014).
Two months later, March 2014, Gary King, New Mexico’s 
attorney general, appealed Nash’s ruling to the state Court of 
Appeals. According to a spokesperson for one of the state’s 
active right to life organizations, “King appealed the ruling 
at the urging of the NM Archdiocese” (WithDignity 2014). 
Another pro-life group, the Euthanasia Prevention Coalition, 
also lobbied King extensively to convince him to act. The group 
was “pleased” with his decision; “EPC thanks all the people 
who contacted Gary King, by email, phone, and through the 
online petition” (Schadenberg 2014).

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
121
The Court of Appeals noted jurisdiction in the case, now 
called Morris v. King, and held oral arguments on January 26, 
2015. There were a number of amicus briefs filed from groups 
on both sides. Supporting the state’s position were Not Dead 
Yet (joined by five other groups all representing the disabled), 
three New Mexico Roman Catholic Archdioceses (Las Cruces, 
Santa Fe, and Gallup), the Disability Rights Legal Center, the 
Euthanasia Prevention Coalition, and the Alliance for Defend-
ing Freedom (representing five Republican state senators, six 
Republican House members, and the state’s Christian Medical 
and Dental associations).
Briefs supporting Dr.  Morris came from the American 
Medical Women’s Association, the New Mexico Public Health 
Association, the American Medical Student Association, 
Compassion  & Choices, the ACLU, the New Mexico ALS 
(amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, commonly referred to as Lou 
Gehrig’s disease) Association, and the New Mexico Psychologi-
cal Association.
Over a year later, in August 2015, the three-judge New Mex-
ico Court of Appeals, by a 2–1 vote, reversed Nash’s decision. 
In three opinions, totaling nearly 150 pages, two judges, Tim 
Garcia and Miles Hanisee, in separate opinions, concluded that 
“aid in dying is not a fundamental liberty interest under the 
New Mexico Constitution.” The dissenting judge, Linda Vanzi, 
agreed with Nash that there is a fundamental liberty interest 
in allowing terminally ill patients to receive aid in dying from 
their physicians.
Judge Garcia wrote the majority decision, heavily rely-
ing on Glucksberg. For him, that case is the only one that 
directly answered the question before the New Mexico courts: 
“whether aid in dying is a constitutional right, fundamental or 
otherwise.”
No court, federal or state, has held that the concept of 
death  .  .  . is rooted within the protections of bodily 
integrity under the Constitution. [Glucksberg] is the only 

122	
The Right to Die
precedent regarding the nearly identical constitutional 
question that is posed in this case. (Morris v. King 2015)
The concurring justice, Hanisee, based his opinion on his 
understanding of the state constitution. It incorporated “no 
right—fundamental or otherwise—to legal narcotics medi-
cally prescribed for the sole purpose of causing the immediate 
death of a patient.” Furthermore, the legislature “is vastly bet-
ter suited to consider and resolve the lawfulness of aid in dying 
in New Mexico than is the judiciary.”
The dissenting judge, Vanzi, used a watershed—and con-
troversial—2015 U.S. Supreme Court 5–4 opinion (Obergefell 
v. Hodges) that, by expanding the meaning of the Fourteenth 
Amendment’s due process and equal protection clauses, discov-
ered a fundamental right to marry for same-sex couples. Justice 
Anthony Kennedy—the pivotal swing vote on the Court—was 
the writer of the majority opinion, joined by the four moderate 
jurists, Justices Ginsburg, Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan.
Kennedy’s opinion “outright reject[ed] the idea that rights 
must grow out of specific historical practices,” wrote a Supreme 
Court scholar (Sullivan 2015). “Rights come not from ancient 
sources alone.” Continuing, Kennedy wrote that rights also 
come from our evolving understanding of liberty. “New insights 
and societal understandings,” he wrote, allow a judge to dis-
cover previously unnoticed and unchallenged inequalities. He 
concluded the opinion with the following observations.
The fundamental liberties protected by the Fourteenth 
Amendment’s Due Process Clause extend to certain 
personal choices central to individual dignity and 
autonomy, including intimate choices defining personal 
identity and beliefs.  .  .  .  [It] is a fundamental right 
inherent in the liberty of the person, and under the Due 
Process and Equal Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth 
Amendment couples of the same sex may not be deprived 
of that right and that liberty. (Obergefell v. Hodges 2015)

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
123
The “ruling drew strong dissents from the Court’s most 
conservative brethren, each of whom wrote their own dissent” 
(Sullivan 2015). Their opinions, “ranging from resigned dis-
may to bitter scorn” (Liptak 2015), all argued that same-sex 
marriage is not “rooted in the nation’s history and traditions.” 
Chief Justice Roberts caustically wrote that “if you are among 
the many Americans . . . celebrat[ing] the achievement of a 
desired goal, celebrate [it]. But do not celebrate the Constitu-
tion. It had nothing to do with it.”
Continuing, Rogers wrote that Kennedy’s opinion was “an 
act of will, not legal judgment. The Court invalidates the mar-
riage laws of more than half the states and orders the trans-
formation of a social institution that has formed the basis of 
human society for millennia, for the Kalahari Bushmen and 
the Han Chinese, the Carthaginians and the Aztecs. Just who 
do we think we are?”
As usual, Scalia’s dissent “did not shy away from histrionics” 
(Sullivan 2015). “Mock[ing] the soaring language of Justice 
Kennedy,” the “o’erweening pride” in the opinion, Scalia wrote 
that Kennedy’s “opinion is couched in a style that is as preten-
tious as its content egotistic.” For Scalia, it was an undemo-
cratic “judicial Putsch [which reveals] that my Ruler, and the 
Ruler of 320 million Americans coast-to-coast, is a majority of 
the nine lawyers on the Supreme Court” (Obergefell v. Hodges 
2015).
The Constitution is an evolving document, wrote the dis-
senting New Mexico appeals court judge. “If rights were 
defined by those who exercised them in the past,” wrote Vanzi, 
“then received practices could serve as their own continued jus-
tification and new groups could not invoke rights once denied” 
(Morris v. King 2015).
Addressing the equal protection argument, Vanzi pointed out 
that physicians in the state are, by statute, allowed to admin-
ister terminal sedation as well as remove life-saving devices 
for their patients. Her colleagues distinguished those actions 
from those where a doctor, providing aid in dying, violates the 

124	
The Right to Die
“assisting suicide” statute. There are no distinctions between 
these medical practices; if they exist in the statute, the equal 
protection clause is violated.
Vanzi disagreed with Hanisee’s parsimonious view of the 
role of the judiciary in the American governmental system. The 
New Mexico courts—indeed, all courts—have the “obligation” 
to review any statute for its constitutionality when challenged 
by a plaintiff. To defend Hansee’s overly cautious position, she 
concluded, “is little more than a bald assertion that the Legis-
lature may constitutionally criminalize conduct simply because 
‘twas ever this.’ ”
The ACLU and Compassionate Choices lawyers imme-
diately filed an “expedited emergency petition” to the New 
Mexico Supreme Court. They asked the judges to issue an 
Extraordinary Writ of Superintending Control from the 
Court of Appeals, because that court’s “fractured decision” 
calls for further review. The writ was granted, briefs filed, and 
oral arguments were made by the two parties on October 26, 
2015. In June 2016, the New Mexico Supreme Court, in a 
unanimous decision, upheld the Court of Appeals decision 
that the “assisting a suicide” criminal law is a valid state policy, 
prohibiting PAD.
In the meantime, challenges to “assisting a suicide” criminal 
statutes have been taking place in other state courts since the 
1990s, but without success. State Supreme Courts in Florida 
(1997), Alaska (2001), Michigan (2001), and Connecticut 
(2010), among others, have all upheld “assisting suicide” crimi-
nal statutes. In 2015, in New York, doctors and dying patients 
challenged the criminal statute that makes “assisting suicide” 
a felony. In October 2015, trial judge Joan Kenney on consti-
tutional grounds, upheld the New York law. In May 2016, in 
Myers v. Schneiderman, Judge Mazzarelli, of the Appellate Divi-
sion, First Department, New York Court of Appeals, rejected 
plaintiff Myers’s petition, upholding the state’s law prohibiting 
a physician from giving aid-in-dying.
In 2017, then, only the Montana Supreme Court has 
allowed PAD.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
125
Some Unresolved Problems Linked with Aid in Dying
As already noted many times in this book, the right to die is a 
very controversial social policy, with the opposing forces bit-
terly fighting to achieve their (contradictory) goals. It is a prime 
example of ongoing “hard ball,” “no holds barred” politics—at 
the local, county, state, and national levels. There has been no 
consensus by the warring participants on how to resolve the 
issue. Nor is there any likelihood of an accord emerging in the 
future.
One unsettling outcome of these battles—in courts, in legisla-
tures, in the media—is an unchanging set of conflicting positions 
that reflect the deep commitment the two sides have to their 
respective beliefs and policy goals. Again and again there have 
been a number of near-insoluble problems and issues that have 
emerged over the past four decades. They involve the following:
1.	 Fears: Fear of the slippery slope, of dying in great pain and 
suffering, about the inadequacy of long-term health care
2.	 The evolving patient-doctor relationship
3.	  Abuses in medical treatment continue due to the continu-
ing implicit bias held by medical professionals against cer-
tain classes of patients
4.	 Semantics: Is it physician assistance in dying or physician 
assistance in suicide?
5.	 The Supreme Court and the Constitution: How to make 
sense of the nation’s fundamental law when litigating PAD?
6.	 “To be Terminal, or not to be ‘Terminal’ ”: This predicament is 
probably the most distressing problem associated with PAD.
Fears
The slippery slope problem is the most feared consequence 
of legitimizing PAD. Even though euthanasia is prohibited 
in every state and every group involved in the policy battles 
agrees that it should be banned, opponents expect the slide to 
euthanasia to ensue if PAD becomes law. The opposition to 

126	
The Right to Die
PAD, especially among the Roman Catholic Church and dis-
ability advocates, is the shared fear that some seriously ill and 
vulnerable patients—the poor, the disabled, minorities, and 
the uninsured—would want to die rather than cope with the 
financial burdens they and their families are facing. Oncolo-
gist Dr. Ezekiel Emmanuel fears that too many doctors “might 
move too readily” to bring an end to these depressed patients. 
“We should address what would give them purpose, not give 
them a handful of pills” (Haberman 2015).
Another fundamental fear-inducing dilemma is the limited 
number of choices dying patients living in great pain and suf-
fering face. For those terminally ill patients coping with life 
without living (where surgeries, chemotherapy, and radiation 
keep the dying patient alive but in greater pain and immobility 
than before), the clashing sides offer radically different paths 
the suffering incurable patient can take.
The PAD opponents suggest faith in God and staying alive 
until God beckons is the way people should die (although the 
Catholic Church and other PAD opponents accept the double 
effect, palliative sedation, and the withdrawal of devices). PAD 
is a sinful, immoral practice and must be fought ceaselessly to 
prevent the hated “culture of death” from becoming the zeit-
geist of the new century.
Joni Eareckson Tada, a quadriplegic, a disability advocate, 
and the founder of the Christian Institute on Disability, wrote 
an essay addressed to Brittany Maynard a month before May-
nard died, addressing the problem that many fearful dying 
patients coped with fitfully. Her words summarize the religious 
opposition to PAD. She wrote:
If I could spend a few moments with Brittany before she 
swallows that prescription she has already filled, I would 
tell her how I have felt the love of Jesus strengthen and 
comfort me through my own cancer, chronic pain, and 
quadriplegia. I would tell her that the saddest thing of all 
would be for her to wake up on the other side of her 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
127
tombstone only to face a grim, joyless existence not only 
without life, but without God.” (Tada, 2014)
PAD support groups reject that road for, they believe, it is 
cruel and inhuman punishment to bar a competent, nonde-
pressed, autonomous, fearful-of-the-future dying person from 
seeking the assistance of a physician to hasten death. For PAD 
advocates, a terminally ill person does not have an obligation 
(to the State or to God) to live.
This issue compels the society to address another emergent, 
much more profound long-term problem: the glaring inad-
equacies of long-term health care in America. Most of us will 
not die from one chronic, terminal illnesses but from an accu-
mulation of assorted maladies that come with aging and which 
lead to an unpredictable timing of death. And confronting all 
but the very wealthy is the fear of running out of funds to treat 
these nonterminal maladies years before death.
In its amicus brief in Vacco, the American Geriatrics Society 
asked a question that goes to the heart of this common fear 
facing most of us as we age: what does a physician tell a patient 
when the patient, faced with expensive medical procedures and 
outrageous prescription drug bills that lead to bankruptcy and 
financial burdens shifted to family, asks the doctor to help him 
die rather than face impoverishment or institutionalization?
In the first decade and a half of the 21st century, prescription 
costs for new drugs have skyrocketed. A new hepatitis C drug, 
Sovaldi, manufactured by a large drug company, Gilead Sci-
ences, was sold for $1,000 a pill (nearly $90,000 for a course of 
treatment) in 2015 (Walker 2015). The cost for existing drugs 
to control, for example, diabetes, high cholesterol, and cancer, 
has been increasing on average 10 percent a year. One existing 
drug, Daraprim, had a 5,000 percent price increase when the 
company was sold to an avaricious entrepreneur. (It went from 
$13.50 to $700 overnight.) (Pollack 2015)
Fear is present in all human lives. How does a fearful, termi-
nally ill person respond to this human predicament? There are 

128	
The Right to Die
choices available, reflecting the dichotomy between the sanc-
tity of life and the sanctity of the autonomous human being.
The Patient–Doctor Relationship
There are dynamic changes in the physician’s attitude toward 
PAD that impact the bond between doctor and patient. 
Although the AMA maintains its opposition to PAD, a major-
ity of doctors (54%) have reexamined their views and have 
come around to accepting PAD and issues associated with that 
protocol. A 2014 Medscape poll of 17,000 physicians indicated 
that a majority of the doctors “supported” their patient’s “deci-
sion to end their life when facing an incurable and terminal 
disease” (31% did not support the patient’s choice) (Medscape 
Ethics Center 2014).
There seems to be a significant attitudinal change in many 
American physicians regarding their behavior with their afflu-
ent, educated, generally white patients. More of them are 
accepting a noted doctor’s view of her profession’s two obliga-
tions to their patients. “One is to support the autonomy, the 
self-determination of their patients. And the other is to relieve 
suffering. If you can’t extend life significantly, then you must 
relieve suffering” (Joyce 2012).
Doctors also know that patients, competent but seriously ill, 
can ask them to remove the devices that sustain life. The patients 
read, regularly, about once secretive physician actions—double 
effect, terminal sedation, the wink and nod—that are now pub-
lic knowledge because of generally supportive media coverage. 
And interactions between patient and doctor have improved 
because of the increased transparency.
At the heart of this change is the primary care doctor. In the 
changing interaction between the two, “it is the primary care 
physician’s obligation to lead this difficult discussion [about 
death]” (Belisomo 2015). Many analysts believe that “without 
widespread intervention of primary providers, patients will be 
less likely to ensure their end-of-life wishes are honored” (Beli-
somo 2015). This fundamental change must continue in order 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
129
for patients to understand death and what they and their fami-
lies can do to prepare for it.
With the 2015 changes in the Affordable Care Act, primary 
care physicians can now spend quality billing time with aging 
patients to explore health options available for them. And 
given these changes, there has incrementally emerged a part-
nership between the two: a sort of equality where conversations 
take place in the doctor’s office; where patients are encouraged 
to ask end-of-life questions; where they expect to be answered 
truthfully; and where patient wishes are discussed and com-
plied with by the doctor.
However, given the reality of sharp wealth differences in Amer-
ica, the vulnerable do not have—nor can develop—the positive, 
open rapport with a physician that more affluent patients have. 
Indeed, many poor patients do not have the financial means to 
go to a doctor’s private office—where the bond between patient 
and doctor can develop over time. The emergency department is 
their doctor’s office.
The doctor-patient relationship is nonexistent when the 
patient is black, or Hispanic, or poor, or old, or disabled. These 
groups are generally treated without any minimal due care. 
All physicians hold implicit biases about these others, and this 
“unconscious racism leads to unintentional and in some cases, 
even unconscious discrimination” (Matthew 2015). Physicians 
will truthfully claim no ill will toward racial and ethnic groups, 
yet, without consciously thinking about it, the doctor is likely 
to have made some implicit assumptions about the patient 
before even seeing him or her. Based on the physician’s past 
limited experiences with these vulnerable cohorts, assumptions 
and stereotypes develop and form the basis of an “unconscious 
racism.” The doctor will assume that a patient from one of 
these demographic groups has less education, limited means, 
and few opportunities to take care to eat well, to exercise regu-
larly, and to take care of herself—all before the doctor meets 
the patient. Her future health and health care are quite likely 
to be adversely affected by these biases. The treatment choices 

130	
The Right to Die
the physician makes as a result, such as withholding complex 
information or deferring expensive treatments, are more likely 
to harm rather than improve a minority patient’s health (Mat-
thew 2015).
The 2014 Institute of Medicine report Dying in America 
provided systematic proof that health disparities are associated 
with the fact that minorities in this country receive unequal 
health care from medical providers. Hundreds of studies show 
that, compared to whites, minority patients are less likely to 
receive appropriate medical treatment for cardiovascular dis-
ease, cancer, cerebrovascular disease, renal disease, HIV/AIDS, 
asthma, diabetes, or pain. They are more likely to receive infe-
rior rehab and material, pediatric and mental health services, 
and hospital-based medical services than their white counter-
parts (Institute of Medicine 2015).
This issue remains one of the major societal problems; it has 
a clear impact on these groups’ views about physician-assisted 
death.
Trust and Mistrust in the Health Care System
The medicalization of death paradigm, by training physicians 
to focus on curing illnesses, has largely bypassed training them 
to specialize in geriatric medicine and palliative care. Today, a 
geriatrics specialty “is one of the lower paid medical specialties, 
in part because virtually all its patients are on Medicare, which 
pays doctors less than commercial insurers” (Span 2013). Med-
ical students, whether it is the low salary or the years of intense 
specialty training or simply because they consider geriatrics 
“depressing,” shy away from that specialty. Given the increas-
ing numbers of aging, there is an annual need for 36,000 medi-
cal students training in the geriatrics specialization; in 2013, 
there “were fewer than 7,000 and falling” (Span 2013).
Yet, quality geriatric care makes a significant difference in 
the health of the aged. “Older adults whose health is moni-
tored by a geriatrician enjoy more years of independent living, 
greater social and physical functioning, and lower presence of 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
131
disease. In addition, these patients show increased satisfaction, 
spend less time in the hospital, exhibit markedly decreased rates 
of depression and spend less time in nursing homes” (Houle 
2015).
The same problem confounds recruitment of palliative care 
specialists. The number of palliative care physicians falls far 
short of society’s needs. Successfully recruiting medical stu-
dents to specialize in palliative care is very difficult for the rea-
sons geriatrics recruiters discover in their search efforts: low 
pay, homogeneity of the patients, depression-inducing spe-
cialty, and both specialties are time-intensive practices. A 2015 
national study found that “there is only one palliative medi-
cine physician for every 1,200 terminally ill patients” (McCoy 
2015). (There is also a shortage of trained palliative care nurses, 
psychologists, and medical technicians.)
In the intense commitment to research and innovation to 
cure cancer, diabetes, heart disease, and other chronic illnesses, 
the new breed of physician has not been trained in carefully 
diagnosing illness and in dealing with death. The result of 
the paradigm change is good and bad. New techniques and 
equipment have successfully tackled many of the deadly ill-
nesses; however, inattention to quality care for their patients 
has resulted in a misdiagnosis crisis, especially critical when the 
patient is diagnosed as terminal.
The Journal of the American Medical Association noted that 
the prevalence of misdiagnosis is “shocking”; there has been 
no improvement in missed diagnoses since the 1930s (Leon-
hardt 2006). How precise is a medical diagnosis of terminal 
illness? This is a problem repeatedly posed by PAD opponents 
in debates and in legislative committee meetings. They remind 
their audience of the times they or their friends or family were 
told by a doctor that they had a terminal illness—only to find 
out the diagnosis was incorrect. In America, they point out, 
doctors seriously misdiagnose serious illnesses 20 percent of the 
time (Leonhardt 2006). The English Royal College of Patholo-
gists, after reviewing diagnostic data about deceased patients, 

132	
The Right to Die
concluded that more than 5 percent of terminally ill patients 
were misdiagnosed (Nelson 2009). Furthermore, studies show 
that when physicians correctly diagnosed the cancer, they regu-
larly overestimated the survival time of terminally ill cancer 
patients (Glare et al. 2003).
Why, then, should a patient with an “alleged” terminal cancer 
take the phenobarbital? PAD supporters respond by pointing 
out that the physicians attending the patient must repeatedly 
concur on the diagnosis and the prognosis of a terminal illness. 
Furthermore, they point out a salient fact: the patient has two 
options: first, filling the prescription, and then, actually taking 
the fatal dosage.
The disagreement will not fade away. PAD opponents cite 
data about medical misdiagnoses, and that it has been a hid-
den health care crisis for decades. These statistics bolster the 
religious, medical, and conservative political groups’ unending 
opposition to PAD.
PAD supporters of aid in dying know the daunting task all 
physicians face to improve the quality of their diagnostic analy-
ses and the advice and counsel they proffer to their patients. 
However, the capable, autonomous individual is a key compo-
nent in determining the success of PAD. From the data gener-
ated in Oregon since the ODWDA was implemented in 1997, 
patients diagnosed as terminal and who choose aid in dying are 
competent and generally financially comfortable (most with 
private health insurance); 93 percent were white; 72 percent 
were dying of cancer; 51 percent were men; the majority were 
highly educated; the median age of those who chose PAD was 
73; before their terminal illness, they had an active life; they 
were in palliative care and then in hospice facilities; and gen-
erally they had a long-term, trusting relationship with their 
physician (Oregon Public Health Division 2016). The data 
shows a careful, qualitative diagnostic judgment reached by the 
consulting physicians over a period of time. Finally, whether 
the dying patient chooses to take the medication is up to him 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
133
or her. And there has been a total absence of patients being 
coerced to ask for and then take the lethal dose of Seconal or 
phenobarbital or morphine.
Another basic problem that exists is a general mistrust of the 
overall national health care system by the disabled, the poor, 
the aged and infirm, the minorities, and other vulnerable per-
sons living in America. They know, they feel, and they live 
with the unfairness brought on by the physicians’ unconscious 
discrimination. A 2016 study validated the truth of their grim 
“reality.” The longevity gap between the top 10 percent rich 
and the bottom 10 percent poor has widened sharply despite 
advances in medicine, technology, and education. Rich men 
live 14 years longer than the bottom 10 percent; rich women 
live 13 years longer than the poorest 10 percent (Tavernise 
2016).
This lack of trust and the continuing unfairness of the health 
care system extends to these groups’ attitude about how PAD 
will affect their lives if the practice becomes law. The disabled 
population has been discriminated against by physicians and 
others who treat and care for them; they believe that there is a 
lack of empathy and understanding and a general bias against 
them because of their physical limitations or ethnicity or inabil-
ity to pay. For the disabled, there is another health care failure: 
poor hospital facilities available to them. Hospitals are very 
slowly addressing the physical shortcomings of the hospital 
environment and its inability to examine the disabled patient 
using medical equipment not designed for their infirmities.
Minorities have a historical mistrust of the health care sys-
tem. Black, Hispanic, and Asian communities are very cogni-
zant of the historical discriminations they and their families 
have experienced—used as guinea pigs for medical experi-
ments, being cared for in separate and inferior hospitals, not 
treated with the latest-model equipment, nor given the most 
advanced new drugs, and without the benefit of cutting-edge 
medical information used by doctors treating them.

134	
The Right to Die
Given the distrust these vulnerable groups share about the 
health care system generally, it is no wonder that they have a 
deep distrust of a legalized PAD environment. Their mistrust 
accompanied by a dreadful fear that PAD will be used against 
them—against their will—underlies the intense opposition of 
groups such as Not Dead Yet to PAD.
Still another problem, seen by persons on both sides, is con-
cern about doctors and nurses employing the “wink and nod” 
alternative to PAD. The practice, by definition, is unregulated, 
not transparent, and it can be—and has been—secretly used 
by medical professionals in response to pleas from families of 
the terribly suffering dying patient—and from the patients 
themselves. Even supporters of PAD are concerned about the 
wink and nod way of assisting the dying. “Making a secret pro-
cess transparent makes it safer,” said the president of Compas-
sion & Choices (Editorial Board 2015). However, there is the 
“catch-22” quandary: making it transparent makes it a felony 
in 45 states!
The Semantic Problem
Is aid in dying physician-assisted suicide or is it physician-
assisted death? This “value laden” semantic problem lies near 
the heart of the clashes between pro- and anti-PAD support-
ers and groups. The use of either one generally “reflect[s] the 
speaker or writer’s political or ideological support for or objec-
tion to the practice [of physician-aid-in-dying]” (Starks et al. 
2013).
For those opposed to PAD, terminally ill patients living in 
states where they can legally acquire a prescription for a lethal 
dose of medicine from their doctor, PAD is suicide, a moral 
sin, a violation of God’s grace. Suicide is suicide, whether it is 
a jilted lover or an expiring cancer patient. Branding PAD as 
“assisted suicide” is “one of the most pervasive tactics employed 
by opponents” (Ryder 2015). “Suicide,” as understood by 
health professionals, denotes “the notion of a premature death 
that is being hastened out of despair” (Starks et al. 2013).

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
135
David Leven is the executive director of End of Life Choices 
New York. In a press conference in 2015, he presented a clear 
example of the semantic differences between the two sides:
The patients taking these medications are not suicidal, 
they don’t want to die. They would prefer to keep on living 
but they don’t have a choice, they are going to die. An 
analogy can be drawn to those who leapt from the World 
Trade Center on 9/11. [They] had a choice to make, either 
burn and asphyxiate to death or leap from the building. 
I don’t think any of us would say they were committing 
suicide simply because they made this choice for themselves 
at the very end of their lives, knowing they were going to 
die, it only being a matter of how. That is what aid-in-
dying is about, a choice people make at the very end of 
their lives for themselves. (Ryder 2015)
The Supreme Court and the Constitution
In every decision the U.S. Supreme Court has made since the 
1970s regarding controversial social policies, there is a funda-
mental conflict between them over how to interpret the words 
in the U.S. Constitution. There is a basic reason for this judi-
cial problem, one that determines how the Court will decide 
cases raising issues such as the constitutionality of aid in dying: 
the Constitution is “a relic . . . written . . . in vague terms that 
require jurists to be creative law makers” (Caplan 2016). While 
it was written by a group of truly brilliant men, they were writ-
ing a Constitution made to endure for centuries; and it has 
been open to interpretation ever since its adoption in the late 
18th century.
From 1789 to the present time, the justices have had to 
determine what the Constitution’s words mean in order to 
decide a case before them. Every justice “ ‘fall[s] back on their 
priors—the impulses, dispositions, attitudes, belief, and so on 
they bring to a case,’ before they look at the facts and at the 

136	
The Right to Die
law to be applied—and then use lingo to obscure their actual 
grounds for deciding” (Caplan 2016).
In this judicial decision-making reality for over two centu-
ries, two general approaches have been employed by the justices. 
There is, as Judge Posner writes, the “ ‘rearview mirror syn-
drome,’ looking backward for the answers to current issues—
backward to our 18th century Constitution” (Caplan 2016). 
These are the originalist jurists—such as Justices Rehnquist, 
Scalia, Thomas, Roberts, Alito—who argue that if the phrase 
“assisting a terminally ill patient to die” is not in the Constitu-
tion, then a state can prohibit that activity. Recall Chief Justice 
Roberts’s caustic comment about the majority legalizing same-
sex marriage: “[The Constitution] had nothing to do with it” 
(Obergefell v. Hodges 2015).
The second general methodology used by other justices, to 
determine whether a practice is protected by the Constitu-
tion, is to look to present-day values and norms to answer the 
question. For these jurists—such as Justices William O. Doug-
las, William J. Brennan, Thurgood Marshall, Ginsburg, and 
Kagan—the document is an evolving one. The Constitution 
is a living basic law, growing through judicial interpretation to 
address societal problems never imagined by the framers.
Resolving the PAD problem in the Supreme Court, in sim-
ple political terms, is “who has five votes?” In U.S. Supreme 
Court decisions since 1990 (Cruzan), the majority of votes 
cast were by the “rear view mirror” jurists. As noted, so long as 
originalists have the votes, the problem for the PAD advocates 
remains. That is why changes in how aid in dying is treated 
now come from the election booth and from state judges, not 
from the U.S. Supreme Court.
The “To Be Terminal, or Not to Be ‘Terminal’ ”  
Problem: An Example of the Slippery Slope?
We are all terminal, but are we “terminal”? This is a problem 
that will not be resolved until a state allows voluntary euthana-
sia (the start of the slippery slope?) or someone becomes a death 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
137
tourist. It deeply troubles and frustrates all those who believe 
in a compassionate, humane response to the pain and suffering 
of patients who are dying of a terminal illness but who are not 
“terminal” (death within six months or less) according to the 
ODWDA and its progeny.
Booth Gardner, the former Washington State governor, has 
been afflicted with Parkinson’s disease since 1992. It is a termi-
nal illness, yet it is not “terminal.” Even though he was a com-
mitted supporter of PAD and he was a key player in convincing 
voters to pass the WDWDA in 2009, Gardner is not able to 
use the protocol in the Act—assuming he wishes to—because 
he has not been told that he has less than six months to live: he 
is not “terminal.”
Dr. Kevorkian was found guilty of second-degree murder 
in 1999 because his client, a 52-year-old man, Thomas Youk, 
dying of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig’s disease), 
was in great pain, was disabled, and wanted to hasten his death 
before life became even more unbearable. Kevorkian actively 
euthanized Youk because the patient was unable to attach and 
then start the death machine. Even if Youk and Kevorkian 
were residents of one of the six PAD states, the doctor would 
be charged because Youk was not “terminal.” Furthermore, if 
Youk was diagnosed as “terminal,” and a resident of Oregon, 
and he had the Seconal, because of his disability, Youk could 
not take the pills to his mouth, nor could he pick up the glass 
and swallow the liquid! And the physician would be commit-
ting a felony if he or she administered the medication.
For the severely disabled, there is yet another heart-rending 
catch-22 that advocates for the disabled have not been able to 
resolve. These patients, primarily young quadriplegics, are com-
petent, are not dying, have received the finest health care since 
their catastrophic injury, and have not been isolated from the 
larger society. Some of them want to end their lives, however 
outstanding the medical, palliative, and rehab care has been. 
But they cannot—for a number of reasons. In PAD states, they 
would not qualify because they are not “terminal.” They cannot 

138	
The Right to Die
kill themselves—even if they possessed the toxic medicine—
because of their near-total immobility. And because of their 
legal and medical status, they have great difficulty convinc-
ing the hospital to withdraw the life-sustaining device (Ghose 
2010).
The Not Dead Yet advocates and others reject the disabled 
patient’s wish. They, in effect, offer the Hawkings remedy: 
“While there’s life, there’s hope.” They argue that society is 
causing the patient’s negative attitude because not enough 
resources have been expended to do a better job of caring for 
such a patient. A bioethicist at the University of Pennsylva-
nia acknowledged the issue: “We don’t like to see people with 
disabilities decide not to go on. And people will put up road 
blocks and try to slow that process in every way they can” 
(Ghose 2010).
The paralyzed patient, meanwhile, is bereft. He or she is in 
a twilight zone, wanting to die but unable to—even by his or 
her own hands. Independent living advocates for the severely 
disabled believe that “the underlying problem is the lack of 
autonomy and dignity afforded to patients with high-level dis-
abilities. ‘The reality is they shouldn’t have to live that way, and 
we should provide the services that make people’s lives bear-
able’ ” (Ghose 2010). For some non-“terminal,” competent, 
nondepressed, severely disabled, and suffering patients whose 
life is unbearable who choose to end it, the problem is that 
they cannot!
This is no longer the case with our neighbor to the north, 
Canada. A major—unanimous (9–0)—Supreme Court of Can-
ada (SCC) decision in February 2015, Carter et al. v. Canada 
(Attorney General), answered this “terminal” problem dramati-
cally. Kay Carter, an 89-year-old Canadian mother of seven, 
died at the Dignitas Clinic in Switzerland. Suffering intoler-
able pain because of her terminal illness—spinal stenosis—she 
became a death tourist because the SCC banned PAD 21 years 
earlier when it announced its 4–3 decision in Rodriguez v. Brit-
ish Columbia (1994).

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
139
More than a year after her death, Carter’s daughter brought 
suit in the British Columbia (BC) courts. She was joined by BC 
Civil Liberties Association, a family doctor, and another dying 
(ALS)-but-not-“terminal” patient, Gloria Taylor. The plaintiffs 
won in the trial court but the BC Court of Appeal overturned 
the ruling. They went to the SCC, which granted them leave 
to appeal. Oral arguments were heard on October 14, 2014.
Less than four months later, the SCC overturned the BC 
appellate court and its own 1994 Rodriguez opinion. It found 
sections 241 (b) and 14 of the Criminal Code to have infringed 
Canadians’ rights to life, liberty, and security of the person 
guaranteed under section  7 of the Canadian Charter of the 
Rights and Freedoms.
A consenting adult’s response to a grievous and irremediable 
medical condition [which causes] endless suffering [physical 
or psychological] is a matter critical to their dignity and 
autonomy. The law allows people in this situation to request 
palliative care, refuse artificial nutrition and hydration, or 
request the removal of life-sustaining medical equipment, 
but denies them the right to request a physician’s assistance 
in dying. This interferes with their ability to make decisions 
concerning their bodily integrity. But leaving people to 
endure intolerable suffering, it impinges on their security 
of person. (Carter v. Canada 2015)
Furthermore, the decision “decriminalized both voluntary 
active euthanasia and physician assisted death.” The SCC 
“accepted the claimants’ definition of [PAD] as a situation 
where a physician provides or administers medication that 
intentionally brings about the patient’s death, at the request 
of the patient.” Finally, and most important for the “terminal” 
problem, the SCC “did not define ‘grievous and irremediable,’ 
but it is clearly not limited to terminal illness.” Even a com-
petent person with dementia, or ALS, who is grievously and 
intolerably suffering can request PAD or voluntary euthanasia.

140	
The Right to Die
The SCC opinion, however, was not immediately imple-
mented. The Court delayed execution of the ruling for one year 
in order to give the Parliament an opportunity to pass PAD leg-
islation. On April 14, 2016, the new prime minister, the ruling 
Liberal Party’s leader, Justin Trudeau, introduced the assisted 
dying bill (Bill G-14), an “Act to amend the criminal code to 
allow medical assistance in dying for patients with a serious and 
incurable illness.” It differed in two fundamental ways from the 
ODWDA model: (1) a patient does not have to be terminal to 
receive aid in dying and (2) voluntary euthanasia is permitted with 
the consent of the patient. The assisted dying bill was acted on—
positively—by the end of the 2016 legislative session because the 
Liberal Party has a majority in both houses of Parliament.
Canada’s judicial response to the issue is the exact opposite of 
the U.S. Supreme Court’s 1997 views on PAD (and the scope 
of the Constitution’s Fourteenth Amendment). Additionally, 
the response by Canada’s national government is nothing like 
the actions of President George W. Bush, Attorney General 
John Ashcroft, and other conservative Republican senators and 
congresspersons in the first decade of the 21st century.
In a nutshell, the terminal/“terminal” existential problem 
(among other difficulties) is solely an American conundrum. 
Unlike Canada and other nations that provide assistance in 
dying, America continues struggling in vain with the question 
of whether a competent, dying patient who is not “terminal” 
has the right to die. An imperative question: Is the person—
whether quadriplegic, suffering from Parkinson’s disease or 
ALS, or some other chronic devastating illness—burdened 
with the obligation to live? A final question: Does compassion 
for these “twilight zone” patients get the better of concerns 
about society skidding down the slippery slope from PAD to 
voluntary euthanasia? Should it?
The Right to Die Dilemma: Is There a Solution?
“There is no question that [PAD] is one of the messiest areas of 
health ethics, policy, and practice,” wrote a columnist (Friedman 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
141
2013). A number of problems surrounding the issue have been 
noted in this chapter. Some reflect society’s inequities, but can 
move toward resolution if social policies—and the necessary 
funding—are addressed and positive changes instituted. There 
are, however, implacable ones; solutions are near impossible 
because of the black versus white dynamic at play—an unwill-
ingness to compromise when their deeply held fundamental 
values are involved.
The Resolvable Problems
There is little difference between the resolvable and unresolv-
able problems associated with the right to die. In the former, 
the solutions are found in massive realignment of public and 
private policies regarding the issue and the larger issue of ineq-
uities in the health care system. Given the hot-blooded par-
tisanship of elected officials and the public, this adjustment 
of the agenda is a herculean task. But it is not an absolutely 
unbending one. There are problems surrounding the medical-
ization of death, the doctor-patient relationship, and, generally, 
the grossly unjust health care situation that conceptually can 
be rationally examined, and change may be an outcome. The 
unyielding problems are another story.
Regarding the fundamental relationship between the pri-
mary care physician and the patient, Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel, a 
highly regarded oncologist and ethicist, offered a simple sug-
gestion: train doctors and nurses to talk about death with the 
patient!
All doctors and nurses should be trained in how to talk to 
patients and their families about end-of-life care. When 
I was starting out, I was lucky enough to be able to witness 
how a great oncologist communicated with patients and 
their families when it was clear they were going to die, but 
I received no formal training whatsoever. It is hard to 
improve care for the dying if health professionals don’t 
know how to talk about it. (Emanuel 2013)

142	
The Right to Die
Another solvable problem is the lack of critical care practi-
tioners and facilities. There is, in the second decade of the new 
century, a shortage of palliative care and hospice facilities and 
medical professionals practicing in these end-of-life centers. 
Emanuel, among others, noted that “over 40% of hospitals 
with more than 50 beds do not have palliative care services.” 
The resolution? “Every hospital should be required to have pal-
liative care services both in the hospital and at the homes of 
dying patients who are discharged” (Emanuel 2013).
Hospice statistics reflect a similar need. In 2013, nearly 
60 percent of deaths occurred without hospice comfort care at 
the end. Of the 42 percent of patients who died in hospice in 
2013, data shows a positive trend in hospice admissions: more 
dying patients entered hospice earlier. In 2001, 18.8 percent 
accessed hospice for three or more days; by 2007, the figure 
was 30.1 percent (Morrison 2015). More time spent in hospice 
by dying patients means more quality comfort care for them, 
making their last days easier.
Palliative care must also be introduced earlier for seriously ill 
patients. In one recent study of lung cancer patients, published 
in The New England Journal of Medicine in 2010, the research-
ers concluded that
among patients with metastatic non–small-cell lung 
cancer, early palliative care led to significant improvements 
in both quality of life and mood. As compared with 
patients receiving standard care, patients receiving early 
palliative care had less aggressive care at the end of life but 
longer survival. (Temel et al. 2010)
More hospice facilities must be introduced so that every hos-
pital has a hospice wing and the necessary medical professional 
teams to provide care for the dying patient in hospital or at 
the patient’s home. Revisions in eligibility for admission into 
a hospice care program must include a change in the require-
ment that physicians certify that patients have six months or 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
143
less to live. “Unless we want to insist that physicians acquire 
crystal balls and take up psychic prediction” (Friedman 2013), 
there must be a rule change where the doctor’s assessment of 
the patient’s needs for specialized care determines eligibility for 
entry into hospice.
These changes can go a long way toward making the end of 
life pain free, but to see them adopted will take significant gov-
ernmental policy change—accompanied by equally substantial 
budgetary shifts by both the U.S. Congress and the president 
to finance these changes. And if these are high cost but needed 
changes in health care, consider the additional costs for train-
ing new palliative care doctors, new geriatrics doctors, and new 
nurses, medical technicians, social workers, and psychologists.
In our polarized political environment, it’s not likely that, 
in the near term, these policy and budgetary shifts will occur. 
But, given the exploding number of millennials getting ready 
for retirement and beginning to examine the next phase of 
their lives, accompanied by the lack of palliative care and hos-
pice programs with a shrinking pool of trained physicians and 
nurses, there will emerge new and insistent demands for change 
by groups representing them.
Another solvable issue—inadequate and discriminatory 
health care treatment for vulnerable groups—reflects a much 
more fundamental problem: the nation’s 240-plus-year history 
of government and private discrimination that targeted the dis-
abled, the elderly, the poor and lower class individuals, and 
ethnic and religious minorities. As a consequence of this brutal 
reality, these abused and discriminated groups fear the system 
and, as well, fear their treatment if PAD is officially permitted. 
The remedy, in part, is, again, a major shift in policy and bud-
get allocations to improve the quality of health care for these 
“others.”
But such political changes—difficult as they are—are the tip 
of the iceberg of discrimination. What is needed is an acknowl-
edgment from the larger public that class, economic, racial, 
gender, and age discrimination in health care is a historical 

144	
The Right to Die
fact. This inequitable treatment exists in America; it must be 
ended by people recognizing the disparities—and the abuses—
in health care because of this pervasive bias. This aspect of the 
problem, in sum, calls for two new behaviors by the national 
community: empathy and compassion.
Unless there is a change in the public’s awareness of the 
plight of vulnerable persons in their midst, which leads to jus-
tice in action in the form of political demands for shifts in 
political and budgetary policy, things remain the same. With-
out the very real and continuing demands for policy changes 
through organized political activities, abuse, intolerance, and 
discrimination in America’s health care system will not change.
The Unbending Problem
The solvable problems enumerated above are at the edge of the 
right to die controversy. With major changes in the American 
society’s domestic public policies—a prodigious task that will 
take place only when polarizing politics are replaced with the 
art of political compromise—these jarring issues revolving 
around health care can be addressed.
However, when we turn to addressing the core problem—
the “rightness” of physician assistance in dying—there is a 
near absolute unwillingness by people to compromise on the 
contradictory but very fundamental ethical, ideological, or 
religious beliefs. As The Right to Die illustrates, this collision 
involves absolute but divergent values. There does not seem to 
be a possibility of reason in action to try to accommodate these 
groups’ differences.
Throughout history these battle lines have endured: belief 
in the sanctity of life versus the belief that all persons have a 
personal fundamental liberty to ask a physician to assist them 
in hastening death. There does not appear to be any common 
ground for the opposing sides to sit down to reason together to 
find a solution.
In our time, ever since the abortion case Roe v. Wade, uncon-
ditional views about life and death, and about the rights all 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
145
persons have to determine and act on their definition of “one’s 
own concept of existence . . . and of the mystery of human life” 
have been expressed (Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Penn-
sylvania v. Casey). Legislators, presidents, governors, attorneys 
general, judges, doctors, nurses, priests, Imans, rabbis, colum-
nists, tweeters, advocates for the disabled, family members, ter-
minally ill patients, and all the others, have all examined and 
created their own set of values about life, dying, and death.
This reality leads to perennial skirmishes—about God, 
about one’s essence—but no clear victories. Thomas Hobbes, 
a 17th-century British political philosopher, wrote that life in 
society is “brutish and nasty.” This values conflict means that 
both sides are continuously preparing for the next battle to 
overturn a PAD law or, on the other side, to fight for passage 
of a PAD bill in the legislature or in a court. These clashes 
will go round and round without any victory. Anniversaries of 
important events—the Roe decision, the passage of legislation 
that ends a state’s assisted dying law—will be celebrated with 
pickets, marches, speeches, and a renewed commitment to “the 
right to die” or to the “sanctity of life.”
References
ACLU New Mexico. 2013. “NMPA Files Amicus Brief in 
Morris v. New Mexico in Support of Expanded End of Life 
Choices.” December 10. https://www.aclu.org/news/new-
mexico-psychological-association-says-physician-aid-dying-
no-kind-suicide
Allen, Mike. 2005. “Counsel to GOP Senator Wrote Memo 
on Schiavo.” The Washington Post, April 7, p. 19.
Ball, Howard. 2012. At Liberty to Die: The Battle for Death 
with Dignity in America. New York: New York University 
Press.
Belisomo, Randi. 2015. “Which Doctors Should ‘Own’ End-
of-Life Planning?” Reuters, February 11.

146	
The Right to Die
Brown, Edmond G. Jr. 2015. Letter to Members of the 
California State Assembly, October 5. www.brown.gov
Bush, George W. 2005. “Statement on Signing Legislation for 
the Relief of the Parents of Theresa Marie Schiavo.” Public 
Papers of the Presidents of the United States: George W. 
Bush, 2005 Book 1. March 21, 2005. Washington, D.C.: 
Government Printing Office.
California Catholic Conference. 2008. E-Newsletter, June 27. 
http://www.diocese-sacramento.org/parishes/PDFs/CCC_
ENewsletter.pdf
California Medical Association. 2015. “California Medical 
Association Removes Opposition to Physician Aid in 
Dying Bill.” May 20. http://www.cmanet.org/news/
press-detail/?article=california-medical-association-removes
Caplan, A.L. 2006. The Case of Terri Schiavo: Ethics at the End 
of Life. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.
Caplan, Lincoln. 2016. “Rhetoric and Law.” Harvard 
Magazine, January–February.
Clark, Annette E. 2006. “The Right to Die: The Broken Road 
from Quinlan to Schiavo.” Loyola University Chicago Law 
Journal, 37, 384.
Colby, William H. 2002. The Long Goodbye: The Death of 
Nancy Cruzan. Carlsbad, CA: Hay House.
Editorial Board. 2015. “Offering a Choice to the Terminally 
Ill.” New York Times, March 14.
Emanuel, Ezekiel J. 2013. “Better, if Not Cheaper, Care.” 
New York Times, January 3.
Friedman, Emily. 2013. “So Quit, Already: Futility, Faith, 
Family, and the Ongoing Battle over End-of-Life Care.” 
Hospitals & Health Networks Daily, August 6.
Ghose, Tia. 2010. “Paralyzed Accident Victim Fights for 
Right to Die.” Journal Sentinel, November 28.

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
147
Glare, Paul, Kiran Virik, Mark Jones, Malcolm Hudson, Steffen 
Eychmuller, John Simes, and Nicholas Christakis. 2003. 
“A Systematic Review of Physician’s Survival Predictions in 
Terminally Ill Cancer Patients.” BMJ, 327, 195.
Goldstein, Amy. 1998. “Pro-Life Activist’s Take on Death: 
Movement Mobilizes against Issues such as Assisted 
Suicide.” The Washington Post, November 10.
Goodnough, Abby. 2005. “The Schiavo Case: The Overview; 
Schiavo Dies, Ending Bitter Case Over Feeding Tube.” New 
York Times, April 1.
Greenhouse, Linda. 2006. “Justices Reject U.S. Bid to Block 
Assisted Suicide.” The New York Times, January 18, p. A1.
Haberman, Clyde. 2015. “Stigma around Physician-Assisted 
Dying Lingers.” New York Times, March 22.
Hillyard, Daniel, and John Dombrink. 2001. Dying Right: 
The Death with Dignity Movement. New York: Psychology 
Press.
Houle, Marcy Cottrell. 2015. “An Aging Population, without 
the Doctors to Match.” New York Times, September 22.
Institute of Medicine. 2015. Dying in America: Improving 
Quality and Honoring Individual Preferences Near the End of 
Life. Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences.
Iwasaki, John. 2008. “State Second in Nation to Allow Lethal 
Prescriptions.” Seattle Post Intelligencer, November 5, 1.
John Paul II. 2004. Address of John Paul II to the Participants 
in the International Congress “Life-Sustaining Treatments 
and Vegetative State: Scientific Advances and Ethical 
Dilemmas.” The Vatican, http://w2.vatican.va/content/
john-paul-ii/en/speeches/2004/march/documents/hf_jp-ii_
spe_20040320_congress-fiamc.html
Johnson, Kirk. 2009. “Montana Court to Rule on Assisted 
Suicide Case.” New York Times, September 1.

148	
The Right to Die
Joyce, Jaime. 2012. “The Evolving State of Physician-Assisted 
Suicide.” The Atlantic, July 16.
“Justice Fears for Roe Ruling.” 1988. New York Times, 
September 14.
Leonhardt, David. 2006. “Why Doctors So Often Get It 
Wrong.” New York Times, February 22.
Liptak, Adam. 2015. “Supreme Court Ruling Makes Same-
Sex Marriage a Right Nationwide.” New York Times, 
June 26.
Lowenstein, Edward and Sidney H. Wanzer. 2002. “Sounding 
Board: The U.S. Attorney General’s Intrusion into Medical 
Practice.” New England Journal of Medicine, 346, 447.
Masters, Brooke A. 1998a. “Pt William Judge Delays Removal 
of Feeding Tube.” The Washington Post, September 22.
Masters, Brooke A. 1998b. “Family Reunites to Let Hugh 
Finn Die.” The Washington Post, September 29.
Masters, Brooke A. 1998c. “Judge Rejects Va. Efforts to 
Prevent Finn’s Death.” The Washington Post, October 1.
Matthew, Dayna Bowen. 2015. Just Medicine: A Cure for 
Racial Inequality in American Health Care. New York: New 
York University Press.
Maynard, Brittany. 2014. “My Decision to Die.” People, 
October 27.
McCoy, Lindsey. 2015. “California Signs Death with 
Dignity, U.S. Behind in Palliative Care.” MedCareer News, 
October 7.
McCoy, Micah. 2012. “ACLU Seeks Ruling That Physicians 
Can Provide Aid in Dying.” American Civil Liberties 
Union of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, March 15.
Medscape Ethics Center. 2014. Ethics Report 2014, Part 1: 
Life, Death, and Pain. http://www.medscape.com/resource/
ethics

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
149
Melton, R.H. and Brooke A. Masters. 1988. “Court Rejects 
Gilmore’s Bid to Overturn Finn Ruling.” The Washington 
Post, October 3.
Monning, Bill. 2015, July 7. “Aid-in-Dying Legislation 
Removed from Assembly Health Committee Calendar.” 
http://sd17.senate.ca.gov/news/2015–07–07-aid-dying-
legislation-removed-assembly-health-committee-calendar
Morrison, Ian. 2015. “Health Care Costs and Choices in the Last 
Years of Life.” Hospitals & Health Networks Daily, March 3.
Nelson, Fraser. 2009. “A Welcome Rejection of Assisted 
Suicide.” The Spectator, July 7.
“New Mexico Judge Rules Doctors Can Help Terminally 
Ill Patients Commit Suicide without Prosecution.” 2014. 
Associated Press, January 14.
Newport, Frank. 2014. “Mississippi Most Religious State, 
Vermont Least Religious.” Gallup, February 3.
Nirappil, Fenit. 2015. “California ‘Right to Die’ Bill Stalls 
with Catholics Opposed.” Associated Press, July 7.
O’Neill, Tip, and Gary Hymel. 1994. All Politics Is Local: And 
Other Rules of the Game. New York: Times Books.
Oregon Public Health Division. 2016. “Oregon Death 
with Dignity Act: 2015 Data Summary.” Oregon Health 
Authority. www.oregon.gov/oha
Orr, Bob. 2007, March 21. VAEH Newsletter #44. Vermont 
Alliance for Ethical Healthcare. http://www.vaeh.org/
vaeh-newsletter-44/
Ostrum, Carol M. 2008. “Initiative 1000 Would Let Patients 
Get Help Ending Their Lives.” Seattle Times, September 21, 1.
Patient Choice Vermont. 2011. “Death with Dignity:  
From Oregon to Vermont” press release, February 23.  
https://vtdigger.org/2011/02/23/death-with-dignity- 
from-oregon-to-vermon/

150	
The Right to Die
Pedroncelli, Rich. 2015. “After Struggling, Jerry Brown Makes 
Assisted Suicide Legal in California.” Los Angeles Times, 
October 5.
Pew Research Center. 2015. Religious Landscape Study. 
http://www.pewforum.org/religious-landscape-study/
Pollack, Andrew. 2015. “Martin Shkreli’s Arrest Gives Drug 
Makers Cover.” New York Times, December 17.
Pope Pius XII. 1957. Address to an International Congress of 
Anesthesiologists, November 24.
Quinlan, Julia D. 2005. My Joys, My Sorrows. Cincinnati, 
OH: St. Anthony Messenger Press.
Redden, Jim. 2014. “Religious Yes, Churchgoers, No.” The 
Portland (Oregon) Tribune, December 18.
Reno, Janet. 1998. “Statement of Attorney General Reno 
on Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act.” U.S. Department 
of Justice, June 5. https://www.justice.gov/archive/opa/
pr/1998/June/259ag.htm.html
“Right-to-Die Bill Allowing Doctor Prosecution 
Fails in House.” 2015. CBS Seattle, February 17. 
http://seattle.cbslocal.com/2015/02/17/
right-to-die-bill-allowing-doctor-prosecution-fails-in-house/
Roberts, Barbara. 2008. “I 1000 Is Not a Slippery Slope.” 
Seattle Post Intelligencer, September 15.
RomanCatholicBlog.com. 2007. “Another Effort to Legalize 
a New Kind of Murder: The California ‘Compassionate 
Choices’ Act.” March 25. http://romancatholicblog.
typepad.com/roman_catholic_blog/2007/03/california_
comp.html
Ryder, Joseph. 2015. “Dying with Dignity: A Patients Right  
to Die.” Stony Brook Press, Features. May 29. http:// 
sbpress.com/2015/05/dying-with-dignity-a-patients- 
right-to-die/.
Schadenberg, Alex. 2014. “New Mexico Attorney General 
Appeals Assisted Suicide Lower Court Decision.” 

	
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions	
151
Euthanasia Prevention Coalition, March 12. http://
alexschadenberg.blogspot.com/2014/03/new-mexico-
attorney-general-appeals.html
Schwartz, James, and James Estrin. 2010. “In Vermont, a Bid 
to Legalize Physician-Assisted Suicide.” New York Times, 
February 11.
Seelye, Katharine W. 2016. “More Than a River Separates 
Bernie Sanders’s State from Primary’s.” New York Times, 
February 7.
Span, Paula. 2013. “Even Fewer Geriatricians in Training.” 
New York Times, January 3.
Starks, Helene, Denise Dudzinski, and Nicole White. 2013. 
“Physician Aid-in-Dying.” Ethics in Medicine, University 
of Washington School of Medicine. https://depts.
washington.edu/bioethx/topics/pad.html
Stutzman. Eli T. 1998. “Political Strategy and Legal Change.” 
In Physician Assisted Suicide: Expanding the Debate, edited 
by Margaret P. Battin, Rosamond Rhodes, and Anita 
Silvers, 123–132. New York: Routledge.
Sullivan, Casey C. 2015. “SCOTUS: Same-Sex Couples 
Have Fundamental Right to Marriage.” The FindLaw U.S. 
Supreme Court News & Information Blog, June 26. http://
blogs.findlaw.com/supreme_court/2015/06/same-sex-couples- 
have-fundamental-right-to-marriage-court-rules.html
Tada, Joni Eareckson. 2014. “Why Brittany Maynard’s 
Choice to Die Is Not Personal or Private.” Washington Post, 
October 15.
Tavernise, Sabrina. 2016. “Disparity in Life Spans of the Rich 
and the Poor Is Growing.” New York Times, February 12.
Temel, Jennifer S., et al. 2010. “Earlier Palliative Care for 
Patients with Metastatic Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.” 
New England Journal of Medicine, 363, 733–742.
Thomas, Cal. 2005. “St. Theresa Sciavo.” Jewish World Review, 
April 1.

152	
The Right to Die
Tucker, Kathryn L. 2008. “In the Laboratory of the States: 
The Progress of Glucksberg’s Invitation to States to Address 
End of Life Choices.” Michigan Law Review, 106:8, 
1593–1612.
Walker, Joseph. 2015. “Gilead’s $1,000 Pill Is Hard for States 
to Swallow.” Wall Street Journal, April 8.
Wilson, Adam. 2008. “What Voters Will Bring to I 1000.” 
Olympian, September 21, 1.
WithDignity. 2014. “New Mexico: ADF Files Friend-of-the-
Court-Brief in Morris v. King Appeal.” https://withdignity.
wordpress.com/tag/morris-v-king/



155
3	
Perspectives
Debbie Ziegler, mother of terminal brain cancer patient Brittany May-
nard, receives congratulations after California passed Death with Dignity 
legislation in September 2015. A year earlier, since California did not have 
a law that allowed physicians to assist patients in hastening their death, 
Maynard moved to Oregon to take advantage of the state’s Death with 
Dignity law. She died in November  2014 using medication prescribed 
by her physician. Maynard’s story became a rallying event in the effort to 
get Death with Dignity legislation passed in other states. (AP Photo/Rich 
Pedroncelli)
This chapter consists of a number of essays about the right to die 
written by participants in these battles in the United States and 
Canada. The authors are men and women with varied backgrounds: 
physicians, advocates for the disabled, pressure group leaders, and 
religious leaders. All have been involved in the political, legal, 
medical, and ethical discussions, most of them for decades; all make 
reasoned arguments defending their contrary positions on this 
controversial issue.
Is There a Right to Die?
Robert D. Orr
The phrase right to die comes up in medicine, in philosophy, 
in politics, and even over a cup of coffee at Dunkin Donuts. 
Many people who use the term assume it is a real entity and 

156	
The Right to Die
further assume that everyone means the same thing when they 
invoke this concept. But what does it mean? Is it a valid right? 
Why is there controversy about it?
A good part of the controversy about this phrase is that it 
has at least two meanings. In contemporary usage, it was first 
invoked in a passive sense—a right to refuse treatment with 
the expectation that death would result. Recall Karen Ann 
Quinlan, the young woman with severe brain damage, whose 
parents went to court to force reluctant doctors to remove the 
ventilator that was sustaining her life. That passive meaning 
rather quickly evolved into an active meaning—a right to actu-
ally die right now, by suicide, assisted suicide, or euthanasia. 
This active sense is the classical meaning of this controversial 
“right” dating back at least to the time of Seneca, the first-
century Stoic philosopher.
These two meanings are not the same; they are not even a 
little bit the same. To emphasize this difference, we must fur-
ther recall that when Karen Quinlan’s ventilator was finally 
removed, she did not die. She lived for another 10  years. 
I would posit that those who claimed her “right to die” were 
incorrect in looking to this ancient concept for support. What 
they really intended was that she had a right to be left alone, 
a right to not have medical treatment imposed on her against 
her wishes.
A thorough review of the theory of rights (a philosophical 
discussion that involves argumentation about whether human 
rights come from divinity, from natural law, from human 
thought, or from some other source) is beyond the scope of 
this essay, but let me briefly cite two influential statements. 
The U.S. Declaration of Independence guarantees to all citi-
zens the inalienable right to “life, liberty and the pursuit of 
happiness” as “endowed by their Creator.” It goes on to state 
that when these rights are infringed upon by government, it is 
proper to alter or abolish the source of infringement. The 1945 
United Nations Declaration of Human Rights guarantees to all 

	
Perspectives	
157
citizens of the world “the right to life, liberty and the security of 
person” as part of the “endowed dignity” of all persons (http://
www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/). Neither 
statement even hints at a right to die. And to try to reinterpret 
either to support a right to die would be a serious distortion of 
the intent of the writers.
Another way to look at this question is to focus on the issue 
of autonomy, a well-accepted concept in morality, political 
theory, developmental psychology, and bioethical thought—
the capacity of a rational individual to make an informed, un-
coerced decision based on his or her own values. Like the issue 
of a right to die, autonomy is often thought of as a monolithic 
concept. This too is incorrect as there is both negative auton-
omy, a right to be left alone (sounds familiar?) and positive 
autonomy, that is, an entitlement. The bioethical principle of 
autonomy is about the negative variety, the almost inviolable 
right of a patient who has mental capacity to accept or refuse 
any recommended treatment, even if refusal will lead to death. 
This is far different from a claim of positive autonomy, a sense 
of entitlement to whatever treatment one chooses, or even a 
claim that someone else has a duty to help that individual to 
die because the claimant has a right to die.
As a physician and as a clinical ethics consultant, I would 
strongly support a patient’s refusal of unwanted life-sustaining  
treatment, for example, the use of a ventilator or a dialysis 
machine or blood transfusions. I would try to understand the 
patient’s reason for refusal; I would try to address any modifi-
able reasons that led to his or her decision; I might even try 
to persuade the patient to reconsider. But if the patient was 
adequately informed and could offer a rational explanation 
for refusal, I would support the patient’s decision, even over 
the objection of his or her family or health care professionals. 
On the other hand, if the family of a patient who had had a 
stroke several days ago from lack of blood supply to a por-
tion of the brain that demanded hyperbaric oxygen treatment 

158	
The Right to Die
(high-pressure oxygen administered in a sealed chamber) be 
used to heal the dead brain tissue, I would not support this 
presumed entitlement since it is contrary to a clear understand-
ing of brain pathology.
There is a huge difference between a right to refuse treat-
ment and a demand for inappropriate treatment. There is a 
huge difference between a right to be left alone and a right to 
die. We could have a protracted discussion about a right to 
commit suicide. (Should individuals or society always step in 
to try to prevent it?) But, in my view, there is no “right” to be 
made dead in which another individual is thereby obligated or 
even allowed to assist the requestor to achieve death.
When anyone asserts a right to die, it is incumbent upon 
those hearing this claim to dig deeper to see if he or she is 
asserting a right to be left alone, free of unwanted treatment, 
or whether that individual really is asking to die now. If the 
former, we should investigate to see if the necessary parameters 
are present, and if they are we should then support that person’s 
right. If the latter, we should find out the reason for the request 
and do our very best to modify and hopefully nullify that rea-
son, thereby supporting the person’s valid right to life, liberty, 
and security of person.
Robert D. Orr, MD, CM, practiced family medicine in rural 
Vermont for 18 years before being awarded a postdoctoral fel-
lowship in medical ethics at the University of Chicago in 1989. 
Since receiving that training, he has taught and practiced clini-
cal ethics at Loma Linda University Medical Center, Califor-
nia; the University of Vermont Medical Center, Vermont; the 
Graduate College of Union University, New York; and Trinity 
International University, Illinois. He has served on numerous 
state and national ethics committees and commissions, lectured 
widely, and published many articles, book chapters, and books. 
His most recent book is entitled Medical Ethics and the Faith 
Factor (Wm. Eerdmans Pub., 2009). He and his wife are retired 
in Vermont.

	
Perspectives	
159
My Life Is Mine
Stanley Greenberg and Kay Stambler
Our thinking is guided by our knowledge and experience. 
Doctors are taught to heal, to look at the value of a human life, 
to make things right. These two, plus many other factors, place 
people who are disabled at a life-threatening disadvantage.
When a disabled person, child, or adult crosses our path we 
think about what the person cannot do. We imagine what we 
would want for ourselves should this disability happen to us. 
Usually we have no idea who the person is beyond his or her 
disability. This leads to making decisions for a person who is 
disabled without seeing who is really there and asking the per-
son what he or she wants.
So what happens when one of us has minimal ability to take 
care of one’s self and is therefore not given support to live a full 
and rewarding life? What is meant by dependence and guard-
ianship? Should anyone make a decision to conclude a life 
because the person is not contributing in the traditional sense 
of the word or someone decides—many someones decide—it 
would be costly and useless to keep the person alive? In the 
United States, this has happened to people with disabilities 
over and over again. It happens throughout our society: in our 
hospitals and in our homes.
There are those who see a person and not a disability. For 
these people, life can be quite different. Consider the lives 
described here and wonder.
Barbara was disabled before she had her drowning accident. 
In the call from a doctor to her guardian, she was described as 
comatose. The doctor arranged for Barbara to be brought to 
the major medical center and asked the guardian to give per-
mission for her body parts to be used to save others. Barbara’s 
guardian said, “Get her to the major hospital.” After her arrival, 
her guardian insisted that a neurologist be brought in, and he 
determined Barbara was not “brain dead.” Barbara’s guardian 

160	
The Right to Die
put people in her hospital room 24 hours a day. On a pad of 
paper that they passed to each other, they wrote who came into 
the room and exactly what they did. Many professionals who 
were treating Barbara were angry they were being watched and 
argued with her guardian that it was a waste of money to keep 
her alive. Barbara lived to go home and find her Mom, whom 
she adored. Her life was different, and she gave smiles and joy 
to all.
Michael was a very cranky man who was also disabled. When 
he arrived at the hospital, he was very sick. His guardian was 
told by the doctor that his kidneys were not working. The doc-
tor then added, “For people like this we usually don’t do dialy-
sis.” The guardian said, “Get him dialysis and then we’ll talk.” 
Michael lived another seven years. He was not less cranky, but 
he sure wanted to live.
Marni was born with frozen joints. Her arms and legs were 
put in casts to straighten them. The casts were changed every 
three weeks. The procedure caused her to not keep anything 
in her stomach for 24 hours. At three months, she went into 
shock, and her pediatrician sent her to the hospital saying that 
there was nothing he could do. Her parents had to “let nature 
take its course.” When another pediatrician from the practice 
examined her, he called in a pediatric surgeon. Surgery showed 
her intestine was tied in a knot. With the operation she lived. 
Without it, she would have died.
Forty-four years later, her life was taken by cancer. Her 
oncology team employed every known method to postpone her 
death. During Marni’s 44 years, her parents were her guardians. 
Unlike some guardians, they knew that Marni’s life was hers. In 
the end, they supported Marni when she decided, nonverbally, 
to discontinue treatment, to be served by hospice and to live 
the remainder of her life pain free. She died surrounded by 
family and close friends and the singing of her rabbi.
So why is Marni’s life relevant to this discussion? Simply 
stated, she would have been allowed to die at three months 

	
Perspectives	
161
of age if the decision was in the hands of a doctor who could 
imagine no future for her and parents who did not know her 
beyond her disabilities. Instead, a pediatrician came on the 
scene and told her parents that she was a whole person with a 
disability whose life could be saved. With the operation, Marni 
lived a life filled with joy, sorrow, achievement, and immeasur-
able value.
By the way, in addition to having difficulty expressing her-
self, she was intellectually disabled. Her parents did whatever 
was necessary to keep her from being segregated and devalued 
and, instead, included in the middle of society. With the help 
of like-minded friends, progressive educators, legal interven-
tion, and always unrelenting tenacity, she lived a normative 
life: folk dancing, gymnastics, summer camp, music lessons, 
religious school, and youth centers.
As a young adult, Marni saw her siblings leave home to be on 
their own, and she made it clear that she would not spend her 
life as a child living in the home of her family. Consequently, 
she was supported to be in her own home for the last 20 years 
of her life. She held several volunteer jobs, went to concerts and 
shows, listened to rock and roll radio stations and loved the 
music, enjoyed going to fast food restaurants and also eating 
lobster and shrimp. She traveled across the country for family 
gatherings and vacations.
At her memorial service, Marni was eulogized by her fam-
ily, her longtime friends, and her rabbi. People from the day 
care center where she went when she was a young child came. 
Her fourth-grade teacher was there. Friends throughout her 
life came and remembered and cried. Her family received 
condolences from people around the country whose lives she 
had touched. One young man who knew her when they were 
5 years old at preschool together composed a poem which con-
cluded that his son, now 5, would know her through him. She 
made an indelible impression on those with whom she came 
into contact, and she will be missed!

162	
The Right to Die
Bioethicists and many physicians who seek to make judg-
ments regarding the lives of those with disabilities question the 
time, energy, and resources necessary to maintain the continu-
ing existence of people who are not productive in the tradi-
tional sense. Some postulate that if someone is “not pulling his 
or her weight,” whose life is determined by measurement on 
a tally sheet and whose existence is quantified by output, that 
person’s life should be ended sooner rather than later.
How then should a life be measured? Should it be mea-
sured by personal income, worth on a balance sheet, number 
of widgets produced, number of graduate degrees, or maybe 
something else? Perhaps another tool should be employed: 
perhaps the number of lives touched positively or the num-
ber of smiles counted when the person’s name is mentioned. 
Maybe attitudes changed by the person’s mere presence should 
be factored in. In any event, Marni, Barbara, and Michael 
lived when doctors advised dying. Their very existence made 
the world a better place, and they died with dignity. Perhaps 
that is enough.
For 50  years, Kay Stambler, MEd, has worked on behalf of 
people with intellectual disabilities as a public guardian, an advo-
cate for educational and community services, and an evaluator 
of services throughout the United States and Canada. She credits 
her daughter with teaching her life’s possibilities and the obstacles 
that confront people throughout their lives. These obstacles include 
medical directions which, if implemented, would end the lives of 
individuals who are intellectually disabled.
Stanley Greenberg has been blind since birth. His love of music 
has grown since he began studying the piano at an early age. He 
received a PhD in music from the Eastman School of Music, and 
his first career was as a phonograph record producer, arranger, and 
executive. In later life, he became an executive in human services, 
serving as a staunch advocate for people with disabilities and their 
quest for complete inclusion in society. He has two living children 
and eight grandchildren.

	
Perspectives	
163
The Campaign to Pass the Patient Choice  
at End of Life Bill in Vermont
Dick and Ginny Walters
In 2013, Vermont became the first state to pass a Death with 
Dignity (DWD) law through the legislative process. Oregon 
and Washington State passed the law by referendum, but Ver-
mont does not allow binding referendum.
By 2002, the Oregon DWD Act had been legal for five years 
and was working well. With the model of the Oregon Act and 
our long-held strong belief in freedom of choice, we believed 
that we could enact similar legislation in Vermont. We were 
both 77 years old and had no idea that it would take 11 years 
to pass the bill and another two years to solidify it.
We were motivated to work for a DWD law because, like 
many others, we had relatives who had suffered. Dick’s father, 
after a severe stroke, begged for help. Ginny’s cousin, dying of 
cancer, pled, “Why is it taking so long?” Among our strong 
supporters were a brother and sister who mourned their sibling 
who, in desperation, had taken his own life with a gun.
Meeting in our living room, a small group formed a 501(c)
(4) corporation. Our younger daughter, an attorney, drafted a 
Vermont bill following the pattern of the Oregon Death with 
Dignity Act. Our other daughter set up our Web site.
We mention this personal family involvement because as the 
issue moved forward in the legislature, opponents stated that 
Vermont was targeted by a national organization to pass this 
law. Knowing that Vermonters, who see themselves as indepen-
dent thinkers, would not want to be directed by outsiders, we 
made sure that our organization maintained and displayed its 
clear Vermont roots.
To find sponsors in the legislature, Dick contacted represen-
tatives and senators who were likely to be in favor of right to 
die legislation. Early on, 39 representatives and a number of 
senators agreed to cosponsor the proposed DWD bill.

164	
The Right to Die
We did, of course, contact national organizations to make 
use of their experience. Both Death with Dignity National 
Center and Compassion  & Choices helped us with advice, 
telephoning, funding, and—most valuable—Oregon people 
who flew in to testify in legislative committee hearings. Among 
them were a rabbi, the head of the state hospice organization, 
and a researcher from Oregon Health & Science University, 
who worked extensively on the statistics in Oregon.
From the beginning, our board of directors included profes-
sors and medical doctors. All were committed to our mission 
and stuck with it; we became a warm, closely knit group. For 
political experience, we were fortunate to connect with a lob-
bying firm with which we developed a close and lasting rela-
tionship. Their steadfast dedication, invaluable expertise, and 
guidance in strategic planning led to our success.
Shortly after our efforts became publicly known, a Vermont 
doctor who was a trustee of the Tennessee-based Christian 
Medical and Dental Association invited the president of that 
organization to help form a local organization to oppose our 
campaign. A disability organization, Right-to-Lifers, the hier-
archy of the Catholic Church, and evangelicals formed a coali-
tion. They continued to cite so-called abuses in Oregon, but 
none was ever substantiated.
However, individuals with disabilities testified in our favor 
in the legislature because people with disabilities, like everyone 
else, want to control their own medical decisions when diag-
nosed with a terminal illness. Polls, broken down by religious 
belief, showed that lay Catholics favor the legislation.
Throughout Vermont the proposed legislation gained atten-
tion and supporters because of letters to the editor and media 
accounts. Polls showed that Vermonters favored the bill by 
more than 2 to 1. (Zogby poll, 2003: 72% vs. 24%; Zogby 
poll, 2007: 81% vs. 14%; Zogby poll, 2011: 64% vs. 26% 
Results are heavily dependent upon wording of a poll.)
Some legislators, because of their personal beliefs, opposed 
the law; others were wary because some of their colleagues had 

	
Perspectives	
165
failed to be reelected after voting for the recently passed civil 
union law. It took time and citizen action to educate represen-
tatives about freedom of choice at the end of life.
Some of our board members spoke at Rotary Club meetings, 
at gatherings at the homes of supporters, and at professional 
meetings of health care providers. We expanded our database by 
setting up DWD displays and collecting signatures at town meet-
ings, which take place throughout Vermont every March. Among 
our thousands of supporters were activists who contacted legisla-
tors, wrote letters to the editor, and contributed to our campaign.
Eventually, we hired a small company to activate our data-
base by organizing telephone trees, continually updating our 
Web site, posting on social media, using email and snail mail, 
and setting up TV ads.
Although the Vermont Medical Association testified that 
our bill was not needed, we developed a list of 200 supporting 
physicians. They understood that for the terminally ill patient, 
just knowing that it’s legal to avoid a protracted painful dying 
process brings peace of mind.
By 2013 we had a governor who had long been an advo-
cate for DWD. The speaker of the House, a strong and deter-
mined leader, also was eager to see our bill passed. To achieve 
a majority vote in the Senate, we needed two senators who 
forced a compromise: a “sunset” provision was added to the 
bill. It would allow most of the safeguards to disappear in 
2016, thereby making physician aid in dying part of standard 
medical practice. Our concern was that weakening the required 
safeguards would make the law vulnerable to repeal.
In 2015, those two senators were no longer in the legislature. 
The revised bill, with the sunset clause removed, was submitted, 
approved, and finally signed on May 20, 2015, thereby solidi-
fying Vermont’s Act 39. The governor, the House speaker, leg-
islators, and thousands of ordinary Vermonters came together 
to establish the Patient Choice at End of Life Act.
Richard (Dick) Walters, 1925–2015. Dick earned his bach-
elor’s degree at Yale. After serving in the U.S. Navy, Dick had a 

166	
The Right to Die
successful career in retail merchandising. In retirement in Vermont, 
his persistence, his warm personality, and his leadership were criti-
cal in achieving the passage in the legislature of Act 39, patient 
choice at end of life. An ardent sailor, his days on Lake Champlain 
gave him the perspective to strategize the route toward that goal. 
Diagnosed with lung cancer in 2014, Dick continued to lead the 
organization until his last few weeks; he was grateful to be able to 
direct his own end of life under the law that wouldn’t have been 
there without him.
Virginia (Ginny) Walters, PhD, graduated from Smith College 
and earned her graduate degrees in physics from Western Reserve 
University. She has taught physics and math at Cleveland State 
University, community colleges, Western Reserve Academy (a prep 
school)—in New York and Pittsburgh as well as in Ohio. Sophisti-
cated in computer practice, Ginny was the behind-the-scenes pow-
erhouse of Patient Choices—a Vermont organization of which her 
husband, Dick, was president.
Why Disability Rights Advocates  
Oppose Assisted Suicide
Diane Coleman
People are often surprised to learn that all of the major national 
disability rights groups that have taken a position on assisted 
suicide oppose legalizing it (Not Dead Yet 2016). This includes 
organizations like the American Association of People with 
Disabilities, National Council on Independent Living, Autistic 
Self Advocacy Network, United Spinal Association, the Dis-
ability Rights Education and Defense Fund, and others.
Why do these disability rights groups oppose assisted 
suicide bills that are marketed under the slogans of “self- 
determination” and “choice,” values these groups otherwise 
strongly support? Simply put, because the dangers of mistake, 
coercion, and abuse posed to old, ill, and disabled people are 
too great. Those of us who live with serious disabilities have 
good reasons to be skeptical about the mantra of choice being 
used to sell assisted suicide as a new treatment option in our 

	
Perspectives	
167
profit-driven health care system. Anyone could ask his or her 
doctor for assisted suicide, but the law gives the actual author-
ity to doctors to make the choice about who is eligible and 
under what circumstances.
Doctors used to exercise near-total control over the lives of 
people with significant disabilities, discouraging parents from 
raising children with disabilities at home, sentencing us to 
institutions, and imposing their own ideas about what medical 
procedures would improve our lives.
Disability groups started paying attention to the problem of 
doctors making life and death determinations in the 1980s in 
high-profile court cases involving the right to refuse treatment. 
One involved Elizabeth Bouvia, a 26-year-old woman with 
cerebral palsy who had a miscarriage and marriage breakup and 
wanted a hospital to make her comfortable while she starved 
herself to death (Johnson 1997). Other cases involved men on 
ventilators stuck in nursing facilities, like Larry McAfee, who 
wanted the right to live in their own apartments or homes, 
or else “pull the plug” (Longmore 1997). The doctors, courts, 
media, and public all viewed these severely disabled individu-
als as the equivalent of terminally ill. They did not get suicide 
prevention efforts equal to those offered to nondisabled people, 
nor the right to live in real homes instead of facilities, but they 
were granted the “right to die.” These cases were a wake-up call 
to disability advocates.
Then the 1990s brought Dr.  Jack Kevorkian, conducting 
assisted suicides using lethal drugs, with two thirds of his body 
count being people who were not terminally ill (Roscoe et al. 
2000). As before, the difference between being disabled and 
dying was not recognized or considered relevant. As before, the 
difficulties disabled individuals faced in living—access to pub-
lic spaces, getting a job, getting married—were not considered, 
or worse, were accepted as rationales for ending their lives. Put 
simply, assisted suicide sets up a double standard, with suicide 
prevention for some and suicide assistance for others, depend-
ing on one’s health and functional abilities. If such distinctions 
were based on race or ethnicity, we’d call it bigotry.

168	
The Right to Die
Two decades later, some might wonder if times have changed 
and awareness has increased. The 18 years of reports on medi-
cally assisted suicides from the Oregon Department of Health 
offer a clear and deeply concerning window into motivations 
behind hastened deaths. The top reasons doctors give for their 
patients’ suicides are not pain or fear of future pain but psy-
chological issues that are all too familiar to the disability com-
munity: feelings of “being a burden on others” (40%), “loss of 
autonomy” (91%), or “loss of dignity” (79%) (Oregon Public 
Health Division 2016).
We don’t know if or to what extent the assisted-suicide-
prescribing doctors knew about consumer-controlled personal 
care services, which could address these concerns. The Oregon 
law doesn’t require doctors to report whether such concerns 
were addressed or whether home care was provided to improve 
the patient’s quality of life. But disability advocates know that 
being in charge of one’s home care makes a critical difference.
The median duration of the relationship between the patient 
and the doctor who prescribed lethal drugs in Oregon was only 
12 weeks, some less than 1 week (Oregon Public Health Divi-
sion 2016). This is not the public image of the doctor who 
treated a person through a long illness and turned to assisted 
suicide after all else failed. Proponents acknowledge that the 
majority of prescribing doctors met patients who were referred 
by assisted suicide organizations (Golden 2016). Those phy-
sicians begin the relationship with the assumption that some 
conditions are worse than death.
Real disability advocacy groups also worry about the increas-
ing prevalence of abuse of functionally impaired elders, with 
federal authorities estimating that 1 in 10 elders is abused, 
mainly by family and caregivers (Lachs and Pillemer 2015). 
Against this backdrop, so-called safeguards in assisted suicide 
bills are hollow. An heir or abusive caregiver can suggest assisted 
suicide to an ill person, sign as witness to the request, and pick 
up the drugs. No independent witness is required at the death, 

	
Perspectives	
169
and in half of the Oregon cases, no such independent witness 
was present. So how would anyone know if the lethal dose was 
self-administered? If the ill person equivocated or had a change 
of heart, how would we ever know that the lethal drug was 
given with full consent (Dore 2009)? Under current report-
ing requirements, there’s no evidence of what happened at the 
end. Proponents of assisted suicide claim that there’s no evi-
dence of abuse, but the lack of depth in the government reports 
shouldn’t be taken as proof that there’s nothing to see. In fact, 
the problem cases that have come to light through mainstream 
media (Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund 2015) 
may be the tip of the iceberg.
Disability rights advocates have become a leading voice in 
the public policy debate over assisted suicide. The threats to 
people who are recently disabled by illness or injury are espe-
cially serious. As a society, we owe it to all old, ill, and dis-
abled people to lead the resistance against laws that sanction 
doctor-assisted death. State lawmakers owe it to all of us to 
look behind the public relations images of assisted suicide and 
consider the dangers to the many who are not safe from mis-
take, coercion, and abuse.
References
Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund. 2015. 
“Some Oregon and Washington State Assisted Suicide 
Abuses and Complications.” https://dredf.org/wp-content/
uploads/2015/04/Revised-OR-WA-Abuses.pdf
Dore, Margaret. 2009. “ ‘Death with Dignity’: What Do 
We Advise Our Clients?” May 2009 Bar Bulletin, King 
County Bar Association. https://www.kcba.org/newsevents/
barbulletin/BView.aspx?Month=05&Year=2009&AID=art
icle5.htm
Golden, Marilyn. 2016. “Why Assisted Suicide Must Not Be 
Legalized.” Section C.1. Doctor Shopping: All Roads Lead 

170	
The Right to Die
to Rome. http://dredf.org/public-policy/assisted-suicide/
why-assisted-suicide-must-not-be-legalized/#doctor-shopping
Johnson, Mary. 1997. “Right to Life, Fight to Die: The 
Elizabeth Bouvia Saga.” The Ragged Edge, January/February. 
http://www.raggededgemagazine.com/archive/bouvia.htm
Lachs, Mark S. and Karl A. Pillemer. 2015. “Elder Abuse.” 
New England Journal of Medicine, 373, 1947–1956. DOI: 
10.1056/NEJMra1404688.
Longmore, Paul. 1997. Essay. The Ragged Edge, January/
February. http://www.raggededgemagazine.com/archive/
p13story.htm
Not Dead Yet. 2016. “Disability Groups Opposed 
to Assisted Suicide Laws.” http://notdeadyet.org/
disability-groups-opposed-to-assisted-suicide-laws
Oregon Public Health Division. 2016. “Oregon Death with 
Dignity Act: 2015 Data Summary.” https://public.health.
oregon.gov/ProviderPartnerResources/EvaluationResearch/
DeathwithDignityAct/Documents/year18.pdf
Roscoe, Lori A., L.J. Dragovic, and Donna Cohen. 
2000. “Dr. Jack Kevorkian and Cases of Euthanasia in 
Oakland County, Michigan, 1990–1998.” New England 
Journal of Medicine, 343, 1735–1736. DOI: 10.1056/
NEJM200012073432315.
Diane Coleman is the founder, president, and CEO of Not Dead 
Yet, a national disability rights group organized to give voice to 
disability rights opposition to legalization of assisted suicide and 
euthanasia in the United States. In addition to using traditional 
advocacy strategies such as public testimony, friend of the court 
briefs, and community education through various media, Not 
Dead Yet uses direct action tactics like rallies and protests. Diane 
has a law degree, has co-taught graduate courses in medical ethics 
at the University of Illinois at Chicago, and uses a motorized wheel-
chair as well as breathing supports.

	
Perspectives	
171
The Canadian Journey to Medical Assistance in Dying
Sister Nuala Patricia Kenny
On February 6, 2015, the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) 
unanimously struck down the Criminal Code prohibitions 
against physician-assisted death (PAD) for a competent adult 
who clearly consents and has a grievous and irremediable medi-
cal condition (including an illness, a disease, or a disability) 
that causes enduring suffering that is intolerable to the indi-
vidual. In this rare situation of the legalization of assisted dying 
through judicial decision, the Court held that the prohibi-
tion on PAD violated the right to life, liberty, and security of 
the person as guaranteed by the Canadian Charter of Rights 
and Freedoms. The decision was breathtaking in its scope; 
included both physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia; was 
not restricted to terminal illness or dying; and failed to pro-
vide a clear definition of a grievous and irremediable medical 
condition.
The federal government was granted a stay of the decision 
for 1 year, later extended to 16 months, for the complex tasks 
of crafting federal and provincial legislation and professional 
regulation. After an inexplicable four-month delay, a Fed-
eral External Panel and a Provincial-Territorial Expert Advi-
sory Group were established to provide recommendations to 
governments. Provincial medical regulatory bodies began to 
develop guidelines and policies. On April 14, 2016, the federal 
government tabled Bill C-14 on medical assistance in dying 
(MAID) in the Canadian Parliament, and on June 17, 2016, a 
week after the deadline and days before Parliament adjourned 
for summer recess, Bill C-14 was passed. MAID came into 
effect in Canada without a consistent national framework of 
regulation and monitoring amidst a patchwork of provincial 
and professional regulatory guidelines.
This reflection describes some of the contentious issues 
addressed during the tumultuous 16 months of discussion and 
debate regarding the legislation and regulation. My perspective 

172	
The Right to Die
on this history is shaped by my Christian faith and my forma-
tion as a physician ethicist educated in the morality of medicine 
and experience in end-of-life care. It reflects my opposition to 
PAD and my intense personal involvement at many levels dur-
ing this time to minimize the harms of this practice, especially 
to the vulnerable, palliative end of life care and individual prac-
titioner and institutional conscience.
While the time between the SCC decision and access to 
PAD is highlighted here, the legal history of the “right to die” 
movement in Canada is traced to a 1993 decision of the SCC 
in the case of Sue Rodriguez. In a 5–4 decision, the Court rec-
ognized that the prohibition on assisted suicide infringed on 
Rodriguez’s rights but deemed it a “justifiable infringement” in 
large part because of concerns regarding protection of the vul-
nerable. There were repeated attempts at revising federal legis-
lation between 1992 and 2010, but all failed. MAID returned 
to the courts in 2012, when the British Columbia Supreme 
Court ruled in favor of plaintiffs Gloria Taylor and Kay Carter 
(both with degenerative diseases) citing violations of the Cana-
dian Charter of Rights and Freedoms in limiting their right to 
MAID. British Columbia successfully appealed the ruling, and 
it proceeded to the highest court in Canada.
Key Contentious Issues
Four overarching themes emerged in the discussions and 
debates. The first related to public support of MAID as a 
response to suffering in conflict with deep concerns from oth-
ers about the medicalization of suffering in the absence of a 
promised national palliative care strategy. Second was the divi-
sion between those for whom the SCC criteria were clear and 
directive and whose priority was optimizing access and those 
who believed in the role of legislation in interpreting and mon-
itoring policy. Third was the intent to normalize MAID as a 
practice versus the concern for robust safeguards for a uniquely 
serious and irrevocable decision, such as the evaluation of the 

	
Perspectives	
173
request by two practitioners and a mandatory period of reflec-
tion between the request and provision of MAID and strict 
reporting and monitoring. Finally, and most contentious, were 
deep divides over any restriction of MAID to terminal illness 
and dying.
Specific contentious issues related to the requirement of 
informed and voluntary consent by a competent adult, con-
cern for the protection of the vulnerable, and protection of 
conscience.
Bill C-14 confined MAID to competent adults whose deaths 
are “reasonably foreseen” and defined an adult as 18 years of 
age. The eligibility of mature minors remains a source of deep 
division. The social and emotional complexity of the relation-
ship between voluntariness and vulnerability, especially for 
those with psychiatric disorders, the homeless, the socially dis-
advantaged, and the dependent elderly, is an ongoing issue for 
many. The acceptability of advance directives for MAID, espe-
cially in an aging society with growing populations of depen-
dent elderly and persons with dementia, is still under debate. 
These contentious issues are to be the subject of independent 
review in the next two years.
The SCC decision and Bill C-14 state clearly that no prac-
titioner is required to participate in MAID. However, the 
notion of conscience is confused and contested. Protection of 
conscience has been misunderstood, not as central to moral 
agency, but as a conflict between the physician’s private beliefs 
and rights and the patient’s right to legally sanctioned medi-
cal interventions. The bill recognizes the desirability of a con-
sistent approach to issues related to MAID but acknowledges 
the province’s jurisdiction over health care. The confusion 
over the importance of conscience and duties of conscientious 
objectors and jurisdictional issues and the role of professional 
regulatory authorities have all contributed to highly inconsis-
tent regulations across the country and great distress to many 
practitioners.

174	
The Right to Die
This journey has brought Canada far from its founding 
beliefs and has revealed challenges for religion in the plural-
istic, secular public space where individual rights and choice 
dominate. Medical morality has been replaced by principle-
based bioethics. Its prioritizing of respect for autonomy has 
paved the way for the consumer model of the physician-patient 
relationship embodied in the SCC decision where the doctor 
is a simply a provider of information and technical expertise 
and where practitioners provide the technical “fix” of MAID 
to spiritual and emotional suffering. Canada has journeyed far 
but challenges for care and the education of new practitioners 
to any meaningful notion of professionalism are profound.
Nuala Patricia Kenny, OC, MD, FRCP (C), was a Sister of 
Charity of Halifax in 1962. She received her MD from Dalhou-
sie in 1972 and fellowship in the Royal College of Physician and 
Surgeons of Canada in pediatrics in 1975. In 1993, she com-
pleted a fellowship in ethics at the Kennedy Institute of Ethics at 
Georgetown University. After a distinguished career in pediatrics, 
she founded the Department of Bioethics of Dalhousie University 
Faculty of Medicine in 1995. From 2009 through 2015 she served 
as Ethics and Health Policy Advisor to the Catholic Health Alli-
ance of Canada and is presently emeritus professor, Dalhousie Uni-
versity, Halifax, Nova Scotia.
Physician-Assisted Death as a Legally  
Available Last Resort Option
Timothy E. Quill
Why might a mainstream primary care or palliative care phy-
sician who is relatively well respected in both of these fields 
become involved in this “edgy” domain? Even if I was personally 
supportive of the option of a physician-assisted death, wouldn’t 
it be safer and better for me professionally and perhaps for the 
fields to keep this discussion underground? In reflecting about 
these questions, I came up with four potential reasons I have 

	
Perspectives	
175
continued to push for PAD to become openly available as a 
“last resort” option (Quill et al. 1997).
1.	 I have cared for a wide range of seriously ill patients who 
have forced me to more forthrightly address these issues 
throughout my practice life. I take care of many strong-
willed, very ill patients and try to help them achieve the best 
possible medical treatments given their medical situations, 
the state of medical science, and their personal views and 
values. For most, when they develop a serious illness, the 
treatment plan starts with aggressive, state-of-the-science 
medical treatment alongside best possible evidence-based 
palliative care (Morrison and Meier 2004). This has been a 
“both/and” proposition for me from the beginning of my 
career, and now a growing amount of data supports that 
early inclusion of palliative care improves both quality and 
length of life (Temel et al. 2010). When disease-directed 
therapy becomes less effective and more burdensome over 
time, this dual approach usually moves toward a more pre-
dominantly palliative approach as exemplified by hospice. 
Although the transition to hospice often involves consid-
erable psychic suffering for both patient and family (and 
frequently clinicians, as they must accept the inherent 
limits of medicine in a very personal way) (Casarett and 
Quill 2007), nonetheless, once the move has been made, 
most patients are grateful and appreciative of what hospice 
has to offer (Lynn 2001). I wish that was always the end 
of the story, but, as a hospice, palliative care, and primary 
care clinician, I am painfully aware that inevitably there 
will be a few patients whose suffering becomes unaccept-
able despite excellent hospice or palliative care toward the 
end of life, and a few of those patients request assistance in 
dying (Quill 1993). Although Diane was the first patient 
to explicitly request and receive aid in dying in my clinical 
practice (Quill 1991), I had helped many previous patients 
who were in similar predicaments to die using indirect 

176	
The Right to Die
methods that society finds more acceptable (e.g., stopping 
life supports, sedation, and voluntarily stopping eating and 
drinking) (Quill et al. 1997). Whether these options are 
significantly morally different from aid in dying is a matter 
of considerable dispute (Foley and Hendin 2002; Quill and 
Battin 2002), but for patients who are dying badly, perhaps 
one of them might provide a needed escape from what is 
experienced by the patient as unacceptable suffering.
2.	 I personally would want to have the option of PAD in 
the future if my condition becomes unacceptable to me. 
I am an adamant believer in and proponent of palliative 
care and hospice, but I have seen enough suffering to know 
the limitations of these practices to relieve all major end-
of-life suffering. For all I know, I may willingly cling to life 
in the ICU no matter how much suffering I experience as 
my death approaches, but more likely than not I anticipate 
that I will probably accept a timely transition to hospice 
and hopefully die peacefully receiving standard palliative 
treatments when my time comes. But being fairly control 
oriented, as are many physicians (and others), I would find 
it very reassuring to know that I could potentially achieve 
an escape to death at a time of my own choosing should my 
dying become too prolonged and too filled with suffering 
that was unacceptable to me. I would love to have a physi-
cian with expertise in palliative care and hospice guiding 
and partnering with me in this process, perhaps challeng-
ing my request for an assisted death if it emerges, but ulti-
mately listening carefully to it and responding to the best 
of his or her ability (Quill 1993).
3.	 The likelihood of abuse with more open, predictable avail-
ability of PAD in the United States is small and could be 
minimized by the requirement of safeguards including 
second opinions by experienced palliative care providers 
(Quill et al. 1992). Over 30 years ago, we had a debate in 
the United States about whether patients on life supports 
should have the ability to voluntarily discontinue them 

	
Perspectives	
177
when death is inevitable or when the suffering associated 
with ongoing treatment was unacceptable. The reluctance 
stemmed from the fact that patients on life supports are 
among our most expensive, and there is potential for coer-
cion within the process of cessation. However, such abuse 
has not occurred. In fact, the due diligence with which 
life supports are stopped in the United States could be a 
model for PAD. At our institution, such decisions are often 
accompanied by second opinions from palliative care, eth-
ics, and psychiatry (if the patient’s decision-making capacity 
and/or the presence of confounding depression are in ques-
tion.) One can look at the medical record and see exactly 
what happened and why. Such assessment and documenta-
tion should become a standard model for all “last resort” 
options, including stopping life supports, palliative sedation 
(potentially to unconsciousness), voluntarily stopping eat-
ing and drinking, as well as PAD (Quill et al. 1992, 1997).
4.	 The method of assistance should be adapted to the cir-
cumstances and values of the patient and family but also 
needs to consider the values and expertise of the assisting 
physicians and other clinicians. As a palliative care clini-
cian with an open mind to all of these options, I frequently 
find myself along with our palliative care team struggling 
with ways to appropriately respond to severe suffering that 
has become unacceptable to the patient. The patient’s clini-
cal circumstances frequently define the boundaries. Patients 
who lack capacity cannot have PAD (where otherwise per-
mitted), and they cannot carry out voluntary cessation of 
food and fluids, but they can have proportionate sedation 
and cessation of life-prolonging treatments (Quill et  al. 
2000). Terminally ill patients with decision-making capac-
ity who cannot swallow or cannot self-administer cannot 
initiate PAD even if they live in environments where the 
practice is legally acceptable, but they can stop all life- 
prolonging treatments, including food and fluids, and they 
can have proportionate sedation. Because I practice in New 

178	
The Right to Die
York, where PAD is illegal, I would have to consider the 
potential consequences (to me and/or the patient’s family) 
of secretly providing PAD or face the legal risks of telling 
the truth. On the other hand, I can legally offer the pos-
sibility of stopping eating and drinking as well as the other 
last resort options if they fit the patient’s circumstances. If a 
clinician cannot provide a legally available option for which 
the patient potentially qualifies (living in Oregon but being 
personally morally opposed to PAD), the clinician should 
let the patient and family know of this limit in a timely 
way but also should be clear about ways in which he or she 
can respond (perhaps with some of the other “last resort” 
options). Over the past several years, I  have supported 
several patients voluntarily stopping to eat and drink on 
our palliative care unit who clearly would have preferred 
a physician-assisted death were it legal (and I would have 
provided it under that circumstance), but they and their 
families were still appreciative that mutually acceptable 
options for an escape could be found.
I have received a lot of attention in this domain because 
I openly speak and write about my advocacy for legal access to 
PAD as one last resort option, but this is a small but impor-
tant part of a much larger movement about which I am pas-
sionate, which includes advocacy for (1) universal access to 
basic health care for our entire population (including more 
open discussion of the boundaries of what treatments might 
and might not be included within that universal access); (2) 
universal access to palliative care for all seriously ill patients as 
part of the standard of care (mainly provided by better trained 
primary care and non-palliative care specialists with palliative 
care specialists available to help with the most challenging cases 
[Quill and Abernethy 2013]); and (3) open and predictable 
access to a wide range of last resort options, potentially includ-
ing physician-assisted death, as small but important pieces of 

	
Perspectives	
179
our commitment not to abandon those who continue to suffer 
unacceptably despite unrestrained efforts to palliate the suffer-
ing (Quill and Cassel 1995).
References
Casarett, D.J. and T.E. Quill. 2007. “ ‘I’m Not Ready for 
Hospice’: Strategies for Timely and Effective Hospice 
Discussions.” Annals of Internal Medicine, 146, 443–449.
Foley, K., and H. Hendin, editors. 2002. The Case against 
Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End of Life Care. Baltimore, 
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lynn, J. 2001. “Perspectives on Care at the Close of Life. 
Serving Patients Who May Die Soon and Their Families: The 
Role of Hospice and Other Services.” JAMA, 285, 925–932.
Morrison, R.S. and D.E. Meier. 2004. “Clinical Practice. 
Palliative Care.” New England Journal of Medicine, 350, 
2582–2590.
Quill, T.E. 1991. “Death and Dignity. A Case of 
Individualized Decision Making.” New England Journal of 
Medicine, 324, 691–694.
Quill, T.E. 1993. “Doctor, I Want to Die. Will You Help 
Me?” JAMA, 270, 870–873.
Quill, T.E. and A.P. Abernethy. 2013. “Generalist Plus 
Specialist Palliative Care—Creating a More Sustainable 
Model.” New England Journal of Medicine, 368, 
1173–1175.
Quill, T.E. and M. Battin, editors. 2002. Physician-Assisted 
Dying: The Case for Palliative Care and Patient Choice. 
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Quill, T.E and C.K. Cassel. 1995. “Nonabandonment: 
A Central Obligation for Physicians.” Annals of Internal 
Medicine, 122, 368–374.

180	
The Right to Die
Quill, T.E., C.K. Cassel, and D.E. Meier. 1992. “Care of the 
Hopelessly Ill. Proposed Clinical Criteria for Physician-
Assisted Suicide.” New England Journal of Medicine, 327, 
1380–1384.
Quill, T.E., B.C. Lee, and S. Nunn. 2000. “Palliative 
Treatments of Last Resort: Choosing the Least Harmful 
Alternative. University of Pennsylvania Center for Bioethics 
Assisted Suicide Consensus Panel.” Annals of Internal 
Medicine, 132, 488–493.
Quill, T.E., B. Lo, and D.W. Brock. 1997. “Palliative Options 
of Last Resort: A Comparison of Voluntarily Stopping 
Eating and Drinking, Terminal Sedation, Physician-
Assisted Suicide, and Voluntary Active Euthanasia.” JAMA, 
278, 2099–2104.
Temel, J.S., J.A. Greer, A. Muzikansky, et al. 2010. “Early 
Palliative Care for Patients with Metastatic Non-Small-
Cell Lung Cancer.” New England Journal of Medicine, 363, 
733–742.
Timothy E. Quill, MD, is the Thomas and Georgia Gosnell Distin-
guished Professor in Palliative Care at the University of Rochester 
Medical Center (URMC), where he is also professor of medicine, 
psychiatry, medical humanities, and nursing. He was the founding 
director of the URMC Palliative Care Division and a past presi-
dent of the American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine.
Dr.  Quill has published and lectured widely about various 
aspects of the doctor-patient relationship, with special focus on end-
of-life decision making, including delivering bad news, nonaban-
donment, discussing palliative care earlier, and exploring last resort 
options. He is the author of several books on end-of-life care and 
over 150 articles published in major medical journals. Dr. Quill 
was the lead physician plaintiff in the New York State legal case 
challenging the law prohibiting physician-assisted death that was  
heard in 1997 by the U.S. Supreme Court (Quill v. Vacco).

	
Perspectives	
181
Death with Dignity, 2016
E. James Lieberman
In Oregon, medical aid in dying has been legal since 1998, 
when 24 terminally ill people received prescriptions to hasten 
death and 16 used them. The law is known as the Death with 
Dignity Act (DWDA). Last year in Oregon, most people who 
hastened death were elderly: 78 percent over age 65, with the 
median age being 73. Ninety percent died at home, usually in 
hospice care. With age and illness come disability, pain, and 
limited mobility.
The main reasons for hastening death are loss of autonomy 
and dignity and inability to enjoy life. Religious conserva-
tives dismiss such motives; they believe that suffering is to be 
endured if it cannot be ameliorated and that unearned suffering 
is redemptive. In a country where religious freedom is a key 
value, this religious minority is remarkably powerful in limit-
ing personal choice for all. Although in principle ecclesiastical 
doctrine cannot be imposed on Americans, such doctrines have 
major influence on policy and legislation. Unlike a number of 
countries that have much better health statistics than the United 
States, we limit effective birth control in health programs as well 
as aid in dying, in accord with conservative religious doctrine.
The term assisted suicide is misleading and prejudicial. Poll-
ing shows that a larger majority of respondents favor an Ore-
gon-type law when questions refer to physician aid in dying 
and patient choice rather than assisted suicide. From the psy-
chiatric/medical standpoint, DWDA patients and the typical 
suicide are very different.
•	 The DWDA patient is terminally ill and wants to live; the 
suicidal patient has no terminal illness but wants to die.
•	 Death with dignity is chosen, peaceful, and supported by 
loved ones; suicide brings shock and tragedy to families and 
friends.

182	
The Right to Die
•	 Death with dignity is openly planned; it only changes tim-
ing to a small degree but adds significant control in a socially 
approved way. By contrast, suicide is secretly planned, im-
pulsive, or violent and wastes years of potentially good life.
•	 Death with dignity empowers vulnerable patients and their 
loved ones; suicide expresses despair and futility.
Our society observes and protects separation of church and 
state. Citizens have freedom of choice in religious matters. 
Religious and political groups may practice according to their 
values but not impose their objections to physician aid in dying 
on others.
In summary, the Death with Dignity Act is consistent with
1.	 the right of individuals to exercise choice in a free country,
2.	 ethical medical practice,
3.	 the integrity of the doctor-patient relationship, and
4.	 the role of state law in regulating medical practice.
E. James Lieberman, MD, has authored articles and books on 
public health and mental health, including Like It Is: A Teen Sex 
Guide (with Karen Lieberman Troccoli, MPH). He was influ-
enced by the post-Freudian approach to psychotherapy developed 
by Otto Rank, and wrote the definitive biography, Acts of Will, 
published also in French and German.
Medical Futility, Then and Now
Barron H. Lerner
When an article promoting the idea of medical futility 
appeared in the Annals of Internal Medicine in 1990, my father 
was thrilled. He believed the term was an apt description of 
the end-stage cases he too often saw as an infectious diseases 
consultant, in which he was expected to prescribe progressively 
more complicated antibiotic regimens to severely ill patients 
with no hope of recovery.

	
Perspectives	
183
The concept of medical futility has achieved mixed success. 
Advocates have promoted it as a way to discourage aggres-
sive treatment of medical conditions that are not reversible. 
Critics—and in some instances the courts—have seen it as an 
unreasonable strategy that interferes with patients’ rights.
A few years ago, while writing a book on my father’s and my 
medical careers (Lerner 2014), I had the opportunity to revisit 
the concept of medical futility by reading journals that my 
father kept during his years in practice. His stories remind us 
of the types of cases that have pushed physicians to try to limit 
the use of questionable interventions at the end of life. My dad 
did so as an unabashed paternalist, something that is no longer 
acceptable. But we should embrace new strategies that seek to 
achieve this goal in an era of bioethics.
Between the mid-1950s and mid-1970s, when my father first 
studied and practiced medicine, doctors generally decided when 
severely ill patients died. They quietly withheld antibiotics, res-
pirators, and, ultimately, cardiopulmonary resuscitation. In some 
instances, these decisions were secretly recorded in patients’ charts.
Trained as a paternalist, my father was comfortable with this 
approach. But times were changing. By the late 1970s, the con-
cepts of patient autonomy and informed consent, promoted by 
the new discipline of bioethics, were shifting control of medical 
decisions to patients. When patients were dying, resuscitation 
became the default option unless a patient or family member 
had signed a do-not-resuscitate form.
Although my dad liked aspects of bioethics, he believed 
that—in the case of dying patients—his hands were being tied. 
For example, one of his demented patients had both a feeding 
tube and a tracheostomy, a hole in his windpipe that was con-
nected to a ventilator. Although the patient was “never going 
to get better or leave a hospital-type setting,” my father wrote, 
“his family will not accept that reality and continues to pray for 
a miracle, which will not be forthcoming.”
In another case, an elderly man hospitalized for six months 
after a hip fracture had experienced countless complications, 

184	
The Right to Die
including infection after infection. “My role in all of this,” my 
father later ruefully noted, “was to juggle his antibiotics, risk 
severe toxicities from the multitude of drugs employed and con-
stantly re-adjust and re-dose according to the circumstances.”
In some instances, my father not only objected to aggres-
sive interventions but actively sought to prevent them. For 
example, he had treated infections for years in a woman with a 
bone marrow disorder that eventually became leukemia. When 
she dramatically deteriorated with leukemic cells throughout 
her body, my dad decided not to treat a pneumonia she had 
developed. Infection, he liked to say, was the “final straw in the 
deterioration of so many of the body’s vital organs and func-
tions.” The patient died.
Similarly, when a young man with end-stage AIDS devel-
oped what my father suspected was lymphoma in his spleen, 
which was causing unbearable pain, he prescribed morphine 
and did not raise the possibility of treating the cancer either 
with the patient or with his parents.
The most jarring case was one in which my father actually 
physically placed his body over a recently deceased patient to 
prevent his colleagues from performing resuscitation. She had 
“agonizing” pain and been hospitalized for months and bed-
bound for years. Resuscitation was inappropriate, he believed, 
although the patient’s primary physician had not obtained a 
do-not-resuscitate order.
In one sense, these stories raise the exact concerns raised by 
critics of medical futility. My dad seemed to be judging for oth-
ers what was an acceptable quality of life.
But he would have argued that he was using his clinical  
expertise—combined with what he had learned about his 
patients’ values and preferences by spending time with them—to 
make the correct decisions. After all, he was in the hospital seven 
days a week, gave his sickest patients our home phone number, 
and even managed their cases when we were on vacation.
Thus, after years of keeping his extremely ill AIDS patient 
alive, my father believed the two of them had a “tacit 

	
Perspectives	
185
understanding” about when it was time to let go. After pre-
venting the resuscitation effort, my dad wrote that he had acted 
“in the name of common, ordinary humanity” and based on 
his “30+ years as a physician responsible for caring and reliev-
ing the pain of my patients who can’t be cured.”
Building on the lessons of the futility movement, modern 
health professionals are developing more sophisticated strate-
gies for assessing if—and how—aggressive technologies should 
be offered to severely ill patients. For example, a 2012 article 
in the Journal of the American Medical Association (Blinder-
man et al. 2012) proposed a framework in which physicians 
could offer CPR as a plausible option, recommend against it or 
not offer it at all. Palliative care specialists are not only experts 
in the scientific value of potential interventions but have the 
time—as did my father—to get to know patients and families.
These are all positive developments. I suspect my dad, who 
died in 2012, would also have been pleased. By the end of 
his career, he was becoming increasingly uncomfortable invok-
ing the paternalistic approach that he had once so devotedly 
practiced. Ultimately, what mattered most was doing the right 
thing for dying patients, not who was in charge.
References
Blinderman, Craig D., Eric L. Krakauer, and Mildred 
Z. Solomon. 2012. “Time to Revise the Approach to 
Determining Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Status.” 
JAMA, 307, 917–918.
Lerner, Barron H. 2014. The Good Doctor: A Father, A Son 
and the Evolution of Medical Ethics. Boston: Beacon Press.
Barron H. Lerner, MD, PhD, is a professor in the Departments of 
Medicine and Population Health at New York University Langone 
Medical Center. His book The Breast Cancer Wars: Hope, Fear 
and the Pursuit of a Cure in Twentieth-Century America, pub-
lished by Oxford University Press, received the William H. Welch 

186	
The Right to Die
Medal of the American Association for the History of Medicine and 
was named a most notable book by the American Library Associa-
tion. Dr. Lerner’s fifth book, The Good Doctor: A Father, a Son 
and the Evolution of Medical Ethics, was published by Beacon 
Press in May 2014 and came out in paperback in May 2015. In 
addition to his research, Dr. Lerner practices general internal med-
icine and teaches medical ethics and the history of medicine to both 
undergraduates and medical students at New York University.



189
4	
Profiles
Jane Cody of Franklin County, Vermont, speaks out against a Death with 
Dignity bill at the statehouse in Montpelier in February 2007. Vermont op-
ponents of a Death with Dignity law worked for over a decade to persuade 
legislators to defeat the bill. However, it was finally passed in 2015. (AP 
Photo/Alden Pellett)
Introduction
This chapter provides information about persons and groups that 
have participated in the discussions, debates, and clashes 
surrounding the right to die controversy. The individuals on both 
sides of the conflict noted here are philosophers, physicians, clergy, 
advocates for the disabled and other vulnerable persons, professors, 
and politicians. The organized groups reflect the wide array of 
interests—political, religious, medical, elderly, disabled, nursing—
engaged in support of or in opposition to legitimatizing the right to 
die with physician assistance in America. In this conflict-laden 
issue, one of a number of controversial public policy issues, there are 
thousands of individuals and dozens of groups participating. This 
chapter tries to capture the essential diversity of the people and 
groups engaged in the right to die battles.
Individuals Supporting Death with Dignity Laws
Marcia Angell
Marcia Angell, MD, is senior lecturer at Harvard Medi-
cal School as well as a faculty associate in the Center for 

190	
The Right to Die
Bioethics. In med school, she trained in both internal medi-
cine and anatomic pathology, but after her academic training 
ended, she became an advocate for change in the relationship 
between patient and physician, especially when the patient 
confronts death. Dr. Angel is an ardent defender of the right 
of a terminally ill patient to receive the highest level of care 
from physicians and hospital professionals. Dr. Angell writes 
frequently in professional journals (e.g., The New England 
Journal of Medicine) and the popular media (e.g., New York 
Review of Books) on a wide range of topics, particularly medi-
cal ethics, health policy, the nature of medical evidence, the 
interface of medicine and the law, and care at the end of life. 
She lectures frequently to public and professional audiences, 
makes many media appearances, and consults with govern-
ment agencies and congressional committees on issues such 
as how government should deal with pharmaceutical over-
charging, medicine, and the law, and what kind of care is 
best for a person at the end of life. In all her writings, talks, 
and presentations, she defends the right of a competent, ter-
minally ill patient residing in one of the six states that have 
physician-assisted dying (PAD) to hasten death in accordance 
with the state law.
Margaret P. Battin
Philosopher and bioethicist Peggy Battin has worked for 
decades to defend the right of terminally ill individuals to 
have greater control over the timing and manner of their 
deaths. As professor of philosophy and bioethics at the Uni-
versity of Utah, Battin tackles issues around end-of-life care, 
suicide, euthanasia, and religion. She has written a number 
of books, some with Timothy Quill, and articles, on the eth-
ics of the right to have a physician assist a dying patient to 
hasten death. In 2008, her personal and professional worlds 
collided when her husband Brooke, an English professor at 
the University of Utah, broke his neck in a bicycle accident, 

	
Profiles	
191
becoming quadriplegic. When he eventually decided to die 
after years of struggling with his condition, Battin found her-
self torn when he asked her to disconnect his ventilator and 
other life-prolonging technologies. Her personal experience 
made her reexamine her beliefs around an individual’s right to 
autonomy, as he sought to achieve the death he believed “least 
worst” for him. Her personal experience with grief and dying 
has strengthened her support for a person’s right to die with 
the aid of a physician.
Gerald Dworkin
Dr. Gerald Dworkin is an outspoken professor of philosophy 
at the University of California, Davis. Dworkin’s main areas 
of research include the nature and justification of personal 
autonomy, paternalism in the criminal law, and the issue of 
which acts may legitimately be criminalized by the state. One 
of Dworkin’s major books is a defense of physician-assisted sui-
cide, Euthanasia and Physician-Assisted Suicide: For and Against. 
In it, he argues against the prevailing double standard applied 
when treating terminally ill patients: On the one hand, doc-
tors who approve of withdrawing patients from life support 
at their request, or who approve of terminal sedation, are not 
subject to criminal indictment. However, physicians who assist 
a terminally ill patient to hasten death are condemned by the 
medical profession, damned by the Church, and indicted and 
prosecuted for violation of the “assisting suicide” state criminal 
statute. He has been a strong advocate for legalizing euthanasia 
and physician-assisted suicide.
Linda Ganzini
Dr. Ganzini is a public health medical practitioner who has 
practiced in Oregon for decades. She has been engaged in 
developing regulations and guidelines for the Oregon Death 
with Dignity Act (ODWDA) with the Oregon Health 

192	
The Right to Die
Administration. Dr. Ganzini’s research interests are centered 
in the areas of geriatric mental health, end-of-life-care issues, 
and improving palliative care for the terminally ill. Dr. Gan-
zini has published extensively in peer-reviewed journals, 
invited articles, book chapters, editorials, and commentaries 
on the topics of the ODWDA, physician aid in dying, assess-
ing mental health in the terminally ill, and medical ethics 
among psychiatrists and health care providers. She is active 
in medical, geriatric, and other medical conferences, talking 
about medical ethics issues involving the care of terminally 
ill patients, underscoring the value of palliative care as well 
as the value of a final option for a suffering terminally ill 
patient: PAD.
Booth Gardner
Booth Gardner was a very popular two-term governor of Wash-
ington whose diagnosis with Parkinson’s disease after he left 
office helped motivate him to lead a successful voter initiative 
to allow physician-assisted suicide. Gardner’s condition did not 
qualify him to use the Washington Death with Dignity Act, 
which the state’s voters approved in 2008. The law, modeled 
on one passed earlier in Oregon, allows terminally ill adults to 
obtain a doctor’s prescription for a lethal dose of medication. 
Gardner knew that Parkinson’s was not considered terminal 
under the law. “I wish we could do a more liberal law, but we’re 
going to pattern it after the Oregon law because it passed,” he 
said during the 2008 campaign. “We’re not going to go farther 
than that now. My goal,” he said then, “is to lessen the pain of 
dying.” The measure passed with 58 percent of the vote. Gard-
ner died on March 16, 2013, at his home in Tacoma due to 
complications of Parkinson’s.
Stephen Hawking
Stephen Hawking is a brilliant physicist and mathemati-
cian and author of A Brief History of Time, which remains an 
international best seller. In 1963, Hawking contracted motor 

	
Profiles	
193
neuron disease (a type of ALS) and was given two years to live, 
yet he went on to Cambridge and became a brilliant researcher 
and professorial fellow there. Hawking is now regarded as one 
of the most brilliant theoretical physicists since Einstein. When 
he was diagnosed with his ailment, Hawking became a spokes-
man for severely disabled persons who wished to stay alive as 
long as possible. He became an arch opponent of all efforts 
to legalize physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia. Since the 
middle of the first decade of the 21st century, however, he has 
become a prominent advocate for the legalization of physician-
assisted death in England.
Derek Humphry
Derek Humphry is a British-born American journalist, author, 
and principal—and quite outspoken—founder in 1980 of 
the Hemlock Society USA, the nation’s first organization pro-
moting physician-assisted death and voluntary euthanasia. 
Humphry zealously argues for the right of persons to choose 
to die on their own terms—with the passive (PAD) or active 
(euthanasia) assistance of a physician. He has served as Presi-
dent of the World Federation of Right to Die Societies. Both 
the Hemlock Society and the World Federation of the Right to 
Die Societies aggressively support the decriminalization of vol-
untary euthanasia and, as the initial step toward that goal, pas-
sage of PAD laws. He is the author of a dozen books about the 
value of euthanasia, including Jean’s Way (about his wife’s strug-
gle with a terminal illness) and the best seller (for many years) 
Final Exit, laying out for readers the arguments for euthanasia 
and the ways it can be achieved.
Jack Kevorkian
A practicing doctor (pathologist) in Michigan, in 1990 Jack 
Kevorkian became a worldwide notorious figure who assisted 
people in ending their lives. He quickly became known as 
“Dr. Death” and for nearly a decade he advertised in newspa-
pers his willingness to help people end their lives. He did not 

194	
The Right to Die
determine whether the person requesting assistance was termi-
nal, was mentally competent (or not), or was in physical or 
emotional pain. He merely provided a service to literal strang-
ers who heard of him and asked him to help them end their 
lives. Between 1990 and 1997, he assisted more than 130 per-
sons to end their lives. After years of conflict with the Michigan 
criminal justice system over the legality of his actions, Kevork-
ian was tried for euthanizing an ALS patient who could not 
operate the “death” machine Kevorkian had made and installed 
in his somewhat battered Volkswagen bus. (All prior deaths 
were instances where the person was able to start the death 
machine without Kevorkian’s active assistance.) Convicted of 
second-degree murder of the ALS patient in 1999, he spent 
eight years in prison. Kevorkian’s actions spurred national and 
international debate on the ethics of passive physician aid in 
dying, euthanasia, and hospice care. He died in Royal Oak, 
Michigan, on June 3, 2011.
Barbara Coombs Lee
Barbara Coombs Lee is the president of Compassion  & 
Choices, one of the two major national organizations dedi-
cated to expanding and protecting the rights of the terminally 
ill through actions in state and federal courts as well as exten-
sive lobbying activities on behalf of state right to die groups. 
She practiced as a nurse and physician assistant for 25 years 
before beginning a career in law and health policy. Since then 
she has devoted her professional life to individual choice and 
empowerment in health care. As a private attorney, as counsel 
to the Oregon State Senate, as a managed-care executive, and 
finally as chief petitioner for the ODWDA litigation in federal 
courts between 1997 and 2006, she championed initiatives that 
enabled individuals to consider a full range of choices and be 
full participants in their health care decisions. Under Coombs 
Lee’s leadership since 1996, the end-of-life choice movement 
has achieved many milestones. In 2008, Coombs Lee was a 
senior advisor for the Washington State Death with Dignity 

	
Profiles	
195
ballot initiative that voters approved by an 18-point margin, 
which led to Washington becoming the second state to legalize 
aid in dying. In 2009, the Montana Supreme Court ruled, in 
the landmark case brought by Compassion & Choices (Baxter 
v. Montana), that it is not against the state’s public policy for 
a physician to provide aid in dying to a mentally competent, 
terminally ill adult. In 2013, her organization’s decade of work 
with Patient Choices Vermont led to the passage of the Vermont 
PAD legislation. She is a tireless advocate for legislation or judi-
cial decisions that legitimatize a terminally ill person’s right to 
seek the assistance of a doctor to hasten death. Her work with 
Brittany Maynard in California in 2014 as well as her organiza-
tion’s support of PAD legislation in California culminated in 
that state becoming, in 2016, the fifth state to allow PAD.
Barron H. Lerner
Barron H. Lerner is a professor of medicine in the Divisions of 
General Medicine and the Medical Humanities at New York 
University’s Langone Medical Center. He has been involved in 
the medical futility movement since the 1990s and has writ-
ten important books (The Breast Cancer Wars) as well as profes-
sional journal articles discussing the importance of a physician 
changing from curing a dying patient to caring for the person. 
He views the medical profession’s zealous pursuit of keeping a 
patient alive using the latest medical devices, drugs, and other 
experiments as medically futile, ethically wrong, and lacking 
any genuine concern for the suffering patient. In addition to 
his research, Dr. Lerner practices general internal medicine and 
teaches medical ethics and the history of medicine.
Brittany Maynard
Brittany Lauren Maynard was born on November 19, 1984, in 
Anaheim, California. In 2014, Maynard, when only 29 years 
old, was diagnosed with an inoperable brain tumor. In short 
order, with the help of Compassion & Choices, she became 
the public face for the death with dignity movement in the 

196	
The Right to Die
United States. Because California had not yet passed a physi-
cian-assisted death bill, she and her husband moved to Oregon 
in order to use the ODWDA. She ended her life on Novem-
ber 1, 2014, at her home in Portland, Oregon. Her cause of 
death was recorded, in accordance with the Oregon death with 
dignity law, as a brain tumor.
Philip Nitschke
Philip Nitschke is, like Derek Humphry and Jack Kevorkian, 
an aggressive zealot for the legalization of voluntary euthanasia. 
He is the Founder of Exit International, a worldwide advo-
cacy group working to decriminalize euthanasia and the use 
of “assisting a suicide” criminal statutes to prevent physician-
assisted death from taking place. In 1996, Nitschke became 
the first doctor in the world to administer a legal, lethal injec-
tion (voluntary euthanasia) under the short-lived Rights of the 
Terminally Ill Act of 1995. Four of Nitschke’s terminally ill 
patients used this law to have him end their suffering before 
the law was overturned in March 1997 by the Australian Par-
liament. The same year, Nitschke retired from medical practice 
to found the Voluntary Euthanasia Research Foundation (now 
called Exit International). Despite not practicing as a doctor 
for well over a decade, his medical registration was suspended 
by the Australian Medical Board in July 2014. The Northern 
Territory Supreme Court in July 2015 found the board’s deci-
sion to be unlawful, and Dr. Nitschke’s right to be registered 
as a medical practitioner in Australia was immediately restored. 
He continues to write and speak out about the importance 
of and the liberty of dying patients to choose euthanasia and 
physician-assisted death in America, New Zealand, Australia, 
and Europe.
Timothy E. Quill
Timothy E. Quill is a professor of medicine, psychiatry, and 
medical humanities at the University of Rochester School of 

	
Profiles	
197
Medicine and Dentistry. He is also the director of the Center 
for Ethics, Humanities, and Palliative Care and a board-certi-
fied palliative care consultant in Rochester, New York. Quill 
has been at the forefront of the right to die movement in Amer-
ica since the late 1980s, with his seminal article about how his 
conversations over many years with a leukemia patient led to 
his providing her with a prescription for a fatal dosage of medi-
cine. After the article appeared in The New England Journal of 
Medicine, he was indicted (but not convicted) for violating the 
New York State “assisting a suicide” law. Since then, Dr. Quill 
has published and lectured widely about various aspects of the 
doctor-patient relationship, with special focus on end-of-life 
decision making, including delivering bad news, nonabandon-
ment, discussing palliative care earlier, and exploring last-resort 
options (including physician assistance in dying in those states 
that allow such counsel and action) with his patients. He is 
the author of many books on end-of-life situations and has 
published numerous articles in major medical journals. One 
of his coauthors on a few of these books is Peggy Battin, a phi-
losophy and medical ethics professor at the University of Utah. 
In the mid-1990s, Dr. Quill was the lead physician plaintiff 
in the New York State legal case challenging the law punish-
ing those convicted of “assisting a suicide.” The U.S. Supreme 
Court, in 1997, heard the case (Quill v. Vacco) along with a case 
from Washington State (Washington State v. Glucksberg). In two 
9–0 opinions, the Court, in opinions written by Chief Justice 
William Rehnquist, upheld the legality of “assisting a suicide” 
criminal laws. Dr. Quill continues to work for more extensive, 
nationwide palliative care and hospice systems; these substan-
tive changes in how society cares for the elderly have come a 
long way since the first palliative care facility and hospice pro-
gram became reality in the 1970s. Quill points out that less 
than half of the chronically and terminally ill patients partici-
pate in either program. Beyond that, Quill believes, is the last 
available option for those terminally ill patients who still are in 
pain and suffering: PAD.

198	
The Right to Die
Eli D. Stutsman
Eli Stutsman is a practicing attorney in Portland, Oregon, and 
secretary on the Board of Directors of the Death with Dignity 
National Center, a major right to die organization. Stutsman 
cofounded Oregon Right to Die in 1993, the political action 
committee that passed the ODWDA into law. He was the 
founding president of the Oregon Death with Dignity Legal 
Defense and Education Center in 1995, which later merged 
with the Death with Dignity National Center, as well as the 
Oregon Death with Dignity Political Action Fund, founded 
in 2001. He was the lead author of the ODWDA in 1993 and 
served as the lead political and legal strategist during the 1994 
campaign to pass the law and again during the 1997 campaign 
to defeat its repeal by the state legislature. Stutsman success-
fully defended the death with dignity law in the first federal 
court challenge, Lee v. Oregon, spanning 1994–1997. He later 
prevailed against the U.S. Attorney General and the Drug 
Enforcement Administration in a second round of federal court 
litigation, Oregon v. Ashcroft and Gonzales v. Oregon, spanning 
2001–2006, in which he won an injunction against the U.S. 
attorney general on behalf of a physician and a pharmacist, 
both threatened with criminal sanctions. On January 17, 2006, 
the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 6–3 in favor of the physician, 
pharmacist, and the state of Oregon.
In 2007, Stutsman authored the Washington Death with 
Dignity Act, passed into law by Washington voters on Novem-
ber 4, 2008. He was a key participant in the drafting of the 
Vermont PAD legislation (passed in 2013) and assisted in the 
decades-long effort by PAD advocates in California until a bill 
was passed in 2015. He continues to serve as a vital legal and 
political consultant in efforts by PAD supporters in other states 
to draft—and pass—death with dignity legislation.
Katheryn L. Tucker
Tucker is director of Legal Affairs for Compassion & Choices, 
the national public interest organization dedicated to improv-
ing end-of-life care and expanding and protecting the rights 

	
Profiles	
199
of the terminally ill. She served as lead counsel representing 
patients and physicians in two landmark 1997 U.S. Supreme 
Court cases (Vacco and Washington), “asserting that mentally 
competent terminally ill patients have a constitutional right to 
choose aid in dying.” The cases brought much needed attention 
to improving care of the dying and to convince the Supreme 
Court to acknowledge the federal constitutional right to aggres-
sive pain management. Between 1997 and 2006, joined by co-
counsel Eli D. Stutsman, Tucker also successfully defended the 
ODWDA from attacks from the federal legislature and the U.S. 
Department of Justice, culminating in the 2006 U.S. Supreme 
Court decision Oregon v. Gonzales, in which the justices, by a 
vote of 6–3, concluded that the Drug Enforcement Admin-
istration unconstitutionally expanded the scope of the 1970 
CSA in order to prohibit Oregon physicians from prescribing 
“controlled substances” to terminally ill patients. Tucker con-
tinues to address critics of the right to die in law review articles, 
conferences, and other outreach ways.
Dick and Ginny Walters
Inspired by passage of the ODWDA, Dick and Ginny Walters 
wanted the same peace of mind, choice, and control for people 
in their home state of Vermont. They founded the advocacy 
organization Patient Choices Vermont in 2002. With the help 
of Eli Stutsman, they translated the Oregon law into Vermont 
language and started calling political leaders in the legislature. 
After getting 30 or 35 to sign off on the idea, they began the 
back-breaking work of educating Vermont citizens, legislators, 
and others about the value of PAD. After years of diligence and 
persistence—and nearly a decade of legislative defeats—they 
succeeded in helping to pass the Patient Choice and Control 
at the End of Life bill in 2013. For their superlative advocacy, 
Compassion  & Choices honored Dick and Ginny with the 
2015 Hugh B. Gallagher award, which is given annually to 
activists who have been the most effective in communicating—
especially to those of diverse age, race, religion, ethnicity, sex-
ual orientation, or physical abilities—the importance of better 

200	
The Right to Die
health care and expanded choice at the end of life. Vermont 
Governor Peter Shumlin commended their tireless work to pass 
Vermont’s aid-in-dying law in a proclamation on June 4, 2015. 
Dick Walters used the Vermont Patient Choice and Control at 
End of Life Act to die peacefully on October 16, 2015.
Samuel D. Williams
The modern debate about physician-assisted death and volun-
tary euthanasia can be traced to 1870, when Samuel D. Wil-
liams (a school teacher and member of a local philosophy club) 
argued for voluntary euthanasia in a speech at the Birmingham 
Speculative Club in England. He advocated the use of newly 
created analgesic drugs (ether, chloroform, and, especially, mor-
phine) not only to alleviate terminal pain but to intentionally 
end a patient’s life. His speech initiated euthanasia and assisted 
suicide debates when it was subsequently published in Popular 
Science Monthly in 1873. In this seminal essay, Williams was the 
first person in the modern era to advocate for voluntary eutha-
nasia for workers who were grievously injured while working 
in dangerous professions (mining, railroads, etc.). Arguing that 
mercy killing and assisted suicide should be allowed for those 
who are “hopelessly suffering,” Williams stated that
in all cases it should be the duty of the medical attendant, 
whenever so desired by the patient, to administer 
chloroform, or any other such anesthetics as may by and 
by supersede chloroform, so as to destroy consciousness at 
once, and put the sufferer at once to a quick and painless 
death; precautions being adopted to prevent any possible 
abuse of such duty; and means being taken to establish 
beyond any possibility of doubt or question, that the 
remedy was applied at the express wish of the patient. 
(Williams 1873)
It was a sensational argument for euthanasia, one that became 
the trigger for the emergence of voluntary euthanasia defenders 

	
Profiles	
201
in nations across the globe over the next half century. Wil-
liams’s euthanasia proposal quickly received serious attention 
in the medical journals and at scientific meetings in England, 
America, and Europe. Still, most physicians held to the belief 
that pain medication could be administered only to alleviate 
pain, not to hasten death. Shortly after his essay appeared, the 
American Medical Association, in its journal JAMA, vigorously 
attacked his euthanasia proposal as an attempt to turn the 
doctor into an executioner. This animosity between the pro-
fessional medical community (doctors, nurses, hospital admin-
istrators, and others) and supporters of euthanasia and PAD 
has continued into the 21st century.
Individuals Opposed to Death with Dignity Laws
John Ashcroft
U.S. attorney general John Ashcroft was one of the most pow-
erful members of President George W. Bush’s cabinet. Ashcroft 
had served as a state attorney general, Missouri governor, and 
U.S. senator prior to being nominated for U.S. attorney gen-
eral on December 22, 2000. Ashcroft’s nomination ran into 
major opposition in the Senate over his extremely conserva-
tive religious and political beliefs, including his opposition to 
abortion and his actions from the late 1980s as governor of 
Missouri to prevent voters from passing a PAD law. Ashcroft 
was confirmed, but the 42 votes against him in the Senate was 
the largest number ever cast against a U.S. attorney general’s 
confirmation.
Following the contentious confirmation, Ashcroft vowed to 
renew the war on drugs, reduce violence due to firearms, find 
a way to delegitimize the abortion business, and combat dis-
crimination. His conservative social views made him a contro-
versial figure in the Bush administration. Despite his long-time 
support for “state’s rights” while a state official, he brought fed-
eral action against Oregon’s law allowing assisted suicide and 
against California’s law allowing medicinal use of marijuana. 

202	
The Right to Die
After filing a petition in the U.S. Supreme Court, Ashcroft v. 
Oregon (2005), that defended the right of a federal administra-
tive agency to prosecute a physician dispensing a controlled 
substance to a dying patient because PAD was not a legitimate 
medical protocol, Ashcroft resigned his position. The case was 
eventually decided by the Supreme Court as Gonzales v. Oregon 
(now named after Ashcroft’s successor, Alberto Gonzales).
Sissela Bok
One of the best-known ethicists in the United States, Profes-
sor Sissela Bok (author of Lying: Moral Choice in Public and 
Private) has argued that the legalization of euthanasia and phy-
sician-assisted suicide entails grave risks and does not address 
the needs, especially palliative and comfort care, of those at the 
end of their lives. This tragic reality for most terminally ill per-
sons is most pronounced in nations without universal health 
insurance available to all. While she believes that a competent, 
terminally ill patient has a right to determine his or her fate 
and can, therefore, order doctors to withdraw (or withhold) 
all medical devices that sustain life, Bok categorically rejects 
PAD and euthanasia. Her continuing objection to euthanasia 
and PAD legislation is clearly enunciated in her coauthored 
1998 book Euthanasia and Physician-Assisted Suicide (For and 
Against).
Diane Coleman
Diane Coleman is a person with neuromuscular disabilities 
who has used a motorized wheelchair since the age of 11. Since 
then, she has been an outspoken advocate for quality health 
care for the disabled, including writing articles and books and 
coauthoring petitions to state and federal courts. She has also 
become, alongside religious and medical professionals, a fierce 
opponent of physician-assisted death and voluntary eutha-
nasia. Coleman is the president and CEO of Not Dead Yet 
(NDY), a national disability rights group which she founded in 
1996 to give voice to disability rights opposition to legalization 

	
Profiles	
203
of assisted suicide and euthanasia. Prior to that, she served 
for 3 years as director of advocacy at the Center for Disabil-
ity Rights in Rochester, New York, and 12 years as executive 
director of Progress Center for Independent Living in Forest 
Park, Illinois. Coleman has presented invited testimony four 
times before Subcommittees of the U.S. House of Representa-
tives and Senate. She is a well-known writer and speaker on 
assisted suicide and euthanasia and has appeared on national 
television news broadcasts for CNN, ABC, CBS, MSNBC, 
and others, as well as National Public Radio. She continues to 
coauthor amicus briefs filed in the U.S. Supreme Court and 
various state courts on behalf of disabled persons for NDY and 
other national disability organizations on the topics of assisted 
suicide and surrogate health care decision making.
Ezekiel J. Emanuel
Dr. Ezekiel J. Emanuel is Vice Provost for Global Initiatives 
and chair of the Department of Medical Ethics and Health 
Policy at the University of Pennsylvania. From January 2009 
to January 2011, he served as special advisor for health policy 
to the director of the White House Office of Management and 
Budget. From 1997 to 2011, he was chair of the Department 
of Bioethics at the Clinical Center of the National Institutes 
of Health and a breast oncologist. Dr. Emanuel received his 
MD from Harvard Medical School and his PhD in political 
philosophy from Harvard University.
Dr. Emanuel has written and edited 9 books and over 200 
scientific articles. The central focus of his writing is the pressing 
need for health care reform, the key innovations in the Afford-
able Care Act (Obamacare), and how they are likely to impact 
the actual delivery of quality health care. Paralleling his com-
mitment to improving the health care system by making deliv-
ery of medical services more efficient to all, he also supports the 
continuing expansion of quality palliative care and hospice per-
sonnel for all patients. He speaks and writes about the need to 
(1) revamp the medical school curriculum to provide doctors 

204	
The Right to Die
with the skills necessary to have genuine, honest one-on-one 
conversations with their patients and (2) strengthen palliative 
care as a sub-specialty that is attractive to first-year medical 
students. Dr. Emanuel is a vigorous opponent of all efforts to 
legalize physician-assisted death and euthanasia.
Atul Gawande
Dr. Gawande is an author of four best-selling books: Compli-
cations, A Memoir of Surgery; Better: A Surgeon’s Notes on Per-
formance; The Checklist Manifesto; and Being Mortal: Medicine 
and What Matters in the End. He is also a surgeon at Brigham 
and Women’s Hospital in Boston, a staff writer for The New 
Yorker, and a professor at the Harvard Medical School and 
the Harvard School of Public Health. He is a leading figure in 
the ongoing effort to improve the quality of the interactions 
between physician and patient, especially so with regard to 
end-of-life conversations. In his writing and speaking about 
the critical importance of the doctor-elderly patient relation-
ship in this time of modern medicine wedded to once-unimag-
inable technological innovations, he focuses on a difficult 
moral and medical issue that has become an intimate part of 
the right to die issue for conscientious doctors and their dying 
patients: “when should we try to fix and when should we not?” 
Like other doctors who have confronted this existential real-
ity with their patients, Gawande believes in the enormous 
role that palliative care and hospice perform in enabling their 
patient to die without pain and in relative comfort. Unlike 
Dr. Quill, who supports PAD as a last option when palliative 
care does not ease the chronic pain and suffering, Gawande 
has not become a PAD advocate. However, his writing about 
how one should approach death is extraordinarily beautiful; 
any person interested in exploring the parameters of the right 
to die—regardless of the person’s predisposition—will do well 
to read Gawande’s ethical-medical philosophy of death and 
dying.

	
Profiles	
205
Jyl Gentzler
Jyl Gentzler is a professor of philosophy at Amherst College. 
Her focus in teaching and research has been to apply ancient 
philosophers’ theories to contemporary political, medical, ethi-
cal, and philosophical thinking regarding the meaning of the 
good life and how we die. Her major writings grapple with the 
philosophical meaning of the term “dignity,” as in the phrase 
employed by supporters of PAD legislation: “death with dig-
nity.” She argues that all such theoretical appeals to the right to 
die in order to validate PAD are defective. Her writings then 
focus on how Aristotle’s understanding of “dignity,” that is, 
how patients, their physicians, and other professionals work-
ing in palliative health care programs, working together, can 
help the patient to find the ingredients to achieve the best pos-
sible life. Her research and teaching is an excellent example of 
the association of philosophy, ethics, and compassionate health 
care to find dignity in living.
Herbert Hendin
Herbert Hendin, MD, is the founder and medical director of 
Suicide Prevention Initiatives and the American Foundation for 
Suicide Prevention. He is professor of psychiatry and behavioral 
science at the New York Medical College. His research and his 
practice have centered on suicide and suicide prevention. He 
has been the lead researcher on studies of suicide among col-
lege students, substance abusers, African Americans, and vet-
erans (especially the relationship between veterans with PTSD 
and suicide) since medical school. He also spent a number of 
summers in Scandinavian countries studying the high levels of 
suicide there. On these trips, he visited the Netherlands, at the 
time the only nation that had passed physician-assisted-suicide 
laws. (In 2002, the parliament passed its present version: the 
“Termination of Life on Request and Assisted Suicide [Review 
Procedures] Act.”) His research there led him to dramatically 
change his views about PAD. He saw—and has written about 

206	
The Right to Die
since then—how the nation’s written protections for vulner-
able elderly persons against abuse and coercion were easily 
bypassed by physicians. For Hendin, this was the real-time, not 
theoretical, slippery slope of physician-assisted suicide. He has 
called what he experienced in the Netherlands the practice of 
involuntary euthanasia.
Since the mid-1960s, he has written 10 books and more 
than 100 scholarly articles, books, and op-ed pieces critical of 
PAD and euthanasia. Among his published books are Seduced 
by Death, The Dutch Experience, The Dutch Cure, PAS in Ore-
gon, and The Case against Suicide. He has testified before con-
gressional committees in opposition to both physician-assisted 
suicide and euthanasia. In his 1996 congressional testimony, 
he raised another issue brought on by the Dutch experience 
with euthanasia: “pressure for improved palliative care appears 
to have evaporated” in the Netherlands because of assisted sui-
cide and euthanasia (Hendin 1996). Although in his nineties, 
Hendin continues his opposition to PAD and his advocacy for 
enhanced palliative care and hospice for patients in serious, 
chronic pain.
Sister Nuala Kenny
Dr. Kenny was born in New York and entered the Sisters of 
Charity of Halifax, Canada, in 1962. She received her BA 
from Mount Saint Vincent University in 1967 and an MD 
from Dalhousie University in 1972. After an extensive career 
in pediatrics and medical education, Dr. Kenny founded the 
Department of Bioethics at Dalhousie University in 1996. 
She is currently a professor in the Departments of Bioethics 
and Pediatrics at Dalhousie. She was a founding member of 
the National Council for Bioethics in Human Research. She 
is a past president of both the Canadian Pediatric Society and 
the Canadian Bioethics Society. Her research interests include 
professional character formation, ethics in health policy and 
public health, pediatric ethics, and end-of-life care. Combin-
ing her faith in the Catholic Church’s doctrine of the sanctity 

	
Profiles	
207
of life with her medical efforts, as physician and bioethicist, to 
save lives, Sister Kenny has been an active advocate, partici-
pating in conferences and writing articles in newspapers and 
other media outlets, against all efforts in Canada to pass legisla-
tion that allows physicians to assist in the death of their dying 
patients. Sister Kenny’s efforts to block changes in Canada’s 
laws regarding PAD failed when, in 2015, the Supreme Court 
of Canada ruled that the Canadian constitution and Charter 
of Rights permit PAD and voluntary euthanasia. In 2016, the 
Canadian parliament passed the necessary legislation to codify 
the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada.
Vicki D. Lachman
Vicki D. Lachman is a nursing executive with degrees in psy-
chiatric nursing and health care organization and manage-
ment. Dr. Lachman did graduate work and received a degree 
in bioethics—with an emphasis on ethical issues at the end 
of life—in 2002. Since 2008, Dr. Lachman has served on the 
American Nurses Association Center for Ethics and Human 
Rights Advisory Board. She also serves on an ethics committee 
and writes the quarterly Ethics, Policy and Law column in The 
MedSurg Nursing Journal. Until 2013, she was a clinical profes-
sor in graduate nursing programs teaching bioethics.
She has authored over 100 publications and a number of 
books in her nursing career. The majority of Dr. Lachman’s 
research and publications deal with bioethics issues such as qual-
ity care for terminally ill patients, physician-assisted death, and 
euthanasia. She disdains the current defense of euthanasia and 
PAD using personal liberty and autonomy. It takes the “moral 
courage” of a medical professional to insist on the expansion 
of quality palliative care and hospice rather than supporting 
the methodology of killing oneself. There must appear such 
committed doctors and nurses to figure out how health care 
organizations can more effectively use their facilities to ensure 
quality care for all ill and dying patients under their care—and 
assisting suicide is not the appropriate way.

208	
The Right to Die
Joanne Lynn
Dr. Lynn is the director, Altarum Center for Elder Care and 
Advanced Illness, Altarum Institute. She is a geriatrician, hos-
pice and long-term-care physician, health services researcher, 
quality improvement advisor, policy analyst, and policy advo-
cate who has focused on ensuring that every American can 
live comfortably and meaningfully despite serious illness and 
disability in the last years of life, at a sustainable cost to the 
community.
She has been a senior researcher at RAND and a tenured 
professor of medicine and community health at Dartmouth 
Medical School and the George Washington University. Her 
work includes development of prognostic indices and uniform 
assessment tools, quality measurement, professional and public 
education, end-of-life care, and quality improvement in pro-
viding quality health care for elderly patients.
Dr.  Lynn has published more than 250 professional arti-
cles, and her dozen books include The Handbook for Mortals 
(awarded the American Medical Writer’s Association award for 
best medical book for the public); The Common Sense Guide 
to Improving Palliative Care (an instruction manual for clini-
cians and managers seeking to improve quality care for their 
patients); and Sick to Death and Not Going to Take It Any More! 
(an action guide for policy makers and advocates that addresses 
how palliative care programs can become a major research 
and practice field in the future—and how medical schools can 
improve palliative care education and training).
Robert D. Orr
Dr.  Orr is co-chair of the Healthcare Ethics Council and a 
senior fellow with the Center for Bioethics & Human Dignity 
(CBHD). A growing interest and involvement in medical eth-
ics led him to pursue a postdoctoral fellowship at the Center 
for Clinical Medical Ethics at the University of Chicago (1989–
1990). In his role as a Christian medical bioethicist, professor 

	
Profiles	
209
of family medicine, advisor, political leader, and strategist for 
the CBHD in planning and implementing strategies to block 
passage of a Vermont death with dignity bill, Dr. Orr has long 
been a leading opponent of the concept of personal autonomy 
and physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia.
He has authored, coauthored, or edited 6 books and contrib-
uted 14 book chapters and over 150 articles related to clinical 
ethics and the ethics consultation process, with a major focus 
on his opposition to any form of PAD, including opposition 
to aggressive physician involvement in the killing of terminally 
ill patients. He has given lectures on these topics regionally, 
nationally, and internationally. He chaired the Council on 
Ethical Affairs for the California Medical Association and was 
vice president of the American Society for Bioethics and the 
Humanities. He has served on the Ethics Commission of the 
Christian Medical and Dental Associations and served as chair-
man of that commission from 1991 to 1994. For more than a 
decade, Dr. Orr led the PAD opposition forces in Vermont. 
Through his leadership, and with the help of conservative 
Republican governor James Douglas, the opposition succeeded 
in blocking or defeating PAD proposals until a new governor 
(who had supported PAD legislation while he was in the state 
Senate), Democrat Peter E. Shumlin, took office in 2010. After 
the bill was finally passed in 2013, Orr continues to lead in the 
opposition’s efforts to overturn the legislation.
Frank A. Pavone
Father Frank Pavone has been active in the pro-life movement 
since 1976. He was ordained a priest of the Archdiocese of 
New York by Cardinal John O’Connor in 1988. He served for 
five years as a parish priest in Staten Island and taught theology 
at St. Joseph’s Seminary and other institutions. In 1993, with 
the permission of Cardinal O’Connor, he became national 
director of Priests for Life. In this full-time position, he has 
traveled to all of the 50 states and to 5 continents, preaching 

210	
The Right to Die
and teaching against abortion and helping other priests to do 
the same. He conducts seminars on pro-life strategy and is 
regularly invited to speak at national and international pro-
life gatherings. Father Pavone is often quoted in papers such at 
The New York Times, The Washington Times, and other national 
media. Under his guidance, the Priests for Life staff has grown 
to 45 fulltime paid employees.
Father Pavone was asked by Mother Teresa to address the 
clergy of India on end-of-life issues. He was also asked to speak 
to the pro-life caucus of the United States House of Repre-
sentatives. Norma McCorvey, the “Jane Roe” of the Supreme 
Court’s abortion decision Roe v. Wade, called Father Pavone 
“the catalyst that brought me into the Catholic Church.” In 
1997, he was asked by the Vatican to help coordinate pro-life 
activities throughout the world as an official of the Pontifical 
Council for the Family. In 1999, The Daily Catholic named 
Father Pavone among the Top 100 Catholics of the Century. 
He serves as a consultant on Dr. James Dobson’s conservative 
organization, Focus on the Family Institute. He is the recipi-
ent, for the year 2001, of the Proudly Pro-Life Award of the 
National Right to Life Committee. In 2002, in recognition of 
his pro-life work, he was awarded an honorary doctorate from 
the Franciscan University of Steubenville. In 2003, Father 
Pavone was elected to be the president of the National Pro-Life 
Religious Council, a coalition of groups from many different 
denominations working to end abortion.
Pope Pius XII, Pope John Paul II, and Pope Francis
These three contemporary leaders of the world’s Roman Cath-
olics provide examples of the Catholic Church’s hallmark 
belief in the sanctity of life and the immorality of abortion, 
the death penalty, euthanasia, and physician-assisted suicide. 
Pope Pius’s 1957 address to anesthesiologists about the differ-
ences between ordinary and extraordinary efforts to prolong 
a patient’s life; John Paul’s 2004 address to a conference of 

	
Profiles	
211
medical professionals about how they must care for patients in 
a permanent vegetative state; and Francis’s 2014 address to the 
Association of Italian Catholic Doctors about the malevolence 
of physician-assisted suicide after Brittany Maynard took her 
life clearly reflect the position of the Catholic Church about a 
person’s right to die.
William H. Rehnquist
A conservative member of the Nixon administration, Rehnquist 
was appointed Associate Justice of the Supreme Court by Presi-
dent Richard M. Nixon in 1972; he was elevated to chief jus-
tice in 1986 by President Ronald Reagan. His 33-year tenure 
(1972–2005) on the court was one of the longest and most 
influential in the institution’s history. He was a conservative 
dissenter on the Supreme Court from 1972 (dissenting in Roe 
v. Wade, 1973) until the early 1980s when President Reagan 
appointed conservatives to replace the moderate justices who 
left the Court. As chief justice, Rehnquist presided over a 
rightward move at the court as the leader of a five-justice con-
servative majority. Rehnquist’s judicial philosophy rested on a 
number of principles: conflicts between the individual and the 
government should be resolved in favor of government; con-
flicts between state and federal authority should be resolved 
in favor of the states; and there had to be constraints on the 
excessive exercise of federal jurisdiction, especially the gen-
eral tendency of the Warren Court majority to use their judg-
ment to broaden the scope of the individual’s right to privacy. 
Chief among the restraints on Court actions was the concept 
of “originalism,” which limited the judiciary’s interpretation of 
the Constitution to the meaning of the original 18th-century 
textual meaning. As chief justice in 1997, using originalism as 
the core concept, he wrote the majority opinions in the two 
major “assisting suicide” cases (Vacco v. Quill and Washington v. 
Glucksberg). Both opinions upheld the right of a state to punish 
anyone who “assisted a suicide.”

212	
The Right to Die
The essence of his self-restraint is found in his comment 
written in a 1976 University of Texas Law Review article: “There 
is no conceivable way in which I can logically demonstrate to 
you that the judgments of my conscience are superior to the 
judgments of your conscience, and vice versa. Many of us nec-
essarily feel strongly and deeply about our own moral judg-
ments, but they remain only personal moral judgments until in 
some way given the sanction of law” (Rehnquist 1976).
He wrote opinions in almost every area of the law. Among 
his most important opinions were those that set limits on the 
meaning of the Constitution’s due process guarantee, declining 
to expand the boundaries of due process in a way that would 
create new rights or encroach on state power. He was one of 
two dissenters in 1972 when the Court majority found that 
“liberty” in the Constitution could be broadened to include a 
woman’s right to an abortion (Roe v. Wade, 1972). As chief jus-
tice he sought to narrow Roe’s impact and consistently rejected 
the notion that the right to die is guaranteed by the Fourteenth 
Amendment. See, for example, his majority opinions in Cru-
zan (1990), Vacco (1997), and Glucksberg (1997).
In Glucksberg, he reflected on his view of courts in our 
society: “Attitudes towards suicide have changed but our laws 
have consistently condemned, and continue to prohibit, assist-
ing suicide. Despite changes in medical technology and not-
withstanding the increased emphasis on the importance of 
end-of-life decision making, we have not retreated from this 
prohibition.” However, given his commitment to federalism 
and states’ rights, he concluded his 1997 opinion with this 
paean: “Throughout the Nation, Americans are engaged in an 
earnest and profound debate about the morality, legality, and 
practicality of physician-assisted suicide. Our holding permits 
this debate to continue, as it should in a democratic society.” 
Rehnquist died in 2005.
Cicely Saunders
Dame Cicely Mary Strode Saunders was a British nurse, phy-
sician, and humanitarian. Saunders became a Red Cross war 

	
Profiles	
213
nurse in 1944 and served as a medical social worker. Her inter-
est in palliative care and pain control developed early. From 
1945, working in hospice care as a volunteer nurse, she was 
involved with the end-of-life quality care of patients with ter-
minal illness. Research work in pharmacology inspired her idea 
to administer low, steady doses of pain relievers to terminally 
ill patients to keep them alert and comfortable (now called pal-
liative sedation). She saw what was needed, particularly bet-
ter pain control, and started planning a specialized hospice 
in the late 1950s. Having been told that she would never get 
such ideas accepted in medicine unless she became a doctor, 
Saunders qualified as a doctor at St. Thomas’ Medical School 
in 1957. She began fundraising for a hospice in 1963 while 
she was working at St. Joseph’s and by 1965 she had enough 
to start building St. Christopher’s Hospice, which opened in 
1967. Saunders planned that St. Christopher’s would be the 
first research and teaching hospice linking expert pain and 
symptom control, compassionate care, and teaching and 
clinical research, pioneering the field of palliative care. She 
is universally recognized as the founder of the modern hos-
pice movement and received many honors and awards for her 
work. In 1987, her work contributed also to the decision by 
The Royal College of Physicians to recognize palliative care as 
a new medical specialty.
Believing that her patients were entitled to a meaningful 
life and to death with dignity, Saunders developed a holistic 
approach to their care that she hoped would also meet their 
emotional and spiritual needs. Among the many honors Saun-
ders received was the Conrad N. Hilton Humanitarian Prize, 
awarded to St. Christopher’s Hospice in 2001. Saunders was 
made a Dame of the British Empire in 1980 and was awarded 
the Order of Merit by Queen Elizabeth II in 1989. Saunders 
died on July 14, 2005, at St. Christopher’s Hospice.
Antonin Scalia
Justice Antonin Scalia has been called the most influential jus-
tice of the last quarter century. He sat on the Supreme Court 

214	
The Right to Die
for 30  years (1986–2016). He was a champion of the con-
servative bloc on the Court and employed a concept that has 
since become synonymous with Scalia—originalism. It is the 
theory of constitutional interpretation that seeks to apply the 
understanding of the words used by those who drafted and 
ratified the Constitution. Judges must be tethered to the orig-
inal understanding of the document and cannot run at will 
to find new meanings to the words and phrases in the 1787 
Constitution.
Scalia eschewed the view—held by a number of his col-
leagues—that the Constitution is an evolving document. For 
Scalia, the Constitution did not say anything about the right 
to die; it was not a fundamental right. Caustically, Scalia said 
in remarks in Philadelphia in 2004: “We have now determined 
that liberties exist under the federal Constitution—the right 
to abortion, the right to homosexual sodomy—which were so 
little rooted in the traditions of the American people that they 
were criminal for 200 years” (Liptak 2004).
In his concurring opinion in the 1990 Cruzan case, the ini-
tial venture of the Supreme Court into the right to die con-
troversy, he expressed his originalist views, his values, and his 
concern about Justices “roaming at will” in the Constitution 
to find new rights: “The various opinions in this case [six] por-
tray quite clearly the difficult, indeed agonizing questions that 
are presented by the constantly increasing power of science to 
keep the human body alive for longer than any reasonable per-
son would want to inhabit it. . . . The answers to these heart-
breaking questions are neither set forth in the Constitution nor 
known to the nine Justices of this Court any better than they 
are known to nine people picked at random from the Kansas 
City telephone directory.”
“This [right to die] is lovely philosophy,” Justice Scalia said in 
1997 during oral arguments for Vacco and Washington. “Where 
is it in the Constitution?”
Scalia died in 2016.

	
Profiles	
215
Joni E. Tada
Joni Eareckson Tada has lived in a wheelchair as a quadriplegic 
for over 40 years due to a diving accident in 1967 when she 
was 17. Though she suffered from deep depression and lost the 
will to live in the aftermath of her accident, she gradually came 
back to a deeper relationship with God. Because of her early 
struggles, she has become strong in her faith and is a testimony 
to the world of how when we are weak, how God is strong. 
Following rehabilitation, when she spent long months learn-
ing how to paint with a brush between her teeth, Tada wrote 
of her experiences in her international best-selling biography 
Joni, and also reenacted the events in the full-length feature 
film with the same title.
In 1979, she established the international nonprofit orga-
nization Joni and Friends; she continues to serve as Founder 
and CEO. The organization offers programs to support people 
affected by disability around the globe through 30  years of 
radio outreach and a new television series; by refurbishing and 
delivering thousands of wheelchairs to needy families in devel-
oping countries through the Wheels for the World program; by 
supporting special needs families through Family Retreats; by 
providing a global network of disability support through Joni 
and Friends offices and international charter support organiza-
tions, including NGOs on every continent; and by publishing 
over 40 books covering topics ranging from disability outreach 
to the purpose for suffering.
Florence S. Wald
Florence Wald is the creator of the hospice movement in the 
United States. Wald envisioned the need to enhance the qual-
ity of life for the terminally ill. Following a trip to England 
in the late 1960s to meet with Dame Cicely Saunders (the 
two women became lifelong colleagues and friends) and assess 
the care delivered at St. Christopher’s Hospice near London, 
Wald returned to Yale and implemented a feasibility study to 

216	
The Right to Die
determine the need for hospice in Connecticut. Since that time, 
her groundbreaking work with the dying through hospice care 
has influenced the further development of hospice—and pal-
liative care—throughout the nation.
She received a master’s degree in nursing from Yale Univer-
sity School of Nursing in 1941 and began her nursing career 
as a staff nurse with the New York Visiting Nurse Service. She 
joined a surgical metabolism research team as a research assis-
tant and taught nursing at the Rutgers University School of 
Nursing.
By 1969, Wald was a professor and dean at Yale, and from 
1970 to 1980 served as clinical associate professor. At the 
same time, she was a member of the board and an integral 
part of the planning staff of Hospice Incorporated in Bran-
ford, Connecticut, the future location of the first hospice in 
the United States. Recognizing that the terminally ill have 
unique needs, Wald developed, with continuing discussions 
with her British colleague Dame Cicely Saunders, a hospice 
model that provides holistic and humanistic care for the 
dying person and requires appropriate understanding of the 
concepts of death and dying among nurses giving care in 
the hospice environment. Wald’s more recent work includes 
bringing the hospice model of compassion and dignity in 
death to the Connecticut Correctional Facilities. Since its 
implementation, hundreds of inmate volunteers have been 
trained to be hospice volunteers within state correctional 
facilities. She has published widely in medical journals and 
earned many distinctions, including a Founders Award from 
the National Hospice Association, a Distinguished Woman 
of Connecticut Award from the governor of Connecticut, a 
fellowship in the American Academy of Nursing, and three 
honorary doctoral degrees. Further, the Connecticut Nurses 
Association established the Florence S. Wald Award for Out-
standing Contributions to Nursing Practice in her honor. 
She died in 2008.

	
Profiles	
217
Organizations Supporting Death with Dignity Laws
American Medical Students Association
The American Medical Student Association (AMSA), with a 
half-century history of medical student activism, is the oldest 
and largest independent association of physicians-in-training 
in the United States. Today, the AMSA is a student-governed, 
national organization committed to representing the con-
cerns of physicians-in-training. AMSA members are medical 
students, premedical students, interns, residents, and practic-
ing physicians. Founded in 1950, the AMSA continues its 
commitment to improving medical training and the nation’s 
health. From the beginning of the right to die issue, the AMSA 
has supported the call for state legislation to allow physicians 
to provide passive assistance to their terminally ill patients who 
request such aid.
American Medical Women’s Association
The American Medical Women’s Association (AMWA) is 
the oldest multispecialty medical organization dedicated to 
advancing women in medicine and improving women’s health. 
It is an organization of women physicians, medical students, 
and other persons dedicated to serving as the unique voice for 
women’s health and the advancement of women in medicine. 
The organization was founded by Dr. Bertha Van Hoosen in 
1915 in Chicago, at a time when women physicians were an 
under-represented minority. The AMWA has been an advocate 
for legitimizing the right to die with a physician’s assistance.
American Pharmacists Association
The American Pharmacists Association (APhA), the oldest 
and largest national professional society of pharmacists in the 
United States, was established in 1852.
Although the APhA “discourages pharmacist participation 
in [state mandated] executions on the basis that such activities 

218	
The Right to Die
are fundamentally contrary to the role of pharmacists as provid-
ers of health care,” it believes that pharmacists should assist in 
implementing PAD. The California End-of-Life Options PAD 
bill, signed by the governor in 2015, contains specific language 
that notes the symbiotic relationship between the patient, the 
doctors, and the pharmacists.
American Psychological Association
The APA was founded in July 1892 at Clark University by a 
small group of around 30 men; by 1916 there were over 300 
members. During World War II, the APA merged with other 
psychological organizations, resulting in a new divisional struc-
ture. Nineteen divisions were approved in 1944; the divisions 
with the most members were the clinical and personnel (now 
counseling) divisions. From 1960 to 2007, the number of divi-
sions expanded to 54. Today the APA is affiliated with 60 state, 
territorial, and Canadian provincial associations. It has, from 
the beginning of the political and medical battles over PAD, 
been a supporter of changing a state’s criminal code to legitimize 
PAD by removing all “assisting suicide” statutes from the law.
American Public Health Association
The American Public Health Association (APHA) works with 
key decision makers to shape public policy to address today’s 
ongoing public health concerns. The organization advocates 
policies that relate to the improvement of health care for all 
persons living in America. They have supported the need for 
congressional action to, for example, improve health care for 
the elderly and disabled and to expand quality palliative and 
hospice care in all medical facilities. From the 1970s to date, 
the APHA has supported legislation passed by state legislatures 
that legitimatizes physician assistance in dying for terminally 
ill patients who are suffering grievously from their chronic ill-
ness. In a major policy statement announced in 1981, entitled 
“Patient Rights to Self-Determination at End of Life,” the 
APHA supported PAD laws that allowed terminally ill patients 

	
Profiles	
219
to seek assistance in dying from their physicians if no other 
options available (sedating, palliative care, hospice) will relieve 
their pain and suffering. As part of its support work for PAD, 
in 1997, the APHA filed amicus curiae briefs in Vacco and 
Washington State on behalf of terminally ill patients and their 
physicians who challenged state laws prohibiting PAD. In their 
briefs, the APHA lawyers argued that there are fundamental 
differences between “suicide” and “assisted death.” PAD is one 
of a few options terminally ill patients select when dealing with 
the unremitting pain they experience. Do I die in great pain 
and suffering or do I die with dignity with the assistance of a 
physician? This is the only binary option available; the APHA 
policy asserts that only a patient at that crossroad can deter-
mine how he or she will die.
Compassion & Choices
Compassion & Choices is a major nonprofit organization in 
the United States working to improve patient rights and indi-
vidual choice at the end of life, including access to medical aid 
in dying. Its primary function is advocating for and ensuring 
access to end-of-life options, including physician assistance in 
dying. With over 65,000 supporters and campaigns in nine 
states, it is the largest organization of its kind in the United 
States. Compassion & Choices provides end-of-life consulta-
tion for dying patients and their families at no cost. Professional 
consultants and trained volunteers work by phone or in per-
son to offer assistance in completing advance directives, make 
referrals to local services including hospice and illness-specific 
support groups, advice on adequate pain and symptom man-
agement, and provide information on safe, effective, and legal 
methods for aid in dying. Through litigation, Compassion & 
Choices protects terminally ill patients’ rights to receive pain 
and symptom management, to voluntarily stop life-sustaining 
treatments, to request and receive palliative sedation, and to 
choose aid in dying under state and federal constitutional pro-
tections. Attorneys for the organization regularly participate 

220	
The Right to Die
in litigating patient cases related to ensuring adequate end-
of-life care and choice, including representing 16 terminally 
ill patient-plaintiffs at the U.S. Supreme Court in Gonzales v. 
Oregon and defeating the Bush administration’s challenge to 
Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act in January 2006. It has been 
engaged in arguing for patient rights to die on their own terms 
in every case brought to state and federal courts.
Compassion in Dying Federation
Formed in 1993 around the time Oregon voters were getting 
ready to vote on the ODWDA, the Compassion in Dying 
Federation began providing national leadership for client ser-
vices, legal advocacy, political lobbying, and public education 
to improve pain and symptom management, increase patient 
empowerment and self-determination, and expand end-of-life 
choices to include aid in dying for terminally ill, mentally com-
petent adults. They labor, in courthouses and legislative bodies, 
to improve care and expand options for patients facing end-
of-life choices. The organization is committed to the goals of 
comprehensive, effective comfort care for every dying person 
and legal and humane aid in dying if suffering is unbearable 
and cannot be relieved.
Death with Dignity National Center
The Death with Dignity National Center provides advocacy 
experts and political strategists to assist state PAD providers 
with end-of-life-care policy reform that will lead to passage of 
Oregon-type Death with Dignity laws.
For example, in California during the many years prior to 
the 2015 signing of right to die legislation, DWD experts 
reviewed and revised every version and amendment of the bill; 
provided expert guidance from the experience of passing and 
implementing similar laws in Oregon, Washington, and Ver-
mont; and coached sponsors and witnesses through hearings 
and meetings. The Death with Dignity National Center part-
ners with local pressure groups, PAD advocates, and ad hoc 

	
Profiles	
221
citizens groups to plot out strategies and tactics to move bills 
through the political process.
Final Exit Network
Final Exit Network is a national nonprofit organization serving 
members throughout the country in all 50 states. It publicly 
offers education (by providing brochure, articles, and guides) 
and support to its members who are faced with chronic, severe 
pain.
Gray Panthers
Founded in 1970, the Gray Panthers is a national organization 
dedicated to social justice for all. However, the Gray Panthers 
is best known for its work on behalf of older persons. It has 
lobbied and litigated against age discrimination in the areas 
of retirement, housing, and health care. The organization has 
over 70,000 members in 85 chapters nationwide. Although 
the organization is strongest at the grassroots level, its rela-
tively small seven-member national staff has effected significant 
changes in federal law. The Gray Panthers developed a broad 
political agenda. Among its goals were affordable housing, the 
creation of a national health system, nursing home reform, and 
consumer protection. The Gray Panthers, very early in the right 
to die debates and political and legal actions surrounding the 
issue, was a vocal supporter of the terminally ill person’s right 
to die with a doctor’s assistance. The organization participated 
in the very first ballot initiative vote on permitting euthana-
sia in Washington State in 1991. (The initiative was defeated, 
54%–46%.)) However, the Gray Panthers has been one of the 
consistent supporters of PAD since then, including its support 
of the 2008 vote in Washington State (which passed this time).
Hemlock Society
The Hemlock Society USA is a national right to die organiza-
tion founded in 1980 in Santa Monica by author and eutha-
nasia activist Derek Humphry. Its primary missions include 

222	
The Right to Die
providing information to dying persons and supporting legisla-
tion permitting physician-assisted dying. In 2003 the national 
organization renamed itself to End of Life Choices, and a year 
later merged with another group into a newly formed national 
organization called Compassion & Choices.
Lambda Legal Defense and Educational Fund
The Lambda Legal Defense and Educational Fund (LLDEF) 
was founded in 1973 as the nation’s first legal organization ded-
icated to achieving full legal and political equality for lesbian 
and gay people. When founder Bill Thom filed an application 
in early 1972 to establish the LLDEF, he borrowed from the 
bylaws of another newly established organization—the Puerto 
Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund. Both organizations 
follow in the path of the original Legal Defense and Education 
Fund organization: the NAACP-LDEF.
Although the right to physician-assisted suicide is not as 
immediate an issue as securing the right to affordable and 
decent health care for people living with HIV, the right to 
determine when meaningful life ends is a fundamental aspect 
of personal autonomy and self-empowerment. On behalf of 
the plaintiffs, the LLDEF’s lawyers coauthored two amicus 
curiae briefs, in Vacco and Washington State (1997). They have 
continued to provide legal counsel in litigation brought on due 
to the opposition to proposed PAD legislation. For the LLDEF, 
assisting PAD groups supports the organization’s fundamen-
tal belief in the historical importance of personal autonomy in 
decision-making for individuals with disabilities such as AIDS. 
That right, unambiguously, must apply to all significant life 
decisions, including the most intimate and personal decision 
of all, whether to hasten death if one’s condition becomes ter-
minal. Like so many other groups supporting PAD legislation 
and the right of personal autonomy, the LLDEF rejects the use 
of the term suicide to define physician assistance in dying. The 
competent, terminally ill patient does not choose between life 
and death, which are the choices a suicidal person confronts. 

	
Profiles	
223
For the dying patient, LLDEF briefs insist, the only real choices 
remaining are intolerable suffering or getting physician assis-
tance to hasten death.
Organizations Opposed to Death with Dignity Laws
American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine
Since 1988, the American Academy of Hospice and Palliative 
Medicine (AAHPM) has dedicated itself to expanding access 
of patients and families to high-quality palliative care and 
advancing the discipline of hospice and palliative medicine 
through professional education and training, development of 
a specialist workforce, support for clinical practice standards, 
research, and public policy. Membership is available to physi-
cians specializing in hospice and palliative medicine, nurses, 
and other health care providers, including trained volunteers, 
who are committed to improving the quality of life of patients 
and families facing serious illness. The primary function of the 
AAHPM is to provide assistance of all varieties for seriously ill 
or dying patients. It has, as a matter of policy (2007), taken a 
position of “studied neutrality” on the controversial issue of 
PAD. While the organization understands the arguments for 
PAD, the medical response to intolerable pain should be inno-
vative palliative care or palliative sedation.
American Association of People with Disabilities
Since 1996, the American Association of People with Dis-
abilities’s (AAPD’s) primary tasks have been to ensure that the 
provisions of the 1990 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 
are implemented in a timely manner and to “unite the diverse 
community of people with disabilities.” Paul Herne, a severely 
disabled student at Hofstra University in the late 1960s, was 
a major figure in the creation of the AAPD and was one of 
the key people responsible for the drafting of the ADA in 
the late 1980s. It was signed into law by President Bush on 
July  26, 1990, and provides the disabled population (more 

224	
The Right to Die
than 50 million in America) with protections against discrimi-
nation similar to the safeguards found in the 1964 Civil Rights 
Act. The need for access by the disabled to high-quality, com-
prehensive, affordable health care and the improvement of 
community-based supports and services for the disabled are 
the fundamental goals of the AAPD. The AAPD, like all other 
disability rights advocacy groups, opposes the legalization of 
assisted suicide. Although the AAPD supports the concept of 
patient self-determination and believes that disabled persons 
must be allowed to make decisions regarding all medical issues 
surrounding their lives, patient autonomy must not extend 
to the disabled person receiving physician assistance to has-
ten death. The AAPD’s explanation for its opposition to PAD 
reflects the fear that all groups representing the disabled share: 
physician error in diagnosis, poor information provided to 
the disabled and their families, and coercion and abuse, pre-
venting severely disabled persons from making reasonable and 
informed judgments about hastening death. To that end, the 
AAPD has joined with nearly one dozen other organizations 
representing the disabled community in filing amicus curiae 
briefs with the federal courts of appeals and the U.S. Supreme 
Court opposing all efforts to legalize PAD.
American Geriatrics Society
The American Geriatrics Society (AGS) is an organization of 
nearly 6,000 health professionals committed to improving the 
health, independence, and quality of life of all older people. 
The society provides leadership to health care professionals, 
policy makers, and the public by implementing and advocating 
for programs in patient care, research, professional and public 
education, and public policy. With regard to the care of the 
elderly who are gravely or terminally ill, the AGS has counseled 
these persons (and their families) about the many benefits of 
entering a quality palliative care facility. It has been a major 
supporter of policies that enhance and expand the availability 
of palliative care and hospice in America. At the same time, the 

	
Profiles	
225
AGS has opposed—by filing amicus curiae briefs, by partici-
pating in lobbying against PAD proposals introduced into the 
state legislature, and through publishing articles in its journal, 
The Journal of the American Geriatrics Society—PAD and eutha-
nasia. The AGS’s opposition to physician-assisted suicide and 
euthanasia rests on its concern that these processes could be 
abused in order to cut expensive medical costs by ending lives 
earlier. The AGS also fears that, because PAD is available to 
terminally ill patients, some caregivers would abuse them and 
coerce the elderly into choosing assisted suicide, particularly if 
the caregiver will benefit from the person’s death. The organi-
zation believes that changing the critically important relation-
ship between doctor and patient from curing to comforting 
will destroy the trust necessary between them. The AGS has 
allied its actions with other opponents of PAD, including the 
American Medical Association (AMA), advocates for the dis-
abled, and palliative care advocacy groups.
American Medical Association
The AMA, founded in 1847, is the largest association of physi-
cians and medical students in the United States. The AMA’s 
stated mission is to promote the art and science of medicine 
for the betterment of the public health, to advance the inter-
ests of physicians and their patients, to promote public health, 
and to lobby for legislation favorable to physicians and patients 
as well as lobby against physician-assisted suicide. The asso-
ciation publishes The Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion, which has the largest circulation of any weekly medical 
journal in the world. From the very start of the movement to 
allow physicians to euthanize severely injured patients, 1870, 
the AMA has been one of the major private groups fighting 
to prevent states from passing laws allowing PAD and eutha-
nasia. Using its political clout, the AMA has lobbied exten-
sively against such laws, in courts, in state legislatures, and in 
the Congress. While the AMA’s leadership is always alert to 
any attempted legislation enabling government to intrude into 

226	
The Right to Die
the profession’s domain by defining or modifying the essential 
norms of medical profession, it has no problem working with 
legislators, governors, judges, and bureaucrats to maintain the 
political, legal, and medical status quo.
American Nurses Association
The American Nurses Association (ANA) is the largest profes-
sional organization representing the interests of the nation’s 
nearly three million registered nurses (RNs). Joining the AMA 
and other medical professional groups opposed to PAD and 
euthanasia, the ANA—through lobbying, joining PAD oppo-
sition briefs in courts, and publishing in The Journal of Issues 
in Nursing—has been very critical of all efforts to legalize PAD 
and euthanasia. As is the case with other medical professional 
organizations opposed to PAD, the ANA strongly supports ini-
tiatives and legislation that enhances and supports quality pal-
liative care and hospice programs.
Autistic Self-Advocacy Network
The Autistic Self-Advocacy Network represents autistic 
patients. Formed in 2006, it has been an active advocate in 
state legislatures for additional research and support to aid their 
clients. Like other disabled rights organizations, the Autistic 
Self-Advocacy Network has joined a consortium that fights to 
achieve two broad goals: (1) improving the quality of care for 
the disabled in the grossly inequitable American health care 
system, and (2) defeating all attempts to legalize euthanasia 
and physician-assisted death. One basic strategy of the Autistic 
Self-Advocacy Network is to join other disability rights organi-
zations in filing amicus curiae briefs opposing PAD. It has been 
lobbying the courts since its formation a decade ago. Its latest 
action using this tactic was a brief filed in a New York appeals 
court case, Myers v. Schneiderman, which supported the dis-
missal by a lower court of a lawsuit seeking to legitimize PAD 
through the state judiciary. The core of the legal argument 
reflects the greatest fear of the Autistic Self-Advocacy Network 

	
Profiles	
227
(and all other disability rights advocacy organizations): instead 
of improving the lives of people with disabilities and illnesses, 
euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide laws “solve” these 
problems by “advising” by ending their lives.
Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund, Inc.
The Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund (DREDF), 
founded in 1979, follows the organizational structure of 
the oldest civil rights organization in American history: the 
NAACP-LDF. The DREDF is a leading national civil rights 
law and policy center directed by individuals with disabilities 
and parents who have children with disabilities. Its primary 
mission is to advance the civil rights of people with disabilities 
through legal advocacy, training, education, and public policy 
and legislative proposals on behalf of the disabled. The primary 
activity of this group occurs in state and federal legislatures 
and in litigation that protects and improves the lives of the 
disabled community. A major litigation issue that consumes 
the DREDF lawyers are cases that address the educational dis-
advantages disabled children face in trying to get a high-quality 
education: it has won litigation that has established the right 
of disabled children to be educated alongside non-disabled stu-
dents in regular classes as well as legal victories that redressed 
unfair and abusive treatment of disabled students attending 
“integrated” schools.
Since the 1990s the DREDF, along with most of the other 
disability rights organizations, has vigorously opposed the 
legalization of assisted suicide and euthanasia, based on their 
ongoing battles with the health care system’s unfairness, bias, 
and prejudice against the disabled. Through political participa-
tion in hearings before legislative committees discussing PAD 
proposals, educating the disabled about the problems they may 
face if PAD was law, co-filing amicus curiae briefs in state and 
federal courts, writing articles for and letters to powerful public 
policy leaders against PAD and euthanasia, the DREDF has 
consistently fought against PAD becoming public policy. While 

228	
The Right to Die
not disparaging the concept of personal autonomy (which is 
vital for the disabled person in order to continue the battle for 
quality health care), the organization’s opposition to PAD is 
based on the medical community’s manipulation of the idea 
of personal autonomy to encourage a disabled person to use 
PAD. The organization believes that the public policy would 
be cruelly implemented because of the many inequities already 
existing for the disabled, the poor, the elderly, and minorities 
in America’s inequitable and discriminatory market and profit-
driven health care system. For the disabled, who have already 
been adversely effected by health care system’s slippery slope, 
the specter of physician-assisted suicide is readymade for slid-
ing into coercion and then euthanasia.
National Disability Rights Network
The National Disability Rights Network (NDRN), created in 
1982, is the umbrella organization for all federally mandated 
Protection and Advocacy Systems and Client Assistance Pro-
grams for individuals with disabilities operating in all 50 states. 
This network is the largest provider of legally based advocacy 
services to people with disabilities in the United States. The 
programs provide training and technical assistance, legal sup-
port, and legislative advocacy to assure that people with dis-
abilities are afforded equality of opportunity and are able to 
fully participate by exercising choice and self-determination. 
The NDRN’s primary task is advocating—in Congress, state 
legislatures, and state and federal courts—for equal access and 
accommodation for the disabled in education, in medical treat-
ment, in health care, and in the workplace. The right to die 
has been an issue that concerns the leadership of the NDRN. 
While very sympathetic to the dilemma of the disabled person 
suffering painfully from a terminal illness who wishes to choose 
death, it fears that that person may be coerced by caretakers 
into using PAD or that the enormous financial expense of con-
tinuing with health care will lead that person to assisted suicide. 
Some state programs have addressed PAD and have taken steps 

	
Profiles	
229
to oppose PAD because of the vulnerability of many disabled 
people who may well be coerced into ending their lives. How-
ever, as of 2016, the national organization hasn’t announced a 
policy on assisted suicide and euthanasia. The lack of a national 
policy is an acknowledgement that state protection and advo-
cacy groups are not aligned on how to address PAD. For some, 
in the pantheon of issues facing disabled people, the right to 
die is not an issue that, at this time, should replace more fun-
damental challenges facing the disabled.
National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization
Formed in 1978, the primary mission of the National Hospice 
and Palliative Care Organization (NHPCO) is to provide qual-
ity end-of-life care to patients, families, and communities— 
accompanied by strong opposition to physician-assisted sui-
cide. For many hospices, that mission extends to influencing 
public policy and practice. In 2005, the NHPCO formally 
rejected physician-assisted suicide as an option for terminally 
ill patients to employ in order to deal with their chronic pain 
and suffering.
National Spinal Cord Injury Association
Founded in 1946, the National Spinal Cord Injury Associa-
tion (NSCIA) is a national medical organization that provides 
active-lifestyle information, peer support and advocacy, and 
training, information, and resources for individuals with spi-
nal cord injuries, their family members, and professionals. 
The NSCIA, like most other groups representing people with 
disabilities, has vigorously opposed PAD and euthanasia as a 
remedy for terminally ill patients. Perhaps the most significant 
problem facing opponents of PAD is the tragic association 
between assisted suicide and America’s profit-driven managed 
health care. Again and again, actuaries and accountants have 
replaced the physician in making health care decisions. The 
health maintenance organizations and managed care bureau-
cracies have overruled physicians’ treatment decisions for their 

230	
The Right to Die
severely disabled patients, leading some to turn to PAD. (The 
cost of the lethal medication generally used for assisted suicide 
is about $35 to $50, far cheaper than the cost of treatment 
for most long-term medical conditions.) The incentive to save 
money by denying treatment already poses a significant danger. 
This danger would increase exponentially if physician-assisted 
suicide is available as an end-of-life alternative. The position of 
the NSCIA is unambiguous: no one should go through a cata-
strophic event that severely injures the spinal cord permanently 
paralyzing the person (the great majority of victims are young 
and male; motorcycle accidents account for 40% of spinal cord 
injuries) without support from medical, rehab, and psychologi-
cal professionals and others trained to help the patient move to 
the next life step.
The NSCIA’s goal is to provide a community of these pro-
fessionals that will surround the disabled person with com-
passionate care and love, addressing the profound depression 
the patient feels by showing the patient that life with such an 
injury is worth living. No one should feel compelled to resort 
to assisted suicide as a solution. Such a solution is an indict-
ment of the health care and social support systems in America’s 
states and in the national health care facilities. In addition to 
opposing PAD in legislative committees and debating PAD 
supporters in public meetings, the NSCIA has been one of a 
number of disability rights organizations to coauthor briefs 
opposing PAD and file the in the U.S. Supreme Court, includ-
ing participation in the two major cases the Court heard in 
1997 (Vacco and Washington State).
Not Dead Yet
Not Dead Yet (NDY) is a national, grassroots disability rights 
group, formed in 1996, that opposes legalization of assisted 
suicide and euthanasia as the deadliest form of discrimination 
against old, ill, and disabled people. NDY helps organize and 
articulate opposition—in political, legal, and judicial settings— 
to all efforts to legalize PAD and euthanasia. In a short period 

	
Profiles	
231
of time, NDY has become the most vocal and aggressive advo-
cate protecting the rights of all disabled people to insure that 
they receive the best health care possible and to block attempts 
by PAD to legalize the right to die across the nation.
Operation Rescue
In 1988, Operation Rescue was founded to fight against abor-
tion rights protected by the U.S. Supreme Court since 1973 
(Roe v. Wade). From the beginning, the group has served two 
purposes: demonstrating obedience to God’s will and pre-
venting abortions, PAD, and any other policy that denies 
the sanctity of life. From its inception, Operation Rescue has 
been a militant anti-choice organization functioning out of 
Wichita, Kansas, and, presently, California and Colorado. 
It is one of many religious-social action groups that engage 
in civil disobedience to protest abortion and, more recently, 
PAD and euthanasia. While it initially protested and took 
action to close down abortion clinics by conducting sit-ins 
in front of Planned Parenthood clinics, it soon turned its 
sights on another controversial pro-choice issue: PAD. By 
1991 Operation Rescue became one of the most outspo-
ken groups opposing abortion, PAD, and euthanasia in the 
United States.
Operation Rescue’s activities attacking PAD began with 
the Schiavo case. The organization was active in the decade-
long battle to save the life of Terri Schiavo, a young wife who 
suffered a catastrophic cardiac arrest and was left in a perma-
nent vegetative state until her death in 2005. Troy Newman, 
the president of Operation Rescue during this time, led his 
group in marches, sit-ins, and prayer vigils, protesting Schi-
avo’s treatment by her husband and state and federal judges, 
who declined to block her death (by the doctor withdrawing 
her life-sustaining hydration and nutrition tube). Additionally, 
Operation Rescue condemned political leaders such as Repub-
lican governor Jeb Bush, whom they felt did not do enough to 
keep Schiavo alive.

232	
The Right to Die
Priests for Life
Priests for Life, formed in 1990 in San Francisco, California, is 
a militant Roman Catholic pro-life organization whose mem-
bers are Catholic bishops, priests, and deacons, although there 
is also a lay auxiliary membership. Its primary function is to 
show the clergy how to aggressively fight to defend the culture 
of life. Its activities focus on ending abortion, PAD, euthana-
sia, and all other public policies that enhance secular society’s 
culture of death. It is rooted in the sacrosanct Gospel of Life 
doctrine of the Catholic Church, recently voiced by Pope John 
Paul II in his Encyclical Evangelium Vitae, March 25, 1995. 
Priests for Life was officially recognized as a Private Association 
of the Faithful on April 30, 1994, and listed in the Official 
Catholic Directory.
Priests for Life, led by Father Frank Pavone, has been seen 
as an uncompromising group within the Catholic Church. Its 
primary task is to assist priests across America in their efforts 
to end abortion and block efforts to pass PAD legislation in 
the states. Priests for Life provides a number of services to the 
clergy: (1) linking actively engaged priests in the fight across 
the nation; (2) publishing a Priests for Life newsletter; (3) pro-
viding priests with homilies, tapes, and other pro-life resources; 
and (4) helping priests speak out against abortion, contracep-
tive use, euthanasia, and PAD.
2016 was a watershed year for Priests for Life and other pro-
life organizations due to the U.S. Supreme Court decision, on 
May 16, 2016, in the case of Zubik v. Burwell. Seven sepa-
rate cases were consolidated in Zubik, including one in which 
Priests for Life was the plaintiff, Priests for Life v. Sylvia Burwell, 
Secretary of Health and Human Services. These cases challenged 
the Affordable Care Act’s (Obamacare) exception to the contra-
ception mandate. The law required employers (through their 
insurance plans) to cover contraception costs without charging 
their employees copays. However, there were two opt-out provi-
sions: (1) churches and all other houses of worship were entirely 
exempt from offering contraception coverage if it goes against 
their religious beliefs, and (2) nonprofit religious organizations 

	
Profiles	
233
(the seven cases consolidated in Zubick), if they do not want to 
aid employees, must fill out a two-page form explaining why 
they want to opt out. If there is an opt-out, then the organiza-
tion’s secular insurer either works with employees directly to 
provide no-cost coverage or finds a secular third party to do the 
work. Priests for Life and the other plaintiff groups argued that 
the 1993 Religious Freedom Restoration Act bars government 
from placing a “substantial burden” on religious beliefs, and 
filling out the two-page form is such a substantial burden. The 
U.S. Courts of Appeals hearing the cases all rejected the peti-
tioners’ challenge to the contraceptive exemption procedure. 
The U.S. Supreme Court, in a short 8–0 unsigned order (a per 
curium opinion) vacated and remanded the cases back to the 
lower federal courts. Priests for Life, the Little Sisters of the 
Poor (a Catholic nursing home), and the other plaintiffs must 
now—with the HHS—return to the courts of appeal to try to 
work out a compromise agreement. If they cannot, the issue 
will be brought back to the U.S. Supreme Court in 2017.
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops
The United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB) 
was formed in 1966. The USCCB’s task is to provide public 
information on the sanctity of human life and “the moral evil 
of intentionally killing innocent human beings,” whether at 
the beginning of life (abortion, use of contraceptives) or at its 
end (death penalty, euthanasia, PAD). The USCCB strongly 
supports the expansion of high-quality palliative care, palliative 
sedation, and, when the time comes, hospice programs. The 
essential message conveyed by the USCCB lies at the core of 
Catholic doctrine: kill the pain, not the patient.
References
Hendin, Herbert. 1996. “Suicide, Assisted Suicide and 
Euthanasia: Lessons From the Dutch Experience,” U.S. 
House of Representatives, Committee on the Judiciary, 
Oversight Hearing, April 29.

234	
The Right to Die
Liptak, Adam. 2004. “In Re Scalia the Outspoken v. Scalia 
the Reserved.” New York Times, May 2.
Rehnquist, William. 1976. “The Notion of a Living Constitution,”  
University of Texas Law Review, 29:2, 402–415.
Williams, Samuel. 1873. “Euthanasia.” Popular Science Monthly,  
3, May.



237
5	
Data and Documents
John Jay Hooker, a veteran legislator who fought valiantly for Death with 
Dignity legislation in Tennessee, receives treatment for his terminal cancer 
during his final lobbying effort in August 2015. Hooker died shortly after-
ward, as did his death with dignity proposal. By 2015, after Brittany May-
nard’s death, more than half of the United States had proposals for Death 
with Dignity laws. (AP Photo/David Goldman)
Introduction
This chapter provides data and documents about the right to die 
from a number of sources—political, religious, medical, and legal. 
The first section, Data, presents statistical and demographic 
information about how Americans die; how American states have 
dealt with assisted suicide in their criminal codes; the framework 
of the Oregon Death with Dignity Act (ODWDA), which serves as 
the model for other states supporting PAD; and who in Oregon 
chooses to use the Act and what reasons they give to their family for 
making that choice.
The Documents section contains letters, presidential statements, 
papal talks, judgments of U.S. attorney generals about the 
legitimacy of the ODWDA, and other documents about the right 
to die. The final segment of this section presents a number of 
judicial opinions, most from the U.S. Supreme Court, that 
enumerate the different views of the judiciary about the right  
to die.

238	
The Right to Die
Data
Top 10 Causes of Death in America (1850–2015)
The top causes of death in America have changed since the 19th 
century (Table 5.1). Due to dramatic changes in public health, 
new drugs for treating respiratory infections, and other medical 
innovations, people are living longer and dying from new life-
style, and chronic, diseases such as cancer and heart disease. These 
changes in (increased) average life expectancy, accompanied by 
how we die, have led to the emergence of the right to die movement 
since the middle of the 20th century.
Legislation on Assisting Suicide (2015)
There are 40 states in which any person “assisting [a] suicide” is 
guilty of a criminal offence. “Assisting suicide” is a felony in most 
Table 5.1  Top ten causes of death in America, 1850–2015
1850
1900
2015
1
Tuberculosis
Pneumonia
Heart disease
2
Dysentery/diarrhea
Tuberculosis
Cancer
3
Cholera
Diarrhea
Chronic lower respiratory disease
4
Malaria
Heart disease
Unintentional injury
5
Typhoid fever
Stroke
Cerebrovascular diseases
6
Pneumonia
Liver disease
Alzheimer’s disease
7
Diphtheria
Accidents
Diabetes mellitus
8
Scarlet fever
Cancer
Influenza and pneumonia
9
Meningitis
Normal aging
Nephritis
10
Whooping cough
Diphtheria
Suicide
Sources:
1850 data: Reuben H. Fleet Science Center, San Diego.
1900 data: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/data/dvs/lead1900_98.pdf.
2015 data: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/fastats/leading-causes-of-death.htm.

	
Data and Documents	
239
state criminal codes. Specifically, 40 states have laws prohibiting 
assisted suicide; 5 states and the District of Columbia are unclear 
either because the state’s common law has no penalty phase or be-
cause they have no specific criminal laws regarding assisted suicide 
(Table 5.2).
Table 5.2  Laws on assisting a suicide: Fifty states (2015)
5 States Allow 
Physician-Assisted 
Suicide
40 States Prohibit 
Assisted Suicide
5 States and D.C. with No 
Statutory Law Nor Common 
Law Making Physician-
Assisted Suicide Illegal
California, L
Alabama, F
Nevada
Montana, SC
Alaska, F
North Carolina
Oregon, BI
Arizona, FM
Utah
Vermont, L
Arkansas, FM
West Virginia
Washington, BI
Colorado, FMa
Wyoming
Connecticut, FM
District of Columbia*
Delaware, FM
Florida, F
Georgia, F
Hawaii, F
Idaho, F
Illinois, FM
Indiana, F
Iowa, F
Kansas, F
Kentucky, F
Louisiana, F
Maine, F
Maryland, F
Massachusetts, FM
Michigan, F
(continued )

5 States Allow 
Physician-Assisted 
Suicide
40 States Prohibit 
Assisted Suicide
5 States and D.C. with No 
Statutory Law Nor Common 
Law Making Physician-
Assisted Suicide Illegal
Minnesota, F
Mississippi, F
Missouri, F
Nebraska, F
New Hampshire, F
New Jersey, F
New Mexico, F
New York, F
North Dakota, F
Ohio, M
Oklahoma, F
Pennsylvania, FM
Rhode Island, F
South Carolina, F
South Dakota, F
Tennessee, F
Texas, FM
Virginia, M
Wisconsin, F
aThe Colorado “End of Life Options Act,” also known as Proposition 106, is on 
the November 8, 2016, ballot in Colorado as an initiated state statute. A “yes” 
vote supports making assisted death legal among patients with a terminal illness 
who receive a prognosis of death within six months. A “no” vote opposes this 
proposal, keeping the prohibition of assisted death in Colorado. In the election, 
Colorado voters voted “yes” (65%–35%). It will be law in 2017.
*In November 2016, the D.C. Commissioners, 11–2, approved a Death with 
Dignity Bill.
BI, ballot initiative; F, felony; FM, felony/second-degree murder; L, legislature-
passed bill; M, misdemeanor; SC, state Supreme Court; state with no laws 
addressing physician assistance and with no state common law regarding 
assisted suicide.
Source: Ollove, Michael. 2015. “More States Consider ‘Death with Dignity’ Laws.” 
The Pew Charitable Trusts. http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/
blogs/stateline/2015/3/09/more-states-consider-death-with-dignity-laws
Table 5.2  (continued )

	
Data and Documents	
241
National Public Opinion Polls on Death  
with Dignity (2014)
The following data summarizes public opinion regarding whether 
a terminally ill person should have the right to ask a physician 
to assist the person to die. These polls generally reflect the public’s 
strong belief that a person should be free to make a decision of such 
magnitude.
Medscape Poll (December 2014)
This poll was conducted between September 18 and November 12, 
2014. Medscape received many of the responses after the October 6, 
2014, launch of Brittany Maynard’s joint campaign with 
Compassion  & Choices to authorize aid in dying in states 
nationwide.
This online survey of 17,000 U.S. doctors representing 28 medical 
specialties agreed by a 23 percent margin (54% vs. 31%): “I believe 
terminal illnesses such as metastatic cancers or degenerative 
neurological diseases rob a human of his/her dignity. Provided there 
is no shred of doubt that the disease is incurable and terminal, 
I would support a patient’s decision to end their life, and I would 
also wish the same option was available in my case should the need 
arise.” The previous Medscape survey on this issue in 2010 showed 
physicians supporting medical aid in dying by a 5 percent margin 
(46% vs. 41%).
Source: Crowley, Sean. 2014. “Post-Brittany Maynard Poll: 
Most U.S. Doctors Now Support Aid in Dying.” Compas-
sion & Choices. https://www.compassionandchoices.org/post- 
brittany-maynard-poll-most-u-s-doctors-now-support-aid-in-
dying/
Harris Poll (December 2014)
This poll was conducted after the death of Brittany Maynard and 
found that three out of four Americans (74%) agreed that “in-
dividuals who are terminally ill, in great pain and who have no 

242	
The Right to Die
chance for recovery, have the right to choose to end their own life.” 
Only 14 percent disagreed with this position (Table 5.3). Support 
for this position cut across all generations and educational groups, 
both genders, and even political affiliation.
Source: Thompson, Dennis. 2014. “Most Americans Agree 
with Right-to-Die Movement.” The Harris Poll. http://www.
theharrispoll.com/health-and-life/Most_Americans_Agree_
With_Right-to-Die_Movement.html
Gallup Survey (May 2014)
Seven out of 10 Americans (69%) agreed that doctors should 
be allowed by law to end the life of a patient who has a disease 
that cannot be cured “by some painless means if the patient 
and his or her family request it.” Even when Gallup asked the 
same question using the language “assist the patient to commit 
Table 5.3  Agreement % on poll question about PAD
Demographic
Percentage
Generation
  Millennials
75
  Gen X
76
  Baby boomers
74
  Matures
68
Education
  High school
75
  Some college
74
  College grad
72
  Post grad
76
Political Party
  Republican
64
  Democrat
78
  Independent
78

	
Data and Documents	
243
suicide,” support dropped only 11 points, to 58 percent; the 
latter figure still represents a 7-point jump from this same 
question the previous year.
Source: McCarthy, Justin. 2014. “Seven in 10 Americans Back  
Euthanasia.” Gallup. http://www.gallup.com/poll/171704/seven- 
americans-back-euthanasia.aspx
Characteristics of Those Who Used the ODWDA in 2015
This data enumerates the characteristics of all those terminally ill 
patients who used the lethal dose to end their lives in 2015 under 
the provisions of the ODWDA.
Patient Characteristics
Of the 132 Death with Dignity Act (DWDA) deaths dur-
ing 2015, most patients (78.0%) were aged 65 years or older. 
The median age at death was 73 years. As in previous years, 
decedents were commonly white (93.1%) and well educated 
(43.1% had at least a baccalaureate degree).
While most patients had cancer, the percent of patients 
with cancer in 2015 was slightly lower than in previous years 
(72.0% and 77.9%, respectively). The percent of patients with 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis was also lower (6.1% in 2015, 
compared to 8.3% in previous years). Heart disease increased 
from 2.0 percent in prior years to 6.8 percent in 2015.
Most patients (90.1%) died at home, and most (92.2%) 
were enrolled in hospice care. Excluding unknown cases, most 
(99.2%) had some form of health care insurance, although 
the percent of patients who had private insurance (36.7%) 
was lower in 2015 than in previous years (62.5% compared 
to 38.3%).
Similar to previous years, the three most frequently men-
tioned end-of-life concerns were as follows: decreasing ability to 
participate in activities that made life enjoyable (96.2 patients), 
loss of autonomy (92.4%), and loss of dignity (75.4%).

244	
The Right to Die
Source: Oregon Public Health Division. 2016. “Oregon Death 
with Dignity Act: 2015 Data Summary. http://public.health.
oregon.gov/ProviderPartnerResources/EvaluationResearch/
DeathwithDignityAct/Documents/year18.pdf
Characteristics of Oregon Patients Using ODWDA: 
Cumulative Data (1998–2014)
Table 5.4 describes, quantitatively, the characteristics of all Or-
egonians who chose PAD and took the prescribed medicine to end 
their lives between 1998 and 2014.
Table 5.4  Characteristics and end-of-life care of 991 DWDA patients who 
have died from ingesting DWDA medications, by year, Oregon, 1998–2014
2015
1998–2014
Total
Characteristics
(N = 132)
(N = 859)
(N = 991)
Sex
N (%)1
N (%)1
N (%)1
  Male (%)
56 (42.4)
453 (52.7)
509 (51.4)
  Female (%)
76 (57.6)
406 (47.3)
482 (48.6)
Age at death (years)
  18–34 (%)
1 (0.8)
7 (0.8)
8 (0.8)
  35–44 (%)
5 (3.8)
18 (2.1)
23 (2.3)
  45–54 (%)
2 (1.5)
61 (7.1)
63 (6.4)
  55–64 (%)
21 (15.9)
184 (21.4)
205 (20.7)
  65–74 (%)
41 (31.1)
247 (28.8)
288 (29.1)
  75–84 (%)
30 (22.7)
229 (26.7)
259 (26.1)
  85+ (%)
32 (24.2)
113 (13.2)
145 (14.6)
  Median years (range)
73 
(30–102)
71 (25–96)
71 
(25–102)
Race
  White (%)
122 (93.1)
831 (97.1)
953 (96.6)
  African American (%)
0 (0.0)
1 (0.1)
1 (0.1)
  American Indian (%)
0 (0.0)
2 (0.2)
2 (0.2)
  Asian (%)
4 (3.1)
9 (1.1)
13 (1.3)
  Pacific Islander (%)
0 (0.0)
1 (0.1)
1 (0.1)

2015
1998–2014
Total
  Other (%)
0 (0.0)
3 (0.4)
3 (0.3)
  Two or more races (%)
1 (0.8)
3 (0.4)
4 (0.4)
  Hispanic (%)
4 (3.1)
6 (0.7)
10 (1.0)
  Unknown
1
3
4
Marital status
  Married (including registered 
domestic partner) (%)
52 (39.7)
395 (46.1)
447 (45.3)
  Widowed (%)
34 (26.0)
198 (23.1)
232 (23.5)
  Never married (%)
9 (6.9)
69 (8.1)
78 (7.9)
  Divorced (%)
36 (27.5)
194 (22.7)
230 (23.3)
  Unknown
1
3
4
Education
  Less than high school (%)
7 (5.4)
51 (6.0)
58 (5.9)
  High school graduate (%)
31 (23.8)
187 (21.9)
218 (22.2)
  Some college (%)
36 (27.7)
224 (26.2)
260 (26.4)
  Baccalaureate or higher (%)
56 (43.1)
392 (45.9)
448 (45.5)
  Unknown
2
5
7
Residence
  Metro counties (Clackamas, 
Multnomah, Washington) (%)
64 (49.2)
361 (42.3)
425 (43.2)
  Coastal counties (%)
7 (5.4)
63 (7.4)
70 (7.1)
  Other western counties (%)
48 (36.9)
365 (42.7)
413 (42.0)
  East of the Cascades (%)
11 (8.5)
65 (7.6)
76 (7.7)
  Unknown
2
5
7
End-of-life care
  Hospice
    Enrolled (%)
118 (92.2)
747 (90.2)
865 (90.5)
    Not enrolled (%)
10 (7.8)
81 (9.8)
91 (9.5)
    Unknown
4
31
35
  Insurance
    Private (alone or in 
combination) (%)
44 (36.7)
489 (60.2)
533 (57.2)
(continued )

246
2015
1998–2014
Total
    Medicare, Medicaid, or other 
governmental (%)
75 (62.5)
311 (38.3)
386 (41.4)
    None (%)
1 (0.8)
12 (1.5)
13 (1.4)
    Unknown
12
47
59
Underlying illness
  Malignant neoplasms (%)
95 (72.0)
667 (77.9)
762 (77.1)
    Lung and bronchus (%)
23 (17.4)
154 (18.0)
177 (17.9)
    Breast (%)
9 (6.8)
64 (7.5)
73 (7.4)
    Colon (%)
7 (5.3)
54 (6.3)
61 (6.2)
    Pancreas (%)
7 (5.3)
56 (6.5)
63 (6.4)
    Prostate (%)
5 (3.8)
35 (4.1)
40 (4.0)
    Ovary (%)
3 (2.3)
33 (3.9)
36 (3.6)
    Other (%)
41 (31.1)
271 (31.7)
312 (31.6)
  Amyotrophic lateral  
sclerosis (%)
8 (6.1)
71 (8.3)
79 (8.0)
  Chronic lower respiratory 
disease (%)
6 (4.5)
38 (4.4)
44 (4.5)
  Heart disease (%)
9 (6.8)
17 (2.0)
26 (2.6)
  HIV/AIDS (%)
0 (0.0)
9 (1.1)
9 (0.9)
  Other illnesses (%)2
14 (10.6)
54 (6.3)
68 (6.9)
  Unknown
0
3
3
DWDA process
  Referred for psychiatric 
evaluation (%)
5 (3.8)
47 (5.5)
52 (5.3)
  Patient informed family of 
decision (%)3
126 (95.5)
729 (93.2)
855 (93.5)
  Patient died at
    Home (patient, family or 
friend) (%)
118 (90.1)
810 (94.6)
928 (94.0)
    Long-term care, assisted 
living, or foster care facility 
(%)
9 (6.9)
37 (4.3)
46 (4.7)
    Hospital (%)
0 (0.0)
1 (0.1)
1 (0.1)
    Other (%)
4 (3.1)
8 (0.9)
12 (1.2)
    Unknown
1
3
4
Table 5.4  (continued )

247
2015
1998–2014
Total
  Lethal medication
    Secobarbital (%)
114 (86.4)
466 (54.2)
580 (58.5)
    Pentobarbital (%)
1 (0.8)
385 (44.8)
386 (39.0)
    Phenobarbital/chloral 
hydrate/morphine sulfate mix 
(%)
16 (12.1)
0 (0.0)
16 (1.6)
    Other (combination of above 
and/or morphine) (%)
1 (0.8)
8 (0.9)
9 (0.9)
End-of-life concerns4
(N = 132)
(N = 859)
(N = 991)
  Less able to engage in activities 
making life enjoyable (%)
127 (96.2)
758 (88.7)
885 (89.7)
  Losing autonomy (%)
121 (92.4)
782 (91.5)
903 (91.6)
  Loss of dignity (%)5
98 (75.4)
579 (79.3)
677 (78.7)
  Losing control of bodily 
functions (%)
46 (35.7)
428 (50.1)
474 (48.2)
  Burden on family, friends/
caregivers (%)
63 (48.1)
342 (40.0)
405 (41.1)
  Inadequate pain control or 
concern about it (%)
37 (28.7)
211 (24.7)
248 (25.2)
  Financial implications of 
treatment (%)
3 (2.3)
27 (3.2)
30 (3.1)
Health care provider present 
(collected 2001–present)
(N = 132)
(N = 789)
(N = 921)
  When medication was ingested6
    Prescribing physician
15
133
148
    Other provider, prescribing 
physician not present
13
243
256
    No provider
6
81
87
    Unknown
98
332
430
  At time of death
    Prescribing physician (%)
14 (10.8)
121 (15.7)
135 (15.0)
    Other provider, prescribing 
physician not present (%)
13 (10.0)
268 (34.7)
281 (31.2)
    No provider (%)
103 (79.2)
383 (49.6)
486 (53.9)
    Unknown
2
17
19
(continued )

2015
1998–2014
Total
Complications6
(N = 132)
(N = 859)
(N = 991)
  Regurgitated
2
22
24
  Other
2
1
3
  None
23
506
529
  Unknown
105
330
435
Other outcomes
  Regained consciousness after 
ingesting DWDA medications7
0
6
6
Timing of DWDA event
  Duration (weeks) of patient-
physician relationship
    Median
9
13
12
    Range
1–1004
0–1905
0–1905
    Number of patients with 
information available
132
857
989
    Number of patients with 
information unknown
0
2
2
  Duration (days) between 1st 
request and death
    Median
45
47
46
    Range
15–517
15–1009
15–1009
    Number of patients with 
information available
131
859
990
    Number of patients with 
information unknown
1
0
1
  Minutes between ingestion and 
unconsciousness6
    Median
5
5
5
    Range
2–15
1–38
1–38
    Number of patients with 
information available
25
506
531
    Number of patients with 
information unknown
107
353
460
  Minutes between ingestion and 
death6
Table 5.4  (continued )
248

2015
1998–2014
Total
    Median
25
25
25
      Range
5 min to 
34 hr
1 min to 
104 hr
1 min to 
104 hr
    Number of patients with 
information available
25
511
536
    Number of patients with 
information unknown
107
348
455
2015
1998–2014
Total
Characteristics
(N = 132)
(N = 859)
(N = 991)
Complications6
(N = 132)
(N = 859)
(N = 991)
  Regurgitated
2
22
24
  Other
2
1
3
  None
23
506
529
  Unknown
105
330
435
Other outcomes
  Regained consciousness after 
ingesting DWDA medications7
0
6
6
Timing of DWDA event
  Duration (weeks) of patient-
physician relationship
    Median
9
13
12
    Range
1–1004
0–1905
0–1905
    Number of patients with 
information available
132
857
989
    Number of patients with 
information unknown
0
2
2
  Duration (days) between 1st 
request and death
    Median
45
47
46
    Range
15–517
15–1009
15–1009
    Number of patients with 
information available
131
859
990
    Number of patients with 
information unknown
1
0
1
(continued )
249

2015
1998–2014
Total
  Minutes between ingestion and 
unconsciousness6
    Median
5
5
5
    Range
2–15
1–38
1–38
    Number of patients with 
information available
25
506
531
    Number of patients with 
information unknown
107
353
460
  Minutes between ingestion and 
death6
    Median
25
25
25
    Range
5 min to 
34 hr
1 min to 
104 hr
1 min to 
104 hr
    Number of patients with 
information available
25
511
536
    Number of patients with 
information unknown
107
348
455
1 Unknowns are excluded when calculating percentages.
2 Includes deaths due to benign and uncertain neoplasms, other respiratory 
diseases, diseases of the nervous system (including multiple sclerosis, 
Parkinson’s disease, and Huntington’s disease), musculoskeletal and connective 
tissue diseases, cerebrovascular disease, other vascular diseases, diabetes 
mellitus, gastrointestinal diseases, and liver disease.
3 First recorded beginning in 2001. Since then, 40 patients (4.4%) have chosen 
not to inform their families, and 19 patients (2.1%) have had no family to inform. 
There was one unknown case in 2002, two in 2005, one in 2009, and three in 
2013.
4 Affirmative answers only (“don’t know” included in negative answers). Categories 
are not mutually exclusive. Data unavailable for four patients in 2001.
5 First asked in 2003. Data available for 130 patients in 2015, 730 patients between 
1998 and 2014, and 860 patients for all years.
6 A procedure revision was made mid-year in 2010 to standardize reporting on the 
follow-up questionnaire. The new procedure accepts information about time of 
death and circumstances surrounding death only when the physician or another 
health care provider is present at the time of death. This resulted in a larger 
number of unknowns beginning in 2010.
7 Six patients have regained consciousness after ingesting prescribed medications 
and are not included in the total number of DWDA deaths. These deaths 
occurred in 2005 (one death), 2010 (two deaths), 2011 (two deaths), and 2012 
(one death). Please refer to the appropriate years’ annual reports at http://www.
healthoregon.org/dwd for more detail on these deaths.
Table 5.4  (continued )

	
Data and Documents	
251
Source: Oregon Public Health Division. 2016. “Oregon Death 
with Dignity Act: 2015 Data Summary.” http://public.health.
oregon.gov/ProviderPartnerResources/EvaluationResearch/
DeathwithDignityAct/Documents/year18.pdf
Family Members’ Views on Why Patients Requested 
Physician-Assisted Death (2004–2006)
Researchers, working with data received from patients who used 
the ODWDA and discussed the reasons they made that choice with 
family members, created a list of nearly 30 responses given by dying 
patients explaining their reason(s) for choosing to hasten their 
deaths. They then asked the family to score these responses from 
most important to less important reasons for requesting PAD. This 
qualitative snapshot of the reasons (Table 5.5) why patients chose 
PAD substantiates the quantitative information presented above.
Table 5.5  Family members’ views on why Oregon patients requested 
physician-assisted death (2004–2006)
Very Important 
(5)
(4)
(3)
(2)
Not at All 
Important 
(1)
Fear of inability 
to care for self in 
future
Fear of 
worsening 
pain in future
Lack of 
energy in 
future
Fear of loss of 
bowel/bladder 
control in future
Confusion
Fear of poor 
quality of life in 
future
Poor quality 
of life
Not 
wanting 
others to 
care for 
him
Inability to care for 
self
Depressed 
mood
Loss of dignity
Wanting to 
die at home
Perceived 
self as 
burden to 
others
Loss of 
independence at 
time of request
Dyspnea
Loss of 
independence in 
future
Worried 
about loss of 
sense of self
Witnessed 
bad 
deaths
Not able to pursue 
pleasurable activities
Fear of 
worsening 
confusion in 
future
(continued )

252	
The Right to Die
Very Important 
(5)
(4)
(3)
(2)
Not at All 
Important 
(1)
Wanting to control 
circumstances of 
death
Pain at time of 
request
Fear of 
worsening 
dyspnea in 
future
Ready to die
Lack of 
energy
Lack of 
social 
support
Life tasks 
complete
Loss of 
bowel/
bladder 
control
Perceived 
self as 
financial 
drain
Source: Data from Ganzini, Linda, Elizabeth Goy, and Steven K. Dobscha. 2008. 
“Why Oregon Patients Request Assisted Death: Family Members Views.” Journal 
of General Internal Medicine, 23:2, 154–157.
Table 5.5  (continued )
Documents
Summary of the 1994 Oregon Death with Dignity Act 
(ODWDA): Requirements
The ODWDA, initially passed in 1994 (and again in 1997), 
serves as a model for all other PAD advocates laboring to get their 
state legislature to pass a right to die bill. This summary provides 
the reader with all sections of the ODWDA, which has become the 
model used by all these groups planning for the upcoming battles 
in the political arena.
The DWDA allows terminally ill Oregon residents to obtain and 
use prescriptions from their physicians for self-administered, 
lethal medications. Under the Act, ending one’s life in accordance 

	
Data and Documents	
253
with the law does not constitute suicide. The DWDA specifically 
prohibits euthanasia, where a physician or other person directly 
administers a medication to end another’s life.
To request a prescription for lethal medications, the DWDA 
requires that a patient must be:
•	 An adult (18 years of age or older),
•	 A resident of Oregon,
•	 Capable (defined as able to make and communicate health 
care decisions), and
•	 Diagnosed with a terminal illness that will lead to death 
within six months.
Patients meeting these requirements are eligible to request a 
prescription for lethal medication from a licensed Oregon phy-
sician. To receive a prescription for lethal medication, the fol-
lowing steps must be fulfilled:
•	 The patient must make two oral requests to his or her physi-
cian, separated by at least 15 days.
•	 The patient must provide a written request to his or her phy-
sician, signed in the presence of two witnesses.
•	 The prescribing physician and a consulting physician must 
confirm the diagnosis and prognosis.
•	 The prescribing physician and a consulting physician must 
determine whether the patient is capable.
•	 If either physician believes the patient’s judgment is im-
paired by a psychiatric or psychological disorder, the patient 
must be referred for a psychological examination.
•	 The prescribing physician must inform the patient of feasi-
ble alternatives to DWDA, including comfort care, hospice 
care, and pain control.
•	 The prescribing physician must request, but may not re-
quire, the patient to notify his or her next-of-kin of the pre-
scription request.

254	
The Right to Die
To comply with the law, physicians must report to the Oregon 
Health Authority (OHA) all prescriptions for lethal medica-
tions. Reporting is not required if patients begin the request 
process but never receive a prescription. In 1999, the Oregon 
legislature added a requirement that pharmacists must be 
informed of the prescribed medication’s intended use. Phy-
sicians and patients who adhere to the requirements of the 
Act are protected from criminal prosecution, and the choice 
of DWDA cannot affect the status of a patient’s health or life 
insurance policies. Physicians, pharmacists, and health care sys-
tems are under no obligation to participate in the DWDA.
The Oregon Revised Statutes specify that action taken in 
accordance with the DWDA does not constitute suicide, mercy 
killing or homicide under the law.
Source: Oregon Health Department. 1997. https://public.
health.oregon.gov/ProviderPartnerResources/EvaluationRe-
search/DeathwithDignityAct/Documents/requirements.pdf
Janet Reno’s Statement about ODWDA  
and the CSA (1998)
Republican senators, disappointed by the 1997 Oregon referendum 
vote that supported the ODWDA, asked the commissioner of the 
Drug Enforcement Administration to interpret the 1970 Con-
trolled Substance Act (CSA) so that physicians in Oregon could not 
prescribe any medications that would be used by terminally ill pa-
tients to end their lives. U.S. attorney general Janet Reno reviewed 
the proposed expansion of the CSA and, in the following document, 
overruled the planned change, noting that the CSA does not autho-
rize the Drug Enforcement Administration to prosecute, or to revoke 
the Drug Enforcement Administration registration of a physician 
who has assisted in a suicide in compliance with Oregon law.
The Department has conducted a thorough and careful review 
of the issue of whether the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) 

	
Data and Documents	
255
authorizes adverse action against a physician who prescribes a 
controlled substance to assist in a suicide in compliance with 
Oregon’s “Death With Dignity Act.” We have concluded that 
adverse action against a physician who has assisted in a suicide 
in full compliance with the Oregon Act would not be autho-
rized by the CSA.
. . . As a matter of state law, physicians acting in accordance 
with the Oregon Act are immune from liability as well as any 
adverse disciplinary action for having rendered such assistance.
The CSA is a complex regulatory scheme that controls the 
authorized distribution of scheduled drugs. Physicians, for 
example, are authorized to prescribe and distribute scheduled 
drugs only pursuant to their registration with the DEA, and the 
unauthorized distribution of drugs is generally subject to crimi-
nal and administrative action. The relevant provisions of the 
CSA provide criminal penalties for physicians who dispense con-
trolled substances beyond “the course of professional practice,” 
and provide for revocation of the DEA drug registrations of phy-
sicians who have engaged either in such criminal conduct or in 
other “conduct which may threaten the public health and safety.” 
Because these terms are not further defined by the statute, we 
must look to the purpose of the CSA to understand their scope.
The CSA was intended to keep legally available controlled 
substances within lawful channels of distribution and use. It 
sought to prevent both the trafficking in these substances for 
unauthorized purposes and drug abuse. The particular drug 
abuse that Congress intended to prevent was that deriving 
from the drug’s “stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect 
on the central nervous system.”
There is no evidence that Congress, in the CSA, intended to 
displace the states as the primary regulators of the medical pro-
fession, or to override a state’s determination as to what consti-
tutes legitimate medical practice in the absence of a federal law 
prohibiting that practice. Indeed, the CSA is essentially silent 
with regard to regulating the practice of medicine that involves 

256	
The Right to Die
legally available drugs except for certain specific regulations 
dealing with the treatment of addicts.
. . . We have concluded that the CSA does not authorize DEA 
to prosecute, or to revoke the DEA registration of, a physician 
who has assisted in a suicide in compliance with Oregon law. 
We emphasize that our conclusion is limited to these particular 
circumstances . . . . However, the federal government’s pursuit 
of adverse actions against Oregon physicians who fully comply 
with that state’s Death with Dignity Act would be beyond the 
purpose of the CSA.
Source: Reno, Janet. “Statement of Attorney General Reno on 
Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act.” June 5, 1998. https://www.
justice.gov/archive/opa/pr/1998/June/259ag.htm.html
John Ashcroft’s Memorandum Regarding Dispensing of 
Controlled Substances to Assist Suicide (2001)
The very controversial presidential election of 2000 brought into 
office Republican George W. Bush, a strong supporter of pro-life 
groups engaged in efforts to overturn Roe and to block any state law 
that allowed physicians to prescribe drugs to enable a terminally ill 
person to hasten death. In 2001, Bush appointed former Missouri 
governor and U.S. senator John Ashcroft to serve as the U.S. attor-
ney general. Ashcroft, who was governor of Missouri when Cruzon 
(1990) was heard, was a strong opponent of abortion, assisting sui-
cide, and euthanasia. Almost immediately after his appointment, 
Ashcroft requested the White House Office of Legal Counsel to pro-
vide him with a legal opinion that answered a critical question: 
did the Oregon law’s authority to allow doctors to prescribe a drug 
“serve a legitimate medical purpose”? If there was no legitimate 
purpose, then the physician could be either criminally charged or 
lose his or her license to practice medicine. After receiving the legal 
opinion, Ashcroft issued this memo, which set aside Attorney Gen-
eral Reno’s 1998 opinion.

	
Data and Documents	
257
Office of the Attorney General
Washington, D.C. 20530
November 6, 2001
MEMORANDUM FOR:
ASA HUTCHINSON
ADMINISTRATOR
THE DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION
FROM: John Ashcroft
Attorney General
SUBJECT: Dispensing of Controlled Substances to Assist Suicide
Questions have been raised about the validity of an Attorney 
General letter dated June 5, 1998, which overruled an earlier 
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) determination that 
narcotics and other dangerous drugs controlled by federal law 
may not be dispensed consistently with the Controlled Sub-
stances Act, 21 U.S.C. §§ 801–971 (1994 & Supp. II 1996) 
(CSA), to assist suicide in the United States. Upon review of 
other relevant authorities, I  have concluded that the DEA’s 
original reading of the CSA—that controlled substances may 
not be dispensed to assist suicide—was correct. I  therefore 
advise you that the original DEA determination is reinstated 
and should be implemented as set forth in greater detail below.
The attached Office of Legal Counsel opinion, entitled 
“Whether Physician-Assisted Suicide Serves a ‘Legitimate Medi-
cal Purpose’ Under The Drug Enforcement Administration’s Regu-
lations Implementing the Controlled Substances Act” (June 27, 
2001) (“OLC Opinion”) (attached) sets forth the legal basis 
for my decision.
1. Determination on the Use of Federally Controlled Substances 
to Assist Suicide. For the reasons set forth in the OLC Opinion, 

258	
The Right to Die
I hereby determine that assisting suicide is not a “legitimate 
medical purpose” within the meaning of 21 C.F.R. § 1306.04 
(2001), and that prescribing, dispensing, or administering fed-
erally controlled substances to assist suicide violates the CSA. 
Such conduct by a physician registered to dispense controlled 
substances may “render his registration . . . inconsistent with 
the public interest” and therefore subject to possible suspension 
or revocation under 21 U.S.C. § 824(a)(4). This conclusion 
applies regardless of whether state law authorizes or permits 
such conduct by practitioners or others and regardless of the 
condition of the person whose suicide is assisted.
I hereby direct the DEA, effective upon publication of this 
memorandum in the Federal Register, to enforce and apply 
this determination, notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
in the June 5, 1998, Attorney General’s letter.
Source: Ashcroft, John. 2001. “Dispensing of Controlled Sub-
stances to Assist Suicide.” Federal Register, November 9, 2001, 
66:218, 56608. http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/fed_regs/
rules/2001/fr1109.htm
Pope John Paul II’s Address, “Life-Sustaining Treatments 
and Vegetative State: Scientific Advances and Ethical 
Dilemmas” (2004)
The Roman Catholic Church has been in the forefront of the anti-
PAD (and anti-abortion) movement ever since these issues became 
controversial public issues discussed in courtrooms and in legislative 
chambers. Leadership has come from the apex of the church: papal 
addresses and encyclicals addressing the sinfulness and immorality 
of human beings taking life away from other human beings. In 
this address, Pope John Paul II talks about the many ethical and 
religious dilemmas brought about by advances in medicine that 
sustain life but leave some in a very diminished state.
2.	 The person in a vegetative state . . . shows no evident sign 
of self-awareness or of awareness of the environment, and 

	
Data and Documents	
259
seems unable to interact with others or to react to specific 
stimuli.
3.	 I feel the duty to reaffirm strongly that the intrinsic value 
and personal dignity of every human being do not change, 
no matter what the concrete circumstances of his or her 
life. A man, even if seriously ill or disabled in the exercise of 
his highest functions, is and always will be a man, and he will 
never become a “vegetable” or an “animal.”
4.	 The sick person in a vegetative state, awaiting recovery or 
a natural end, still has the right to basic health care (nutri-
tion, hydration, cleanliness, warmth, etc.), and to the 
prevention of complications related to his confinement to 
bed. He also has the right to appropriate rehabilitative 
care and to be monitored for clinical signs of eventual 
recovery.
I wrote in the Encyclical Evangelium Vitae, making it clear 
that . . . euthanasia . . . is always “a serious violation of the law of 
God, since it is the deliberate and morally unacceptable killing 
of a human person.”
5.	 No evaluation of costs can outweigh the value of the funda-
mental good which we are trying to protect, that of human 
life. Moreover, to admit that decisions regarding man’s life 
can be based on the external acknowledgment of its qual-
ity, is the same as . . . introducing into social relations a 
discriminatory and eugenic principle.
7.	 Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, in conclusion 
I exhort you, as men and women of science responsible for 
the dignity of the medical profession, to guard zealously 
the principle according to which the true task of medicine 
is “to cure if possible, always to care.”
Source: Address of John Paul II to the Participants in the Inter-
national Congress “Life-Sustaining Treatments and Vegetative 
State: Scientific Advances and Ethical Dilemmas.” March 20,  

260	
The Right to Die
2004. http://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/speeches/ 
2004/march/documents/hf_jp-ii_spe_20040320_congress-
fiamc.html. © Libreria Editrice Vaticana. Used by permission.
President George W. Bush’s Signing Statement on  
the Terri Schiavo Case (2005)
In the tragedy of Florida woman Terri Schiavo, who was in a per-
manent vegetative state since 1990 till her death in 2005, the U.S. 
Congress took a last-ditch gamble on a strategy they hoped would 
keep the comatose woman alive. They passed a bill that enabled a 
federal district court judge to hear and act on a petition brought by 
her parents who wanted to keep her alive. In the effort to stop the 
withdrawal of life-saving artificial means requested by Schiavo’s 
husband, President Bush took an emergency flight from Texas to 
the nation’s capital to sign the bill. In this signing statement, Presi-
dent Bush notes that his action reflects the primary value of the 
sanctity of life.
Statement by the President
Today, I signed into law a bill that will allow Federal courts to 
hear a claim by or on behalf of Terri Schiavo for violation of 
her rights relating to the withholding or withdrawal of food, 
fluids, or medical treatment necessary to sustain her life. In 
cases like this one, where there are serious questions and sub-
stantial doubts, our society, our laws, and our courts should 
have a presumption in favor of life. This presumption is espe-
cially critical for those like Terri Schiavo who live at the mercy 
of others. I appreciate the bipartisan action by the Members of 
Congress to pass this bill. I will continue to stand on the side 
of those defending life for all Americans, including those with 
disabilities.
Source: Bush, George W. 2005. Public Papers of the Presidents 
of the United States: George W. Bush (2005, Book I). March 21. 
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 500.

	
Data and Documents	
261
Pope Francis’s Address “False Compassion” (2014)
This papal address by Pope Francis in November 2014 is one of 
the most recent speeches by a number of popes about an emergent 
very important ethical issue: how society treats—and should treat— 
terminally ill persons, conscious or not, in the last stage of their lives. 
Over the last century, many medical and technical innovations—
new drugs, artificial devices that save lives, new imaging tools to 
diagnose patient problems, powerful electronic microscopes used in 
surgery—have vastly improved a physician’s ability to save and ex-
tend lives. Roman Catholic doctrine has applauded these changes but 
has also cautioned about the ease with which society has come to 
accept physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia as methods of “com-
passionately treating” the poor, elderly, feeble, disabled, and other vul-
nerable persons. Given these new medical practices, it is fashionable 
for people to compassionately support abortion or to create new life 
in petri dishes. In this 2014 address to Italian Catholic physicians, 
Pope Francis condemns this “false compassion” and pleads with his 
audience to act as “good Samaritans,” helping their patients to live.
There is no doubt that, in our time, due to scientific and tech-
nical advancements, the possibilities for physical healing have 
significantly increased; and yet, in some respects it seems that 
the capacity for “taking care” of the person has diminished, 
especially when one is sick, frail and helpless. . . . In many 
places, quality of life is primarily related to economic means, 
to “well-being,” to the beauty and enjoyment of physical life, 
forgetting the other, more profound, interpersonal, spiritual 
and religious dimensions of existence. In fact, in the light of 
faith and right reason, human life is always sacred and always 
has “quality.”
The predominant school of thought sometimes leads to “false 
compassion” which holds that it is a benefit to women to pro-
mote abortion; an act of dignity to perform euthanasia; a sci-
entific breakthrough to “produce” a child, considered as a right 
rather than a gift to be welcomed; or to using human lives as 
laboratory animals, allegedly in order to save others. Instead, the 

262	
The Right to Die
compassion of the Gospel is what accompanies us in times of 
need, that compassion of the Good Samaritan, who “sees,” “has 
compassion,” draws near and provides concrete help. Your mis-
sion as doctors places you in daily contact with so many forms of 
suffering. I encourage you to take them on as “Good Samaritans,” 
caring in a special way for the elderly, the infirm and the disabled. 
Faithfulness to the Gospel of life and respect for life as a gift from 
God sometimes require brave choices that go against the current, 
which in particular circumstances may become points of consci-
entious objection. . . . We are living in a time of experimentation 
with life. But it is harmful experimentation. Making children, 
rather than accepting them as a gift, as I said. Playing with life. 
Be careful, because this is a sin against the Creator: against God 
the Creator, who created things this way. Many times in my life 
as a priest, I have heard objections. . . . We all know that with 
so many elderly people in this throw-away culture, euthanasia is 
being performed in secret. There is also another. And this is say-
ing to God: “No, I will end life, as I see fit”. A sin against God 
the Creator: think hard about this.
Source: Address of His Holiness Pope Francis to Participants in 
the Commemorative Conference of the Italian Catholic Phy-
sicians’ Association on the Occasion of Its 70th Anniversary 
of Foundation. November  15, 2014. https://w2.vatican.va/
content/francesco/en/speeches/2014/november/documents/
papa-francesco_20141115_medici-cattolici-italiani.html/  
© Libreria Editrice Vaticana. Used by permission.
Excerpt from “Dear Brittany”: Letter from a Terminal 
Brain Cancer Patient (2014)
In the fall of 2014, Brittany Maynard instantly became a world-
famous name; her story and her photographs were seen in papers 
and magazines and on social media. She was a young terminally 
ill brain cancer patient who chose to hasten death with physician 
assistance. Philip Johnson is another young terminal brain can-
cer patient who disagrees with Maynard’s choice. He is a Roman 

	
Data and Documents	
263
Catholic Seminarian, who has continued to battle his illness. This 
letter shows how he is approaching his brain cancer very differently. 
For him, life is a gift from God; only He can take it away. Father 
Johnson will be ordained as a priest in January 2017.
Last week I came across the heartbreaking story of Brittany 
Maynard, a 29-year-old woman who was diagnosed with ter-
minal brain cancer one year after her wedding. When doctors 
suggested that she might only have six months to live, she and 
her family moved from California to Oregon in order to obtain 
the prescriptions necessary for doctor-assisted euthanasia. She 
is devoting her last days to fundraising and lobbying for an 
organization dedicated to expanding the legality of assisted sui-
cide to other States.
Brittany’s story really hit home, as I was diagnosed with a very 
similar incurable brain cancer in 2008 at the age of twenty-four. 
After years of terrible headaches and misdiagnosis, my Grade 
III brain cancer (Anaplastic Astrocytoma) proved to be inop-
erable due to its location. Most studies state that the median 
survival time for this type of cancer is eighteen months, even 
with aggressive radiation and chemotherapy. I was beginning 
an exciting career as a naval officer with my entire life ahead of 
me. I had so many hopes and dreams, and in an instant they 
all seemed to be crushed. As Brittany said in her online video, 
“being told you have that kind of timeline still feels like you’re 
going to die tomorrow.”
I was diagnosed during my second Navy deployment to 
the Northern Arabian Gulf. . . . A few months after radiation 
and chemotherapy, I was discharged from the Navy and began 
formation for the Roman Catholic priesthood, a vocation to 
which I have felt called since I was nineteen years old.
I have lived through six years of constant turmoil, seizures, 
and headaches. I often changed hospitals and doctors every few 
months, seeking some morsel of hope for survival. Like Brit-
tany, I do not want to die, nor do I want to suffer the likely 
outcome of this disease. I do not think anyone wants to die in 

264	
The Right to Die
this way. Brittany states relief that she does not have to die the 
way that it has been explained that she would—she can die 
“on her own terms.” I have also consulted with my doctors to 
learn how my illness is likely to proceed. I will gradually lose 
control of my bodily functions at a young age, from paralysis to 
incontinence, and it is very likely that my mental faculties will 
also disappear and lead to confusion and hallucinations before 
my death. This terrifies me, but it does not make me any less 
of a person. My life means something to me, to God, and to 
my family and friends, and barring a miraculous recovery, it 
will continue to mean something long after I am paralyzed in a 
hospice bed. My family and friends love me for who I am, not 
just for the personality traits that will slowly slip away if this 
tumor progresses and takes my life.
There have been times over the past six years that I wanted 
the cancer to grow and take my life swiftly so that it would all 
be over. Other times, I have sought forms of escape through 
sin and denial just to take my mind off of the suffering and 
sadness, even if only for a few moments. However, deep in my 
heart I know that this approach is futile. My illness has become 
a part of me, and while it does not define me as a person, it has 
shaped who I am and who I will become.
Suffering is not worthless, and our lives are not our own to 
take. . . . There is a card on Brittany’s website asking for signa-
tures “to support her bravery in this very tough time.” I agree 
that her time is tough, but her decision is anything but brave. 
I  do feel for her and understand her difficult situation, but 
no diagnosis warrants suicide. A diagnosis of terminal cancer 
uproots one’s whole life, and the decision to pursue physician-
assisted suicide seeks to grasp at an ounce of control in the 
midst of turmoil. It is an understandable temptation to take 
this course of action, but that is all that it is—a temptation 
to avoid an important reality of life. By dying on one’s “own 
terms,” death seems more comfortable in our culture that is 
sanitized and tends to avoid any mention of the suffering and 
death that will eventually come to us all.

	
Data and Documents	
265
Brittany comments, “I hope to pass in peace. The reason to 
consider life and what’s of value is to make sure you’re not miss-
ing out, seize the day, what’s important to you, what do you 
care about—what matters—pursue that, forget the rest.” Sadly, 
Brittany will be missing out on the most intimate moments of 
her life—her loved ones comforting her through her suffering, 
her last and most personal moments with her family, and the 
great mystery of death—in exchange for a quicker and more 
“painless” option that focuses more on herself than anyone else. 
In our culture, which seeks to avoid pain at any cost, it is not 
difficult to understand why this response is so common among 
those who suffer.
Source: Johnson, Philip G. 2014. “Dear Brittany: Our Lives Are 
Worth Living, Even with Brain Cancer.” The Catholic Diocese of 
Raleigh. October 22. http://www.dioceseofraleigh.org/content/
raleigh-seminarian-terminal-brain-cancer-responds-brittany-
maynard. Used by permission of the Catholic Diocese of Raleigh.
Brittany Maynard’s Farewell Facebook Message (2014)
Brittany Maynard sent this Facebook message to her friends on the 
day she ended her life.
Goodbye to all my dear friends and family that I love. Today is 
the day I have chosen to pass away with dignity in the face of 
my terminal illness, this terrible brain cancer that has taken so 
much from me . . . but would have taken so much more.
The world is a beautiful place, travel has been my great-
est teacher, my close friends and folks are the greatest givers. 
I even have a ring of support around my bed as I type. Good-
bye world. Spread good energy. Pay it forward!
Source: Many news organizations reprinted Maynard’s Novem-
ber 1, 2014, Facebook entry. See, for example, the (London)  
Mirror, http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/world-news/terminally- 
ill-brittany-maynard-posts-4556983. See also the Washington Post,  

266	
The Right to Die
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/ 
2014/11/02/brittany-maynard-as-promised-ends-her-life-at-29/
Edmond G. Brown’s Letter Supporting the End of Life 
Options Act (2015)
This letter was written by California governor Brown to explain to 
the legislators why he decided to sign the End of Life Options Act.
To the Members of the California State Assembly:
ABx2 15 is not an ordinary bill because it deals with life and 
death. The crux of the matter is whether the State of California 
should continue to make it a crime for a dying person to end 
his life, no matter how great his pain or suffering.
I have carefully read the thoughtful opposition materials 
presented by a number of doctors, religious leaders and those 
who champion disability rights. I have considered the theologi-
cal and religious perspectives that any deliberate shortening of 
one’s life is sinful.
I have also read the letters of those who support the bill, 
including heartfelt pleas from Brittany Maynard’s family and 
Archbishop Desmond Tutu. In addition, I have discussed this 
matter with a Catholic Bishop, two of my own doctors and 
former classmates and friends who take varied, contradictory 
and nuanced positions.
In the end, I was left to reflect on what I would want in the 
face of my own death.
I do not know what I would do if I were dying in prolonged 
and excruciating pain. I am certain, however, that it would be a 
comfort to be able to consider the options afforded by this bill. 
And I wouldn’t deny that right to others.
Sincerely,
Edmund G. Brown, Jr.
Source: Brown, Edmond G., Jr. 2015. Letter to Members of 
the California State Assembly, October  5. https://www.gov.
ca.gov/docs/ABX2_15_Signing_Message.pdf

	
Data and Documents	
267
Excerpts from the U.S. Constitution
Tenth Amendment (1791)
The Tenth Amendment is at the core of America’s system of limited 
and separated powers between the U.S. government and all state 
governments. The central government (the president, Congress, and 
the U.S. Supreme Court) has only those powers delegated to it in 
Articles 1–3 of the Constitution (and any amendments added to 
the constitution). All powers not delegated to the U.S. government 
are reserved to the states. It is the state’s use of these “police pow-
ers” that triggers litigation in the federal courts. In the right to die 
controversies, a major question regarding the use of state powers is 
whether a state law that punishes any person “assisting a suicide” is 
a constitutional use of state power.
The powers not delegated to the United States by the Consti-
tution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the 
States respectively, or to the people.
Fourteenth Amendment (1868)
This amendment, one of three “Civil War” Amendments to the 
U.S. Constitution, is a major restraint on the use of state govern-
ment powers. It has been the essential clause in nearly all cases 
involving petitions to a federal court by persons claiming that a 
state action has injured them and, in so doing, deprived them of 
life, liberty, or property without due process of law and/or denied 
“any person” equal protection of the laws.
Section 1
All persons born or naturalized in the United States and subject 
to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of 
the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any 
law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of 
the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, 
liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any 
person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.

268	
The Right to Die
Source: National Archives, Charters of Freedom. http://www.
archives.gov/exhibits/charters/constitution.html.
Cases Impacting the Right to Die (Excerpts)
The cases excerpts below all impact right to die litigation in state and 
federal courts. Some, like McCulloch, talk about how an appellate 
court should interpret the Constitution when determining whether 
governmental powers are “constitutional.” Most of these cases, how-
ever, inform the reader of how the judges and justices interpreted the 
Constitution in right to die petitions. A final case excerpt is a 2015 
Canada Supreme Court opinion, Carter v. Canada, that radically 
changed the law regarding physician assisted death in that country.
McCulloch v. Maryland (1819)
An important decision that strongly suggested a broad interpreta-
tion of the U.S. Constitution, with judges “deducing” the meaning 
of the phrase “from the nature of the objects themselves.”
Opinion: Chief Justice John Marshall
A Constitution, to contain an accurate detail of all the subdivi-
sions of which its great powers will admit, and of all the means 
by which they may be carried into execution, would partake of 
the prolixity of a legal code, and could scarcely be embraced 
by the human mind. It would probably never be understood 
by the public. Its nature, therefore, requires that only its great 
outlines should be marked, its important objects designated, 
and the minor ingredients which compose those objects be 
deduced from the nature of the objects themselves. . . . In con-
sidering this question, then, we must never forget that it is a 
Constitution we are expounding.
Source: 17 U.S. 316 (1819).
Roe v. Wade (1973)
Roe is a watershed opinion in American jurisprudence. In a 7–2 
vote, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that a woman’s right to have an 

	
Data and Documents	
269
abortion falls in a person’s “zones of personal privacy” protected by the 
Fourteenth Amendment. Whether this privacy right is found in the 
“liberty” phrase in the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process clause or 
in the Ninth Amendment’s reservation of “other rights” to the people, 
a state cannot prevent a woman from choosing to have an abortion.
Majority Opinion: Justice Harry A. Blackmun
The Constitution does not explicitly mention any right of pri-
vacy. In a line of decisions, however, the Court has recognized 
that a right of personal privacy, or a guarantee of certain areas or 
zones of privacy, does exist under the Constitution. In varying 
contexts, the Court or individual Justices have, indeed, found 
at least the roots of that right in the First Amendment, in the 
Fourth and Fifth Amendments, in the penumbras of the Bill of 
Rights, in the Ninth Amendment, or in the concept of liberty 
guaranteed by the first section of the Fourteenth Amendment. 
These decisions make it clear that only personal rights that 
can be deemed “fundamental” or “implicit in the concept of 
ordered liberty,” are included in this guarantee of personal pri-
vacy. They also make it clear that the right has some extension 
to activities relating to marriage, procreation, contraception, 
family relationships, and childrearing and education. This right 
of privacy, whether it be founded in the Fourteenth Amend-
ment’s concept of personal liberty and restrictions upon state 
action, as we feel it is, or, as the District Court determined, in 
the Ninth Amendment’s reservation of rights to the people, is 
broad enough to encompass a woman’s decision whether or not 
to terminate her pregnancy.
Source: 410 U.S. 113 (1973).
Cruzan v. Missouri Department of Public Health (1990)
Cruzan involves a comatose young woman in a permanent vegeta-
tive state. Her parents, after many discussions over a number of 
years with medical personnel and their parish priest, asked the hos-
pital to remove all artificial means that were keeping their daugh-
ter alive. After the hospital and then Missouri courts declined their 

270	
The Right to Die
request, the parents filed a petition for certiorari with the U.S. 
Supreme Court. It was granted and Cruzan became the initial 
foray into the right to die controversy by the justices. The question: 
Does Ms. Cruzan (with surrogates acting in her best interest) have 
a right in the Constitution that trumps the hospital’s refusal to 
withdraw the mechanisms from a patient?
Opinion: Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist
We granted certiorari to consider the question whether Cruzan 
has a right under the United States Constitution which would 
require the hospital to withdraw life-sustaining treatment from 
her under these circumstances.
An incompetent person is not able to make an informed and 
voluntary choice to exercise a hypothetical right to refuse treat-
ment or any other right. Such a “right” must be exercised for her, 
if at all, by some sort of surrogate. Here, Missouri has in effect 
recognized that under certain circumstances a surrogate may act 
for the patient in electing to have hydration and nutrition with-
drawn in such a way as to cause death, but it has established a 
procedural safeguard to assure that the action of the surrogate 
conforms as best it may to the wishes expressed by the patient 
while competent. Missouri requires that evidence of the incom-
petent’s wishes as to the withdrawal of treatment be proved by 
clear and convincing evidence. The question, then, is whether 
the United States Constitution forbids the establishment of this 
procedural requirement by the State. We hold that it does not.
. . . We believe Missouri may legitimately seek to safeguard 
the personal element of this choice through the imposition of 
heightened evidentiary requirements. . . . In our view, Missouri 
has permissibly sought to advance these interests through the 
adoption of a “clear and convincing” standard of proof to govern 
such proceedings. “The function of a standard of proof, as that 
concept is embodied in the Due Process Clause and in the realm 
of factfinding, is to ‘instruct the factfinder concerning the degree 
of confidence our society thinks he should have in the correct-
ness of factual conclusions for a particular type of adjudication.’ ”

	
Data and Documents	
271
. . . We believe that Missouri may permissibly place an increased 
risk of an erroneous decision on those seeking to terminate an 
incompetent individual’s life-sustaining treatment. An erroneous 
decision not to terminate results in a maintenance of the status 
quo; the possibility of subsequent developments such as advance-
ments in medical science, the discovery of new evidence regarding 
the patient’s intent, changes in the law, or simply the unexpected 
death of the patient despite the administration of life-sustaining 
treatment at least create the potential that a wrong decision will 
eventually be corrected or its impact mitigated. An erroneous 
decision to withdraw life-sustaining treatment, however, is not 
susceptible of correction. . . . [It is] final and irrevocable.
. . . We conclude that a State may apply a clear and convinc-
ing evidence standard in proceedings where a guardian seeks to 
discontinue nutrition and hydration of a person diagnosed to 
be in a persistent vegetative state.
Source: 497 U.S. 261 (1990).
Washington v. Glucksberg (1997)
Glucksberg and the following case ( Vacco) were heard on the 
same day. Both cases centered on one of the fundamental questions 
raised in the right to die conflicts argued in the federal courts. The 
two cases began in federal district court when terminally ill patients 
and their doctors challenged the constitutionality of Washington 
and New York state laws that made a person who “assisted a sui-
cide” guilty of a felony. The federal appellate courts heard petitions 
from the losing sides, and both the Second and the Ninth Courts of 
Appeals concluded that these two state laws violated the Fourteenth 
Amendment’s due process and equal protection clauses. The losing 
parties in both cases—the state governments—immediately filed 
for certiorari, and the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to review (and 
consolidate) both cases on the same day. Chief Justice Rehnquist 
wrote the majority opinion in both cases (although there were a 
number of concurring opinions written by other justices). The  

272	
The Right to Die
essential question was whether either the due process clause or the 
equal protection clause was broad enough to protect a terminally 
ill person’s privacy rights from a governmental law that prevents 
that person from receiving the assistance of a physician in order to 
die. Did the two state laws “offend” the Fourteenth Amendment?
Opinion: Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist
The question presented in this case is whether Washington’s 
prohibition against “caus[ing]” or “aid[ing]” a suicide offends 
the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
We hold that it does not.
We begin, as we do in all due process cases, by examining 
our Nation’s history, legal traditions, and practices. In almost 
every State—indeed, in almost every western democracy—it is 
a crime to assist a suicide. The States’ assisted-suicide bans are 
not innovations. Rather, they are longstanding expressions of 
the States’ commitment to the protection and preservation of 
all human life. Moreover, the majority of States in this coun-
try have laws imposing criminal penalties on one who assists 
another to commit suicide.
Attitudes toward suicide itself have changed since Bracton, 
but our laws have consistently condemned, and continue to 
prohibit, assisting suicide. Despite changes in medical technol-
ogy and notwithstanding an increased emphasis on the impor-
tance of end-of-life decision making, we have not retreated from 
this prohibition. Against this backdrop of history, tradition, and 
practice, we now turn to respondents’ constitutional claim.
The Due Process Clause guarantees more than fair process, 
and the “liberty” it protects includes more than the absence 
of physical restraint. . . . The Clause also provides heightened 
protection against government interference with certain funda-
mental rights and liberty interests.
. . . But we “ha[ve] always been reluctant to expand the con-
cept of substantive due process because guide posts for respon-
sible decision making in this unchartered area are scarce and 
open-ended.”

	
Data and Documents	
273
. . . We now inquire whether this asserted right has any place 
in our Nation’s traditions. Here we are confronted with a con-
sistent and almost universal tradition that has long rejected 
the asserted right, and continues explicitly to reject it today, 
even for terminally ill, mentally competent adults. To hold 
for respondents, we would have to reverse centuries of legal 
doctrine and practice, and strike down the considered policy 
choice of almost every State.
Throughout the Nation, Americans are engaged in an ear-
nest and profound debate about the morality, legality, and 
practicality of physician-assisted suicide. Our holding permits 
this debate to continue, as it should in a democratic society. 
The decision of the en banc Court of Appeals is reversed, and 
the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with 
this opinion.
Source: 521 U.S. 702 (1997).
Vacco v. Quill (1997)
Opinion: Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist
The Court of Appeals concluded that some terminally ill  
people—those who are on life support systems—are treated 
differently than those who are not, in that the former may 
“hasten death” by ending treatment, but the latter may not 
“hasten death” through physician assisted suicide. This conclu-
sion depends on the submission that ending or refusing lifesav-
ing medical treatment “is nothing more nor less than assisted 
suicide.” Unlike the Court of Appeals, we think the distinc-
tion between assisting suicide and withdrawing life sustaining 
treatment, a distinction widely recognized and endorsed in the 
medical profession and in our legal traditions, is both impor-
tant and logical; it is certainly rational.
. . . Furthermore, a physician who withdraws, or honors a 
patient’s refusal to begin, life sustaining medical treatment pur-
posefully intends, or may so intend, only to respect his patient’s 

274	
The Right to Die
wishes and “to cease doing useless and futile or degrading things 
to the patient when [the patient] no longer stands to benefit 
from them.” The same is true when a doctor provides aggres-
sive palliative care; in some cases, painkilling drugs may hasten 
a patient’s death, but the physician’s purpose and intent is, or 
maybe, only to ease his patient’s pain. A doctor who assists 
a suicide, however, “must, necessarily and indubitably, intend 
primarily that the patient be made dead.” Similarly, a patient 
who commits suicide with a doctor’s aid necessarily has the 
specific intent to end his or her own life, while a patient who 
refuses or discontinues treatment might not.
. . . We disagree with respondents’ claim that the distinc-
tion between refusing lifesaving medical treatment and assisted 
suicide is “arbitrary” and “irrational.” Granted, in some cases, 
the line between the two may not be clear, but certainty is not 
required, even were it possible.
. . . Logic and contemporary practice support New York’s 
judgment that the two acts are different, and New York may 
therefore, consistent with the Constitution, treat them dif-
ferently. By permitting everyone to refuse unwanted medical 
treatment while prohibiting anyone from assisting a suicide, 
New York law follows a longstanding and rational distinction.
Source: 521 U.S. 793 (1997).
Gonzales v. Oregon (2006)
Gonzales brought an end to many tactics, in both state legislatures 
and the state judiciary, as well as the Congress and the U.S. Su-
preme Court, to invalidate the results of a 1994 Oregon initiative 
that established the nation’s first death with dignity law. After the 
voters in 1997 reaffirmed their commitment to the ODWDA, op-
ponents sought other means to overturn the election results. One 
strategy, acted on by conservative Republicans in Congress, was to 
lobby the administrator of a federal agency, the Drug Enforcement 
Administration, to broaden language in a federal statute, the 1970 

	
Data and Documents	
275
Controlled Substances Act, to eviscerate the Oregon law. The Drug 
Enforcement Administration, after George W. Bush became presi-
dent in 2001, amended the controlled substance law to bar any 
physician from prescribing any “regulated” drug to assist another to 
commit suicide. The reason: such action did not serve a “legitimate 
medical purpose.” Oregon challenged the change in CSA regulations 
that would, if allowed to stand, effectively terminate the ODWDA.
Majority Opinion: Justice Anthony Kennedy
The question before us is whether the Controlled Substances 
Act allows the United States Attorney General to prohibit 
doctors from prescribing regulated drugs for use in physician-
assisted suicide, notwithstanding a state law permitting the 
procedure.
.  .  .  Attorney General Reno considered the matter and 
concluded that the DEA could not take the proposed action 
because the CSA did not authorize it to “displace the states as 
the primary regulators of the medical profession, or to override 
a state’s determination as to what constitutes legitimate medi-
cal practice.”
In 2001, John Ashcroft was appointed Attorney General. 
 . . . He claims extraordinary authority. If the Attorney Gen-
eral’s argument were correct, his power to deregister necessarily 
would include the greater power to criminalize even the actions 
of registered physicians, whenever they engage in conduct he 
deems illegitimate. This power to criminalize—unlike his 
power over registration, which must be exercised only after con-
sidering five express statutory factors—would be unrestrained. 
It would be anomalous for Congress to have so painstakingly 
described the Attorney General’s limited authority to deregister 
a single physician or schedule a single drug, but to have given 
him, just by implication, authority to declare an entire class of 
activity outside “the course of professional practice,” and there-
fore a criminal violation of the CSA.
The idea that Congress gave the Attorney General such 
broad and unusual authority through an implicit delegation in 

276	
The Right to Die
the CSA’s registration provision is not sustainable. Congress, 
we have held, does not alter the fundamental details of a regu-
latory scheme in vague terms or ancillary provisions—it does 
not, one might say, hide elephants in mouseholes.
In light of the foregoing, however, the CSA does not give 
the Attorney General authority to issue the Interpretive Rule 
as a statement with the force of law. . . . To read prescriptions 
for assisted suicide as constituting “drug abuse” under the CSA 
is discordant with the phrase’s consistent use throughout the 
statute, not to mention its ordinary meaning.  . . . The text 
and structure of the CSA show that Congress did not have 
this far-reaching intent to alter the federal-state balance and the 
congressional role in maintaining it.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is
Affirmed.
Source: 546 U.S. 243 (2006).
Baxter v. Montana (2009)
Baxter is a Montana Supreme Court decision that grappled with 
the right to die dilemma and concluded that Montana’s constitu-
tion does not prohibit a physician from providing a terminally 
ill patient with a prescription for a lethal drug that the patient 
may choose to use if the pain and suffering become unmanage-
able—so long as there was no coercion involved. This PAD pro-
cess is a private one, between two individuals, and does not run 
afoul of any Montana public policy. Because the court examined 
the state constitution’s language, there was no appeal to the U.S. 
Supreme Court. No “federal question” was raised in the litigation. 
Unlike the other four states who passed death with dignity laws 
that generated a specific set of guidelines for implementing the law, 
in Montana there are no procedures for implementing PAD. The 
Montana Supreme Court ruled only on the constitutionality of a 
private doctor-patient relationship. The legislature must establish, 
by law, a proper course of action to protect vulnerable patients from 

	
Data and Documents	
277
irresponsible actions by the physician or by the patient’s family. 
Through 2016, although there have been PAD (and anti-PAD) 
bills introduced, none has made it out of committee.
LEAPHART, Judge
. . .
The bar brawler, prison fighter, BB gun-shooter, and domes-
tic violence aggressor all committed violent acts that directly 
caused harm and breached the public peace. It is clear from 
these cases that courts deem consent ineffective when defen-
dants directly commit blatantly aggressive, peace-breaching 
acts against another party.
In contrast, a physician who aids a terminally ill patient in 
dying is not directly involved in the final decision or the final 
act. He or she only provides a means by which a terminally ill 
patient himself can give effect to his life-ending decision, or 
not, as the case may be. Each stage of the physician-patient 
interaction is private, civil, and compassionate. The physician 
and terminally ill patient work together to create a means by 
which the patient can be in control of his own mortality. The 
patient’s subsequent private decision whether to take the medi-
cine does not breach public peace or endanger others.
Although the “against public policy” exception of § 45–2–
211(2)(d), MCA, is not limited to violent breaches of the peace 
as discussed in the above cases, we see nothing in the case law 
facts or analysis suggesting that a patient’s private interaction 
with his physician, and subsequent decision regarding whether 
to take medication provided by a physician, violate public pol-
icy. We thus turn to a review of Montana statutory law. We 
similarly find no indication in Montana statutes that physician 
aid in dying is against public policy.
The Terminally Ill Act, in short, confers on terminally ill 
patients a right to have their end-of-life wishes followed, even 
if it requires direct participation by a physician through with-
drawing or withholding treatment. Section 50–9–103, MCA. 
Nothing in the statute indicates it is against public policy to 

278	
The Right to Die
honor those same wishes when the patient is conscious and able 
to vocalize and carry out the decision himself with self-adminis-
tered medicine and no immediate or direct physician assistance.
In conclusion, we hold that under § 45–2–211, MCA, a 
terminally ill patient’s consent to physician aid in dying con-
stitutes a statutory defense to a charge of homicide against the 
aiding physician when no other consent exceptions apply.
Source: MT DA 09–0051, 2009 MT 449 (2009).
Morris v. New Mexico (2014)
Morris is another right to die case with a similar history (the di-
lemma faced by terminally ill persons living in one of 45 states that 
prohibits physicians from assisting such a dying person). Plaintiffs, 
terminally ill patients, and their doctors brought suit in a New 
Mexico county court, arguing that the New Mexico constitution’s 
privacy protections allow a physician to assist a terminally ill pa-
tient to hasten death. Because “assisting suicide” is a felony in the 
New Mexico criminal laws, they called for the court to invalidate 
that section of the criminal code. The trial judge ruled in favor 
of the plaintiffs, and PAD was no longer considered a criminal 
offense. The ruling went into effect in the two counties under 
the court’s jurisdiction. Local government officials immediately 
brought suit in the New Mexico Court of Appeals and, in a 2–1 
vote, the appeals court overturned the trial judge’s conclusions. The 
case excerpts that follow are the majority opinion and the dissenting 
opinion. The case has been appealed to the New Mexico Supreme 
Court; oral arguments were held in October 2015. In June 2016, 
the New Mexico Supreme Court, in a unanimous decision, upheld 
the Court of Appeals decision that the “assisting a suicide” criminal 
law is a valid state policy, prohibiting PAD.
Garcia, Judge. Majority opinion.
A New Mexico statute makes “assisting suicide” a fourth degree 
felony and defines the proscribed conduct as “deliberately 

	
Data and Documents	
279
aiding another in the taking of his own life.” NMSA 1978,  
§ 30–2–4 (1963). The question presented is whether this stat-
ute may constitutionally be applied to criminalize a willing 
physician’s act of providing a lethal dose of a prescribed medi-
cation at the request of a mentally competent, terminally ill 
patient who wishes a peaceful end of life (aid in dying) as an 
alternative to one potentially marked by suffering, pain, and/or 
the loss of autonomy and dignity. The district court concluded 
that Section 30–2–4 is invalid under two provisions of the New 
Mexico Constitution as applied to any physician who provides 
aid in dying to a patient. In reaching its conclusion, the district 
court determined that aid in dying is a fundamental liberty 
interest and that the State did not meet its burden to prove that 
Section 30–2–4 met a strict scrutiny standard of review.
We conclude that aid in dying is not a fundamental liberty 
interest under the New Mexico Constitution. Accordingly, we 
reverse the district court’s order permanently enjoining the 
State from enforcing Section 30–2–4. . . . The district court 
concluded that Section 30–2–4 is invalid under two provisions 
of the New Mexico Constitution as applied to any physician 
who provides aid in dying to a patient. In reaching its con-
clusion, the district court determined that aid in dying is a 
fundamental liberty interest and that the State did not meet 
its burden to prove that Section 30–2–4 met a strict scrutiny 
standard of review.
We conclude that aid in dying is not a fundamental liberty 
interest under the New Mexico Constitution. Accordingly, we 
reverse the district court’s order permanently enjoining the 
State from enforcing Section 30–2–4. In addition, we affirm 
the district court’s determination that, for statutory construc-
tion purposes, Section 30–2–4 prohibits aid in dying.
Vanzi, Judge, dissenting.
The question presented is whether NMSA 1978, Sec-
tion 30–2–4 (1963) may constitutionally be applied to crimi-
nalize a willing physician’s act of providing “aid in dying” at 
the request of a mentally competent, terminally ill patient who 

280	
The Right to Die
wishes a peaceful end of life as an alternative to being forced 
to endure an unbearable dying process marked by suffering, 
including extreme pain and/or the loss of autonomy and dig-
nity. I would hold that it may not and would therefore affirm 
the district court’s order permanently enjoining the State from 
prosecuting under Section 30–2–4 any physician who provides 
aid in dying in accordance with the parties’ agreed definition. 
I present my analysis in full, save for my recitation of the fac-
tual record and statutory interpretation, regardless of any rep-
etition with portions of the majority opinion.
. . .
The question at the heart of this case is who has the right 
to decide when and how a mentally competent, terminally ill 
New Mexican will end her life after the options for meaningful 
improvement of her terminal condition have been exhausted, 
such that “life” means being forced to endure unbearable suf-
fering until death arrives. I recognize that citizens may disagree 
about the profound implications of a terminally ill individu-
al’s decision to end her suffering by ending her life, but our 
judicial obligation is to give effect to the liberty interests of 
all New Mexicans in accordance with the guarantees of our 
Constitution. Other choices and decisions central to personal 
autonomy and dignity have long enjoyed the status of constitu-
tionally protected liberty interests. I would hold that the New 
Mexico Constitution protects aid in dying as a liberty inter-
est subject to heightened scrutiny. While it is impossible for 
me to conclude that governmental infringement of the right 
to aid in dying could be justified by any lesser interest than 
that required for constitutional rights previously recognized 
as “fundamental,” the required level of scrutiny need not be 
determined in this case. For the State concedes that mentally 
competent, terminally ill citizens have a fundamental right to 
decide for themselves when and how to end their lives, and it 
provides no acceptable justification for denying them the only 
means available to effectuate that right in a peaceful and dig-
nified manner—a lethal dosage of medication prescribed by 

	
Data and Documents	
281
a willing physician acting in accordance with the established 
standard of care for aid in dying. It is beyond dispute that the 
suffering of these citizens “is too intimate and personal for the 
State to insist, without more, upon its own vision [to preserve 
life], however dominant that vision has been in the course of 
our history and our culture.”
Source: D-202-CV 2012–02909 (2014).
Lee Carter et al. v. Attorney General of Canada (2015)
This is a stunning decision from Canada’s highest tribunal, the Su-
preme Court of Canada. The majority overturned an earlier decision 
of that court, Rodriguez v. Attorney General, British Columbia, 
1993, that rejected a petition from a patient dying of Lou Gehrig’s 
disease. The patient argued that s241 (b) of Canada’s Criminal Code 
which prohibits PAD was constitutionally invalid. By a 5–4 major-
ity the Supreme Court of Canada affirmed that the challenged provi-
sion was constitutional and did not violate the Canadian Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms. In 1994, in Carter et al. v. Attorney General 
of Canada, the Supreme Court revisited the Rodriguez precedent and 
overturned it, concluding that the Canadian Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms does provide all persons in Canada with a right to die with 
the passive or active assistance of a physician. The Court suspended 
implementation of their order for a period of 12 months. In that pe-
riod, the government introduced right to die legislation that adheres 
to the general conclusions of the Supreme Court of Canada.
Majority: McLachlin C.J.
The prohibition on assisted suicide is, in general, a valid exer-
cise of the federal criminal law power under s. 91(27) of the 
Constitution Act, 1867, and it does not impair the protected 
core of the provincial jurisdiction over health.
Insofar as they prohibit physician-assisted dying for com-
petent adults who seek such assistance as a result of a grievous 
and irremediable medical condition that causes enduring and 

282	
The Right to Die
intolerable suffering, ss. 241(b) and 14 of the Criminal Code 
deprive these adults of their right to life, liberty and security of 
the person under s. 7 of the Charter. . . . Here, the prohibition 
deprives some individuals of life, as it has the effect of forcing 
some individuals to take their own lives prematurely, for fear 
that they would be incapable of doing so when they reached 
the point where suffering was intolerable. The rights to liberty 
and security of the person, which deal with concerns about 
autonomy and quality of life, are also engaged. An individual’s 
response to a grievous and irremediable medical condition is 
a matter critical to their dignity and autonomy. The prohibi-
tion denies people in this situation the right to make decisions 
concerning their bodily integrity and medical care and thus 
trenches on their liberty. And by leaving them to endure intol-
erable suffering, it impinges on their security of the person.
The prohibition on physician-assisted dying infringes the 
right to life, liberty and security of the person in a manner that 
is not in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. 
The object of the prohibition is not, broadly, to preserve life 
whatever the circumstances, but more specifically to protect 
vulnerable persons from being induced to commit suicide at a 
time of weakness. Since a total ban on assisted suicide clearly 
helps achieve this object, individuals’ rights are not deprived 
arbitrarily. However, the prohibition catches people outside the 
class of protected persons. It follows that the limitation on their 
rights is in at least some cases not connected to the objective 
and that the prohibition is thus overbroad. It is unnecessary 
to decide whether the prohibition also violates the principle 
against gross disproportionality.
Having concluded that the prohibition on physician-assisted 
dying violates s. 7, it is unnecessary to consider whether it 
deprives adults who are physically disabled of their right to 
equal treatment under s. 15 of the Charter. . . . While the limit 
is prescribed by law and the law has a pressing and substantial 
objective, the prohibition is not proportionate to the objec-
tive. An absolute prohibition on physician-assisted dying is 

	
Data and Documents	
283
rationally connected to the goal of protecting the vulnerable 
from taking their life in times of weakness, because prohibiting 
an activity that poses certain risks is a rational method of cur-
tailing the risks. However, as the trial judge found, the evidence 
does not support the contention that a blanket prohibition 
is necessary in order to substantially meet the government’s 
objective. The trial judge made no palpable and overriding 
error in concluding, on the basis of evidence from scientists, 
medical practitioners and others who are familiar with end-of-
life decision-making in Canada and abroad, that a permissive 
regime with properly designed and administered safeguards 
was capable of protecting vulnerable people from abuse and 
error. It was also open to her to conclude that vulnerability can 
be assessed on an individual basis, using the procedures that 
physicians apply in their assessment of informed consent and 
decision capacity in the context of medical decision-making 
more generally. The absolute prohibition is therefore not mini-
mally impairing. Given this conclusion, it is not necessary to 
weigh the impacts of the law on protected rights against the 
beneficial effect of the law in terms of the greater public good.
The appropriate remedy is not to grant a free-standing 
constitutional exemption, but rather to issue a declaration of 
invalidity and to suspend it for 12 months. Nothing in this 
declaration would compel physicians to provide assistance in 
dying. The Charter rights of patients and physicians will need 
to be reconciled in any legislative and regulatory response to 
this judgment.
The appellants are entitled to an award of special costs on a 
full indemnity basis to cover the entire expense of bringing this 
case before the courts. A court may depart from the usual rule 
on costs and award special costs where two criteria are met. 
First, the case must involve matters of public interest that are 
truly exceptional. It is not enough that the issues raised have 
not been previously resolved or that they transcend individual 
interests of the successful litigant: they must also have a sig-
nificant and widespread societal impact. Second, in addition 

284	
The Right to Die
to showing that they have no personal, proprietary or pecuni-
ary interest in the litigation that would justify the proceedings 
on economic grounds, the plaintiffs must show that it would 
not have been possible to effectively pursue the litigation in 
question with private funding. Finally, only those costs that 
are shown to be reasonable and prudent will be covered by 
the award of special costs. Here, the trial judge did not err in 
awarding special costs in the truly exceptional circumstances 
of this case. It was also open to her to award 10 percent of the 
costs against the Attorney General of British Columbia in light 
of the full and active role it played in the proceedings. The trial 
judge was in the best position to determine the role taken by 
that Attorney General and the extent to which it shared car-
riage of the case.
Source: 2015 SCC 005, Date: 2015–02–06. Docket: 35591 
(2015). Reproduced with the permission of the Supreme Court 
of Canada. 2016.



287
6	
Resources
Right to die advocates rally in front of the New Mexico Supreme Court 
building in October 2015. On June 30, 2016, judges ruled that the Con-
stitution did not allow physicians to participate in helping patients to die. 
To date, only one state supreme court, Montana’s in 2008, has interpreted 
its constitution to allow doctors to help their dying patients. (AP Photo/
Russell Contreras)
Introduction
There are an untold number of resources—books, journal articles, 
reports, and legislative inquiries—that provide readers and 
researchers with every aspect of the right to die controversy. This 
chapter provides a very small annotated sampling of these 
resources—in both support of and opposition to physician assistance 
in dying—that have been published or are available on the 
Internet. The following books, articles, legislative reports, proposed 
physician-assisted dying (PAD) legislation (in the United States as 
well as in other nations), and reports published by organizations on 
both sides of the PAD controversy merely touch the surface of the 
right to die.
Books
Ralph Baergen, editor. 2000. Ethics at the End of Life. Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth.

288	
The Right to Die
This textbook of medical ethics presents all of the most 
common problems encountered in end-of-life medical 
care.
Howard Ball. 2012. At Liberty to Die: The Battle for Death with 
Dignity in America. New York: New York University Press.
A defense of a terminally ill patient’s right to seek physician 
assistance to die and the problems the right to die move-
ment has encountered in the legal and political processes.
Margaret Pabst Battin. 1994. Least Worst Death: Essays in Bioethics 
on the End of Life. Oxford University Press.
Margaret Pabst Battin. 1995. Ethical Issues in Suicide. Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J., Prentice-Hall.
Margaret Pabst Battin. 2005. Ending Life: Ethics and the Way We 
Die. New York: Oxford University Press.
Margaret P. Battin, Rosamond Rhodes, and Anita Silvers. 1999. 
Physician-Assisted Suicide: Expanding the Debate. New York: 
Routledge.
As a bioethicist, Peggy Battin writes about the right of 
people to end their own lives. Professor Battin’s books all 
focus on human suffering, suicide, euthanasia, and the 
importance of dignified death.
Kieran Beville. 2014. Dying to Kill: A Christian Perspective on 
Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide. Cambridge, OH: Christian Pub-
lishing House.
A very sobering account of attempts to legitimate assisted 
suicide in our society, something which Christians must be 
prepared to resist. Kieran Beville discusses the issues that 
this raises sensitively, biblically, and uncompromisingly.
George M. Burnell. 1993. Final Choices: To Live or to Die in an 
Age of Medical Technology. New York: Insight Books.
Final Choices is an excellent presentation of the issues, 
options, and obstacles concerning the right and ability 

	
Resources	
289
of a dying person to control her future. Burnell is a psy-
chiatrist with direct experience in grief and bereavement 
counseling. The book emphasizes the critical impor-
tance of the development of open communication— 
at the concluding stages of a patient’s life—within the 
family and with members of the treatment staff.
Robert A. Burt. 2002. Death Is That Man Taking Names: Intersec-
tions of American Medicine, Law, and Culture. Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press.
Burt maintains that dying patients, their families, and 
their physicians are “all vulnerable to unruly psychologi-
cal forces unleashed by the imminent prospect of death” 
and that self-determination by patients is an inadequate 
safeguard against the many surrounding “forces of evil.” 
He uses legal and clinical examples of physician-assisted 
suicide, abortion, and capital punishment to illustrate his 
thesis.
A.L. Caplan, editor. 2006. The Case of Terri Schiavo: Ethics at the 
End of Life. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Press.
The ethical dilemmas that the Schiavo case illumi-
nated continue to stir great controversy. This book is 
an in-depth examination of the dilemmas and provides 
information and documentation from many persons 
opposed to the right to die. The editors have included 
a foreword by Dr. Jay Wolfson, Terri Schiavo’s court-
appointed guardian ad litem, as well as Dr. Wolfson’s 
report to Governor Jeb Bush (R-FL) on the case and 
Governor Bush’s reply; public statements by Presi-
dent George Bush and Senators David Weldon, Rick 
Santorum, Tom DeLay, Bill Frist, and Barney Frank; 
statements by the pope and other representatives of the 
Catholic Church on this issue; plus much medical and 
legal background material on both precedents to the 
Schiavo case and its aftermath, including the results of 
the autopsy report.

290	
The Right to Die
William H. Colby. 2006. Unplugged: Reclaiming Our Right to Die 
in America. New York: AMACOM.
The book addresses the fundamental questions of the right 
to die debate and discusses how the medical advances that 
brought so much hope and healing have also helped to 
create today’s dilemma surrounding death and dignity. 
It illuminates the complex legal, ethical, medical, and 
deeply personal issues of the right to die debate and dis-
cusses the implications of current laws and proposed leg-
islation, various medical options (including hospice), and 
the typical end-of-life decisions many face.
Ian Dowbiggin. 2003. A Merciful End: The Euthanasia Movement 
in Modern America New York. Oxford University Press.
Ian Dowbiggin. 2005. A Concise History of Euthanasia: Life, 
Death, God, and Medicine. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
The author is an historian who has studied the euthana-
sia movement in history. His books examine Americans 
who struggled throughout the 20th century to change the 
nation’s attitude—and its laws—regarding mercy killing. 
In tracing the history of the euthanasia movement, he 
documents its intersection with other progressive social 
causes: women’s suffrage, birth control, abortion rights, as 
well as its uneasy pre–World War II alliance with eugen-
ics. Such links brought euthanasia activists into fierce 
conflict with Judeo-Christian leaders who worried that 
“the right to die” might become a “duty to die.”
Ronald Dworkin. 1993. Life’s Dominion: An Argument about 
Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom. New York: Knopf.
The author, a highly respected lawyer and legal philos-
opher, argues that the key philosophical question to be 
resolved regarding abortion and euthanasia is how far soci-
ety can go to impose a single official view upon person-
ally held convictions of the inherent value of all life. His 
analysis of the right to die requires that the abstract moral 

	
Resources	
291
principles set out in the U.S. Constitution be interpreted 
to insure equal concern for the dignity of all human life.
Doris Zames Fleischer and Frieda Zanes. 2001. The Disability 
Rights Movement: From Charity to Confrontation. Philadelphia, 
PA: Temple University Press.
The book is a well-researched examination and analysis 
of the treatment of disabled persons in America for two 
centuries. It examines the blind, the deaf, the disabled 
war veterans, deinstitutionalization and independent liv-
ing for disabled, push for legislation to assist the disabled 
community, the role of pressure groups representing the 
disabled, access to jobs and education for the disabled, 
the sorry state of the health care system, the impact of 
technology on the disabled, and how the disabled have 
impacted the culture.
Kathleen Foley and Herbert Hendin, editors. 2009. The Case 
against Assisted Suicide: For the Right to End-of-Life Care. Balti-
more, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
The book of essays rejects arguments for patient auton-
omy and compassion, often used in favor of legalizing 
euthanasia, because they do not advance or protect the 
rights of terminally ill patients. The essays show the dan-
gers that legalization of assisted suicide would pose to the 
most vulnerable patients. The medical profession must 
improve palliative care and develop and educate doctors 
to take a more humane response to the complex issues 
facing those who are terminally ill.
Atul Gawande. 2014. Being Mortal: Medicine and What Matters 
in the End. New York: Metropolitan Books.
The author, a practicing surgeon, is critical of the medi-
cal profession’s aggressive commitment to curing patients 
rather than caring for them. He argues that quality of life is 
the desired goal for patients and families. He offers exam-
ples of freer, more socially fulfilling models for assisting 

292	
The Right to Die
the infirm and dependent elderly, and he explores the 
varieties of hospice care to demonstrate that a person’s last 
weeks or months may be rich and dignified.
Walter Glannon. 2005. Biomedical Ethics. Oxford University 
Press.
The book is a philosophical introduction to the most 
important ethical positions and arguments in six areas 
of biomedicine: the patient-doctor relationship, medical 
research on humans, reproductive rights and technolo-
gies, genetics, medical decisions at the end of life, and 
the allocation of scarce medical resources. There is a dis-
cussion of perennial issues in medicine, such as doctors’ 
duties to patients and recent and emerging issues in sci-
entific innovation, including gene therapy and cloning.
Neil M. Gorsuch. 2006. The Future of Assisted Suicide and Eutha-
nasia. Princeton University Press.
The book assesses the strengths and weaknesses of the 
arguments for assisted suicide and euthanasia. The author 
then builds a nuanced, novel, and powerful moral and 
legal argument against legalization. The argument is based 
on the idea that human life is intrinsically valuable and 
that intentional killing is always wrong.
James W. Green. 2008. Beyond the Good Death: The Anthropology 
of Modern Dying. University of Pennsylvania Press.
The book takes an anthropological approach, examin-
ing the changes in Americans’ concept of death since the 
1970s. The attitudes of baby boomers differ greatly from 
those of their parents and grandparents. The author pro-
vides an interpretation of the ways in which Americans 
react when death is at hand for them or for those they 
care about.
Herbert Hendin. 1997. Seduced by Death: Doctors, Patients, and 
the Dutch Cure. New York: Norton.

	
Resources	
293
A suicide-prevention psychiatrist turns a critical eye on the 
Dutch experience of voluntary death with the assistance 
of a physician and merciful death chosen for patients no 
longer capable of giving consent.
Daniel Hillyard and John Dombrink. 2001. Dying Right: The 
Death with Dignity Movement. New York: Routledge.
The book provides an overview of the death with dignity 
movement; a history of how and why Oregon legalized 
physician-assisted suicide; an examination of the ethical, 
legal, moral, and medical complexities involved in this 
debate; and an analysis of the future of physician-assisted 
suicide. There is an excellent discussion of the question 
of how to balance a patient’s sense about the right way to 
die, a physician’s role as a healer, and the state’s interest in 
preventing killing.
Derek Humphry. 1978. Jean’s Way. Eugene, OR: Hemlock Society.
Derek Humphry. 1992. Final Exit: The Practicalities of Self- 
Deliverance and Assisted Suicide for the Dying. Eugene, OR: Hem-
lock Society.
Derek Humphry. 1993. Lawful Exit: The Limits of Freedom for 
Help in Dying. Junction City, OR: Norris Lane Press.
Derek Humphry. 2000. Freedom to Die: People, Politics, and the 
Right-to-Die Movement. Eugene, OR: Hemlock Society.
Derek Humphry. 2002. Let Me Die Before I Wake, a Supplement 
to Final Exit. Eugene, OR: Hemlock Society.
Derek Humphry. 2004. The Good Euthanasia Guide: Where, What, 
and Who in Choices in Dying. Eugene, OR: Hemlock Society.
Derek Humphry. 2008. Good Life, Good Death: Memoir of an 
Investigative Reporter and Pro-Choice Advocate. Eugene, OR: 
Hemlock Society.

294	
The Right to Die
The author is a major supporter of physician-assisted 
death and an ardent defender of euthanasia. Some of his 
books are guides for people who wish to hasten death; 
others focus on euthanasia. He has been politically active 
in efforts to pass right to die bills.
Stephen Jamison. 1997. Assisted Suicide: A Decision-Making Guide 
for Health Professionals. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Almost all doctors and nurses who work with dying 
patients get asked from time to time to assist their patients 
to die. This book directly addresses this dilemma: what 
should the doctor or nurse do when asked to assist a dying 
patient to achieve a peaceful and painless death?
James H. Jones. 1993. Bad Blood: The Tuskegee Syphilis Experi-
ment, New York: The Free Press.
The book provides compelling answers to the questions 
of how and why U.S. Public Health officials systemati-
cally deceived black men in 1930s Alabama into believing 
they were patients in a government study of “bad blood.” 
Tracing the evolution of medical ethics and the nature of 
decision making in bureaucracies, the author argues that 
the Tuskegee study was not, in fact, an aberration, but a 
logical outgrowth of race relations and medical practice in 
the United States. It explains the disrespect that minori-
ties have about health care in America.
Paul Kalanithi. 2016. When Breath Becomes Air. New Yok: Ran-
dom House.
The author, 36 years old, on the verge of completing a 
decade’s worth of training as a neurosurgeon, was diag-
nosed with stage IV lung cancer. One day he was a doctor 
treating the dying, and the next he was a patient strug-
gling to live. The book traces Kalanithi’s transformation 
from a naïve medical student “possessed by the question 
of what, given that all organisms die, makes a virtuous and 
meaningful life” into a neurosurgeon at Stanford working 

	
Resources	
295
in the brain, the most critical place for human identity, 
and finally into a patient and new father confronting his 
own mortality. What makes life worth living in the face of 
death? The book is a poignant portrayal of a human being 
confronting death.
David F. Kelly. 2006. Medical Care at the End of Life: A Catholic 
Perspective. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
A medical ethicist reviews the difficult questions for end-
of-life medical care from a Catholic point of view.
John Keown. 2002. Euthanasia, Ethics, and Public Policy: An 
Argument against Legalisation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
The author is an opponent of euthanasia. His argument 
against euthanasia examines both its pitfalls and answers 
a controversial philosophical question: are there circum-
stances in which withdrawal of treatment from patients 
should be considered euthanasia?
Jack Kevorkian. 1991. Prescription: Medicide: The Goodness of 
Planned Death. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books.
The world-famous “Doctor Death” tells of his lifelong 
efforts to permit prisoners condemned to death to donate 
their organs and/or give their bodies to be used in medi-
cal research and discusses his efforts to make physician-
assisted voluntary death acceptable in America.
Susanne C. Knittel. 2015. The Historical Uncanny: Disability, Eth-
nicity, and the Politics of Holocaust Memory. Fordham University 
Press.
This book is a study of European history in the first half of 
the 20th century that touches eugenics, euthanasia, and 
the persecution of the vulnerable. It examines two dis-
crete events that occurred during World War II: the mur-
der of thousands of mentally ill and disabled Germans at 
Grafeneck and the murder of Italian Jews and partisans 

296	
The Right to Die
in Trieste by the same German military personnel. Exam-
ined in these two histories are the relationships between 
disability and race, eugenics, euthanasia, ethnic persecu-
tion, and genocide.
David Kuhl. 2002. What Dying People Want: Practical Wisdom for 
the End of Life. New York: Public Affairs Press.
This book is based on interviews with dying people. 
The author addresses end-of-life realities—practical and  
emotional—through his own experiences as a doctor and 
through the words and experiences of people who knew 
that they were dying.
Vicki D. Lachman. 2006. Applied Ethics in Nursing. Springer.
The book is an easily understandable guide to the kind of 
ethical dilemmas a nurse faces in practice. Using a question- 
and-answer format along with numerous case studies, 
it offers best practices and strategies for approaching the 
difficult problems commonly found in clinical practice, 
including questions patients raise about end-of-life care 
and physician-assisted dying.
Edward J. Larson and Darrel W. Amundsen. 1998. A Different 
Death: Euthanasia and the Christian Tradition. Downers Grove: 
IVP.
Based on the recognition that much of the current rheto-
ric on physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia is lacking 
in appeal to historical precedent, this book reviews the 
history of euthanasia within Christendom.
Barbara Coombs Lee, editor. 2003. Compassion in Dying: Stories 
of Dignity and Choice. Troutdale, OR: NewSage Press.
The stories in the book are from individuals who sought 
to use the Death with Dignity Act. Most individuals have 
felt empowered by choice and control in how they die—
whether or not they opt to use the prescribed meds to end 
their lives—and often experience renewed hope. The edi-
tor is the president of Compassion & Choices.

	
Resources	
297
Roger S. Magnusson. 2002. Angels of Death: Exploring the Eutha-
nasia Underground. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
This book explores all the dynamics of helping victims of 
AIDS to die. The research took place in Australia and San 
Francisco, California. But the experiences of these doc-
tors, nurses, social workers, and other friends can easily 
apply to the situations of any patients who need aid and 
support in the process of dying.
Lila Perl Marshall. 2007. Cruzan v. Missouri: The Right to Die? 
New York: Marshall Cavendish Benchmark.
The book explores a controversial event, the line between 
the state’s right to protect life versus the right of guardians 
of a patient in a permanent vegetative state to remove all 
life support. The book details, highlights, and clarifies the 
complex legal arguments of both sides.
Charles F. McKhann. 1999. A Time to Die: The Place for Physician 
Assistance. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
A physician and professor at a medical school discusses all 
perspectives on physician-assisted death.
David Novak. 2007. The Sanctity of Human Life. Georgetown 
University Press.
Novak is a Jewish theologian who digs deep into Jewish 
scripture and tradition to find guidance for assessing three 
contemporary controversies in medicine and public pol-
icy: the use of embryos to derive stem cells for research, 
socialized medicine, and physician-assisted suicide.
Sherwin B. Nuland. 1994. How We Die: Reflections on Life’s Final 
Chapter. New York: Knopf.
The book was a National Book Award winner; it has 
become the definitive text on perhaps the single most 
universal human concern: death. It examines the current 
state of health care and our relationship with life as it 
approaches its terminus. It also discusses how we can take 
control of our own final days and those of our loved ones.

298	
The Right to Die
Tip O’Neill and Gary Hymel. 1994. All Politics Is Local: And 
Other Rules of the Game. Holbrook, MA: Adams Media.
A small, classic book that candidly explains the nature of 
the political process in contemporary America.
Larry I. Palmer. 2000. Endings and Beginnings: Law, Medicine, 
and Society in Assisted Life and Death. New York: Praeger.
The book argues that legislative analysis is often more 
important than judicial analysis in dealing with issues 
that arise because of new reproductive technologies and 
physician-assisted suicide. A reliance on individual rights 
alone for answers to the complex ethical questions that 
result from society’s faith in scientific progress and sci-
ence’s close alliance with medicine will be insufficient and 
ill advised.
Michael J. Perry. 1999. We the People: The Fourteenth Amendment 
and the Supreme Court. New York: Oxford University Press.
The book evaluates the critics’ arguments that the U.S. 
Supreme Court, for more than eight decades, has engi-
neered a “judicial usurpation of politics.” There is an 
examination and analysis of a number of major Four-
teenth Amendment perennial controversies—over race 
segregation, race-based affirmative action, sex-based dis-
crimination, homosexuality, abortion, and physician-
assisted suicide.
Tom Preston. 2007. Patient-Directed Dying: A Call for Legalized 
Aid in Dying for the Terminally Ill. New York: iUniverse Star.
The book is based on a physician’s discussions with his 
terminally ill patients. He explains why patients—not 
physicians or others—should be able to make their own 
decisions about when and how to die. Insightful reasons 
about why aid in dying is not suicide when used by ter-
minally ill patients and why physicians who help them die 
are not assisting suicide are presented.

	
Resources	
299
Timothy E. Quill. 1993. Death and Dignity: Making Choices and 
Taking Charge. W.W. Norton.
The last years of nine of Dr. Quill’s patients are discussed. 
Terminal sedation was the closest Dr. Quill was willing to 
go toward helping patients to die. After 1997 he became 
an advocate for physician assistance in dying and greater 
use of quality palliative care.
Timothy E. Quill. 1996. A Midwife through the Dying Process: 
Stories of Healing and Hard Choices at the End of Life. Baltimore, 
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Timothy E. Quill. 2001. Caring for Patients at the End of Life. 
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Timothy E. Quill and Margaret P. Battin, editors. 2004. Phy-
sician-Assisted Suicide: The Case for Palliative Care and Patient 
Choice. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
This book is a collection of articles written by various 
people in support of the right to die generally and more 
specifically in support of life-ending drugs prescribed by a 
physician as a means of voluntarily ending one’s life under 
careful safeguards.
Julia D. Quinn. 2005. My Joys, My Sorrows. Cincinnati, OH: 
St. Anthony Messenger Press.
The mother of Karen Ann Quinlan writes about the pain-
ful decision to end Karen’s life by withdrawing life-saving 
equipment.
Betty Rollin. 1985. Last Wish. New York: Linden Press.
The book is an intimate memoir of a daughter’s struggle 
to come to terms with her terminally ill mother’s deci-
sion to die. It is an examination of the ethical, spiritual, 
and technical aspects of assisted suicide and a compelling 
argument for the right of the terminally ill to a humane 
and dignified death.

300	
The Right to Die
Lois Shepherd. 2009. If That Ever Happens to Me: Making Life 
and Death Decisions after Terri Schiavo. University of North Caro-
lina Press.
The author opposes the right to die and looks behind 
labels like starvation, care, or medical treatment to con-
sider what care and feeding really mean, when feeding 
tubes might be removed, and why disability groups, the 
faithful, and even the dying themselves often suggest end-
of-life solutions that they might later regret. There is a 
concern about living wills and other end-of-life actions 
that require letter-perfect documents; they can actually 
weaken, rather than bolster, patient choice.
Scott Cutler Shershow. 2014. Deconstructing Dignity: A Critique 
of the Right to Die Debate. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
An excellent analysis of the right to die debate, from the 
ancient philosophers to contemporary doctors, bioethi-
cists, and philosophers.
Wesley J. Smith. 1997. Forced Exit: The Slippery Slope from Assisted 
Suicide to Legalized Murder. New York: Random House.
Smith is one of the strongest opponents of the right to die 
in the United States.
Lois Snyder and Timothy E. Quill, editors. 2001. Physician’s 
Guide to End-of-Life Care. Philadelphia, PA: American College 
of Physicians.
The book is a collection of articles by 27 doctors, pro-
fessors, and lawyers exploring various aspects of terminal 
care. It was written to provide doctors who have never been 
trained in palliative measures and end-of-life care with 
important information about terminal care. It is divided 
into three sections containing clearly focused, practical 
information with illustrative cases. Topics include com-
munications; relationship building; the goals of palliative 
care; evidence-based approaches to pain, depression, and 
delirium; intractable suffering; and legal, financial, and 

	
Resources	
301
quality issues. Palliative medicine should be a core clinical 
skill for all physicians who care for seriously ill patients.
Margaret Somerville. 2014. Death Talk: The Cast against Eutha-
nasia and Physician-Assisted Suicide. Montreal, Canada: McGilll-
Queen’s University Press.
A professor of law examines all of the issues surrounding 
euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide. Legalizing the 
right to die would cause irreparable harm to society’s value 
of respect for human life, which in secular societies is car-
ried primarily by the institutions of law and medicine. 
Civilization should not permit the purposeful ending of 
human life. But all forms of making end-of-life decisions 
within standard medical care should be permitted.
Sigrid Sterckx, K. Raus, and F. Mortier, editors. 2013. Continuous 
Sedation at the End of Life: Ethical, Clinical, and Legal Perspectives. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Essays explore all dimensions of terminal sedation as a 
method of managing dying. Europe and North America 
are the most common settings, but Japan is mentioned a 
few times.
L.W. Sumner. 2010. Assisted Death: A Study in Ethics and Law. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
A careful philosophical exploration of end-of-life medi-
cal choices, which are intended or foreseen to shorten the 
process of dying: (1) “euthanasia” and “physician-assisted 
suicide”; (2) using pain-killers, knowing that vital func-
tions will probably be suppressed; (3) terminal sedation—
keeping the patient continuously unconscious until death; 
(4) terminal dehydration—giving up all food and water, 
supplied by any method.
Sidney Wanzer and Joseph Glenmullen. 2007. To Die Well: Your 
Right to Comfort, Calm, and Choice in the Last Days of Life. New 
York: Da Capo Press.

302	
The Right to Die
The authors provide clear legal and medical guidelines for 
the terminally ill and their loved ones who are facing end-
of-life decisions. Drawing on case histories, they outline 
the rights of patients and advise them on how to appoint 
a health care proxy and on ways to refuse unwanted treat-
ments. The authors also support opting for only comfort 
care, in which the focus is on minimizing pain and mak-
ing patients comfortable. However, when someone is in 
uncontrollable pain with no hope of improvement, has-
tening death—through large doses of morphine, refusal 
of fluids, or inhaling helium—should be an option.
Marilyn Webb. 1999. The Good Death: The New American Search 
to Reshape the End of Life. New York: Bantam Books.
The book analyzes the consequences of lingering, debili-
tating diseases of old age; technology and medicine con-
tinue to dazzle, prolonging life without considering the 
issue of its quality. The author traveled across the country 
for six years, collecting stories and information that reflect 
every angle of the subject. She examined the range of care 
and values in places, ranging from tiny hospices to major 
metropolitan medical centers. She interviewed 300 physi-
cians, nurses, and health care workers. She let conflicting 
views air: theologians versus Christian clerics; supporters 
of the right to die against pro-life conservatives.
Mark C. Weber. 2007. Disability Harassment. New York Univer-
sity Press.
Disability and civil rights studies lie at the core of this 
book written by a lawyer. The author frames his exami-
nation of disability harassment on the premise that dis-
abled people are members of a minority group that must 
negotiate an artificial yet often damaging environment 
of physical and attitudinal barriers. The book considers 
courts’ approaches to the problem of disability harass-
ment, particularly the application of an analogy to race 

	
Resources	
303
and sex harassment and the development of legal rem-
edies and policy reforms under the Americans with Dis-
abilities Act.
James L. Werth, Jr. 1997. Rational Suicide? Implications for Men-
tal Health Professionals. Taylor & Francis.
The author argues that rational suicide is not an oxymo-
ron; the book is an analysis of the act of suicide in history 
and how medical professionals, especially psychologists, 
have tried to work with patients to address this problem.
James L. Werth, Jr., and Dean Blevins, editors. 2009. Decision 
Making Near the End of Life: Issues, Developments, and Future 
Directions. New York: Routledge.
Twenty-nine authors explore various dimensions of end-
of-life decision making. This book is based on extensive 
research and some personal experience. Doctors, nurses, 
professors, and some laypersons offer their perspectives.
Sue Woodman. 2000. Last Rights: The Struggle over the Right to 
Die. Da Capo Press.
The book presents the views of activists and opponents of 
the right to die. The author considers the complex ques-
tions that will continue to engage human beings for as 
long as we live and die. In the end, the book explores this 
question: could the right to die be humankind’s ultimate 
civil rights struggle?
Simon Woods. 2007. Death’s Dominion: Ethics at the End of Life. 
Open University Press.
Drawing on a philosophical framework, the author 
explores end-of-life issues in order to reflect on the nature 
of the good death and how this may be achieved. The 
book considers whether it is permissible or desirable to 
influence the quality of dying. Offering palliative seda-
tion as a possible alternative to terminal sedation, the 
author furthers his argument to examine why some forms 

304	
The Right to Die
of assisted dying can be shown to be compatible with the 
ideas of palliative care.
Kevin Yuill. 2013. Assisted Suicide: The Liberal, Humanist Case 
against Legalization. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Yuill argues against changing the laws prohibiting assisting 
suicide. He presents an atheistic case against the legaliza-
tion of assisted suicide. Critical of both sides in the right 
to die arguments, he questions the assumptions behind 
the discussion. Yuill shows that our attitudes toward sui-
cide—not euthanasia—are most important to our atti-
tudes toward assisted suicide.
Articles
Marcia Angell. 2012. “May Doctors Help You to Die?” New York 
Review of Books, October 11.
This author supports the importance of physician-assisted 
death.
George J. Annas. 2006. “Congress, Controlled Substances, and 
Physician-Assisted Suicide—Elephants in Mousehole.” The New 
England Journal of Medicine, 354:10, 1079–1084.
This article is an analysis of Republican Party efforts (by 
Congress and the president) to use the executive branch 
bureaucrats and agencies to destroy the Oregon Death 
with Dignity Act (ODWDA).
Anonymous. 1988. “A Piece of My Mind: It’s Over Debbie,” 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 2, 258.
This is a watershed essay that triggered a raging debate 
about euthanasia. The author wrote about his euthanizing 
a female cancer patient in a hospital.
Jerald G. Bachman, Kirsten H. Alcser, David J. Doukas, Rich-
ard L. Lichtenstein, Amy D. Corning, and Howard Brody. 
1996. “Attitudes of Michigan Physicians and the Public toward 

	
Resources	
305
Legalizing Physician-Assisted Suicide and Voluntary Euthanasia.” 
New England Journal of Medicine, 334:5, 303–309.
This study presents an analysis of Michigan doctors’ views, 
largely negative, of PAD.
Charles H. Baron. 2006. “Not DEA’d Yet: Gonzalez v. Oregon.” 
Hastings Center Report, 36:2, 8.
This report is an analysis of the U.S. Supreme Court deci-
sion that enabled the ODWDA to remain in force.
Charles H. Baron. 2015. “Physician Aid in Dying: Wither Legal-
ization after Brittany Maynard?” Health Affairs, March 12.
This article is a discussion of the impact of Maynard’s 
death (and the attendant publicity) on the proposed PAD 
bill in the California legislature.
William G. Bartholome. 1996. “Physician-Assisted Suicide, Hos-
pice, and Rituals of Withdrawal.” Journal of Law, Medicine & 
Ethics, 24:3, 233–236.
The author argues for hospice care as the most humane 
way to assist a terminally ill patient.
T.L. Beauchamp. 1999. “The Medical Ethics of Physician-
Assisted Suicide.” Journal of Medical Ethics, 25:6, 437–439.
The author supports the extension of PAD to all states. 
The bottom line is that PAD is the patient’s choice: this 
decision is “compassion in its truest form.”
Julie Beck. 2014. “ ‘Going to Switzerland’ as a Euphemism for 
Assisted Suicide.” The Atlantic, August.
This article is an examination of the reality of “suicide 
tourists” going to Switzerland to end their lives because 
of a fatal illness and what nations are doing to control the 
influx.
Philip A. Berry. 2013. “From Empathy to Assisted Dying: An 
Argument.” Clinical Ethics, 8:1, 5–8.

306	
The Right to Die
The author argues that physicians should place patient 
autonomy above legal or societal objections to PAD.
Hazel Biggs. 2011. “Legitimate Compassion or Compassion-
ate Legitimation? Reflections on the Policy for Prosecutors in 
Respect of Cases of Encouraging or Assisting Suicide.” Feminist 
Legal Studies, 19:1, 83–91.
This article is an examination of the guidelines created by 
the Director of Public Prosecutions (Great Britain) that 
prosecutors must adhere to in cases involving PAD. It 
questions whether the primacy of a doctor’s compassion 
for the patient and subsequent assistance in dying is con-
sistent with the guidelines.
J.A. Billings and S.D. Block. 1996. “Slow Euthanasia.” Journal of 
Palliative Care, www.ncbi.nih.gov
The authors examine of the use of palliative sedation to 
treat pain and suffering in the terminally ill patient.
Brian Bix. 2003. “Physician-Assisted Suicide and Federalism.” 
Notre Dame Journal of Law, Ethics and Public Policy, 17:1, 53–70.
The author examines the ways in which the American 
federal system (with its separation of powers between the 
central and state governments and the idea that the states 
serve as laboratories for finding new ways to govern for 
the public interest) intersects with and enables states to 
pass—or defeat—PAD laws.
Meredith Blake. 2015. “Seeing a Proportionate Response to Per-
sonal Choice in Dying.” Health Law Central (Canada), February.
This article is an examination of events and thoughts 
about the right to die that led to the Canadian Supreme 
Court’s decision in Carter v. Canada.
Sandra Boodman. 2013. “Doctors Diagnostic Errors Are Often 
Not Mentioned but Can Take a Serious Toll.” Kaiser Health News, 
May 6.

	
Resources	
307
This article focuses on an issue that, in 2016, was the third 
leading cause of death: medical errors.
Joseph Boyle. 2004. “Medical Ethics and Double Effect: The 
Case of Terminal Sedation.” Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics, 
25:1, 51–60.
The author explains how the doctrine of double effect can 
be relied on to distinguish terminal sedation from eutha-
nasia and PAD.
J.F. Bresnahan. 1995. “Observations on the Rejection of Physi-
cian-Assisted Suicide: A Roman Catholic Perspective.” Christian 
Bioethics, 1:3, 256–284.
The author presents a critique of the efforts of pro-choice 
groups to pass PAD legislation from the perspective of the 
Roman Catholic Church.
Dan W. Brock. 1999. “A Critique of  Three Objections to Physician- 
Assisted Suicide.” Ethics, 109:3, 519–547
The author rebuts some major criticisms of right to 
die legislative proposals. He argues that patient self- 
determination is the fundamental ground of the right to 
forgo treatment in order to hasten death.
Bert Broeckaert. 2011. “Palliative Sedation, Physician-Assisted 
Suicide, and Euthanasia: ‘Same, Same but Different’?” American 
Journal of Bioethics, 11:6, 62–64.
The author examines palliative sedation protocol, whose 
use in 2016 by physicians treating dying patients has expo-
nentially increased. Are there ethical differences between 
palliative sedation to death and PAD and euthanasia?
JuVan D. Bruce et al. 2006. “Palliative Sedation in End of Life 
Care.” Journal of Hospice and Palliative Nursing, 6, 20–27.
These authors argue that palliative care (terminal seda-
tion) is practically and ethically more appropriate than 
PAD laws or euthanasia.

308	
The Right to Die
Robert Burt. 2003. “Why Oregon Matters: Death, Assisted 
­Suicide and the Principle of Double Effect: The Legal Debate.” 
Lahey Clinic Medical Ethics Journal, 10:2, 4–5.
This article is a defense of legislation that humanely 
addresses the final wishes of terminally ill patients.
Courtney S. Campbell. 2009. “Northwest Passages.” Philosophy 
in the Contemporary World, 16:1, 66–78.
The article discusses the implementation of death with 
dignity legislation in Oregon (and its potential impact 
on other northwestern states Washington, Montana, and 
California). The author concludes that while the Oregon 
statute’s implementation has furthered patient choice and 
empowered physicians, it has failed a critical test of public 
transparency.
Lincoln Caplan. 2016. “Rhetoric and Law” Harvard Magazine, 
January/February.
This article is an examination of the writings of a major 
American federal appeals court judge, Richard A. Posner. 
Posner, a highly regarded federal appellate judge and a 
judicial scholar, is very critical of the “originalist” judicial 
philosophy employed by some justices sitting on the U.S. 
Supreme Court.
David J. Casarett and Timothy E. Quill. 2007. “ ‘I’m Not Ready 
for Hospice’: Strategies for Timely and Effective Hospice Discus-
sions.” Annals of Internal Medicine, 146:6, 443–449.
The authors are supporters of palliative care and hospice 
for grievously suffering patients—but also believe that 
PAD, where legal, is a final option. The article discusses 
strategies doctors use to encourage dying patients to enter 
palliative care or hospice.
A. Chapple, S. Ziebland, A. McPherson, and A. Herxheimer. 
2006. “What People Close to Death Say about Euthanasia and 

	
Resources	
309
Assisted Suicide: A Qualitative Study.” Journal of Medical Ethics, 
32:12, 706–710
This article is based on interviews with patients, who 
know they were nearing death, about PAD and euthana-
sia. Those who had seen others die were particularly con-
vinced that the law should be changed to allow assisted 
death.
S.B. Chetwynd. 2004. “Right to Life, Right to Die and Assisted 
Suicide.” Journal of Applied Philosophy, 21:2, 173–182.
The author examines, from an ethical rather than a legal 
point of view, how the right to life might imply a right to 
die, and whether this right to die can include the right of 
a doctor to assist the person to die.
Annette E. Clark. 2006. “The Right to Die: The Broken Road 
from Quinlan to Schiavo.” Loyola Law Review Chicago Law 
Review, 37:383.
The author reviews the 40 years since Quinlan (1976), 
arguing that there has been a haphazard and largely ideo-
logically driven right to die idea that ignores the reasoned 
arguments in the original New Jersey opinions.
Cynthia B. Cohen. 1996. “Christian Perspectives on Assisted 
Suicide and Euthanasia: The Anglican Tradition.” Journal of Law, 
Medicine & Ethics, 24:4, 369–379.
The author reviews the basic ethical arguments against 
PAD and euthanasia from a Christian perspective.
A. Craig, B. Cronin, W. Eward, J. Metz, L. Murray, G. Rose, 
E. Suess, and M.E. Vergara. 2007. “Attitudes toward Physician-
Assisted Suicide among Physicians in Vermont.” Journal of Medi-
cal Ethics, 33:7, 400–403.
This article is an examination, based on interviews with 
physicians practicing in Vermont, of medical support and 
opposition to proposed PAD legislation in the state.

310	
The Right to Die
Patrick Daly. 2015. “Palliative Sedation, Foregoing Life-Sustain-
ing Treatment, and Aid-in-Dying: What Is the Difference?” Theo-
retical Medicine and Bioethics, 36:3, 197–213.
The author examines a number of possible choices avail-
able for terminally ill patients.
C. Delkeskamp-Hayes. 2003. “Euthanasia, Physician Assisted 
Suicide, and Christianity’s Positive Relationship to the World.” 
Christian Bioethics, 9:2–3, 163–185.
This article is a discussion of PAD and euthanasia from a 
Christian perspective.
April Dembosky. 2015. “Doctors’ Secret Language for Assisted 
Suicide.” The Atlantic, May 27.
The essay examines the “wink and nod” behavior of doc-
tors and nurses in their treatment of terminally ill patients.
Charles Douglas, Ian Kerridge, and Rachel Ankeny. 2008. “Man-
aging Intentions: The End-of-Life Administration of Analgesics 
and Sedatives, and the Possibility of Slow Euthanasia.” Bioethics, 
22:7, 388–396.
The authors present a bioethical examination of the use 
of terminal sedation in cases where a dying patient is suf-
fering greatly.
Gerald Dworkin. 1998. “Physician-Assisted Suicide and Public 
Policy.” Philosophical Studies, 89:2–3, 133–141.
This article by a noted philosopher supports PAD.
Gerald Dworkin, R.G. Frey, and Sissela Bok. 2000. “Euthana-
sia and Physician-Assisted Suicide—For and Against.” Mind, 
109:436, 893–896.
The authors present cogent arguments for and against 
PAD and euthanasia.
Ezekiel J. Emanuel. 1995. “Empirical Studies on Euthanasia and 
Assisted Suicide.” Journal of Clinical Ethics, 6:2, 158–160.

	
Resources	
311
Ezekiel J. Emanuel. 1997. “Whose Right to Die?” The Atlantic, 
March.
This article examines the ethical questions surrounding 
the right to die.
G. Finlay and R. George. 2011. “Legal Physician-Assisted Sui-
cide in Oregon and The Netherlands: Evidence Concerning the 
Impact on Patients in Vulnerable Groups—Another Perspective 
on Oregon’s Data.” Journal of Medical Ethics, 37:3, 171–174.
This essay criticizes positive interpretations by PAD sup-
porters of post-death data about terminally ill patients.
Emily Friedman. 2013. “So Quit Already: Futility, Faith, Family 
and the Ongoing Battle over End of Life Care.” Hospitals and 
Health Networks Daily, August 6.
This moving essay describes the problems associated with 
the medicalization of death, but the author is unwilling 
to support PAD. She fears the consequences because of 
the impunity inherent in legalizing assisted suicide. Physi-
cians and, to a lesser degree, nurses have too much power; 
rogue members of both professions get away with murder.
Linda Ganzini, Thomasz M. Beer, Matthew Brouns, Motomi 
Mori, and Y.C. Hsieh. 2006. “Interest in Physician-Assisted Sui-
cide among Oregon Cancer Patients.” Journal of Clinical Ethics, 
17:1, 27.
Linda Ganzini, D.S. Fenn, Melinda A. Lee, Ronald T. Heintz, 
and J.D. Bloom. 1996. “Attitudes of Oregon Psychiatrists toward 
Physician-Assisted Suicide.” American Journal of Psychiatry, 
153:11, 1469–1475.
The authors of the above articles examine data about the 
views of medical professionals regarding implementation 
of the ODWDA.
Linda Ganzini, Elizabeth R. Goy, Lois L. Miller, Theresa A. 
Harvath, Ann Jackson, and Molly A. Delorit. 2003. “Nurses’ 

312	
The Right to Die
Experiences with Hospice Patients Who Refuse Food and Flu-
ids to Hasten Death.” New England Journal of Medicine, 349:4, 
359–365.
Linda Ganzini, Theresa A. Harvath, Ann Jackson, Elizabeth R. 
Goy, Lois L. Miller, and Molly A. Delorit. 2002. “Experience of 
Oregon Nurses and Social Workers with Hospice Patients Who 
Request Assistance with Suicide.” New England Journal of Medi-
cine, 347:8, 582–588.
Willard Gaylin, Leon R. Kass, Edmund D. Pellegrino, and Mark 
Siegler. 1988. “Doctors Must Not Kill.” JAMA, 259: 2139–2140.
In this article, medical professionals critique PAD.
Jyl Gentzler. 2003. “What Is a Death with Dignity?” Journal of 
Medicine and Philosophy, 28:4, 461–487.
The author examines the different meanings of dignity in 
the phrase that describes PAD: death with dignity. How-
ever, these arguments are all defective.
Robin Gibson. 2013. “The Case for Euthanasia and Physician-
Assisted Suicide.” The Australian Humanist, 109:109, 11.
The article presents a philosophical justification of PAD 
and euthanasia.
Michael B. Gill. 2009. “Is the Legalization of Physician-Assisted 
Suicide Compatible with Good End-of-Life Care?” Journal of 
Applied Philosophy, 26:1, 27–45.
The author critiques bioethical arguments against the 
compatibility of palliative care and PAD.
Paul Glare et al. 2003. “A Systematic Review of Physicians’ Sur-
vival Predictions in Terminally Ill Cancer Patients.” British Medi-
cal Journal, 327:195.
This article is an examination of the data illustrating the 
difficulty of medical projection of a patient’s death.

	
Resources	
313
Fiona Godlee. 2012. “Assisted dying.” British Medical Journal, 344, 
1–9.
The coeditor of the BMJ argues in favor of the passage of 
the right to die law in Great Britain. Doctors should be 
allowed to help terminally ill patients to die.
Thomas Halper. 1996. “Privacy and Autonomy: From Warren 
and Brandeis to Roe and Cruzan.” Journal of Medicine and Phi-
losophy, 21:2, 121–135.
This interesting article examines how a person’s “right to 
privacy” (defined by two lawyers at the turn of the 20th 
century) is misapplied as “personal autonomy” in right to 
die cases heard in contemporary Supreme Court decisions.
Theresa A. Harvath, Lois L. Miller, Elizabeth R. Goy, Ann Jack-
son, Molly A. Delorit, and Linda Ganzini. 2014. “Why Do Older 
People Oppose Physician-Assisted Dying? A Qualitative Study.” 
Palliative Medicine, 28, 353–359.
This article explores the attitudes of the elderly regarding 
PAD.
M.T. Harvey. 2002. “What Does a ‘Right’ to Physician-Assisted 
Suicide (PAS) Legally Entail?” Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics, 
23:4–5, 271–286.
The author argues that PAD legislation in America is defi-
cient because it lacks statutory obligation that makes it 
legally binding on a doctor who promises to help a termi-
nally ill patient die to carry out the promise.
P.R. Heft, M. Siegler, and J. Lantos. 2000. “The Rise and Fall of 
the Futility Movement.” New England Journal of Medicine, 343, 
293–296.
The authors examine this small medical movement’s rise 
and fall in the 1990s (objecting to the excessiveness of 
doctors’ efforts to aggressively “cure” all their gravely ill 
patients by any means necessary).

314	
The Right to Die
Nancy S. Jecker. 2009. “Physician-Assisted Death in the Pacific 
Northwest.” American Journal of Bioethics, 9:3, 1–2.
This analysis of data generated in Oregon disproves con-
cerns of opponents that the poor, the elderly, and the dis-
abled would be adversely affected by PAD.
Jaime Joyce. 2012. “The Evolving State of Physician-Assisted Sui-
cide.” The Atlantic, July 15.
An essay, written before Massachusetts voters narrowly 
defeated (51%–49%)) a proposed PAD bill, tracks the 
success of PAD efforts in Oregon and Washington State.
Yale Kamisar. 1995. “Against Assisted Suicide: Even a Very Lim-
ited Form.” University of Detroit Mercy Law Review, 72, 735–69.
A noted constitutional law scholar’s important essay dis-
cusses his legal and ethical opposition to PAD.
Sister Nuala Kenny. 2015. “Physician-Assisted Suicide: Medical-
ization of Suffering and Death.” Impact Ethics, Canadian Bioeth-
ics, February 13, pp. 1–5.
A Roman Catholic Nun/MD explains why the church is 
opposed to PAD.
Vicki Lachman. 2010. “Physician-Assisted Suicide: Compassion-
ate Liberation or Murder?” Ethics, Law, and Policy, MEDSURG 
Nursing (Official Journal of the Academy of Medical-Surgical 
Nurses), 19:2, March/April.
The author, a nurse, expresses the belief, held by a major-
ity in the nursing profession, that PAD is a form of killing 
prohibited by a state’s criminal code as well as a practice 
that conflicts with the mission of the medical profession.
Ken Levy. 2007. “Gonzales v. Oregon and Physician-Assisted Sui-
cide: Ethical and Policy Issues.” Tulsa Law Review, 42, 699–729.
This article is an analysis of the federal government’s 
(unsuccessful) efforts to overturn the ODWDA through 
an expansive interpretation of the 1970 Controlled Sub-
stances Act.

	
Resources	
315
Erich H. Loewy. 2004. “Euthanasia, Physician Assisted Suicide 
and Other Methods of Helping Along Death.” Health Care Anal-
ysis, 12:3, 181–193.
The author is troubled by the useless suffering (physical 
and emotional) of terminally ill patients yet is reluctant to 
argue for passage of PAD legislation because of serious—
and unanswered—ethical questions about killing another 
person, as well as whether a physician’s participation in 
killing a patient is ethically consistent with the oath to do 
no harm.
Edward Lowenstein and Sidney H. Wanzer. 2002. “The U.S. 
Attorney General’s Intrusion into Medical Practice.” New Eng-
land Journal of Medicine, 346, 447.
Another article examines Attorney General Ashcroft’s 
efforts to use his authority to prevent doctors in Oregon 
from assisting terminally ill patients to hasten death.
Gunilla Lundquist, Birgit H. Rasmussen, and Bertil Axelsson. 
2011. “Information of Imminent Death or Not: Does It Make 
a Difference?” Journal of Clinical Oncology, 29:29, 3927–3931.
This article examines what occurs when doctors treating 
terminally ill cancer patients tell one group of patients 
about their imminent death but do not tell another 
group. Providing the information leads to improved care 
and an increase in the likelihood of the patient and family 
making decisions regarding the character, location, and 
quality of the final weeks of life.
Michele M. Mathes. 2004. “Assisted Suicide and Nursing Eth-
ics.” Medicine Surgery and Nursing, 13:4, 261–265.
The author critiques PAD.
Brittany Maynard. 2014. “My Decision to Die.” People Maga-
zine, October 27.
This essay is by a young woman dying of inoperable brain 
cancer who moved from California to Oregon to be able 
to receive physician assistance in hastening her death.

316	
The Right to Die
Ian Morrison. 2015. “Health Care Costs and Choices in the Last 
Years of Life.” Hospitals and Health Networks Daily, March 3, 
pp. 5–8.
The essay examines the impact of longevity on health care 
systems. There is a major focus on the need to improve 
the doctor-patient relationship when the patient has a 
terminal illness. The pain and dilemmas of dealing with 
mortality are examined from the perspectives of physi-
cians, patients, and family members.
Elizabeth Morrow. 1996. “Attitudes of Women from Vulner-
able Populations toward Physician-Assisted Death: A Qualitative 
Approach.” Journal of Clinical Ethics, 8:3, 279–289.
The article examines why certain women oppose PAD.
Alicia Ouellette. 2013–2014. “Context Matters: Disability, the 
End of Life, and Why the Conversation Is Still So Difficult.” New 
York Law School Law Review, 58, 371.
This very important essay is about the necessity of improv-
ing conversations between disabled patients and the medi-
cal professionals responsible for providing quality medical 
care for them.
William J. Peace. 2012. “Disability Discrimination.” Hastings 
Center Bioethics Forum, July 27, pp. 1–2.
The author, a disabled scholar, discusses the many prob-
lems the disabled confront on a daily basis within and 
beyond the health care system.
Carol L. Powers and Paul C. McLean. 2011. “The Community 
Speaks: Continuous Deep Sedation (CDS) as Caregiving versus 
Physician-Assisted Suicide as Killing.” American Journal of Bioeth-
ics, 11:6, 65–66.
This report explains why the Harvard University Commu-
nity Ethics Committee concluded that CDS is an appro-
priate and ethical approach to care giving for terminally ill 
patients in great pain rather than PAD, which is criminal 

	
Resources	
317
and unethical. CDS is an alternative to PAD, conclude 
the authors, the way care giving is an alternative to killing.
Timothy E. Quill. 1991. “Death and Dignity: A Case of Indi-
vidualized Decision Making.” New England Journal of Medicine, 
324:10, 691–694.
Timothy E. Quill. 2004. “Dying and Decision Making— 
Evolution of End-of-Life Options.” New England Journal of Med-
icine, 350:20, 2029–2032.
Timothy E. Quill. 2012. “Physicians Should “Assist in Suicide” 
When It Is Appropriate.” Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 40:1, 
57–65.
Timothy E. Quill, Bernard Lo, Dan W. Brock, and Alan Meisel. 
2009. “Last-Resort Options for Palliative Sedation.” Annals of 
Internal Medicine, 151:6, 421–424.
These and other articles and books by Dr. Quill and his 
colleagues focus on the critical role of palliative care and 
hospice in the care of gravely ill patients but also defend 
the value of PAD as a last option available—where legal—
to ease the pain and suffering of dying patients.
Timothy E. Quill and Ira R. Byock. 2000. “Responding to Intrac-
table Terminal Suffering: The Role of Terminal Sedation and Vol-
untary Refusal of Food and Fluids.” Annals of Internal Medicine, 
132:5, 408–414.
Terri A. Schmidt, A.D. Zechnich, Virginia P. Tilden, Melinda 
A. Lee, Linda K Ganzini, Heidi D. Nelson, and Susan W. Tolle. 
1996. “Oregon Emergency Physicians’ Experiences with, Atti-
tudes toward, and Concerns about Physician-Assisted Suicide.” 
Academic Emergency Medicine, 3:10, 938–945.
The article examines the views of emergency department 
doctors about PAD in Oregon, the first state to pass a 
PAD law.

318	
The Right to Die
David Shaw. 2007. “The Body as Unwarranted Life Support: 
A  New Perspective on Euthanasia.” Journal of Medical Ethics, 
33:9, 519–521.
This interesting essay discusses differences between with-
drawing (and letting die) and PAD (voluntary active 
euthanasia). The author presents another perspective about 
dying: what happens if a patient is mentally competent 
and wants to die but his or her body provides unwarranted 
life support unfairly prolonging his or her mental life?
Kenneth R. Stevens, Jr. 2006. “Emotional and Psychological 
Effects of Physician-Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia on Partici-
pating Physicians.” Issues in Law & Medicine, 21, 187.
This article reviews medical and public literature regarding 
the reported emotional and psychological effects of par-
ticipation in physician-assisted suicide and euthanasia on 
the physicians involved. The author concludes that the lit-
erature suggests that some doctors were adversely affected 
emotionally and psychologically by their experiences.
Jennifer S. Temel et al. 2010. “Earlier Palliative Care for Patients 
with Metastatic Small-Cell-Lung Cancer” New England Journal 
of Medicine, 363, 733.
This article emphasizes the importance of earlier palliative 
care so that it can have a meaningful effect on patients’ 
quality of life and end-of-life care.
Susan W. Tolle, Virginia P. Tilden, Linda L. Drach, Erik K. 
Fromme, Nancy A. Perrin, and Katrina Hedberg. 2004. “Char-
acteristics and Proportion of Dying Oregonians Who Personally 
Consider Physician-Assisted Suicide.” Journal of Clinical Ethics, 
15, 111–118.
All the coauthors are associated with the Oregon Depart-
ment of Human Services, the state agency responsible for 
annual compilation and reporting of statistics about those 
who received a lethal prescription in accordance with the 
ODWDA. It is an excellent source of data.

	
Resources	
319
Kathryn L. Tucker. 2008. “In the Laboratory of the States: The 
Progress of Glucksberg’s Invitation to States to Address End of Life 
Choices.” Michigan Law Review, 106, 1593.
The author, one of the lawyers arguing on behalf of PAD 
supporters in the U.S. Supreme Court, writes about the 
positive impact of Glucksberg even though the justices 
rejected her arguments in support of PAD.
Johannes J.M. van Dieden. 2007. “Terminal Sedation: Source of 
a Restless Ethical Debate.” Journal of Medical Ethics, 33, 187–188.
The author asks whether terminal sedation is euthanasia 
or good palliative intervention. He concludes that, in 
most cases, they are ethically different clinical situations.
Jukka Varelius. 2012. “Ending Life, Morality, and Meaning.” 
Ethical Theory and Moral Practice, 16:3, 559–574.
The author examines how philosophical arguments about 
the meaning of life have figured in recent medical ethical 
debates on voluntary euthanasia and physician-assisted 
suicide. Will a terminally ill person insist on living only if 
there is a reason to do so?
Joseph L. Verheijde and Mohamed Y. Rady. 2011. “Justifying 
Physician-Assisted Death in Organ Donation.” American Journal 
of Bioethics, 11:8, 52–54.
This controversial essay examines the ethics of a new medical 
protocol: donation after cardiac death. Can PAD be justified 
when the outcome is harvesting of the decedent’s organs?
James L. Werth, Jr. 1999. “When Is a Mental Health Professional 
Competent to Assess a Person’s Decision to Hasten Death?” Eth-
ics and Behavior, 9:2, 141–157.
The author develops a set of guidelines to enable men-
tal health professionals to determine if a professional has 
the training and expertise necessary to be part of a PAD 
medical assessment team that must determine whether or 
not a terminally ill patient is clinically depressed.

320	
The Right to Die
Susan M. Wolf. 2008. “Confronting Physician Assisted Suicide 
and Euthanasia: My Father’s Death.” Hastings Center Report 38:5, 
23–26.
The author, a professor of law, medicine, and public pol-
icy at the University of Minnesota, reexamines her oppo-
sition to PAD as her father lies dying.
Right to Die Legislation
Connecticut. 2014. Raised Bill No. 5326. An Act Concerning 
Compassionate Aid in Dying for Terminally Ill Patients.
Bill introduced in Connecticut State Senate. Rejected.
Find more at: www.cga.ct.gov/2014/TOB/H/2014hb-5326
Massachusetts. 2012. Massachusetts “Death with Dignity” Initia-
tive 11–12, also known as Question 2.
The ballot language of the measure read as follows:
A yes vote would enact the proposed law allowing a physi-
cian licensed in Massachusetts to prescribe medication, 
at the request of a terminally ill patient meeting certain 
conditions, to end that person’s life (48.1%).
A no vote would make no change in existing laws (51.9%).
Find at: www.ballotpedia.org/Massachusetts
Minnesota. 2015–16. SF 1880. The Minnesota Compassionate 
Care Act of 2015.
PAD bill introduced in Minnesota State Senate. Failed.
Find more at: www.revisor.mn.gov/bills/text/php?number
New York. 2015. A0 5261. Patient Self-Determination Act 
(Proposed).
Following the ODWDA, the New York proposal would 
authorize a physician with a bona fide physician-patient 
relationship with a patient with a terminal illness or con-
dition to prescribe a lethal dose of the medication to be 

	
Resources	
321
self-administered. The proposed statute defines terminal 
illness or condition as an illness or condition which can 
reasonably be expected to cause death within six months, 
whether or not treatment is provided. It provides legal 
immunity to health care providers who act in accordance 
with the proposed PAD law.
PADF bill introduced in New York State Assembly. No 
action.
Find more at: www.assembly.state.newyork.us/leg
North Carolina. 2015–2016. HB 611. Enact Death with Dig-
nity Act. April 13, 2015.
PAD bill introduced in North Carolina House of Repre-
sentatives. Failed.
Find at: www.ncleg,net/gascripts/BillLookUp/
Oklahoma. 2016. HB 2848. An Act Relating to Public Health 
and Safety; Creating the Oklahoma Death with Dignity Act.
Find more at: www.oklegislature.gov/BillInfo.aspx?Bill= 
HB%2/
United Kingdom. 2014–15. Assisted Dying Bill [HL] 2014–15. 
Bill 006 2014–15.
A bill to enable competent adults who are terminally ill 
to be provided at their request with specified assistance 
to end their own life and for connected purposes. The 
Assisted Dying Bill is a specific, focused piece of legisla-
tion that would provide safeguarded choice and control 
to terminally ill adults and prevent prolonged suffering 
among these dying adults who want to have choice over 
how and when they die. It will also ensure that terminally 
ill adults who have assistance to die do so having met clear 
predetermined criteria and have explored all their alterna-
tives, rather than as at present, in secret, when checks are 
only made after someone dies.
Find more at: www.services.parliament.uk

322	
The Right to Die
Reports
American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine. 2015. 
Advisory Brief: Guidance on Responding to Requests for Physician-
Assisted Dying. http://aahpm.org/positions/padbrief
This brief instructs medical providers on how to react to 
a request for PAD.
Center for Arizona Policy. 2014. Physician-Assisted Suicide  &  
Denial of Care. http://www.azpolicypages.com/life/physician- 
assisted-suicide-denial-of-care/
The report explains that proposed legislation designed 
to permit physician-assisted suicide has been introduced 
repeatedly in the Arizona legislature over the past decade. 
It is presented so that opposition to PAD will be better 
prepared to block efforts to enact any type of physician-
assisted suicide measures.
Colorado Health Institute. 2016. Aid in Dying: Colorado Confronts 
a Difficult Policy Question, January. http://www.coloradohealthin-
stitute.org/uploads/downloads/Aid_in_Dying_report1.pdf
This report was prepared for political actions in the Colo-
rado state legislature, which is set to once again confront 
the issue in 2016 after voting down a bill in support of aid 
in dying during the 2015 session. The Colorado “End of 
Life Options Act,” also known as Proposition 106, is on 
the November 8, 2016, ballot in Colorado as an initiated 
state statute. A “yes” vote supports making assisted death 
legal among patients with a terminal illness who receive a 
prognosis of death within six months. A “no” vote opposes 
this proposal, keeping the prohibition of assisted death in 
Colorado. Prepared by the Colorado Health Institute, the 
report offers historical context, both national and inter-
national, that is essential to understanding the debate. It 
highlights perspectives on both sides of the right to die.

	
Resources	
323
Committee on Care at the End of Life. 1997. Approaching 
Death: Improving Care at the End of Life. Washington, D.C.: 
National Academy Press. http://www.nap.edu/catalog/5801/
approaching-death-improving-care-at-the-end-of-life
This report argues that we can do much more to relieve 
suffering, respect personal dignity, and provide opportu-
nities for people to find meaning at life’s conclusion.
Director of Public Prosecutions. 2014. Policy for Prosecutors in 
Respect of Cases of Encouraging or Assisting Suicide. https://www.cps.
gov.uk/publications/prosecution/assisted_suicide_policy.html
This policy presents guidance for prosecutors when a per-
son acts to encourage or assist the suicide or attempted 
suicide of another person (“encouraging or assisting 
suicide”).
F. Michael Gloth. 2003. Physician-Assisted Suicide: The Wrong 
Approach to End of Life Care. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Confer-
ence of Catholic Bishops. http://www.usccb.org/about/pro-life- 
activities/respect-life-program/physicianassisted-suicide-the-
wrong-approach-to-end-of-life-care.cfm
This report provides information on physician-assisted 
suicide drawn from clinical and public policy experience. 
Arguments on both sides of the public debate are pre-
sented, and it is shown that as a matter of morality, medi-
cine, and public policy, physician-assisted suicide is the 
wrong approach to end-of-life care. Current public policy 
efforts to improve the quality and availability of palliative 
care and hospice given to all terminally ill patients must 
be supported.
Hastings Center. 2016. Bioethics Briefing Book: From Birth to 
Death and Bench to Clinic. http://www.thehastingscenter.org/
briefingbook/briefing-book/
This report covers issues of ethics in several fields, includ-
ing abortion, end-of-life care, and PAD.

324	
The Right to Die
Institute of Medicine. 2015. Dying in America: Improving Qual-
ity and Honoring Individual Preferences Near the End of Life. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press. http://www.
nationalacademies.org/hmd/Reports/2014/Dying-In-America-
Improving-Quality-and-Honoring-Individual-Preferences-Near-
the-End-of-Life.aspx
In this report, a committee of experts concludes that 
improving the quality and availability of medical and 
social services for patients and their families could not 
only enhance quality of life through the end of life, but 
may also contribute to a more sustainable care system.
Lois Snyder and Daniel P. Sulmasy. 2001. Physician-Assisted 
Suicide. Position paper of the American College of Physicians– 
American Society of Internal Medicine. Annals of Internal Medi-
cine, 135, 209–216. https://www.acponline.org/system/files/
documents/running_practice/ethics/issues/policy/pa_suicide.pdf
In this article, The American College of Physicians–
American Society of Internal Medicine states that it does 
not support the legalization of physician-assisted suicide. 
It remains thoroughly committed to improving care for 
patients at the end of life.
Marker, Rita L. 2013. Euthanasia, Assisted Suicide & Health Care 
Decisions: Protecting Yourself & Your Family. Steubenville, OH: 
Patients Rights Council. http://www.patientsrightscouncil.org/
site/euthanasia-assisted-suicide-health-care-decisions-toc/
This report discusses the reasons used by PAD activists to 
promote changes in the law; the contradictions that the 
actual proposals have with those reasons; and the slippery 
slope that follows when assisted suicide becomes law. The 
report shows the failure of so-called safeguards and out-
lines the impact that euthanasia and assisted suicide have 
on families and on a society committed to the sanctity 
of life.

	
Resources	
325
New York State Task Force on Life and the Law. 1994. When 
Death Is Sought: Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia in the Medi-
cal Context. New York: Department of Health. https://www.
health.ny.gov/regulations/task_force/reports_publications/
when_death_is_sought/
In this report, one of the first published by a state, the 
task force unanimously recommended that New York 
laws prohibiting assisted suicide and euthanasia remain.
President’s Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in 
Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research. 1981. Defin-
ing Death: Medical, Legal and Ethical Issues in the Determination 
of Death. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office. http://
www.bioethics.gov/reports/past_commissions/defining_death.pdf
This report develops a uniform definition of death in the 
law.
Special Joint Committee on Physician-Assisted Dying. 2016. 
Medical Assistance in Dying: A Patient-Centered Approach. Parlia-
ment of Canada, 42nd Parliament, 1st Session. http://www.parl.
gc.ca/HousePublications/Publication.aspx?DocId=8120006
The special committee’s report calls for medical assis-
tance in dying to be available to individuals with termi-
nal and nonterminal grievous and irremediable medical 
conditions that cause enduring suffering that is intoler-
able to the individual in the circumstances of his con-
dition. Further, unlike PAD guidelines in America, 
the Canadian report defends the views that individu-
als should not be excluded from eligibility for medical 
assistance in dying based on the fact that they have a 
psychiatric condition.
Task Force to Improve the Care of Terminally-Ill Oregonians. 
1998, 2008. The Oregon Death with Dignity Act: A Guide-
book for Health Care Professionals. Portland, OR: Center for 
Ethics in Health Care, Oregon Health & Science University. 

326	
The Right to Die
https://www.ohsu.edu/xd/education/continuing-education/
center-for-ethics/ethics-outreach/upload/Oregon-Death-with-
Dignity-Act-Guidebook.pdf
A state agency has developed a Guidebook for Health Care 
Professionals as a collective response to its enactment. 
Designed to be a useful resource for health care profes-
sionals and institutions as they contemplate the Oregon 
Act’s implications for practice, underlying the report is 
the assumption that regardless of the health care profes-
sionals’ personal view regarding the Oregon Act, open 
communication, consideration of comfort needs, and 
respect for divergent views are necessary components of 
care. The report presents ethical and practical guidelines 
to enhance compassionate care whether or not a physician 
or health care system is willing to participate in providing 
a prescription as set forth in the Oregon Act.
United States Senate. 2005. The Consequences of Legalized 
Assisted Suicide. Hearing before the Subcommittee on the Con-
stitution, Civil Rights, and Property Rights. 109th Congress, 2nd 
Session, May 25, 2006. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing 
Office. https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-109shrg45836/
pdf/CHRG-109shrg45836.pdf
These hearings examined important issues of abortion, 
the death penalty, physician-assisted suicide, and eutha-
nasia (the first two are legal in the United States, the last 
two considered criminal) to examine whether they pro-
mote or inhibit the culture of life.
Some Organizations Supporting Right to Die 
Legislation
Compassion & Choices (national)
www.compassionandchoices.org
Compassion of Oregon (state)
www.compassionoforegon.org

	
Resources	
327
Death with Dignity National Center
www.deathwithdignity.org
Euthanasia Research and Guidance Organization
www.finalexit.org
Final Exit Network
www.finalexitnetwork.org
Hawaii Death with Dignity Society
www.hawaiidwdsociety.org
Hemlock of Illinois
www.hemlockofillinois.org
Hemlock Society of Florida
www.hemlockflorida.org
Hemlock Society of San Diego
www.hemlocksocietysandiego.org
Some Organizations Opposing Right to Die Legislation
Black Americans for Life
www.nrlc.org/outreach/bal
California: Seniors against Suicide
www.seniorsagainstsuicide.org
Choice Is an Illusion
www.choiceillusion.org
Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund
www.dredf.org
Kansas against Assisted Suicide
www.kansasagainstassistedsuicide.org
Maryland against Physician-Assisted Suicide
www.stopassistedsuicidemd.org

328	
The Right to Die
Massachusetts Family Institute
www.mafamily.org
Montanans against Assisted Suicide
www.montanansagainstassistedsuicide.org
National Association of Pro Life Nurses
www.nursesforlife.org
National Right to Life
www.nationalrighttolifenews.org
Not Dead Yet
www.notdeadyet.org
Patients Rights Council
www.patientsrightscouncil.org
Second Thoughts Connecticut (disability rights)
www.second-thoughts.org
TASH (disability rights)
www.tash.org
Utah against Assisted Suicide
www.utahagainstassistedsuicide.org
Vermont Alliance for Ethical Healthcarevaeh.org
www.vaeh.org



331
7	
Chronology
A drawing of Jack Kevorkian, housed at the University of Michigan’s Bent-
ley Historical Library in Ann Arbor, Michigan, in October, 2015. Between 
1990 and 1998, Dr. Jack Kevorkian, a retired Michigan pathologist, assisted 
over 130 persons with the end of their lives. “Dr. Death,” as he was re-
ferred to in the media, advocated voluntary euthanasia and solicited clients 
through newspaper ads in Michigan papers. Kevorkian’s papers are now 
available to the public. (AP Photo/Carlos Osorio)
This chapter provides the reader with an overview of major events 
(legislation, laws, discoveries, books, executive branch actions, 
appellate court decisions, organizations, etc.) in the emergence of 
the right to die in the past century.
1906  The first right to die/euthanasia bills are introduced in 
Ohio and Iowa legislatures. Both bills are rejected.
1937  The National Society for the Legalization of Euthana-
sia is founded; it is reorganized in 1938 as the Euthanasia Soci-
ety of America
1954  The book Morals and Medicine (by Joseph Fletcher) is 
published; it forecasts the coming of right to die controversies.
1957  Pope Pius XII issues a Catholic encyclical distinguish-
ing ordinary from extraordinary means for sustaining life.
1958  Death of a Man (Lael Wertenbaker) is published; it is 
the first book by a person who assisted her husband to die.

332	
The Right to Die
1967  A right to die bill is introduced in the Florida legisla-
ture by Dr. Walter W. Sackett. It is unsuccessful.
1969  A voluntary-euthanasia bill is introduced in the Idaho 
legislature. It fails.
1969  Luis Kutner develops the first living will document.
1969  On Death and Dying by Elisabeth Kubler-Ross is pub-
lished. It has a major impact on the right to die issue.
1974  Dr. Florence Ward founds the Connecticut Hospice, 
in Branford, Connecticut. It is the first hospice in America.
1975  California passes the first living will law in America.
1976  A New Jersey Supreme Court decision, In Re Quinlan, 
allows parents to disconnect their daughter’s respirator but not 
her nutrition and hydration tubes. She lives for another nine 
years.
1976  The California Natural Death Act is passed. This first 
state aid in dying law gives legal status to living wills and pro-
tects doctors from lawsuits for failing to treat incurable illnesses.
1978  The play Whose Life Is It Anyway?, examining a quad-
riplegic confronting the right to die, opens. A movie version 
premieres in 1981.
1980  Pope John Paul II issues the Declaration in Euthanasia 
encyclical opposing mercy killing but supporting palliative care 
and the right to refuse extraordinary means to save life.
1980  The Hemlock Society is founded by Derek Humphry 
in California.
1982  The U.S. Congress includes a provision to create a 
Medicare Hospice Benefit in the Tax Equity and Fiscal Respon-
sibility Act of 1982. It is made permanent by Congress in 1986.
1984  Advanced Care directives are legal in 22 states and the 
District of Columbia.
1985  Karen Ann Quinlan dies.
1987  The California State Bar Association passes Resolution 
#3–4–87, becoming the first public organization to support 
physician-assisted dying (PAD).

	
Chronology	
333
1988  Americans against Human Suffering, a pro-PAD 
group, fails to receive sufficient signatures to place the Califor-
nia Humane and Dignified Death Act on the November ballot 
as an initiative. It is the first effort in America to have voters 
decide whether PAD will be legitimatized.
1988  An anonymous article, “It’s Over Debbie,” appears in 
JAMA.
1988  The Unitarian Universalist Association of Congrega-
tions passes a national resolution supporting PAD for termi-
nally ill patients; it is the first national religious institution to 
support the right to die.
1990  This is a watershed year in the right to die controversy. 
Events include the following:
•	 Cruzan v. Missouri Department of Health, the initial U.S. 
Supreme Court opinion in the right to die controversy, is 
decided.
•	 Theresa Schiavo suffers heart stoppage and anoxia and enters 
into a permanent vegetative state (PVS). This is the begin-
ning of a 15-year tragedy that ends in 2005, when she dies 
after life support is withdrawn.
•	 Washington Initiative 119, the first voter referendum on 
PAD and voluntary euthanasia, is filed.
•	 Dr. Jack Kevorkian assists in the death of his first client, 
Janet Atkins, who was suffering from Alzheimer’s disease.
•	 The Hemlock Society of Oregon provides a Death with Dig-
nity Act proposal to state legislators; the act fails to get out 
of committee.
•	 Congress passes the Patient Self-Determination Act, requir-
ing hospitals receiving federal funds to tell patients they 
have a right to refuse or demand treatment.
•	 The American Medical Association adopts a formal position 
that, with informed consent, a doctor can withdraw or with-
hold treatment from a terminal patient and may discontinue 
treatment of a patient in a PVS.

334	
The Right to Die
1991  Dr. Timothy Quill publishes “Death and Dignity” in 
The New England Journal of Medicine.
1991  Derek Humphry’s book Final Exit is published and 
appears on the New York Times best-seller list.
1991  Choice in Dying is formed through the merger of two 
PAD groups, Concern for Dying and Society for the Right to 
Die.
1991  Washington Ballot Initiative 119 is rejected by voters, 
54 to 46 percent.
1992  Americans for Death with Dignity places the Califor-
nia Death with Dignity Act on the state ballot as Proposition 
161. It is defeated, 54 to 46 percent (same vote percentages as 
in the 1991 defeat of the Washington ballot initiative).
1993  Compassion in Dying is formed in Washington State 
to counsel terminally ill patients and participate in lawsuits 
challenging assisting suicide statutes.
1993  Oregon Right to Die, a political action committee, is 
formed to write and work for passage of the Oregon Death 
with Dignity Act.
1993  Litigation challenging New York and Washington 
State assisted suicide statutes is brought in U.S. federal district 
courts.
1993  Hospice is included as a nationally guaranteed benefit 
in President Bill Clinton’s health care reform proposal but is 
not passed by Congress.
1994  The Death with Dignity Education Center is formed 
in California to support efforts to provide compassionate care 
for terminally ill patients.
1994  Compassion in Dying v. Washington is announced by 
the federal district court, overturning the state assisting suicide 
statute. The state appeals.
1994  Quill v. Koppell is filed in Federal District Court (New 
York), challenging the state’s assisting suicide statute. Quill 
loses and files an appeal in the federal Second Circuit Court 
of Appeals.

	
Chronology	
335
1994  Measure 16, an Oregon ballot initiative (the Ore-
gon Death with Dignity Act), is approved by voters, 51 to 
49 percent.
1995  A U.S. District Court judge rules that Oregon Mea-
sure 16, Oregon Death with Dignity Act (ODWDA), is 
unconstitutional.
1995  The Second Circuit Court of Appeals hears oral argu-
ments in Quill v. Vacco.
1995  Compassion v. Washington is reheard by an 11-judge 
panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
1996  The Ninth Circuit reverses a three-judge panel deci-
sion, ruling assisting suicide statute unconstitutional. The 
order is stayed, pending appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.
1996  The Second Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals reverses 
the district court judgment in Quill, ruling that the assisting 
suicide statute was an unconstitutional violation of the Four-
teenth Amendment’s equal protection clause. The order is 
stayed pending appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.
1996  The U.S. Supreme Court grants certiorari in Washing-
ton v. Glucksberg and Vacco v. Quill.
1997  Oral arguments in Glucksberg and Quill are heard in 
the U.S. Supreme Court.
1997  The 1994 Oregon Death with Dignity Act is validated 
when Oregonians vote 60 to 40 percent against Measure 51, 
which called for the repeal of ODWDA. The law takes effect 
on October 27, 1997.
1997  President Bill Clinton signs the Assisted Suicide Fund-
ing Restriction Act.
1997  U.S. Supreme Court decisions are released in Washing-
ton v. Glucksberg and Vacco v. Quill, overturning the Second 
and Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals and upholding state 
“assisting suicide” criminal statutes.
1998–2005  The Schiavo tragedy unfolds in Florida, involv-
ing state and federal legislative and executive branches, includ-
ing President George W. Bush.

336	
The Right to Die
1998  Measure B, a ballot initiative to legalize PAD, is 
defeated by Michigan voters, 70 to 30 percent.
1999  Dr. Jack Kevorkian is found guilty of second-degree 
homicide. He actively participated in the death of Thomas 
Youk, suffering from ALS, who could not self-administer the 
lethal medication.
1999  Texas passes the Futile Care Act, allowing physicians to 
discontinue treatment in cases where doctors believe it serves 
no purpose. This action is taken after consultations with patient 
and family indicate no opposition.
2000  A  PAD ballot initiative in Maine is defeated 51 to 
49 percent.
2003  U.S. Attorney General Ashcroft asks the Ninth U.S. 
Circuit Court of Appeals to overturn the U.S. District Court 
opinion that ODWDA does not run afoul of controlled sub-
stance regulations.
2004  The Hemlock Society is renamed End of Life Choices, 
then merges with Compassion in Dying, into Compassion & 
Choices.
2005  Terri Schiavo, in a permanent vegetative state since 
1990, dies after removal of hydration and nutrition tubes.
2005  The U.S. Supreme Court grants certiorari in Ashcroft 
v. Oregon to decide whether the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court 
of Appeals decision validating the ODWDA was correct, or 
whether the PAD law violated the federal Controlled Sub-
stance Act.
2005  The Vermont legislature receives an initial PAD bill, 
House Bill 168. No action is taken.
2005  The U.S. Supreme Court hears oral arguments in Gon-
zales v. Oregon (formerly Ashcroft v. Oregon).
2005  California legislators receive Assembly Bill 651 (Cali-
fornia Compassionate Choices Act). No final action is taken.
2005  The number of hospice provider institutions in Amer-
ica tops 4,000 for the first time.

	
Chronology	
337
2006  The U.S. Supreme Court votes 6–3 to uphold the 
ODWDA, ruling that U.S. attorney general Ashcroft over-
stepped his authority by interpreting the Controlled Substance 
Act to prevent Oregon from implementing the ODWDA.
2006  Washington Initiative 1000, the Washington Death 
with Dignity Act (WDWDA), is introduced (SB 684). The 
bill is killed in committee. Former governor Booth Gardner 
begins work to pass the WDWDA using the ballot initiative 
method.
2006  The American Board of Medical Specialties recognizes 
hospice and palliative care medicine as a medical specialty.
2008  Washington voters pass ballot initiative I-1000, 
WDWDA, on November 4 by a 58 to 42 percent margin.
2008  In Baxter v. Montana, the Montana Supreme Court 
rules that the Montana Constitution does not prohibit PAD.
2008  California passes the nation’s first Terminal Patients 
Right to Know End of Life Options Act, which mandates that 
all physicians have “comprehensive information and counsel-
ling” discussions about end-of-life options available to termi-
nally ill patients. New York becomes the second state to mandate 
such physician actions in consultations with their terminally ill 
patients.
2009  The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Edu-
cation adds hospice and palliative medicine to its list of accred-
ited programs.
2010  A provision in the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act (Obamacare) requires state Medicaid programs to 
allow children with a life-limiting illness to receive both cura-
tive treatment and hospice care.
2010  New York, modeling legislation mirroring California’s 
Terminal Patients Right to Know End of Life Options Act 
(2008), passes the Palliative Care Information Act. Hospital 
administrators and hospitalists must inform terminal patients 
about all options available to them at the end of life.

338	
The Right to Die
2010  Compassion & Choices brings a suit in the Alameda 
County, California, court. In Hargett v. Vitas Hospice, Com-
passion & Choices charged that hospice medical profession-
als working for the largest for-profit hospice corporation, Vitas 
Hospice, allowed a 43-year-old mother of three to die in great 
pain because she was not informed of the availability of pallia-
tive sedation and was not provided with adequate pain manage-
ment. Compassion & Choices lawyers argued that the failure 
to inform the patient of all end-of-life options was “reckless 
and inexcusable.” It deprived the woman of a “peaceful death” 
and was “outside the standard of care” required of all public 
health facilities under the 2008 California Terminal Patients 
Right to Know End of Life Options Act.
2013  The Vermont legislature passes the Patient Choice at 
End of Life Act. Governor Peter Shumlin signs the bill on 
May  20. The original Act 39, Patient Choices and Control 
at the End of Life, contained a provision sunsetting certain 
patient-protection safeguards on July 1, 2016. The sunset was 
added during the original debate in 2013 so backers could get 
enough votes for passage; the sunset affected a requirement 
for a psychiatric evaluation if there is any indication a patient 
requesting lethal medication has impaired judgment and a 
15-day waiting period between a patient’s first and second 
requests for the medication. Governor Shumlin signed the bill 
on May 20, 2015.
2014  A New Mexico trial judge rules, in Morris v. Branden-
berg, that the New Mexico Constitution’s Individual Rights 
section allows a competent, dying patient to seek PAD.
2014  Brittany Maynard, a terminal brain cancer patient liv-
ing in California, moves residency to Oregon in order to die in 
accord with ODWDA. She dies in late November 2014. Media 
coverage of Maynard’s plight is covered extensively in America 
and worldwide.
2015  In the Vermont legislature, SB 108, an act repealing 
the sunset provisions in the 2013 Patient Choices at End of 

	
Chronology	
339
Life Act, passes both houses and is signed by Governor Shum-
lin on May 20.
2015  In a Special Legislative Session, California legislators 
pass Senate Bill 128, the California End of Life Options Act. 
Governor Brown signs it into law on October 5.
2015  Physician assistance in dying is law in 5 states; 45 states 
and the District of Columbia have laws making assisting sui-
cide a criminal act.
2016  Colorado voters approve Colorado End of Life 
Options Act. Colorado is the sixth state to have a Death with 
Dignity Bill. The D.C. Commissioners vote 11–2 to approve 
a D.C. DWD bill.


341
Glossary
Right to die debates occur in a variety of locations: political arenas, 
legislative chambers, courtrooms, town hall meetings, picketing on 
the streets, and in the press. These discussions revolve around a 
number of distinguishable categories that have their own lexicon: 
legal options for the dying, terms used in legal briefs, jurisprudential 
concepts, emergency medical technician language, medical illnesses, 
voting practices, and bioethical language. This glossary provides the 
reader with a brief definition of some significant terms and their 
connection with the right to die.
Advanced directive  An advanced directive is a legal docu-
ment prepared by a person, optimally after discussions with 
family, clergy, and doctors, which indicates how the person 
wishes to be treated in the event of a medical emergency 
that leads to unconsciousness. It is a document that should 
reflect the person’s health care wishes in the event a medical 
event leaves the patient incapable of verbally making medi-
cal decisions. It is also a document that reflects the state 
of a person’s health at a particular point in time; as such, 
based on changes in a person’s health, the advanced direc-
tive should reflect the person’s latest instructions regarding 
health care.
Alzheimer’s disease  Alzheimer’s disease is an illness that very 
slowly attacks and destroys the brain’s nerve cells. It leads to 
loss of memory, the gradual deterioration of reasoning and 

342	
Glossary
language skills, and stark behavioral changes. There is, at pres-
ent, no cure for Alzheimer’s disease. Further, because people are 
living longer, there will be a significant increase in the number 
of persons who succumb to this disease.
Amicus curiae  This Latin phrase means “friend of the court.” 
An amicus curiae brief is prepared by lawyers for an organiza-
tion interested in affecting the outcome of a substantive legal 
issue before a court. The argument made in an amicus brief 
reflects the specific view of the group and, at its best, provides 
the court with a helpful perspective about the issue.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig’s disease)  Amy-
otrophic lateral sclerosis, ALS, is sometimes called Lou Geh-
rig’s disease, after baseball player Lou Gehrig, who died of it. 
It is generally a fatal illness, with death caused by the degen-
eration of the cells in the central nervous system that control 
voluntary muscle movement. It is a progressively debilitating 
disease where the patient loses all ability to move the limbs, to 
talk, and, in the end, to swallow. There are a few ALS patients 
who live beyond two to five years. Stephen Hawking, the 
world-famous physicist, has been living with a form of ALS 
for decades.
Ballot initiative  The ballot initiative is a seldom-used pro-
cess that allows a group of citizens to place proposals before 
the general population that hadn’t been addressed by state or 
local governments. A number of states have seen ballot initia-
tives to legalize physician assistance in dying placed before the 
voters. (The group seeking to have the initiative placed before 
the voters must first receive the requisite number of signatures 
in order to place the issue to the public.) Four ballot initiatives 
were employed in passing a PAD bill (Oregon, Washington 
State, California, and Colorado). A ballot initiative, however, 
differs from a referendum. A referendum is a proposal brought 
by the state legislature that asks the voters to approve or reject 
a particular existing law. For example, after the 1994 initiative 
for the Oregon Death with Dignity bill was passed, in 1997 

	
Glossary	
343
the Oregon legislature introduced a referendum that, if passed, 
would overturn the Oregon Death with Dignity Act. It failed, 
60 to 40 percent, and the Oregon bill remains state law.
Cardiac arrest  Cardiac arrest is the sudden, unexpected loss 
of heart function in a person. Each year, more than 420,000 
emergency cardiac arrests occur in the United States. It is the 
major medical reason for requests for 911 assistance. First 
responders such as emergency medical technicians are trained 
in CPR and other life-saving techniques that are applied at the 
scene of the event and in the ambulance bringing the victim to 
the nearest hospital emergency department.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation  Cardiopulmonary resus-
citation (CPR) is the initial emergency treatment for cardiac 
arrest. CPR is continuous compressions of the chest in order to 
keep blood flowing through the victim’s body and brain while 
delivering oxygen to the bloodstream. CPR is the first step in 
treating cardiac arrest until first responders arrive. The EMTs, 
once on scene, will move the patient from CPR to using a device 
called an electrical defibrillator to shock the heart in order to 
reestablish normal heart rhythms. In the past decade, techno-
logical innovations have led to the development of small, por-
table defibrillators; these new devices are becoming available in 
locations where there is heavy foot traffic so that when a person 
has a cardiac arrest, passersby—following instructions on the 
device—can rapidly assist in restoring a normal heart beat.
Case or controversy  This is a legal term found in Article III, 
Section 2, of the U.S. Constitution. In order for a federal court 
to consider whether to hear a case and reach a decision, there 
must be an actual dispute between the parties. If the contro-
versy has been resolved prior to a court examination of the legal 
issues, it is moot and will not be heard. No federal court will 
provide an advisory opinion. There must be actual injury pres-
ent in order for a court to note its jurisdiction to hear the case.
CAT scan  A CAT (computerized axial tomography) scan is a 
painless X-ray test in which a computer generates cross-section 
 

344	
Glossary
views of a segment of a patient’s anatomy that seems to be 
the cause of the medical problem. It can identify normal and 
abnormal structures, and it is used to provide important infor-
mation about the state of the patient’s health to the physician.
Certiorari  Certiorari is a written petition filed by a losing 
party with the U.S. Supreme Court asking the Court to review 
the decision of a lower federal or a state supreme court. The brief, 
prepared by lawyers, contains a statement of the facts of the case, 
the legal questions presented for review, and arguments as to 
why the Court should grant the writ and hear the case on the 
merits. Certiorari is a totally discretionary action of the Court. 
Most petitions (>95%) are denied. Generally, successful peti-
tions show that a “significant federal question” is presented in 
the case. A “vote of four” Justices is necessary to grant certiorari.
Death tourist  If a terminally ill person seeking to hasten his 
or her death lives in a state or country that legally prohibits 
physician assistance in dying, then the dying person can travel 
to a country or a state where medical assistance in dying is 
legal. Such a person is a “death tourist.”
Do not resuscitate order  A do not resuscitate (DNR) order 
is a medical order written by a doctor at the request of a patient 
being treated in a hospital. It instructs care givers not to do 
CPR or use a defibrillator if the patient’s breathing stops or if 
the patient’s heart stops beating. Any competent patient has 
a fundamental right to request the physician to write a DNR 
order.
Double effect  This is a medical term that states if a doctor 
does something morally good (treating a terminally ill patient 
with a sufficient amount of a pain medication) that has a mor-
ally bad side effect (the patient dies because the drug reduced 
pain but caused death), the physician’s action is ethical and not 
criminal so long as the bad side effect wasn’t intentional.
EEG  An electroencephalogram (EEG) is a test that detects 
electrical activity in the brain using small, flat metal discs (elec-
trodes) attached to the scalp. Brain cells communicate via elec-
trical impulses and are active all the time, even when a person is 

	
Glossary	
345
asleep. The EEG is a vital source of information for a physician 
treating an unconscious patient.
EMT  A person trained in the use of procedures required in 
emergency medical care, such as cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
and use of an electrical defibrillator before and during trans-
portation to a hospital. EMTs (emergency medical technicians) 
generally work with mobile emergency response teams, such as 
ambulance or fire and rescue teams. In America, a majority of 
EMT rescue operations are staffed by trained volunteers who 
reside in the town or city they serve.
En banc  When all the members of a federal U.S. Court of 
Appeals court hear an argument, they are sitting en banc. This 
Latin term refers to court sessions with the entire membership 
of the court participating rather than the typical federal three-
judge panel that initially hears petitions received by the courts. 
Permission to file a request for an en banc review is a discre-
tionary power of the federal appeals courts.
Eugenics  A “pseudo-science” extremely popular in America 
and Europe for a century (1850–1950), eugenics deals with the 
improvement of the hereditary qualities of new generations of 
citizens through tight control by the state. Central to the suc-
cess of this human breeding plan is the institutionalization or 
forced sterilization of all “unfit” persons.
Eugenics movement  This broad-based pseudo-science move-
ment seeks to influence the emergence of a superior class of 
citizens by barring immigration by members of ethnic groups 
whom eugenicists consider biologically inferior, as well as insti-
tuting forced sterilization programs to ensure that “imbeciles” 
and other unfit persons cannot reproduce inferior offspring. 
Between 1907 and 1937, 32 American states passed statutes 
requiring sterilization of “unfit, inferior” persons (criminals, 
imbeciles, feeble minded people, prostitutes, and other defec-
tive persons). In 1927, the U.S. Supreme Court validated the 
practice of eugenic sterilization. In Buck v. Bell, a case chal-
lenging Virginia’s Eugenical Sterilization Law, Carrie Buck was 
chosen to be sterilized because of her “feeblemindedness” and 

346	
Glossary
alleged sexual promiscuity. The judge ordered Carrie to be ster-
ilized to prevent her from giving birth to more “defective” chil-
dren. The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the judge’s order. Justice 
Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., wrote the opinion; it reflected the 
eugenics philosophy: “It is better for all the world, if instead 
of waiting to execute degenerate offspring for crime or to let 
them starve for their imbecility, society can prevent those who 
are manifestly unfit from continuing their kind. . . . Three gen-
erations of imbeciles are enough.” By the mid-1970s, nearly 
70,000 persons had been sterilized by the states.
Euthanasia  Euthanasia is the practice of a physician inten-
tionally and directly ending a patient’s life in order to relieve 
pain and suffering, with the assent of the patient. The word 
euthanasia comes from the Greek—“eu,” goodly or well, and 
“thanatos,” death, meaning the good death.
Extraordinary means  Extraordinary means are ways of pre-
serving human life that cannot be obtained or used without 
extreme difficulty in terms of pain, expense, or other burden-
ing factors. Extraordinary means to save a life includes use of 
a ventilator, dialysis machine to regularly cleanse the patient’s 
blood, chemotherapy, use of experimental drugs, and risky 
surgery. In addition, medical efforts to save a patient’s life are 
considered extraordinary if, when used, they do not offer a rea-
sonable hope of benefit to the one receiving such extraordinary 
treatment. For many religions (e.g., Roman Catholicism) there 
is no general moral obligation to use extraordinary means to 
keep a person alive, on the premise that God does not exact 
what is beyond the ordinary power of humans in general to 
provide.
Fallibilism  Fallibilism is a social theory that no belief (the-
ory, view, or thesis) can ever be rationally supported or justified 
in a conclusive way. There always remains a possibility that the 
belief could be proven to be false.
Fundamental rights  Fundamental rights are a group of 
inalienable rights that have been recognized by various U.S. 

	
Glossary	
347
Supreme Court majorities over the centuries and that must be 
afforded protection from government encroachment. These 
rights are specifically identified in the Constitution (especially 
in the Bill of Rights) or have been found in judicial interpre-
tations of the Constitution’s due process clause. Examples of 
fundamental rights not specifically listed in the Constitution 
include the right to marry and the right to privacy, which 
includes a right to contraception, the right to interstate travel, 
and a woman’s right to choose to have an abortion.
Hippocratic oath  This is one of the oldest standards of 
professional behavior in medical history. Written in antiq-
uity, its principles are revered by doctors to this day: treat the 
sick to the best of one’s ability, preserve patient privacy, teach 
medicine to the next generation, and, its most famous axiom, 
“do no harm.” The American Medical Association’s Code 
of Medical Ethics proclaims that the oath “has remained in 
Western civilization as an expression of ideal conduct for the 
physician.”
Hospice care  Hospice care is palliative care at the end of a 
terminally ill patient’s life. Hospice care is a choice of a termi-
nally ill patient when medicine cannot provide a cure for the 
illness; its sole purpose is to provide quality comfort care for 
the dying patient. The first hospice care program was intro-
duced in Connecticut in the mid-1980s. In 2016, nearly half 
of all terminally ill patients are under hospice care; most of 
them are cared for in their homes.
Intermediate scrutiny test  Intermediate scrutiny is a test 
used by judges in state and federal courts in order to deter-
mine a law’s constitutionality. To pass intermediate scrutiny, 
the challenged law must be found by the reviewing court to 
further an important government interest by means that are 
substantially related to that interest. As the name implies, 
intermediate scrutiny is less rigorous than the strict scrutiny 
test but more rigorous than the rational basis test employed by 

348	
Glossary
a court to determine whether the challenged statute or regula-
tion is constitutional.
Involuntary euthanasia  This is when a physician or another 
medical technician takes the life of a person who is not termi-
nally ill. It is involuntary because the person has not requested 
death and would not want to die.
Jim Crow laws  These laws were state and local regula-
tions enforcing racial segregation, primarily in the American 
South, after the Civil War ended in 1865. They continued in 
force until the mid-1960s when the 1964 Civil Rights Act 
was passed. These de jure—state ordered—laws segregated 
all persons, from birth to death, on the basis of race. By the 
1940s Jim Crow legislation had created two societies, black 
and white, separate and unequal. The U.S. Supreme Court in 
Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) had concluded that the Constitution 
did not forbid the establishment of “separate but equal” facili-
ties (schools, hospitals, cemeteries, and all other social interac-
tions) for blacks and whites. In Brown v. Board of Education 
(1954), another U.S. Supreme Court decision, the Justices 
unanimously overturned the Plessy precedent. That decision 
was the beginning of the end of Jim Crowism and de jure racial 
discrimination.
Liberty interest  Liberty interest, also referred to as funda-
mental rights, is a shorthand phrase encapsulating all persons’ 
rights of individual liberty and autonomy as well as the right of 
privacy. In the American constitutional system, the people have
•	 the right to purchase and use birth control,
•	 the right to marry and the right to procreate,
•	 the right to custody of one’s own children and to raise them 
as one sees fit,
•	 the right to refuse medical treatment,
•	 the right to freedom of speech,
•	 the right to travel freely among the states,

	
Glossary	
349
•	 the right the vote,
•	 the right to freedom of association,
•	 the right to freedom of religion.
These rights cannot be denied or abridged unless the govern-
ment can show, in a court, that it is necessary for the govern-
ment to achieve some compelling state objective. However, 
if the government action is challenged in the U.S. Supreme 
Court, the justices employ the most severe analysis—the “strict 
scrutiny” test—to determine whether the deprivation of a per-
son’s liberty interest serves a compelling state interest.
Medical futility movement  In the 1990s, a small number 
of physicians, frustrated because of the profession’s excessive 
commitment to using new innovative medical technology to 
save lives, using the latest powerful drugs to cure an incurable 
illness, or performing a lengthy surgical procedure, joined to 
protest these “futile” attempts to save their dying patients. They 
saw that many of these “cutting-edge” efforts did not extend the 
patient’s life and left the patient in even greater pain and suf-
fering than before the treatment. These critics are members of 
the medical futility movement. These physicians wrote articles 
in medical journals and essays in news magazines and spoke 
out in a variety of public gatherings about the importance of a 
physician going from curing a dying patient to caring for that 
person. Instead of trying to cure all their patients, physicians 
must qualitatively assess whether the patient should be sub-
jected to yet another procedure if there is little likelihood for a 
meaningful existence after the procedure is concluded.
Medicalization of death  In the second half of the 20th cen-
tury, because of the exponential increase of new medical theo-
ries about postponing death, the invention of new mechanical 
devices that sustained life, and the discovery of new wonder 
drugs and new surgical strategies to attack cancer and other 
deadly diseases, medical professionals became the very center 
of the death experience.

350	
Glossary
The “medicalization of death” reflects the change from dying 
at a private, communal event managed by the patient, family, 
and clergy in the home to, after the 1950s, an event primarily 
involving the aggressive actions of doctors and other medical 
personnel in hospitals utilizing the latest medical technologies 
to forestall death because they can. The sole goal of the medi-
calization of death philosophy was to rid the patient of the 
medical problem, to cure the patient. There was not much con-
cern for caring for the patients, nor does this practice address 
the consequence of doctors’ aggressive attempts to cure: the 
poor quality of life—enhanced pain and suffering—the patient 
must live with after the surgery.
“Merciful death”  Merciful death or good death are two terms 
used to describe voluntary euthanasia. It is the action of a phy-
sician putting a terminally ill patient to death painlessly.
MRI  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is one of numer-
ous significant medical/technological innovations developed in 
the past few decades that physicians now rely on to signifi-
cantly improve their diagnostic methods when treating their 
patients. The MRI is a technique that uses a magnetic field 
and radio waves to create detailed images of the organs and 
tissues within the patient’s body. Use of such devices has led 
to longer lives for many patients. The other side of the coin is 
the dark side of 21st-century medical innovation: Using MRI, 
CAT, and other diagnostic equipment provides a doctor with 
information that allows a more accurate prognosis, but many 
patients who live longer no longer have the quality of life they 
experienced before the onset of the illness.
Oath of Medical Ethics  Physicians, like many other pro-
fessionals, generally are members of an organization that rep-
resents them in the social and political arenas. For doctors, 
the oldest such association is the American Medical Asso-
ciation (AMA), created in the middle of the 19th century, 
which remains the largest medical association in the nation. 
It provides the medical community with a variety of benefits 

	
Glossary	
351
that improve the quality of care they provide to their patients. 
Through the auspices of the AMA, members share informa-
tion about medical practice. Regular public meetings are held, 
and The Journal of the American Medical Association, JAMA, 
provides physicians with the latest research findings about 
treating illness. Equally important, the AMA, like all other 
professional associations, has established—with modifica-
tions made from time to time—a set of normative standards 
that lay out the character of doctor-patient interactions. Criti-
cally important in this litany of ethical principles is the physi-
cian’s responsibility to care for the patient. The AMA’s Oath 
of Medical Ethics is the profession’s repository of standards of 
conduct that call for all physicians to “do no harm” to their 
patients.
Originalism  This theory, held by a small number of Supreme 
Court justices, is that the U.S. Constitution should be inter-
preted based on the “original intent” of its creators. U.S. 
Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia was a foremost defender 
of the theory. He said: “It is essential to originalism, as it is 
not to so-called ‘evolutionary constitutional jurisprudence,’ to 
know the original meaning of constitutional provisions.” An 
originalist jurist will determine the constitutionality of a law 
based on this assessment of the original meaning.
Palliative care  Palliative care focuses on relieving a patient’s 
pain and suffering, often triggered by a chronic illness, that 
adversely affects the patient’s quality of life. Palliative care is a 
relatively new medical subspecialty; the earliest palliative care 
hospital wings were created in the late 1980s, to care for patients 
suffering grievously from illness. Palliative care is available to all 
patients suffering and in need of medical care that alleviates the 
pain. Qualitative care is the hallmark of palliative care.
Palliative medicine subspecialty  Palliative medicine is a new 
medical subspecialty that employs an interdisciplinary team of 
health care workers (physicians, nurses, medical technicians, 
social workers, and psychologists) practicing patient-centered 

352	
Glossary
care. Such care requires qualitatively addressing the patient’s 
physical, emotional, and spiritual needs.
Palliative sedation  The primary intent of palliative sedation 
is to relieve a conscious patient’s pain and suffering by admin-
istering a sedative such as morphine. This treatment leads to a 
significant reduction of pain, decreased awareness, or uncon-
sciousness. Unlike terminal sedation, palliative sedation is not 
meant to take the patient’s life.
Petitioner  In litigation in any state or federal court, the per-
son presenting a petition to a court to appeal a lower court 
decision is called a petitioner. The opponent in such a proceed-
ing is known as the respondent.
PVS  A person who, because of catastrophic traumatic event, 
is deprived of oxygen to the brain for more than six to eight 
minutes and remains unconscious for one month is in a per-
sistent vegetative state. After a year in this medical condition, 
the patient is considered to be in a permanent vegetative state 
(PVS). A patient in a PVS has no awareness of the environment, 
nor is there any evidence of purposeful, voluntary behavioral 
reactions to noises, people, smells, and touch. Furthermore, 
when a person is in a PVS, there is no language comprehen-
sion, and the patient lacks the ability to engage in conversation. 
Families of patients in PVS have petitioned state courts to allow 
attending physicians to withdraw all artificial medical devices 
that keep the unconscious person alive. Quinlan (1976) was 
the first case to appear in any American court that addressed 
the right to die. Since then, other PVS litigation has been heard 
in a number of state courts. In 1990, the U.S. Supreme Court 
entered the discussion regarding the right to die in Cruzan v. 
Director, Missouri Department of Health.
Rational basis test for constitutionality  The “rational basis” 
test is used by state and federal judges to determine whether 
a law is constitutional. It is the lowest of three tests created 
and applied by a court to decide a case. (The other two levels 
are “strict scrutiny” and “intermediate scrutiny.”) The rational 

	
Glossary	
353
basis test is employed by a court when there are no fundamen-
tal rights allegedly abridged by the law. To pass such a test, the 
court must conclude that the law has a “reasonable, rational 
relationship” to a legitimate government interest.
Sanctity of life  The principle of the “sanctity of life” is at the 
very heart of all groups—religious, conservative, disabled, bio-
ethicists—opposed to physician-assisted death and euthanasia. 
According to this principle, human beings are the stewards of 
their physical bodies and souls, but God is the creator; only 
God can terminate the life of a human being. Humans must 
do all they can to preserve the sanctity of life. Abortion, physi-
cian-assisted death, and euthanasia are actions that are seen as 
immoral, unholy, and criminal.
Slippery slope  As employed by opponents of PAD and 
euthanasia, the slippery slope argument is that once such an 
assisted death law is passed by a legislature, there will inevitably 
be incremental exceptions and interpretations to the law that 
broaden the scope of such legislation without much reasoned 
debate or further political actions. Thus, opponents argue that 
PAD laws will be extended to cover a situation where a termi-
nally ill quadriplegic patient, unable to self-medicate to hasten 
death, will be helped by a family member or a medical pro-
fessional. This may be followed by extending PAD to allow 
patients with a terminal disease (Parkinson’s, cancer, etc.) but 
who under the original PAD legislation are not terminal (death 
within six months) to receive medication they may use to take 
their life. Finally, there is the slide from an expanded PAD sys-
tem to euthanasia. Initially, it is voluntary euthanasia, where a 
patient requests a physician to terminate life; then it will slide 
down into the monstrous practice of involuntary euthanasia, 
where the state orders forced euthanasia of persons determined 
to be unworthy of life.
State police powers  State-level police powers are granted by 
the Tenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. A state uses 
its police powers to pass laws to benefit, preserve, and protect 

354	
Glossary
the safety, health, welfare, and morals of all people within its 
territory. When there is a clash between a state law and federal 
powers, that use of state power can be challenged, often by 
arguing that the Fourteenth Amendment prohibits state laws 
that deprive people of “the equal protection of the law.”
Strict scrutiny test for constitutionality  Strict scrutiny is 
a test used by courts to determine the constitutionality of cer-
tain laws or governmental actions. The test is employed when a 
petitioner claims that a law has either abridged a fundamental 
right (such as freedom of speech) or adversely impacted mem-
bers of a suspect class (i.e., racial and ethnic) protected by the 
Constitution. The government’s lawyers must show that the 
law was passed to further a “compelling governmental inter-
est” and that it was “narrowly tailored” to “achieve that gov-
ernmental interest.” If the court determines that the state has 
not shown a compelling interest or the law was not narrowly 
tailored, the law is declared unconstitutional.
Sunset provision  A sunset provision in a law states that the 
law will no longer be valid after a specific date, unless further 
legislative action is taken to extend the law.
Terminal illness  A terminal illness is an irreversible illness 
for which there is no cure and generally leads to death within 
six months. All medical prognoses about how much time a 
patient has before death, however, are estimates and are often 
inaccurate.
Terminal sedation  Terminal sedation is a treatment (usually 
with a pain relief medication such as morphine) administered 
by a physician that places a terminally ill patient into a state 
of unconsciousness until death. In this state, the dying patient 
does not perceive the pain brought on by the fatal illness.
Voluntary active euthanasia  Voluntary active euthanasia 
occurs when a physician intentionally administers medications 
to hasten a patient’s death at the patient’s request and with full, 
informed consent by the terminally ill person.

	
Glossary	
355
Wink and nod  Occasionally, doctors and nurses convey 
unwritten instructions and agreement about how to treat a 
dying patient in great pain. The “wink and nod” is a set of ver-
bal signals between a physician and a nurse to suggest (and con-
firm) a medical action (“make sure you don’t give the patient 
too much morphine”) that will hasten the patient’s death. 
Because the ensuing medical action may be considered con-
troversial or a violation of medical ethics (as well as a violation 
of criminal laws), the “wink and nod” leaves no formal record 
that can be used to criminally charge, discharge, or decertify 
the medical staff involved.


357
Index
Act Concerning the 
Administration of Drugs, 
etc. to Mortally Injured 
and Diseased Persons, 
9–10
advanced directive, 48
impact of lack of, in PVS 
cases, 61
Affordable Care Act, 129
African Americans, 40
discrimination of, in health 
care, 31–43
fear of PAD by, 41
seen as second-class citi-
zens, 42
used as guinea pigs, 
 41–42
aid in dying, definition of, 
93, 94
American Association of 
Progressive Medicine, 12
American Civil Liberties 
Union (ACLU) of New 
Mexico, 118–119
American College of Legal 
Medicine, 27
American Geriatrics 
Association (AGA), 35
opposition to PAD, 35–36, 
42–43
American Geriatrics 
Association, view of PAD’s 
impact on doctors by, 43
American Medical Association 
(AMA), 11–12
code of medical ethics and, 
35
Hippocratic Oath and, 35
mission of, 38
opposition to PAD, 6, 
38–39, 97–98, 105–106, 
106–108, 110
political role of, 38
American Medical Student 
Association, 27
American Medical Women’s 
Association, 27
American Nurses Association 
(ANA), 38–39
code of ethics of, 38–39
commitment of, to hospice, 
39

358	
Index
American Pharmacists 
Association, 27
American Psychological 
Association (APA), 20
Americans for Death with 
Dignity, 110
amicus curiae briefs in 1997 
PAD cases, 87–88
as applied challenge to 
statute, 90–91
not used in 1997 PAD 
cases, 89–91, passim
Aquinas, St. Thomas, 31–32. 
See also double effect
Ashcroft, John
appointed attorney general 
in 2001, 99
post-Cruzan actions of, 73
See also Cruzan v. Director, 
Missouri Department of 
Health
Ashcroft Directive, 99–101, 
257–258
challenged in federal 
courts, 100–102
opposed by AMA, 99
Ashcroft v. Oregon (Gonzales v. 
Oregon), 100–102
opposition of, to PAD, 98
Supreme Court and, 101
Assisted Suicide Prevention 
Act, 2006 (ASPA), 
101–102
assisting suicide, 13
data, 2015, 239–240
state prohibiting, 13
Auer v. Robbins, 1997, 102
autonomous person’s liberty 
interest, PAD supporters’ 
basic argument, 59–60
ballot initiative, 342–343
Baxter v. Montana, 2009, 
116–118
petitioner’s claim, 116–117
Bell, Alexander Graham, 8
Bill for an Act Requiring 
Physicians to Take 
Human Life, 1906, 
(Iowa), 9–10
Blackmun, Harry A., 58–59
fear of, overturn of Roe, 86
See also Roe v. Wade
Bohjalian, Chris, 15
Brandenberg, Kari, 119
Breyer, Stephen (U.S. 
Supreme Court 
justice), 85, 91. See also 
Washington v. Glucksburg
Brown, Jerry, 22, 113
and special 2015 ­summer 
legislative session, 
113–114
End of Life Options 
Act, 2015 letter of, 
­supporting, 266
personal issues of, 114–115
Brown, Theresa, 16
Brown v. Board of  
Education of Topeka, 
Kansas, 1954, 9
Brownback, Sam, 101–102

	
Index	
359
Buck v. Bell, 1927, 8–9. See 
also eugenics movement; 
Holmes, Oliver W.
Bush, George W. (U.S. 
president), 73, 85, 99
role of, in Cruzan, 79–80
Schiavo signing statement, 
2005, 260
California Catholic 
Conference, 111
anger of, at governor, 114
referendum drive of, fails, 
115
California Death with 
Dignity Act, Ballot 
Proposition 191, 94
euthanasia and PAD 
­allowed in, 94
California Death with 
Dignity National Center, 
110
California End of Life 
Options Act (EOLOA), 
2015, 109–115
California Medical 
Association, 111
officially neutral on PAD, 
position of, 112
California Natural Death 
Act, 1976, 109–110
Californians against assisted 
suicide, 110
makeup of, 111
California’s religious 
demographics, 110, 111
cancer, impact of 
chemotherapy on, 17
Carter et al. v. Canada 
(Attorney General), 2015, 
138–139
Carter, Jimmy (U.S. 
president), 81, 82
chronic illnesses, 3–4
reasons for emergence of, 
2–3
Civil Rights Act (1964), 13
clear and convincing evidence 
standard, 70
in Cruzan, 70–71
in post-Cruzan litigation, 72
reasonableness of, 71–72
Clinton, Bill (U.S. 
president), 85
veto threat of, of PRPA, 99
Coalition against Assisted 
Suicide (Washington), 
104–105
Not Dead Yet in, 104
Compassion and Choices, 
28, 102, 110, 118–119
Derek Humphry and, 28
mission of, 29
participation of, in Baxter, 
116–118
Compassion in Dying v. State 
of Washington (1996), 27, 
82
conference sessions, in 
Supreme Court, 89–90
votes and opinion 
­assignment in, 89–90

360	
Index
Connecticut Hospice, 18
Controlled Substance Act, 
(CSA), 1972, “legitimate 
medical practice” in, 98
Cruzan, Nancy, grave marker 
of, 73
Cruzan v. Director, Missouri 
Department of Health, 61
ends distinction 
­between ordinary and 
­extraordinary, 68
division on court in, 71–73
facts in, 69–74
heard by U.S. Supreme 
Court, 68–73
Scalia concurrence in, 72
Darwin, Charles, 8
death
data on, 1850–2015, 238
depictions of, in books and 
film, 48–49
at home, 6
medical error causing, 4
top causes of, 2–3
See also medicalization of 
death
Death Tourist, 33
Death with Dignity National 
Center, 29, 102, 103
mission of, 30
work with Patient Choices 
Vermont,	 107–109
Death with Dignity Vermont 
(Patient Choices 
Vermont), 106–107
mission of, 106
Dellinger, Walter, 88
Dignitas Clinic, Switzerland, 
138
doctor-patient relationship, 
4, 141–142
in 19th century, 4
in 20th and 21st centuries, 
4–5
double effect, 31–32. See also 
Aquinas, St. Thomas
Douglas, Jim H., opposed 
PAD, 107–108
en banc, in Compassion in 
Dying and Vacco, 82, 84
End of Life Choices New 
York, 135
End of Life Options Act 
(California), 2016, 
113–115
eugenics movement, 8, 
345–346
forced sterilization and, 8
popularity of, 10
Progressive Era and, 8
eugenics, 7
euthanasia and, 9
science of, 8
selective breeding and, 8
sterilization laws and, 9
euthanasia, 1, 6
bills, 5–7
clashes over, 7
rejected in Quinlan, 63
Euthanasia Prevention 
Coalition (New Mexico), 
120–121

	
Index	
361
facial challenge to statute, 
90–91
basis of 1997 PAD 
­decisions, 89–92
fallibilism, 34
federal courts, rebuffs by, of 
political efforts to destroy 
PAD, 97–99
Finn, Michele, 67
Ford, Gerald (U.S. 
president), 85
Francis (pope), 34
Gallup Poll, 2014 survey of 
least and most religious 
states, 105–106
Galton, Francis, 8
Garcia, Tom, 121–122
Glucksburg precedent used 
by, 122–123
Gardner, Booth, impact of, 
on passage of WDWDA, 
104–105
Gilmore, James III, 67
Ginsberg, Ruth Bader (U.S. 
Supreme Court justice), 85
wink and nod concern of, 
88–89
See also Washington v. 
Glucksburg
Gonzales, Alberto, 101
Gonzales v. Oregon, 2006, 
100–102
dissents, 102
reasons for Supreme  
Court decision in, 
101–102
Hanisee, Miles, 121–122
Hatch, Orrin, opposition of, 
to PAD, 98
Hawkins, Stephen, 46–47
views of PAD by, 47
health care system problems, 
141–144
discrimination against 
­vulnerable groups, 143–144
earlier application of 
­palliative care, 142
empathy and compassion 
needed, 144
lack of critical care doctors, 
142
lack of hospice facilities, 
142–143
national budgetary shift 
needed, 143
policy change needed 
­regarding, 143
political polarization and, 
143
resolution of, 143–44
train doctors to talk about 
death, 141
Hemlock Society, 25, 93, 
110. See also Humphry, 
Derek
Hippocratic Oath, 6
disregard of, by Greek  
and Roman doctors,  
6–7
See also American Medical 
Association
Hobbes, Thomas, 145
Hoff, Phil, 107

362	
Index
Holmes, Oliver W. (U.S. 
Supreme Court justice), 
8. See also Buck v. Bell; 
eugenics movement
hospice care, 17, 31–32, 
125–126
alternative to PAD, 33
in America, 18
history of, 17–18
mission of, 18
Hoss, Frank A., 66, 68
Huff, Bob, 11
Humphry, Derek, 25, 93
euthanasia advocates, 96
Hyde, Henry, opposition of, 
to PAD, 98
In Re Quinlan, 1976, 18–19, 
61
Catholic dogma in, 64
impact of, on PAD 
­developments, 62–65
as milestone in right to die 
issue, 65
rights of personality in, 63
See also permanent 
­vegetative state
In Re Terri Schiavo, 2005, 60, 
61, 75
history of, 76–80
litigation in, 77
political use of, by 
­Republicans, 79–80
resurgence of Catholic 
Church’s attack on PAD 
after, 79
industrial society, 3
brutality of, 6
health of persons in, 3
Iowa Euthanasia Bill  
(1906), 9
press coverage of, 12
radical features of, 10
James Gilmore III v. Hugh 
Finn, 1996, 61, 65–68
separation of powers issue 
in, 68
Jones, Robert, 100
Journal of the American 
Medical Association 
(JAMA), 23
“It’s Over Debbie” essay in, 
23–24
judges generally defer to 
judgment of political 
branches, 74
Kennedy, Anthony (U.S. 
Supreme Court justice), 
24, 85
concern of, increased 
­caseload if PAD affirmed, 
89
majority opinion of, in 
Obergefell, 122–123
Kennedy, John F. (U.S. 
president), 13–14
Kevorkian, Dr. Jack, 24
as Dr. Death, 24–25
King, Gary, 120–122
Kunin, Madeleine, 107

	
Index	
363
Lethal Drug Abuse and 
Prevention Act (LDAPA), 
1998, 98
Liberty Interest, 348–349
Manhgalik, Dr. Aroop, 118
Martinez, Mel, 79
Maynard, Britany, 49
death of, 111
“Farewell” Facebook letter, 
2014, 265
impact of, on passage of 
CEOLOA, 109, 113, 115
McCarter, Dorothy 116
medical futility movement, 15
medicalization of death, 2, 
14, 16
essential premise of, 16
medical failure and, 15
reflects changes in dying, 
14
mercy killing, 1. See also 
euthanasia
Missouri Citizens for Life, 73
Missouri “living will” statute, 
69–70
Montana Constitution, 22
Montana Rights of the 
Terminally Ill Act, 1985, 
117
Montana Supreme Court, 
116
morphine, 6. See also 
physician assistance in 
dying
Morris, Dr. Katherine, 118
Morris v. Bradenberg, 2014, 
120–121
Morris v. King, 2014, 121
pressure groups’ briefs, 
121–122
lower court decision 
­reversed, 121–123
Morris v. New Mexico,  
2014–2016, 118–124
Myers v. Schneiderman (NY), 
2016, 124
Nash, Nan G., 119–120
New England Journal of 
Medicine (NEJM), 26
publication of controversial 
PAD essay, 26–27
New Jersey Supreme Court, 
63
New Mexico Conference  
of Catholic Bishops,  
120
call for appeal by, 120–121
New Mexico Psychological 
Association, 119
New Mexico Supreme Court, 
Morris v. King decision, 
124
Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of 
Appeals, 80–83
three-judge panel of, in 
Glucksberg, 80–81
Nitschke, Philip, 25
creates Final Exit, 25
Nixon, Richard M. (U.S. 
president), 85

364	
Index
Not Dead Yet, 43–46
amicus curiae briefs filed, 
100, 105, 107, 114–115
umbrella organization for 
disabled, 44
Obama, Barack (U.S. 
president), 86
Obergefell v. Hodges, 2015, 
122–124
dissents in, 123
as precedent for New ­Mexico 
judge Vanzi, 122–123
O’Connor, Sandra Day (U.S. 
Supreme Court justice), 
73, 85
concern of, increased 
­caseload if PAD OK’d,  
89
federalism, 74
saves Roe in Webster vote, 
86
view of states as 
­laboratories, 73
Ohio Euthanasia Bill (1906), 
9
O’Neill, Tip, 92
Operation Rescue, 77
oral argument, guidelines for, 
87
in Vacco and Glucksburg, 
87–89
Oregon Death with Dignity 
Act, 21–22
history of (1994–2006), 
96–102, 110
patient data, 1998–2014, 
244–251
success of, reasons for, 
96–97
summary of, 252–254
Oregon demographics, 
96–97
most unchurched state,  
96
Oregon voters
characteristics of, 96–97
dislike of, about religious 
pressure on legislators, 97
Orr, Dr. Robert, 107, 109
physician assistance in dying 
(PAD)
advocates for, 2, 23–30
alternatives where, illegal, 
30–33
arguments against, 33–36
balance of, between police 
powers and individual 
liberty, 93–94
in Canada, 138–140
Canadian Charter of the 
Rights and Freedoms 
and, 139–140
“catch–22” and, 44–45
Congress and agencies 
used, in an attempt to 
defeat, 97–100
early defeats, 94–96
medical opposition to, 
37–39
opposition to, 2, 33–47

	
Index	
365
opposition’s fear, 95–96
public opinion polls and, 
49
PVS cases’ impact on,  
19
reasons for choosing, 
19–23
Roman Catholic Church 
and, 37
unsolvable core problem of, 
144–145
victories, reasons for, 
102–103
voluntary euthanasia and, 
20
vulnerable groups opposed 
to, 39–47
watershed year for, 75
Pain Relief Promotion Act 
(PRPA), 1999, 98–99
palliative care, 17
alternative to PAD, 33
basic mission of, 18
palliative sedation, 32
Paul, John, II (pope), 77–78
view of PVS patients by, 78
permanent vegetative state 
(PVS)
basic facts in, 61, 65
cardio pulmonary 
­resuscitation and, 60
cases, 60
causes of, 60–61
contractions in, 69
emergency medical 
­technicians and, 60
litigation in state and 
­federal courts, 60–80
twilight existence,  
60–61
personal autonomy standard, 
7
Pew Research Center, 36
Pius XII (pope), 64
extraordinary and ­ordinary 
means to save lives, 
64–65
Planned Parenthood of 
Southeastern Pennsylvania 
v. Carey, 1992, 59, 145
plaintiffs use of, as 
­precedent, 59–60, 97, 
107, 114, 116, 119
Priests for Life, 77
public health service agencies, 
3
Quill, Timothy, 26
PAD as last option, 26
See also Vacco v. Quill
Quinlan, Karen Ann, as 
“sleeping beauty,” 65
“rational basis” standard, 74
Reagan, Ronald (U.S. 
president), 85, 91–92
Rehnquist, William H., 5
history and traditions of 
nation in and Vacco and 	
Washington, 88–91
writes both majority 
­opinions, 90

366	
Index
Reinhardt, Stephen, 81–82
Reno, Janet, CSA decision of, 
254–256
reverses 1997 DEA “stop” 
order, 98
right of privacy, 58–59
right to die, national battles 
over, 58
and abortion battles to, 58, 
59
begins in courts, 59
Roberts, Barbara, 105
Rockefeller, John D., 8
Rodrigues v. British Columbia, 
1994 (Canada), 138–139
Roe v. Wade, 1973, 58, 61
impact of, in PAD 
­litigation, 61–62
threat of overturn of, 86
Roman Catholic Church, 11, 
77, 96
primary political opponent 
of PAD, 36–37, 60–63, 
94–95, 104–105, 106–
108, 110–114
slippery slope fears and, 95
See also Francis (pope); 
Paul, John, II (pope)
Roosevelt, Theodore (U.S. 
president), 8
sanctity of life principle, 7, 
34, 65, 78
cornerstone of PAD 
­opposition, 65–66
Saunders, Dame Cicely, 18. 
See also hospice care
Scalia, Antonin, 85
condemns of Obergefell 
­majority, 123
philosophical	questions 
raised by, 88–91
Shumlin, Peter, 109
slippery slope, 36
dreaded fear of, 95
impact of, on disabled, 104
and involuntary euthanasia, 
95
Snelling, Barbara, 107
Souter, David (U.S. Supreme 
Court justice), 85, 92
slippery slope, major 
­concern of, 88–91
See also Washington v. 
Glucksburg
St. Christopher’s Hospice, 
London, 18
state standards in PVS cases, 75
state Supreme courts, enter 
PAD politics, 116–124
sterilization of persons, 8
Stevens, John Paul (U.S. 
Supreme Court justice), 
85
“strict scrutiny” standard, 74
fundamental rights 
­protected by, 74–75
Stutsman, Eli, help of, in 
drafting Vermont PAD 
bills, 107–109. See also 
Compassion and Choices
Tada, Joni Eareckson, 
126–127

	
Index	
367
Tallman, Richard, 100
terminal sedation, 32
Terri’s Law Bills, 79
Congress, 79–80
Florida, 79
unconstitutionality  
of, 79
Thomas, Cal, 75
Thomas, Clarence (U.S. 
Supreme Court justice), 
85
three-judge U.S. Court of 
Appeals panels, 81–82
Tribe, Laurence, 88
double effect discussed by, 
89
Trudeau, Justin, 140
Tucker, Kathleen L., 88
Tutu, Desmond, 115
unresolved PAD problems, 
125–14O
attitudinal changes in 
MDs, 127–128
general mistrust of public 
health care system,  
133
high prescription drug 
costs, 127
inadequacy of health care, 
127
interpretations of Consti-
tution by opposition, 
135–136
misdiagnosis, 131–132
quadriplegics dilemma,  
137
semantic: suicide/dying, 
134–135
shortage of palliative care 
physicians, 127
terminal/”terminal,” 
136–138
unequal treatment, 
133–134
“wink and nod” but no 
transparency, 134
unsuccessful state efforts to 
pass PAD, 102–103
U.S. Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, 
4
U.S. Civil Rights 
Commission, 40
U.S. Constitution, 13
equal protection clause in, 
87
and PAD, 87
Fourteenth Amendment, 
20–21, 58–59
fundamental rights in, 
13–14
U.S. Drug Enforcement 
Agency (DEA), use of,  
to destroy ODWDA,  
98–100. See also  
Ashcroft, John; Reno, 
Janet
U.S. Patient Self-
Determination Act, 48
U.S. Supreme Court, 59–60, 
68
grants certiori in Glucksberg 
and Vacco, 82–83, 84

368	
Index
“rear view mirror”	
of, 
136
U.S. Supreme Court justices, 
lawyers aware of views 
of, 86
political backgrounds of, 
85
relationship	 of, to 
­president’s party, 86
U.S. v. Salerno, 1987, 90
Vacco and Glucksburg 
opinions (six), 89–92
Vacco v. Quill, 1997, 32, 59, 
80
in court of appeals,  
83–84
litigation history of, 80–92
Vanzi, Linda, dissent in 
Morris v. King, 121–124
Vermont groups opposing 
PAD, 107–108
Vermont Patient Choice and 
Control at End of Life 
Act, 2013, 105–109
Vermont residents, 
demographic picture of, 
106, 108
town meetings and, 107
Virginia Department of 
Medical Assistance 
Services, 66–67
Voting Rights Act (1965),  
13
vulnerable groups, 39–47
barriers placed against, 
46–47
discrimination in health 
care experienced by, 
40–41
identity of, 39–43
perception of physicians by, 
45–46.
Wald, Florence, 18. See also 
hospice care; Saunders, 
Dame Cicely
Washington Death with 
Dignity Act, (WDWDA), 
Ballot Measure I–1000, 
2008, 104–105
vitriolic battle over, 105
See also Gardner, Booth
Washington Initiative, Ballot 
119 (1991), 93
Washington v. Glucksberg, 
1997, 59–60, 80
litigation history of,  
80–92
Webster v. Reproductive  
Health Services, 1989, 86. 
See also Blackmun,  
Harry A.
Weill Cornell Medical 
College, 17
Williams, Samuel, 6–7
impact of, on PAD,  
7–8

About the Author
Howard Ball (BA, Hunter College, CUNY, 1960; MA, PhD, 
Rutgers University, 1970) is a political scientist with a special-
ization in constitutional law, the federal judiciary, civil rights, 
and the international community’s responses to war crimes, 
crimes against humanity, and genocide. Since 1965, he has 
taught full-time at Hofstra University, Mississippi State Uni-
versity, the University of Utah (Dean, SBS), and the University 
of Vermont (Dean, A&S). In addition, he has taught at SUNY 
Stony Brook, Dartmouth College, Vermont Law School, Sofia 
(Bulgaria) Law School (Fulbright), and Szeged University, 
Hungary (Fulbright). He is the author of over three dozen 
books (for ABC-CLIO, Oxford University Press, NYU Press, 
Random House, and other university presses) about Ameri-
can public policy, judicial biographies (Justices Hugo Black, 
William O. Douglas, Thurgood Marshall), the U.S. Supreme 
Court, and the prosecution of war crimes and genocide. He 
grew up in the Bronx and has lived in Vermont for the past 
25 years. He has been married to Carol for 53 years, has three 
daughters (Sue, Sheryl, and Melissa) and three grand-kids 
(Lila, Nate, and Sophie), three horses, and two dogs. His next 
research project will examine the history, politics, and legal 
issues associated with the nativist movement (“America First”) 
in America since 1789.

