
“As a sports and performance psychologist who promotes the positive use
of persuasion and influence to turn people into extraordinary performers,
I always urge clients to read Kevin Hogan’s material. His new book, The
Science of Influence, will now be at the top of the required reading list for all
my sales training and coaching clients. Hogan has outdone himself this
time.This is a must-read for everyone who wants to be more successful.”
—Richard F. Gerson, Ph.D., CPC, CPT, CMC
Author of 19 books, including
HEADcoaching: Mental Training for Peak
Performance and Winning the Inner Game 
of Selling
“Whether it is in the boardroom, on the golf course, or across the dinner
table, we all struggle to unlearn bad habits, put to rest unfounded fears, and
effect positive change. Kevin Hogan offers us a simple but powerful way to
shape behaviors, responses, and performance—both our own and those of
others.”
—Linda Parker
Educator and author of The FabJob Guide to
Become a Professional Golfer
“A cornucopia of research-proven tips, techniques, and resources to help
you unlock the key to your prospect’s mind and elicit a positive response.
Easier, faster, and more effective for those in business than an advanced
degree in psychology!”
—Roger C. Parker
Author, coach, consultant


THESCIENCE
OFINFLUENCE
How to Get Anyone
to Say “Yes” in 8
Minutes or Less!
Kevin Hogan
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2005 by Kevin Hogan.All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning,
or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or
authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400,
fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for
permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty:While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with
respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically
disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No
warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials.
The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation.The
publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services, and you should consult a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss
of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services please contact our Customer
Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at 
(317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears
in print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley
products, visit our web site at www.Wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Hogan, Kevin.
The science of influence : how to get anyone to say “yes” in 8 minutes or less! / Kevin
Hogan.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-471-67051-0
1. Success in business.
2. Influence (Psychology)
3. Persuasion (Psychology)
I. Title.
HF5386.H654 2004
153.8'52—dc22
2004007667
Printed in the United States of America.
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

For Jessica and Mark Hogan
The kids every parent asked for


Contents
About the Author
ix
Preface
xi
1 Influencing Others to Change
1
2 The First Four Seconds
15
3 The Delta Model of Influence
31
4 Credibility:The Pivot Point of Persuasion
57
5 The New Principles of Influence
67
6 Introduction to Omega Strategies
83
7 Framing Principles, Persuasion Techniques, and 
Influential Strategies
107
8 Applying the Laws of Influence
133
9 The Influential Secret of Oscillation
159
10 Mind Reading: How to Know What They Are Thinking
169
11 I’ll Think About It
175
vii

12 How Their Brain Buys . . .You!
213
Bibliography
225
Index
233
Need a Speaker?
241
viii
Contents

About the Author
Kevin Hogan is the author of 11 books, including the international best
seller The Psychology of Persuasion: How to Persuade Others to Your Way of
Thinking, as well as Irresistible Attraction: Secrets of Personal Magnetism.
He has acted as a body language expert to Cosmopolitan, Selling Power,
Woman’s World, First for Women, In Touch, Star, Mademoiselle, Playboy, Success!,
the New York Post, the Los Angeles Times, and many other publications.
Truly dynamic and motivational speakers are rare. Kevin has more en-
ergy than the bunny with the drum. He leaves audiences all around the
globe with skills and information they never thought they would have.
Motivational and inspirational only begin to describe Kevin in person.
When companies need a deal closed, Kevin is often the person they call in
to make the deal happen today. He has integrity, honesty, heart, and one of
the most influential minds on the planet for you and your company.
Kevin holds a doctorate in psychology. His undergraduate degree was
in speech communications.
Living in poverty much of his childhood, Kevin learned to sell to earn
money early in life. He worked hard to take care of his family of four
brothers and sisters with his Mom after Dad left.
Today Kevin is single and the truly proud father of two amazing chil-
dren, one a teenager . . . and you wonder why he stays on top of the latest
in influence and persuasion?
ix


Preface
I’ll never forget the excitement of finishing The Psychology of Persuasion:
How to Persuade Others to Your Way of Thinking.The very first review copy
we sent out was to Robert Cialdini, the guru of academic influence and
the author of Influence: Science and Practice—the work I had studied in
college.
The Psychology of Persuasion changed the way people thought about in-
fluence. It was the first book to take the fundamentals of influence and put
them into a working model.Today, 10 years later, John Wiley & Sons has
asked me to write a book that will become the new source for influence
in academic, business, entrepreneurial, and sales arena.This was a tall order,
to be sure. I considered simply updating The Psychology of Persuasion itself.
But then I considered the research that has transpired in the past
decade in this field.There has been research about some of the most in-
credible facets of influence and persuasion that I only dreamed of 10
years ago. We know so much now that we didn’t know in 1995—it is
truly awe-inspiring.
The Science of Influence is truly a new text for influence in this new mil-
lennium.What I’ve done is collected the most profound elements of influ-
ence and assembled them into one-easy-to understand, very readable
book.And that’s important. Scientific research can be exciting to a scientist
and a sleeping pill to the reader of the paper. My job was to take all of the
research, test it in the real world, and describe it so that anyone can under-
stand it—and then utilize it.
xi

If I were a quantum physicist I would probably write Quantum Physics
for Kids. Making difficult things easy to understand is one thing I bring to
the table that most authors don’t in this very complex field of human be-
havior. Fortunately I don’t understand quantum physics.
Some of the information in this book is information I discovered
purely by accident (the exciting work in body language and proxemics, for
example).There is other information I uncovered in research papers detail-
ing unique and exciting studies by professors from around the world that
no one has ever heard of. I then real-world tested their stuff. (Ever hear of
Kahneman and Tversky? Gilovich? Dillard? O’Keefe? Gass? That’s what I
thought—and they are the biggest names in the field!) The researchers’
material that worked is in here.The stuff that didn’t . . . well, I’m not going
to tell them!
“Is there anything really new out there, Kevin?” People ask me this all
the time.You know what? There is so much that is new and immediately
useful in selling, marketing, presentation skills, even therapists, that I had to
pare nearly 1,000 pages of work down to 200!
I was ecstatic to discover a new Law of Persuasion in 2001, and that
information is here. It opens new routes to “yes” that we’ve never used be-
fore.There is powerful information about presentation order (what do you
talk about when, and why).We now know answers where before 2002 we
guesstimated.There is information about how to deal with more than one
product or options on a product or service.You will be stunned at what
you learn.You’re going to change the way you communicate with your
friends and family as well.
I’m going to show you the ins and outs of permanent change in other
people’s behavior, why it’s difficult—and how you can go about making it
happen.You want the customer for life? It’s here. For real, for the first time.
No kidding.
You’re going to find out that I don’t write like an academic.They will
roll their eyes.You’re going to find out I don’t write like a salesperson.
They are going to roll their eyes, too.What you’re going to find out that
matters is that I write for you, not me. I write so it all makes sense and is
crystal clear to you. Oh, and the people who are rolling their eyes? They
xii
Preface

will end up with the book gripped in their hands and with their eyes
glued to the page.
You can count on what you read in this book.Take it to the bank. If
you use this book in selling, management, therapy, or whatever, you can
know it is rock solid.
Finally, I want to talk about giving credit.Who discovered what? Who
came up with what? I do my best to note the researchers, salespeople, and
the academics. I like to be credited when I come up with an incredible
brainstorm and I want to give the same back. If you see a mistake or notice
anything that needs to be changed for the next edition, let me know right
away. Credit needs to be given and I do my level best to do just that.The
Bibliography at the back of the book will keep you busy for a few years.
This book is going to change the way you think, and that means it is
going to change your life. Be prepared. Be excited.You have never read
anything like this. Enjoy the ride; it’s going to be fun!
—KEVIN HOGAN
Minneapolis, Minnesota
Preface
xiii


1
Influencing 
Others to Change
This book is about getting people to change . . . something—a behavior,
an attitude, a product, a service, their relationship to or with you.You want
someone to do something different from what they were doing a few
minutes ago.You want someone to say “yes!” to you, now. In order for that
to consistently happen it would probably be a good idea to know what it
is that makes people tick. I want you to know precisely what it is that gets
people to not only say “yes!” but, if necessary, say “yes!” all the time!
My life has been aimed at helping people change and to change
people. It’s exciting, it’s fun, and I’ve been fortunate enough to discover
many keys that other promoters of influence have neglected to look for.
The process of starting change, getting people to question the status quo,
and actually implementing the change in another person’s brain is an ex-
citing process.
Short-term decisions of “yes” or “no” are much easier than achieving
long-term change. Permanent change is difficult. Period. You go to the
1

same grocery store every week.You go to the same gas stations, attend the
same church, take the same route for your daily walk or jog, work out at
the same gym . . . well, you get the idea.You do the same things every day,
and there is nothing wrong with that. In fact, the stability of these behav-
iors can be very positive indeed! In this book you will learn how to get
people to say “yes” to you now . . . and over the long term!
Unfortunately, some of the things that people do are in direct opposi-
tion with what we want them to do.That’s where influence and persuasion
come in handy. Some people smoke cigarettes, do drugs, drink too much,
beat their kids, rape, steal, eat too much, hang out with the wrong people in
the wrong element, take part in self-destructive behaviors, and fail to act on
living what they dream their life should be about. People universally agree
that these are things that need to change in one’s self and in others.Agree-
ment and action, of course, are often not related to each other in reality.
Even when people want change it turns out to be something that
people desperately fail at.You’d think that if they want to change it would
be easy, right? Of course it isn’t that way at all.Why?
The first reason is remarkably simple.Your brain has lots and lots of
highways that connect lots and lots of cells.These highways light up with
activity every day when you participate in various activities. You think
“walk,” and you go for the same walk you always do. When you think
“drink,” you will go drink the same liquids you always do.Your brain is lit-
erally wired through all of your previous behavior to do exactly what it
has in the past. That wiring rarely changes, except by lack of use of the
highway system. However, new wiring (new highways!) can come about
through repetition of new behaviors—and through repetition of thoughts,
though with murkier results than actual behaviors such as intentionally
taking a walk on a different path every day for a few weeks, intentionally
eating a new food every day for a few weeks, intentionally taking part in
any new behavior every day for a few weeks.
It used to be said that a new habit takes 21 days to form. It now ap-
pears that it takes five days to form a new habit that is repeated daily (i.e.,
to create new neural pathways in the brain). Unfortunately, creating a new
habit rarely if ever erases an old habit.That means choice continues to be
2
Influencing Others to Change

involved in everyday decisions and change even though there is a new
highway. Getting someone to not eat junk food today is fairly easy; getting
the person to do it for a lifetime is another thing altogether. Getting the
dream date isn’t as hard as you might think. But getting the person to say
“yes” to a longer-term commitment is another thing altogether.
With this in mind it can be understood that there is no reason to as-
sume that people will be motivated, after today, to perform a newly de-
sired behavior, regardless of what it is.The easy shift back to the strong,
well-traveled neural pathways in the brain (which essentially project
themselves into your external world) is not only possible, it is likely.
Therefore, the person who wants to quit smoking, start eating better, or
change any behavior probably won’t regardless of the motivational device
unless it is consciously and intentionally repeated time after time and day
after day for months, at which point it can compete as the more likely to
be followed pathway.
The status quo is the status quo for just this reason.That which is fa-
miliar is the path of least resistance. This is also why the brain reacts so
strongly with “no!” to all but the most familiar requests or behaviors. It
takes enormous initial effort to change because one literally must forge
new highways in the brain. Once formed, the highways must be strength-
ened through regular usage and maintained by even further usage.
Do They Even Know What They Want?
Sit down for this one (the second reason change isn’t easy): People don’t
know what they want, don’t know how they will feel when they get it,
and don’t really know themselves.What does this mean for change?
We each have a conscious mind and an unconscious mind. Even with
hypnosis, you can’t really have two-way communication with the uncon-
scious mind in any effective and reliable fashion, but you can communicate
with the conscious mind. Even more interesting is that the conscious and
unconscious minds appear to have significantly different personality char-
acteristics, attitudes, and motivations.
Do They Even Know What They Want?
3

The unconscious mind is not a six-year-old child, as has so often been
speculated. In fact, sometimes the unconscious mind is far more useful
than its conscious counterpart—but not always.
The conscious mind is able to compute, calculate, compare, contrast,
and perform all kinds of impressive cognitive functions.The unconscious
mind makes rapid-fire choices (though rarely decides between two op-
tions) under stress, which are more often right than wrong when there is
significant experience in a situation (fighting fires, surgery, combat, etc.).
The unconscious also tends to stereotype and categorize people right
down to whether someone you meet is like someone you knew in the past
and if so assigning them the same traits as the person you once knew. The
unconscious mind doesn’t “think” per se; it simply “does.” It experiences a situa-
tion and produces some behavior. Objections in sales situations almost al-
ways come from this part of the brain.
To override this behavior would take conscious effort on your
client’s behalf.That usually doesn’t happen. More typically the conscious
mind will create a reason for performing some behavior, when it really
has no clue why the body is eating, going to bed, getting in the car, or
taking an exit.
The unconscious mind simply directs the body to act. Its force is usu-
ally strong and difficult to change in the short term. Because, as a rule, the
unconscious mind is rooted in deep and old brain function, it doesn’t “vo-
calize” its opinions in a rational way. It simply reacts. Generally the uncon-
scious mind acts in a way that would be consistent with past behaviors in
similar situations, meaning that it could save your life or it could overlook
important new information and accidentally drive you to your demise. It is
a holdover from our evolutionary history. It (the unconscious) appears to
4
Influencing Others to Change
The unconscious mind makes rapid-fire choices. It also tends to
stereotype and categorize people right down to whether someone you
meet is like a person you once knew.

drive almost all animal behavior, with conscious mind functions being lim-
ited to a few different kinds of animals.
The unconscious mind deals with now.The conscious mind deals with
the future.The unconscious mind is rigid.The conscious mind is flexible.
The unconscious mind is sensitive to negative information.The conscious?
Positive.The unconscious is a pattern detector.The conscious is an after-
the-fact checker. The unconscious mind is multisystemic. The conscious
mind is a single system.
Conscious Mind
Unconscious Mind
Future.
Now.
Flexible.
Rigid.
Sensitive to positive 
Sensitive to negative 
information.
information.
After-the-fact checker.
Pattern detector.
Single system.
Multisystemic.
Because the brain develops these two substantially distinct minds, it’s
important to realize that both minds have typical behaviors and those be-
haviors are often at odds with each other.The conscious mind may want
to be accurate whereas the unconscious mind wants to feel good.
Internal conflict in most people is very real and very normal.
Typically we consciously have an objective or goal (lose weight, get a
different job, start your own business, begin a true personal development
phase in your life). However, the unconscious mind learned early on to
fear that which is unknown. It’s a simple survival mechanism. To walk
where we have walked before is generally safe.To stretch our boundaries is
often something that seems risky to the unconscious self, and therefore the
very idea of these changes can literally feel bad.That gut instinct is proba-
bly wrong but that is what the survival mechanism in the brain sends to
the body. Fear.Anxiety. Maybe even panic.
The conscious, rational self, which hates the present job, the weak state
of personal development, or the fat body, knows that change should take
Do They Even Know What They Want?
5

place, but to actually commit to a plan to overcome the status quo where
the fear is present is daunting and seemingly counterintuitive.
Therefore it is critical to evaluate the emotions of the moment or the day
and discover if there is a legitimate, rational signal that your brain is relaying
to you. Or is the brain simply telling you it is afraid, and the fear is false ev-
idence appearing real (FEAR)? If you decide (consciously) that the mind
and body are feeling afraid without good cause for the situation at hand,
realize that it will take some significant amount of time to overcome the
fear of the situation. It certainly won’t go away in a minute, an hour, or a
day.Typically it is necessary to wire in a completely new set of responses to
the current situation and fight through fear and negative emotions every
day until new levels of comfort can be achieved.
One of the great problems of trying to know yourself is that you really
can’t completely know yourself. Study after study shows that complete
strangers are almost as good at predicting our behavior as we are ourselves.
We think we know ourselves but we really don’t know ourselves as well as
we would like to. Because of the way the brain works, though, if we don’t
like what we see ourselves doing and thinking, we can change. It is a slow
process and often difficult, but once change becomes the status quo, it be-
comes rigid. So select well.
Two Personalities?
Are we really two personalities woven into one person?
I confess, it’s a funny thing:The personality of the unconscious mind
correlates to a person’s behavior and the person’s conscious mind corre-
lates to a person’s behavior—but the conscious mind and unconscious
6
Influencing Others to Change
Complete strangers are almost as good at predicting our behavior as
we are ourselves.

mind of that person don’t correlate to each other! Gulp.That’s why people
say things like, “I don’t know,” “I have to think about it,” “I’m not sure
what I want to do.”
People typically look to make sense of themselves and the world
around them. Because we all do and say things that truly surprise us, we
must construct (fabricate) a narrative (story) that makes sense of those be-
haviors that conflict with our intentions.The rationales and explanations
help us put the incongruency behind us and move on to other things.
What makes understanding ourselves and others even more difficult is
the painfully distorted memories we all carry in the three-pound universe.
The brain simply isn’t a videotape recorder that records events.The brain is
a vast array of storehouses and interpreting functions that constantly store,
re-store, interpret, and reinterpret our memories and beliefs. False memo-
ries are so common that almost every conversation of any length includes
reference to at least one memory that never happened.
Recognizing these two defective elements of the human experience
(our suspect memory and the dual nature of our personality(ies)), one can
understand the arguments, the fights, and the butting of heads that take
place in relationships and communication in general between people who
have lived through the same events and remembered and interpreted them
so differently.
Recent research does show that there is some predictability in how we
will respond to other people. For example, a person who is fond of her sis-
ter will tend to be fond of people who exhibit behaviors similar to those
of the sister.
How do you actually come to know yourself? Pay attention to your
behavior in any given situation and you learn who you are. And, of
course, even that is suspect because we don’t see ourselves as clearly as we
Two Personalities
7
The brain is a vast array of storehouses and interpreting functions.

see others.As mentioned, research reveals that we are better judges of oth-
ers’ future behavior than we are of our own.We tend to see ourselves in a
much better light than we see others, and that light creates a halo effect
around what most of us believe about ourselves. We tend to see others
more accurately.
Real estate agents observe the lack of sense of self-knowledge in oth-
ers every day.They listen while their clients describe the exact house they
want.The agents then show them several houses that their clients love and
one that they eventually buy that has little in common with what the indi-
viduals detailed just hours or days before! Real estate agents figured it out
a long time ago: Buyers have no clue what they really want.
And when we do see ourselves behave in some fashion, we often have
no idea why we did what we did.A research project had women approach
men on a somewhat dangerous footbridge and start a conversation. The
same women later approached men seated on a bench away from the foot-
bridge.The results were that 65 percent of the men who were approached
on the footbridge asked for a date, while only 30 percent of those on the
bench asked for a date.Arousal was attributed incorrectly to the woman on
the bridge instead of the actual anxiety-provoking feelings that the man
felt on the bridge.
Unfortunately, we don’t have the ability to access the reasons we do
these kinds of things, and observation helps only to some degree. Our
need to find a reason for behavior, any reason, helps us make sense of our
world and make us happy, even if it isn’t accurate.
And what about those faced with difficult decisions in life? Beginning
or ending a relationship? Buying a business or not? Buying your product
or service!?
The research is compelling. After initially analyzing the problem
once, the individual stands a far better chance of making a good deter-
mination than the other individual who ponders for days, weeks, or
months.This is true even when people write out their reasons for their
decisions on paper or on a computer. In comparison studies, individuals
seem to make better decisions when gathering enough information,
thinking about it, and then deciding versus writing all the reasons for
8
Influencing Others to Change

and against an idea. (Ben Franklin is rolling over in his grave . . . and I’m
sure I will, too!)
So, with this rather bleak picture of how poorly we make decisions
and how poorly we know each other, what is the answer? How can you
get people to say “yes!” to you now and in the future?
It appears that going out into the future and speculating on what
events and experiences might take place is the best option for creating the
changes necessary when conflicted.To be sure, we can’t accurately predict
how we will feel in the future.This has been shown in volumes of studies.
However, we can gain foresight by specifically seeing ourselves in future
situations and determine what course(s) of action will ensure the success
of those determined course(s).
For years it was thought that journaling was a grand way to determine
insight and learn about ourselves. And this is true as long as we do not
journal after particularly negative or traumatic experiences that will later
taint the story of our life into being something it was/is not. Instead, it’s
best to journal on a consistent basis and describe events and experiences
with the realization that negative emotions happen daily in everyone and
that in itself is not necessarily a bad thing as long as action is taken on
those states to improve the quality of life each and every day. Numerous
studies have shown that people who think about the negative emotions
that have been recorded actually end up far worse off than had they not
reviewed the emotions of the past. Such is the nature of writing history
and then rewriting it without the benefit of all the other experiences that
happened that day/week/month/year. Result:These people tend to pre-
dict a more negative future for themselves than those who do not rumi-
nate. I bring up this crucial point because a lot of us sell a product or
service that can develop a track record.A car can appear to be reliable or
Two Personalities
9
After initially analyzing the problem once, the individual stands a far
better chance of making a good determination than the other
individual who ponders for days, weeks, or months.

unreliable, but if you just had a minor breakdown today, you will certainly
be seeing the car as much less reliable than it has been previously.
In the final analysis, the road to changing the self (yours or someone
else’s) is about creating behavioral change first, which will almost always
lead to attitudinal change. In plain English, that means you have to get
people to do something if you want them to say “yes!”
Three Ways to Change
I want to share with you three ways to change that no one wants you to
know about.
What do some major corporations, all military leaders, and many ma-
jor religions know that most other people don’t?
The military leadership of every world government discovered this
first factor ages ago. Every successful religious and spiritual organization
found out how to utilize this factor millennia past. In recent history, be-
yond the military and spiritual organizations, some major corporations
have discovered how to thoroughly and completely change people, modify
behavior, and alter attitudes.What’s the first secret?
Imagine: boot camp.
You arrive.They cut your hair (if you have any), issue clothing con-
forming to a specific standard, the same cut and color as everyone else’s.
You have a new place to eat and you are told specific times to wake up, eat,
and sleep.Your activities are dictated from the beginning of the day to the
end of the day.You are looking at dozens of other faces that you have never
seen before. Your environment has changed.
There will be phone calls home once each week and you will not be
using a telephone or the Internet for the balance of the days.There is very
little contact with the outside world.
All of this is necessary to rapidly change your loyalties,behavior,and atti-
tudes so that if you are forced into high-stress situations like battle your be-
havior will be predictable and manageable . . .and you will stay alive.You will
be taught to watch out for everyone else in the group, and they will be there
10
Influencing Others to Change

to support you.An interdependent relationship is being created.There are no
independent relationships and there are no independent thinkers allowed.
All of the needs of the military require rapid change, rapid behavior
modification, and a rapid restructuring of beliefs.The same changes are fa-
cilitated in some large corporations, the large church, some schools, and a
few other groups throughout society.The model is powerful and is effec-
tive with all but the most stubbornly nonconformist individuals.
The three overlooked principles to change yourself and others begin
with changing a person’s environment. Humans, like animals, interact with
and respond to their environment far more than we are aware of at the
conscious level.
I We act very differently in church than we do . . .
I . . . at the office, and we act differently at the office than we do . . .
I . . . at the football game, and we act differently at the football game
than we do . . .
I . . . at the dinner table in our homes each night and than we do . . .
I . . . in our hotel room.
Why?
Cultural rules dictate our behavior at church and in the office. Group-
think or social influence comes into play at the football game as well as the
church and office. Personal relationship dynamics enter into the mix at the
dinner table, joining the other environments. Finally, the hotel room is
most interesting because you are a stranger in an environment without a
leader or group to conform to, and often you are by yourself, thus you are
able to discover more about the true nature of who you are as you are
most definitely curious about your environment and not quite certain
what to do with that environment, leaving behavior largely unpredictable
for you—but very predictable for the hotel chain.
Three Ways to Change
11
Cultural rules dictate our behavior in public.

You don’t know how you will behave, but the hotel does.The hotel
knows what you will do (and charges you handsomely for it).The manager
knows you will do at least two of three things in your room that will gen-
erate a profit on most stays:
1. You will use the telephone (that’s why local phone calls are $1.50).
2. You will eat a snack (the minibar prices for food and drink about
eight times retail prices).
3. You will watch a movie (priced at three times the price of a
video).
You may not know that you are going to do these things. In fact,
you may bring your own cell phone, your own snacks, and your own
DVD for your computer, and you still utilize the hotel’s services, and
they know you will. They know you better than you do, because the environ-
ment stimulates behavior.
Key: If you want to change your own or someone else’s behavior, the first
thing you can often do is change the environment. If you can control the envi-
ronment, you can typically predict or create a specific behavior.
It is known how people will behave in church, at the dinner table, at
the office, and in the hotel. Deviations can occur but behavior is remark-
ably predictable.
People learn how to behave in all of these environments and then they
do behave that way.An extroverted individual will be remarkably compli-
ant in the quiet atmosphere of the library.The introverted person will sing
out in church and stand up and cheer at the football game.The behaviors
are learned and reinforced. People do what they are told, and when they
don’t we medicate them so they will comply!
Changing the environment is uniquely powerful in changing behav-
ior. There is no greater single influence. Not genetics, not peer pressure.
Not parenting. The environment stimulates behavior, and changing behavior is
most easily accomplished in a different environment.
12
Influencing Others to Change

And there is more.
The environment can be changed to develop different behaviors.The positions
of chairs, furniture, and decor can be altered, thus changing how much
people like each other.These alterations also change how (and how much)
people interact, which will directly impact whether people will like each
other, be more (or less) anxious, and be more (or less) comfortable.
The colors of carpeting, furniture, and walls all change the perceptions
of people in the environment and literally change their behavior.
An interesting element in changing the environment is that it tends to
change behavior first, rather than the attitude of the individual.This fact is
most profoundly noted in many religious institutions, the military of every
government, large corporations, and some schools.
When a person is moved from one environment to another, especially
when one is unfamiliar with the new environment, the brain has to
change; it enters into a state of flux and typically becomes more suggestible.
From the standpoint of your self, this factor can help you determine
whether you should remain in the same environment you are in or inten-
tionally change it. From the standpoint of changing the behavior of others,
this information helps you know whether you should take a person out to
lunch, to dinner, or on a trip—or meet them at an international destina-
tion. The further removed from their norm the more likely it is to gain
compliance in most people.
The environment has a dramatic impact on whether someone else will
say “yes” or “no” to you. It’s the very first indicator that a “yes” or “no” is
coming.The next indicator is equally controllable: your appearance.
Three Ways to Change
13


2
The First 
Four Seconds
15
SNEAK PREVIEW!
Your body language and your physical appearance will jump-start your
instant likability, your persuasiveness, and most importantly how you
are perceived by every person who meets you. You have less than 10
seconds and realistically closer to four seconds to make a good first
impression on those with whom you come into contact. A world of re-
search clearly indicates that you will be judged professionally and per-
sonally in the first few seconds of your meeting someone for the first
time. In fact, your first impression is recorded and is used as a yard-
stick for all future communication by those you meet. Whatever that
first impression is going to be on your part, you want it to be intentional
and on purpose.

The First Impression
The second one person sees another, a lot happens in the unconscious
mind.The conscious results are often seemingly instantaneous. Do any of
these thoughts sound familiar to you?
“It’s a gut instinct. I don’t like her. I can’t put my finger on it.”
“There’s just something about him that bugs me. I don’t know what it
is, but I can always tell.”
“My intuition tells me that he’s just not right.”
People think and feel these thoughts when they observe mixed signals
from people they meet.There is an internal conflict between the nonver-
bal (we’ll call it “body language” from here on in) and the verbal signals a
person receives.The sad part is that people really believe they have good
instincts and that they should trust their intuition.Why sad? Because when
there are mixed messages in communication the person tends to say “no”
because “it” doesn’t feel “right.”
You see someone new: In the first four seconds of that encounter (or
observation!) an incredible amount of processing happens in your brain at
the unconscious level.You’ll never know what went on.
Would you like to have a clue as to what is going on in the three-
pound machine behind your eyes?
When you first meet someone, millions of neurons in the brain are
activated.Your brain immediately wakes up. The brain instantly tries to
categorize the person into a certain type.Who is she like? Is that good? Is
she attractive? What’s unique about her? What is familiar about her? All of
this is done without thought and awareness. It’s the way the brain works.
If you had to consciously analyze everything about everyone new you
met, you would be so busy at the conscious level that you’d have ab-
solutely no time to think about anything but how they look. Instead, the
unconscious mind immediately goes to work, makes all kinds of judg-
ments and evaluations, and essentially pegs the person as a winner or loser
in approximately four seconds.
16
The First Four Seconds

Sometimes all of this happens in less than four seconds and sometimes
it takes a little more time, but in those first moments after one person
meets another there is an intensely powerful “yes” or “no” response.This
response is about the person. It has nothing to do with their religion, their
political party, or their product or service. It’s just “yes” or “no.”
When you first see someone, you instantly categorize and/or filter the
person you are observing into one of many different categories. One way
the brain categorizes is whether the brain believes that the person is of
high status or low status within the group.That’s important because hu-
mans (and animals in general) are wired to be attracted to the more pow-
erful and higher-status individuals in any given group. Another instant
filter is whether your brain finds the person attractive, unattractive, or
somewhere in between.
The brain also notes whether the individual being observed pays at-
tention to their physical appearance.
The brain does a great deal more than just a little processing in those
first few seconds. It also notes the person’s intentionally chosen emblems
and adornments (broaches, pins, necklace, rings, other jewelry, makeup,
style of glasses, tattoos, and body markings/piercings). All of this is ob-
served, filtered, and categorized almost instantly by the various parts of the
brain.Ultimately what happens is that you get a response or reaction inside
that indicates to you whether you accept and maybe like all that you see or
(more likely) that you are disinterested or do not like what you see.
There is nothing fair, politically correct, or reasonable about this
process. It is an instant evaluation that is almost always permanent and
rarely given a conscious—or second—thought. The exception occurs
when someone you see is on the bubble.There are some people you see
that your initial response to is “yes.” Yes, you like them; yes they are attrac-
tive; yes, they have taste; and yes, they appear to be healthy and so on. Most
The First Impression
17
When you first see someone, you instantly categorize and/or filter the
person you are observing into one of many different categories.

people you see are processed, literally, as “no.” The answer to a question
they might ask you is a polite but certain “no.”The amount of respect you
would have for them is “no.” They simply are “no.” But there is a small
group of people to whom you say “maybe” regardless of whether a ques-
tion has been asked.This group of people includes people who are on the
bubble.This group is the only one that doesn’t get an unconscious “yes” or
“no.”They get a “hmmmmm. . . .” Like the “yes,” they get your attention
but you wonder about them. Something doesn’t seem right about them.
What is it?
It’s the fact that unlike the majority of people whom you instantly fil-
ter into “yes” and “no” piles, certain people have incongruencies about
them. Perhaps they are not attractive, but they have taste and style and you
approve of other filters as well. Or perhaps they are attractive but they have
numerous body markings and piercings that give you pause to wonder
about them.These people fall into a “maybe yes” category.
Oh . . . and no question has been asked yet. No one has said hello.
They may not even have looked at you, but you have already said “yes,”
“no,” or “maybe” and you haven’t a clue as to who they are or whether
you will meet them.
You simply walked past each other in the terminal at the airport or in
the hall at the office.You don’t know this person.They might have an ap-
pointment with you or you may never say “hello” to them in your life. But
you do say “yes” or “no” long before you say “hello,” and that is why they
must do everything they can to get you to say “yes,” even when they don’t
know you are there . . . and you must do the same if you are to hear “yes” once
you communicate with someone.
Most men see a woman’s body type first.Then they see her face. Most
women see a man’s face first, then his body type. (Throughout this book
you will discover that men and women think very differently and commu-
nicate very differently. Understanding what is important to the majority of
men and women will help you hear “yes” far more often than you will
hear “no.”)
The instant you first see someone, and long before you even are
aware that that someone is going to say “hello” to you, you have already
18
The First Four Seconds

said “yes” or “no” to them and they have already said “yes” or “no”
to you.
To overcome these initial and instant impressions takes an enormous
amount of work.The instant impression is still somewhat permeable and
could be overruled; it doesn’t happen often, but it does happen. It’s much
easier to radiate a powerful and positive impression at all times so you
never have to determine whether you are exhibiting a positive impression!
In the next three seconds—long before people say “hello”—most de-
cisions are becoming less permeable. Time is short for you to get from
“maybe/no” to “maybe/yes.”
It makes no difference whether you are selling cars, showing real es-
tate, going into a conference with the sixth-grade teacher, searching for a
mate, or watching the church soloist. The maybe/approve, maybe/disap-
prove reaction is instantaneous. It’s unconscious.You aren’t even aware you
made the judgment except in those few cases when someone is on the
bubble.You simply made the decision—except you didn’t.Your uncon-
scious mind made the decision and you had nothing to do with it!
It seems absolutely absurd to think that someone will instantly evalu-
ate you for a job, a relationship, a business deal, or anything, for that matter,
based on an instant impression! But remember, every human being alive
makes these unconscious evaluations.
The First Appearance in Action
In 2002, I asked the owner of an adult learning facility to let me host a
“speed dating” night. I just wanted to learn whether people could really
make a “no, I don’t want to ever date this person” or “yes, I’d like to go on
another date with this person” decision in six minutes.
The First Appearance in Action
19
To overcome these initial and instant impressions takes an enormous
amount of work.

The promotion went in the catalog as an evening where you could
have 10 dates or more with 10 different people in two hours.Total price?
$49.As I expected, the turnout was impressive.
Each date lasted six minutes. Exactly six minutes. At the end of each
six minutes the individuals would write “Y” or “N” on a three-by-five-
inch card with their name/number and their date’s name/number. If the
two people both wrote “Y,” the cards were put into their envelope and
given to them at the end of the evening.
I observed all 18 pairs of people through each of their dates and took
notes about what was happening in their particular date. I then predicted
whether the pair would “match” or not. (As expected, the vast majority of
course did not match.) Some of what I learned is detailed later in the
book. Most interestingly, when I privately interviewed individuals at the
end of the evening, almost everyone said they had no need for the full six
minutes of date time. They knew in the first few seconds whether they
would be interested in dating the person again. There were two people
who said they would have liked more time than six minutes to decide with
at least one other person. Other than that, everyone knew almost immedi-
ately, just as predicted.
Your perceived level of attractiveness by other people will be a sig-
nificant benefit or detriment in your career, in your relationships, and
throughout all aspects of your life. It isn’t fair, but it is true. People who
are not especially attractive learn how to deal with less than perfect
physical features and work with what they have. Before we consider just
how to increase your face value, let’s look at the results of some fascinat-
ing studies about physical appearance. (I promise there won’t be any
20
The First Four Seconds
Your perceived level of attractiveness by other people will be a
significant benefit or detriment in your career, in your relationships,
and throughout all aspects of your life.

boring footnotes or complex explanations, just the easy-to-understand
results.)
The Power of Physical Appearance
Did you know that in university settings, professors who are considered
physically attractive by students are considered to be better teachers on the
whole than unattractive professors? Attractive professors are also more
likely to be asked for help on problems. These same attractive professors
also tend to receive positive recommendations from other students to take
their classes and also are less likely to receive the blame when a student re-
ceives a failing grade! (Romano and Bordieri 1989)
A wide variety of research indicates that men’s marriage and dating
decisions are often made with great weight placed on physical attractive-
ness.They will often reject women who are lacking (in their opinion) in
positive physical features.Women, on the other hand, place less significance
on a man’s physical attractiveness in considering him for a date or mar-
riage, according to studies by R. E. Baber.
Did you know that in studies by J. E. Singer done on college cam-
puses, it has been proven that attractive females (attraction as perceived by
the professors) receive significantly higher grades than male students or
relatively unattractive females?
There is more evidence that shows you must make the most of what
you have physically.
Among strangers, studies by D. Byrne, O. London, and K. Reeves show
that individuals perceived as unattractive in physical appearance are gener-
ally undesirable for any interpersonal relationship.
In one significant study of 58 unacquainted men and women in a so-
cial setting Brislin and Lewis found that that after a first date 89 percent of
the people who sought a second date decided to do so because of attrac-
tiveness of the partner.
In the persuasion process, Mills and Aronson found that attractive fe-
males are far more convincing than females perceived as unattractive.
The Power of Physical Appearance
21

The Two Big Questions
Where does all this come from?
Can I be persuasive if I’m not what most people think is physically
attractive?
The answer to the second question is “yes!”
The answer to the first question is a bit of a story. It all started when
you were a baby.The baby is born and in less than three days the baby will
imitate simple behaviors like smiling, frowning, and sticking her tongue
out.Within a few more days the baby gains a clear vision of her environ-
ment and she now is able to focus on people, easily distinguishing Mom
from other people. When Mom leaves the room and the baby is shown
picture after picture of stranger after stranger, the baby looks at those pho-
tographs of people who are physically attractive for a much longer time
than those people in the photographs who aren’t physically attractive.The
desire to look at beautiful people (and symmetrical objects, by the way) is
prewired into the little baby’s brain.
There are more distinctions in the infant’s observational patterns.The
infant prefers looking at faces that are smiling to those with a scowl or
frown.This response is also prewired into the infant.
Even more startling, though, is the behavior of the mother with the
baby. Mothers of babies who are perceived as attractive are more likely to
gaze at their babies and allow no distractions from the world around them.
Babies who are perceived (independently) as unattractive are more likely
to be cared for in the sense of having their diapers changed, being burped,
and being fed, with secondary attention paid to the babies’ faces.
The mother, of course, is unaware of her behavior contrasted with
other mothers. Her behavior to gaze at beauty was prewired in her at birth
as well.The experience of the enjoyment of beauty begins in the gene and
is further shaped in infancy.
It appears one reason that most children are perceived as beautiful by
their parents is that the perception acts as a survival mechanism for the
baby.What else would stop us from acting out when the little one is prone
22
The First Four Seconds

to endlessly whine? (There is more stopping us than the irresistibility of
the infant, but it is a very good thing the baby is irresistible!)
Throughout nature the beautiful and colorful animals of a species fare
better in mating, survival, and acquisition of resources.This includes hu-
mans. One recent study revealed that most of the wealth acquired by
women in the world today is acquired by the most attractive women.
Some of this wealth is acquired through inheritance, some through mar-
riage, and some through the women’s work.
The survival instinct is strong in women and the genes that shape a
woman’s beauty and her response to beauty encourage her to optimize her
appearance. This has been true for millions of years. Today, Madison Av-
enue exploits this survival instinct, and women drive the cosmetics and
“look good” industry to being one of the most important industries in the
world.The cosmetics industry employs more people than most industries
in the world. In Brazil, there are more Avon representatives than military
personnel. The business of looking good continues into the twenty-first
century some two million years after it began . . . and it’s still going strong.
Madison Avenue didn’t create beauty, though, nor does Madison Av-
enue set the standard of beauty. Far from it. There are more than two
dozen countries in the world that place a higher value on physical attrac-
tiveness than do Americans.Typically these cultures do so because attrac-
tiveness is often a clue as to the healthiness of a spouse. Countries that are
disease-ridden, especially parasitic disease, are homes to individuals aspiring
to mate with physically attractive people.
Volumes of research reveal that girls and women who are perceived as
attractive get better grades on tests, earn more money on the job, and
marry husbands with more resources (money and education, generally)
than other women. Something seems politically incorrect about all of this
but the facts speak loudly.The physical attractiveness factor is important in
relationships, culture, and the survival of the species—of all species.
Among men in military academies, those who are physically attractive
tend to go on to better careers than those who are average or perceived as
unattractive.There is also a preference for attractive men by women upon
The Two Big Questions
23

initial contact, but this preference isn’t as great as other traits considered
desirable by women.
It is interesting to note that attractive people tend to be more at ease
and confident in social settings than others are.This is probably because of
all the positive traits unconsciously ascribed to these individuals by every-
one else in the environment. If people constantly approach someone with
the same positive, smiling outlook toward that person (the physically at-
tractive individual) the person is likely to develop the typical verbal and
nonverbal responses to that behavior.This means that an almost self-ful-
filling prophecy happens in attractive people . . . and they don’t even
know it.
Standardized tests show that attractive girls and women score no better
or worse than unattractive ones. Only when grading is subjective does at-
tractiveness play a role.
A problem ultimately arises in this world that is run by personal ap-
pearance. Attractive women often find themselves strongly disliking and
avoiding the company of other attractive women. It appears that this is a
survival instinct. No one wants to lose access to his or her resources. Stay-
ing away from other attractive women means there is less competition
when being observed by a potential mate.We all try to control our envi-
ronment that we live and work in.The means and objectives are often very
different between men and women.
Attractiveness is important to men and women in social settings but
it is definitely more important to men in almost all countries of the
world except Sweden and Poland, where physical attractiveness require-
ments are similar between men and women. With these two countries
being the exceptions, men place a higher value on attractiveness than
women do, and this fact directly changes both nonverbal and spoken
communication encounters.
Once you understand the gravity of your appearance and that it
changes the minds, desires, and thoughts of everyone you interact with,
you discover you have an opportunity to improve all future relationships
and communication opportunities.
It’s very important to look as good as you can.This might mean using
24
The First Four Seconds

makeup or not but it probably more often means keeping your weight
down.A small waist has shown to be a big factor in how people evaluate
other people. Obesity is a leading cause of diabetes and other illnesses in-
cluding cancer.We’ve all been wired to have a compulsion to invest our
lives with healthy people, especially those we are going to mate with.
Now, how do we apply all of this startling information to the compli-
ance-gaining situation?
Have you ever heard of love at first sight? Two sales were made be-
fore two people ever spoke. Both people decided that they wanted what
they saw, heard, smelled, and felt inside. Sales are made and broken every
day in the same manner. In this module you will learn how to help your
client fall in love with you and your products and services, before you
even say a word.
Nonverbal communication is almost always unconscious communica-
tion. Most people have no idea what is going on at the sublanguage level
of communication. This book will help you master this most critical
process of persuasion.
Many self-proclaimed experts of influence and body language have
misquoted a brilliant study by Albert Mehrabian. The wannabe experts
state that 93 percent of all communication is nonverbal.That wasn’t what
Mehrabian concluded at all. However, most of the finest researchers do
agree that nonverbal communication and physical appearance make up
The Two Big Questions
25
It’s very important to look as good as you can.
What you wear, your makeup, your jewelry, your watch, your socks,
your shoes, your coat, your glasses, and everything else about how you
look can make or break a sale or a relationship, before you ever open
your mouth.

between 50 and 80 percent of the impact of a communication.The same
is true for the persuasion climate.
Al Gore Teaches a Lesson about Influential Space
Every four years the two (or three) presidential candidates square off in
three debates so Americans can get a clear view of the issues that face
the nation. Americans get to see the candidates in an up close and per-
sonal way. I’ve watched for years. Last year, the BBC asked me to ana-
lyze the body language of then Vice President Al Gore and Governor of
Texas George W. Bush. Specifically they wanted to know what the can-
didates’ bodies were saying; then, as part of a suspenseful ploy, they asked
me to predict the election, but we would wait until after the third de-
bate to do so.
The nonverbal communication of the debate revealed a somewhat un-
comfortable George Bush. He was usually ill at ease and appeared to be
guarded in his responses.Al Gore appeared overly confident, arrogant, and
even a bit cocky. He was completely comfortable, looked at ease, and
seemed to feel in total control of the first debate. Gore was so overwhelm-
ing that afterward his handlers coached him to be kinder and gentler in
the second debate.After getting beaten in the second debate Gore took off
the gloves and came out forcefully in the final debate, which was a stand-
up debate in a town meeting type of forum.
At the beginning of the first debate, Gore walked toward Bush and
into his personal space as Bush was speaking.This threw Bush completely
off and Gore appeared to be a lion ready to eat his prey. Unfortunately for
Gore, his behavior came off as being rude, arrogant, and too aggressive for
someone who was going to be the president of the entire United States
and not just those who watch the World Wrestling Federation.
I told the BBC that this ploy on the part of Al Gore would backfire.
Americans don’t like jerks, and the people on the fence would swing to
Bush and away from Gore just because of this one 10-second incident on
television. It was now apparent to me that George Bush would win the
26
The First Four Seconds

election, though I told the BBC,“George Bush will win, but this election
is going to be very, very close.” I had no idea how prophetic that would be.
Had I been advising and coaching Al Gore, I never would have let him
approach George Bush in any way other than a friendly, warm manner.
People like friendliness and feel comfortable around people who are kind.
Almost all people feel threatened when their space is entered, especially
when the perpetrator is physically larger than they are.When you look at
the tape of the debate, Bush clearly feels threatened and we as viewers feel
queasy as we see Bush approached. Gore’s intention is uncertain, and be-
cause of this moment he lost thousands of votes.
What is the lesson?
Whether seated or standing, you should stay out of your client’s intimate space.
This space is normally defined as an 18-inch bubble around the entire
body of your client. Entering this space is done at your own risk. This
doesn’t mean that you can’t share a secret with your client. This doesn’t
mean you can’t touch your client. It does mean that if you enter into a
client’s intimate space you are doing so strategically and with a specific in-
tention. There can be great rewards when entering intimate space but
there are also great risks, so be thoughtful about your client’s space.
Similarly, if you leave the “casual-personal” space of a client, which is
19 inches to four feet, you also stand at risk of losing the focus of atten-
tion of the client. Ideally, most of your communication with a new client
should be at a distance of two to four feet, measuring nose to nose.This
is appropriate, and generally you begin communication at the four-foot
perimeter of space and slowly move closer as you build rapport with
your client.
There’s more to it than just how far you are standing or seated from
someone. The actual space you occupy while in the persuasion process
Al Gore Teaches a Lesson about Influential Space
27
Almost all people feel threatened when their space is entered,
especially when the perpetrator is physically larger than they are.

makes a great deal of difference as to the result of the process. Imagine that
you are making a sale at a kitchen table.Would it matter if it were in your
client’s kitchen or yours? Imagine that you were closing a deal in a restau-
rant and then contrast that with closing the same deal in a nightclub. Dif-
ferent? Of course it is.
Now imagine that you are in an office setting and that your client is
sitting directly across from you. Next, imagine that your client is sitting to
the right of you. Imagine you are standing in a retail store next to your
client. Now, imagine that you are seated and your client is seated. How are
each of these different to you? Each of these images creates very different
feelings and probabilities of influencing your client.
Remember: Only the exceptional person is a 10.Almost everyone can
dress like a 10, walk like a 10, and elect to look as good as they can for
every dinner, meeting, and get-together. Physical features and how you
utilize those physical features matter. You can’t change what your face
looks like, but you can change your frown into a smile and increase your
face value.Your waistline is under your control and it matters.Your hair (if
you have hair!) is under your control, and hair is very important in
whether people filter you in or out.The first few seconds make all the dif-
ference in the world! They matter so much that you can’t afford to ever
neglect them again. Remember people will judge you in the first four sec-
onds.The rest of this book will show you what to do next, whether people
initially think “yes” or “no.”
Thirteen Secrets of Making a Magnetic 
First Impression That Will Last a Lifetime
Whether it is your first meeting with a person or a current meeting with
someone you already are familiar with, the first few minutes are more
than critical to the outcome, they essentially are the outcome. Harvard
tells us that the first 30 seconds of a meeting are critical. I agree, with the
added note that the first four seconds of any influential encounter are the
most important.
28
The First Four Seconds

With this in mind you can make some significant preparatory ef-
forts so your message is received with the greatest likelihood to draw a
“yes!” response.
1.
Dress about 10 percent better than you expect your client/cus-
tomer to be dressed. Do not overdress or underdress. Both of
these choices are considered disrespectful by clients.
2. People feel most comfortable when others seem to be like
them in appearance, beliefs, or values. Predict the values and
beliefs of your clients and customers and emulate or at least be
aware of these factors so that you are prepared to make your
best first impression.
3. You should be immaculate when you meet your client/customer.
This means you should smell clean (not heavily cologned, as
many men and women use far too much of the smelly stuff), have
your hair trim and neat, and physically appear as good as you pos-
sibly can.
4. Find out what values are most important to a person in doing
business with you and determine those values that are relevant to
your product/service.“What is most important to you in possibly
doing business with me?”
5. Ask your client how he knows when he has his values met. If he
tells you fast service is his highest value, ask him, “How do you
determine what fast service is?”
6. Ask your client: If you give him his highest value (fast service in
this instance), will he work with you? If not, then what really is
his highest value? (He’s holding back and you have not yet devel-
oped a trusting rapport.)
7. Be certain that you know what your client needs your product/
service to do. Needs and values are often different from each
other, and we aren’t interested in what your service could do for
your customer but what it must do for your customer to be loyal
to you. “If you had to pick one thing that our service/product
must do for you, what would it be?”
Thirteen Secrets of Making a Magnetic First Impression
29

8. Be certain to note the client’s speaking and listening pace (they
are generally identical) and match them as closely as possible. Do
not speak so fast that your client fails to process what you are say-
ing (if your client speaks slowly), and do not speak slowly if your
client processes rapidly (clue: your client speaks rapidly) as you
will bore him.
9. If you are nervous about your meeting for whatever reason, then
your client probably is as well.Take advantage of the brain’s orga-
nization and keep your client to your right if possible when shak-
ing hands, sitting, and communicating.This accesses more of the
left brain for both you and your client and allows you both to re-
lax and perform more analytically.
10. When meeting with women (regardless of whether you are male
or female) you should try to keep your eye level below that of
your counterpart. Research reveals that almost all women are
more comfortable and less intimidated when their eye level is
higher than those around them.
11. When clients are particularly emotional do not exceed their level
of emotion as you model their behavior. Do allow yourself to be
somewhat upset/concerned by the cause of their anger.“The city
is making you pay an extra $20,000 for your license this year?
What is that about?!”
12. Be familiar with the terminology of the business/profession of
your clients. Research reveals that using the exact same buzz-
words and corporate lingo your customer does identifies you as
an insider and makes your client more likely to say “yes” to you.
13. Show sincere interest and fascination with your client/customer,
their interests, pursuits, and business. Nothing is as important in
building rapport as an honest and caring interest in the person
you are trying to influence.
30
The First Four Seconds

3
The Delta 
Model of Influence
What about everything that happens after those first four seconds? What
next? Every book I’ve ever read about persuasion, influence, and selling
neglected to put strategies and techniques into a usable sequence for at
least some presentations.
There are hundreds of ways to present information to clients, cus-
tomers, prospects, and buyers.The Delta Model of Influence is one of my
top 10 favorite models of selling. I call it the Delta Model because delta
means small or incremental. (Read that as “subtle.”) When you are making
your presentations and proposals to others in the sales process you should
note that the following key elements are occurring whether it is a one-on-
one lunch date or a speech before a group of 1,000.This model is effective
and I recommend you utilize it often in your business.This chapter out-
lines the model for you so you have an idea of how to present whatever it
is you want to communicate. It all begins with rapport.
31

The Seven Keys to Rapport
Before I delve into the subject of rapport with you, I want you to see the
seven keys to establishing and maintaining rapport. Everything else you
read in this chapter will then be filtered through these seven points.
1. A person of influence must synchronize with the customer using
modeling, mirroring, pacing, and matching.
2. A person of influence shows true, genuine, and sincere interest in
clients and customers.
3. As a person of influence, confirm you are in rapport with your
client or customer.
4. Find out what is most important to your client/customer (iden-
tify values).
5. Ask questions to discover the rules that define your customer’s
values.
6. Ask questions to identify needs.
7. Ask questions to discover the rules that define the customer’s
needs.
The Bridge to Their Heart: Rapport
Comfort. People want to be comfortable. Most people live in personal
or corporate environments that either are not conducive to loving com-
munication or are worse—often hostile and unkind.When people are in
our presence we want them to feel at ease. This sometimes means we
have to do those things we know will make people feel comfortable,
with that as our sole intention. Building rapport often entails doing and
32
The Delta Model of Influence
People want to be comfortable.

saying things that seem awkward but are perceived by others as loving
and sensitive.
Rapport is the perceived affinity between two or more people.
Most people enjoy talking about themselves and probably don’t get to
do this as often as they would like.This is one reason the values determina-
tion model is so important and effective.When you ask people about their
values, you are asking them about their most highly held feelings and
thoughts.This is an important element in understanding people and can
greatly assist in developing rapport.
Your ability to build and maintain rapport in communication is one of
the key skills of being a caring communicator.A great example of rapport
building in literature (and one of my all-time favorite stories) is found in
the New Testament.You may remember the story of the Apostle Paul trav-
eling to Greece. Athens at that time had a mostly pagan culture.The city
was filled with idols and temples to mythological gods. As a Jew, this was
repugnant to Paul. Some of the local philosophers challenged Paul to a de-
bate and brought him to the infamous Mars Hill. It is here that we pick up
Paul’s ability to create rapport and touch people.
“Men of Athens, I perceive that in all things you are very religious.” (This
immediately breaks their skeptical pattern of thinking and creates an in-
stant bridge for Paul to metaphorically walk on.)
“. . . for as I was passing through and considering the objects of your worship,
I even found an altar with the inscription:To the Unknown God.Therefore, the
One whom you worship without knowing, Him I proclaim to you.” (Paul uses his
rapport-building skills masterfully.The altar is one of the Greeks’ objects of
worship.The God Paul wants to discuss is one of the Greeks’ gods. He is
not going to talk about some new god!)
“God, who made the world and everything in it, since He is Lord of heaven
and earth, does not dwell in temples made with hands.” (God made the
world, Paul tells the Greeks. He is obviously much too big to live in a
man-made temple.)
Paul continues his discourse, explaining that God gives us life,
our breath, and a place to live. He explains that God needs nothing 
from us.
The Bridge to Their Heart: Rapport
33

“. . . for Him we live and move and have our being, as also some of your own
poets have said,‘For we are also his offspring.’”
“Therefore, since we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that
the Divine Nature is like gold or silver or stone, something shaped by art and
man’s devising.”
Paul once again maintains rapport by returning to and citing the
Greeks’ authorities. Building rapport is one step. Maintaining rapport and
bridging into the message you wish to tell is another.
“Truly, these times of ignorance God overlooked, but now commands all men
everywhere to repent, because He has appointed a day on which he will judge the
world in righteousness by the man he has ordained. He has given assurance of this
to all by raising him from the dead.”
Paul has reached the crux of his message and has held the attention of
his audience. The rapport that Paul built with the antagonistic philoso-
phers is the key to his successful communication here.
Rapport is much more than verbal compliments and praise, of course.
Nonverbal behavior is involved as well.
Nonverbal Rapport-Building Skills
I Physical appearance. An individual’s dress and grooming can help
make someone feel comfortable or out of place. How we dress in
large part determines how much people will trust and like us. Each
situation has a proper manner of dress affiliated with it. It seems like
an inauthentic part of communication to dress in a certain manner
to set people at ease, but indeed it is very authentic.You are dressing
a certain way to help the people you communicate with feel com-
34
The Delta Model of Influence
How we dress in large part determines how much people will trust
and like us.

fortable.You have gone beyond your needs and desires regarding
dress to those of others.
I Vocal cues. It is best to gain rapport by matching the same rate and
tone of voice that your fellow communicator is using. It is not nec-
essary to mimic the other person; simply alter your speech patterns
in the direction of the other person.
I Posture and physiology. One of the most effective methods to gain
rapport is to match the posture and physiology of your partner. Sit-
ting or standing in a similar fashion is called, “pacing.” You can
check later in your communication to see if you are actually in rap-
port by “leading.” Leading means, for example, that if you are both
sitting with uncrossed legs, you cross your legs. The other person
will follow suit shortly, assuming you are in rapport. Once you have
effectively led the other person, you can share your ideas and
thoughts more constructively.
I Breathing. Watch how and from where the other person is breath-
ing.You can pace the person’s breathing pattern as a powerful mode
to build rapport. People who breathe at the same rate are usually in
sync with each other. When you make love with someone your
breathing normally is matched breath for breath.
All of these rapport builders lead us to an important key involving au-
thentic communication: You must often be more like others than yourself if your
goal is to engage people in deep and intimate relationships.
Remember a time when you were in complete rapport with some-
one. This is a time that you both were almost thinking the same thing.
Were you sitting near each other? Was your physiology similar? Think of
another time and answer the same questions.
During these moments of rapport did you feel that you were on a roll
or experiencing enthusiasm or other intense emotion at the time?
On a piece of paper or in a personal journal record your memories of
a time when you felt very self-conscious about your body.
Write about a time when you felt very uncomfortable with another
person or a group.
Nonverbal Rapport-Building Skills
35

Using some of the information you have learned in this chapter,
how might you have been more comfortable in these situations? Record
your thoughts.
The 21-Point Delta Model
Having thoroughly tickled your conscious and unconscious mind, it’s
time to look at the Delta Model of Influence. Each point is numbered so
you will be able to identify your strengths and weaknesses in this area as
you progress.
1. Establishing and Maintaining Rapport
Rapport can be defined as being in sync with another person. Generally
people are more likely to be in rapport with someone else if they like that
person. How do you know if you are in rapport? Answer this question:
Are they responding to you in a positive manner?
If so, you are in rapport.
I remember what Zig Ziglar said at a seminar,“They don’t care how
much you know until they know how much you care.”Therefore, you will
want to begin to develop a sense of empathy and sincere curiosity about
others. Rapport occurs on different levels of communication.You can be
technically skilled at acting and appear to be in rapport, but if you don’t
sincerely care about your customer and the people you are working with,
what is the point? There are several methods of developing rapport.
2. Using Content to Build Rapport
Discover what people’s interests are, and if you are not already in tune with
a customer’s interest, learn about it. People like to talk about what they
love and what they know about! When I teach “Mind Access” seminars,
36
The Delta Model of Influence

one of my favorite stories about building rapport is the “learning about
fishing” story. Living in Minnesota, I have many clients who are avid fish-
ermen. How would I connect with my clients knowing absolutely nothing
about fishing? I grew up a Chicago Cubs fan and child prodigy in mathe-
matics, and even though I lived very close to Lake Michigan, unlike most
kids I never enjoyed fishing.
In Minnesota, a big deal is made every year when it is time for the
“opener.”To my mind,“opener” means opening day at Wrigley Field.The
only Wrigley many of my customers know about, though, is the chewing
gum. It seemed I was doomed to never meeting many of my clients at
more than a superficial level . . . until one day I decided to learn about
fishing by asking all of my clients who love fishing to tell me their favorite
fishing stories. I began asking questions that to them must have seemed ab-
solutely ridiculous. Over the past few years, I have built an array of knowl-
edge and stories about fishing. I can direct you to all of the best lakes for
fishing and I can tell you what to fish for at these lakes . . . and I’ve never
been fishing in the state, not once.You can build a great deal of rapport
and long-term friendships by showing and experiencing sincere interest in
what is important to other people. Sharing the experiences of your client’s
hobbies, lifestyle, and interests is using content to build rapport.
3. Using Processes to Build Rapport
There is more to building rapport than swapping fishing stories. Becoming
in sync with another person or a group can take a great deal of skill, in ad-
dition to the sincere interest that is necessary in building relationships.
Many customers will not feel comfortable discussing their families, hob-
bies, and lifestyles with you, a perfectly nice perfect stranger. How does the
ice get broken when stories are very uncomfortable for the customer?
The 21-Point Delta Model
37
People like to talk about what they love and what they know about!

Many of your customers were taught as children to not talk to strangers.
Many of your customers were taught to keep private matters private. How
do you help these customers become comfortable with you?
4. Pacing
When in doubt, the most effective way to begin building rapport with
anyone is by pacing. Pacing is essentially synonymous with matching or
mirroring. In other words, be like your customer, because he likes people
who are like him.There are a number of techniques that can be used to ef-
fectively pace your client, to begin building rapport.
5. Use of Your Voice
Imagine that your customer is in an upset mood. He has a sharp edge to
his voice as you get to make your presentation. Many salespeople would
attempt to get him out of his mood with enthusiasm or a cheery story. In
fact, the rule of thumb is when in doubt, pace your client. If your client
has an edge in his voice, let your voice have an edge. If he sounds angry, let
yourself be angry—however, briefly with something that occurred today
as well.This vocal pacing will help put you in sync with your client. Even-
tually you will lead your client out of the negative frame of mind, if you
choose to. (There are many times when a negative frame of mind is neces-
sary to making a sale.)
There is more that you can do with your voice than match the tone
of your client.We all speak with a measurable average number of words
per minute. Many people drawn to the sales profession speak quickly.
Part of this experience is due to the nature of the business—we are ob-
ligated to be quick and to the point. Unfortunately, if your client speaks
slowly and you are speaking quickly to meet a time constraint, you
probably will lose the sale. People tend to speak at a rate that is consis-
38
The Delta Model of Influence

tent with how they process their thoughts and internal representations.
If people tend to think in pictures (movies), they tend to speak very
quickly. People who tend to speak very slowly process information
through their feelings and emotions. In between are people we call the
radio announcers who speak with more rich and resonant voices and
normally think in words.
Your ideal is to speak in the same rate and pitch of voice as your client.
6. Why Pace Breathing?
Admittedly, one of the more difficult pacing techniques is that of pacing
your customer’s breathing. Breathing is one of the most unconscious of all
body functions, and pacing of breathing is one of the great rhythm gener-
ators of all time.Two people in the heat of sexual passion often are breath-
ing at the exact same pace. Two people sitting side by side in deep
meditation often experience the same exhale and inhale points. In group
hypnosis, hypnotherapists find that having the group breathe together ac-
tually creates a wonderful bonding rapport in the room.As you watch your
client breathe, begin to breathe in when she does.When she exhales, begin
to exhale at the same time. It is best to practice this pacing technique
when you are not in verbal communication with people. For example, if
you are waiting in line somewhere and someone is talking to someone
else, begin to pace their breathing.You can practice this at home by pacing
someone who is unaware that you are doing it. Our research shows that
pacing another person’s breathing results in the two people regarding each
other more favorably.
The 21-Point Delta Model
39
People tend to speak at a rate that is consistent with how they process
their thoughts and internal representations.

7. Physiology and Posture
Pacing someone’s posture and physiology is much easier than pacing
someone’s breathing. If you sit erect and stiff and your client is seated in a
comfortable, relaxed manner, you are not likely to develop the rapport you
hope for. Pacing physiology too closely can be a mistake, though. If every
move your client makes is mirrored immediately back at him, he will be-
gin to feel uncomfortable.The most effective manner of pacing physiology
is to match the posture and general body position of the other person.The
next few points on leading, describe how to appropriately test your pacing
skills with your client and be certain you have established rapport.
8. Leading
Developing a sincere interest in relationships and friendships with others is
the first step in the sales process. Pacing your customer is the second step.
Leading comes third. A lead is successful when the person follows you. If
you are sitting across from your client and you both have similar physiology
and you are both enjoying each other’s company, you have an opportunity
to now begin leading, which is the beginning of the active processes in sell-
ing. Will the client now follow you into the sales presentation? You have
been following him for minutes and minutes.You’ve matched his vocal pac-
ing and his physiology.You have shared mutual interests. Now it is time to
take a nonverbal break from pacing and start leading. If your client follows
your lead you have successfully built rapport at the unconscious level and
you can begin your sales presentation momentarily. The next two points
describe key methods of determining if you are in rapport with your client.
9. Leading with the Tone, Rate, or Pitch of Your Voice
If you have been successfully matching your client, you have an opportu-
nity to lead by altering one of your vocal qualities.You may, for example,
40
The Delta Model of Influence

increase your speaking rate a little bit and induce a more enthusiastic at-
titude in the tone of your voice to help you bridge the conversation to
your product.The context of your discussion will help determine when
and if this is appropriate.When you notice that the client follows your
lead with a more enthusiastic voice, an increased rate of speech, a higher
or lower tone of voice, you can feel assured you have successfully devel-
oped rapport.
10. Leading with Physiology, Posture, and Movement
The simplest movements that you make will often be mirrored identically
by a customer in rapport with you. Imagine that you have been sitting
with a hand to your chin for several minutes, as has your customer.You be-
lieve you are ready to test to be certain you are in rapport. If you are sitting
at a restaurant, you can move your hand to pick up a glass of water and
watch to see what your client does. If he follows you by also picking up his
glass of water, or even picking up a pen or a napkin, you have successfully
led your client to the next stage of the selling process.
You need to begin the rapport process again if your client does not
follow your lead.
11. Inducing Reciprocity
Building rapport begins within you.The entire process of building rapport
is built on the foundation of concern, caring, compassion, interest, and a
desire for the well-being of your customer. Pacing and leading comprise a
The 21-Point Delta Model
41
The simplest movements that you make will often be mirrored
identically by a customer in rapport with you.

process that creates comfort for you and the client to know that you are
moving along at a pace that is appropriate for the client.The entire process
of building rapport, pacing, and leading could take as little time as one
minute and as much as an hour or more.After rapport has been established
you can enter into the body of your presentation.There are many ways to
begin the sales presentation, but my favorite is to give my client some-
thing. I regularly give a book that I wrote called The Gift: A Discovery of
Love, Happiness, and Fulfillment to my clients at this point.
You may not have a book to give, so here are some ideas to consider
when deciding how you will induce reciprocity. What you will give to
your customer to induce reciprocity will be in part based on the average
profit per sale and the significance of your gift. Gifts tend to be recipro-
cated with sales in direct correlation to the dollar value of the gift that is
given. Specialty items like pens, date books, and calendars are perceived as
advertising items and do not induce reciprocity.You must think of some-
thing appropriate that you can give to your customer that will be appreci-
ated. Inducing reciprocity is not just a sales technique; it is a way of life.
There is almost a metaphysical energy that seems to emanate from the giv-
ing of gifts. Expect nothing in return when you induce reciprocity. The
simple act of giving helps you develop a caring and compassionate person-
ality.That is what people are buying when they buy from you: you!
12. Sharing Part of You with Them
Show your confidence in your customers by helping them with one of
their potential clients. In other words, offer to help them in any way you
can. Can you make a phone call for them as a referral? Can you help them
bring more business to their store by taking 50 of their business cards?
What can you do to freely help them with their business that is above and
beyond the scope of your sales call? Offer to help. I’ve done this for years in
selling and marketing, and my kindness has been returned a thousand
times over.Would you be willing to write them a testimonial on your let-
42
The Delta Model of Influence

terhead for them to show their customers? That is the kind of treatment
you would like from your customers, so why not offer it first?
13. The Common Enemy
Nothing binds two people, groups, or nations like a common enemy. Find
your customer’s enemy and align yourself with your customer’s viewpoint.
Do the same people try to hurt your mutual businesses? Resonate with
your customers. Once someone shares with you who his enemies are, you
have built a relationship for life. Does your customer hate the IRS? Taxes?
Unemployment compensation insurance? Lawsuits? Government? Crimi-
nals? Drugs? Gangs? What are the common threats to business and society
that you both dislike and you both know hurt your businesses? You won’t
find a common enemy in every sales interview, but if you are thinking of
the theme, the opportunity to put both of you on the same side of the
table will occur during about half your interviews. Once you have a com-
mon enemy you have a sale and a lifetime relationship.
14. A Short Story about Someone like Them
If you can build a reservoir of stories (short stories) about people who have
become your customers, you can utilize this selling tool.Tell today’s cus-
tomer about another customer who recently bought from you.This cus-
tomer should be someone they remind you of. You can build an
entrancing sales presentation around such stories, and they make great
lead-ins to the core of your presentation.
The 21-Point Delta Model
43
Nothing binds two people, groups, or nations like a common enemy.

15. Respect
Sincerely show respect for the person via a compliment.Always be looking
for things to like about other people.A little respect goes a long way, and
you cannot underestimate the value of a sincere compliment of respect in
the selling environment.
16. Knocking Their Socks Off
The shortest amount of time we spend with any client is normally that of
the actual sales presentation. When you begin the process, the very first
thing you do is this: Blow them away with an astonishing claim, an amaz-
ing fact, something that few would know. Show them something astound-
ing that no one else has shown them. Make the biggest claim that you can
substantiate.The client will always remember and consider this introduc-
tion. Start strong, finish strong.Your claim for your product or your service
should be colossal and it must be true. Knock their socks off.
17. Always Giving More Than You Promised
Napoleon Hill always made sure his audiences knew the principle of going
the extra mile. Follow the examples of those who sell who become mil-
lionaires. If you promise something, make sure that your customer gets ex-
actly what you promise and then some. Remember that phrase: . . . and
then some!
18. The Power of Understatement
After making your big, fat claim, you can quickly work your way into your
sales presentation.This is the time to make sure you don’t overinflate your
product or service.You made your big, fat claim; now support it with the
44
The Delta Model of Influence

power of understatement. In other words, if your mutual fund portfolio
has a track record of 12 percent return per year over the past 10 years, then
understate that by saying, “Now, if you average 10 percent per year . . .”
For 10 years you have earned a 12 percent return, but you are being con-
servative for your client and he knows it and appreciates it.
19. Be Precise:Then Beat Your Precision
If you know that this automobile is going to get your customer 19 miles
per gallon, tell him that.Then tell him a secret.“But if you use Mobil One
oil you can literally add an extra three miles per gallon of gas, and that
translates to an extra $100 of gasoline savings per year.” Be precise, then be
better than being precise.
20. Get It Done Faster, Easier, Better
You live in an age when your customer wants everything to be better,
cheaper, faster, quicker, smarter, easier, more luxurious. So promise what
you can, and then deliver . . . and then some. If they tell you that your com-
petitor will get them X, then if you can really do it, you tell your customer
that you are going to get them X + 2. Never be beaten because of the lack
of going the extra mile.What can you do for your customer that no other
agent will do for them? What can you do for them that no one else in the
business does? Answer these questions, then do it.
21. Be on the Edge of Your Seat
Pay attention with bated breath to every word your customer has to say. It
should be clear that what your customer has to say is the most important
thing in either of your worlds at that moment . . . and it is. If these were
the last words you would hear while you were alive you would want to
The 21-Point Delta Model
45

know what your customer has to say. Live your sales presentation as if the
significance of each word will change your very life. Relationships are ce-
mented when you do this. With the attitude of respect, going the extra
mile, and intense excitement about your customer and his life, you won’t
need to use a multiplicity of closing tactics on your customer. He will de-
mand that you sell him your product—now!
Fifteen Never-Before-Revealed Secrets 
to Optimize Persuasive Messages
Revelation is exciting! Over the next few pages you will discover some of
the most powerful secrets of influence.
Primacy and Listing Order
Knowing what order to present information in makes all the difference in
the world, literally.
I think most people would agree that in elections when the voter is
not familiar with the names on the ballot, it is simplest to choose the
first option. What’s interesting is that research clearly shows that order
makes a difference even in large-scale elections with recognizable names
of candidates!
As reported by Jon Krosnick, in the 2000 presidential race, George W.
Bush received 9 percent more votes among Californians in districts where he
was listed first on the ballot than where he was listed later. Even in high-
profile elections such as the presidential race, name order in balloting does
make a big difference.
46
The Delta Model of Influence
Pay attention with bated breath to every word your customer has 
to say.

In general, we know there is a huge advantage to being listed first. In
multiple-choice questions, people often choose “A” simply because it is
listed first. But knowing that the world can change due to list order is
amazing! In all three states where name order was studied (California,
North Dakota, and Ohio), Bush got more votes when listed first on the
ballot. Other candidates studied also received more votes when listed first.
Name recognition and other factors may make a difference, but the impact
of name order is clear.
Peripheral Cues and Central Cues
Being listed first on the ballot is what’s called a peripheral cue.A peripheral
cue is a factor that is not relevant to the main factor. It is a factor not cen-
tral to the decision in question. Central cues are the main factors involved in
making a decision.
Do not underestimate the value of the information in this piece of re-
search. Bush received 9 percent more votes when he was listed first.That is
upwards of 100,000 votes or more! You will need to utilize this informa-
tion when you are positioning yourself in your sales and speaking and per-
suading career.
In a three-choice list, you should be first or last. In a list of more
choices, most people won’t get to the end of the list.When presenting in-
formation to others, you want people to select “your choice.”That means
describing and detailing it first (or last).
Today we take the process of persuasion and help you tailor your mes-
sage with some pretty shocking tactics. A tactic differs from a strategy in
that a strategy is more of a plan.A tactic is one element, a smaller piece of
the strategy.
I confess that there is some knowledge in the arena of influence that
Fifteen Never-Before-Revealed Secrets to Optimize Persuasive Messages 47
In a three-choice list, you should be first or last.

even I simply don’t like to part with.The value is so great that it’s worth
keeping quiet about.Yet, when I started the Science of Influence series of
CDs (the foundation for this book), I was compelled to put (almost)
everything on the table for the program.This is one of the dozen or so in a
collection of secrets that I didn’t plan on bringing out because the material
is so profound that it will soon be replicated by others and will bring the
cumulative value of the information down in five years. Nevertheless, I
want you to have it. This collection of secrets is about optimizing your
persuasive message.
After producing the first 28 CDs in the Science of Influence series,
one thing is now clear to me. A plethora of variables, useful tactics,
powerful strategies, and precision models in the process of gaining com-
pliance exist and now can easily be made operational.There are also nu-
merous models of persuasion and influence that can help you gain
compliance rapidly.
Did you know that for a significant number of sales calls, persuasive
presentations, and proposals you should not mention the benefits of you,
your product, service, or idea? Heresy, you say? Heretical, yes; and ab-
solutely proven factual.
Did you know that different people need different amounts of infor-
mation and if you guess wrong as to how much and what you say you lose
the client, the sale, the date, and the deal? True.
And that’s just the beginning.
Knowing When Enough Is Enough: Before You Begin
“Too much information!”
You hear that sometimes when you tell someone something that they
really didn’t need to know. Maybe it was about an operation or some bad
food or changing the baby’s diaper. Just about anything about these sub-
jects will draw the response “too much information!” from some people.
What about in selling? In the process of persuasion? How about ask-
ing for the date? Closing the deal?
48
The Delta Model of Influence

Is it possible to give too much information and lose the sale?
Yes, it happens all the time.
Is it possible to not give enough information and screw up the sale?
Yes, it happens all the time.
Can you predict when to give what amount of information?
Yes!!
In fact, this one factor is so important that if you guess wrong you will
definitely lose the sale. Period.
How much information to give someone is just one crucial piece of
information you must know to optimize every persuasive presentation.
How you determine this is based on whether the person you are commu-
nicating with is likely to mentally process your information peripherally or
centrally. (Now, don’t freak out!)
That means, are they actually considering, pondering, analyzing, and
thinking about your message? Or are they relying on other cues like
positive images or positive values for the answer? (Your appearance,
your expertise, your status, your company reputation, and so on are all
examples of peripheral cues that have nothing to do with your actual
message: your presentation.)
The more information your clients consider and the more they
evaluate, the more information you need to give them. The less in-
formation they want, the more likely they will say “no” if you go into
great detail.
There are other things that are crucial to success as well. Message
repetition, prior knowledge, self-referencing, and other factors will determine
whether you will be successful in persuading someone to your way of
thinking.
Fifteen Never-Before-Revealed Secrets to Optimize Persuasive Messages 49
How much information to give someone is just one crucial piece of
information you must know to optimize every persuasive
presentation.

Repetition
Remember the old Budweiser commercial where there were three frogs
sitting on their logs and they repeated the words,“Bud,”“Weis,”“Er.”—
over and over and over until it was ingrained in your mind. So, the next
time you were presented with a choice to order a beer, what did you
say? “Bud-Weis-Er.” Repetition (a peripheral cue) makes a difference in
decision making.
When making a presentation, the simple repetition of key thoughts,
ideas, and concepts can pay off big time. In a presentation about how to
give a speech, this is what speakers bureau owner Dottie Walters said:
“Tell them what you’re going to tell them, tell them, and tell them what
you told them.”That was it.There is a lot to be said for the ancient tactic
of repetition.
Dramatic Difference
What is memorable about you and your product? What is the dramatic dif-
ference between you and your competition? If your customers don’t re-
member what it is, they will say “no.” Stress the dramatic difference
between you and the person next to you. Show the quality difference, and
repeat it over and over.They may not hire you today, but in the future they
may.When they think of you, they will think of the dramatic difference,
and it will make a difference in the outcome of their decision.
50
The Delta Model of Influence
“Tell them what you’re going to tell them, tell them, and tell them
what you told them.”
—Dottie Walters

Repeatable Message
I can’t stress enough the importance of a repeatable message. Find a way to
put your message in a form that is easily repeatable. When I have made
mistakes in the past in influence, it is when I failed to create a meme, or a
message that can be easily replicated. Memes are ideas that pass from per-
son to person to person.These are the ideas that spread like wildfire—and
result in lots of sales!
Remember the beer commercial that showed the Bud Bowl? As the
Super Bowl progressed, the beer bottles played football just like the real
players in the game. Budweiser is expert at using peripheral cues to sell its
beer. Bud Bowl/Super Bowl.Who always wins? Bud. Bud. Bud.
Miller Lite also used the concept in its “Tastes Great/Less Filling”
campaign. Remember this? An interesting sidebar on this campaign is that
after the Miller Lite commercials, the concept of light beer hit big, and
every brand came out with a light beer. “Light beer” became so generic
that Miller had to let go of the concept.
Prior Knowledge
How much do your clients know about your product beforehand? When
they already know about your product, you should not share the benefits
with them.When they already are experts and have that knowledge, you
must speak to that prior knowledge in great detail.When your customer is
not an expert, in contrast, you must share the benefits with them.
Physical Attractiveness
Surprising research reveals that your physical attractiveness makes a differ-
ence when communicating with an expert. When you’re talking about
the numbers, statistics, and details, physical appearance does not seem to
Fifteen Never-Before-Revealed Secrets to Optimize Persuasive Messages 51

matter. But when you are simply verbally communicating with an expert,
you should always look your best.
How Much Is Too Much?
With regard  to how much information to give someone, here is a good rule
of thumb:The more expert a person is in a given area, the more features
(not benefits) that person needs information about to make a decision.
Knowledgeable people are going to match your message to what they al-
ready have stored in their memory and mind. If you come across as not
knowing the actual working details of whatever your idea or proposal is,
you lose. If you have quality information, you engage the client and opti-
mize your chances of making the sale.
When a person is not an expert in a certain area, less information is
generally more likely to be processed more quickly and favorably.And be-
cause in this case less is better, you want that message to be very different.
You want to share benefits and not features with this client. When the
client is not an expert, peripheral cues become crucial.
Self-Referencing
When you are communicating with your clients/customers, be absolutely
certain to “paint them in the picture of your presentation.” Research
clearly shows that your clients will give far more consideration to your
proposal and will remember it in greater detail if your presentation en-
courages them to see themselves using your product or service. Remem-
52
The Delta Model of Influence
The more expert a person is in a given area, the more features (not
benefits) that person needs information about to make a decision.

ber that self-referencing is a peripheral cue. If you are the expert or your
sources are and the client has marginal knowledge, then self-referencing is
a powerful peripheral cue to use. However, if your clients have tons of
product/service/idea knowledge and you spend time on getting them in
the picture, you are wasting your time and blowing the presentation!
The more people self-reference the more likely they are to buy, and
the more likely they are to remember you and your services.
This is true for almost all advertising where the customer/client has
some motivation to use your services. (If the client has no motivation to
make use of you, all the self-referencing in the world won’t make the sale!)
Remember the controversial commercial that came out about a year
ago where the two beautiful and scantily clad girls were wrestling in the
mud? It aired a lot in 2003 but:What was the product? If you guessed beer
you got that right. But what brand? Right, most other people don’t know,
either. It was Miller, but you get the point.Viewers may have a great feel-
ing toward mud in the future but they are unlikely to find a particular
brand of beer interesting because of the ad.
Why? There was no viewer involvement with the product. Had the
catfight girls sipped on the beer during their bout or had they used the
beer cans as defensive weapons, then the product could be referenced by
the viewer. But there is no linkage between the commercial and use and
therefore the commercial ultimately fails.
So what did the Miller folks do when they finally figured this out?
They pulled the plug on the catfight girls last month and added Pamela
Anderson in lingerie in a bedroom scene, which is enough to get any-
one’s attention, but, does she hold a Miller Lite? Does she drink any
Miller Lite? Does she have a tattoo of a Miller Lite? Does she in any way
talk with you the viewer about buying her a Miller Lite (self-referenc-
ing!) No. She holds a pillow and throws it at another beautiful woman,
making for an enjoyable 30 seconds, a controversial TV spot, and of
Fifteen Never-Before-Revealed Secrets to Optimize Persuasive Messages 53
Remember that self-referencing is a peripheral cue.

course ultimately another 1 to 2 percent market share lost. No self-refer-
encing—no money made!
Remember the controversial and sexy Calvin Klein commercial
where the models all appeared to be under 18? The press went nuts. Even-
tually Calvin Klein got what they wanted.They had 18-year-olds posing as
14-year-olds in hot jeans that teens could identify with (self-referencing)
and they had all the free advertising from the controversy.The commercials
became news and thus were running for free (genius)! However, the key
difference was the self-referencing for the target audience.The teens could
see themselves wearing the jeans and ultimately did indeed buy them,
making for a brilliant campaign.
Authority
In a presentation, a person who is considered a credible source, an author-
ity, is more likely to make the sale. In the next chapter I share with you this
research on credibility.
When talking with your clients, you must make it known that you are
the source, the expert. (But you should also be aware that source credibil-
ity does not convince those who also are experts.) The fact that you are an
expert can tend to create competition in the mind of your buyer. Short-
term, anyone can be an expert. Long-term, if you can show that you are
the expert, you can make the sale.
With this group of people it is not the message that matters, it is the
fact that you are the source, the expert.With nonexperts, you focus on
the message.
Arousal
Arousal decreases central processing in the brain and increases peripheral
processing. If you want your clients to be persuaded by central cues,
54
The Delta Model of Influence

you will need to keep arousal to a minimum. If you want them to be
persuaded by peripheral cues, you should utilize covert tactics to in-
crease arousal and make them open to the peripheral cues you are opti-
mizing. It is to be noted that arousal can be excitation, happiness, and/
or enthusiasm.
Directed Thinking
You want to be able to direct your client’s thinking in the persuasive process.
You would like to be able to get across the idea of finding the difference
between you and the norm of the category. Once you have them thinking
about that, you’ve locked in a piece of the sales puzzle.
For example, what is the difference between Kevin Hogan and other
speakers? I do not have a prepared presentation. Mine is a stream-of-con-
sciousness presentation, and one speech is never the same as another. Other
presenters try to make you believe their speeches are not prepared, and
they may get lost in their presentations. How is my speech a little different
from theirs? I don’t want to be totally different from the rest. Show that
you have made alterations, improvements, and adjustments from others.
Now we return to the concept of the dramatic difference.This is a great
place to share what that is with your client.
Unusual Claims
When trying to hook the client, you can use the tactic of unusual claims.
Examples would be:
“I’ll show you seven things no one has ever shown you before.”
“Here are three new ways to clean your shower without putting on
gloves.”
“Pay your bills without ever writing another check.”
Fifteen Never-Before-Revealed Secrets to Optimize Persuasive Messages 55

Checklisting
If you look at a successful hotel ad or credit card brochure, you will see a
list of benefits you will get with this product.Then next to that list will be
the competitor and its list of benefits—which always comes up short.
The competition has fewer items checked off.The comparison is pre-
sented clearly.We have more benefits! Checklisting is one of the most pow-
erful tactics you can use in your advertising and promotion.
56
The Delta Model of Influence

4
Credibility:
The Pivot Point 
of Persuasion
Perception of Credibility: Do You Have It? 
It Means Everything
His Holiness the Dalai Lama, John F. Kennedy, Ronald Reagan, Bill Clin-
ton, Oprah Winfrey, Adolf Hitler, Osama bin Laden, Benjamin Franklin
. . . all masters of persuasion.They differ(ed) very much in their goals, ob-
jectives, and vision but they are/were all successful at influencing the
masses. Why? Credibility. Among those they wanted to influence, they
are/were believable.They knew their business.They knew their outcomes.
They were incredibly competent.
Credibility is one of the common denominators of success at influenc-
ing others. Credibility . . . (O’Keefe 1990, 181), is the “perceiver concern-
ing the believability judgments made by a communicator.”
57

Credibility Is the Pivot Point
Credibility matters. Credibility is the pivot point in influence. Unfortu-
nately, it doesn’t initially matter whether you have credibility (or are credi-
ble); it matters whether you are perceived that way.
The perception of your credibility is critical to your being recognized
as a person of influence. Credibility is an emergence of six component fac-
tors of which the first is most crucial to success in persuasion.
What factors make up credibility?
1. Competence.
2. Trustworthiness.
3. Expertise.
4. Likability.
5. Composure.
6. Sociability.
Competence is the first major component in the credibility puzzle. Go
back to the list of the names at the beginning of this chapter. They
are/were all very competent people. Competence is a cornerstone of cred-
ibility. (Notice that competence isn’t correlated with having good values,
morals, or the best interests of others.) You can fake competence for a
while, but eventually competence is tested and it makes or breaks you.
Competence is expertise. It is your qualification(s).
Golden Key: Building your true competence level and building the per-
ception of your competence are two separate projects:You must be the ex-
pert, and you must be perceived as the expert.
What specifically do you want to work on? (McCroskey and Young
1981) You want to work on the Seven Scales (continuums) of Competence
(being experienced, informed, trained, qualified, skilled, intelligent, and an
expert) with those two goals in mind.
Key Point:You want to be competent, and you want to be perceived as
competent. It does you no good at all to be competent and be perceived
otherwise.
58
Credibility: The Pivot Point of Persuasion

Do an important exercise. Answer these 14 questions.Take your time
and assess yourself with great objectivity. If you do this and don’t fly past
these questions to the next set of techniques, you will make great strides in
determining your real and perceived credibility.
1. Are you experienced or inexperienced?
2. Are you perceived as being experienced or inexperienced?
3. Are you informed or uninformed?
4. Are you perceived as being informed or uninformed?
5. Are you trained or untrained?
6. Are you perceived as being trained or untrained?
7. Are you qualified or unqualified?
8. Are you perceived as being qualified or unqualified?
9. Are you skilled or unskilled?
10. Are you perceived as being skilled or unskilled?
11. Are you intelligent or unintelligent?
12. Are you perceived as being intelligent or unintelligent?
13. Are you an expert or not?
14. Are you perceived as being an expert or not?
After answering all these questions, you must construct a competence-
building and perception-of-competence building system. If you aren’t ex-
perienced, you need to become experienced. If you aren’t perceived as
experienced you must make clear verbally, in writing, via testimonial, or in
some covert fashion that you are experienced.
If you look in the yellow pages you may come across words and
phrases that attempt to establish credibility, because this is such a big piece
of the influence puzzle.
“Licensed.”
“Certified.”
“M.D.”
“Ph.D.”
“Has 27 years of experience.”
“Harvard educated.”
Perception of Credibility: Do You Have It? It Means Everything
59

“Black belt.”
“Award-winning.”
“Internationally known.”
On television you see Michael Jordan lend his credibility and compe-
tence as the world’s greatest athlete to everything from hamburgers to bat-
teries to underwear.This is roughly what a testimonial on the back of a
book does for the author. It is called the “halo effect.”You are borrowing
someone else’s credibility to build your own. It’s smart to do and some-
thing you should pursue as well.
Competence is the cornerstone. Covertly make your client base aware of
your competence. (Have awards on the wall of your office. Have testimonials
in your portfolio.) Then, make it certain that in all of your interactions
with your clients every single one of them knows that your knowledge
runs deep and wide.You are the obvious expert in your field.
There are four pieces of the persuasive setting.The first three all de-
mand the dimension of credibility for success.
1. The environmental context.
2. The persuader.
3. The message.
4. The audience/recipient.
Of course, having credibility and presenting a credible image to your
customer are very different things. Here is a list of a number of character-
istics of credibility building.These words identify areas of credibility that
you must have to be a person of influence.
Trustworthiness.
Character.
Safety.
Goodwill.
Personal integrity.
Expertise.
60
Credibility: The Pivot Point of Persuasion

Competence.
Qualification.
Here are a few words you can utilize when you communicate your
message of credibility to the public:
Experienced.
Informed.
Trained.
Qualified.
Skilled.
Intelligent.
Expert.
“as seen on TV” . . . hard to believe but true.
Has 25 years’ experience.
Credentials
In any given situation you have four ways to show your credibility.
Within each of these factors are some polarities that form a continuum
of your behavior.Where would you be seen by most people in each of
these areas?
1. Extroversion.
Bold/timid.
Verbal/quiet.
Aggressive/meek.
Perception of Credibility: Do You Have It? It Means Everything
61
In any given situation you have four ways to show your credibility.

2. Composure.
Poised/nervous.
Relaxed/tense.
Calm/anxious.
3. Sociability (likability).
Good-natured/irritable.
Cheerful/gloomy.
Friendly/unfriendly.
4. Being inspiring to others.
Once again, don’t fly past these characteristics. Go back and look at the
characteristics again.Where do you find yourself among them?
Seven Ways to Increase Your Credibility:
The Nucleus of Influence
Current scientific research reveals that credibility is one of the golden keys
to getting anyone to say “yes” to you.Very few people have credibility in
their profession because they don’t understand what it is and why they
need it, and they certainly have no idea about how to acquire it.
Write down the following formula and keep it nearby at all times.
Whether you are a therapist, a small business owner, or a sales manager at a
major corporation, this is the formula that will determine whether anyone
will ever listen to you:
Expertise + Trustworthiness = Credibility
Imagine these two lists of topics about which a company might want
to hire Kevin Hogan for training, consulting, or a keynote speech:
Group A: Sales, Influence, Marketing, Body Language, Unconscious
Communication, Persuasion, Motivation, Goal Achievement, Per-
sonal Authenticity, Communication Skills.
62
Credibility: The Pivot Point of Persuasion

Group B: How to Be Politically Correct, Union Power, How to
Change the Oil in Your Car, Government Support for the Arts.
You get the idea.You can see Kevin Hogan making major progress in
the company about group A topics because of massive credibility in
those areas.
Credibility = Expertise + Trustworthiness
I have no expertise in group B topics and certainly would have no
trustworthiness if I claimed to support those issues (although oil changes
are very important, and I love the arts—just not the government support
of them). It would be inauthentic to promote myself as a sensitivity trainer
or someone who wants people to communicate anything but the gentle
truth to their company.
Nothing persuades like credibility in people’s decision-making processes.
You need it,I need it,and indeed everyone needs credibility or we will all ul-
timately fail at whatever we do.Consider:
Martha Stewart
That name not long ago was perceived as having massive credibility. Not
long ago Martha Stewart had a TV show, a profitable publicly held busi-
ness, and her own magazine: massive credibility. But then one day it all
slipped away. Poof. In a matter of days Martha Stewart had zero credibility.
It’s hard to trust the Martha Stewart name today, and when there is no
trust there is no credibility.
Seven Ways to Increase Your Credibility: The Nucleus of Influence
63
Nothing persuades like credibility in people’s decision-making
processes.

Your Mom?
Remember when she said,“Get with a big company that gives you lots of
benefits and retirement.”Then boom! In 2001/2002 millions lost their re-
tirement pensions, their jobs, and many their self-respect because of the
corruption of a few in their companies and a bad economy. Lesson: Don’t
trust everything to anyone. How many people look back at the lousy ad-
vice someone they loved gave them only to have been hung out to dry—
innocent and well intended as the advice giver was? Mom.A great Mom,
lousy business adviser.
So what are the seven research-proven ways to build your credibility?
Daniel O’ Keefe discussed these seven in his book, Persuasion. My take
is a bit different from his but you get the idea!
1. Stress your education, position, and experience. The evidence is
overwhelming. People respect someone who has a higher position
(M.D. vs. orderly), more extensive education (Ph.D. vs. high
school), and more experience (20 years of X vs. just out of school).
You cannot immediately change your education but you can re-
frame your position and frame your experience so that it accents
you in the best possible light.You should never lie or exaggerate
but definitely put yourself on stage at the better angle.
2. Be a fluid communicator. Again, the evidence is overwhelming:
Communicate your message without the use of “uh” or slips of the
tongue. Don’t mispronounce words. Each flaw counts against the
communicator.This is so important that the lesson is clear.A fluid
communicator will not read a script or use notes to any significant
degree.You need to know everything about your topic, product, or
service.You need to be able to influentially communicate that in-
formation, and don’t even try until you are ready.
3. Pick up your speaking pace.The research is mixed here, but usually
a slightly faster than normal pace is superior to other options.The
reason is simple.You can’t communicate quickly if you don’t know
the answer/information.
64
Credibility: The Pivot Point of Persuasion

4. Cite evidence. I always tell people to never buy a book without a
bibliography unless they enjoy fiction. No sources means no credi-
bility. It’s better to say “Daniel O’Keefe says” than to say “research
shows.” One shows you are well read, while the other shows you
read The National Enquirer.
5. Argue against your point of view. Every great speaker knows that
when you bring up the point of view that disagrees with your own
you are more likely to win the audience over.Why? That is what
they are thinking, and you defuse or inoculate your audience to
the opposite point of view.The more you say that surprises your
audience/client in this respect, the more likely you are to gain crit-
ical persuasion points.
6. Be likable. This quality won’t affect your listener’s perception of
your expertise but it will affect their perception of your trustwor-
thiness, and that is the second key aspect of credibility. Being lik-
able doesn’t happen overnight. Read a book like my Irresistible
Attraction or Talk Your Way to the Top to enhance your charismatic
influence on others.
7. Use humor . . . carefully. Humor can increase the trustworthiness
of a communicator if the humor is appropriate to the context and it
is not excessive.A little humor can really help your persuasiveness—
a little, not a lot!
Seven Ways to Increase Your Credibility: The Nucleus of Influence
65


5
The New 
Principles 
of Influence
Over the years there has been a lot of animosity between academics and
street-smart businesspeople. Academics don’t go out and actually do the
work; they study and research things. Street-smart businesspeople (including
salespeople) don’t actually know what specifically they are doing that is work-
ing.When you take the two worlds and bring them together, you get . . . this
book. For 20 years I’ve been interested only in what works.You have the
same interest or you wouldn’t have picked up this book.
Before we move on to the universal principles of influence in business
and relationships, I want you to take a little self-test with me.Throughout
the book you will get an opportunity to participate in lots of self-tests. In
each of the tests, the questions have been used in numerous studies before.
The answers you give will help you understand how you think, and as you
go through the book you will literally come to understand how people in
general think and decide. Ultimately you will learn how you can utilize all
of this new learning to be far more influential.
67

Framing a Question
For your first dip in the pool of new knowledge, I want you to participate
in a decision-making game that comes from Kahneman and Tversky
(1984). Simply read this scenario and write down the answers before going
through the evaluation.
Imagine that we are preparing for the outbreak of a dangerous disease
that is expected to kill 600 people.Two alternative programs to combat the
disease have been proposed. Assume that the scientific estimates of the
consequences of the programs are:
I If program A is adopted, 200 people will be saved.
I If program B is adopted, there is a one-third probability that all 600
people will be saved and a two-thirds probability that no people
will be saved.
What do you advise—program A or program B? Once you record
your answer, read on.
There are two other options now.
I If program C is adopted, 400 people will die.
I If program D is adopted, there is a one-third probability that 
nobody will die and a two-thirds probability that all 600 people
will die.
Write down your choice of program C or D; then read on.
Kahneman and Tversky found that 72 percent of their subjects (med-
ical doctors in this case) chose the “sure thing” (program A) over the “risky
gamble” (Program B). However, the researchers obtained almost the oppo-
site results when the question was framed the opposite way (C, D).
Then 78 percent of the same people (doctors) chose option D, which
is identical to option B (C is identical to A).
In other words, someone who chooses A logically must also choose C.
Someone who chooses B logically must also choose D because they are
68
The New Principles of Influence

the same exact results. However, the different framing or perspective that is
given shifts people’s thinking in a dramatic fashion.
Fear of Loss versus Possibility of Gain
Key to Influence: The majority of people will do far more to avoid los-
ing something they already have than they will to get something they
don’t have.
Key to Influence: Fear of loss is a much greater motivator to most than
the possibility of gain.
Need more evidence? (Say “yes,” as that is the logical response!)
The same Princeton University researchers who did the framing research
project looked at another situation. They told one group of students to
imagine they have arrived at the theater only to discover they have lost
their tickets.Would you pay another $10 to buy another ticket? A second
group was asked to imagine they are going to the theater but they haven’t
bought a ticket yet.When they arrive at the theater, they realize they have
lost a $10 bill.Would they still buy a ticket?
In this study, 88 percent of those who lost the $10 in cash said they
would buy the ticket, but only 46 percent of those who lost the ticket
(which they paid $10 for) would buy another ticket!
There is nothing logical or rational about the way people buy or make
their decisions to buy from you.
Logic would tell you that people want the best product.
They don’t.
Fear of Loss versus Possibility of Gain
69
There is nothing logical or rational about the way people buy or
make their decisions to buy from you.

Logic would tell you that people want the most choices possible and
that they make decisions logically.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
I have a confession to make. I’m not completely logical, either. I
haven’t worn a seat belt (except in Seattle, Warsaw, and Boston) for 20
years. My stepdad was nearly killed in a car accident. In 1979 he was struck
by a farm vehicle and didn’t have his seat belt on. Had he been wearing it,
he would have been crushed to death in the car. Because he didn’t have it
on, he was thrown through the window—140 feet—and barely lived . . .
but lived.That emotional imprint has kept the seat belt off me for years;
and yet my kids wear a seat belt or we don’t put the car in drive. How’s
that for crummy logic?
Now let’s talk about how all of this should change the way you sell,
buy, and influence others to your way of thinking.
Freedom of Choice . . . or Barrier to Selling?
Even more interesting is research that was just released from Stanford Uni-
versity. Researchers went to a grocery store and set up tasting booths
there. On one table they had 24 jams that the people could taste. On an-
other there were six different kinds of jams.As you would expect, 60 per-
cent of all people who stopped at the table with 24 jams tasted a jam. Only
40 percent of those stopping at the table with six jams tasted there.
What’s shocking? Underline this, then highlight it in yellow:
I Thirty percent of all people who stopped at the table with six jams
purchased one of the jams.
I Only 3 percent of people who stopped at the table with 24 jams
purchased any of them!
The ramifications are enormous. The larger number of options (in
jam, religion, spousal choices, jobs) creates what we call cognitive dissonance.
Cognitive dissonance is what happens when you hold two or more beliefs
70
The New Principles of Influence

or ideas and don’t know which to choose. It makes you feel overwhelmed.
People like to have choices; it gives them freedom. But if you give people
too many choices they will simply freeze and do nothing.
This is clear in a casino (where I have been known to spend a few
hours). Bettors will drive themselves crazy trying to figure out which
team, horse, or color to bet on.When they place their money, they be-
come certain they are on the correct side. Later when their team loses,
they can say,“I knew it was going to go that way. I should have listened
to myself.”
Similarly, people do this when they buy a clothing.They see blue; they
see black.They stand there helpless. Finally they buy the black and then
they feel better inside . . . in fact relieved!
When faced with too many choices, most people can become para-
lyzed and do nothing at all. People who feel overwhelmed simply drop
everything.They do nothing and give birth to procrastination.
If you tell someone,“You can have any of these 100 choices of paint,”
there is a good chance the person will freak out! People are not used to de-
ciding among so many options.They won’t be able to decide what to do. If
you say,“I can give you one of these four options,” then the person finds it
much easier to choose.
The truly devastating impact of the internal desire to be directed in-
stead of being given a few options happens in brainwashing and sudden
conversion experiences. Here, there is only one correct way or ideology
and all others are wrong.This solves the problem of cognitive dissonance
and creates what Eric Hoffer called True Believer.
Key Question for You: How will you utilize your newfound knowledge
about cognitive dissonance in the selling and persuasion process?
Freedom of Choice . . . or Barrier to Selling?
71
When faced with too many choices, most people can become paralyzed
and do nothing at all.

Quick Summary
1. People crave direction. Give them direction that wires into their
unconscious drives.
2. People want to believe they are in control, and feel better when
they perceive they are.
3. Help people resolve their cognitive dissonance by narrowing op-
tions and alternatives quickly and decisively.
4. Realize that your profits will increase with fewer choices for your
clients and customers.There are not 64 color choices for the new
Lexus or Honda.There are seven choices.
5. Too many choices means that people will freeze and not know
what to do.Always be prepared to direct people to the best choice
for them.
Your First $10,000 Key: (A $10,000 Key is different from a Key to In-
fluence because the ultimate value of these special keys is found in their
ease of application in all walks of life, sales situations, and communication.)
People want what other people already have.
Your Second $10,000 Key: People overestimate the value of what they
already possess.
Every four-year old child will tell you that the most important toy in a
room full of toys is the one that the other child is playing with!
Always think long-term.Your clients look to you for guidance and
will remember the results.
Mine Is Best
In the first part of this chapter, we discussed how the vast majority of
people do not normally make buying decisions (or any decisions, for
that matter) in a logical or rational fashion. In fact, you found just 
the opposite.
72
The New Principles of Influence

1. You found that people make decisions based on how a proposition
is framed (positive versus negative, for example).
2. You also found out that people who have purchased a ticket to the
theater and lose it are not likely to replace it, but someone who
loses money (the cost of the ticket) will still buy a ticket. Owning
“money” and owning “a future event” are different things.
3. You discovered that people typically are more likely to purchase
something when there are fewer options to choose from instead of
having many options.
None of these things should matter in whether we buy or don’t buy,
but they do. Just applying these three simple facts should be enough to
help you increase your sales by 15 to 25 percent if you apply them to your
product, your mode of receiving payment, and your specific situation.
Now, how can we top paradigm-shaking facts like these?
Glad you asked!
You’ve probably thought that as a therapist or a salesperson (the two
largest demographics of my readers around the world) if you can just get
people to change their attitudes you can get them to change their behav-
iors (in fact, you could say that persuasion is about influencing attitude,
and compliance is about changing behavior).
But perhaps you haven’t thought of the opposite: Change the behavior
first and you can change the attitude forever. Here are some examples of suc-
cessful behavioral changes to influence long-term attitude change. Once
people “own their actions” or once people own something their behavior
and attitudes both begin to change. In fact, once people own something or
possess something they believe that what they own is worth more than it
really is, whether it is an idea or something tangible.
Mine Is Best
73
Once people “own their actions” or once people own something their
behavior and attitudes both begin to change.

Ziv Carmon, a French marketing professor, and MIT’s Dan Ariely di-
vided a group of nearly 100 Duke University students into two groups.
One group was asked to state the highest price they would pay for a ticket
to the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Final Four bas-
ketball tournament.The other group was told to imagine they had such a
ticket and were asked for the lowest price at which they would be willing
to sell it.The median selling price was $1,500.The median buying price
was $150! The sellers perceived their ticket as worth 10 times what the
buyers thought it to be worth!
(Could it be that what a person will lose once they no longer have their
product/idea is a cause of the inflated price? Keep reading and you will see
that you are right! Fear of loss plays a big role in decision making . . .a much
larger role than it should!)
Endowment Effect
This effect has been exploited for generations. In the profession of selling,
everyone knows the “puppy dog” close—the technique of getting your
product into your customer’s office or home for a short period of time.
Why? Because like taking a cute puppy dog home, once we possess some-
thing, we value it more highly than we did when it was in the store. Once
we do that, the “price” of the goods goes up in the human mind. That
price is more than its price tag at the store, and the individual then buys it.
What marketing strategies currently utilize this psychological quirk in hu-
man nature as an influential strategy to make sales?
I Book-of-the-Month Club.
I Columbia House CD Club.
I Magazine subscriptions.
I Office supply sales (especially photocopier machines!).
I Art galleries.
So many different companies utilize the endowment effect in selling
it’s a wonder that everyone doesn’t. Key learning strategy for today: How
74
The New Principles of Influence

can you use the endowment effect without actually having your prod-
uct/idea in the customer’s possession?
From Your Life
Have you ever had someone from a church or group invite you to their
meeting or service? That didn’t change your attitude (or, say, your reli-
gion).You simply went as a favor. But then after some period of time you
decided that you liked this church or group and decided to join. Later as
time went on you decided that your newfound group was indeed the right
group to belong to.
Many groups do not ask you to change what you believe; they simply
ask you to take part in their service/group/organization and “test-drive” it
to see how you feel, for example, and see if it works for you.
The brain is a funny thing. Once you start to perform a set of actions
you become accustomed to the actions and you would feel a void if those
actions were no longer there.Therefore, your attitudes begin to change.
Now, none of this is good or bad; it’s simply an example of how you
can utilize actions that you own to change attitudes. In fact, there is little
that is more effective in changing attitudes than regularly performing a set
of actions or rituals. Rituals are remarkably important in attitude change.
Key Question for You: How can you get people to take an action in-
stead of persuading them to change an attitude or belief?
There are a few multibillion-dollar corporations that know how to
reach the inborn genetic programming within each of us so we will be in-
clined to purchase their products.You are going to now learn a few of the
secrets of these multibillion-dollar international successes.The world’s best
advertising is not geared at just our behavior but at something that is next
to impossible to change: our DNA.We aren’t going to take you through a
scientific explanation of how each of these mind access points works.That
would take a set of encyclopedias.What you are going to learn is how to
Endowment Effect
75

apply the research that we have done in the sales situation so that it is easy
for you to utilize.
All people need food, clothing, and shelter in our society.Those are in-
born programs.We must eat to survive.We must have clothing to survive
the cold winters.We must have some kind of shelter for inborn needs of
security and territorial ownership. Beyond this, there are very few inborn
needs, but there are many inborn tendencies that drive human behavior as
your customer grows and becomes an adult.
Your Appeal Should Be to the Many or Greater Cause,
Not Just Your Client
Our genes do not simply generate the tendency for us to survive and care
for the self; they virtually command and carry out a powerful compulsion
to care for the larger groups that we are part of. In fact, almost all of our
genetic makeups are so designed that we will help the larger groups we are
part of survive before we will save ourselves.
Have you ever seen a news story where a man raced into a burning
building to save a young child? Not only is that an altruistic act, it is part of
most people’s genetic programming.The compulsion to care for others in
our group is very powerful.
Almost all people are preprogrammed to act in the best interests of:
I Themselves.
I The family.
I The group.
I Society.
I God.
76
The New Principles of Influence
The world’s best advertising is not geared at just our behavior but at
something that is next to impossible to change: our DNA.

The big mistake that salespeople make is that they appeal only to the
customer’s best interest when they should be appealing to the customer’s
interest in how your product will help his family, his employees, his civic
groups and church organization, society as a whole, and even God. It was
only in 1998 that there was discovered a portion of the brain that is acti-
vated when communicating with the divine.
There is an old McDonald’s commercial that illustrates how to appeal
to the greater genetic needs.The theme song,“You deserve a break today,
so get up and get away, to McDonald’s . . ” plays in the background.The
image is that of a man who has had a long day at work and the theme ini-
tially plays to his deserving a break.The genetic motivator, however, is not
self-satisfaction. The motivator is when you see Dad and Mom and the
kids all driving off to McDonald’s together.
Exercise: In order to motivate a person you often must widen the context
for the emotional reasoning to engage. Describe how you can you do this
for your product(s) and/or services.
Competition Is a Driving Genetic Force of Survival
The field of evolutionary psychology has taught us that competition be-
tween individuals and groups is what naturally selects winners and losers in
society.When you are appealing to your customer to purchase your prod-
ucts and services,appeal subtly to the fact that owning your products or ser-
vices will give him an advantage in society, within the group or against his
competitors.The makeup of the individual is to survive competitively.The
world’s greatest competitors are those who become the wealthiest individu-
als. Bill Gates,Ted Turner,Warren Buffett—all of these men are very good
people, yet brilliant competitors. Bill Gates doesn’t seek to own a share of
the market with Microsoft—he seeks to dominate the market with Mi-
crosoft and does so by providing outstanding products at reasonable prices.
Microsoft seeks to dominate with great products and services.You can do
the same by appealing to the competitive nature in your customers. Do so
Competition Is a Driving Genetic Force of Survival
77

quietly and with careful subtlety. It is a genetic fact that those who opt out of
competition reduce their level of prestige on the societal ladder.
Exercise: Realizing that competition is one genetic component of what
creates success and failure in society, take your time and carefully answer
the following three questions.
1. How can competing to dominate your market with great service
and great products help you and your family ascend the ladder
of success?
2. How can you sell more of your products and services by appeal-
ing to the need in our customers to be at or near the top of the
success ladder?
3. How does being competitive enhance the quality of your life?
The Principle of Larger Numbers
It is a known fact that madness is the exception in individuals and far more
common in groups. Most normal humans would never throw ice balls at
unprotected innocent people walking down the street.Watching a football
game in season would never convince you of this truth as referees are con-
stantly on the lookout for spectators who they know can generate great
harm. Soccer fans have been seen on numerous occasions to literally kill
people at soccer games because of the intensity generated during the com-
petitiveness of the game.
Every public speaker knows that persuading most of the people in a
large group is far easier than persuading one individual in a one-on-one
setting. There is an almost evident IQ deficiency in groups. Groupthink
78
The New Principles of Influence
The world’s greatest competitors are those who become the wealthiest
individuals.

takes over and people will follow the vocal proponents of a proposition.
Most people are like sheep waiting for the shepherds.
Scientific research clearly shows that the more people there are in a
group the more likely that the vast majority of the group will comply with
whatever the leader is proposing.The fascinating caveat is that there is a
very common fear of speaking and presenting before groups.
People act like animals in groups and are easily herded. However, you
cannot expect or even consider having 100 percent assenting opinions in
group settings. In all groups there are individuals who rise above group-
think.When facing their objections always honor and respect their view-
points and continue on with your presentation. The vast majority will
always rule and you will nearly always succeed in group selling situations if
you follow all the key elements presented here.
Remember the truism from the nineteenth century: The larger the
lynch mob the more brutal the lynching. Those in an emotional frenzy
lose all sense of ethics.Think of experiences that you have had that make
this fact clear to you.
Those in group settings tend to be led by the unconscious minds of
the rest of the group.The average intelligence of the unconscious mind is
about that of a six-year-old.This doesn’t mean that there isn’t a vast array
of information stored in the unconscious mind; indeed there is. It does
mean that the unconscious mind is far more reactive and emotional than
the analytical conscious mind.The conscious mind rests in group settings,
making an easy target for the ethical salesperson or the unethical swindler.
Principle of We All Need Someone to Love
All humans need to feel wanted. Science and medical research clearly re-
veals that feeling unwanted stunts all forms of human growth and devel-
opment. Physical, psychological, and emotional growth all are influenced
by a person’s perception of feeling wanted. In fact, people who say they
don’t need to feel wanted are literally lying or psychotic. The need is
preprogrammed.
Principle of We All Need Someone to Love
79

You need to make it clear to your customers that you are interested in
them as more than customers. People can literally sense genuine interest,
and when they do they are likely to develop the long-term relationships
with you that will create win-win selling situations.
One medical study (Ryan and Lynch 1989) concluded that “a lack
of warmth and meaningful relationships” is a significant cause of heart
attacks in many people. What does this tell us about needs prepro-
grammed into our behavior? We are physically influenced by love, com-
passion, and relationships.
Dr. Dean Ornish published a wealth of material about the fact that
closeness can literally heal people and separation from loved ones can kill.
Understanding this biological fact helps us influence others in a powerful
way, doesn’t it?
Exercise: Name and explain how numerous products and services are uti-
lizing and/or exploiting this information (dating services, 900 lines, chat
rooms, etc.).
Nine Golden Keys
You learned in this chapter that:
1. People make decisions based on how a proposition is framed.
2. People do more to avoid losing than to make an equal gain.
3. Reduce choices in order to increase sales and compliance.
4. Change the behavior first and you can permanently change the
attitude.
80
The New Principles of Influence
All humans need to feel wanted.

5. People overestimate the value of what they own.
6. Appealing to higher values is more important than appealing to
the individual.
7. People want to be at the top of the pecking order.
8. It’s much easier to influence a group than an individual.
9. People will do much to be part of a group.
Nine Golden Keys
81


6
Introduction to
Omega Strategies
Before you learn about omega strategies I want to give you your first IPQ
test! (Do I have you in suspense?)
In the preceding chapter you decided how you would react in a cou-
ple of different hypothetical scenarios. Now, I want you to discover where
you are at in terms of your understanding and ability to apply some of the
principles of influence.This test is one that I gave in “Coffee with Kevin
Hogan” (if you don’t subscribe, my goodness, go to www.kevinhogan.com
right now and do so!), and the response was one of great appreciation.
Even if you may have taken this test already, please do so again.
Testing Your Influence and Persuasion Quotient
Wouldn’t it be great to know how to frame your products, services, and
ideas—yourself—so that others simply fall over as they try to get to you?
83

Over the next several months I will be releasing on my web site the culmi-
nation of years of research and meta-analysis of what works and what
doesn’t in the fields of influence, persuasion, and compliance. All of this
material is 100 percent ready for use in selling and marketing.Virtually all
of the information is new and has never been shared in anything that I
have ever released.
To gauge your current knowledge of what works in influence, let’s
start with a test that you can take to see what your IPQ (Influence and
Persuasion Quotient) is. You’ll need a pen and paper and about five
minutes of your time. Write all your answers down. This is crucial, as
you will see.
1. Imagine you are considering purchasing a CD player but you
haven’t decided which brand or model you want to buy.You walk
past an electronics store and see a sign in the window advertising a
popular Sony CD player that is on sale for $99. You know that
price is well below the standard retail price.
A. Recent research shows that what percentage of people would
buy the Sony?
24%.
48%.
59%.
66%.
B. Research shows that what percentage of people would wait to
learn about other models?
76%.
52%.
41%.
34%.
2. Now imagine the same situation except that the store is also adver-
tising a high-quality Aiwa CD player for $159. Like the Sony, this
player is a bargain.
84
Introduction to Omega Strategies

A. Research shows that what percentage would buy the Sony?
11%.
27%.
39%.
51%.
B. Research shows that what percentage would buy the Aiwa?
11%.
27%.
39%.
51%.
C. Research shows that what percentage would wait to learn
about other models?
62%.
50%.
46%.
10%.
(If you knew the answer to just these two questions, you would have an
enormous understanding of what causes people to buy now,and how people
make choices. But there is more you can learn. Continue with question 3!)
3. In a research project by Kahneman & Tversky (1984), researchers
offered individuals their choice between a Minolta X-370 camera
priced at $169.99 and a Minolta Maxxum 3000i priced at $239.99.
What percentage of people chose the Minolta X-370 at
$169.99?
10%.
30%.
50%.
70%.
4. The same researchers as in question 3 also offered a different group
of participants the same two cameras noted in question 3 but also
offered the Minolta 7000I at $469.99.
Testing Your Influence and Persuasion Quotient
85

A. What percentage of people chose the X-370?
21%.
31%.
41%.
51%.
B. What percentage of people chose the Maxxum 3000i?
47%.
57%.
67%.
77%.
C. What percentage of people chose the Minolta 7000I?
2%.
12%.
22%.
32%.
Knowing how the wild card of the third product that is new, signifi-
cantly more expensive, and probably better changes the buying decisions
of individuals is absolutely essential in understanding how to communicate
with and influence people. Before we talk more about that, score your self-
test right now!
Scoring
Question
Answer
Points If Correct
1A
66%
3
1B
34%
3
2A
27%
4
2B
27%
4
2C
46%
5
3
50%
4
4A
21%
4
86
Introduction to Omega Strategies

4B
67%
4
4C
12%
4
Total
35
Your score:
30+
Superb.You have a solid understanding of the dynamics of in-
fluence.Well done! You are in the top 10 percent.
20–29
Not bad. You have some of the basic concepts of influence
down and a good intuition. The Science of Influence series of
CDs and home study manuals will help you enormously.
11–19
Don’t worry. More than 50 percent of the marketing and
salespeople we work with are in this category.You aren’t alone and
we aren’t telling anyone! Order the first volume of the Science of
Influence and start utilizing its cutting-edge information.
10 or fewer points. Almost 30 percent of sales and marketing people
fall into this category.The Science of Influence will change your
life and your income forever!
As you have learned, adding the Aiwa CD player to the decision-mak-
ing process caused people to not know what to do—46 percent of the
people couldn’t decide so they put off their decision! Among the half that
did buy, they were evenly split between going for the bargain and opting
for the better product. Unfortunately, cutting your sales this much will kill
most businesses. Don’t make this mistake!
The next thing we learn from our test is that when given the two
original forced choices between the two cameras people were split be-
tween the bargain and the higher-quality option. However, adding another
choice, the very expensive camera, caused a large majority of individuals to
buy the middle-priced product.
Pay close attention: In numerous research studies in catalog promo-
tions the addition of an extremely expensive, high-end product causes people to buy
the next highest product with a great degree of consistency.
Testing Your Influence and Persuasion Quotient
87

Reducing Resistance in Relationships, Business, and Life
I’ve held you in suspense long enough.What is an omega strategy?
An omega strategy is a strategy that is specifically planned to reduce resistance to
your message and as such has nothing to do with adding value to your offer.
Here’s what to do before they say,“I shouldn’t have listened . . .”:
Broadly speaking, there are two ways you can be more persuasive and
gain compliance.You can make your offer more attractive or you can re-
duce the resistance that you experience with the other person. Most books
in the world of selling, persuasion, and influence deal with making your
offer more attractive.This article, however, is going to show you how to
reduce resistance. It’s something that hasn’t been dealt with much in the
literature, so it might take a bit to lay out this mind-blowing information
from all angles.
Do you remember the last time someone said, “I think you should
. . . ,” or “If you do this, it will work,” or “Do this,” or “Do that,” or “If
you buy this . . . ,” or “I’d do X if I were you”? And then for some rea-
son you not only didn’t do it, you did the opposite! This is called a “po-
larity response,” or in psychological terms, “reactance.” Eliminating or
reducing the polarity response and reactance is what this article is all
about. There’s nothing easy about understanding all of this, but if you
stick with me over the next few pages, you will be astounded by what
you learn.That’s a promise. If you don’t read these pages, you will always
regret that you didn’t learn this information and begin applying it in
your life, your relationships, and your business!
My life’s work is in large part about influencing the human mind
(yours, mine, our client’s and customer’s, and the public’s—everyone’s!) for
health, wealth, and happiness. You and I are always fascinated by the
88
Introduction to Omega Strategies
You can make your offer more attractive or you can reduce the
resistance that you experience with the other person.

processes that people use to decide between X and Y realizing how the
choice will, perhaps, change their life forever.
Before we go on with why we sometimes respond negatively without
a great deal of thought and conscious cognition, I’d like to share with you
a story of how one simple decision that started with a “no way” knee-jerk
reactance could alter the course of a person’s work and life.
It was 1998 and Archie Levine was the event planner for a small non-
profit organization. He asked me to speak at its convention in Seattle. (I
had been going to speak for this group the previous year but it didn’t hap-
pen. I had been on the last flight of the day and it was canceled due to me-
chanical difficulties.Yes, another stellar moment for Northwest Airlines.)
When Archie quoted me the fee, I immediately said, “Sorry, I can’t do
that.” Inside, I said,“No Way!” But due to other circumstances that would
soon materialize, I decided to speak at this convention—not because of the
convention and certainly not the money—but rather because when I an-
nounced I might be there, a cyber friend, Richard Brodie (inventor of Mi-
crosoft Word and author of Virus of the Mind), said if I came he’d introduce
me to the audience.Well, I could hardly wait. I loved his book.And he said
he found my book The Psychology of Persuasion fascinating. (He was obvi-
ously the genius that everyone claimed he was.)
Yes, I was going to Seattle to speak, but the fee wasn’t even close to
my standard fee.The nonprofit group just couldn’t afford it. My incentive
was that I was going to have dinner with Richard.That was really why I
was going to go to Seattle.The convention—well, I’d give my 1,000 per-
cent, but to dig into the brain of Brodie was the real enticement to me!
So, I went.
Richard and I met and we hit it off from the first. He and I would be-
come good friends. Since we met, Richard has written testimonials for
three of my books, and he wrote the Foreword to Talk Your Way to the Top.
Meanwhile, because I decided to go to Seattle, I also met the woman
who would become the co-author of two of my books (Irresistible Attraction
and Through the Open Door:Secrets of Self-Hypnosis).Mary Lee is an excellent
writer and has a sharp mind.Her contributions to these books helped make
them among my favorite books. She also worked with me on developing
Reducing Resistance in Relationships, Business, and Life
89

training sessions in Seattle, where she brought me several students, includ-
ing Ron Stubbs, Bev Bryant, and Katherin Scott, who are now partners
with me on various other projects.
Three years later, on a trip to Las Vegas with Richard, I met his
good friend Jeffrey Gitomer, who is the author of The Sales Bible. Jeffrey
is a rough-edged guy with a heart of gold.We became friends and even-
tually he wrote the Foreword and testimonials for my recent book,
Selling Yourself to Others. He’s one of the nation’s highest-paid and 
finest speakers.
There is a lot more that came out of Archie Levine’s phone call to me
six years ago, but the point of course is that my decision to go was a life-
altering decision in every way.
Key: My initial gut reaction to this offer was,“No way!”The money was
lousy, the venue was mediocre, and I saw nothing attractive about the con-
vention from a professional standpoint . . . until I had more information,
and it took weeks to get the information I needed to make one of the best
decisions of my life.
Wouldn’t it make sense for you to make sure that your decisions and
the decisions you influence others to make are the best ones?
Two Kinds of Resistance
Broadly speaking, there are two kinds of resistance.The first is because of
reactance (a knee-jerk deflection of anything that infringes on our per-
sonal choice or freedom), and the second is because of anticipated regret
of complying or failing to comply with a request.
Did you know that very few people will trade a lottery ticket they
have just purchased for the original dollar they paid? Now, at best, a lottery
ticket is worth 50 cents on the dollar. (This is complicated to explain, but
if you bought $100,000,000 of lottery tickets you’d win about
$50,000,000 for a net loss of $50,000,000—i.e., 50 cents of value for every
90
Introduction to Omega Strategies

dollar spent—a terrible gamble for you and a moneymaker for everyone
else involved.)
Now, why do people want to keep their lottery ticket once they pos-
sess it? Why don’t they want to part with this terrible investment?
The reason is that people anticipate regret regarding of what would
happen if the ticket happened to win! They’d feel terrible, and they don’t
want to live with that feeling. Thus they keep the ticket! The person
thinks,“If I sell this ticket back for $1 and it wins, I will feel like an idiot!”
In this case, the lottery ticket is perceived as a positive and the regret is
about how the person would feel on missing out on the positive experi-
ence of winning.
The next section discusses just how to turn “no” into “yes” before they
say “no!”
Exercise: Draw these distinctions and ask these questions in your mind:
What is the difference between reactance and anticipated regret? How do these two
critical concepts relate to your business or life situation?
Overcoming Resistance with Omega Strategies
From what we already know about influence, people make knee-jerk reac-
tions to people’s requests for compliance on issues.We often say “no” with-
out knowing why—it simply feels right.
From the point of view of persuasion it’s important to not allow that
“no” reaction to take place, and if it does to disarm it as rapidly as possible.
Once people have taken a public stand on an issue it is increasingly more
difficult to get them to change their minds.
Overcoming Resistance with Omega Strategies
91
Once people have taken a public stand on an issue it is increasingly
more difficult to get them to change their minds.

In the Psychology of Persuasion you discovered the Law of Consis-
tency.This law states that people will behave in a way that they believe
is consistent with their past statements about an issue and their past be-
haviors about an issue.This is backed up by numerous studies in social
psychology.
Even more interesting is that research shows that if people pass up on
an opportunity once, they will almost certainly pass up on that same op-
portunity in the future (Tykocinski and Pittman, 1998).Their behavior sets
a precedent. Once someone passes up an opportunity, no matter how pos-
itive, they tend to decide that way in the future as well.
In general, people will avoid doing something that could be in their
best interest simply because they have avoided doing it in the past.
Dr. Matthew Crawford of the University of Arkansas did an experi-
ment where a confederate was placed in the room with subject after sub-
ject. The confederate would encourage the subjects to bet on the
confederate’s choice of the winner of a given football game.The confeder-
ate working for Crawford would say,“You definitely have to pick team X.”
Crawford soon discovered some interesting things.
Half the subjects were instructed to notice and record how much they
would regret their decisions if they chose X and Y won versus if they
chose Y and X won. In the end the majority of the subjects said they
would feel much worse defying (choosing team Y) and losing versus com-
plying (going with team X) and losing. The result was that 73 percent
complied with the confederate and chose team X.
But when subjects were not asked to consider how they would feel
about their decision (no instruction was given at all) if they chose X and Y
won, or Y and X won, things were very different. Only 24 percent of this
group chose team X!
Without the contemplation to consider the regrets they would
have, people typically respond with a polarity response, also known as a
cognitive reactance. They have a knee-jerk “no” response hardwired
into their brains.
Finally, in Crawford’s study, all subjects were informed that their team
lost. Results:Those who complied with the confederate felt much worse
92
Introduction to Omega Strategies

than those who reacted with a polarity response. (People are lousy at pre-
dicting their future feelings!)
$10,000 Key to Influence: Having the subjects focus on the regret of
both complying and reacting (polarizing) helped increase compliance and
overcome resistance.
I know what you are thinking! You are wondering how could it be
that actually putting attention on the negative (“No, I will not. I am a free
person and I will do as I please!”) helps subjects to be persuaded to do
what they are resistant to?
The question makes total sense.The fact is that people would like to
comply if they can see a way to do so.They simply don’t want to have re-
grets about it, so the best thing to do is to go there and look at what hap-
pens if they do and if they don’t comply.This very exercise of looking at
both sides increases the chance of compliance dramatically.
When a confederate is in the room and supposedly siding with the
person/subject whom we are trying to persuade, the confederate can actu-
ally help our cause by defiantly standing up for the point of view held by
the subject.The confederate literally can say,“I haven’t made up my mind.
It’s my choice, and I’ll choose what I want.”
According to Crawford,“This reinstatement of personal freedom, a re-
lease from reactance, actually increases the percentage of participants who
choose Alternative A, beyond that of a group that never had its personal free-
dom threatened. . . .Thus the arousal of reactance and the subsequent re-
duction of this resistance is an effective way to increase compliance.” (All
emphasis mine.)
The four steps:
1. The participant’s/person’s/subject’s “freedom of choice” is
“threatened.”
2. Focus is placed on the person’s feeling’s of the threat to their
freedom.
3. The threat is negated.
Overcoming Resistance with Omega Strategies
93

4. Persuasion is accomplished with future regret verbalized or focus-
ing on the threat to personal freedom.
The key is to go quickly beyond reaction on the person’s part (an un-
conscious reaction) and focus on anticipated regret (which is conscious and
controllable). By doing this we dramatically increase compliance. You
might feel that this is counterintuitive, but it overcomes the reaction of a
knee-jerk,“no!” response!
This brings us to a key question that Crawford has asked and answered
and to which I will add my comments.
What causes people to be this way at the unconscious level?
Crawford believes that mainstream culture values autonomy, self-de-
termination, and independence, and that the importance of these values is
reinforced at an early age.
I agree, but I would add that this reactionary behavior is genetically
wired.Any animal that feels it is trapped and doesn’t have freedom to es-
cape will prepare to fight or flee.That’s the “no!” response!
Therefore, the human animal when trapped will say “no!” but when
asked to ponder the feelings of the future instead of the personal freedom
that is threatened the individual will focus on anticipated feelings of regret
of not doing what they are being asked and are therefore more likely to say
“yes” and comply.The conscious mind (left brain, say) is likely to override
the unconscious mind (right brain, say) and consider the options in a non-
reactionary mode.
Most people aren’t very good at predicting what emotions they will
feel when they make a choice that doesn’t work out for the best. People
often believe,“I will regret this decision so much” when in fact they later
do not feel that way when things turn out badly.The exception to this rule
94
Introduction to Omega Strategies
Most people aren’t very good at predicting what emotions they will
feel when they make a choice that doesn’t work out for the best.

is people who are constantly planning for the future and anticipating fu-
ture events. Research does indicate that these people do have a better grip
on what their emotions will be in the future. However, these individuals
are in the minority, so when someone tells you that they will feel a certain
way, remember that the statement is a guess and not a fact.
Mastering Omega Strategies
Time for another measure your of IPQ (Influence and Persuasion Quo-
tient), and a sly way to reveal more principles of influence to you!
1. In a study using students posing as beggars, would the students re-
ceive more or less when requesting a specific amount of cash?
2. Are people more or less likely to have a knee-jerk reaction of resis-
tance when they’ve been taken advantage of in the past?
3. Do hotel bellmen receive larger tips for delivering better service?
4. What can waiters and waitresses do to increase their tips?
5. What are the top three reasons some waiters and waitresses receive
more money in tips than others do?
6. What percentage of men believe they are above average in ap-
pearance?
7. What percentage of women believe they are above average in
appearance?
8. What is the earning power of above-average-looking men and
women versus average-looking and below-average-looking men
and women?
Bonus Question: How would a waiter or waitress offering a piece of choco-
late candy with the check affect the amount of tip received?
Here are the answers, and the research that backs them up.
1. In a study using students posing as beggars, would the students receive more
or less when requesting a specific amount of cash?
Mastering Omega Strategies
95

Students posing as beggars found that they received money 44 percent
of the time when they didn’t ask for a specific sum. If they asked for a spe-
cific single coin, they got it 64 percent of the time. But if they asked for an
arbitrary amount, such as 37 cents, they got it 75 percent of the time.What
can we learn? The more precise the request, the more likely it is to be ful-
filled—the more irresistible it is.
2. Are people more or less likely to have a knee-jerk reaction of resistance
when they’ve been taken advantage of in the past?
“Once people learn they have been fooled and taken they develop
much more resistance. Detecting and avoiding cheats is one of the most
powerful driving forces in human behavior.” (Brad Sagarin, Northern Illi-
nois University)
3. Do hotel bellmen receive larger tips for delivering better service?
Taking a few extra minutes to (1) inform guests how to operate the
television and thermostat, (2) open the drapes in the room, and (3) offer to
bring guests ice doubled a bellman’s tips! He received an average tip of $4.77
when he did these things and an average tip of only $2.40 when he did not
do them. Providing these extra services increased tips from men as well as
women and from young as well as elderly guests. (Lynn and Gregor 2001)
4. What can waiters and waitresses do to increase their tips?
Data was collected in 1991–1992 on a sample of 207 dining parties at
a Mexican restaurant and on a sample of 148 dining parties at a Chinese
restaurant in Houston,Texas.The servers used a coin toss to randomly de-
termine whether they would stand or squat when first interacting with a
table.They also recorded the customers’ experimental condition—bill size
and tip size.
A waiter at a Mexican restaurant increased his average tip by $1.22
(from 14.9 percent to 17.5 percent of the bill) by squatting down next to
96
Introduction to Omega Strategies
Once people learn they have been fooled and taken they develop much
more resistance.
—Brad Sagarin

the table when introducing himself to his customers.A waitress at a Chinese
restaurant increased her average tip by $0.72 (from 12 percent to 15 percent
of the bill) by squatting down next to her tables. (Lynn and Mynier 1993)
5. What are the top three reasons some waiters and waitresses receive more
money in tips than others do?
Data were collected on a sample of 51 servers at a Mexican restaurant
in Houston,Texas, in the early 1990s. Servers posed for photographs and
completed a questionnaire that included questions about their service abil-
ities and questions from the self-monitoring scale. Ten judges indepen-
dently rated the photographs on physical attractiveness. An assistant
manager at the restaurant recorded the afternoon and evening charge sales
and tips of each server at the restaurant for a period of six weeks.The rela-
tionships among the variables measured in the study were analyzed using
weighted multiple regression.
Servers received larger tip averages to the extent that they were physi-
cally attractive, to the extent that they rated their service abilities highly,
and to the extent that they were sensitive to the situational appropriateness
of their own behavior. Physical attractiveness had a stronger effect on the
tips of waitresses than on the tips of waiters, while self-rated service ability
had a stronger effect on the tips of waiters than on the tips of waitresses.
However, all of these effects were observed only for evening tip averages.
None of these variables predicted servers’ average lunch tips. In fact, even
servers’ average evening tips were only weakly related to their average
lunch tips. (Lynn and Simons 2000)
6. What percentage of men believe they are above average in appearance?
7. What percentage of women believe they are above average in appearance?
A study by Michael French, French Economics: “Attractive Women
Earn More Money” (Hospital and school district workers) provided the
following self-report of women’s and men’s physical appearance:
Men
Women
Above average
47
33
Average
49
61
Below average
4
6
Mastering Omega Strategies
97

8. What is the earning power of above-average-looking men and women ver-
sus average and below-average-looking men and women?
Michael French found that above-average-looking women earned 8
percent more than average women.There was no statistical difference re-
lated to physical appearance of men.
Bonus Question: How would a waiter or waitress offering a piece of
chocolate candy with the check affect the amount of tip received?
In a study of tipping, a waitress working for David Strohmetz of Mon-
mouth University at a New Jersey restaurant offered one, two, or no pieces
of chocolate to 80 dining parties (293 people). No candy? The average tip
was 19 percent. Two pieces, 22 percent. When she gave one piece of
chocolate and then offered a second piece, her tips averaged 23 percent.
Exercise: What are three ways you can implement this information today
in your business and in your relationships?
The Power of the Future . . . in the Present
Alpha strategies are those that make an offer more attractive.
Omega strategies are those that reduce resistance.
Resistance is a thing that can be used up and replenished like water in
a tank.
In an experiment, students were divided into “gullible” and “skeptical”
groups based on interview questions. Each of these was then further di-
vided into four subgroups.
The first subgroup was shown seven video clips of unfamiliar candi-
dates running for office and where they stood on the issues. One group
was asked to pay particular attention to the first clip. The other three
groups were told to pay attention to the last.Two of these last three groups
were shown a travelogue of Fiji before the last video was shown. One of
these two remaining groups was told to think positively about Fiji. The
98
Introduction to Omega Strategies

other remaining group was told to make a list of all things that could go
wrong on a trip to the islands. Finally, all subjects had to criticize each ad-
vertisement and candidate.
Gullible subjects used up their resistance to advertising early on.They
became less critical of the candidates as the experiment proceeded even
though the clips were shown in different orders to different students.
Reaction to the final clip depended on the approach that had been
taken on the travelogue. If the subjects criticized the Fiji trip, they were
more likely to look at the final candidate positively. If they were told to look
positively at the Fiji trip, they were more likely to criticize the candidate.
Skeptical subjects reacted differently. Skeptics were least critical of the
first candidate and became increasingly more critical as time went on, re-
gardless of the Fiji travelogue.
Key: It is possible to use up resources for resistance, therefore making peo-
ple less likely to resist your message.
Exercise: How can you use up resistance early on with your clients and
customers, making them more susceptible to your message?
Using Time Perspective
The Tenth Law of Persuasion, as you know from my books Covert Hypnosis
and Selling Yourself to Others, says, “Changing someone’s time perspective
helps them to make different decisions. When people change their time
perspective they change how they feel about something and the decisions
they make in regard to it.”
Having carefully looked at the work of Steven Sherman, Matthew
Crawford, and Allen McConnell, I find their research dovetails in some very
unique and special ways with the Tenth Law of Persuasion, time perspective.
I must confess that when I discovered this missing piece in the persua-
sion and influence models a few years ago, I truly felt I had singularly
come across one of the missing links in the science of influence. However,
Using Time Perspective
99

it is more than instructive to discuss the work of these leading academic
researchers because it appears that my work was concurrent with theirs
and I want to offer full credit to these men for the work they have done
and the information that they have brought to light.
When I was just starting my career in selling, I found that asking peo-
ple to commit to buying something from me in the future was a very
powerful strategy to actually having people follow through later. I also
learned that having people envision being happy with their purchases in
the future was an excellent way to increase my personal sales.
When I wrote scripts and trained fund-raisers for nonprofit charities I
discovered that having people envision feeling good in the future about
decisions to give today literally increased donations dramatically.The only
thing was that I had no hard data, just case studies and personal experience
from my work as a salesman, fund-raiser, and trainer.
Today we have the real-world experience and the academic documen-
tation to show an overwhelming amount of evidence that shifting a per-
son’s time perspective really is one of the most powerful tools of
persuasion and influence imaginable.
When I sold life insurance in 1985 for Farmer’s Insurance Group, I felt
very comfortable asking my future clients to imagine how they would feel
if they died and left their spouse with no money to pay the bills, pay off
the house, to put the kids through college, and so on. I then would look at
the spouse and say something like,“Doesn’t it feel good to have a spouse
who wants to take care of you long after he isn’t here to do so?”
I meant every word of it. I had learned the value of not having a par-
ent with life insurance very early in my life and again later in life. It can be
devastating. For the tiny amount of money that life insurance costs some-
one (for term insurance) I was 100 percent congruent in my asking my
clients to imagine the future and look at what it would be like when they
were gone.
I’m not the only person to have done this as a salesperson. Many indi-
viduals have intuitively utilized the principle to aid in decision making.
Many use this theme manipulatively. Many use it because they care. One
fact is certain:Asking your client to see themselves in the future and imag-
100
Introduction to Omega Strategies

ine what it would be like is strikingly powerful in increasing compliance
and gaining agreement.
In 1996, I developed a psychotherapeutic tool to be used in hypnosis
called the Time Track Therapy Intervention (see my New Hypnotherapy
Handbook).This intervention focuses in large part about having a client “go
into the future” and imagine in detail some of the good things their life
might offer them. The handbook instructs therapists to create a positive,
believable, and realistic future from which they can look back toward the
present and see how they took the steps toward this new and compelling
future.The results of this intervention have proved to be healing and dra-
matic in ways I never would have imagined.The e-mails and testimonials
are abundant. However, they don’t represent scientific proof that the inter-
vention is successful. Case studies are useful, of course, but they may or
may not represent the norm.
Returning to the more traditional settings of influential behavior (di-
rected at the goal of gaining compliance) we have always wanted docu-
mentation as to what specifically is effective and what is not.The need for
external and reliable validation now appears to be near completion for the
experience of having individuals see the future, good or bad, to gain com-
pliance, and this is where I truly appreciate the work of Sherman, Craw-
ford, and McConnell.
In addition to the aforementioned influence researchers, Robert Cial-
dini has discussed the notion that the principle of scarcity (see The Psychol-
ogy of Persuasion or Selling Yourself to Others for detailed information about
scarcity) is similar to the notion that people lose freedom (choices) in the
future if they do not comply with a proposal today.This is in line with the
anticipated regret model. Scarcity has certainly proven to be an effective
principle for gaining compliance. So is the utilization of fear.
Using Time Perspective
101
Asking your client to see themselves in the future and imagine what it
would be like is strikingly powerful in increasing compliance and
gaining agreement.

Key: Fear has proven to be effective in the vast majority of studies re-
searching the appeal to fear when combined with highly effective persua-
sion messages. However, fear appeals generate a polarized response when
combined with ineffectual persuasion messaging. (Witte and Allen 2000)
What else helps overcome resistance and the polarity (knee-jerk) “no”
response?
As noted earlier, literally asking the individual to consider the future is
an excellent technique for gaining compliance. Instead of telling someone
what to do,which typically generates the knee-jerk response,asking the per-
son to tell you whether they would do something if someone asked them to
do it is the key strategy that has been successfully studied by Sherman.
Crawford has discussed some truly remarkable research, which serves
as a template for influencing using these future pacing themes. Researchers
asked some individuals to give an afternoon of their time to charity.Two
percent of those asked complied. Researchers also asked other individuals
to tell them what would happen if someone asked them to give an after-
noon to charity. Of this group 40 percent said “yes.”Two weeks later this
group of individuals was called again (the people who were asked to pre-
dict the future), and 38 percent said “yes”—they would comply in helping
the charity. Numerous studies show that individuals agreeing to do some-
thing are much more likely to do so when the time actually comes when
compliance is requested than simply directing individuals to comply.
Individuals also are influenced by their own beliefs and imaginings
about the future.When asked to describe how team A might defeat team
B, those individuals then tend to believe that team A will actually win the
game.The effect is observed when other individuals are asked to imagine
how team B might defeat team A.
Sherman also found that individuals who were asked to explain their
hypothetical future success or failure at completing an anagram task were
all likely to do better than control groups who were given no opportunity
to explain their future success.
People who imagine a positive future appear to succeed and do better
than those who do not.This indicates that stopping the knee-jerk “no” is
102
Introduction to Omega Strategies

very possibly the right thing to do in addition to being the most influen-
tial option.
Finally, in another study done more than 20 years ago, Gregory, Cial-
dini, and Carpenter found that individuals who were asked to describe
how much they would enjoy owning cable TV later were found to be
much more likely to actually purchase cable.
The evidence is strong. Having individuals imagine the future is a
powerful tool for gaining compliance now . . . or in the future.
Exercise: What can you do to implement the concepts of bringing your
clients out into the future in your business and relationships?
Mastering the Science of Influence
To know that reciprocity is effective is one thing.To know how and when
to induce reciprocity is quite another.To know that asking for a favor can
be a powerful technique of influence is different from knowing when to
ask—and how. I want to show you how to communicate persuasively us-
ing a couple of separate techniques of influence . . . and I also want to
show you what not to do.
“Son, if you do that you will kill yourself,” said Mom—and the son
went right back and doing it . . . remember?
Mom neglected a key factor of influence that almost everyone forgets:
$10,000 Key to Influence: Give specific instructions or steps when directing or
attempting to influence behavior. Simply telling someone to stop doing some-
thing or to “get a job” or “behave” or “shut up” is utterly and completely
destined to fail because these are not instructions.
Mastering the Science of Influence
103
People who imagine a positive future appear to succeed and do better
than those who do not.

Decades of research reveal that specific instructions are necessary to influence
and induce compliance. What does this mean to you? It means that you need
to walk people step-by-step through a process that leads them to the door
you ultimately want them to open.Anything short of doing this is unlikely
to succeed in the short or long term.
I want to direct your attention (did you catch that?) to another tech-
nique that can be remarkably influential or explode in your face. Fear.
Fear is something we are all wired to fight or flee from. Our irrational
fears are those that we attempt to conquer and overcome. No one likes to
experience fear. Fear literally can motivate people in ways few other
things can.
“If you have sex without a condom you could get AIDS!”
That statement could induce fear or not. It could induce a behavioral
change but it probably won’t.The word “AIDS” now is a bit like “acci-
dent.”The public has been inoculated to the word through overuse.
“Imagine that you keep smoking those cigarettes and what you see is
your kids and your grandkids coming to look at you in your casket, crying
because they can’t speak with you anymore because you committed a slow
suicide with tobacco.Your face is shriveled and they will never think of
you in the same way.”
Now, that is a scary scenario for most people with children. (You’ve
used fear in a powerful fashion.) Let’s follow it up with “And if you cut
down to half a pack of cigarettes each day this month and to a cigarette
each day next month and finally throw the pack away, wouldn’t it be
something to see you healthy and happy, having fun, playing with those
grandkids?”
What happened here? We scared the hell out of our friend and then
we gave a specific set of instructions to follow.That’s persuasive. However,
cigarette smokers may have heard it 50,000 times, in which case they are
vaccinated against your proposal and they will not pay attention to your
petition. Once a person has heard the same words or concepts over and
over the warnings lose their power.What to do?
And is it ethical? That’s an interesting question and books have been
written about such things! I don’t know the answer to the question but
104
Introduction to Omega Strategies

I’m glad we brought it up. A good rule of thumb is to always act in the
very best interests of everyone you communicate with.
The lesson here is simple. If you are going to use fear in a communica-
tion in order to foster change or alter behavior—or encourage someone to
buy your product, idea, or service—you must also include a step-by-step
set of instructions in your message in order for it to be successful.
This formula therefore is:
Negative Emotions + Behavioral Plan →Behavioral Change
What happens when two scary or anxiety-producing experiences
compete with each other for the person’s behavioral response?!
Academic researchers have been studying anticipated regret for the past
few years, and here is a scenario that was proposed to 164 UCLA students.
You’ve parked your car in the lot and you are rushing to class for an
important quiz you don’t want to be late for.You realize on the way that
you may have left your car unlocked!
A number of students were then told to imagine how they would feel
if they went back to the car, found it was locked all along, and now had
missed the quiz. Others were told to imagine how they would feel if they
didn’t go back to the car and instead took the quiz, only to discover after-
ward that the car had been vandalized. How would they feel then?
All students were asked whether they would go back to the car or go
to take the quiz. Of those told to imagine the car vandalized, 69 percent
said they would return to the car and check to see if the doors were
locked. Of those who were told they would miss the quiz, 34.5 percent
said they’d go back and check on the car.The control group showed 46
percent returning to check on the car.
Mastering the Science of Influence
105
Once a person has heard the same words or concepts over and over the
warnings lose their power.

Lesson: In general where the students experienced anticipated regret they said
they would take the action appropriate to prevent the regret from happening.
We all know that what people say they will do and what they actually
do in real life are very different things. Later research has in fact validated
this fact.Where people experience anticipated regret, they tend to take ac-
tion to prevent the regret.As people of influence that’s a mighty important
thing to remember!
Exercise:Write down 10 things you can do in your business where if peo-
ple don’t take advantage of your product or service these negatives things
will happen to them. In other words, how can you take advantage of the
concept of anticipated regret?
106
Introduction to Omega Strategies

7
Framing Principles,
Persuasion
Techniques, and
Influential Strategies
More about Framing
“No” often means “no,” but it doesn’t have to! Allow me to keep you in
suspense for just a few moments and let you indulge yourself with an-
other game you can play and compare your results to the majority of
the population:
Situation A: In a game you receive $1,000. In addition, you have a
choice between a certain gain of $500 or a 50 percent chance of
winning an additional $1,000 and a 50 percent chance of winning
nothing.Which do you choose?
Situation B: In a game you receive $2,000. In addition, you have a
choice between a certain loss of $500 or a 50 percent risk of los-
ing $1,000 and a 50 percent chance of losing nothing.Which do
you choose?
107

Before you read on, please do make your choice.
These are the situations that Kahneman, Slovic, and Tversky (1982) pre-
sented to hundreds of subjects. Situations A and B are 100 percent identical,
but most people choose differently in each situation because of the framing.
In both situations you are deciding whether you want $1,500 guaranteed or
have a 50–50 chance of ending up with either $1,000 or $2,000.
How do most people respond?
In situation A, 84 percent of people choose the certain $1,500 (the
first option). Only 16 percent gamble on the 50–50 chance of ending up
with either $1,000 or $2,000.
In Situation B, 31 percent of people choose the certain $1,500 (the
first option).A full 69 percent are willing to gamble on the 50–50 chance
of ending up with either $1,000 or $2,000.
The situations are 100 percent identical yet the frame makes all the
difference in the world as to how people decide.
Question: Examine the two frames (situations) carefully.What is the differ-
ence between the frames and why do you think people choose the way
they do? How might you utilize your hypotheses in your own interactions?
Here are a few lessons we learn from research that examines frames
and choices:
Lesson A: People do not necessarily decide what is best for them; they
decide what presentation of facts is more attractive.
Lesson B: Because we all succumb to the presentation of facts (and
fallacies) and not to reality itself, we all need to look at any important
decisions from all points of view.
Lesson C: People will lock in a sure gain in favor of any risk in the future,
but they will let their losses run. (Example: People hold a stock to-
day at 10 that they bought at 70 because they have so much in the
stock.This is one of the stupidest things people do.They should
take the money and invest in the instrument that holds the highest
probability of appreciation.)
108 Framing Principles, Persuasion Techniques, and Influential Strategies

Let’s move this to a more real-world scenario and see how the way
people think causes them to make bad decisions, and how you can influ-
ence them to do what is in their best interest once they blow it.
Scenario 1
You see a brand-new car that you have been drooling over for months. It’s
priced $500 below invoice an offers a $2,000 rebate! But because money
has been tight, you decide against buying the car.Three months later, your
financial situation has improved and you see the same car still priced at
$500 below invoice but the rebate program ended last month. Do you
buy the car?
If you are like most people the answer is “no.”Why would that be? You
can get a car at below invoice (That’s supposedly what the dealer pays for
the car, not the retail price on the car!) The reason is that most individuals
experience what is called “avoidance of anticipated counterfactual regret.”
In simple English, that means that if we bought the car now, we would feel
as if we had missed out on last month’s bargain and don’t want to regret it.
To avoid that pain, people will continue to pass up great opportunities,
even though they aren’t quite as great as “the one that got away.”
However, if you drive past the dealership every day on your way to the
office, the repeated exposure to the car is often enough to overcome the
inertia of inaction and allow you to change your mind and buy the car.
You’re going to be seeing what you could have had every single day, and
therefore you are experiencing regrets of another kind anyway, so you be-
come more likely to stop back and buy the car.
Now, if you can understand this you can influence others to your way
of thinking in ways you have never dreamed of.
I You’ve met with a client or customer and given them a grand op-
portunity, which they declined. How can you stay in front of that
customer over the weeks and months so they ultimately will do
business with you? (Out of sight = out of mind.)
More about Framing
109

I How can you change an offer or restructure an offer so that the
client/customer feels as if they are getting the same original price
on something and therefore does not need to psychologically avoid
buying from/saying “yes” to you?
Scenario 2
Another example might be a TV that you know retails for more than
$600. In the Sunday paper you see it on sale for $397 but it’s for one day
only. It’s a super bargain if you ever saw one, but you decide against it for
some reason.The following Sunday the set is still on sale but this time for
$497.You missed the first opportunity for some reason or other and now
you have an opportunity to still get the TV at a big discount . . . and of
course you don’t buy it because you will feel the loss of the $100 that you
would have saved had you purchased it last week!
The research of this phenomenon shows that inaction inertia occurs
when the second action opportunity is in some sense worth substantially
less than the initial opportunity, even though the current action opportu-
nity has positive value in an absolute sense. (Tykocinski 1998)
Therefore, once a customer or potential customer/client says “no” to you, you
must develop a strategy to overcome inaction inertia or you will lose this client forever.
How can you structure your initial offer so that it is a tremendous
value while allowing the customer to feel the perception of a similar
tremendous value later . . . if they say “no” to you now?
In the case of the TV, perhaps you might include a service contract at
no cost.This costs the company next to nothing and is quoted at $80 to
the customer.
In the case of the automobile, you could offer to do 18 months of free
oil changes and tune-ups.Total value could be as much as $500 and the
real cost is next to nothing because a tune-up might not be needed, espe-
cially in the first year and a half, and the cost of oil and a filter is negligible
compared to the profits on the automobile sale.
A person of influence must preclude the “no” reaction in the first
110 Framing Principles, Persuasion Techniques, and Influential Strategies

place.The best way to do this is by utilizing tools of anticipated regret that
overcome resistance.
Publishers Clearing House has done this for years. (Many would say
unethically and I might not argue about that.) Here’s how it has used an-
ticipated regret in its mailings in the past:
Suppose we told you . . . you were recently assigned the winning su-
per prize number, but you didn’t enter so we gave the $10,000,000
to somebody else! Deciding not to enter our sweepstakes is serious
business.
That’s pretty powerful stuff, isn’t it?
Asking a person to engage in counterfactual thinking means you are
having someone consider alternate realities that could be true had some-
one done some other set of actions. Counterfactual thinking generally is
related to regret, and Publishers Clearing House has mastered the concept
of regret in marketing, as you can see!
Here is your homework assignment that will help you build your
powers of influence.
1. List four specific ways that you can utilize anticipated regret with
your products and services.
2. List four specific ways you can keep your product/service/ideas in
front of your prospects who have temporarily said “no” to you.
3. Write down how you normally frame your offers and see if there
are other ways that you can frame your offers to make them more
appealing.
Foot in the Door: A Proven Persuasion Strategy 
That Leads to “Yes!”
(Bonus:This is a free $10,000 Key that I have shared with numerous com-
panies. It’s now yours free for reading. Use it wisely.)
Foot in the Door: A Proven Persuasion Strategy That Leads to “Yes!”
111

You can’t persuade someone if you can’t get in front of them to com-
municate your message. For hundreds and thousands of years businesses,
merchants, therapists, and salespeople have used the foot in the door
(FITD) technique to gain access to the person who can say “yes.” Does it
really work as well as salespeople think?
You already know that every persuasion and influence strategy that
works in selling works in therapy, works in marketing—well, you get the
idea.We tend to say “yes” or “no” based on the interaction of certain mea-
surable variables.
I favor any strategy in the field of influence that is tested and proven to
be effective. I want to share two powerful techniques that increase your
chances of getting the result you want: the foot in the door (FITD) tech-
nique and the amendment technique.
FITD Technique
The foot in the door technique is a simple concept.The idea is to get your
client/customer to say “yes” to a simple and small request immediately be-
fore you ask for a big “yes.”
Remember the old days when an encyclopedia salesman would come
to the door offering a free three-book set of a thesaurus, dictionary, and
grammar book if you simply listened to his presentation about his ency-
clopedias? I do. I still have the Britannica in the office.This is the perfect
example of the foot in the door technique.You ask your client/customer
to say “yes” to a small request so that you can have an opportunity to ask
your customer to say “yes” to a large request.
Effective?
112 Framing Principles, Persuasion Techniques, and Influential Strategies
You can’t persuade someone if you can’t get in front of them to
communicate your message.

More than you know!
Foot in the door strategies are the strategies that have sold billions of
dollars of time-sharing (one of the worst investments you can make—
though it can be fun!). How? Most resorts will ask you to give them 90
minutes of your time in exchange for a free television, tickets to Disney
World or a free weekend at the resort.The 90 minutes they want is a struc-
tured high-pressure presentation designed for the person who has prede-
termined that “There is no way that we will buy.”The strategy has been
effective for decades.
Pharmaceuticals are getting their foot in the door in a positively bril-
liant fashion now. Instead of having doctors give away free samples, many
pharmaceutical companies are having the doctor give the patient a free
prescription coupon redeemable at the pharmacy and all the doctor has to
do is write the prescription.The pharmaceutical wins big because not only
is the prescription written but it is at the pharmacy where all that needs to
be done is call in for a refill when the prescription is used up. Absolute
brilliance that didn’t always work when the M.D. was giving free samples
to the patient.
All of this sounds good, but what does the research reveal?
Research shows that using FITD can increase compliance in many situations
by as much as 200 percent! Here are a few facts that have been discovered:
1. The larger the first request that is agreed to, the more likely the
person/company is to say “yes” to the second and more important request.
$10,000 Gift for You. (I’ve gotten paid $5,000 for this on more than
one occasion.)
This was borne out with one company I consulted with that used
coupons to discover which coupons would draw more people and what
the retention rate of each coupon was.The discovery was that the higher
the price paid on the first coupon, the larger the retention rate.The lower
price/greater discount on the coupon had a much higher usage rate but a
much lower retention rate. Read this 10 times and calculate the implica-
tions for your situation!
Foot in the Door: A Proven Persuasion Strategy That Leads to “Yes!”
113

2. Do not use money to induce compliance to the first request.When this is
done, the foot in the door technique does not work.
In other words, don’t offer someone money as an inducement to do
business with you or to buy your product/service.
3. The receiver of the foot in the door must actually do something, not say
they will do something, for FITD to be effective. (Burger 1999)
Always remember:What people say and think they will do bears little
relationship to their actual actions. It’s not that people are ill willed or have
bad intentions; people simply are lousy predictors of their future actions. In
fact, simply go with this:What people say they are going to do is relatively
meaningless. Observe what people have done in the past and you can pre-
dict what they will do in the future with greater accuracy than by asking
what they intend to do in the future.
4. If the request has some prosocial aspects (Dillard, Hunter, and Burgoon
1984) people are sometimes significantly more likely to comply than in situations
that are clearly for profit only.
The foot in the door technique is one of the most powerful persua-
sion techniques, and there are reams of research studies in the literature
that prove this beyond a shadow of a doubt. It’s time to start putting to-
gether a plan on some level as to how you and your business/company can
utilize the FITD technique!
Exercise: How can you apply the foot in the door technique to your spe-
cific persuasion scenarios?
114 Framing Principles, Persuasion Techniques, and Influential Strategies
What people say and think they will do bears little relationship to
their actual actions.

Four Tested Ways to Be More Persuasive with Framing
1. Get something of yours (your product, your idea, your service) that has
value into your customers’ hands/minds as soon as possible! As soon as someone
possesses something, they perceive it to be more valuable than they did
immediately prior to owning it.
Research by Kahneman and Tversky (1984) brings these examples to
our attention:
I Individuals who ultimately bet on team A in a football game are of-
ten ambivalent as to which team to select until they actually place
their bets on team A. Once they have placed their bets, they tend to
dramatically favor team A and show little hesitation in sharing their
certainty that team A will win.
I Students receive mugs in a research setting and are given the oppor-
tunity to sell the mugs. Other students are given the opportunity to
buy the mugs. Students will not take less than $7.12 on average for
the mugs they have taken possession of.The other students will not
pay more than $3.12 on average for the same mugs. Lesson: Once
you own something you value it more highly than those who do
not own it—even if it has been owned for only 10 minutes!
2. Create a frame (a word picture in your customer’s mind) that your product/
service/idea is something that they already possess . . . so that it becomes the
status quo in their thinking:“Once our lawn service is yours we help you
eliminate all that crabgrass that the old services you used to use never were
able to control.”
I Students in one class were given a decorated mug as compensation
for filling out a questionnaire. In another class, students received a
large bar of Swiss chocolate.When given the opportunity to trade
with members of the other class, only 10 percent of students traded
their item while 90 percent stayed with what they had.
I More impressive: 45 students received a gift package of a Stanford
calendar and a free dinner at MacArthur Park Restaurant. In an-
Four Tested Ways to Be More Persuasive with Framing
115

other group of 45, the students received a Stanford calendar and a
certificate for an 8 × 10 professional portrait. Later that day all the
subjects were told they could trade their current package for either
two free dinners at MacArthur Park Restaurant or a professional
portrait sitting including an 8 × 10, two 5 × 7’s, and a wallet photo.
The results were that 81 percent of the dinner/calendar group
swapped their package for the two dinners.
Lesson: People want what they have and more of it!
3. Create a word picture that creates a moderate amount of tension if the client
doesn’t do business with your company. In other words, what will the clients
lose if they do not do business with you?
I Research: In one experiment with gambling, individuals were given
the opportunity to flip a coin and bet $10. Only with a payoff of
$25 and a possible loss on the individual’s part of $10 were most
willing to gamble! That’s a 2.5:1 ratio for a 1:1 bet!
I Research on real-life applications: Loss aversion is more pro-
nounced for personal safety than for money. (People will do more
to protect themselves than their money.) Loss aversion is more pro-
nounced for income than leisure. (Losing a chance to travel isn’t as
powerful as losing income.)
Lesson: People move away from loss. Determine what people lose if
they don’t do business with you and artfully develop word pictures that
clarify the hurt they might experience. For example,“You are seven times
more likely to become disabled than die in any given year, and if you be-
come permanently disabled your family will lose everything because you
will be unable to work and they will have the added expense of taking care
of you. If you carry insurance against this enormous risk, you avoid losing
everything and have the ability to maintain a high standard of living no
matter what happens to you.”
4. Don’t confuse opportunity costs with out-of-pocket expenses.Your cus-
tomer doesn’t and is watching you to see how you promote your 
116 Framing Principles, Persuasion Techniques, and Influential Strategies

business. The following research was conducted in two cities by tele-
phone sampling:
Scenario 1. A shortage has developed for a certain popular make of au-
tomobile, and customers must now wait two months for delivery.
The dealer has been selling the cars at list price. Now the dealer
prices the cars at $200 over list. Is this acceptable or unfair?
Acceptable 29%.
Unfair 71%.
Scenario 2: A shortage has developed for a certain popular make of au-
tomobile, and customers must now wait two months for delivery.
The dealer has been selling the cars at $200 below list price. Now
the dealer sells this model at list price. Is this acceptable or unfair?
Acceptable 58%.
Unfair 42%.
Scenario 3: A company is making a small profit. It is located in a city
experiencing a recession with substantial unemployment but no
inflation.The company decides to decrease wages and salaries this
year by 7 percent.Acceptable or unfair?
Acceptable 37%.
Unfair 63%.
Scenario 4: A company is making a small profit. It is located in a city
experiencing a recession with substantial unemployment and in-
flation of 12 percent.The company decides to increase salaries by
only 5 percent this year.Acceptable or unfair?
Acceptable 78%.
Unfair 22%.
Each pair of scenarios presents two is identical situations. (Scenarios 1
and 2 both involve a price rise of $200; scenarios 3 and 4 both involve
wages 7 percent below the inflation rate.) However, the consumer reacts
very differently to each option. Consumers do not want to perceive
money coming out of their pockets. Be certain to frame every promotion
Four Tested Ways to Be More Persuasive with Framing
117

in such a way that the consumer is clearly saving (and assume no mathe-
matical ability on the part of the consumer).
Mastering the Science of Influence: Priming the Pump
Do these four thought exercises with friends,groups (best!),or on your own.
1. Read this scenario:
John is intelligent, industrious, impulsive, critical, stubborn, and jealous.
Mark is jealous, stubborn, critical, impulsive, industrious, and intelligent.
Quickly, which person do you think you would like more, John 
or Mark?
You have a lot of company if you said John. Most people do, and the
reason is simple.Although the same traits were used to describe John and
Mark, the principle of primacy primes the mind to filter everything else
you learn about someone through the first characteristic, that of being in-
telligent in John’s case and jealous in Mark’s case As each characteristic is
mentioned in order, it becomes less and less important.
2. Guesstimate the total of each of these multiplication problems. Show the
first equation to one person and the second equation to another. Each per-
son gets only five seconds.
1 × 2 × 3 × 4 × 5 × 6 × 7 × 8 = ?
8 × 7 × 6 × 5 × 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 = ?
The average guess for the first problem is 512. For the second? 2,250.
The correct answer is 40,320!
Why the big difference in guessing and the huge distance in both cases
118 Framing Principles, Persuasion Techniques, and Influential Strategies
Consumers do not want to perceive money coming out of their
pockets.

from the right answer? People group the first few numbers together in
each set and then guessed based on this information.
3. Group 1 (or person 1 if you are doing this with only two friends) is shown
these words and asked to remember them:“adventurous,”“self assured,”“indepen-
dent,” and “persistent.”
Group 2 is shown this set of words and asked to remember them:
“careless,”“conceited,”“solitary,” and “stubborn.”
Now, each has 15 seconds to describe and evaluate the following per-
son: Donald is a parachutist.
The descriptions given by the individuals or groups will be heavily
slanted toward the words they had to remember. Group 1 typically finds
Donald a free spirit.Group 2 typically finds Donald careless and a daredevil.
$10,000 Key to Influence: Whether you realize it or not, everything you
watch,listen to,read,and think about influences the next thing you consider.
4. Say the following word five times, then continue reading.
“Blood.”
What color does a traffic light have to be to proceed?
Did you say “red?”
Go back and look at the question. Interesting, eh?
These four scenarios all take advantage of our brain’s programming for
primacy.We tend to lose the ability to consider much information after the
first important piece, and in fact we tend to filter or disregard information
that doesn’t match our current information, whether or not the new in-
formation is valuable.
Key to Influence: There is an enormous amount of research, old and
new, that confirms that what happens first in some experience, event, or
situation alters our perceptions of everything that follows.There is also an
equally large amount of research that shows that what happens last in some
experience, event, or situation is extremely important in our perceptions
and beliefs.
Mastering the Science of Influence: Priming the Pump
119

Are the two findings in contradiction? No.The brain tends to remember
that which happens first and last in sequences,events,and life in general.The
balance between the two (primacy and recency) is very interesting. One ex-
periment shows that when two speakers are giving speeches one right after
the other with no break, the first speaker tends to be received better and ap-
preciated more. However, when speakers (say candidates for office) can
choose between speaking before a group this week or next week, they
should choose the later event as people (when they go to the polls, say) will
forget what happened last week, and the freshness of this week’s speaker and
her message will ultimately be seen in a much better light.When consider-
ing going first or last, the key determining factor for positioning is the
elapsed time between the events.The shorter the elapsed time,the better it is
to go first.The longer the elapsed time, the better it is to go last.
Let me ask you a few questions, may I?
What was the first school you attended?
What was the second?
Who was the first person you kissed?
Who was the second?
What was the first apartment you rented?
What was the second?
What was the first car you actually owned?
What was the second?
What was your first job?
What was your second?
I think you get the idea!
So, we know we have a hard time remembering things in the middle!
We are good at beginnings and endings. How do we use this enlightening
information?
120 Framing Principles, Persuasion Techniques, and Influential Strategies

Priming people to accept a message is all about starting out with a
great impression—something big, a promise, a big smile, something that
sets the stage for everything that can happen later. Remember that what
happens first will be remembered and will serve as a filter for everything
that comes after.
Quick! Get a pen and paper.
Choose which you prefer (you’re making monetary bets). Circle or
write down your choice.
Alternative A:A sure gain of $240.
Alternative B: A 25 percent chance to gain $1,000, and a 75 percent
chance to gain nothing.
Choose which you prefer:
Alternative C:A sure loss of $750.
Alternative D: A 75 percent chance to lose $1,000, and a 25 percent
chance to lose nothing.
Kahneman and Tversky (1984) found that 84 percent of people
choose alternative A over B.
First Key:When people have a sure thing in hand, they tend not to go for
the potential bigger gain and lose what they have. People hate to lose what
they have.
Second Key: Instead of the sure loss, people will gamble at an even
greater loss for the chance to break even. (This is why casinos have big
chandeliers, big-name acts, and the best hotel rooms on the planet.)
When people feel pain or have experienced loss, they will spend more to get out
of the loss or come out of the pain, even if the odds are against success.
In fact, 73 percent of all people choose the AD combination even
though BC is a better choice (only 3 in 100 will choose that combination)
Mastering the Science of Influence: Priming the Pump
121

and the one that is the logical choice.And so it is with our species.We are
a rationalizing people. We make emotional choices and then rationalize
(make them seem logical, whether correct or incorrect).
Third Key: How a question, proposal, idea, product, or statement is
framed can largely determine what the majority of people will decide and
actually do.
Most people respond or react to the fear of loss and the threat of pain
in a much more profound way than they do to the potential for gain.This
does not mean, however, that all of your influential messages should be
couched in the language of fear and threats. Far from it. In fact, in some
situations fear and pain will turn someone away from your attempted per-
suasive communication.
Once you begin to understand when it is appropriate to use prohibi-
tions, losses, and fear in your message and when it is appropriate to use al-
lowances, gains, and positive messages, you will find yourself influentially
succeeding in ways you didn’t think were possible.
We pride ourselves on being in charge, in control, intelligent, great-
decision making beings . . . until we are exposed to the truth. Sigh. . . .We
often respond to others in ways that make absolutely no rational sense
whatsoever. Becoming aware of most of these mechanisms of stimulus/re-
sponse, environment/response, frame/response, perception/response will
help you become a superb decision maker and open the door for you to
become a remarkably influential person.
What about educated people? Medical doctors? How do they decide
what to do, and how will they influence your decision?
A 1987 study in the New England Journal of Medicine involving 1,193
participants revealed this:
122 Framing Principles, Persuasion Techniques, and Influential Strategies
Most people respond or react to the fear of loss and the threat of pain
in a much more profound way than they do to the potential for gain.

Which of two treatments would specialists prefer—surgery or radia-
tion therapy for cancer? It depended on how the question was asked!
If the medical specialists were asked the question in terms of “surgery
will yield a 68 percent chance of surviving after one year,” then three-quar-
ters of the time surgery was chosen.If the question was asked in the mortal-
ity (death) frame (32 percent will be dead by the end of one year), then
only 58 percent of the time did the specialists choose the surgery option.
Fourth Key: The frame of a proposal can alter life-and-death decisions
even though the identical data is used to make the decisions!
Hypnotic Confusion
Milton Erickson, M.D., was one of the twentieth century’s best-known
hypnotherapists.
Erickson utilized the tactic of confusing his patients so they would go
into a trance and be distracted from resistant thoughts they would have to-
ward Erickson or hypnosis in general. Erickson believed that whatever
suggestion followed the confusing tactic he would use would be more
likely to take hold and succeed.
Some hypnotic confusion techniques have proven to be counterpro-
ductive and actually increase resistance, but simple disruptions followed
by an elegantly simple reframe actually have been proven to be successful
in influence.
Example 1:The Cupcake Study
People coming to the Psychology Club table on campus used the follow-
ing answers in response to the question “How much are they?”
Control:“These cupcakes are 50 cents; they’re really delicious.”
Mild disruption:“These half cakes are 50 cents; they’re really delicious.”
Severe disruption:“These petits gâteaux are 50 cents;they’re really delicious.”
Hypnotic Confusion
123

What worked for making sales?
Mild disruption: 74 percent.
Severe disruption: 67 percent.
Control: 46 percent.
Does this work with anything other than students selling cupcakes?
Example 2:The Donation Study
Students asking for donations to their Richardson Center asked people to
donate “some money” in the control and “money some” (just those two
words in their door-to-door presentation) in the disruption condition.
A third condition was tested using “money some” and the name of the
organization incorrectly stated as “Center Richardson.”This was a severe
disruption.
Results:
Disruption: 65 percent of houses donated.
Control: 30 percent of houses donated.
Severe disruption: 25 percent of houses donated.
Exercise: How can you use the technique of hypnotic confusion in selling
your idea or product (or yourself). List three ways.
The Amendment Technique
There are different ways we can present our price to our client. Look at
the following two ways.
1. “These cupcakes are 50 cents.”
2. “These cupcakes used to be a dollar, but now they’re 50 cents.”
124 Framing Principles, Persuasion Techniques, and Influential Strategies

What difference can that little bit of wording make? A big difference.The
sentence you want to use,of course,is the second one.We are telling our cus-
tomer that we have amended the price.The power is in its startling the client
with the original price,and then revealing the new reasonable price.
How can we use this data to our advantage? You tell your customer
that your bicycles were $129.95 each, but now they’re $ 99.95! People ap-
preciate knowing how much something did cost, and what is a reasonable
amount for that product today.
Bonus: Price Points
In the United States,we think of money in terms of our standard currency.
We have $1, $5, $10, $20, $50, and $100 bills.These are all what we call
“price points.”A price point is a point at which going over that price will
make our customer hesitate, or even refuse to buy.
The most common ones are $.99, $9.95, $19.95, and $99.95.
What about $20,000? A car for $19,995 is much cheaper than one for
$20,195, right?
Exercise: How can you use the amendment technique in your business
today? List three ways. How can you take advantage of price points in
your industry?
How Most People Make Bad Decisions . . .
How You Can Help Them Make Good Ones!
Our life experience is largely a combination of our state of mind, com-
munication, relationships, actions, and decisions. If someone is to achieve
Most People Make Bad Decisions . . . Help Them Make Good Ones!
125
People appreciate knowing how much something did cost, and what is
a reasonable amount for that product today.

success in some area of life, certainly making well-considered decisions is
critical. Learning how you make decisions and how others make their de-
cisions will not only allow you to become a more influential person, it
will help you grow yourself—with fewer regrets and more wins!
Is it time for a career change?
Which job should you take?
Should you marry this one?
Should you divorce this one?
Should you buy this car?
Should you buy that home?
Before you make that big decision you may want to read this set of ar-
ticles, which will shed light on not only our decision-making blind spots
and errors, but also how to actually make great decisions.
Reams of research show that in general:
I People assume when they decide on something and it turns out
well that they made a good decision—when it easily could have
been attributed to chance (luck).
I People tend to overemphasize the importance of pain by about
2.5:1 in decision making. (People may not need to feel great but
they don’t want to hurt at all.)
I People rationalize their emotional decisions instead of making ra-
tional decisions.
I People make their decisions emotionally when the answer to a
question or proposition isn’t obvious.
I People make their decisions impulsively, then stand by their impulse
as if the decision was made rationally.
I People make their decisions based on their experience and not the
experience of the masses.
I People make decisions based on the socioenvironmental frames
they put the decisions into. (A woman going to Planned Parent-
126 Framing Principles, Persuasion Techniques, and Influential Strategies

hood for counseling will get different advice than the woman going
to her conservative pastor.)
I People tend to make decisions on their own instead of seeking the
counsel of numerous others who can give additional perspectives.
I People are unaware of the enormous power of the actual words that
are used to ask the question, and how the phrasing can make an
enormous difference in the actual decision that is made.
I People are unaware as to how the influence of specific questions
changes their minds unconsciously. (“Are you sick of driving that
old junker?” versus “Are you thinking of buying a new car?”)
I People tend to avoid what they perceive as risky.
I People tend to lack the skills to calculate the chances that events
will or won’t happen.
I People tend to decide on the sure thing even when it doesn’t make
real sense to do so.They will take a sure $100 instead of a 50–50
chance at $250, for example.)
I People tend to make decisions without a solid understanding of
“the real-life likelihood of events.” (Read that as mathematics, sta-
tistics, and probability.)
Not only do most of us make lots of bad decisions, we also tend to
dramatically overrate our decision-making skills! We tend to remember
our good decisions and think we’re actually good at decision making.
But wait! It gets worse! We tend to overestimate everything about our-
selves from the income we earned last year to the grades we got in ele-
mentary school. Here are just a couple of examples of how people
perceive their judgment in the real world to be in contrast to how it 
really is.
Ninety-six percent of all men rate their physical appearance as average
or better!
Ninety-four percent of all women rate their physical appearance as av-
erage or better!
Most People Make Bad Decisions . . . Help Them Make Good Ones!
127

What’s wrong with this picture? (Obviously only 51 percent are aver-
age or better.The other 49 percent are below average.)
Ninety-one percent of all business leaders believe they are good or
very good decision makers.
Eighty percent of businesses fail in the first four years.
Ninety percent of new products fail to make a profit.
What is wrong with this picture?!
Now, with these amazing facts behind us, it would seem that seeking
expert advice from your broker, your agent, your attorney, your therapist,
or your mom would be helpful (maybe), but don’t get too excited until
you look at this:
Here’s an example of how we tend to overrate expert advice:
About 20 percent of all stock mutual fund managers select stocks that
ultimately do better than the S&P 500 index, often called “the market.” In
other words, only 20 percent of experts—people paid millions of dollars
per year to beat the market—succeed at doing so.Think about that. Given
reams of computer analysis, data, and information, a full 80 percent of the
world’s smartest professional investors cannot do better than the person
who claims to know nothing about the market and simply invests in the
500 companies in the S&P 500!
Why are these experts so poor at deciding what stocks to buy?
I Past performance is not always an indicator of future results . . . but
most experts still make investment decisions as though it is.
I Most experts don’t consider the factors that really will influence the
future.
I They believe their own publicity clips.
Almost every decision we make in business, relationships, or life is a
function of probability.That means that you don’t actually know the out-
come of the decision in advance.When you get in your car and drive to
work you are deciding that people will drive carefully on their side of the
128 Framing Principles, Persuasion Techniques, and Influential Strategies

road while you speed along at 55 mph on your side of the road with two
painted yellow lines dividing you.And indeed that is a decision that when
you look at it this way is fairly risky but in reality the probability of disas-
ter striking (someone running head-on into you and killing you) is very
slim. In this case, our day-to-day experience and our illusion of control
(we’re driving so everything will be okay) confirm for us that while we see
a lot of accidents, we know that almost everyone is safe driving to and fro.
So we drive.
But the same set of factors can work the opposite way in making
decisions.
Millions of people buy lottery tickets every day. The lottery (like
Powerball) is one of the worst bets on the planet.The odds are 55,000,000
to 1 that you will lose—and, yes, eventually someone has to win, but let’s
put those chances into perspective: If you have been struck by lightning 40
times or have died in 20 plane crashes then you might just be the person
to win the lottery—those are the same odds as winning the jackpot in the
Powerball game! The fact is that you aren’t going to win the lottery and
neither am I. It is a terrible decision to buy a ticket. Just take your dollar
bill or $10 bill and burn it. Feel better? Ouch!
What about the “easier” lotto games? What about games where you
only have to match three numbers to win $500 for your measly $1 invest-
ment? From 000 to 999 there are 1,000 total numbers that can be drawn.
Your odds of winning therefore are 1 in 1,000.That means that on aver-
age for every $1,000 you spend on the lotto you will get returned $500.
You should get $1,000 for a winner but the government/lottery sponsor
is giving you $500. I don’t know how much you earn, but a lot of people
make only $500 per week and it’s worth considering that the govern-
ment, which regulates the lottery, is really extracting a “stupid tax” from
those foolish enough to decide to play. Now, could you pick the winner
Most People Make Bad Decisions . . . Help Them Make Good Ones!
129
Almost every decision we make in business, relationships, or life is a
function of probability.

tonight in a 1 in 1,000 event and win the $500? Sure you could. Lots of
people will. But it’s still a foolish decision to buy the ticket just because it
could happen.
So how do you make a good decision?
There are lots of factors involved. Dozens actually. Let’s look at one
simple factor and key to making good decisions.
Key to Influence:What is the chance of something happening versus the
payoff? If the payoff is worth more than the risk, then the decision is a
good decision even if you are wrong. If the payoff is worth less than the
risk, the decision is a bad decision, even if you are right.
Example: Last year I won a nice sum of money on the Super Bowl. I
have a modeling tool for picking football games. Some years the model
does better than others. My model said that New England would beat St.
Louis about one-third of the time in this specific game.The casino was of-
fering about $450 for each $100 bet if New England did indeed win. It
was very difficult to put money on New England (because they should
lose two-thirds of the time in this game), but clearly because they should
win one-third of the time (assuming the model is right) and the casino was
willing to pay off more than double those odds, I had no choice but to bet
it all on New England. In other words, according to my model, the casino
should pay off only $200 in addition to getting my $100 back, but it was
offering $450! I had to make the wager. I did.They won. It was good.
Now, New England could have lost and it still would have been a
good bet because the casino was going to pay me more than twice as
much on a win as they should have. It’s no fun when your decision turns
out wrong, but you can learn to make the best decisions possible.We’ll talk
much more about just that in later chapters.
130 Framing Principles, Persuasion Techniques, and Influential Strategies
It’s no fun when your decision turns out wrong, but you can learn to
make the best decisions possible.

It’s sometimes difficult to calculate the probability of life events.
“If I buy the Palm Pilot will I really use it?”
“Will I be happier if I divorce him?”
“Will I be happier if I go out with Jane instead of Betty?”
“If I quit the job will I find a better one?”
“If I take the job will I be happy there?”
“If I marry Bill/Bonnie, will he/she be a good spouse?”
“If I have children, will they be born free of major defects?”
For these questions it is more difficult to determine what the right de-
cisions are because they include numerous variables that need to be
weighted and all possible options explored before such decisions are final-
ized. (Once a decision is actually made, most humans are unable to change
their minds because they will appear to be wrong in their own minds, to
their peer group, or society in general.)
Most People Make Bad Decisions . . . Help Them Make Good Ones!
131


8
Applying the 
Laws of Influence
You drive down the street.You have to stop at stop signs, yield to oncom-
ing traffic, and even keep to the speed limit (at least when you see a high-
way patrolman!).These are all simple laws. Laws created by society for the
safety and betterment of the masses aren’t necessarily perfect, nor are they
absolutes. Laws of society don’t always work.
However, universal laws like the law of gravity always work. If you
drop 10,000 baseballs off the top of the Sears Tower in Chicago, the balls
will all drop to the street below, probably doing major damage. None of
the balls will rise up toward the atmosphere as you drop them off the
Sears Tower.
These are universal laws that never change. If you try to break a uni-
versal law, normally you won’t get a second chance to make things right!
Legislated laws are different. If you follow them you will probably live
longer and pay fewer traffic tickets.
133

The laws of influence aren’t quite like the laws of society or the laws
of the universe. In fact, most people aren’t even aware of the laws of influ-
ence.They simply tend to act in accordance with the laws at a completely
unconscious level.There are major prices to pay when the laws of influ-
ence are broken.The problem is that most people aren’t aware of the laws
in the first place. If people unconsciously follow the rules they will be hap-
pier and communicate well with others. If people don’t follow the rules
they will run into lots of problems, experience broken relationships, earn
less income, be more readily downsized in corporations that are cutting
back, and—well, you get the idea.
There is nothing you do that is more important than communicat-
ing with others. There are very specific laws that govern not only the
communication process but also the sales process. It’s interesting because
sometimes when you drive past the highway patrolman at 75 mph you
don’t get a ticket. Sometimes you fail to yield to oncoming traffic and
you don’t get in a car accident. Every now and then you run the stop
sign and you don’t hit a pedestrian. The laws exist, though, and when
they are followed they tend to work in favor of law-abiding citizens.
When they are broken, the chances that something will go wrong are
dramatically increased. The same is true in this respect for the laws of
influence.
How can there be laws of selling? How can something like sales or
communication have laws? As our species has evolved for millions of years
we have discovered that we tend to need the cooperation of others to suc-
ceed. Gaining the cooperation and compliance of other people is ab-
solutely critical to the persuasion process and the continuance of society as
we know it.
In this chapter you will learn how to apply the 10 Laws of Influ-
ence. Following each of these rules is important in gaining compliance
from others. In most situations on most days of your sales career, if you
follow each law you will find selling to be a fairly simple experience.
What’s better, if you utilize these 10 laws in all of your communication
you will find that your sales career is fun, sometimes challenging, and al-
ways rewarding.
134
Applying the Laws of Influence

1. Law of Reciprocity
When someone gives you something of perceived value, you immediately
respond with the desire to give something back.
It’s December 24 and the mail has just arrived.You open a Christmas
card from someone you had taken off your Christmas list.This is a crisis!
“Honey, are there any more Christmas cards left?”
“Yeah, in the drawer.”
“Thank God.”You go to the drawer and sure enough there is a card
there—but there are no envelopes to fit the card into! You search and
search, finally deciding to use an envelope that isn’t quite large enough . . .
but you have to use something!
You sign the card, and yes, you personalize it! (You write something
special just for the sender.) You stuff the card into the envelope that is still
too small.You slide a picture of the family in, and you even find a leftover
newsletter that tells everyone what your family has been up to all year.
“I’ll be back in a while, I have to go to the post office and mail this
card.”
Why do you have to go to the post office?
You have to go because the letter must be mailed with a postmark be-
fore Christmas! December 24 will show that you cared. December 26 will
show that these people were an afterthought in your mind, not worthy of
sending a card to before Christmas.You race off to the post office—and
you have just discovered the power of reciprocity.
You were taught to share your toys and your snacks and your space
and your time with all those around you.You were scolded when you
were selfish and you were rewarded with kind smiles and pats on the
head when you shared.The Law of Reciprocity was installed at a very
early age.
The world’s greatest people and marketing mavens give something to
their clients—and I don’t mean a business card.
I Have you ever received a bar of soap in the mail?
I Have you ever received a box of cereal in the mail?
1. Law of Reciprocity
135

I Have you ever received return address labels from a charity in the
mail?
I Have you ever received a handful of greeting cards from a charity in
the mail?
I Have you ever received a sample-size shampoo bottle in the mail?
These are all examples of what we call “inducing reciprocity.” The
practice is very simple, yet absolutely brilliant. If your product is top qual-
ity and it is something that everyone can use, send everyone a small sample
of it, and they will be more likely to buy it the next time they go to the
store for two reasons.
First, they will recognize it as something they have used. The brain
picks up on what is familiar. (Have you ever noticed how many cars there
are like yours on the road? What happened to all the rest?!)
Second, reciprocity has been induced when someone gives you some-
thing and you give them something back. Reciprocity has also been in-
duced when someone gives you something and you feel compelled to give
something back. Kellogg’s was nice enough to send us their free box of ce-
real, and because it tasted good we should at least buy their cereal this one
time.We return the favor.
Reciprocity, based on scientific research, appears to be the single most
powerful law of selling persuasion there is, but is there a problem?
I If you sell life insurance, you can’t give away $10,000 of free cover-
age.
I If you sell real estate, you can’t give away bathrooms.
I If you sell speaking services you can’t give away free speeches.
I If you are a stockbroker you can’t give away 100 shares of Mi-
crosoft.
What do you do if you don’t have sample-size products or services?
How do you take advantage of this powerful law of share and share
alike?
136
Applying the Laws of Influence

You do not have to give away free samples to utilize reciprocity.You
must only give away something that has perceived value. My favorite
method of inducing reciprocity is taking someone to lunch or sharing a
valuable tip related to building their business or income in some way. (I
like these approaches because they are measurable and the person knows
that you really helped them when they follow through on your sugges-
tion.) Taking someone to lunch is usually an inexpensive way to induce
reciprocity, and you have the added benefit of meeting one of your client’s
16 basic desires (the desire to eat). Sharing helpful secrets that are truly
specialized knowledge is also an elegant way to induce reciprocity. One
simple idea can often help someone earn hundreds or thousands of dollars
per year more in income.
Can I share a secret with you?
I keep some of my money in the Strong Funds Money Market ac-
count. It pays much more interest than a bank does and the money is safe.
You can write checks on your account just like a checking account, and if
you just used that secret to make more money, I’d be happy that I shared it
with you.
Can I share another secret with you? The Strong Advantage Fund is
even better! It pays about 1 to 3 percent more interest than the Strong
Money Market Fund and you can write checks on that account, too. If
you took $10,000 out of the bank or CD and put it into the Strong Ad-
vantage Fund you would earn 2 to 3 percent more interest per year on that
money than you do in the bank or CD. Now, granted that only comes to
about $300 per year, but how many free copies of this book can you give
away to your friends in return for that one $300 gift? How will your
friends feel about you when you give them the most cutting-edge selling
power ever put into one book?
1. Law of Reciprocity
137
Give away something of perceived value to someone, and others will
feel compelled to do likewise.

Here are a few creative ideas for people to use as inexpensive giveaway
items.
Life Insurance and Financial Products
Give away a free report that lists all of the top-performing investments for
the past three years (even if it contains information that is positive about
your competitors!).Give away a handy chart that people can place on the re-
frigerator that shows the 10 questions to ask telemarketers to determine the
legitimacy of investment opportunities and requests for charitable donations.
Real Estate
Estimate the dollar of the loan the client will take out and run several
amortization tables showing how small extra payments each month will
cut years off the life of the loan, save the client tens of thousands of dollars,
and create long-term financial freedom. If the client is already putting
every penny toward the 30-year mortgage, give away a handy booklet that
shows how to do simple maintenance on the house, how to find good ser-
vice people to work on the home in the future, and how to keep the
home in top-dollar condition should they decide to sell.
Automobile
If you sell a great car, give away a recent Consumer Reports article compar-
ing your car with others in its class. If you sell a car that is a good car but
not listed as one of the best, give away a list of the top 10 strategies to keep
the car running cheaply and its resale value high.
The message to you is that everyone can give something away for free
with nothing expected in return. It is a scientific fact that reciprocity is
effective.The key is that what you give away must have perceived value
138
Applying the Laws of Influence

on the part of the client.Traditional promotional items like personalized
pens and date books may be useful or they may not be.You can test them
to see if they assist in making sales. It doesn’t matter what your giveaway
actually costs you.What matters is the value the client places on the item,
report, or product.
Exercise: How can you utilize the Law of Reciprocity when selling your
products or services? Be very specific.
2. Law of Time
Changing someone’s time perspective helps them to make different deci-
sions.When people change their time perspective they change how they
feel about something and the decisions they make in regard to it.
Time is the subtle equalizer in life. No matter how rich or poor you
are, time is the one commodity that is the same for everyone. Everyone has
this moment of experience only. What happens in this moment is nor-
mally not a matter of conscious choice or thought.
Quite often when you walk into a client’s office or you contact them
in some other way they will immediately equate you, at the unconscious
level, with all of the other people they have ever met. In all probability they
have more negative experiences than positive experiences with people.
Two things need to happen.You must distinguish yourself from all the
other people they’ve known, and you need to move their time filter from
the past to the present or future. People have emotional responses that are
attached to various stimuli.You are a stimulus.You trigger positive or neg-
ative experiences in all of your clients’ minds whether or not each client
knows it. What’s more interesting is that this response isn’t necessarily
linked to you! Most people see you as a salesperson and they have a nega-
tive emotional response to all salespeople.Therefore, in most cases, you are
a bad salesperson when you walk in the door.You haven’t opened your
mouth or asked any questions and you are already a bad salesperson.
Ready for more?
2. Law of Time
139

When you walk out the door your client is going to think differently
of you but by the next time you talk with your client his brain will be
back in bad salesperson mode for two reasons. First, he will confront many
other idiots posing as salespeople between now and then. Second, his past
emotional memories are not going to be wiped away by a fun one-hour
meeting with you!
Therefore, you must become an expert at altering time.You must be-
come a master of moving people through time so that they are not af-
fected by their past programming and emotions.You must be able to get
them to look at your product and service from a completely different per-
spective! And you can.
Time plays a big role in people’s decision-making processes.There
are three fundamental ways that people experience time: past, present,
and future.
Past: Some people live in the past or use the past as their guidepost for
all decisions they will make in the present and future.These people are of-
ten cynical and depressed.They also make fewer bad decisions than other
people.Their guard is up and they will make fewer errors because of this.
They will also miss out on opportunities because of their experiences.You
will need to remember this!
I I was ripped off once before doing this.
I I ate at a place like this once and it was terrible.
I I got conned the last time I bought a car.
I I never get a good deal.
I The stock market always goes down when I invest.
These are all common experiences for people who process all infor-
mation through filters of the past.
Present: Some people live in the present moment.These people tend to
have much less stress and to give little thought to the past or future.They
tend to be lousy planners and to seek instant gratification. Usually their
credit cards are maxed out because they have sacrificed a future they can-
not see for the pleasure of the moment.They think like this:
140
Applying the Laws of Influence

I I know it’s right when I feel it.
I I do what feels good.
I I just wanted to have fun.
I It looks like fun so I’m going to do it.
I I never thought I’d get pregnant.
I Who’d have thought I’d lose all that money?
Future: Some people filter most of their thoughts in terms of the fu-
ture. They tend to live in the future, delay instant gratification, and have
determined that the past, for better or worse, isn’t that relevant for them.
People who live in the future are constantly planning, organizing, prepar-
ing, and sacrificing.They sacrifice the moment for a brighter tomorrow.
They think like this:
I I could buy a car now but that money is better off invested.
I I’ll wait for retirement.
I I could buy that now but I’d like to watch that money build up
over time.
I I better not do that because I might get pregnant.
Once you know how people generally filter their information you can
have them look at different events in the past, present, or future or you can
change the perspective from which they are looking.
You can change someone’s time perspective with some linguistic ma-
neuvers that rival the martial arts.
Client: “Look what happened to the market this past year. It went to
hell. Dropped by 50 percent.Why would I want to invest in your
mutual funds?”
2. Law of Time
141
To get your clients out of the mistakes of the past, get them to see
things from a future perspective.

Salesperson: “You might not want to. But the next time the market
doubles or triples wouldn’t you want just a little piece of that for
your future?”
Client: “My experience is that I listen to a salesperson and I get
ripped off.”
Salesperson: “When you go out 10 years into the future and look back,
what do you do right to correct that?”
Client: “Last three times I bought a big yellow pages ad I lost my butt.”
Salesperson: “I understand. If we can create an ad that will pull in the
future will you be up for that?”
Client: “I tried hypnosis before and it doesn’t work.”
Salesperson: “So you had someone who didn’t know what they were
doing. If you were to work with someone who was adept at his art
and knew how to help you, would you be willing to do that?”
Exercise: How can you utilize the Law of Time when selling your prod-
ucts or services? Be specific.
3. Law of Contrast
When two things, people, or places that are relatively different from each
other are placed near to each other in time, space, or thought, we see them
as more different, and it is easier to distinguish which one we want more.
There is a wonderful piece of television history from the archives of
the Tonight Show with Johnny Carson. Carson hosted the Tonight Show for
almost 30 years. One night, Johnny had the number-one Girl Scout
cookie salesperson in the country on. He asked her the secret of her suc-
cess. She said, “I just went to everyone’s house and said, ‘Can I have a
$30,000 donation for the Girl Scouts?’When they said ‘No,’ I said,‘Would
you at least buy a box of Girl Scout cookies?’”The audience couldn’t stop
laughing and neither could Johnny.The little girl had mastered the contrast
principle, at age eight.
Have you ever walked through a grocery store and watched people take
142
Applying the Laws of Influence

two competing products and put one of them in each hand, then look at
them side by side,literally weighing which one they should buy? The princi-
ple that guides people in this product choice is called the Law of Contrast.
Psychological studies have shown that people can use the Law of
Contrast in a very specific and predesigned fashion. If you can show your
expensive product or service first and then show what you would like to
sell (what you think creates the best win-win with your client) second, the
client is very likely to purchase the second item.
When you were a child you would go into a store with one of your
parents and as Mom shopped, so did you.You may have picked up two or
three items to propose to your mother for possible purchase. Time after
time Mom programmed into you either one of two themes:
1. They’re too expensive—you can’t have either of them.
2. You can have the little (cheapest) one.
You soon learned that the best method of selling Mom was to note
how little the item cost. “Mom, it’s only a dollar,” your voice would res-
onate in a pleading fashion.With the proper eye contact and pitiful face
the strategy regularly worked.
The Law of Contrast doesn’t say that you will always sell the less ex-
pensive of two products. It does say that if you put two products or ser-
vices close together in space, in time, or in a person’s mind, the person will
begin to clearly see the differences and their programming will help them
choose “which” instead of “whether or not to.” Price was the most com-
mon programming installed into most of us as children, but there defi-
nitely were many parents who programmed the theme “it’s junk—don’t
3. Law of Contrast
143
Show your client the product you believe is the best option and/or least
expensive last. The client is compelled to own something and normally
will take the least expensive item if it is shown last.

buy garbage” into their children.These adult clients now buy higher-qual-
ity items when possible.The Law of Contrast acts within each of us to help
us choose which of a number of items to buy.
Real Estate
Show your client a home that they not like first then show them a home
that meets all of their buying criteria second. People tend to buy what
they are shown or experience second.
Financial Products
Tell your clients you have two products to show them.The best financial
fit for your clients to own is a diversified portfolio of mutual funds.You
first show them an expensive annuity product and then follow that with a
brief explanation of another option, that of owning mutual funds that re-
quire a smaller investment and offer easier access should they need their
money.The better product and lower price both come second in this case,
creating a compelling unconscious urge to invest in the mutual funds.
Clothing
Once the client has agreed on buying the suit or dress, now present a tie, a
scarf, a new pair of shoes, or a nice necklace as an absolute must. If the
client has purchased a $400 suit, isn’t a $37 tie a necessary purchase?
Electronics
Your customers have said “yes” to the computer; now you can show them
the extended service plan,a piece of useful or fun software,or an extra bat-
144
Applying the Laws of Influence

tery for emergencies.These $100 items contrast nicely to the $2,000 they
just spent on the computer and almost seem irrelevant.
A useful rule to remember in any sales situation is that when someone
mentions that your product or service “is too expensive” or “costs too
much,” you respond with a gentle, “Compared to what?” “Compared to
what?” is a question that puts your client’s thoughts into perspective and
allows them to rethink their apparent “no” response. If your client was
heading toward a “no” response, “Compared to what?” may often bring
them back to the “yes” response.
Exercise: How can you utilize the Law of Contrast when selling your
products or services? Be specific.
4. Law of Friends
When someone asks you to do something and you perceive that the
person has your best interests in mind, and/or you would like him/her
to have your best interests in mind, you are strongly motivated to fulfill
the request.
How many times have you experienced someone knocking on your
front door asking you to donate money for some cause? Compare the
number of times you donated to the cause when you knew the person
who asked you to donate in contrast to how often you donated when you
didn’t know the person who asked you to donate.
If you are like most people, you have donated more often when
your neighbor has come to the door asking you to donate.You felt em-
pathy for the person you know who is possibly being put upon by this
4. Law of Friends
145
Let your clients buy one of several necessary items first; then let them
buy the add-ons or accessories second. In contrast to the large main in-
vestment the accessories seem small and a good value.

charitable requesting.The people who solicited from you less regularly
received fewer donations because they didn’t have that same empathy or
trust.We tend to say “yes” when we know someone or perceive they are
our friends.
In a similar context, most people would never go to a meeting for mul-
tilevel marketing if a friend or acquaintance didn’t ask them to look at this
business opportunity.The greatest strategy a multilevel marketing corpora-
tion can utilize is the “listing of friends and family” strategy as the first con-
tacts in the multilevel marketer’s early days in his new business.These friends
and family are the most likely to say “yes” to actually going to a meeting.
As people develop relationships with their clients they become
friends. Friendships grow and become special, and future sales are all but
assured with the ongoing relationship.
An extremely powerful persuasion tool that few salespeople ever use is
that of pointing out the negative aspects of their products and services.
One of the most effective ways to influence people is to argue against your
own point of view or argue against your own self-interest so that it appears
that you are being unbiased in your proposals.
One group of researchers had a heroin addict tell people that there
should be stricter courts and more severe sentences. The researchers
found the heroin addict to be more credible than others presenting sim-
ilar points of view.This was one of the few instances when people be-
lieved someone who was not perceived as physically attractive.When the
message conflicts with the expectations of your buyer you’ll be perceived
as more serious. This is a powerful point, and when you utilize it with
careful skill you will regularly bring out any minor negative aspects of
your products and services.
146
Applying the Laws of Influence
Help people see you as their friend and someone who cares about them,
and you will dramatically increase the probability of their compliance.

Financial Products
Tell your client a story of how you recently helped your family members
with their finances in the same manner that you are going to help your
client.When they understand that they are going to be treated exactly like
family, they perceive you also have their best interests in mind.
Real Estate
Share with your client why you would not buy a specific house. If it is clear
that your client is not interested in the house, and you don’t like it, either,
explain why this house is not something you would recommend your
friends buy and then explain in detail why. This strengthens your bond
with your clients.
Exercise: How can you utilize the Law of Friends when selling your prod-
ucts or services? Be specific.
5. Law of Expectancy
When someone you respect and/or believe in expects you to perform a
task or produce a certain result, you will tend to fulfill this person’s expec-
tation whether positive or negative.
There is a famous study from the 1970s by psychologist, Dr. R.
5. Law of Expectancy
147
Be eager to point out any negative aspects of your proposal. This ac-
complishes two important things. First, it makes you appear far more
trustworthy, and second, it allows your clients to be set at ease as you
are doing their job of finding the drawbacks of the proposal.

Rosenthal that reveals that the expectation of one person can radically
alter, both positively and negatively, the actual results of how people will
perform. Students were divided into what teachers were told were
bright and dull groups of students.The students were told nothing.The
group that was made up of supposed high-IQ students performed at an
average of an “A” level in their schoolwork after eight months. The
group that was made up of supposed low-IQ students performed at an
average of a “D” level after eight months. In reality, there was no differ-
ence in the IQs of the students. They were randomly divided into the
groups and the only variable in the study, which was immediately dis-
continued, was the expectation of the teachers involved.
In psychology, the placebo effect is a well-documented and scientifi-
cally measurable response on the part of the body to be healthier (or in the
case of a nocebo, to be sicker) based on expectancy, suggestion, and belief.
In the Korean War, there were thousands of casualties and not enough
morphine to relieve the pain of the suffering soldiers. Medics and doctors
were forced to give sugar pills and the suggestion that the soldiers would
shortly be out of pain.Approximately 25 percent of all soldiers taking the
placebo had their severe pain relieved.
This same level of expectancy is necessary as a belief in yourself about
your abilities to be successful and also about your influential ability with
your clients to win them to your products and services.
Exercise: How can you utilize the Law of Expectancy when selling your
products or services?
148
Applying the Laws of Influence
The behaviors you expect of yourself and others are more likely to be
manifested in reality. If you believe that your clients will most certainly
buy from you, they probably will.

6. Law of Consistency
When an individual announces in writing (or verbally to a lesser degree)
that he is taking a position on any issue or point of view, he will strongly
tend to defend that belief regardless of its accuracy even in the face of
overwhelming evidence to the contrary.
I There is much research about “consistency” that you might ini-
tially think isn’t about consistency. I want to bring this to your at-
tention now so that you understand consistency as you never have
before. I want to show you a very important factor of how the
mind operates and how you can construct influential messages
with ease! Consider from Plous (1993) and Stanford University
study cited earlier:
I In a nationwide opinion poll 70 percent of Americans once
gave an opinion about a legislative act that didn’t exist. Some
felt the states should take care of the responsibility; some felt the
government should.
I When asked their opinion on how easy getting a divorce should
be in the United States, 40+ percent more Americans chose the
last option of three regardless of which option was offered last.
I Sales of jams in a store increased 10 times when people could
stop by and sample up to six jams versus those days the store of-
fered 20 options.
I College students reported cheating to be wrong when given the
opportunity to fill out anonymous forms. Even those students re-
porting strong attitudes against cheating on exams immediately
cheated on their exams when given the opportunity.
I When pollsters ask people what is the most important issue facing
the nation people respond with hundreds of different answers that
are completely different and in greatly differing percentages than
when pollsters ask people to choose from a list of options the one
they consider to be the most important issue facing the nation.
6. Law of Consistency
149

I When people are asked about such hot topics as nuclear weapons
they respond with opposite opinions depending on how the ques-
tion is phrased.
From these and dozens of other valid and reliable studies you can con-
clude six crucial points:
1. People’s opinions, thoughts, and desires are often molded by the
questions they are asked.
2. People’s thoughts, opinions, and desires are often created in the
moment and have little or no relationship with what they will ac-
tually do or what they will believe later.
3. Many people have beliefs about things that are not real, based on
fictitious questions (like acts of Congress) and not knowledge.
4. Most people are fairly automatic in their behavior. They see a
commercial and because they believe what they see without criti-
cal thought, decide what drink to drink, restaurant to eat at, tax
preparer to use, all based on suggestion.
5. Once most people choose something, write something down, or
say something, whether it makes any sense or not, whether it is in
their best interest or not, they tend to stick with that decision, re-
gardless of how that decision was made.
6. People don’t like cognitive dissonance. Most can’t hold two oppos-
ing thoughts in their minds, so they simply pick the thought/deci-
sion/belief they currently hold and eliminate the rest without
further consideration.
All of this is part and parcel of the Law of Consistency.
Your clients’ past decisions and public proclamations dramatically in-
fluence their beliefs and attitudes. Once people have publicly said, “I’ll
never X,” they normally never do. Many people make public statements
that they have not thought out that often turn into beliefs and permanent
attitudes.The reason is simple.We are taught that our word is our bond.
When we say something you can count on us.
150
Applying the Laws of Influence

Did you know that 70 percent of all people are the same religion they
were raised in as children? This is the Law of Consistency in real-life ac-
tion! People respect consistency and predictability.
A recent research study had subjects make decisions among various
choices.
Group A was asked to “remember their decision.”
Group B was asked to “write their decisions on a magic slate and then
pull the sheet up,‘erasing’ their decision.”
Group C was asked to write down their decisions on paper with ink
and hand them in to the researchers.
Which group stuck with their decisions? Right. Group C stuck with
their decisions more than three-quarters of the time.
Group B kept their decisions half the time, and Group A tended to
change their minds.The lesson is to get your client to write things down as
he participates in the sales process. He could write down anything from
goals for the coming year to what he would really like in a car, a house, a
stock portfolio, or a vacation time-share package.The key is to get a pen in
the client’s hand and have him write!
Never ask a question that will pin the client down to a permanent
“no” response.
Exercise: How can you utilize the Law of Consistency in selling your prod-
ucts or services?
7. Law of Association
We tend to like products, services, and ideas that are endorsed by other
people we like and respect.
Tell me, what is it that Michael Jordan knows about underwear that
I don’t? Didn’t Michael sign a $40,000,000 deal with Calvin Klein to
do a few commercials about underwear? Now, it’s my opinion that I
know as much about underwear as Michael Jordan and I would have
shot those commercials for half what he got! But Kevin Hogan is a
7. Law of Association
151

name known in the field of selling. Michael Jordan is a name known
throughout the world. Michael Jordan was paid two cents for every per-
son on earth who knew his name. If I were paid two cents for every
person who knew my name, I’d get paid about $7,000. That is why
Michael Jordan got paid $40,000,000.
Calvin Klein paid $40,000,000 to link one of the world’s most loved
and best-known people to its product. Underwear.That is what the Law of
Association is all about.
When your products and your services are linked to credible, lik-
able, positive-image people, your client will tend to like the products
and services.
For years authors have known that the best way to sell a book is to get
people to write favorable testimonials for the dust jacket and front matter
of the book.This adds credibility to the book because we respect the peo-
ple who wrote the quotes.
The power of a testimonial or of someone famous using your products
or services can be the key that unlocks the doors of the unconscious mind.
If you do not have the ability to have the famous endorse your products or
services, ask other people who are using your services to write you a short
letter testifying to the fact that your product or service has helped them
change their life or their business, or made some significant difference that
they didn’t have before.
The testimonial speaks volumes about you so you don’t have to.
Exercise: How can you utilize the Law of Association in selling your prod-
ucts or services?
152
Applying the Laws of Influence
Allow people to see you and your products or services linked to the re-
spected, the famous, and the experienced, and your probability of the
“yes” response is heightened dramatically.

8. Law of Scarcity
When a person perceives that something he might want is limited in
quantity, he believes the value of what he might want to be greater than if
it were available in abundance.
What the public finds valuable never ceases to amaze us. Remember
the bizarre Christmas season of 1996? This was when advertisers promoted
Tickle Me Elmo dolls to children and then, to drive the price up, simply
refused to produce the dolls in quantity.The prices of the dolls grew outra-
geous. Stores sold out of the dolls after creating huge demand and over-
pricing them. Within weeks, the Minneapolis Star Tribune printed six and
seven columns of classified ads placed by people offering to sell their Tickle
Me Elmos for anywhere from $300 all the way up to $695!
Imagine this:A mother and child go into the store when the dolls first
come out and Mom buys her child a doll for $30.Eventually the media pro-
motes these dolls to the point where stores and shopping centers are flooded
with people trying to find Tickle Me Elmos and being forced to settle for
other products in the store for their children’s Christmas presents.The mar-
keting campaign was a bonanza for Tickle Me Elmo,radio station giveaways,
and retailers, and it was all induced by intentional marketing scarcity.
Which of the following should you use as an indication of scarcity?
I Act now!
I Limited supplies!
I One day only!
All of those are common themes in advertising and marketing.Which
works best? “Act now” is third most effective.“One day only” is an effec-
tive theme but doesn’t even compare to “limited supplies.” If you can show
that there are only a few of your products or services available, that is going
to increase their perceived value!
The limited-supply frame almost always goes back to your client’s
childhood. One or two pieces of cake were left and when your client was
four years old he knew that if someone else got the last piece of cake there
8. Law of Scarcity
153

would be none for him. It was imperative to attempt to get one of the last
pieces of cake. Scarcity was installed at an early age and has been reinforced
throughout our adult lives.The strings wound into scarcity are very pow-
erful indeed and you should begin to devise methods to use the principle
of scarcity in your daily sales meetings.
Real Estate
In the state of Minnesota in the year 2004, many homes are selling in liter-
ally days. It is completely ethical to tell your clients “The average house in
Minnesota is selling in 31 days. If you want this house, put an offer on pa-
per, now.”
Automobile
“There are only three cars like this on the lot. I suspect they will sell out
by Monday. That doesn’t mean you can’t get this car again, but it does
mean you could wait weeks or months to get a factory-delivered car with
all of these options. It’s up to you.”
Financial Products
“You can never predict the future, but what happens if this January is like
most Januarys and the market goes up 4 percent while you are deciding
whether this is the time to open your IRA?”
154
Applying the Laws of Influence
Your client must be made aware that something about you, your ser-
vice, or your product is scarce. (Scarcity can include quantity of product,
the time you have to spend with someone, or a number of specific prod-
ucts at a special low price.)

Exercise: What is it that your client loses if he doesn’t buy from you? That
is your scarcity point.
9. Law of Conformity
Most people tend to agree to proposals, products, or services that will be
perceived as acceptable by the majority of other people or a majority of
the individual’s peer groups.
Everyone wants to be accepted. “What will people think?” is some-
thing that we all ask ourselves at the unconscious level.We all want to be
liked and we all want people to look at what we buy and do with respect
and admiration.When your client thinks about how his peers will view his
purchase, the sale can be made or broken without going any further.
Therefore it is important to assure your client, at the unconscious level,
that his buying your product or service is an outstanding idea.
Conformity is related to consistency in some ways. Conformity is be-
ing consistent with your peer group’s acceptance. Consistency is being
perceived as predictable and ethical within your peer group and even
within yourself.
Nonconformists and rebels even tend to conform to their groups that
are known to be rebellious against society. Consider that Greenpeace ac-
tivists are very much nonconformists in the eyes of the public, but among
their own group they conform to the nonconformist standard.
Jehovah’s Witnesses and Latter-Day Saints are both Christian sects that
are considered apart from Christianity by other denominations.They are
nonconformists and are proud and honored to be. However, within their
9. Law of Conformity
155
Allow your client to see his future after purchasing your products and
services as one where his peers and family not only approve but are ex-
cited about his purchase.

own groups, they have clear-cut and definite standards that must be con-
formed to.Your understanding of your client’s conforming standards can
make or break your sales.
“Imagine how your wife will respond when she sees that you have
gone out and bought her, and really your whole family, a brand-new car!”
“Imagine how your husband will feel when you show him that you
took the initiative to invest in your retirement so his life will be easier—es-
sentially not having to work until he is 77.”
Exercise: What can you say to your clients to appeal to their sense of
conformity?
10. Law of Power
People have power over other people to the degree that they are perceived
as having greater authority, strength, or expertise in contrast to others.
Power comes with authority and charisma. Power is the ability to
change. Power is both real and a perception.Your clients will perceive you
as more powerful if you act with confidence but not conceit, comfort but
not disregard, and certainty but not knowing it all. Power is something that
exists within you and must be brought out. Once people perceive you as
competent, caring, knowledgeable, confident, and certain, then their confi-
dence level in you goes up.
If you attempt to use power over other people, instead of with other
people, then you will lose sales and lose friends. Power with people is per-
ceived by most as strength and is often called charisma. Power over others
is normally resented and people are less likely to conform if they think you
are trying to control them.
One recent study that discussed power and authority revealed that 95
percent of all nurses were willing to dispense drugs to patients, after being
authorized by physicians, that they knew would indeed likely kill the pa-
tient.That’s power.
156
Applying the Laws of Influence

When you are selling a product, it is assumed you are the expert. If you
know everything there is to know about your product you become the go-
to guy. Subtly make sure your client knows you are the best or among the
best in your company. People like to deal with the guy at the top.
Auto mechanics may not have a high recognition value for power, but
when your car breaks down, they become the most powerful people in the
world, don’t they? They have the solution to your problem. If they made
the solution appear easy they would have no power.The simple fact that
most people are ignorant of how to utilize power is why many of them are
perceived as beggars or nuisances.
Exercise: What are three subtle ways you can let your client know you are
among the top people with regard to knowledge, client service, and/or
sales in the company? How can you show your client that you are not just
another salesperson?
10. Law of Power
157


9
The Influential
Secret of Oscillation
Oscillation is one of the best-kept secrets in human influence. None of the
gurus of persuasion or influence will talk about oscillation (and they may
not know what it is).
Very few people who understand belief and behavior oscillation want
anyone else to grasp the concept. Oscillating beliefs and values are key in
successfully understanding and persuading others.
As you learn about managing oscillation in others I want you to keep
the following in mind:
Core concept:“Yes” is not a true decision. It is agreement or affirma-
tion to a proposal at a particular instant in time . . . and you had best seize
the moment.
Had you asked for a response five minutes earlier or later you almost
certainly would have gotten a different answer, regardless of what the
question was!
Remember when you were 16 or 26 and you were in that moment
159

when you probably were going to be intimate with someone else? Your
heart pounded.You knew you could get pregnant, or get her pregnant, or
get AIDS or syphilis.You had always thought you believed that you would
never have unprotected or possibly premarital sex. Perhaps you:
I Thought it was wrong.
I Knew it was against your religion.
I Would never take the risk of acquiring a life-threatening disease.
I Would never take the risk of pregnancy.
I Believed you should wait to have sex until you were married.
I Were waiting for the right person.
Remember? Your beliefs were strong. Firm. Written in stone. You
could have preached a sermon about whichever of these beliefs you held
close and lived by. (If this specific example is foreign to you, simply think
of the other firm beliefs you had that you violated within a matter of sec-
onds or minutes of first considering doing so.)
And then you were in the moment.And you had this experience that
was something you knew you wouldn’t do but you did. Upon reflection,
you were surprised at your behavior. Perhaps you were shocked.You now
had to try to justify your actions in some way or determine that what you
originally believed was wrong.An internal mess. Remember?
Let’s examine what happened on that day:
1. You held a powerful, intense, unwavering belief for a long time.
2. You knew that you would never behave in a different fashion than
what you believed.
3. With only minutes of consideration, you violated a belief you had
had for years and perhaps for your entire life.
4. Afterward you wondered if you really knew who you were, or
worse, you experienced tons of guilt because you so easily and in-
stantly wavered on something that was a belief that defined who
you were.
160
The Influential Secret of Oscillation

You had never oscillated or vacillated about this remarkable subject in
the past.You were always absolutely certain about what you believed and
how you felt.You knew you could never behave in any other way than
what you valued and believed. It was as impossible as a man reaching the
moon in the 1960s.
And then you did “it.”
How is that possible?
I use this extreme example to begin our discussion of oscillation be-
cause in this example there is essentially no oscillation until the minutes
before the moment.Then all of a sudden the wavering begins and it is of-
ten experienced as scary because conflicting beliefs now begin to enter the
mind. Back and forth, pro and con. Strong feelings/emotions overcome
what we might call “rational thought,” and a lifetime of certainty is trans-
formed after minutes of oscillation to a completely different behavior.
In this case, first there is no oscillation, then there is a burst of oscil-
lation and indecision (often accompanied by confusion), and then a spe-
cific behavior occurs. After the behavior, something must happen to
make the individual whole or congruent again.The person must recon-
cile the behavior with the previous beliefs by either establishing new be-
liefs, condemning themselves, or returning to their old beliefs with a
renewed vigor realizing they have “not been themselves.”The oscillations
after the behavior are often as dramatic as or more dramatic than those
prior to the behavior.
What follows is a completely different example that illustrates this
critical point.
(If you don’t understand football, you may want to forgive me in ad-
vance and dig in for the next four paragraphs.)
The Influential Secret of Oscillation
161
Strong feelings/emotions overcome what we might call “rational
thought,” and a lifetime of certainty is transformed after minutes of
oscillation to a completely different behavior.

When I first looked at the January 2003 Super Bowl to handicap it, I
determined the number should be Oakland –3 at a neutral site. San Diego
isn’t really quite neutral, as the proximity to the Bay Area versus Florida
certainly favors Oakland. I thought the number should be bumped a
point or two, perhaps to as much as 5. In Vegas the number opened at 5
and got bet by the pros (smart-money betters) down to 4 where it stayed
until Sunday.
I have a model I use to handicap football games. One of the key ele-
ments that had led me to pick New England the year before was the likely
number of turnovers in the game. (The other most important factors are
yards per pass for/against.) In 2003, I concluded,Tampa Bay should be the
recipient of about one more interception than Oakland.That means if the
two teams played millions of times,Tampa would win about 55 to 60 per-
cent of the time. So, my money goes on Tampa Bay. (There are other fac-
tors that are analyzed in this tough-to-call game, but that isn’t the point of
this article!)
As soon as I laid a significant number of dollars on Tampa Bay, my
mind started to find additional data to support the decision to bet Tampa
Bay. Now as I thought about it, 9 out of 10 of my thoughts supported my
decision to bet Tampa. This large volume of unconscious justification
about a decision that is almost a flip of a coin in true probability is un-
called-for based on real world evidence. My emotions started to selectively
filter out reasons to bet on Oakland and support my expensive choice of
betting on Tampa Bay.
It took me six hours to finally bet the amount of money I did. I vacil-
lated between taking the offensive Oakland scoring machine versus the
solid as a rock (Tampa) defense. Back and forth.Then when my gut said
Tampa more often than not, I ran the numbers and they also pointed to
Tampa Bay.Then as time went on in the week, I became more certain—
which of course was only an illusion because it wasn’t based on real-world
evidence, only on feelings and justifications. (In this case Tampa was kind
enough to actually win and allow me another problem, which is believing
I am better/smarter than I really am! But, that’s okay—I got paid.
Here’s what happens:There is typically an arbitrary decision point that is
162
The Influential Secret of Oscillation

set in almost every negotiation/communication/decision. (“I have to
know today.”“If we don’t have a deal by the 31st, I let someone else have
it.”“If you buy today you get 10 percent off.”) A decision needs to be or
probably will be made. In some cases, if an obvious decision isn’t instantly
made (yes, I will pull over for the police officer because I don’t want this
ticket to be higher than it is now) things could get worse.Almost all deci-
sions that require conscious thought (most decisions require no thought or
conscious attention at all) find people oscillating back and forth as to what
to do, especially before the decision point.
Realize that people would make a very different decision at 5:00 P.M.
than at 5:05 P.M. on something that goes back and forth a lot in the mind!
People literally change their mind as each moment passes in many deci-
sions. Unless people have firm beliefs as discussed earlier in the decision
about having sex, people are constantly oscillating on decisions. Back and
forth. Back and forth. Sometimes with varying degrees of intensity. “No,
absolutely not.”That was today.Then tomorrow,“Well, maybe.”Then the
next day:“I don’t think so, but it’s possible.”
You can see the pendulum swing back and forth, or the child on the
swing go higher or lower. More important for our discussion is that oscil-
lation is not a day-to-day experience. It is a moment-to-moment experi-
ence.“Yes” and “no” in varying degrees flip-flop from moment to moment
and minute to minute.
The oscillation will continue indefinitely unless a new stimulus enters
the equation—and then any change is subject to further change.
Once persuaded to do anything, there is definitely short-term change
in behavior. Instead of doing one thing, a person does another. Instead of
believing one thing, a person believes another. Nevertheless, people can
and do regularly change even strong beliefs.The more public a person is
with their belief/behavior, the more likely they are to maintain that belief.
(The minister of the church is more likely to maintain his belief than the
parishioner sitting in row 30 because of the weekly public exposition of
his beliefs through sermons and prayers.)
Beliefs and behaviors that are not made public are more likely to
change due to future attempts at persuasion.
The Influential Secret of Oscillation
163

Someone who begins a diet plan and attends classes or meetings is
likely to continue to succeed while attending the classes. As soon as the
person stops attending the classes or going to the meetings, the chances are
greatly increased that they will stop their weight control program and re-
vert to old beliefs and behaviors.
The more people there are who have opinions and the more important those
people’s opinions about a person are, the more powerful the desire one has to keep
the new belief or behavior consistent with the new belief.
Key Question: Is there anything we can predict will happen after a per-
son has been persuaded?
Yes. Once someone has been persuaded there is a very good chance
they will go through oscillations of regret, sometimes so great that they
will actually immediately change their mind again and cancel a purchase
or not take a job they thought they should, for example.
You can virtually eliminate this specific reaction through the uti-
lization of principles that allow someone to anticipate their regret prior
to the decision point so that when they experience the change of be-
lief/behavior they will be expecting it and will react in a less intense
fashion.
Did the firefighters need to be persuaded on 9/11? Did they experi-
ence oscillation?
You hire an account to do your books and reduce your taxes.
Your personal trainer’s job is to get rid of your gut.
The chef? To cook.
A police officer? To protect public safety.
But what happens when an airplane flies into a building? What hap-
164
The Influential Secret of Oscillation
Beliefs and behaviors that are not made public are more likely to
change due to future attempts at persuasion.

pens inside of the mind of the firefighter who is racing upstairs while
everyone else is going down?
Specifically there is no way to know. Even the firefighters who lived
could only report what they think they remembered and thought at the
time of the most incredible crisis imaginable, reminiscent of D-Day in
some ways. Firefighters train for disasters but they usually have a sense of
control about their own safety. Going into the World Trade Center was
quite another thing.
We know that many office workers trapped in the buildings who were
about to lose their lives called loved ones.The same was true for the pas-
sengers on the flight that was heroically downed in Pennsylvania that fate-
ful day. We do know that oscillation probably takes place in these
extraordinary circumstances.The desire to be with loved ones.The desire
to live. Being able to live your life in the way you choose and ultimately
die doing that which you love. I imagine there was oscillation and it was
fairly rapidly dismissed by the objective, the task at hand.
Veterans of war no doubt experienced similar feelings, thoughts, and
oscillations. But what about the more mundane? Buying a car? Saying
“yes” or “no” to the request for a date? Saying “yes” or “no” to the mar-
riage proposal?
There is ample evidence that reveals that the closer one comes to a goal or 
an objective (the wedding day, for example) the more likely one is to experience
regret.
As humans we experience fear and anxiety responses when we lose
the “freedom options.”That’s one reason ordering fish or fowl can be such
a difficult problem! As soon as a decision is near, anxiety can incapacitate a
person, even on little decisions about what to eat in a restaurant.
In fact, reams of research indicate this repulsion to the goal is great as it
is approached in many contexts.This often leads to self-sabotage and other
destructive behaviors.
This is why people say they would like to invest in their 401(k) plan
next year but if they were asked to make a deposit today they would not
do so!
The Influential Secret of Oscillation
165

Oscillation is not indecisiveness per se. It is a normal and often useful
reaction to situations that have unknown variables.
I Oscillation is wavering between two or more possibilities.
I The wavering can become more intense as the deadline looms.
I The anxiety and fear level increases as the deadline comes closer.
I The desire to move away from any choice that limits future free-
dom of choice in any way increases as a decision point nears.
A woman who is in love with two men chooses man A. (Men do not
choose women, regardless of what religion or theory of evolution you
subscribe to that tells you otherwise.) She decides,“I will spend my life
with Andrew.” But as she comes closer and closer to actually spending
the rest of her life with Andrew, she begins to wonder if she has made a
big mistake and starts to seriously reconsider Bill! Sure, she dumped Bill
a month ago, but really, when she thinks about it, Bill is probably the bet-
ter choice.
This oscillation doesn’t just happen with women. My mom regularly
told me that it’s a woman’s prerogative to change her mind. I always
thought that was a lousy excuse. It turns out to be true, though, except
that everyone changes their minds! Most people change their minds as the
goal approaches or the other options have been rejected.
Sometimes these oscillations are manifested in behavior. Sometimes
they are not. Either way, they are happening in the mind of the individual.
According to Fink, Kaplowitz, and Hubbard (2002), oscillation (wa-
vering) increases when the person or message doing the persuading is per-
166
The Influential Secret of Oscillation
Oscillation is not indecisiveness per se. It is a normal and often useful
reaction to situations that have unknown variables.

ceived as credible.When someone is believable and states an opinion that
isn’t consistent with what the individual currently believes, credibility be-
comes a critical issue.
The power of the argument/message is also critical.A well-framed argu-
ment will cause people’s minds to waver between options.Consider the State
of the Union speech by President George W. Bush at the end of January
2003. Bush faced great opposition on his objective of attacking Iraq. In the
State of the Union, Bush could not provide the “smoking gun” that many
wanted, so he provided a logical line of thinking that was difficult to refute. I
paraphrase: There were 30,000 missiles that could be used to carry weapons of mass
destruction. Sixteen have been found.Where are the other 29,984?
Indeed.Where were they? Bush clearly and concisely stated the facts
of what weapons Iraq had at the end of 1998 and then claimed to reveal
what Iraq had not declared.The strategy essentially worked, as 84 percent
of the nation had a positive view of the speech. Doubts remained (that is
part of what oscillation will always yield!), and perhaps we will never know
all the facts. But one thing is certain:The strength of a well-stated argu-
ment can cause oscillation. The stronger the argument, the greater and
more frequent the oscillation. This means: The more powerful the argu-
ment, the more often the person will vacillate between beliefs/choices and
the more real both choices become.
What about the 16 percent who weren’t convinced and who didn’t
seem to waver at all? Perhaps they did. Perhaps not. Certainly if their opin-
ion was written in stone they simply didn’t oscillate at all. However, re-
member the option of having sex or not and how most did so? That was
written in stone.
Wavering between two or more options occurs when something is
important. Someone hates their job but they want to keep their income,
which is high when compared with jobs the person would qualify for
should they leave their current job.
Stay
Go
Hate job, well paid.
Less money, more enjoyable work.
The Influential Secret of Oscillation
167

This is an important issue and oscillation could occur dozens of times
per hour, day, week, month, and year. Oscillation will generally not happen
to any significant degree in issues that are not important to the person.
Why would a millionaire care if a cup of coffee is $2 or $1? She probably
wouldn’t and thus wouldn’t waver. Generally speaking, an issue has to be
important to engender vacillation.You can tell when you are oscillating
when you feel torn or you feel like you are being pulled in two directions.
Generally risk is involved. Staying with the job entails the risk of never
enjoying other aspects of life. Going entails the risk of never having the
money you have now. People oscillate when something is important and
entails tangible risks both in the change and in the status quo.
168
The Influential Secret of Oscillation

10
Mind Reading:
How to Know
What They 
Are Thinking
In this chapter I’m going to reveal a few of my most closely held secret
methods of determining what people are thinking in the moment. I am
going to give you some incredible tools.You will learn one of my favorite
models for determining current thought, and I am going to give you one
of my favorite models for utilizing that specific information in gaining
compliance.
Maybe it’s just me, but I like to know what other people are thinking.
I don’t want to guess.
I want to know.
When you can know, you can determine how best to help that person
get what they want in business and in life. Instead of being involved in a
long-drawn-out process, you can get rapid outcomes that are favorable to
everyone involved. Ultimately that’s what we all want. Most people expe-
rience massive idiopathic fear when it comes to communication in almost
any context. In other words, they feel uncomfortable putting their feelings
169

and thoughts on the table for fear that they will be hurt in some way.
When people cloak thoughts and feelings it makes communication in-
credibly difficult. Honesty becomes compromised and everyone gets poor
outcomes.You see this in every aspect of life.
When people don’t tell you what they are thinking/feeling, you sim-
ply need to discover, calculate, or determine those thoughts in other ways.
You can utilize body language, psychographics, evolutionary psychol-
ogy, psychobiology, cultural beliefs, religious beliefs, peer pressures, psycho-
logical profiles, and expectancies along with prior behavior to determine
almost anyone’s current thoughts with some significant degree of accuracy.
On larger scales you can read groups, cultures, specific demographics,
and nations using essentially the same tools.
The more you know about someone or some group, the easier it is to
gain compliance. It’s that simple.
It’s true in relationships, it’s true in family and friendships, it’s true in
the selling context, it’s true for all aspects of business, it’s true for the ther-
apist, and it’s true for nations dealing with other nations.“Intelligence” in
the military sense is what separates the wheat from the chaff in every as-
pect of life.
The ethical use of influence is never more necessary than when you
have good intelligence about your client and customer. Knowledge is
potential power, and that power can just as easily be used for good as it
can be for bad.The line is not always instantly clear, and sometimes the
line changes.
Without having excellent intelligence about your clients and con-
sumers you have little chance of being persuasive beyond random luck.
With good intelligence, you can achieve incredible results in gaining com-
170
Mind Reading: How to Know What They Are Thinking
The more you know about someone or some group, the easier it is to
gain compliance.

pliance.And if you think it’s important in business, can you imagine how
important it is in personal relationships?
But before we get into utilizing intelligence, I want you to look at
some ethical issues that arise in acquiring and utilizing intelligence. Influ-
ence hinges on good intelligence, and more than that, the ethical use of
persuasion techniques can be compromised if you aren’t careful.“Win-win
or no deal” is more than a slogan; it is a necessary reality to build long-
term relationships that are mutually beneficial for two people or parties.
The United States led the invasion of Iraq using intelligence that sup-
posedly revealed Iraq had biological and chemical weapons that it had not
destroyed. Will those weapons ever be found? I have no idea. Certainly
they were there in the prior couple of years.The bigger question, though,
is does it matter? It’s tough to find anyone in the free world who wasn’t
appalled when thousands of people were found to be buried alive by Sad-
dam Hussein’s regime. Never had the connection between Hitler and Sad-
dam been so clear. Such a person and such a regime doesn’t deserve to be
in power on the planet, and it’s arguable whether they deserve the privi-
lege of life itself. So, the intelligence may or may not have been excellent
but an even more extraordinary discovery of brutality essentially makes the
issue moot.
One of my favorite movies of all time is Meet John Doe. This 1941
black-and-white movie starred Gary Cooper. The movie was released as
Nazism and fascism were rapidly spreading in Europe, and it was in part a
response to those who would find fascism an alternative in the United
States.The movie was superb and it did its job.
A young newspaper reporter (Barbara Stanwyck), about to lose her
job, concocts a story about a man who is so disgusted with the world that
he is going to commit suicide on Christmas Eve. His fictitious note “sent”
to the newspaper office is signed “John Doe.”The reporter keeps her job
but eventually has to find the would-be martyr—who exists only in her
mind. She interviews possible role players and ultimately convinces a
homeless man (Gary Cooper) to be “John Doe” to the public.
Further interviews and press launch a John Doe movement across
the country, based on principles of being a good neighbor, trust, helping
Mind Reading: How to Know What They Are Thinking
171

others, and making the little guy feel important. Ultimately John has to
run for president.The unwilling but trapped John does indeed give the
speech of a lifetime to a huge audience.Wondering how he can live with
himself as a fraud, John seriously contemplates suicide and is saved only
by a throng of John Doe fans. One woman’s deception to save her job in
wartime turns into a wonderful movement of enormous good.A home-
less man’s agreement to play the role of John Doe becomes a massive in-
ternal struggle between self and public fraud and greater good of the
country and the world.
Two paragraphs do not do the movie justice. It doesn’t do justice to
the ethical issues involved, and it doesn’t do the subject of persuasion and
influence justice. Rent this two-hour movie to challenge every ethical and
moral view you hold. I promise you will be glad you did!
I would venture to guess that if you take advantage of the information
I am about to reveal to you, you will nearly double your response from
your sales, adding clients and making successful your influence efforts.
(Notice I didn’t say “increase by 10 percent,” I said nearly “double.”)
Here is who John Doe is in the twenty-first century.You are selling
your ideas, products, and services—and yourself—to John every day. So
you may as well meet him (and his dear friend Jane Doe).
I In general people aren’t as satisfied as they could be.
I Most people have only a moderate amount of self-esteem.
I Two-thirds of women and one-third of men don’t like the way
they look.
I Nearly everyone worries and has a deep-seated fear of rejection.
I Almost everyone is afraid to grow old.
I Virtually everyone has a fear of death.
I Almost everyone works to avoid pain, and once in pain will do
what it takes to get out of pain.
I People don’t have time to be smart shoppers, and they don’t com-
parison-shop that much.
I When people get their minds set on something, they want it now.
(As a rule, people will not delay gratification!)
172
Mind Reading: How to Know What They Are Thinking

I Most people still perceive credit cards as not being equal to real
money.
I People want to make decisions that will make them look good to
others.
That’s just a thumbnail sketch of a few of John’s and Jane’s traits.They
are universal because we have all evolved from the same gene pool and in
some transactions tend to respond similarly in social exchanges. In other
words, people are somewhat predictable.
Realizing this, how do we sell to John Doe and how do we market to
him? How do we make use of the information used by the largest adver-
tising firms in the world on our shoestring budgets? How do we talk to
John and Jane so they listen and comply quickly? How do we know what
they are thinking and feeling?
Once we know what our prospects’ needs, wants, and desires are, we
can use this information to prepare a message that firmly impresses on the
mind how we can help them.We can clearly show our prospects how they
will feel better, get out of pain, and look like they make great decisions to
the people in their peer group.
Here is a good model for you to latch onto and make your own:
1. Paint a clear picture for your reader and bring it up really close. It
needs to show this: what you presently have, who you presently
are, or how you presently feel is not satisfactory.You can do, have,
or be more, and you can feel better!
2. Product/idea/service X helps many people just like you get that
result.
Mind Reading: How to Know What They Are Thinking
173
Once we know what our prospects’ needs, wants, and desires are, we
can use this information to prepare a message that firmly impresses
on the mind how we can help them.

3. Try it once.You have nothing to lose and everything to gain.
4. Other people will respect you and like you more for using this
product/idea/service.
5. Imagine your future as you deserve it to be.You can reach your
dreams and achieve your goals if you use this product/idea/service.
6. This product/idea/service is guaranteed, so you can feel secure in
making a decision now.
7. To take advantage of this product/idea/service, call/write now be-
cause only Y number of people will be allowed to participate.
Here’s all you have to do . . .
Now, obviously not all market messages use this model or all compo-
nents of it. But, based on the market research I have done, this model ap-
peals to John Doe. Research reveals that John and Jane do act now when
responding to this model!
Now it’s up to you. How can you implement this model in your sales
or business, and will you start today or wait until tomorrow?
174
Mind Reading: How to Know What They Are Thinking

11
I’ll Think 
About It
What does that mean?
It means they don’t feel right in at least one way.They can’t quantify it
because it is a feeling (or feelings), so you’d better be prepared!
Let’s look at feelings and what they mean in the persuasion process.
The pendulum swings back and forth (oscillation).At each moment in
time it’s in a slightly different place than it was just a fraction of a second
before.And so it goes until it stops . . . where? Right back in the middle:“I
don’t know.”“Maybe.”
The unconscious mind runs off survival instincts, sometimes with suc-
cess, sometimes not.The unconscious mind is very different from the con-
scious mind. It runs on autopilot. It is basically a stimulus/response
mechanism that adapts along the way, but slowly. The conscious mind is
that computer, if you will, that thinks, calculates, and can make a decision.
But those decisions come at a cost. The unconscious is often drawn in
many different directions, not just one or two, and to cut off any option is
175

a threat to the freedom of the being. (Write that down.This will be re-
ferred to by people as,“I have a bad feeling,”“I’m not sure,”“I don’t feel
comfortable,” and so on.)
Eliminating choices to a human (and many other animals) can be
quite an experience.You and I hate to see that freedom say goodbye.And
for good reason.While there are options (escape routes) there is comfort in
the status quo.When there is comfort in the status quo (what’s going on
today) there is seemingly little reason to change. Many animals hunt other
animals with this fundamental principle as their guiding principle: “Let
them feel secure, safe, then kill.” Sun-tzu may have even written about it.
People want to feel good, and feel comfortable so they can live in the illu-
sion that they are happy, when of course the delusion will be shattered in
due course. There is no relationship between feeling comfortable today
and long-term happiness. I would suggest the opposite.
But is going for the “yes” response like going for the kill? That
seems . . . so wrong!
And it would be if you were going to kill someone.
Unfortunately, at the unconscious level most people perceive every
change from the status quo as a threat to their very survival.
Someone wants to quit smoking cigarettes, for example. At the con-
scious level that is a no-brainer: Lung cancer will chew you up and spit
you out. But at the unconscious level the smoking is behaviorally wired
into the brain as an adaptation. Just like overeating.You wonder why so
many people who live in poverty are grossly obese? They want to feel
good and they want the most important choice they have to not be taken
away.Think you can change that using convention thinking? Not likely. It
has nothing to do with sense or logic. Someone’s feelings will challenge all
of your persuasive communication (i.e., just about all communication).
Take away the option of smoking and the being goes nuts inside.Anx-
176
I’ll Think About It
Unfortunately, at the unconscious level most people perceive every
change from the status quo as a threat to their very survival.

iety hits stellar levels.Take away the option of choosing more food and the
being once again goes nuts inside.They know they shouldn’t feel this way
but they do. In Hale Dwoskin’s book, The Sedona Method, he shares Lester
Levenson’s tools for letting go of feelings of fear, anger, shame, resentment,
and grief.Why? Because feelings are the muck of life.They kill the being.
They are the unreliable indicators that destroy lives. And when you feel
bad and your life is going to heck, you have a double dose of disaster. Most
people really believe they should trust their feelings. If you do, you are des-
tined for more than failure in all aspects of your life.
You will never persuade or be persuaded of something you currently
don’t experience. In other words, you will remain status quo for the rest
of your life. Feelings aren’t a barometer of the quality of life.They aren’t
a barometer of good and bad, (long-term) happiness, or sadness even.
They are a barometer of the unconscious mind’s past experiences and
genetic programming.
And when you are attempting to persuade someone, you can bet that
the person’s conscious mind will analyze your offer and come up with a
fairly quick rational decision to do what you ask followed immediately by
a flood of anticipated regret. So they say “yes,” then they feel “no.”
Now the person doesn’t trust you.And they think it’s you! You’re ma-
nipulating them. Really?
Ever see someone buy a $25,000 automobile right after they quit their
job? They needed to fill the option void that would likely exist upon fur-
ther review. Everyone in the car biz knows that once you buy it, it’s yours.
So the people buy today because they won’t have the money tomorrow.
This makes no sense because sense doesn’t come into play. It’s all instinct
and behavioral shaping of the unconscious mind that cause people to feel.
As soon as they feel strongly,then everything can quickly go to heck unless
something is done and fast.
People’s gut instincts took the Twin Towers down. People’s feelings
caused the trains to be blown up in Madrid.The terrorists were sure their
feelings were right.They trusted their gut, and “knew” they were doing
the right thing. History repeats itself every few days or years. In 1999
people were saying “this time it’s different” because they felt the greed
I’ll Think About It
177

and euphoria of getting rich fast in the stock market. Um, it’s not differ-
ent. Do not trust those feelings ever. When Saddam gives you the big
smile saying you can trust him, just let the mustache remind you of Adolf.
Remember the guy who kills his own people for sport? Feelings. They
felt totally in the right.
Remember that the next time someone tells you they “don’t feel
right” or “have a bad feeling.”
Here’s the reality principle:
Life really is all about persuasion.
People must go up one level from feelings to thought and take control
of their lives. Part of that is all about being persuaded (changing) and per-
suading (causing change).
Almost every time you open your mouth you want someone to do
something for you.
You want them to say “yes” to you and “no” to the competitor, and to
do business just with you.
You want the girl to go out with you, dump her boyfriend, and be
eternally devoted to you.
You want the guy to marry you, massage your feet, and bring home
the bacon.
You want them to hold the mayo, bring you a fork, and change your
$100 bill.
You want them to pick up their clothes, turn the music down, and
study.
It’s all about persuasion.
I could show you many books that have some pretty funny ideas about
what gets people to do things. Sometimes they work, sometimes they
rarely work, sometimes they just end up making you look, well, dumb.
My outcome for you is to be able to persuade almost anyone to do al-
most anything in less than eight minutes.
Now, here’s the rub.
I can show you how to get that sale, almost any sale. Once.
I can show you how to get that girl, almost any girl. Once.
I can show you how to get the kids to listen. Once.
178
I’ll Think About It

I can show you how to get great service. Once.
But after you have that first “yes” your personality and who you are
become crucial. Getting the first “yes” can be the toughest. Getting the
second is either easier or more difficult, but it’s a different ball game com-
pletely. Once someone has knowledge about you in a certain area or a
certain way, you have to utilize a number of new strategies to get to “yes”
again.And, of course, I’ll give you tips along the way about how to do just
that. Nevertheless, this book is about getting the tough first “yes.” It’s all
about converting her from him to you.About getting someone to switch
from them to you. About getting compliance now. And you will be able
to do it.
Amazed?
I was, too.
You have to deal with the feelings.
You have to get people’s feelings positively linked to you.
Real or illusion, if you have the answer to their problem, the solution
to their challenge, you must create positive feelings in that person or you
will end up with wider swings of oscillation.
You have to assume that people will feel regret or anticipate the feel-
ing of regret, and you need to prepare them for that outcome.
You absolutely must realize that at any moment people are on the
pendulum between the conscious mind response, which is probably cor-
rect, and their feelings, which are probably all over the map trying to make
sense of your proposal or offer.
You must get commitment and reinforce the person’s decision as a
good one.
When you have commitment in most cultures you have psychological
pressures from the inside that almost obligate the person to move forward
with what they have agreed to. Hopefully, you represent the best product,
service, idea, and person in the area you excel in.As you become a master
I’ll Think About It
179
Getting the first “yes” can be the toughest.

of influence you truly gain a valuable power that can bring on compliance
rapidly in almost all situations.
“No.” It’s the only thing that is more annoying to hear than “I’ll think
about it.” In both cases there is no intention for further decision making or
even thought on the subject at hand. Therefore the time to act on your
part is probably now. Or maybe it was time to act five minutes earlier by
precluding “no” in the first place.
Most of the time they (your client, customer, the girl) simply say “no.”
They don’t mean anything by “no.” It isn’t even typically an answer that re-
ally means “no” or even “probably not.”“No” simply means,“My uncon-
scious mind doesn’t think it responds,and the response that keeps me in the
status quo, which is what I am familiar with, says ‘no.’”
It is a reaction.
When the doctor tests your knee reflexes, you do not think, “Okay,
now, logically I can be reflexive and will swing my knee forward three
inches in a third of a second after it is gently struck.”Your knee simply
moves. It reacts. It says . . . “no.”
Now, this doesn’t mean that all “no” responses are up for grabs.That
simply isn’t the case. Many times your clients have thoughtfully deter-
mined that your service isn’t right for them. In these cases “no” means
“no,” but the person could be either right or wrong.You retain the option
of turning “no” into “yes.” (They might be wrong in this case and we can
present information again in such a way that “yes” might indeed be the
correct response.)
Finally, there are instances when “no” is simply the well-thought-out
and correct decision, although it’s not common that it’s this cut-and-dried.
It never makes sense to ask someone to do what isn’t in their best interests,
so in these cases you don’t.
The unconscious mind doesn’t think or make decisions. By definition it
can’t and it never will. It has no capacity to come up with alternatives. It re-
acts in the way it immediately sees the environment and avoids the greatest
fear and pain.The unconscious mind is the dominant force in almost every
human being’s life—and remember, the unconscious mind doesn’t even
think! It’s been programmed through genes and through the environment.
180
I’ll Think About It

In situations where you have made hundreds of decisions (driving a
car) the unconscious mind almost always makes good movements and re-
acts well to keep you and everyone around you safe. In these cases, a per-
son’s intuition tends to be good. (Intuition simply means your immediate
reactions and how you feel about them—not what you think about them.)
In situations where you have much less experience making essentially all
correct decisions, like driving a car, your reactions and feelings about your
reactions are completely suspect and so are theirs.
Think of this:
If every time someone got up in front of a group they were ap-
plauded, they would feel comfortable in that situation and in all likelihood
seek it out in the future.
Or, if every time they were alone they felt devastated, they would
likely seek out the company of others at all costs.The (unconscious) mind
simply adapts to whatever it is given and attempts to avoid fear and pain
of things that it has been conditioned to avoid. As for the unknown, it’s
rarely a better option than the status quo, unless that status quo is enor-
mously painful.
And the status quo is painful at the conscious level. Look in the
mirror. If you see that extra layer of fat, the conscious mind is very
much in pain. But the unconscious is not. The act of eating feeds the
being and until it experiences pain and fear because of the eating there
is no need for the unconscious to adjust to anything.The unconscious
mind doesn’t see the fat as painful or something to fear.There is no ex-
perience in that regard.Therefore the mind is set on “status quo” in this
situation.To overcome the unconscious in the status quo takes an enor-
mous amount of conscious determination and internal pressure from
commitments to others.
I’ll Think About It
181
To overcome the unconscious in the status quo takes an enormous
amount of conscious determination and internal pressure from
commitments to others.

There are also times when “no” is a conscious decision that overrides
the unconscious desire of “yes.”
Everyone has experienced wanting to have just one more piece of pie
but saying “no” because you know you are going to be bloated and un-
comfortable later. Here the conscious mind takes over the autopilot.
You’ve had the situation where someone wanted to have sex with you
and although the body was willing, the conscious mind said “no.” You
knew it was too risky or perhaps against your values.
The conscious mind can say “no” based on rational thought in spite of
the unconscious drives and desires to opt for “yes.” In these cases there is
also a time and a place to turn the “no” into “yes,” and there are times
when it is best to leave “no” at “no.”
The best way to get past “no” is to not hear it in the first place.You’ll
use attractiveness-raising and resistance-reduction techniques, alpha and
omega strategies, but even more fundamental is remembering your first
objective. In order to accomplish this you must win over the conscious and
unconscious minds in a fairly quick fashion (usually not as easy as you
would like to believe).That means that your proposal must make sense, and
it must be in line with one of the fundamental desires or drivers of their
behavior.This is not the same as emotions, but emotional content is obvi-
ously going to accelerate a “yes” response once the proposal is tracked into
a fundamental driver. (Reminder:There are 16 core drivers that you can
read about in my book Covert Hypnosis:An Advanced Course in Unconscious
Influence. They include the drives and desires of sex, food, connection, ac-
quisition, learning, competition, altruism, and others.)
If your proposal isn’t tracked in one of the 16 drivers that is driving
their lives (for example, the desires to eat and to bond could be driving
forces in one life while the desires to have sex and to acquire could be
drivers in another person) you’re simply going to hear “I’ll think about
it” or “no.”
Obviously this doesn’t mean, “Okay, if you go out with me, I’ll give
you lots of food and be a great person to bond with” or “Now, if you buy
a house from me you’ll get lots of sex and acquire lots of money.” In fact,
people are often embarrassed by their core drivers.You don’t see people
182
I’ll Think About It

walking around saying,“And I’m proud that altruism and connection drive
my behavior.”
Those desires that drive our behavior are pretty obvious to ourselves.
(For example, I have thousands of books in my library, so do you think
that the desires to learn and to acquire might be among my top four or
five drivers?)
As is detailed in Covert Hypnosis: An Advanced Course in Unconscious
Influence, there is an elegance to tracking your proposal into their core
drivers.
Key: You lay down a logical proposal that wires right into a key driver
and you get “yes.”You don’t have to hear “no” or “I’ll think about it”
because you are triggering the deep drive to move in the direction of
your proposal.
You don’t even always have to ask someone to do something in these
cases; you simply tell them! I have a good friend who simply says, “This
book is going to give you proven insights into human behavior that you’ve
never pondered. Get it now, Kevin.” And I do. I trust the source (crucial
piece) and it feeds into a driving force in my life that is rarely overridden
by anything else.
If tranquillity were one of my core drivers then the same person
would say,“This book is going to save you so much research time and re-
duce your stress levels like you wouldn’t believe. Get it.”
Granted, it takes a while to be able to identify a person’s driving de-
sires. And it takes practice and feedback on your efforts of weaving mes-
sages into drivers to begin to understand just how powerful this is. Once
you are able to do this, you have the world at your fingertips.You can have
as much or as little success as possible. Indeed, this is what power and em-
powerment are all about.
Think about it.
If you just knew what your most powerful core drivers are and you
knew how to weave messages to yourself, what would that mean? Then,
consider just what happens when you can do the same with others.Then
I’ll Think About It
183

think how big your world gets and just how wide the sphere of your influ-
ence becomes.
Influence: It’s Not How You Ask, But When!
Imagine: July meeting for 2004 benefits plan. . . .
“Okay, everyone, a show of hands. How many of you are going to
want to be part of our new benefits program? Corporate is matching up to
50 percent of your contributions to your 401(k). That means if you put
$15,000 in your 401(k), the company will put in $7,500.”
“Sure thing—I’ll make a contribution to my 401(k) plan.”
From a simply rational perspective, this is a no-brainer. Every person
should say “yes,” contribute the maximum that the company allows, and
chalk up a tidy 50 percent return on investment. (Read that as “I’m smart
enough to take all the free money I can get.”)
Of course they will!
Now imagine it’s six months in the future. In fact, research shows that
when you ask people if they intend to do just about anything “in a few
months” or “next year,” they will affirm that they are going to participate;
and then . . . they don’t.
They get to December when it’s time to fill out the paperwork, which
amounts to a signature that affirms that the employee wants free money,
and they just can’t pull the trigger and watch all that money “taken” from
their paycheck. They opt out—or ask for only a little free money from
their company.
But remember, people don’t think rationally.They will refuse to take
free money, which is why they are working in the first place! Or worse,
they realize the value of getting free money and refuse to take all of it!
Why? What is wrong with this picture?
Let’s look at another example, this one of how the mind works as far
as time is concerned.
A friend asks you to do something next week that you only margin-
184
I’ll Think About It

ally want to do. It would be okay, but it would be just as okay not to do it.
You say “yes.”
As the time approaches you feel more and more like you would rather
get something done around the house or go shopping. It now seems like
work to do what you previously said “yes” to.
“My kids are sick and I’ve got to stay home and take care of them.”
And you stay home or go shopping.
Or you have this experience:
You’re at a Tupperware party and you know the moment is
coming. . . .
“Now, if you want to receive a bunch of free gifts like this container
that you can stand on and still not break (she demonstrates) you can host a
party at your house. But I’m really booked for the next couple of months,
so it would have to be in March. Jane, do you want to do one?”
“Sure.”
“March 7?”
“Sure, that’s fine.”
“Great, honey. How about you Jessica? I can do one on the 4th of
April.”
“Sure, I’ll do that.”
And so on and so forth.
Now, having a Tupperware party isn’t a bad thing. It’s probably a very
good thing. With a good hostess, the guests will probably have fun and
everyone will spend just a little money. But you do have to obligate your
friends and family to come, which is a bit uncomfortable for just about
anyone. But hey, it’s three months out.
As the party approaches you feel torn as you prepare to send out the
invitations. You wonder why you said “yes” in the first place. You still
haven’t sent the invitations. It’s probably going to be fine but part of you
doesn’t want to do the party. Life is busy and this really wasn’t necessary.
But you said you’d do it—in front of a lot of your friends—and you’re go-
ing to have a Tupperware party.
When you were asked it didn’t seem like that big of a deal, certainly
Influence: It’s Not How You Ask, But When!
185

not an obligation that entails a bit of work.As the date approaches, though,
it does seem as though this is an all-day project.
I was watching TV the other night and an annoying commercial came
on for Wickes Furniture.
“Two thousand and five,” the young suburban housewife says as she
sits on her new couch.
“This week only you have no payments till 2005,” the young hus-
band parrots.
“Wickes has no payments and no interest till 2005!”
“Wow, no interest?!” the husband feeds the line back, and so the com-
mercial goes.
Is the commercial effective?
You bet.
The furniture store isn’t selling a recliner or sofa; it is selling free furni-
ture . . . for 2004 at least.The year 2005 is 13 months away, and that means
that you can have new furniture for free! You look around your house and
you think,“You know, we do need new furniture.”
And you probably do. This is not only an effective promotion, it’s
also ethical.
When an event is a long way off it’s easy to say “yes.”
In fact, the further an event is in the future, the easier it is to say “yes.”
In each of the preceding examples you discover how easy it is to say
“yes” today.
In the case of the retirement account the funny thing is that people
consistently have regret as they approach the new year that they have
agreed to participate in something that is completely in their best interest
without exception. Unfortunately, people perceive the 401(k) as an ex-
pense when of course it is a crucial asset. But it does represent money that
the person doesn’t get to use today. And that feeling of loss of freedom
plays a role in the person’s feeling that they now are not as certain about
186
I’ll Think About It
When an event is a long way off it’s easy to say “yes.”

the program. (Remember that when feelings come into play, rational
thinking often departs.)
In the case of the Tupperware party, you say “yes” today partially be-
cause you feel obligated to do so because you are asked in front of a group.
It’s not unethical, but there is a feeling of pressure involved.Who wants to
look bad in front of the group? In this real-life scenario a person’s future
isn’t on the line. It’s a Tupperware party and it is helping someone you
know earn a living. It’s a good thing to do. Nevertheless, as the day ap-
proaches, the desire to participate dramatically declines because it takes
away your freedom of choice for the party day, in part because you are
obligating your friends and family to do something that will be fun but
uncomfortable for some.
The furniture store, of course, is the easiest to say “yes” to today be-
cause getting new furniture and spending no money (for at least one year)
is more than tempting; it’s downright delicious.You must do this.The com-
pany puts off the payment so far into the future that most people can’t
even get there in their minds.
Now, you think this is pretty amazing stuff? Obviously it’s easy to get
people to say “yes” to something that is going to happen far in the future.
Just wait until you learn how to utilize this powerful information in your
business and your practice and your life.
And speaking of time, what happens when you ask for an answer at
different points in a conversation (early on, in the middle, at the end)?
Does it matter when you ask for agreement? Does it matter when you ask
for the date?
And when you do ask for something, should the event happen quickly
(do you take her out tomorrow night or in two weeks?) or do you put it off?
The Most Common Reason They Say “No,” and 
How to Overcome It
The reason that word “no” comes out of their mouths is because it is an
instant reaction. They did this or something like this before, and they
The Most Common Reason They Say “No,” and How to Overcome It
187

determined quickly it was a bad decision.About 90 percent of all “no’s”
come from this background. Pay close attention. . . .
All of a sudden the water turns cold.You turn around in the shower
and quickly turn the temp up up up. But it doesn’t go up. Someone else is
using the hot water in the house! You turn it off instantly.That relaxing 20-
minute shower has been destroyed. Six months later you still remember it
as someone being incredibly rude and that it was a bad shower.You ab-
solutely don’t remember the 20 minutes of relaxation.
The next day you take a five-minute shower. It feels good—warm, re-
laxing. But you remember that someone will probably start using the hot
water so you get out fairly quickly. It was a nice shower—relaxing, if short.
And later that week, you remember that it was a good shower.
All relationships have ups and downs. Most of the time they are in the
middle and you really aren’t in a relationship but working at work, clean-
ing the house, whatever.Then you go through a period where you argue,
fight, bicker. Ugh. It’s horrible! Time for a new relationship.You break the
news.Arguments elevate.You knew it! And for the rest of your life you tell
people that you can’t believe you stuck with it for 25 years. A waste of
your life.
In order to understand how to influence, you need to understand how
people make decisions, how they remember the past, and how they see the
future.This is what has been missing for hundreds of salespeople and mak-
ing persuasion a numbers game instead of essentially selling everyone.
As you’ve seen from the examples, people:
1. Remember peak experiences (especially the really bad experiences).
2. Remember how things end.
3. Do not see the future clearly.They do not know how they will feel
when certain events transpire, even if they want them to
All of this is crucial in communication, persuasion, and obviously your
business and relationships.
In fact, this might be some of the most important information you
188
I’ll Think About It

have ever learned. Read on. Have you ever been in a conversation with
someone and then that person says,“Why did you say ____?”
“I didn’t say that!”
“Yes, you did. I heard you!”
“I did not!”
That night in separate conversations (or journal entries) both of you
make the other person out to be an idiot or thoughtless or something else
that isn’t positive!
Clearly one of you is incorrect, but both of you are equally certain
that your memory is correct.The fact is that trying to resolve this is impos-
sible.This is the problem of memory.The brain makes stuff up out of thin
air to fill in blank spots. Everyone experiences these moments when they
said or heard (or saw!) something that actually wasn’t articulated or heard
(or seen).You can’t convince a brain otherwise, because it was there!
Now, if you can’t rely on your memory to know what really happened
30 seconds ago, how can you rely on it for accurately representing what
happened in the past? Answer:You can’t . . . but only you know this.The
other person doesn’t.Therefore you have to either move past this point or
give them a short course in neuroscience. If you choose the latter, you can
start with this:
In one recent research study people were having a necessary
colonoscopy.At regular intervals during the process they were asked to share
their level of discomfort.At the end of the process for one group the scope
was allowed to simply not move for a minute right before it was removed.
The other group had the scopes removed a minute earlier (when the
colonoscopy was actually finished) and with no additional minute of rest.
Results:The group who had the scope in longer but finished “easier”
remembered the colonoscopy very differently from those who had the
shorter-time colonoscopy. The patients who had the extra minute of no
The Most Common Reason They Say “No,” and How to Overcome It
189
The brain makes stuff up out of thin air to fill in blank spots.

scope movement while still inserted, remembered the colonoscopy as “not
that bad.”The group who had no extra moment of rest remembered it as
much worse.
Key Point:When matched with how people actually reported they felt at
each interval in the process (not later that night in a journal entry), their
later recollections reflected the end of the process and not the entire expe-
rience. People remember how an experience ends and generalize the ending back to
the rest of the experience.
Strategy: At each step, know that the people you are talking with do
not operate with video cameras in their mind. They operate on their
memories, regardless of whether the memories are accurate.Therefore you
need to clearly show how not acting (even though they recall the action as
being painful in the past) will have dire consequences.
Then you must show how both decisions could play out, along with
the probabilities of both.
For people who lost money in the stock market, you can understand
their interest in staying in safe money market securities! Unfortunately,
the reality is that they are probably not going to make much money if
they do that.
You simply can’t tell them to ignore the past.
You must point out that it could happen again, though it’s more likely
that more typical returns and results are in the offing.
The research in persuasion is clear. You must point out both possible fu-
tures for you to be successful. Otherwise, the person will be destined to go
with what they feel, instead of what makes sense.The phobia of losing is
tough to get past without at least acknowledging and examining those
possible outcomes.
Then finish with a very clear picture of a very likely future. If you
paint a too-rosy future, you will both lose.They will feel manipulated. If
you paint a likely future realistically, there is an excellent chance that peo-
ple will respond appropriately.
190
I’ll Think About It

Ultimately the stock market crashed, the Titanic sank, and the Twin
Towers went down. But those are not reasons to avoid the stock market,
boating, or tall buildings. In fact, having failed in the first two quarters of
the game is all the more reason to try harder in the second half.
That is the message that needs to be made clear to your client, and
they will get it if you use that metaphor. Never let a bad result in the past
phobically turn your client into a nonclient!
Influential Power of Choice Reduction
It would seem to be such a good thing. Lots of candidates. Maybe you re-
member the 2004 Democratic presidential primary season: The outspoken
wild man Howard Dean,the superliberal Al Sharpton,the ex-general and TV
analyst for war movements in the recent Gulf War Wesley Clark,Senator John
Edwards, and Vietnam vet and now Senator John Kerry. Lots of choices.
Surely one should emerge by the end of the primaries and make an obvious
alternative to the conservative incumbent,President George W.Bush.
But influence doesn’t work the way most people think, and choice is a
counterintuitive problem from the get-go.
The more choices you have, the less appealing each of the choices ap-
pears. In fact, it is hard to find any exceptions to this in sales literature, aca-
demic research, and even politics.
If you were a presidential reelection big shot, you might be thinking,
“Man, they are all slamming us this week.This is terrible.We are going to
suffer in the polls.We have to fight back.”
That would be an error.
The correct response is to say and do absolutely nothing.
Influential Power of Choice Reduction
191
If you paint a likely future realistically, there is an excellent chance
that people will respond appropriately.

Now, that sure seems counterintuitive. But here is the situation at the
unconscious level.
The more choices with which you are presented, the less you like all
of them.
In fact, when someone is presented with one choice, she is more likely
to accept that one choice as opposed to declining.When someone is pre-
sented with two choices the likelihood of the person simply not choosing
either of them dramatically increases.When presented with three or more
choices, the likelihood of selecting any choice is very small indeed.
When medical doctors were presented with a new drug to treat os-
teoarthritis, 75 percent of them were likely to prescribe the new medica-
tion versus 25 percent referring patients to a specialist. When a second
medication was placed among the options, 50 percent of the doctors re-
ferred patients to a specialist. They simply chose to not choose. Choices
cause anxiety, uncertainty, and, believe it or not, depression.And that really
seems counterintuitive, doesn’t it?
In Barry Schwartz’s Paradox of Choice, he points out the very interest-
ing research done combining choice and framing. Observe:
Parents divorce. Custody of the child will be awarded to one parent.
You are the judge.Would you choose parent A or parent B?
Parent A
Parent B
Average income.
Above-average income.
Average health.
Minor health problems.
Average working hours.
Lots of work-related travel.
Reasonable rapport with child.
Very close relationship with child.
Relatively stable social life.
Extremely active social life.
Which parent did you choose?
Interesting, huh? Not easy, but two-thirds of those surveyed chose to
award custody to parent B.
But when a new group of people were surveyed and the question was
asked like this: “Which parent would you deny custody to?” 55 percent
192
I’ll Think About It

chose to deny custody to parent B.Why? Because there are reasons to deny
a parent based on the negative aspects of parent B.
Choices plus framing can change the world.
Key: Each additional choice or option takes away from the positive light
of all other options.
I just bought a new camcorder. I was pondering between getting a
professional camera or a small digital one that would do an excellent job
like my old Sony.What to do . . .
Canon’s Super 
Sony PC 330 Handheld 
Professional Camera
Compact Unit
Impossible to pack in 
Easy to pack in carry-on 
carry-on luggage
luggage
$3,000 with accessories.
$2000 with accessories.
3 CCD.
1 CCD.
1.5 megapixels for still photos.
3 megapixels for still photos.
Easy to use with tripod.
Difficult to use with tripod.
Perfect video quality.
Excellent video quality.
Best low light.
Mediocre low light.
Now, there is no right choice for me or you. There are simply
choices—and, frankly, a lot of them. I travel a lot—too much.That’s why I
prefer a camera I can carry on. I hate checking luggage.
I also want a great picture. This camera will film programs that will
eventually be up for sale at kevinhogan.com. In addition, we use a lot of
photographs, and I have a 4 megapixel camera that is amazing, so I don’t
have to have this feature if I choose not to.
I pondered and pondered. It took almost five hours just to narrow the
field to these two camcorders.
What did I finally choose?
I chose the camera I could carry for a couple of reasons. First, I don’t
Influential Power of Choice Reduction
193

have to bring my other digital for still photography. Portability is very im-
portant to me. In fact, with all things being close to equal it turned out to
be the single most important variable. Had camera video qualities been
medium or just good, I would have chosen the Canon. Instead, with ex-
cellent video (not perfect!) I opted for the smaller unit. Never will this
new camera be in Malaysia when I am in Australia.
Had someone simply shown me one or the other and I had not done
an exhaustive Web search and comparison project, I likely would have pur-
chased either of these or anything similar in quality in less than five min-
utes. Need a camera. Need it now. Let’s go.
Choices, while theoretically good to have, leave you wishing you had
another option (great low light) and constantly wondering,“Would it have
made a difference to have the other camera?”
One aspect of influence we’ve visited several times in the book 
is the impact of emotions on the results of persuasive communication
attempts.
Going back to your medical doctor: If your doctor is in a good mood
and feeling positive (gifted with a box of candy in the research project) he
makes diagnoses faster and more accurately!
Positive emotions cause us to feel more comfortable in evaluating op-
tions and coming up with a correct decision!
Only doctors?
No.
Schwartz reports that when students are offered six essay topics versus
30 essay topics those students presented with only six topics actually write
better essays than those who had a much broader choice. Reduced choice
not only makes it easier to choose; it also makes our choices better and
more effective!
194
I’ll Think About It
Positive emotions cause us to feel more comfortable in evaluating
options and coming up with a correct decision!

Problems of Choices
What do Miss Hawaiian Tropic, keeping a diary or journal, and Average Joe
teach us about instantly becoming more influential, earning far more
money, and having better relationships? Be prepared to be stunned—and
take notes.
During the past two years I have been reevaluating my once firmly
held belief that people should journal their lives and their thoughts, espe-
cially in terms of their relationships.Why? In recent research studies it has
been revealed that people who write down their feelings and thoughts
about their partners are much more likely to fail at predicting the success
of the relationship. It turns out that what is easy to put into words is not
what helps people predict the success of the relationship. In fact, the oppo-
site is true.
So what? It turns out that people who do not (or are asked not to in
research studies) analyze their relationships in writing tend to remain in
those relationships and the tendency of those who do analyze their rela-
tionships in writing tend to not stay in relationships.
Worse? Upon follow-up, those who wrote about their relationships
later regretted leaving their relationships.As you’re probably already start-
ing to think how this applies in your life and business (especially when
tracking employee information!) the ramifications are enormous.
Key Application Concept: If you are going to have your client or cus-
tomer evaluate you, your product, or your service, have them do so based
on specific preset criteria.
Keep this in mind. I’m coming back to this crucial discovery and its
further applications later. . . . Have you seen or heard of this goofy TV
show called Average Joe or Average Joe: Hawaii? I watched a few of the
shows in the first installment. Concept: Reality TV show in which a
good-looking girl will get to whittle down 16 average joes (men who
are average guys) to one guy. (I don’t have any idea what the ultimate
prize was.)
Problems of Choices
195

At first this girl is appalled.These guys are not what she signed up for.
After the initial shock, she gets familiar with the guys to the point where
they are very acceptable to her. More: She actually starts to like some of
them and enjoy their company quite a bit. Just as you think there is justice
in the world, the former cheerleader is brought a half dozen sleek-bodied
guys to compete with the average-joe guys for her attention.
The comparison effect is now recalibrated, and ultimately there is no
contest. Sleek-bodied guy easily beats out average joe (sorry, guys).The av-
erage-joe guys simply can’t visually compete with the sleek-bodied guys.
Three key points:
1. When the setting was all average joes the girl was very much inter-
ested in a number of them.There was no frame of reference out-
side of the average guys for comparison.
2. When the sleek-bodied guys arrived, all the average guys were
sharply contrasted and all suffered by the new comparison.
3. Even among the sleek-bodied guys, many of them suffered by
comparison with each other.
Have you ever watched a beauty pageant (Miss Universe, Miss Amer-
ica, Miss Hawaiian Tropic)? Up to 100 absolutely stunning women take
the same stage. Then under careful scrutiny, as the women stand side by
side, then come into view by themselves, you and I begin to see flaws in
each of these women! Enough that viewers will say, “She isn’t that good
looking” or some similar remark.These are not your average-jane women.
These are women who come in at 9.8 on the Richter scale that is hard-
wired into all men from birth. But side by side you become fooled into
thinking that Miss 9.8 is really closer to a 7.0 and barely worthy of being
on your TV screen. (This reaction is true of both men and women, and by
the way women are the primary audience for these shows.)
We all suffer from comparison when we are stacked up next to many
other choices.A few? You can maintain your projection and perception of
status, prestige, beauty. Against the backdrop of many applicants, available
future partners, and so forth? You sink fast, and so do all the others!
196
I’ll Think About It

Imagine you sell a product. Imagine it has tons of competitors. Imag-
ine you have two sheets of papers.All the competitors’ products should be
compared to each other on the first page.Your product should be the only
product on the second page.
Key Application Concept: If you place your idea/product/service in
with 20 others it becomes just another piece of the stew. If you set it off by
itself it shines.
Key Application Concept:You work in a cubicle with 20 other people
in the same room/office.You are part of a sea of faces. All begin to look
alike after a while. If you are going to differentiate yourself you literally
need to find ways to separate yourself from the crowd if you are going to
advance, become valued, and gain importance.
Let’s go back to our Miss Hawaiian Tropic pageant for a moment.
(Don’t I ask a lot?) Miss California steps out and introduces herself.You are
a judge.You must start to evaluate her and tell her whether in your mind
she should make the final eight.You must justify your reasons. Ready for
this? Those who must articulate or write down their reasons most regret
their choices later.
The way the human brain is wired, you instantly come up with a deci-
sion, then begin to come up (or make up) reasons to justify your decision.
Here is an interesting fact:The more people have to create reasons for their
decisions the more they become disappointed in their choice later! This is
true of all decisions.
Key: When you make a decision you will regret it more later as you dis-
cuss the reasons for making the decision.
Problems of Choices
197
We all suffer from comparison when we are stacked up next to many
other choices.

Key Application Concept: When you get the decision you want from
the other person, it is time to shut up and move along. If you ask for all the
reasons why they decided the way they did you might just get a reversal in
a few days.
Key Application Concept: Once you have a decision, do not encourage
people to think about how good their decision was or even set guideposts
in the future for them to evaluate it. Be happy they decided in your favor
and gave you their business or trust.
Let’s take a deep breath and think for a second. Middle-class Amer-
ica has never been as wealthy or lived a better, healthier, safer lifestyle
than in 2004. (It has nothing to with Bush or Clinton—or any politi-
cian, for that matter!) But 10 times as many people are suffering from
depression in middle-class America than in 1904! They are getting mar-
ried five years later than just a few years ago, and they are staying at
their present employer a small fraction of the time their parents did 30
years ago.
What is going on?
TMC. Too many choices! People are becoming responsible for their
choices and it is causing an enormous amount of distress, anguish, regret,
anxiety, and depression!
Key Application Point: Take the choices others have to make when
working with you. If you want your client/customer to be happy with
you, and you want to make the sale and then get repeat business, begin to
limit options quickly. Do not sell 100 different colored cards. Sell five. Do
not sell 100 different customized computers made to suit their needs (un-
less you are telling them what they need).
Key Application Point: Find the key one, two, or three values or
needs a person has as they relate to you and give them those things!
Everything else is noise that will cause the person to be less happy with
their decision.
198
I’ll Think About It

I hear someone say,“Well, then give them a money-back guarantee,”
“They can always exchange it,” “Let them swap it for something else if
they aren’t happy.”
This will strike terror in the hearts of just about everyone, but here is a
fact based on recent research.
Scary fact: When people have the opportunity to reverse their deci-
sion, return a product, or get a refund on a purchase, they tend to be less
satisfied with their decision later!
Now, that runs contrary to everything I was ever taught 100 years ago
in Selling 101!
The odd fact is that when people are buying something or even get-
ting into an arranged marriage (as happens in other countries and was the
norm a few centuries ago in most cultures) the people are happier and the
relationships last much longer.
Am I suggesting you take back your money-back guarantee and make
it more difficult to return products at Wal-Mart? No. It is time to evaluate
how you present this information to your customers.
If your client has made a decision to buy a competitor in the past six
months and that experience failed, he probably regrets it. However, the ex-
periences that happened years ago that cause the most regret are those
things that weren’t done.
This is important:You are attempting to influence someone and they
made a mistake recently and they are still smarting from it.And they regret
it. If what you are proposing is similar to what they regret doing, you need
to be prepared for a “no”:“I did this with them and I really regret it. Been
there, done it, not going to do that again.”You will need to prepare to
frame your proposition differently.
However, if your client has not done something in the more distant
past that they wish they had done, this is powerful leverage for them to
take action now.
Key Point: The problem is that if people pass up one opportunity 
in the past they tend to pass up similar opportunities for the rest of their
lives!
Problems of Choices
199

But there is more about regret that you have to consider.
When an Olympian gets a silver medal, the athlete is happy on the
stand and probably excited. But, as time marches on, silver medalists realize
they were just ticks away from the gold.This is something that breeds de-
pression, disappointment, and frustration forever. If you try to console the
person by saying,“My, you were second, good going!” you will not build
rapport. These emotional hot buttons are something you will need to
work around.
On the other hand, the same Olympian winning the bronze medal is
happy. Bronze medalists have done well. They didn’t just miss the big
medal—there was yet another person between them and the gold. They
may have been close.They may have been ticks away, but these athletes are
happy with their result as time goes by.They are proud and it sticks.There
is no significant regret.
Therefore, when you are communicating with someone about their
accomplishments in rapport-building communication be certain that you
know whether they are likely to be feeling positive or negative about the
subjects of conversation!
What’s the right thing to do when you discover regrets?
Here’s a quick peek at how to handle this kind of regret so you can get
beyond the regret and bring the client into more receptive feelings where
they will be more likely to comply with your request. Let’s imagine a new
auto sales decision.
“The last new car I bought turned out to be okay but it really wasn’t
my idea but my wife’s to buy it.”
“You know, at least it was new. It didn’t cost you anything to maintain,
and it didn’t break down. Shoot, she could have made a better choice, but
you didn’t lose anything.Today we’ll get you exactly what you need.”
I play blackjack when I visit Las Vegas. I fancy myself a pretty good
player. I play quickly and make decisions based on statistical models.There
isn’t much left to intuition or hunches.
If there are others at the table and someone makes a decision that
turns out to be a mistake (at a blackjack table people think that anything
that didn’t make them money was a mistake—not true) they typically
200
I’ll Think About It

want to see what the next card left concealed is so they could know if
making a different decision would have been the right thing to do.
When they see that having made a different decision would have re-
sulted in the same outcome (losing their money) they accept their fate and
are annoyed.When they see the concealed card and realize that had they
made a different decision they would have won money, they feel not only
annoyed but disgusted and frankly show symptoms of depression!
In either case the outcome is the same but the degree of regret is dra-
matically different.
I constantly remind my seat partners (if they made the right decision)
that they did indeed make the right decision and that shows they know
what they are doing.This helps build rapport and keeps things calm, be-
cause no one wants to look stupid or feel humiliated when it comes to
putting money at risk and losing.
Do the same thing when dealing with your clients! Never let someone
feel stupid about past mistakes. Make sure they know that any intelligent
person would have done the same thing if they were presented with a sim-
ilar situation. If you show even an unconscious body language cue that the
person did make a foolish mistake or was humiliated in any way, the answer
to your request will be “no.”
Imagine that your neighbor buys a new lawn mower. He had his old
one for a decade! Yours is a junker and you should have known better than
to buy it, but what do you know about lawn mowers? Nothing. Zip.You
can’t even spell the words.
“Hey, Mark, what kind of mower did you buy when you tossed yours
the other day?”
“Toro XR57Q.”
You know what you are going to buy?
A Toro XR57Q.
Problems of Choices
201
Never let someone feel stupid about past mistakes.

If you do not buy a Toro XR57Q and your new lawn mower breaks
down, needs repairs, or even conks out after one summer, you are going to
look like an idiot! You will massively regret it and that is precisely where
your mind goes.Therefore, this is easy.Toro XR57Q.
There can be no regrets if you buy the XR57Q. Sold.
Persuading the Represented Mind:
Representation and Exaggeration?
Like everyone else on the planet, you represent the real world in a way that
really is a mental interpretation or representation of reality.
Have you ever had this conversation:
“I can’t believe you just said that!”
“I didn’t say that. I said __________.”
“No, you didn’t. I heard you say _________”
“I did no such thing.You are dreaming. I clearly said ____________.”
And the reality-checking pair will never find the answer—because
there really is no answer and the two people will permanently represent
the event differently.This causes each person to paint a picture of the other
person and who they are instead of taking a videotape and storing it in
their mind.
What our senses pick up vary from person to person. Other people
see slightly different colors than you do.They hear different sounds than
you do.They smell different smells than you do . . . or not at all. If you go
to a foreign country people say words that you cannot say because you
cannot hear all the sounds in the word.You literally have to be trained to
hear them!
All of this is just the tip of the “representation” iceberg. It does go
much further.The implications for influence? Dramatic.
For example, seeing a child starve is a powerful image. Seeing 500
starve logically should give you a much more powerful image—but it
doesn’t.The difference in empathy or grief is marginal.
Not only do you literally see, hear, feel, taste, and smell a different
202
I’ll Think About It

world than the person next to you, you also literally misrepresent the im-
portance of almost everything in the world. (And so do I!)
People misrepresent the scope, the importance, and the significance of
almost every experience in life. All of this causes persuasion to be much
more than a game of logic that has an obvious solution. Listen carefully:
There can be no obvious solution because the other person literally sees a
different world than you do.
What happens when these differences come up in everyday conver-
sation is one person will attempt to represent the picture or problem to
someone using a technique called exaggeration. Sometimes exaggera-
tion helps someone get the leverage needed to create change. Usually it
does not.
People often believe that if you exaggerate your case you can dramati-
cally improve your sales presentation or your proposal. It often seems that
exaggeration in written copy (“251 seats have already been sold”) will re-
ally make a big difference in your success.
But is this the case? And how do we know?
There is an interesting phenomenon in human behavior that you can
call “scope neglect.”
In a nutshell, scope neglect could be described like this: I’m a million-
aire.You tell me that if I give you $100 I will really be helping you out. I
decide whether to give you the $100. However much value I feel you will
get in your $100 is just about the same as how I will feel about giving you
$1,000. Neither amount causes any money pain, but they are seen as very
similar numbers.
Or:
A fund-raiser is taking place in an actual research study. Some people
are told that their donation will immediately help save the lives of 2,000
Persuading the Represented Mind: Representation and Exaggeration? 203
Sometimes exaggeration helps someone get the leverage needed to
create change. Usually it does not.

birds. Another group is told their donation will help save 20,000 birds. A
final group is told their donation will save 200,000 birds.
It would seem that the last group should give far more money to the
charity than the first group.
But what happened? Group one averaged giving $80 per person.
Group two averaged $78 per person. Group three averaged $88 per person.
I was surprised.
I really was! I thought that there would at least be a significant differ-
ence between saving 200,000 birds’ lives versus 2,000. But there was no
significant difference. Increasing the numbers just didn’t matter.
What about something other than birds.
Residents in four western states were asked to make donations to
save either a single wilderness area or 57 wilderness areas.Theoretically
the group asked to donate to save 57 areas should give a lot more money
(57 times as much?) than those asked to save one area. This wasn’t the
case. In fact, the group asked to donate to save a total of 57 wilderness
areas gave only 28 percent more money than those asked to help save
one wilderness area.
Lesson: People neglect the scope of a problem because they develop a representa-
tion of it.They don’t take the time to put every piece of information up on
the board and analyze them all detail by detail.They get a picture or repre-
sentation in their mind, then believe that that is the representation that is
reality. Of course it isn’t.The scope of the situation is neglected and usually
dramatically so.
Because of this thinking process there are many ramifications for those
who influence others. Exaggerating benefits or possible results from your
program is unnecessary and an enormous risk when contrasted with relat-
ing facts. It doesn’t pay off, and if someone were to find out you were ex-
aggerating it could destroy your business. Never exaggerate.
And there is more.
In an experiment related to scope neglect (this example is called “ex-
tension”) people were asked to estimate how many murders took place in
Detroit the previous year. Another group was asked how many murders
took place in Michigan that year. The first group offered a median re-
204
I’ll Think About It

sponse of 200 people murdered in Detroit. The second group offered a
median response of 100 people murdered in Michigan.
I don’t have to tell you that Detroit is just one city in Michigan. One
city.But Detroit has a reputation of being dangerous and violent. Michigan
has a reputation of being a cold state in the Midwest.
People thought there were twice as many murders in Detroit as in
Michigan—and Detroit is only a part of Michigan!
But think about how people think. People don’t think in any logical
fashion.They think in terms of biases.
What this means is that the painted picture is far more important than
any logic when it comes to whether the person will decide on one thing
when compared to another. People base their decisions on the pictures in
their minds and not on the real-life experiences in the real world.There-
fore you need to be able to find out what those pictures are so you can
communicate clearly with your counterpart.
Talking about what “is” or “is not” will not make you more persuasive.
Finding out what representations your client has will, and this is where
you can make dramatic steps forward in the process of persuasion.
Flagging in the Persuasion Process
Flagging is one of the most powerful cutting-edge techniques of persua-
sion. I’ve saved it for last in order to leave you on a “wow!” note. Combin-
ing the latest in memory research, neuroscience, and real-life selling and
therapeutic skills, you begin to discover some fascinating phenomena.
Flagging is one specific technique that you can use to dramatically increase
compliance in almost all aspects of influence.
Up until now, you have learned that people remember their (good or
bad) peak experiences and how experiences ended, then generalize those
two things to an entire lifetime of experience.This is important when at-
tempting to influence people to repurchase your service or product when
they might have had a bad experience.Another useful way to prepare for
people who have possibly misremembered past experiences with you or a
Flagging in the Persuasion Process
205

competitor is to prepare your presentation to integrate with that new be-
lief as it is their new reality, if you will.
You learned that people make current decisions (usually in the form
of instant reactions) based on past experiences.
You know that if someone has said “no” to a profitable opportunity in
the past, it is very unlikely they will say “yes” when asked again.This seems
counterintuitive; it should be that people will always accept a proposal that
obviously benefits them. But this is not how the brain functions. If the
brain came to a “no” conclusion last time, then that will be the instant re-
action to a similar proposal this time.
Much like driving to your office, the brain doesn’t like to make deci-
sions more than once. Once it has decided, it will typically stick with that.
This is not rational per se; it is simply the way you and I were wired to
make life easier in the decision-making process!
You know that how people remember their past is crucial in how you
must communicate with them today for optimum influence potential.
Here is the latest in persuasion research about how people remember
the past and its impact on whether they will say “yes” to you—and then
what specifically to do about it.
If you were to ask people what their opinion was last year (or even last
week or yesterday) about a political issue, a personal issue, or pretty much
anything, there is a surprisingly good chance they will have remembered
completely incorrectly.
Studies have been done that show that people remember a movie as
being particularly good when leaving the theater, only to change their
mind the next day after reading a review in the newspaper that had a con-
trary point of view.
What past research hasn’t shown was specifically who was remember-
ing more correctly and who was remembering more incorrectly.And this
is a crucial piece of the persuasion puzzle that has been missing—until the
twenty-first century. Now it is yours.
Think back to the year 2000.
Al Gore and George Bush were in a tight election race. In one exper-
iment participants were asked to predict the percentage of the popular
206
I’ll Think About It

vote each candidate would have.You probably remember that Gore was
about 5 percentage points ahead going into the final days of the campaign.
The polls were roughly matched by the participants of this experiment
who said (on average) that Gore would win by 4.7 percent over Bush.
After the election, we knew only one fact, and that was that Gore won
the popular vote by about 0.3 percent. (We didn’t know who would actu-
ally be the president, because of chads in Florida!)
When the participants were asked after the election but before the
winner was determined in Florida, they remembered saying that Gore
would win by (on average) 0.6 percent! What happened to those 4.1 per-
centage points?
What happened was that people watched the news and discovered that
Gore won by 0.3 percent and the actual fact superseded what prediction
they made the prior month—and by a great deal.
Let’s pause here and quickly analyze this first step: People look in ret-
rospect at what actually did happen and not at what they though would
happen when evaluating how they thought at the time.That’s mighty im-
portant in persuasion all by itself, but there is more that is going to blow
you away!
Key Point: When influencing others remember that if you ask them
how or what they decided in the past you will not likely receive accu-
rate information.
Does anyone remember the past correctly? The first answer is of
course “no.” Memory changes with every view of that memory. Experts or
people who are directly involved in a situation remember their predictions
of outcomes very differently from those who have little investment or in-
terest in the outcomes.
In the Gore/Bush election those people who admitted to not having
political expertise remembered their predictions of the popular vote in a
very interesting way (remembering after the fact that Gore would win by
7.5 percent of the vote versus the 4.7 percent they predicted prior to the
election, which runs completely counter to the information they had after
Flagging in the Persuasion Process
207

the election was over).Yes, they remembered that their original predictions
were much less accurate than they actually were!
However, those people who felt they had expertise predicted Gore
would win by 5 percent but remembered predicting a real horse race with
only a projected 0.7 percent difference. Experts or people who have in-
volvement remember things in a different way. In this study experts
thought they were almost perfectly accurate in their predictions. They
were far from it!
I think one way to utilize the fact that we all have such dismal
memories is help someone feel comfortable with their expertise.A cou-
ple of examples:
“You probably figured the Gore/Bush election would be incredibly
close, but who would have ever thought it would have been a decision
made in court by one vote!”
This kind of approach reduces the insult factor that can happen when
you have the kind of knowledge you do about influence, memory, and de-
cision making.
Another way to utilize people’s lack of accurate recall is to place a flag
in their memory to begin communication with.
“Remember when Gore and Bush debated and Al Gore seemed so ar-
rogant to the public that his numbers started dropping at the very end?
Well, that was one of the reasons I thought Bush had a chance.”
The flag is Gore’s arrogance.The point of placing a flag in someone’s
memory is that once it is there it becomes part of their permanent mem-
ory and gives you a point from which to establish a key piece of the per-
suasion process.A real-life example:
“Remember when you bought this house? Did you want something
that would be big enough for your family to comfortably live in?”
208
I’ll Think About It
The point of placing a flag in someone’s memory is that once it is
there it becomes part of their permanent memory and gives you a
point from which to establish a key piece of the persuasion process.

Now, the agent has no clue if this is true but by flagging the memory
of the decision to buy the house you add this specific “recollection” into
their memory as if it had always been there.
If you were to ask,“What caused you to buy this house?” people will
generate numerous possibilities internally before giving you a reason.That
reason could be helpful in the persuasion process, but one thing is certain:
The reason that they state probably had little to do with their decision in
the first place!
Therefore they will be more likely to doubt the generation of their
own recollection, and even though you now have a piece of information
that is useful, it also has drawbacks.
What, for example? Specifically that the person generated a number of
internal responses of their reason before saying what it was. This causes
question marks to pop up in the mind and makes a further conversation
more interesting but less likely to persuade.
If you flag a memory you will get one of two responses. Either the
people will accept the flag (most typical) and think in terms of “com-
fortable” in this case or they will rapidly tell you just why they did buy
the house.
“No, it wasn’t space or comfort at all. I needed a home that was near
the school.”
At this point you have a client with dramatic recall (still as unlikely to
be accurate).This allows you to utilize their flag in the persuasion process
that has begun.
Once people have a flag anchored in place it primes mental processes
to think in terms of the flag.Yes, you can bet that the nearness to school
factor will be a determining factor at this point.
Key Point: You can flag another person’s memory through their own
generation of the flag or by planting the flag yourself. The flag should
always be something that was considered by the other person at some
time. If the flag is self-generated by the other person they are more
likely to internally argue or struggle with the flag because while they
originally came up with the flag they generated other options that they
Flagging in the Persuasion Process
209

considered and therefore they might recall these other points and begin
to oscillate internally.
Imagine I were to say,“Pick a number. I’m thinking of 61,000.”
What is your number?
Now, imagine that I say to someone else,“Pick a number. I’m thinking
of 14.”
The responses from the two individuals are going to be dramatically
different.Very few people will pick a number higher than 100 in the latter
case. In the former case where I said I was thinking of 61,000, people will
pick numbers in the thousands, tens of thousands, and even hundreds of
thousands.
In both cases I primed the response by stating an anchor or flag—in
the first case a big number and in the second a small number.
The faster I ask for a response the closer to the anchor the response
will be.
These numbers mean nothing but have direct impact on suggestions
given to the person.
Let’s move this interesting phenomenon into the persuasion and mar-
keting arena.
Research participants were shown apartments to rent. They were
given rental fees for the apartments that varied from very high to very
low. When the individuals were given high numbers the individuals 
focused on the positive aspects of the apartment. When they were 
given low numbers they were much more likely to focus on the nega-
tive aspects.
In further research, participants who are asked to accept one proposal
or another are more likely to focus on the positive aspects of the proposal.
Participants asked to reject one of two options are likely to focus on nega-
tive aspects of the two.
And there is more, but it all comes down to one key concept:Anchor-
ing is priming and it is an associative error. Whatever you mention to
prime their thinking is going to cause error in the thinking toward the an-
210
I’ll Think About It

chor—even when you tell someone that this is what you are doing! What
does this mean in the real world?
Real estate agents are supposed to be experts in pricing real estate. But
take the same property and put a different list price on it by the owner and
you get valuations that are biased toward the valuation the owner put on
the house!
In courtrooms, judges who are asked for extremely long sentences
tend to have their thinking biased toward the long sentence.The same is
true for requests for short sentences.
Judges are also biased by anchors in compensation cases. Whether
$100 or large sums, judges are more likely to be biased by the number
that is requested.
Even more interesting, older adults who should know what percent-
age of their money is being saved and spent will be biased toward anchors
and not what they know to be correct.
“People estimate that Gandhi lived to be roughly 67 years old if they
first decided whether he died before the age of 140, but only 50 years old
if they first decided whether he died before or after the age of 9.” (Strack
and Mussweiler 1997)
Why? Because people evaluate hypotheses by trying to confirm them
and not intentionally looking for ways to refute them.The mind pointed
in a direction is unlikely to go back the other way without much further
thought and consideration.
Here is what is even more interesting. When people come up with
their own anchors, they are still biased toward their anchor instead of logi-
cally answering the question!
Flagging in the Persuasion Process
211
The mind pointed in a direction is unlikely to go back the other way
without much further thought and consideration.

Applications
Clearly if you are selling a service for $1,000 and want to sell the most of
them possible then you probably should set a high anchor. “What you
will gain from this experience is easily worth $9,000. I could ask for half
of that fee but I’m not going to. Instead I’m going to ask only $1,000 for
this experience.”
At first glance you might think that the anchor is set too high.As indi-
cated earlier, though, people will set their acceptable price much higher
when there is a high anchor.This is true even when the anchor is absurdly
high. (Remember the Gandhi at 140 example?) You know that the anchor
is set high yet it influences you anyway.This is the power of the anchor or
flagging. It’s all about how the brain processes information, and that is one
of the key pieces we have been missing.
Does this mean that you should flag a high anchor for every promo-
tion you do?
No.
Setting high anchors will get you sales, but don’t be surprised if you
lose a disproportionately high percentage of these clients because many
will buy and then be offered the service later at a lower price by some-
one else.
If your service is a one-time-only type of service, you might want to
try setting a high anchor, then contrast that price with a significantly lower
price, compelling the person to buy.
212
I’ll Think About It

12
How Their Brain
Buys . . .You!
When I travel to Warsaw, I ask my sponsor to get me a room at the Shera-
ton Hotel there.They treat me like a king. I don’t think about it anymore,
I just instantly know that I want to stay there (stimulus/response rein-
forced over time). I have the same experience at the “W” Hotel in Seattle
and The Venetian in Las Vegas.There is zero time spent on decision mak-
ing. It’s all done unconsciously, and because these are based on repeatedly
positive experiences, they are typically good decisions. Now, if you were to
ask me if I seriously compare hotel travel plans to increase my enjoyment
factor or get a better price or a better room somewhere else I’d probably
say “yes,” and I’d probably be wrong!
Nine out of 10 consumers leaving the checkout line at a grocery store
remember handling the brand they bought and the competing brand to
compare it with the one they bought. Hidden cameras reveal that most in-
dividuals’ memories were completely wrong. In fact, less than 1 in 10 actu-
ally handled competing brands. People regularly remember behaviors and
213

actions that don’t happen in real life, and this is critical to the influence
process, sales, and marketing.
Pay attention:
People anticipate purchasing their brand prior to arriving at the store
and then they do indeed purchase it. (Just like I am staying at The Venet-
ian in Las Vegas.) They believe they spend time weighing their decisions
in the stores, but this isn’t true. Where brands are involved, consumers
spend only five seconds on average in that category of the store. Five sec-
onds.There is no thought, no decision making.The conscious mind does
not engage. Consumer remember comparing products but they don’t.
They go the category and purchase their brand choice almost instantly.
They made their decision at home at an unconscious level. They never
gave it a conscious thought.
The consumer had a good experience in the past with product X. Per-
haps it was advertised and the advertising clicked in the consumer’s mind.
Either way, the purchase happened with little or no attention (conscious
thought).At kevinhogan.com we have a simple rule. Put out programs that
no one can match in quality and application. In other words, almost every-
thing is new—cutting-edge new.Ahead of the market.Way ahead.And we
have loyal customers who know they will win with every program. It’s
part of branding. More about that later.
Key: People make many buying decisions in large part because of trust.
It’s well known in marketing that individuals will buy the generic
painkiller for themselves but only Children’s Tylenol for their kids even
though the two products are identical. People trust the brand when the
chips are down.
Question: Are you branded for trust? Do people look to you/your
company and immediately trust it over all the competing generics?
Case in Point: Each month I put out two or three new CD programs. I
love doing it! Each program contains truly cutting-edge material that indi-
viduals can immediately use, and there is never a question as to whether it
will be good, be delivered quickly, and be just as magical (if not more so) as
214
How Their Brain Buys . . . You!

the promotion was for the program.Trust is branded into the name.If it isn’t
the best, I won’t make the program.
My Goal for You: I want you to start branding trust into you/your com-
pany name so you become the instant obvious solution to some group’s
problems. Trust breeds loyalty. It’s very hard to switch from someone or
something you completely trust. In fact, it’s almost impossible to change
true loyalty, because the stress of change would be enormous.
There is a lot more to making an indelible positive impression in every
human being you meet.Trust is a great starting point. Loyalty is a perfect
goal; but what about influence?
Just because you are worthy of trust and loyalty does not mean that
you have the ability to initially influence someone; nor does it mean you
will be able to influence people to “buy you.”You must have something,
some set of solutions that meet needs and wants of other people.And you
must be able to influence people to take a chance on you.
Why Most People Fail at Being Persuasive:
Why Focus Groups Don’t Work
The focus group is nearly the biggest waste of money a company can
make. Focus groups and job interviews in human resources. They don’t
work.They predict nothing.“But Kevin, the focus group said they would
buy my product or use my services.” For some reason some companies
(and small businesses) still use focus groups.Why? (There is an alternative:
if you need to know, contact me.)
All the research shows that focus groups don’t work. In fact, almost all
products that focus group research suggests to launch eventually fail.
Most People Fail at Being Persuasive: Why Focus Groups Don’t Work
215
You must have something, some set of solutions that meet needs and
wants of other people.

Why? Because very little of people’s behavior is driven by their con-
scious minds. Most people cannot explain why they do what they do, or
predict what they will buy (or do) in the future. The unconscious mind
(aka implicit thought or implicit memory) is not accessible by verbal
means. Words can only give an approximation of what the unconscious
does, and to analyze why a person does something or what they might do
is only a guess on the conscious mind’s part.
If people knew what their behavior would be in the future, then focus
groups would produce product after product of winners. But they don’t
and they never will.They are inherently and seriously flawed. “If we put
this product on the market, would you buy it?”The answer is failure.
Why do most people fail to influence others? Because they attempt to
communicate with the sole intention of having the other person make a
logical decision. If they can “just talk some sense into him,” they will get
him to see things their way.
Of course people don’t decide on the answer to most problems in a
logical fashion.Their reactive portion of their brain, the oldest and emo-
tionally driven part of the brain, decides. The conscious mind, mostly
composed of the cortex, then justifies the behavior/emotional decision to
make that decision make sense.
Have you ever noticed that sometimes you do something and then
someone asks you why you did it? You make something up and then feel
guilty because you aren’t sure if you are telling the truth. It’s completely
normal and to be expected because people typically don’t think about
what they are going to do.They simply do it and then communicate a rea-
son that best fits the circumstances.
Have you ever seen a news story where someone performed a certain
behavior, then later realized how foolish it was? They couldn’t believe
what they had done. Had President Clinton been discreet, his affair never
would have been made public and his family would not have been hurt.
His mistake (beyond the moral choice of his affair) was to have his meet-
ings with the intern in the White House.There are no secrets in the White
House. No one knows that better than a president. Cameras, audio, surveil-
lance, Secret Service everywhere! And this is the place a president selects
216
How Their Brain Buys . . . You!

for an affair? But because of the Inner Dummy, as one author likes to call
it, the nation was scandalized for an entire year.
What Causes This Problem?
People live lives where patterns of experience are repeated over and over.
(We go to the same job, drive the same highways, do the same things,
every day.) The unconscious mind learns all of this and executes the
body’s behavior all day long. Rarely does the conscious mind come into
play in decision making. It is the client’s unconscious mind that is saying
“yes” and “no.”
Your goal as a professional is to ingratiate the conscious mind of your
client/customer and focus most of your attention on the unconscious
mind.What on earth does this mean? It means that you need to persuade
the unconscious mind.The conscious mind is only the justifier of uncon-
scious reactions.The unconscious reacts and the conscious tries to explain
why you did what you did! And because of this, you want to have a true
understanding of the nature of the mind and discharge what you were
taught in the past as antiquated and dated.Then realize that people are in-
fluenced or buy mostly on their gut reaction, their instincts.These largely
flawed responses and reactions to the environment are the triggers to say-
ing “yes” and buying.
Question: What does your client use you or your product for? What
would your client use your service for?
First Answer:This question can only be answered after you get past this
fact:Whether you sell yourself, a product, or a service, people are buying,
saying “yes,” to you. They are buying you and because of you, if they trust
What Causes This Problem?
217
Your goal as a professional is to ingratiate the conscious mind of
your client/customer and focus most of your attention on the
unconscious mind.

you. If they don’t, nothing has a chance to happen.Trust begins and is en-
gendered when reliability is established.Are you always there? Do you re-
spond quickly? Are you helpful? Do you respond to needs beyond making
the sale? Do you produce results? Is every client/customer you have as
precious to you as a family member? Is this felt by the client?
Second Answer: Secondarily (sometimes primarily), people are buying
an experience. Diet Coke refreshes. The trip to the beach will relax the
person.The trip to Las Vegas will stimulate and excite the person.The new
car will make the person feel good, comfortable, hot, safe, secure, admired,
or any of a host of other feelings that are associated with vehicles. A
woman buys lingerie from Victoria’s Secret to feel sexy. She buys Dannon
yogurt because it is wholesome. People want to have experiences. They
want to have the feelings that these experiences foster.
My Goal for You: Determine what experience you want to give your
clients and customers. Determine what experiences your product or ser-
vice gives to your customer.The two things could be completely different.
If you sell medical supplies, you’d probably like your experience with your
customer to be different than their experience with the medical supplies.
You should have yourself experientially defined and you should have your
product experientially defined.This is part of branding yourself and work-
ing with your products at a brand level.
You Can’t Get to “Yes” If You Can’t Get Their Attention
Branding is different for you (an individual) versus enormous monster
companies such as McDonald’s, Burger King, Subway, or any other large
franchise.When the big franchises put a big storefront out there, it’s dif-
ferent.They can do an enormous amount of evaluation to determine ex-
actly what the customer wants. They can find out exactly what the
consumer needs. The idea is to keep adapting and adjusting as people
evolve and grow.
Advertising makes sense for those franchisees that already depend on
their big brand. Do you need a web site? Yes, your web site address is just as
218
How Their Brain Buys . . . You!

important as your actual location.A web site is so important in today’s mar-
ket. Study kevinhogan.com and kevinhogan.net to determine how we have
built the brand “Kevin Hogan.” And how are the two web sites different?
One is designed to sell influence and body language and the real Kevin
Hogan to the public in general (www.kevinhogan.com).The other is de-
signed to sell our services to corporate America (www.kevinhogan.net).
How do you really convince someone that you are the answer to
their problems, especially when you are at point zero? What is point zero?
It’s when you’ve just started a product line or service.You are brand-new
in an industry.
What is it about you that will encourage someone to listen to you in
the first place? If you can’t get someone’s attention you have no opportu-
nity to influence that person in any way. And why should someone pick
you or buy you or buy from you when they have been with someone else
for years? This is a critical question.
There must be a process; and there is:
I You must get their attention.
I You must hold their attention.
I You must have a bold promise.
I You must detach any previous commitment.
I You must overdeliver on the promise.
I They need to be excited to tell lots and lots of people whose atten-
tion you will eventually want (create a mind virus).
Lots of people have skills in their field and lots of people can get peo-
ple’s attention.The big challenge is to ultimately have what it takes to be
skilled and to get the attention of those you want to connect with. It isn’t
going to be easy, is it? But you know what? You can do it.You can become
You Can’t Get to “Yes” If You Can’t Get Their Attention
219
If you can’t get someone’s attention you have no opportunity to
influence that person in any way.

the answer.You can be seen as the obvious go-to guy (gal). Can you guess
what happens when you hit critical mass and everyone knows you are the
go-to guy?
Whether you are trying to win the girl, sell real estate, or heal the
world, there must be a very specific brand image that you must have and
that you must be able to live up to.
“Wait a minute! You said win the girl? Sell real estate? Heal the world?
“I’m not a company or cup of soup; I’m a person!”
And that is why you need to be a powerful brand, easily distinguished
from and a far superior option to those you compete with.You eventually
want to be seen as the obvious choice. If you want to be influential you
want to be the credible, obvious, excellent choice. Period.
Wouldn’t it make life so much easier in every respect if you were
known as the ___________? (You fill in the blank.)
(It would!)
Are you a salesperson?
A manager?
A therapist?
An entrepreneur? (If you are one you are really all of them when you
think about it, and I’m not kidding!)
There is an enormous amount of competition out there and yet the
arena is even bigger. Not only do you need to be able to promote yourself,
but you also must have the character and skills to be among the best in
your field.
What makes a brand is far more than promotion and marketing. It is
the repeated behaviors of individuals over a long period of time. It is the
ingredients in the product. It’s the taste (McDonald’s french fries). It’s the
feel. It’s the look. It’s the sound. If the product is you, it is your character,
attitudes, beliefs, and who you are as a person.
220
How Their Brain Buys . . . You!
What makes a brand is far more than promotion and marketing.

Still don’t get it? Try this:What is it that makes you special and differ-
ent from the rest?
It is your ability to self-promote effectively, efficiently, and at a very
small expense.
I How do you “brand yourself”?
I How do you get people to see “brand you”?
I How do you get people to switch to “you as a brand”?
I How do you develop a long-term relationship with your new
client/customer?
I like to think of salespeople, entrepreneurs, and therapists all as real es-
tate agents.The reason is that the real estate agent can’t sell for long by ac-
cident. That means that the agent can’t earn money without making
contacts and using effort.That is true for all salespeople. It is true for all
successful entrepreneurs and it is true for all successful therapists. In addi-
tion, the real estate agent must keep a crystal-clear middle and long-term
perspective at all times. The agent realizes that all effort done today will
not pay off for 3 to 12 months.Then it is up to the agent to constantly
keep up with every contact and their home needs.
The real estate agent is a metaphor for almost all businesses. Breaking
into real estate, just like starting a therapy practice or your own business or
any sales position, puts you at position zero.You are starting with no con-
tacts where everyone else seems to be and some cases is selling the same
thing you are. Point zero can also mean that you have been in the profes-
sion for 20 years but haven’t been active.
Answer this:Why go with the new guy on the block when there is a
realtor who has sold 150 houses this year and you are looking at his full-
page ad in the yellow pages?
That is a critical question not only for the agent but for every person
who has a service/product and is at point zero or close to it on the map.
The first answer is that by being at point zero, you have time.You
aren’t seeing many clients/customers, so you have time to completely and
fully help anyone and everyone who comes your way. Not only do you
You Can’t Get to “Yes” If You Can’t Get Their Attention
221

have time to help but you have time to build a true relationship with each
client/customer. You have time to do everything you possibly can for
each person you work with while you are at or near point zero.That is a
huge benefit.
Being new in a field (or near point zero) also means that you will
work harder for your client than the guy who had 150 clients last year.
You’ll probably let your buyer see twice as many houses or give your client
an extra half hour per visit when you are new.You are selling service when
you are new.You are selling yourself.
I You care. (You wouldn’t have chosen the profession/business if you
didn’t!)
I You work hard for your clients.
I You find out answers that others won’t/don’t have time to.
I You have time to differentiate yourself from everyone else in
your field, and whatever your field is, there are a lot of them out
there!
I You have time to create a game plan for life and business.
Capturing attention is simple, but it isn’t easy.That means that process
is very doable but it takes effort.Thousands and thousands of commercial
messages compete for your pocketbook.There seems to be more TV sta-
tions available now than there are stars in the sky.These stations all have
thousands of commercials.Then there are radio stations, magazines, news-
papers, and—well, there is a lot of competition for attention.
In a certain sort of backward way, the lack of money to compete with
those with huge advertising budgets can be advantageous. Now, don’t
think I have lost my mind. Ever hear of Chicken Soup for the Soul? No one
made that book a multimillion seller except the two authors. Every day
authors Jack Canfield and Mark Victor Hansen did radio, book signings,
presentations, and classes; they appeared on television.They put the world
on hold and the result of branding themselves well is publishing history.
They started with very little money but had a strong concept of what they
wanted to do.They spent no money on advertising their first book.They
222
How Their Brain Buys . . . You!

put in time and differentiated themselves from every other feel-good book
title out there. It worked.
It doesn’t take money to build success. It does take tenacity.
In fact, most people who have money fall into traps that eventually
suck their money away like a Hoover. Those who actually earn their
money by offering a great product/service/self tend to treat their reward
with respect and tend to achieve long-term success. Money can actually be
an impediment to successfully differentiating yourself. People often believe
they can buy differentiation.They can’t. It takes character and qualities. It
takes true differences. It takes true superiority in some way or ways. (Then
money can be a big help!)
The best way to get attention is to model Canfield and Hansen.
Whether you are a tax accountant, a therapist, or a salesperson, you need to
be out there all the time. That might mean something slightly different
from field to field and profession to profession, but you need to be in front
of your potential client as much as possible.
That is the beginning of accessing the attention you need.
That is the first step.Then you have to keep their attention and make a
big promise.
The Attention Model
Produce or represent a product that meets the needs of a niche market.
There should be a reason that you are different from everyone else. Dif-
ferentiate yourself, or you are the same as every other salesperson out
there. If you sell real estate, specialize in exceptional homes or lakeshore
property. Make your niche specialized so that you can be the go-to per-
son for your market.
Begin to brand yourself—get your face out there.Teach and speak at
The Attention Model
223
It doesn’t take money to build success. It does take tenacity.

book signings, community (adult) education facilities, technical colleges,
and so on.The process of building the brand snowballs.The more people
you are in front of, the more opportunities you have to network and
meet people’s needs, and the more people want you to provide a service
for them.
Public relations means free advertising. Don’t pay for advertising.
There are so many ways out there to get your name before the public for
free—or even get paid to do it. Radio stations are always looking for
guests. Continuing education centers are always looking for experts to
teach on niche topics.Talk before clubs like the Kiwanis, the Optimists, the
Eagles. Don’t promote yourself, but offer an informational flyer for follow-
up with interested parties. Offer real, important information to help peo-
ple, along with your contact information so it’s easy to find you.
Most people’s brands fail. They focus on the marketing and promo-
tion, but fail on the critical factor.You must distinguish yourself from the
rest of the crowd. Remember that you are selling yourself as the brand.
You are the best. Be seen that way!
224
How Their Brain Buys . . . You!
Make your niche specialized so that you can be the go-to person for
your market.

Bibliography
Allesandra, Tony, and Michael J. O’Connor. The Platinum Rule: Do unto
Others As They’d Like Done unto Them. New York:Warner Books, 1996.
Anastasi, Tom. Personality Selling: Selling the Way Customers Want to Buy.
New York: Sterling Publications, 1992.
Andreas, Steve, and Charles Faulkner. NLP:The New Technology of Achieve-
ment. New York:William Morrow, 1994.
Aronson, Elliott. The Social Animal. New York:W. H. Freeman & Company,
1995.
Baber, R. E. Marriage and Family. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1939.
Belsky, Gary, and Thomas Gilovich. Why Smart People Make Big Money
Mistakes and How to Correct Them. New York: Fireside, 1999.
Bernieri, Frank, and Robert Rosenthal.“Interpersonal Coordination, Be-
havior Matching, and Interpersonal Synchrony,” In Robert Feldman
and Bernard Rime, eds., Fundamentals of Nonverbal Behavior. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Bethel, William. 10 Steps to Connecting with Your Customer: Communication
Skills for Selling Your Products, Services, and Ideas. Chicago: Dartnell Cor-
poration, 1995.
Bloom, Howard. The Lucifer Principle:A Scientific Expedition Into the Forces of
History. New York:Atlantic Monthly Press, 1995.
Brodie, Richard. Virus of the Mind:The New Science of the Meme. Integral
Press, 1996.
225

Brooks, Michael. Instant Rapport: The NLP Program That Creates Intimacy,
Persuasiveness, Power! New York:Warner Books, 1989.
Brooks, Michael. The Power of Business Rapport: Use NLP Technology to Make
More Money, Sell Yourself and Your Product, and Move Ahead in Business.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1991.
Burger, Jerry, T. Chartrand, and S. Pinckert. “When Manipulation Back-
fires: The Effects of Time Delay and Requestor on the Foot in the
Door Technique.” Journal of Applied Psychology 29(1) (1999): 211–221.
Buzan,Tony, and Richard Israel. Brain Sell. Brookfield,VT: Gower, 1995.
Byrne, D.“Attitudes and Attraction.” In L. Berkowitz, ed., Advances in Ex-
perimental Social Psychology. (Vol. 4, pp. 35–89). New York: Academic
Press, 1969.
Canfield, Jack, and Mark Victor Hansen. Chicken Soup for the Soul, 10th ed.
Health Communications, 2003.
Carmon, Ziv, and Dan Ariely.“Focusing on the Forgone:Why Value Can
Appear So Different to Buyers and Sellers,” Journal of Consumer Re-
search 27 (December 2000): 360–370.
Cialdini, Robert B. Influence: Science and Practice, rev. ed. New York:William
Morrow, 1993.
Cohen, Allan R., and David L. Bradford. Influence without Authority. New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1991.
Dalet, Kevin, with Emmett Wolfe. Socratic Selling: How to Ask the Questions
That Get the Sale. Chicago: Irwin Professional Publishing, 1996.
Dawson, Roger. Secrets of Power Persuasion: Everything You’ll Ever Need to Get
Anything You’ll Ever Want. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1992.
Dayton, Doug. Selling Microsoft: Sales Secrets from Inside the World’s Most Suc-
cessful Company. Holbrook, MA: Dayton, 1997.
Decker, Bert. You’ve Got to Be Believed to Be Heard: Reach the First Brain
to Communicate in Business and in Life. New York: St. Martin’s Press,
1992.
Dillard, James, J. E Hunter, and M. Burgoon.“A Meta-analysis of Two Se-
quential Request Strategies for Gaining Compliance: Foot in the
Door and Door in the Face.” Human Communication Research 10
(1984): 461–488.
226
Bibliography

Dillard, James, and Michael Pfau. The Persuasion Handbook: Developments in
Theory and Practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2004.
Dwoskin, Hale. The Sedona Method. Sedona,AZ: Sedona Press, 2003.
The Economist.“Persuasion.”(Interviewed quote from Brad Sagarin,Northern
Illinois University). (May 2, 2002).
Farber, Barry J., and Joyce Wycoff. Breakthrough Selling: Customer-Building
Strategies from the Best in the Business. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall, 1992.
Fink, E. L., S.A. Kaplowitz, and S. M. Hubbard.“Oscillation in Beliefs and
Decisions.” Pp. 17–38 in J. P. Dillard, and M. Pfau, (eds.), The Persuasion
Handbook: Developments in Theory and Practice. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications, 2002.
Forgas, Joseph P., and Kipling D.Williams. Social Influence: Direct and Indirect
Processes. Philadelphia: Psychology Press, 2001.
French, Michael. “Physical Appearance and Earnings.” Applied Economics
34(5) (March 20, 2002): 569–572.
Gass, Robert, and John Seiter. Persuasion, Social Influence and Compliance
Gaining. New York:Allyn & Bacon, 2004.
Gilovich,Thomas, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman. Heuristics and Bi-
ases:The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment. New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2004.
Gitomer, Jeffrey. The Sales Bible: The Ultimate Sales Resource. New York:
William Morrow, 1994.
Gregory,W. L., R. B. Cialdini, and K. M. Carpenter.“Self-Relevant Scenar-
ios as Mediators of Likelihood Estimates and Compliance: Does Imag-
ing Make It So?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 43 (1982):
89–99.
Hamer, Dean. Living with Our Genes:Why They Matter More Than You Think.
New York: Doubleday, 1998.
Hoffer, Eric. The True Believer. New York: HarperCollins, 1954.
Hogan, Kevin. Covert Hypnosis:An Operator’s Manual. Eagan, MN: Network
3000 Publishing, 2003.
Hogan, Kevin. Irresistible Attraction: Secrets of Personal Magnetism. Eagan,
MN: Network 3000 Publishing, 2000.
Bibliography
227

Hogan, Kevin. New Hypnotherapy Handbook. Eagan, MN: Network 3000
Publishing, 1998.
Hogan, Kevin. The Psychology of Persuasion: How to Persuade Others to Your
Way of Thinking. Gretna, LA: Pelican Publishing Company, 1996.
Hogan, Kevin. The Science of Influence (CD Program) Eagan, MN: Network
3000 Publishing, 2004.
Hogan, Kevin. Talk Your Way to the Top. Gretna, LA: Pelican Publishing,
1998.
Hogan, Kevin, with Wil Horton. Selling Yourself to Others. Gretna, LA: Peli-
can Publishing, 2003.
Hogan, Kevin, with Mary Lee LaBay. Irresistible Attraction: Secrets of Personal
Magnetism. Eagan, MN: Network 3000 Publishing, 2001.
Hogan, Kevin with Mary Lee LeBay. Through the Open Door: Secrets of Self-
Hypnosis. Gretna, LA: Pelican Publishing Company, 2000.
Holt, Charles. Markets, Games and Strategic Behavior: Recipes for Interactive
Learning. University of Virginia, 2003.
Johnson, Kerry L. Sales Magic: Revolutionary New Techniques That Will Double
Your Sales Volume in 21 Days. New York:William Morrow, 1994.
Johnson, Kerry L. Subliminal Selling Skills. New York:AMACOM, 1988.
Kahneman, D., J. L. Kntesch, and R.Thaler.“Anomalies:The Endowment
Effect, Loss Aversion, Status Quo Bias.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
5: 193–206.
Kahneman, D., P. Slovic, and A. Tversky, eds. Judgment under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1982 (ab-
breviated KST).
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. Choices, Values and Frames. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2000.
Kennedy, Daniel S. The Ultimate Sales Letter, 2nd ed. Avon, MA: Adams
Media Corporation, 2000.
Kent, Robert Warren. The Art of Persuasion. Surfside, FL: Lee Institute,
1963.
Knapp, Mark, and Judy Hall. Nonverbal Communication in Human Interaction,
3rd ed. Fort Worth,TX: Harcourt Brace College Publications, 1992.
228
Bibliography

Knight, Sue. NLP at Work:The Difference That Makes a Difference in Business.
Sonoma, CA: Nicholas Brealey Publishing, 1995.
Knowles, Eric, and Jay Linn. Resistance and Persuasion. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2004.
Kostere, Kim. Get the Results You Want:A Systematic Approach to NLP. Port-
land, OR: Metamorphous Press, 1989.
Krosnick, Jon. Rethinking the Vote:The Politics and Prospects of American Elec-
tion Reform (Oxford University Press).
Lavington, Camille, with Stephanie Losee. You’ve Only Got Three Seconds:
How to Make the Right Impression in Your Business and Social Life. New
York: Doubleday, 1997.
Lewis, David. The Secret Language of Success: Using Body Language to Get
What You Want. New York: Carroll & Graf, 1990.
Linden,Anne, with Kathrin Perutz. Mindworks: Unlock the Promise Within—
NLP Tools for Building a Better Life. Kansas City, MO:Andrews McMeel
Publishing, 1997.
Lynn, M., and R. Gregor.“Tipping and Service:The Case of Hotel Bell-
men.” International Journal of Hospitality Management 20 (2001): 299.
Lynn, M., and K. Mynier. “Effect of Server Posture on Restaurant Tip-
ping.” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 23 (1993): 678–685.
Lynn, M., and T. Simons.“Predictors of Male and Female Servers’Average
Tip Earnings.” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 30 (2000): 241–252.
McCroskey, J. C., and T. J.Young. “Ethos and Credibility: The Construct
and Its Measurement after Three Decades. Central States Speech Journal.
32 (1981): 24–34.
McNeil, B.J., S.G. Pauker, H.C. Sox, and A.Tversky.“On the Elicitation of
Preferences for Alternative Therapies.” New England Journal of Medicine
306 1982: 1259–1262.
Mehrabian, Albert. Silent Messages: Implicit Communication of Emotions and
Attitudes. Belmost, CA:Wadsworth, 1981.
Mills, J., and E.Aronson.“Opinion Change as a Function of the Commu-
nicator’s Attractiveness and Desire to Influence.” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology I, (1965): 173–177.
Bibliography
229

Moine, Donald J., and John H. Herd. Modern Persuasion Strategies:The Hid-
den Advantage in Selling. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1984.
Moine, Donald J., and Kenneth Lloyd. Unlimited Selling Power: How to Mas-
ter Hypnotic Selling Skills. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1990.
Myers, David G. Intuition: Its Powers and Perils. New Haven:Yale University
Press, 2003.
O’Keefe, Daniel J. Persuasion: Theory and Research. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications, 1990; rev. ed. 2003.
Ornish, Dean. Love and Survival. New York: Perennial Books, 1999.
Overstreet, H.A. Influencing Human Behavior. New York: Norton, 1925.
Patton, Forrest H. Force of Persuasion: Dynamic Techniques for Influencing Peo-
ple. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1986.
Peoples, David. Selling to the Top. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1993.
Perloff, Richard. The Dynamics of Persuasion. Hillside, NJ: Lawrence Erl-
baum Associates Publishers, 1993.
Piirto, Rebecca. Beyond Mind Games:The Marketing Power of Psychographics.
Ithaca, NY:American Demographic Books, 1991.
Plous, Scot. The Psychology of Judgement and Decision Making. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1993.
Qubein, Nido. Professional Selling Techniques: Strategies and Tactics to Boost Your
Selling Skills and Build Your Career. Rockville Centre, NY: Farnsworth
Publishing Company, 1983.
Redelmeier, D., J. Katz, and D. Kahneman.“Memories of Colonoscopy:A
Randomized Trial.” Pain. 104(1–2) (2003): 187–194.
Richardson, Jerry. The Magic of Rapport. Capitola, CA: Meta Publications,
1988.
Robbins,Anthony. Unlimited Power. New York: Fawcett, 1987.
Robertson, James E. Selling the Mind’s Eye:What They Didn’t Teach You in
Sales Training. Portland, OR: Metamorphous Press, 1990.
Romano, S.T., and J. E. Bordieri.“Physical Attractiveness Stereotypes and
Students’ Perceptions of College Professors.” Psychological Reports 64(3,
Pt 2) (1989): 1099–1102.
Rosenthal, R., and L. Jacobson.“Pygmalion Effects: Existence, Magnitude,
and Social Importance.” Educational Researcher 16 (1987): 37–40.
230
Bibliography

Rosenthal, R., and L. Jacobson. Pygmalion in the Classroom:Teacher Expecta-
tion and Pupils’ Intellectual Development. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, 1968.
Ryan, R. M., and J. H. Lynch. (1989). “Emotional Autonomy versus De-
tachment: Revisiting the Vicissitudes of Adolescence and Young Adult-
hood. Child Development, 60: 340–356.
Sadovsky, Marvin C., and Jon Caswell. Selling the Way Your Customer Buys:
Understand Your Prospects’ Unspoken Needs and Close Every Sale. New
York:AMACOM, 1996.
Schwartz, Barry. The Paradox of Choice:Why More Is Less. New York: Ecco
Publishing, 2004.
Sherman, S. J., M.T. Crawford, and A. R. McConnell.“Looking Ahead as a
Technique to Reduce Resistance to Persuasive Attempts.” (2002)
Chapter 8 in E. S. Knowles and J. A. Linn, eds., Resistance and Persua-
sion. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2004.
Strack, F., and T. Mussweiler. (1997).“Explaining the Enigmatic Anchoring
Effect: Mechanisms of Selective Accessibility.” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 73: 437–446.
Strohmetz, D., B. Rind, R. Fisher, and M. Lynn. (2002). “Sweetening the
Till:The Use of Candy to Increase Restaurant Tipping.” Journal of Ap-
plied Social Psychology 32(2): 300–309.
Thaler, Richard. The Winner’s Curse: Paradoxes and Anomalies of Economic
Life. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992.
Thompson, George J., and Jerry B. Jenkins. Verbal Judo:The Gentle Art of
Persuasion. New York:William Morrow, 1993.
Tracy, Brian. Advanced Selling Strategies: The Proven System of Sales Ideas,
Methods, and Techniques Used by Top Salespeople Everywhere. New York:
Fireside, 1995.
Tversky,Amos, and Daniel Kahneman.“Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice:
A Reference Dependent Model” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(4)
1991: 1039–1061.
Tykocinski, O. E. and T. S. Pittman.“The Consequences of Doing Noth-
ing: Inaction Inertia as Avoidance of Anticipated Regret.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 75 (1998): 607–616.
Bibliography
231

Vitale, Joe. The Seven Lost Secrets of Success. Houston:VistaTron, 1994.
Wegner, Daniel. The Illusion of Conscious Will. Cambridge: Bradford Books,
MIT Press, 2002.
Weiner, David, and Gilbert Hefter. Battling the Inner Dummy:The Craziness
of Apparently Normal People. New York: Prometheus Books, 1999.
Willingham, Ron. The Best Seller:The New Psychology of Selling and Persuad-
ing People. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1984
Wilson, Timothy D. Strangers to Ourselves: Discovering the Adaptive Uncon-
scious. Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University, 2002.
Witte, K., and M.Allen.“A Meta Analysis of Fear Appeals: Implications for
Effective Public Health Campaigns.” Health, Education and Behavior 27
(2000): 291–615.
Zimbardo, Philip G. The Psychology of Attitude Change and Social Influence.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991.
232
Bibliography

Index
233
Advertising, 218–219, 224
Alpha strategy, 98
Amendment technique, 124–125
Anchoring, 210–212
Appealing to many or greater cause,
76–77
Appearance:
beauty, enjoyment of,
22–23
first impression and, 17–19,
20
improving, 24–25
power of, 21
rapport and, 34–35
See also Attractiveness
Arguing against point of view, 65,
146
Arousal, 54–55
Association, law of, 151–152
Associative errors, 210–211
Attention:
getting, 218–223
paying, 45–46
Attractiveness:
communication with expert and,
51–52
confidence and, 24
culture and, 23
gender differences and, 21,
24
perceived level of, 20–21
See also Appearance
Authority, 54
Average Joe (TV show), 195–196
Beauty, enjoyment of, 22–23
Behavior:
changing to change attitude,
72–74
drivers of, 182–183
environment and, 10–13
Beliefs:
changing, 163
emulating, 29
Bellmen, 96
Boot camp, 10–11

Brand:
establishing, 220–221, 223–224
purchasing, 213–215
Breathing, 35, 39
Brodie, Richard, 89, 90
Building:
rapport, 30, 34–38
success, 222–223
Bush, George W., 26–27, 167,
207–208
Central cues, 47–48
Change:
of behavior before attitude, 72–74
habit, forming new, 2–3
long-term, 1–2
three ways to, 10–13
unconscious mind and, 3–6
Charisma, 156
Checklisting, 56
Choice:
decision making and number of
choices, 70–72, 87
framing and, 108–111
problems of, 195–202
reduction of, 191–194, 198
Claims, unusual, 55
Cognitive dissonance, 70–72
Comfort and rapport, 32–34
Commitment, gaining, 179–180
Communication:
authentic, 35
fluid, 64
mixed messages in, 16
nonverbal, 25–28
Competence and credibility, 58–60
Competition and survival, 77–78
Compliance:
increasing, 91–95
specific instructions and, 103–106
Conflict, internal, 5
Conformity, law of, 155–156
Conscious mind:
description of, 3–6, 175–176
group setting and, 79
saying “no” and, 182
Consistency:
conformity compared to,
155
law of, 92, 149–151
Content, using to build rapport,
36–37
Contrast, law of, 142–145
Credentials and credibility, 61–62
Credibility:
characteristics of, 60–61
credentials and, 61–62
increasing, 62–65
message and, 54
perception of, 57
as pivot point, 58–61
Decision making:
emotion and, 194
factors in, 125–127
fear of loss compared to
possibility of gain, 69–70, 74
game for, 68–69
judgment, perception of,
127–128
234
Index

number of choices and, 70–72,
87
overrating expert advice, 128
probability and, 128–131
process of, 8–9
regret and, 197
unconscious mind and, 216
See also Oscillation
Delta Model of Influence:
attention, paying, 45–46
breathing, 39
common enemy, finding, 43
content, using, 36–37
establishing and maintaining
rapport, 36
giving more than promised, 44,
45
knocking socks off, 44
leading, 40–41
overview of, 31
pacing, 38
posture and physiology, matching,
40
precision, 45
processes, using, 37–38
reciprocity, inducing, 41–42
respect, 44
sharing part of self with client,
42–43
stories, telling, 43
understatement, power of,
44–45
voice, using, 38–39, 40–41
Differentiation, 223
Directing thinking, 55
Dramatic difference, 50
Dress, 29, 34–35
Drivers of behavior, 182–183
Emotion:
decision making and, 194
predicting, 92–95
See also Feelings
Endowment effect, 74–76
Enemy in common, finding,
43
Environment and behavior,
10–13
Erickson, Milton, 123
Ethics, 104–105, 170, 171
Evidence, citing, 65
Exaggeration, 203–204
Expectancy, law of, 147–148
Experiencing product, 217–218
Eye level, women and, 30
Fear:
of loss compared to possibility of
gain, 69–70
as motivator, 104–105
FEAR (false evidence appearing
real), 6
Feelings:
about past mistakes, 201
creating positive, 179
trusting, 176–178
See also Emotion
Financial products, applying 
laws to, 138, 144, 147,
154
Index
235

First impressions:
example of, 19–21
overview of, 15–19
preparing to make positive, 29–30
Flagging, 205–212
Focus groups, 215–217
Football games, handicapping,
162
Foot in the door (FITD) technique,
111–114
Framing:
choices and, 108–111
game for, 107–108
increasing persuasiveness with,
115–118
questions, 68–69
Freedom, threats to, 175–177
Friends, law of, 145–147
Future:
agreeing to event in, 184–187
imagining, 100–103
pointing to possible, 190
predicting, 9–10, 94–95
thinking of, 141
Gender differences:
attractiveness and, 21, 24
eye level and, 30
Gifts, 42
Gitomer, Jeffrey, 90
Giving more than promised, 44,
45
Gore, Al, 26–27, 207–208
Groupthink, 78–79
Habit, forming new, 2–3
Humor, using, 65
Hypnotic confusion, 123–124
Inaction inertia, 110
Influence and Persuasion Quotient
(IPQ) test, 83–87
Instructions, giving, 103–106
Intuition, 181
Journaling, 9, 195
Judgment, perception of, 127–128
Knocking socks off, 44
Knowing when enough is enough,
48–49, 52
Knowledge:
prior, speaking to, 51
of self, 6, 7–8
Large numbers, principle of, 78–79
Laws of influence:
association, 151–152
conformity, 155–156
consistency, 149–151
contrast, 142–145
expectancy, 147–148
friends, 145–147
overview of, 133–134
power, 156–157
reciprocity, 135–139
scarcity, 153–155
time, 139–142
Leading, 35, 40–41
236
Index

Lee, Mary, 89–90
Likability, 65
Limited-supply frame, 153–154
Loss aversion, 116, 121–122
Loyalty to brand, 215
Meet John Doe (movie), 171–172
Memes, 51
Memory:
as changing, 207–208
of end of experience, 189–190
false, 7, 189, 205–206, 213–214
flagging, 208–211
of opinions, 206–207
Message:
credibility and, 54
mixed, in communication, 16
repeatable, 51
repetition of, 50
See also Optimizing persuasive
message
Mind, see Conscious mind;
Unconscious mind
Mind reading:
ethical use of good intelligence,
170–171
model for, 173–174
overview of, 169–170
in twenty-first century, 172–173
Money-back guarantee, 199
Need for someone to love, principle
of, 79–80
Nervousness, handling, 30
Niche market, 223
Nonverbal communication:
influential space, 26–28
as unconscious, 25–26
“No” response, overcoming,
187–191
Omega strategy:
definition of, 88
mastering, 95–98
overcoming resistance with,
91–95
Opportunity, passing up, 199
Optimizing persuasive message:
arousal, 54–55
authority, 54
checklisting, 56
claims, unusual, 55
directed thinking, 55
dramatic difference, 50
knowing when enough is
enough, 48–49, 52
peripheral and central cues,
47–48
physical attractiveness and, 51–52
primacy and listing order, 46–47
prior knowledge, 51
repeatable message, 51
repetition, 50
self-referencing, 52–54
Oscillation:
arbitrary decision point and,
162–163, 166–167
examples of, 159–162, 167–168
Index
237

Oscillation (Continued)
in extraordinary circumstances,
164–165
overview of, 159
public statements and, 163–164
regret and, 165
Pace, speaking and listening, 30, 35,
38–39, 64
Pacing, 35, 38–40
Past, experience of, 140
Peripheral cues, 47–48, 49, 53
Personality, dual nature of, 6–10
Persuasion,Tenth Law of, 99
Persuasive message, see Optimizing
persuasive message
Physiology, see Posture
Placebo effect, 148
Point of view, arguing against, 65,
146
Point zero, starting at, 221–222
Polarity response, 88, 92–93
Posture:
leading with, 41
matching, 35, 40
Power:
of choice reduction, 191–194
law of, 156–157
Precision, 45
Predicting future, 9–10, 94–95
Present, experience of, 141–142
Price points, 125
Primacy and listing order, 46–47,
118–123
Priming pump, 118–123, 210–211
Principles of influence, 80–81
Processes, using to build rapport,
37–38
“Puppy dog” close, 74
Rapport:
building, 30
comfort and, 32–34
content, using to build, 36–37
definition of, 33
establishing and maintaining, 36
keys to, 32
nonverbal skills for building,
34–36
processes, using to build, 37–38
Rationalization, 121–122
Reactance:
compliance and, 93, 94
description of, 88, 90
Real estate, applying laws of
influence to, 138, 144, 147, 154
Reciprocity:
inducing, 41–42
law of, 135–139
Regret:
accomplishment and, 200
anticipated, 90, 92, 105–106
blackjack and, 200–201
decision making and, 197
oscillation and, 165
Repeatable message, 51
Repetition of message, 50
Representation of reality, 202–205
238
Index

Resistance:
omega strategies for, 91–95
reducing, 88–90
types of, 90–91
using up resources for, 98–99
Respect, 44
Rituals and attitude change, 75
Rules, cultural, 11
Scarcity, principle of, 101, 153–155
Scope neglect, 203–205
Self, knowledge of, 6, 7–8
Self-referencing, 52–54
Sharing part of self with client,
42–43
Space, influential, 26–28
Speed dating, 19–21
Status and attraction, 17
Status quo and unconscious mind,
181
Stewart, Martha, 63
Stories, telling, 43
Strategy compared to tactic, 47
Strong Funds, 137
Success, building, 222–223
Tactic compared to strategy, 47
Testimonials, 152
Thinking:
counterfactual, 111
directing, 55
of future, 141
groupthink, 78–79
Time, law of, 139–142
Time perspective, 99–103
Time Track Therapy Intervention,
101
Trust and branding, 214–215
Unconscious mind:
change and, 3–6
decision making and,
216
focusing on, 217–218
in group setting, 79
overview of, 175–176
status quo and, 180–181
Understatement, power of, 44–45
Value, overestimation of, 115
Values:
asking about, 33
emulating, 29
Voice, using, 38–39, 40–41
Waiters and waitresses, 96–97,
98
Web site:
of author, 83, 84
importance of, 218–219
Writing decision down, 150–151,
197
Index
239


Need a Speaker?
Kevin is a guaranteed victory for your meeting and will leave your group
motivated with new knowledge and skills. He has spoken throughout the
world from Sydney, Australia to Warsaw, Poland. Call Kevin personally at
(612) 616-0732 and discuss your next meeting with Kevin.Visit Kevin on
the web: www.KevinHogan.com.
241

