
The Essentials of
Managing Programmes
This indispensable handbook details the practical steps that can lead to success
in programme management. Accelerating change has demanded that companies
and organisations use programme management methods and techniques to
eﬀect it. John Bartlett provides the beneﬁt of his deep involvement in mana-
ging large-scale change, where his advice and guidance have proved successful
for both the private and public sectors of commerce and industry.
The book is compatible with several existing frameworks, not least the UK
government’s Managing Successful Programmes approach. It is arranged with-
out cumbersome theory but presents just the essentials needed for good prac-
tice. The Essentials of Managing Programmes is recommended reading in many
universities and the Association for Project Management.
Pick up and use this concise, intensely practical guide to develop a shared
understanding, shared language and shared purpose in all your programmes;
across project managers, sponsors, programme board members and all those
involved in or aﬀected by organizational transformation.
John Bartlett is an author with deep business experience of directing change
through projects and programmes. He is a Fellow of he Association for Project
Management and has written widely on the subject including three books, on
risk management, programme management and quality management.

The Essentials of Project and Programme Management
Over the last ﬁfteen years projects and programmes have become part of the
everyday activities of organizations large and small. Understanding the essentials
of how to plan projects, manage programmes or handle risk represents knowl-
edge and skills that have moved beyond the purview of specialist project
managers into the world of the generalists. Books in The Essentials of Project and
Programme Management series are written for project sponsors, project team
members, project owners, new project managers and others who work on the
periphery of projects or are drawn into project teams on a temporary basis. The Series
is characterised by very readable, concise and applied books that provide an
essential grounding in the context, skills and behaviours associated with successful
project working.
The Essentials of Project Management 4e
Dennis Lock
The Essentials of Managing Programmes 6e
John Bartlett
The Essentials of Managing Risk in Projects and Programmes 3e
John Bartlett
The Essentials of Managing Quality in Projects and Programmes 2e
John Bartlett

The Essentials of
Managing Programmes
Sixth edition
John Bartlett

Sixth edition published 2017
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2017 John Bartlett
The right of John Bartlett to be identiﬁed as author of this work has been
asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and explanation without
intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
ISBN: 978-1-138-28828-7 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-28829-4 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-26800-2 (ebk)
Typeset in Bembo
by Taylor & Francis Books

Contents
List of illustrations
vi
Preface
viii
1 Introduction
1
2 Applicability to business
9
3 Moving from Business Strategy to Programme Design
17
4 Organising a programme
29
5 Supporting the programme
43
6 Managing risk
56
7 Beneﬁts management
69
8 Using soft systems thinking in programme management
80
9 Programme governance
87
10 Communication management
96
11 Conclusion
101
Bibliography
103
Index
104

List of illustrations
Figures
1.1
Graduated examples of business projects and programmes
6
2.1
Flow of business change from aims to operation
9
2.2
The Corporate Programme Oﬃce as a change ﬁlter
11
2.3
Schematic of a typical e-commerce programme
12
3.1
The three stages of programme inception
18
3.2
Schematic of a portfolio of company change
18
3.3
Extract from a Change Blueprint schematic of change vehicles
19
4.1
A typical Programme Executive
31
4.2
Typical large programme organisation
41
5.1
Summary of common Programme Oﬃce elements
51
6.1
Eight things to get right
58
6.2
The contractual divide
59
6.3
Example of using risk analysis for deciding the best of
two options
65
6.4
The link between exceptions and the relative cost of dealing
with each
66
7.1
Beneﬁts systemigram for part of an e-commerce programme
71
7.2
Contributors to beneﬁts achievement
73
7.3
Proﬁle of departmental track record
78
8.1
Example of a conceptual model for a programme blueprint for
changing a services business
81
8.2
Using root deﬁnition components as a foundation for a
conceptual map
83
8.3
Alternative approach to mapping risk pathways
8
8.4
Example of a risk pathway from cause to consequences
85
9.1
Outline governance information ﬂow
87
9.2
Sample dashboard page
88
9.3
Beneﬁts dilution from planned beneﬁts to realisation
91
4

Tables
1.1
Main diﬀerences between a project and a programme
4
2.1
Costs of programmes
14
2.2
Measurement of beneﬁts
15
3.1
Typical contents of a Blueprint for Change
20
3.2
Typical contents of a Business Case
21
3.3
Example of the hierarchy of goals and objectives from Business
Strategy to Project
24
3.4
A programme and its projects divided into tranches
26
4.1
Typical quality areas in a business and IT programme
33
4.2
Summary of Programme Executive roles
36
5.1
Complementary activities of a Project Manager and the
Programme Oﬃce
45
9.1
Framework for governance
93
9.2
Sample ﬁlled framework
94
10.1 Typical contents of a Communication Plan
97
10.2 Example of summary activities from a Communication Plan
99
List of illustrations
vii

Preface
Since the ﬁrst publication of my book Managing Programmes of Business Change I
have been privileged to witness or be part of some of the 20th century’s most
signiﬁcant programmes, such as the year 2000 problem and the implementation
of the euro. Since the 1990s, programme management has evolved and
matured and programmes have become increasingly whole-company or global.
Now in the 21st century, companies and organisations know they must
embrace techniques and methodologies that will enable them to implement
and react to change with rapidity and assurance. Whether a programme is to
build a new town or to take a business to a new level, the need for structure
and control is paramount.
The concept of programme management as a structure for strategic change is
now ﬁrmly embedded in many organisations. It ﬁts well with the discipline of
change management, which concerns itself with the strategy and feasibility of
desired change and also with project management, which is needed to build
the desired change.
I hope that this present volume will contribute from a practical point of view
and give guidance that will enable companies and organisations to execute
successful programmes and to produce their own corporate change structures
and programme management templates.
John Bartlett, BA Hons (Lond), FRGS, FRSA,
Hon. FAPM, CPM, LTCL, ALCM, LLCM

1
Introduction
Programme management is now an important and recognised management
technique in the world of business change. Since the publication of the ﬁrst
serious book on programme management by the UK government in 1994 (A
Guide to Programme Management, CCTA, UK), interest in the subject has
burgeoned. Subsequent editions of this book, published as Managing Successful
Programmes, have maintained the demand for further knowledge.
During the 1990s government organisations needed to respond to National
Audit Oﬃce concerns over the failure of several high-proﬁle change projects,
whilst the need to have a structured approach in order to manage business change
became an increasing requirement of blue chip enterprises. The 1990s also saw
mergers and acquisitions on an unprecedented scale, and businesses had to
embark on holistic restructuring following the world-wide recessions of the
early part of the decade. Holistic change has continued into the 21st century
with further large-scale mergers, acquisitions and business recessions. To
manage change of this magnitude, programme management has become the de
facto approach, even though, in its embryonic state, debate continues over its
essential elements. The main principles, however, are fairly well established,
and debate over the next few years will surely centre on pinning down the
terminology and ﬁne-tuning its approach.
A key area of debate has been the diﬀerences between programme manage-
ment and project management. This is where many people ﬁnd diﬃculty,
particularly in making the important decision whether a desired business change
should be structured as a programme or a project. The deﬁnitions given later in
this chapter set out the essential diﬀerences, and should leave the reader in no
doubt about how to make the right decision.
It is ironic that the ﬁrst real test of programme management in recent years
came not from the inﬂuences mentioned earlier but from a decision made years
ago by computer programmers to code years using only two digits. This Year
2000 problem, or the failure of many computers and computer programs to
properly recognise dates in the year 2000 and beyond, had major implications
for business and government. The test was signiﬁcant for programme manage-
ment because the problem aﬀected every part of a company’s organisation, and
enormous resources had to be marshalled to tackle it. Programme management

was recognised as a key approach for solving this problem, and year 2000
programmes were implemented on an unprecedented scale world-wide. There
are many who would decry the enormous cost and eﬀort involved in solving
the year 2000 problem, but millions of lines of code were changed, and the fact
that the millennium passed without any serious computing incident bears
testimony to the eﬀort and cost expended.
The lessons learned from the year 2000 have had to be applied with equal
vigour to other examples of whole-company change, such as the preparation for
the euro, customer relationship management (CRM) programmes, e-commerce
programmes, mergers and acquisitions, and enterprise resource management
(ERM) programmes. Whilst the year 2000 programmes were driven from
technical problems, these later programmes were undertaken for business or
legislative reasons, and reﬂect the diverse changes now regularly occurring
world-wide. Electronic commerce, for example, challenges the way companies
trade and operate. Much of this change can only be tackled at a programme
level.
Undoubtedly, the ﬁrst decades of the new millennium will see further large-
scale business change, as companies ﬁght for product and service supremacy,
increased market share and increased proﬁtability. Programme management
will have to become a much more sophisticated discipline in order to tackle the
complexities of this accelerating change. Forces such as the Internet, e-commerce,
social networking and digital money will signiﬁcantly change working habits and
patterns, and management techniques will have to cater for these revolutionary
changes.
Programme management is not a methodology in the way that project
management can be. It is rather a framework that acts as guidance for good
practice. This book is one of these. Its guidance is taken from tough practice,
and there is nothing mentioned in terms of technique that has not been tried
successfully, and on some large and complex programmes.
What deﬁnes a programme?
Several deﬁnitions of a programme exist currently, each oﬀering a diﬀering per-
spective on a similar theme, i.e. that a programme is a collection of vehicles for
change, designed to achieve a strategic objective. Programme management is the
approach taken to manage a programme, which may comprise the employment
of a management method or selection of appropriate management techniques.
In many deﬁnitions, vehicles for change is often substituted by projects, but in
the author’s experience, projects are not the only change vehicles. Incremental
and operational change can be accomplished that does not require the discipline
of a project to carry out the change. These can still be validly part of a programme,
particularly if undertaken as preparatory measures, like an investigation, study
or questionnaire survey.
The word collection is important, since in a programme the vehicles for
change are often not physically related to each other, unlike sub-projects
2
Introduction

within a project. For example, a project to ﬁt out a new warehouse and an
investigation into the number of customers with an “A” credit rating are not
obviously related vehicles for change, but they could be parts of an overall
business programme to diversify product supply. Thus, although each vehicle
may be physically diﬀerent, it relates to the programme through its contribu-
tion to the overall strategic objective. Also, projects within a programme often
depend on synergy. One project might only be successful if other projects are
completed in a certain way. A programme is an ideal vehicle for the management
of such synergy.
In a project, sub-projects are traditionally formed from discrete pieces of
work from a work breakdown structure. They are typically related to the
design, development and implementation phases of a project and not just the
end objective. Thus, a project to ﬁt out a new warehouse may contain sub-
projects such as trunking and cabling, ﬁtments construction, warehouse operations and
goods inwards handling. These are clearly related to each other throughout var-
ious phases of the project’s lifespan. The warehouse ﬁt-out project is not rela-
ted in the same way to other projects or change vehicles in the product supply
programme, such as a project to implement an ordering process via the Inter-
net. However, both projects, if implemented, would contribute to the overall
programme’s strategic objective.
Most deﬁnitions agree on the business objective goal, whether the actual words
used are strategic business objective, strategy, goal or aim. Programme man-
agement is at a state currently where deﬁnitions are still somewhat ﬂuid. This is
no surprise, as even a more mature discipline such as project management may
have many deﬁnitions.
Programmes exhibit certain characteristics, which some people like to
include as part of the deﬁnition. These relate often to the longevity of pro-
grammes or their position within a company. It is true that programmes tend to
be longer in duration than projects, and may, in fact, be self-perpetuating or
ongoing. Certainly, they tend to have higher focus within a company because
they are strategic, and are usually applicable to not lower than departmental
level. It is the author’s opinion, however, that any deﬁnition of programme
should be kept as simple as possible, and favours the deﬁnition of a business
programme as a collection of vehicles for change, designed to achieve a strategic business
objective.
Table 1.1 summarises the main diﬀerences between a project and a pro-
gramme, which are covered in detail under the relevant chapters in this book.
Whereas projects tend to have a singular focus and deliver to speciﬁc objec-
tives, programmes tend to take a wider view and deliver a multiplicity of
objectives towards the achievement of a business strategy. The construction of
the Channel Tunnel, linking England to France, for example, might have been
conceived by some as a large project, but in reality it was a major programme
of change. The act of digging the tunnel was just one major project within this
programme. Whereas this project’s objective was to dig the tunnel, the pro-
gramme supported the strategic objective of providing a fast and continuous rail
Introduction
3

link from the UK to the Continent. Other projects within the programme
included the UK high-speed rail link, the construction of the international
terminals at Ashford and Ebbsﬂeet, marketing, ticketing, support operations,
customs changes and French link-ups to major European rail routes. The tunnel
has been operational for several years and many of the projects have been
completed, but the original programme was only completed with the opening
of the high-speed line from St Pancras Station. Had the strategy been con-
ceived originally as a programme and not just as individual projects, the
important sponsorship, funding and economies of scale might have been better
achieved. A programme could also have stayed in place to accommodate further
enhancements in an evolving strategy. Piecemeal development is always more
costly in the long term.
In another example, the hosting of the London 2012 Olympic Games was
deliberately established as a programme from the outset and closely followed
the UK government’s Managing Successful Programmes (MSP)1 framework.
Within the programme were several major construction projects, not least the
clearing of the existing industrial site and construction of the Olympic Park.
However, the scope of the programme not only included the ability to host a
successful Olympic Games but also the renovation of the site for future
housing and parkland. In typical programme format, contracts for various con-
struction projects were only issued by the programme when ready. This
enabled appropriate phasing to be accomplished and to incorporate lessons
learned along the way.
Table 1.1 Main diﬀerences between a project and a programme
Project
Programme
Chapter
Focus is on a single objective,
usually non-strategic
Focus is on a business strategy, always
strategic
1, 2
The change that a project seeks to
bring about is narrow
The change that a programme seeks
to bring about is wide ranging
1, 2
Beneﬁts are delivered through a
single undertaking and accrue
usually only after its completion
Beneﬁts are delivered incrementally
by projects and other change vehicles
during the lifespan of the programme
7
Main deliverables tend to be few
Main deliverables tend to be many
3
Timescale is usually rigidly deﬁned
Timescale is loosely deﬁned, with
some exceptions
2, 3
Scope changes are managed as
exceptional events
A programme is designed for scope
changes
1, 2
Sub-projects are related to project
outcome and to themselves
Projects and other change vehicles
are related to programme outcome,
but may be otherwise unrelated
1
A project is organised usually
into sponsor, project manager,
sub-project managers and team
A programme is organised usually
into programme manager, executive
team and project managers
4
4
Introduction

Another key diﬀerence between a project and a programme relates to the
achievement of beneﬁts. Beneﬁts are achieved during the life of a programme,
as completing projects are decommissioned and new ones commissioned. In a
project, beneﬁts only usually accrue once the project has been completed, and
after the project team has been disbanded few organisations seriously put into
practice a beneﬁts management regime. A programme, however, is an ideal
vehicle for monitoring the achievement of beneﬁts. If a particular completed
project did not achieve its desired outcome after a period of time, the programme
can commission another project to take corrective action.
Scope changes are exceptional events in projects, the scope having been
agreed, signed oﬀand frozen for development; but a programme should be
designed for change – its longevity makes scope changes both inevitable and
desirable. The ability to turn a programme around and change direction is a
master stroke of management, and is facilitated through a ﬂexible organisation
structure. Thus, the organisation of a programme is diﬀerent from a project,
reﬂecting the diﬀerent perspectives of the strategic business objective and the
singular objective, and the level at which programmes and projects tend to sit
within a company structure.
Throughout the following chapters these key diﬀerences between project
and programme will be exempliﬁed. However, understanding the diﬀerences is
one thing. Being able to decide whether a piece of change should be executed
via a project or a programme is another! The next section deals with this
decision problem.
Project or programme?
Identifying whether a particular idea for change is a project or programme is an
important undertaking, since the right management approach needs to be
adopted to ensure the change has a good chance of success. Sometimes it is
glaringly obvious, other times more complex. There are no hard and fast rules
for every business situation, but some good general guidelines can be compiled.
Normally, diﬃculty will only be encountered with large pieces of change,
where the choice is between commissioning a large, complex project or a
programme.
Figure 1.1 shows some examples of business change, categorised as projects
or programmes. Those shown as projects could either stand alone or be part of
a programme. Local conditions of scope and scale will dictate which of these
undertakings are projects or programmes, though size is not the key criterion.
A large project could be larger than a programme in terms of resources, cost or
scope, but a programme has the characteristics of being complex and multi-
disciplinary rather than large in size. The choice of project or programme
becomes greyer towards the centre of the diagram, and some could equally be
both. The problem is that all the projects shown could also be part of a larger
programme anyway, so the choice must always be made by asking the ques-
tion: What is the strategy? The answer to this question will decide whether a
Introduction
5

LESS COMPLEX -
MORE COMPLEX
LESS COMPLEX -
MORE COMPLEX
Marketing
Workflow
Product
Whole Company
Business
Event
Assessment
Development
Re-organisation
Process
Re-engineering
Sales
Re-organise
New IT
De-merger
Conference
Department
Platform
New Airport
Catalogue
Upgrade
New
Introduce
Establish
Launch
Power
Ordering
Knowledge
Joint-Venture
Cabinets
Process
Management
Local
New
Stock
Company
Business
Software
Accounting
Market
Relocation
Globalisation
Upgrade
System
Flotation
Business
Switch From
Re-surface
Trade
Office
Local Currency
Car Park
Exhibition
Relocation
Restructure
to the Euro
Design
Refurbish
Extend
Signage
Canteen
New Building
Highway
New Rail Link
PROJECT
PROGRAMME

projects are commissioned and decommissioned in response to changing
requirements from the employees. The programme ends only when the
employees no longer require support; but in today’s innovatory business
environment there is a continuous stream of new products and processes for
which the employees need support.
Innovative undertakings, such as research into a new drug, are also well
suited to being managed as programmes. At the start there is usually no indi-
cation of how the research will turn out, and there is certainly no immediate
indication of any end date. Many scientiﬁc undertakings should really be
managed as programmes, because of their inherent uncertainty. Projects do not
like uncertainty. They need to be precisely speciﬁed in order to have any
chance of success. Too much uncertainty will lead to regular scope changes as
well as time and cost implications.
A good test for identifying whether the desired change is a project or pro-
gramme is by questioning its scope. For example, a plan to roll out several
hundred computer tablets to a company’s sales force might well be conceived
as a project. The main deliverable focus is the tablet, but there will probably be
ancillary deliverables, such as courses for training in tablet use. The roll-out is
not dependent on other change, but will be executed as a single undertaking,
even though delivery may be staged over time.
This has all the indications of a stand-alone project. However, in reality, it is
unlikely that the roll-out of computer tablets on any scale would not be part of
a strategic initiative. The roll-out is more likely to be one project within a
business programme – a programme that satisﬁes a strategic objective of, say,
increasing the eﬃciency of the sales force. There may be several discrete pro-
jects focusing on the whole concept of sales force eﬃciency, such as re-appraising
the earnings basis of the sales force – something not directly related to the roll-out,
but deﬁnitely part of the overall eﬃciency strategy.
The roll-out project has now become part of a wider business plan. Its scope,
management and implementation now have the opportunity to be far more
assured through its wider association. However, far too few organisations
would choose programme rather than project as the change vehicle here. The
easier option often seems to be to focus on the singular objective as opposed to
the bigger picture. This action can easily result in duplication of eﬀort, resources
and cost, and piecemeal implementations of change.
So, the key question to ask when considering any change is: Could there be a
bigger picture? Might the change be more eﬀectively undertaken as part of
something larger? It’s a diﬃcult question, not to ask, but to answer, since
many departments within a company or organisation are not able to see the big
picture. The big picture is something that usually only an executive cross-
functional organisation can see. More enlightened companies, though, have
discovered that signiﬁcant cost savings can be gained by implementing change
as strategic programmes, so they have established functions within their orga-
nisations to take this bigger view. This is something that is discussed in Chapter 2
of this book.
Introduction
7

In summary, the task of programme identiﬁcation is an important and con-
sidered undertaking and it is not surprising that the UK government devotes a
whole stage to programme identiﬁcation in its MSP framework. Given this
importance, it is worthwhile establishing a set of questions speciﬁc to your
company or division for use as a rule of thumb in making sure that desired
change is correctly identiﬁed as the right piece of change, i.e. programme,
project or small change.
Personally, I feel that in today’s business, with its strong focus on cost saving,
no project is truly stand-alone. Perhaps all projects should be thought of as
being part of a programme of change. For many organisations and businesses,
the truly stand-alone project may well be a thing of the past.
Summary
Programme management as a structured method is only of relatively recent
origin. Its terminology, tools and techniques are still emerging. Its increasing
popularity, in spite of its deﬁciency in tools and techniques, is a reaction to the
complexity and wide-ranging nature of today’s change.
Certainly, programme management has the ability to tackle complex change
over ﬂexible timescales. A key requirement, however, is to be able to diﬀer-
entiate between project and programme. Failure to do this can result in costly
duplication of eﬀort and ineﬃcient use of resources. Few major projects are
truly stand-alone. They usually belong to some sort of change strategy.
Companies and organisations seeking to embrace programme management as
a method should consider how their organisations need to be structured to
take full advantage of its beneﬁts. Chapter 2 deals with the applicability of
programmes to a business and their integration into its structure.
Note
1 Managing Successful Programmes, London: Cabinet Oﬃce, 4th edn, 2011; ISBN:
9780113313273.
8
Introduction

2
Applicability to business
Management of change
Programme management as a structured discipline provides a valuable vehicle for
managing strategic change, whether that change be across an entire company or
conﬁned to a particular business or departmental function.
Programme management not only allows a business strategy to be broken
down into projects and other change vehicles at the outset, but also allows the
interpretation of that strategy to be ﬂexible during a programme’s lifespan.
The change upon which programmes focus is usually directed from the top
of an organisation downwards, in that it is strategic. A business strategy dictates
a change to a business operation and a project or programme is needed to carry
it through. Figure 2.1 shows this typical top-down ﬂow. It also shows change
that is non-strategic (i.e. that which does not require a business strategy, since it
does not aﬀect the base purpose of a company’s business). This might be, for
Figure 2.1 Flow of business change from aims to operation
[CORPORATE AIMS
I
/
~
Strategic Change
Non-Strategic Change
/
/
~
Programmes
Operational
Projects
I
Change
\
I
Projects
I BUSINESS OPERATIONS I

example, changes to local operating procedures or minor change in response to
government regulatory requirements. Non-strategic change can emanate from
lower down the organisation, and is more likely to do so than strategic change.
At the top of an organisation, though, change typically takes the form of
aims or ideas, with direction being given to functional heads to execute that
change in whichever way they feel empowered. This is not normally a pro-
blem for non-strategic change, but could cause diﬃculties where the change is
strategic. Conveying strategic change in this way is open to misinterpretation
by individual functions and also devolves executive control.
Whole-company strategic change is particularly vulnerable. Some hard les-
sons have been learned through the implementation of changes required to
deliver e-commerce, for example, where executive direction to individual
divisions has been at the idea level, instead of at an organised programme level.
This has resulted in diﬀering interpretations of the change requirements by each
division. It may have been convenient for corporations to direct divisions to
establish an e-commerce plan and report back progress, but without guidance
from the centre such a direction is foolhardy. Ultimately, if things go wrong in
any one division, shareholders will blame the corporation, not the division.
Increasingly, strategic change is being mapped and planned at the top of the
organisation, and Corporate Programme Oﬃces are being constructed to ﬁlter
corporate aims and ideas into the correct change channels (Figure 2.2). These
are permanent oﬃces that commission and track company change as pro-
grammes and projects, rolling up progress from individual managers and
reporting it to the board. The concept is not new, and the author ﬁrst assisted
with the implementation of such an oﬃce at the headquarters of a UK retail
ﬁnance organisation in 1988. There, over 60 projects or programmes were
regularly on the “books” at any one time, ranging from the refurbishment of
the front of the building (a Premises Department project) to the implementation
of computing technology in support of high-street outlets (an information
technology, or IT, programme). The Corporate Programme Oﬃce, or corpo-
rate change oﬃce, as it might be more appropriately called, ensured that
each project or programme was properly represented in terms of sponsorship,
funding, resources and corporate priority.
In today’s business environment, where whole-company change occurs with
increasing regularity, such a corporate structure provides considerable beneﬁts,
and ensures that programmes and projects are given the right business priority
and get oﬀto a good start. Programme management, therefore, sits more
comfortably within this sort of corporate structure.
Having such a controlling structure for company or organisational change
enables faster decisions to be made by the executive. For example, reaction to
the marketplace can be quicker if there is a need to accommodate an urgent
initiative. There would be no need to spend time searching down the organi-
sation to identify projects that could be cancelled or deferred. The Corporate
Programme Oﬃce should have all this information to hand. The role of a
Corporate Programme Oﬃce is discussed later in this chapter.
10
Applicability to business

Duration of programmes and change components
Projects are transient in nature. They tend to come and go, but ought to have
deﬁned start and end dates. However, projects that are of long duration, in
excess of, say, nine months, run a greater risk of scope change, as a result of
changing business requirements and market conditions.
Business programmes tend to be of longer duration than projects, and one
would expect to see programmes in excess of nine months’ duration. Two-year
programmes are not uncommon, and the author has witnessed four- and even
ten-year durations. Their end dates tend to be less ﬁxed than projects and, like
lengthy projects, they are also subject to scope change. However, programmes
should be designed for scope change, since their very longevity makes changes
almost certain. A two-year IT programme, for example, is unlikely to imple-
ment exactly the same technology as conceived at its outset. Technology and
the marketplace move on.
There will be other changes occurring in the environment surrounding a
long-running programme, such that a programme needs to be able to steer its
course without being closed to an inﬂexible plan. The work of a Programme
Sponsor is more important in this respect than for a single project. Keeping an
eye on environmental changes and advising the business executive accordingly
will ensure that the programme is still relevant in its chosen course. Changes
occurring outside a programme need to be reﬂected in its component projects.
Thus, a critical diﬀerence between programme and project management is the
handling of changes. Programme management should allow for change as a
normal occurrence, rather than as an exceptional occurrence, as is the case with
Figure 2.2 The Corporate Programme Oﬃce as a change ﬁlter
Applicability to business
11
ICORPORATE AIMS I
/
CORPORATE PROGRAMME OFFICE
/
Strategic Change
Non-Strategic Change
Change

projects. This means that end dates in long-running programmes are rarely
correct and should never be viewed as set in stone.
Figure 2.3 shows the typical project constituents of a programme for a busi-
ness transitioning from traditional trading to e-commerce. Such programmes
reﬂect the need to eﬀect radical changes to a business in order to take advan-
tage of the trading beneﬁts aﬀorded by technology. However, as they progress
the concept of e-commerce becomes less deﬁned, making it part of the fabric,
so to speak. Such programmes tend to roll on, taking advantage of new
developments in technology and reacting to competitive pressures. A decision
has to be taken at some point to say that the desired change of state has taken
place and the programme has achieved its beneﬁts.
It is not unusual for programmes to include whole-programme decision
checkpoints. Some programme management methods mandate these, and
extend them to breathing spaces of weeks or even months. There is only so
much change an organisation can take in one go, and it is useful to be able to
stand back and take stock of what has been accomplished, and to take advantage
of the beneﬁts delivered so far.
Implementing a Corporate Programme Oﬃce
Today’s companies have to react with increasing frequency to external changes.
Many of these changes radically alter the way products are manufactured or
sold, or the way services are oﬀered. Such radical change requires a company to
Figure 2.3 Schematic of a typical e-commerce programme
12
Applicability to business

react in order to compete. The ability of a company to react often depends on how
good its decision making is. The quality of its decision making depends partly on
the quality of its decision makers and partly on the completeness of its data. This
latter is especially important, since no matter how good the decision makers, if
the data are incomplete or of poor quality then the decisions will be ﬂawed.
The Corporate Programme Oﬃce is designed to enable companies to react
quickly to radical change. It does this by monitoring the execution of change
to ensure that beneﬁts are achieved in line with business and ﬁnancial expec-
tations, and by treating change as a corporate asset. There are still too many
companies managing change in organisational silos, which results in increased
costs, duplication of eﬀort and ineﬃcient distribution of beneﬁts.
The logical implementation of strategic blueprints is via programmes and
projects, but these need to be locked into a controlling function at corporate
level. Such a function is the Corporate Programme Oﬃce, which seeks to
derive value from the change programmes it controls. Establishing such a
function brings considerable beneﬁts to a company, not least through knowing
the committed level of change being undertaken at any one time, its risk
exposure, priority, cost and beneﬁts. Implementation of the function, however,
requires an organisational and mindset change that some long-in-the-tooth
companies could ﬁnd diﬃcult to embrace.
It only needs one major market change, however, to focus the mind. A good
example of this was the sudden introduction of direct insurance selling to the
UK market in 1994, through an initiative by the Royal Bank of Scotland. At a
stroke, this challenged the time-honoured practice of using intermediaries to
sell insurance. Boosted by IT providing better and faster data, the risks of selling
insurance directly were mitigated. The insurance industry was caught unawares.
Not only had someone made it possible to sell insurance directly, but the initiative
had not even come from within the insurance industry, but from a bank!
To make matters worse, it was also very successful. So much so, that insur-
ance companies vied to implement their own direct channels as fast as possible.
This proved problematic, however, for several reasons. To launch a direct
channel quickly needed ready cash, and many had already spent their budgets
for the year on other initiatives. The alternative was to review existing business
programmes and see what could be axed. However, many failed to understand
the exact nature, cost and progress of their current change initiatives, simply
because corporate control of change was inadequate. I was consulting to a UK
insurance company at the time and remember the hasty scramble to get data on
existing programmes within each department. How many days do you think it
would have taken? Three at the most? Guess six weeks and you would be
nearer the mark. Taking several weeks to establish a current set of ﬁgures is
hardly an ability to react to a fast-moving marketplace. Ironically, the reason for
my consultancy was to discuss with the Board the establishment of a Corporate
Programme Oﬃce! With such a function the data should have been immedi-
ately available to a certain currency, suﬃcient at least for the Board to make
initial decisions.
Applicability to business
13

For the insurance industry, with the launch of a direct channel, the market
had changed overnight. It would not have been possible without the avail-
ability of better information, assisted by information technology. IT has since
engendered further radical market changes, making the need for the Corporate
Programme Oﬃce function even more urgent.
A later example is, of course, the year 2000 computing problem. Even
before the problem could be assessed company-wide, accurate inventories
needed to be established. The time taken to establish these inventories varied
enormously, depending on the state of records and conﬁguration management
practices. A sound lesson to be learned from the year 2000 is that the retention
and accessibility of corporate knowledge is of vital importance for today’s
business. If anyone doubts that it may ever be used again to the extent that the
year 2000 demanded, then think only of the company-wide implications of
European monetary union and e-commerce. Again, those companies that can
absorb this major change and remain competitive will thrive.
Figure 3.2 in Chapter 3 shows how the Corporate Programme Oﬃce can
control an entire company change structure. Every piece of change is linked
back from project to change strategy.
Cost of programmes
Programmes are not portfolios of projects bundled together for the sake of con-
venience. A programme has its own management and administrative infrastructure.
Therefore, it is a costly undertaking.
The true cost of a programme comprises the cost of resources, materials,
premises and equipment plus its risk exposure (see Chapter 6), and is only
apparent once a certain stage of a programme has been reached. The cost
becomes clearer as each stage is progressed, so estimates have to be agreed for
each stage (see Table 2.1).
These stages are convenient sign-oﬀpoints for budgetary purposes as well as
feasibility. The thoroughness of the estimates and the approvals required will
depend on existing company approval processes. Some companies will want to
Table 2.1 Costs of programmes
Stage
Cost approach
Business Strategy
Rough estimate for budgetary
purposes
Change Blueprint
Rough estimate for change vehicles
plus risk element
Programme Feasibility/Business Case
Feasibility estimates plus risk exposure
for management approval
Programme Design
More assured estimates for each
change vehicle plus overall risk
exposure
14
Applicability to business

go out to tender for a whole programme or various parts of a programme. The
earliest feasible point for inviting tenders is during the latter phases of Pro-
gramme Feasibility. Final contracts, however, need the detail of a Programme
Design to be of real value, and some companies would prefer to wait until this
stage before inviting tenders. Many potential suppliers, however, would prefer
to be involved in the detail of Programme Design rather than be oﬀered a fait
accompli. A more assured contract can be constructed if suppliers are able to be
party to the design process.
Against the cost of a programme must be weighed its beneﬁts. Each project
and change vehicle will contribute, but some projects may only be cost eﬀec-
tive when considered as part of a programme. Considered individually they
may not be cost eﬀective. Beneﬁts need to be quantiﬁed from the outset, but
like costs, only rough estimates can probably be given at ﬁrst. For each beneﬁt
a measurement vehicle needs to be decided, together with its source. For
example, a beneﬁt of saving telephone calls for the introduction of a local
number operation might be stated as in Table 2.2. (See Chapter 7 for more
information on beneﬁts management throughout a programme’s lifespan.)
I ﬁnd it diﬃcult to conceive setting a budget for an entire programme at its
outset. The longer a programme is in duration, the more uncertain the outcome.
For a programme to remain ﬂexible in its execution of a business strategy, it needs
to be unhindered as much as possible by time and cost. Financial managers tend
not to like too much ﬂexibility in cost, preferring to earmark a budget for the
duration. Experience, however, shows that setting budgets by stage is pre-
ferable to an overall budget. The London 2012 Olympics Programme, for
example, suﬀered somewhat through its ﬁxed end date for the hosting of the
Olympic Games and many perceiving it to be a single deliverable, and so suited
to having a ﬁxed overall budget. This is very much “large-project” speak and not
at all in keeping with the concept of “programme”. The strategy behind the
programme includes land regeneration, so the programme was designed to
continue for some time after the Games had been held. Building an Olympic
Park is a series of projects within a much wider programme. To set a budget at
the outset for a major programme is, quite frankly, madness.
Implementing a programme management method
The real beneﬁt to be obtained from programme management is the adoption
of a common company approach to the management of programmes. Just as
many companies have adopted particular approaches and tools for project
management, can they do likewise for programme management? Of course,
Table 2.2 Measurement of beneﬁts
Beneﬁt
Measurement vehicle
Measurement source
Reduction in cost of
telephone calls
Number and cost of non-local
calls against local calls
Telephone service
invoice breakdown
Applicability to business
15

implementing a programme management method presupposes that a project
management method will be implemented or already exists.
Unfortunately, programme management methods have yet to reach the same
sort of maturity as project management methods. Fully comprehensive methods
are few and far between, but some companies have managed to create their
own approaches, either working from scratch or adapting others. Some have
taken the UK government’s open approach and written low-level guidance for
users, whilst others have taken a more tools-oriented direction. Few software
programs, though, have been constructed speciﬁcally for programme manage-
ment. Many software applications designed for project management claim to
cater for programme management, but tools are not a substitute for a good
method.
The successful implementation of a programme management method must
be set against a current company culture for embracing change and the use of
structured methods. It will not be easy in some organisations. Household
Finance Bank, for example, was able to establish a structure to co-ordinate all
of its UK change initiatives, whereby all change is linked ﬁrmly to business
strategy and co-ordinated centrally under a Director of Corporate Co-ordination.
The structure has been stable for more than 20 years, so it is clearly embedded
in the company culture.
Implementing programme management within the context of corporate
change management brings signiﬁcant eﬃciency and cost savings. Increasingly,
companies are being forced to address their whole approach to change manage-
ment, since whole-company change is becoming a fact of life. The re-engineering
of a corporation may need to take place several times during forthcoming
decades, either as a reaction to competition and the marketplace, or through
acquisitions, mergers, de-mergers, downsizing and the outsourcing of functional
activities.
Summary
Programmes deliver strategic change, and are best managed in an environment
that recognises the importance of change management. Today’s penchant for
whole-company change is well served by programme management. Having a
Corporate Programme Oﬃce as part of a company structure is a particular
beneﬁt in the translation of strategic ideas to practical change, and enables
programmes and projects to be properly prioritised and positioned. It also
enables companies to react quickly to changes in the marketplace.
Programmes are costly ventures, but the beneﬁts they bring usually justify
their undertaking. Companies should only embark on programmes if they
accept that change during the life of a programme is inevitable. Few pro-
grammes are of short enough duration to escape a change in composition or
scope. Today’s rapidly changing marketplace gives testimony to that.
16
Applicability to business

3
Moving from Business Strategy to
Programme Design
This chapter deals with the diﬃcult task of translating strategic change into a
viable programme. It is the closest the book comes to methodology, but the
author believes that a structured guide through the critical stages is more value
to the reader than commentary. These stages reﬂect the author’s own
experience.
Figure 2.1 in the previous chapter showed the ﬂow of business change from
corporate aims to operation. Programmes are born out of strategic change, but
before they can be conceived a Business Strategy needs to be constructed
which outlines what the strategic change comprises. There are three main
stages involved in the birth of a programme:
1
Business Strategy
2
Programme Feasibility
3
Programme Design
Most programme management frameworks agree on these basic components,
but the terminology and number of stages may be diﬀerent.
Figure 3.1 shows the logical progression from Business Strategy to Pro-
gramme Design via Programme Feasibility. For non-business change the Future
Business Operation is re-worded as Future Operation.
Business Strategy to Change Blueprint
It is beyond the scope of this book to specify the contents of a Business Strat-
egy, since each company or organisation will have its own way of producing
such a document. However, in this context a Business Strategy should outline
the aims and desired directions of a business, and will probably specify goals,
objectives, risks, an outline of the current business operation and the reasons for
business change.
It is good practice to keep a Business Strategy document as a high-level series
of business goals, and to specify the change objectives that will meet those goals
in a separate, but related document. This separate document may be referred to
as the Blueprint for Change, since it eﬀectively becomes the mode for

Figure 3.2 Schematic of a portfolio of company change
Figure 3.1 The three stages of programme inception
18
Business Strategy to Programme Design
Strategy
Strategy
Blueprint for Change
Programme Feasibility
Programme Design
I
Programme Design Document
Business Case
ProgrammeProgramme
ProgrammeProgramme
Vision
Ission
Strategy
Corporate PMO
Portfolio of Change
nufacturing
Marketing
Operations
HR
Sales
IT
Accounts
Business Strategy
Business Strategy
Blueprint for Change
Blueprint for Change
Programme 1
Programme 21
Programme 3
Programme 1
21
Project 11
Project 21
Project 11
Project 21

implementing the Business Strategy. A reason for keeping the two documents
separate is that it is likely that the Blueprint will change more than the Strategy
itself, and there is no point in updating two documents regularly. Figure 3.2
shows a representation of a corporate portfolio of change, comprising several
Business Strategies. These are shown in the context of various company func-
tions (Marketing, Operations, etc.). This approach is discussed at the end of this
chapter.
The Blueprint might identify one or more programmes as well as stand-alone
projects and local operational initiatives, depending on the scale and scope of
the desired change. For example, in the Annual Report of XYZ Machine
Tools, the Chairman might announce a Strategy for improving service to cus-
tomers. The Strategy states several goals related to improving service. Suﬃcient
vehicles need to be identiﬁed to execute the Strategy and achieve the desired
change. Senior management interpret the Strategy and produce a document
entitled Blueprint for Valued Customers. The Blueprint identiﬁes a programme to
improve customer satisfaction, with suggested projects in each of seven
departments, plus a separate programme to change the way products are sold.
Both initiatives are necessary to achieve the goals of the Strategy, but may be
executed as separate vehicles of change.
In another example, a company wishes to execute a strategy to become one
of the top ten companies in its industry sector. Figure 3.3 shows an extract
from a Blueprint of the sort of programmes, projects and change vehicles that
might be necessary.
There is no template for a Change Blueprint, since companies will want to
write such a document according to their own style. It should, however,
include a risk assessment for embarking on the desired change, plus the usual
business and ﬁnancial assessments for this type of document. Besides suggesting
vehicles for change, the Blueprint should also specify some aspects of future
business operation and the feasibility of the overall Strategy.
Figure 3.3 Extract from a Change Blueprint schematic of change vehicles
Business Strategy to Programme Design
19
Skill Profiles
Working
Development
Patterns
Study
Workplace
Rationalisation
Project
Direct
Selling
Project
Automated
Warehouse
Project
Marketing
Strategy
Marketing
Events
Project
Advertising
Campaign
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
WorkingWorking

Table 3.1 summarises the typical contents of a Change Blueprint. Although
the Blueprint can stand alone as a single document, it is important to ensure
that it maintains strong links with the Business Strategy and the feasibility
studies it will spawn. Note that the Blueprint speciﬁes the objectives for the
Business Strategy’s goals. It does not have its own goals.
IBM UK Ltd produced a classic whole-company Blueprint in 1990, when,
under the leadership of Nick Temple, the entire company underwent a massive
cultural reorganisation in preparation for changing the company from a purely
hardware manufacturer and supplier to a 50 per cent software and services com-
pany. The document was known simply as Blueprint for the Nineties and spawned
several programmes, initiatives and projects in support of the overall strategy.
A Blueprint should have an owner, since it needs to be updated in line with
change implementation progress, organisational and operational changes, and
any changes to the Business Strategy. Some organisations nominate the same owner
for the Blueprint as the Business Strategy, but it may be another individual and,
ideally, someone who will champion the Blueprint’s contents.
Programme Feasibility
The next step in the change process is to establish separately the feasibility of
each change vehicle mentioned in the Blueprint. This can be a signiﬁcant
undertaking, and is likely to be the ﬁrst signiﬁcant cost expenditure of the
process, so should only be embarked upon once there is general agreement that
the Blueprint is sound. This aﬃrmation should mean that the Business Strategy
is also sound, and that the goals of the Strategy are suﬃciently covered by the
objectives of the Blueprint in order to make it achievable.
Programme Feasibility is the ﬁrst stage in the lifespan of an individual pro-
gramme, but for many programmes it is also the last. Many never reach the
Table 3.1 Typical contents of a Blueprint for Change
Contents
Interpretation or origin
Strategic goals
Summary of goals from the Business Strategy
Change objectives
Objectives that will meet the Business Strategy goals
Change feasibility
An indication of what can be achieved over what time period
Change beneﬁts
Summary of perceived beneﬁts from the Business Strategy
Outline of future
business operation
A sketch of the company or business function after implementation
of the Blueprint
Vehicles for change
A list of potential programmes, projects and local initiatives, and
their priorities for implementation
Outline of costs
A rough ﬁrst estimate of the costs of implementing the Blueprint
(e.g. human resources, equipment, facilities, marketing, support
and maintenance)
Risk assessment
An assessment of the risks of implementing the Blueprint
20
Business Strategy to Programme Design

consequent Programme Design stage, since their viability is not able to be con-
ﬁrmed. However, the money spent in assessing a programme’s feasibility is
rarely wasted, since knowledge will be acquired for useful future use. It is better
to reject a programme at this stage than discover its inappropriateness later and
at greater cost. Feasibility is often a circular event, with the Blueprint being
revisited in order to make adjustments to the scope of change.
During the Feasibility stage, a Business Case will need to be prepared, which
will conﬁrm the viability of the programme in terms of costs, resources and
beneﬁts. Table 3.2 shows the typical contents. It is also useful to construct a
map of the Future Business Operation that the programme will bring about. This
will be linked to the similar, but higher-level, future business outline in the
Blueprint. The document at the programme level will be a useful yardstick for
the role of Business Change Manager (see Chapter 4) in monitoring the
expected beneﬁts of the programme. It is, therefore, desirable for the Business
Change Manager to be appointed at the Programme Feasibility stage in order
to draw up the Business Case.
Programme Feasibility is completed once suﬃcient information has been
gathered to enable a decision to be made concerning the viability of the pro-
gramme. It is not worth compiling too much detail of the programme’s design
during the Feasibility stage in case approval to move to the Design stage is not
forthcoming. However, enough needs to be known in order to compile a rea-
sonable Business Case. The Programme Design stage will, of course, produce
much more detail, and the Business Case can then be enhanced.
It is important not to launch into Programme Design too quickly, since it
too can be a costly exercise. Many companies employ external consultants to
assist with the production of Change Blueprints and feasibility studies. Their
impartiality is often a key requirement for tackling what are often sensitive areas
Table 3.2 Typical contents of a Business Case
Contents
Interpretation or origin
Programme goals
Goals that support the Change Blueprint objectives
Programme
objectives
Objectives that will meet the programme goals
Programme feasibility
Reason for the programme and its feasibility, timescale, etc.
Programme beneﬁts
Quantiﬁed beneﬁts from the programme that support the
beneﬁts from the Change Blueprint
Outline of future
business operation
A sketch of the company or business function after implementation
of the programme
Outline of resource
plan
Estimate of resources required for the life of the programme
Outline of costs
Estimate of the costs of implementing the programme (e.g.
human resources, equipment, facilities, marketing, support and
maintenance), together with risk exposure cost (see Chapter 6)
Risk assessment
An assessment of the risks of implementing the programme
Business Strategy to Programme Design
21

of business change. However, few companies are so well organised that
descriptions of business processes and operations are readily to hand and are up
to date. Usually, there is signiﬁcant delving to do in order to gather the
necessary data and it is unlikely that production of a Change Blueprint, for
example, could be accomplished in less than six weeks for a medium-size
programme.
Designing a programme
Once the feasibility of a programme has been agreed, the programme can
proceed to the design stage known as Programme Design. During this stage a
design document is constructed which sets out the scope and structure of the
programme. It is initially a high-level view, since it will not be known at the
outset exactly how many projects will be commissioned during the life of
the programme. It is continually reviewed, and will become a basis for steering
the programme and evaluating any changes of direction. Some refer to this
document as the Programme Blueprint, but throughout this book it will be
referred to as the Programme Design Document in order to avoid any confusion
with the Change Blueprint.
What needs to be designed? There are several key elements of design that
need to be considered, and certain minimal decisions need to be taken in order
to ensure that the programme gets oﬀto a good start. These are:
1
The business reason for the programme: a brief statement from the Change
Blueprint of the business beneﬁts of the programme.
2
Goals and objectives of the programme: those that support the goals and
objectives of the Blueprint and Business Strategy.
3
Programme scope, boundaries and assumptions: what the programme does and
does not encompass, its constraints, external dependencies and assumptions.
4
Work elements and priorities: what work the programme needs to undertake
and its perceived projects.
5
Timescale: the phasing of the programme into manageable pieces of work.
6
Organisation and roles: the programme’s organisational structure, roles and
responsibilities.
7
Programme support: the management method, tracking and measurement,
and administrative structure (Programme Oﬃce).
8
Risks and issues: the main risks and issues currently known, collected from
items 1 to 7 above.
The above are shown in the order in which they are usually designed. If
Programme Feasibility has been done well, then Programme Design is merely
taking feasibility to the next level of detail. There should be no fundamental
questions during Programme Design regarding the Business Strategy or programme
viability. If there are, it is unwise to proceed to Design.
22
Business Strategy to Programme Design

Programme goals and objectives
The programme goals and objectives must support those of the Blueprint and
Business Strategy. It is important to remember that since the Change Blueprint
is the implementation plan for the Business Strategy, it has only objectives that
underwrite the goals of the Business Strategy. Thus the pathway from Business
Strategy to programme is: Business Strategy goals to Change Blueprint objectives to
programme goals and objectives.
From the Blueprint it will be clear which segment of the overall change the pro-
gramme is designed to undertake, so there should be a good starting point for
deﬁning the programme’s goals. In deﬁning programme goals and objectives it
should not be forgotten that the goals and objectives for individual projects will
need to ﬁt below those of the programme. Thus a hierarchy of goals and objectives
is established from Business Strategy to individual project, as shown in the example
in Table 3.3. Standard business techniques may be used for their deﬁnition.
Objectives should be clear and unambiguous, and, where possible, should be
quantiﬁable. Many people ﬁnd the task of deﬁning objectives to be diﬃcult
because of this, but if a programme is to be clear in its execution and delivery
there should be no doubt about the clarity of the objectives. The main rule is
to ensure that there are suﬃcient objectives to cover the aim of each goal. Thus
Goal 4 of the Corporate Trading Programme in Table 3.3 should have objec-
tives that cover services, customers, quality and products. Some goals may need
only a single objective, whilst others may need a dozen.
Scope, boundaries and assumptions
The programme scope states what the programme does and does not encom-
pass. It may be expressed in terms of geography, markets, divisions of the
company and aﬀected departments, products, services, processes, systems, per-
sonnel, suppliers and customers. Dependencies on other programmes, projects
or company initiatives should also be considered and mapped.
The scope is often a choice of what is feasible and what is desirable, and since the
latter may not be feasible currently but might well be in the future, it is useful to
document both views for later reference. The scope should also state any con-
straints that may be placed upon it, in terms of resources, timescale, budget, etc.
The scope should relate to the programme goals and objectives and be quite
clear in its content. A scope that is not decisive could cause problems for the
programme later.
The scope should also include key assumptions regarding the programme.
For example:

It is assumed that the Northern District warehouse will not be relocated
before programme completion.

It is assumed that Transport Division will provide oﬃce space and facilities
for the XYZ Project.

It is assumed that the Programme Oﬃce will be sited at Head Oﬃce.
Business Strategy to Programme Design
23

Assumptions need to be ratiﬁed before the programme gets underway. This
is in order to avoid having to make costly changes to the programme at a later
date from assumptions that are found to be invalid. Also, assumptions often
imply risk, so may need to be added as risks to the risk register.
Constructing the scope may be accomplished using similar processes for the
construction of a project scope. A good initial approach is to organise a work-
shop for key decision makers. Several iterations may be necessary before the
scope is deemed sound.
Table 3.3 Example of the hierarchy of goals and objectives from Business Strategy to
Project
Business Strategy
Goal 1: Maintain the ability to trade during the changeover of systems and processes
without degradation of service or quality
Other goals
Change Blueprint
Objective 1: Achieve trading readiness across all divisions of the company by the end of
2019
Other objectives
Corporate Trading Programme
Goal 1: Ensure all IT systems are legally compliant across trading geographies
Goal 2: Ensure all business processes are legally compliant
Goal 3: Ensure key suppliers interfacing with the company are compliant with standards
and processes
Goal 4: Ensure customers are aware of changes being made
Goal 5: Ensure no degradation or loss of service to customers
Goal 6: Ensure suﬃcient training is provided to retail staﬀ
Other goals
Other objectives
IT Project
Goal 1: Ensure critical business programmes are compliant
Goal 2: Ensure continuity of service during code conversion and testing
Goal 3: Ensure disaster recovery procedures are up to date
Other goals
Other objectives
24
Business Strategy to Programme Design

Work elements and priorities
This part of the Design states the types of work that need to be undertaken in
order to identify the programme’s constituent projects. Each piece of work
must relate to the programme goals and objectives and be within its scope. The
work is prioritised and apportioned into projects, each of which needs to be
scoped and deﬁned at a later date.
Projects will have been suggested in the Change Blueprint, according to
work elements known at the time. During Programme Design, these projects
are ratiﬁed or amended. Any signiﬁcant changes are fed back to the Blueprint.
It is unlikely that the work elements will change from Blueprint to programme
scope, but their organisation into projects might.
For example, programme work elements such as establish a customer support centre
and devise customer support policy could be grouped into a project called Customer
Support. How much can be accomplished in terms of work breakdown for indi-
vidual projects at this stage depends on the expertise of the programme designers. It
is not necessary to go to a ﬁne level of detail, since this will be done later by
those having a greater knowledge of the project. However, a starter set of work
elements would be useful when each project embarks on its scoping, for example:
Customer support project
Produce project plan
Establish a customer support centre
Establish terms of reference
Draw up space requirements
Select location
Assess facilities and equipment
Place equipment orders
Lay cables
Staﬀ
Produce job descriptions
Recruit staﬀ
Train staﬀ
Devise customer support policy
Produce training manuals
Publicise service
It may only be possible to construct a rough work breakdown structure for each
project. Often there will be precedents for repeatable work such as the establishment
Business Strategy to Programme Design
25

of a customer support centre, and template work breakdown structures may exist
within the company, upon which designers can draw. A repository of previous
project experience is also useful for the scoping exercise, though few companies
have such a luxury available. Having a work breakdown structure facilitates the
assignment of responsibilities and the project’s organisation into sub-projects.
Timescale
Only an idea of the programme timescale can be given at the Design stage,
since each project has yet to be scoped and planned. Certain time-related
considerations should be examined here, however, such as the eﬀects of the
implementation of major change on the workforce. Should, for example, the
programme be broken down into blocks of work with periods of normal
business operation in between? Many refer to these blocks as tranches (from the
French word for “slice”), which are themselves almost mini-programmes. It
is sometimes preferable to divide programmes of several years in length into
time- or work-based tranches. Table 3.4 shows this idea.
Unlike a project, a programme may not have a deﬁned end date at its outset.
It is often not appropriate. The programme completes either when the last
piece of change from its objectives is implemented or the business beneﬁts are
declared achieved. Many programmes change their shape and direction several
times before “time is called”. It is this ﬂexibility of timescale which enables
programmes to be such useful vehicles for change.
Organisation and roles
Deciding on the programme roles and completing the organisation chart is a funda-
mental part of Programme Design. Chapter 4 covers this important work in detail.
Programme support
A programme, like a project, requires an administrative infrastructure to support its
day-to-day activities. The centre of this activity is within the Programme
Oﬃce, which is described in detail in Chapter 5.
Table 3.4 A programme and its projects divided into tranches
Programme
Tranche 1
Tranche 2
Tranche 3
Project 1
Project 2
Project 4
Project 5
Project 8
Project 9
Project 3
Project 6
Project 10
Project 11
Project 7
Project 12
Time →
26
Business Strategy to Programme Design

A programme also requires a management method, which will specify what
will be managed, by whom and how. The method should state, for example,
how beneﬁts and quality will be managed; and a good method will include
structures and techniques for these and for other functions. Typical management
functions include:

quality (including deliverables and testing)

beneﬁts

communication

design

programme exceptions (risks, issues, changes)

costs, expenses, payments, budget

personnel time, performance

time schedule, milestones, dependencies

contracts

resources

documentation

health and safety
Risks and issues
Several risks will have been identiﬁed during Programme Feasibility, and per-
haps some issues. These should be carried forward into Programme Design.
The process of risk management should already have started, and it is helpful to
have a Risk Manager appointed as early as possible during the programme’s
lifespan. Construction of a Risk Register will be helpful at this stage. This can
be passed to the Programme Oﬃce when it is established.
The management of programme risk is discussed in detail in Chapter 6.
Establishing a corporate change function
Figure 3.2 shows a structure that I have established for some companies. It is a
permanent function that allows corporate change to be controlled, ﬁnanced, orga-
nised and implemented rapidly. It establishes a link right back to a company’s
mission and vision, and allows for any strategic change to be mapped and
executed as projects or programmes. It requires the establishment of a Corporate
Programme Oﬃce, which is a small controlling function (mentioned in Chapter 2).
Any department requesting any signiﬁcant change contacts the oﬃce initially,
which checks whether the proposed change ﬁts with current corporate strategy.
If it does, that change can be adequately planned into the current portfolio of
projects and programmes. The function can tap into a skills base and ensure that
change is properly resourced and that standard methodology can be followed.
The corporate change function is an overhead but its value to a company can
be immense. I have witnessed on several occasions companies needing to make
Business Strategy to Programme Design
27

rapid strategic change in order to beat the competition, but not knowing how
to implement that change quickly. The problem is usually that no one seems to
know how much change is being undertaken at any one time throughout the
company, so it is diﬃcult to see what may need to be cut or deferred to
give way to the new important change. The corporate change function can
state immediately the value, beneﬁts and progress of any of the change in its
portfolio. This enables executive decisions to be made conﬁdently and for new
change to be resourced rapidly.
The corporate change function recognises change as a necessary and regular
occurrence in a business. It sits alongside the business, allowing for change to be
appropriately eﬀected with minimum disruption to business-as-usual.
Summary
Designing business programmes is a professional task, and best undertaken by
experienced programme management consultants. The most diﬃcult aspect is
the transition from Business Strategy to Programme Design. Considerable
groundwork needs to be accomplished, and there is often a temptation to
move forward too quickly in the vital preparatory stages. Use of the structured
approach described, however, should ensure that key aspects are not missed,
that expectations are adequately established and that there is conﬁdence in the
outcome.
28
Business Strategy to Programme Design

4
Organising a programme
During the Programme Feasibility stage some thought will have been given to key
programme roles, and these should be conﬁrmed during the Programme Design
stage, when the remaining roles and the structure in which they reside are estab-
lished. Programmes have been known to succeed or fail merely on the choice of
leaders and the designation of their authority. Because a programme is close to the
heart of a business it becomes part of the company fabric, so it must not be left
unattended (which is sadly the case of many business projects). The programme
must also be accorded the correct level of priority within the company.
There is general agreement in programme methodologies that a Programme
Manager must be appointed, and that this is the person accountable for the day-
to-day management of the programme. It should be a full-time role, but,
depending upon size, scope and activity of the programme, might be con-
sidered part-time. A relatively inactive programme (i.e. with few currently
commissioned projects) could justify a part-time Programme Manager. Aspects
of this role are described later in this chapter.
The roles described in this chapter are those that the author has utilised
successfully. People often ask the author whether it is necessary to implement
all of the roles described. The answer must be that any change that the pro-
gramme is required to support is going to be costly, and that stinting on
resources is bound to have an eﬀect on its quality. The key decision criteria for
roles are to ensure that a bureaucratic organisation is not established, that roles
are ﬁlled suﬃcient to the requirement at a particular stage, and that there is also
ﬂexibility to adjust roles throughout a programme’s life.
It is, therefore, essential to plan the resource requirement during the Design
stage with reference to the planned complement of projects. If, for example,
the programme is planned to commence with only one project that is only a
preparatory piece of work, then there is no point in immediately establishing a
full programme staﬀ. Figure 2.3 showed a complement of several projects and
initiatives that kick oﬀin parallel, and are augmented at the end of the ﬁrst
year. It would be inappropriate here to commence with a skeleton staﬀ. Also,
the phases shown represent very diﬀerent types and intensity of work. This needs
to be taken into account when assessing this type of programme’s organisation
requirements.

It is easy to be dismissive about programme management, treating it as being
just a larger piece of work than project management, but the skills are very
diﬀerent. A programme that is not tightly controlled will overrun on costs and
deliver reduced beneﬁts. The risks of not being in control are higher when
programme roles are not recognised as requiring professional skills – not any
person from a business function can be a Programme Manager, for example.
Major programmes can beneﬁt from employing an experienced programme
consultant to assist in building an appropriate organisation structure and select-
ing the right candidates for particular roles. Indeed, many companies value
consultancy advice for the whole of the crucial Design stage.
The Programme Executive
In the author’s experience, the Programme Manager is not an isolated role,
unlike that of a Project Manager. To be eﬀective, the programme needs to
be managed by an executive team. The Programme Manager is still accountable
and designated as leader, but is supported by a management team, which makes
up the core team or Programme Executive. These are senior roles, and represent
the business and technical aspects of the programme. Some organisations prefer
to call the Programme Executive the Programme Board.
The numbers and types of roles within the Programme Executive will vary
according to the need of the programme and the programme method
employed. Figure 4.1 shows a typical generic set, where the Programme
Manager is supported by a Business Change Manager, Risk Manager and
Design Manager. The author has seen the addition of Health & Safety Manager
and Communication Manager in programmes where these roles were seen to
be of vital importance. Sometimes Design Manager has been replaced by
Quality Manager and on other occasions omitted altogether. Table 4.2 shows a
comparison of the generic roles.
A programme may have its resources based in various parts of a company. Its
projects are likely to be undertaken in a variety of departments, but it is useful
for all members of the Programme Executive to be sited close to each other.
Some programmes, however, are fairly well contained, and may be centred on
one department, such as Personnel or the IT department.
As the managing team, the Programme Executive should meet regularly.
These meetings can form part of the scheduled cycle of meetings described in
Chapter 5 (the Programme Oﬃce).
The Business Change Manager
The Business Change Manager is concerned with the change to the business
that the programme brings about and its eﬀect on stakeholders. Signiﬁcant
liaison is required, therefore, between the programme and business functions,
and the Business Change Manager needs to understand the requirements of
each project and their contribution to the overall realisation of beneﬁts.
30
Organising a programme

The programme will bring about new ways of working, so the Business
Change Manager needs to set expectations of the changes to each business
function and ensure that they are prepared for the change. Conversely, local
business changes need to be understood and evaluated against the objectives of
the programme.
Executing this role requires a good understanding of the business functions
aﬀected by the programme. The Business Change Manager must be able to
map the current business processes and articulate the beneﬁts to senior man-
agement. The role requires great diplomacy and negotiation skills. There may
be many areas resistant to change, and considerable clarity of explanation will
be required when selling the beneﬁts of change.
Consider the changes that have aﬀected companies over the last 20 years or
so, particularly in working patterns. First, oﬃces gave way to open-plan areas.
Then, individual desks gave way to shared desks (or hot desks) and job sharing
appeared. Now, virtual workers are an increasing percentage of a company’s
workforce, with more employees working from their homes. These are dra-
matic changes, though few of them have ever been eﬀected through a struc-
tured programme of change. Many have in fact crept in as incremental changes,
and may not have beneﬁted everyone equally. Having a Business Change
Manager helps to ensure that all voices are heard and that the proposed changes
are suﬃciently evaluated for all relevant company working patterns.
One of the early activities of the Business Change Manager in the develop-
ment of the programme is to validate the programme’s Business Case. It is
always more diﬃcult to work from a Business Case developed by someone else,
so if the Business Change Manager can be appointed at Programme Feasibility
stage, he or she will be able to assist in the initiation of the Business Case and
attain a mental ownership of it for later stages.
Across the life of a programme some projects will need to be re-scoped
during their execution, either as a result of a general change of direction or
through the need to resolve a diﬃcult problem. The eﬀect on the programme’s
Figure 4.1 A typical Programme Executive
Organising a programme
31
Programme
Programme
Programme
Programme
Programme
Programme
Programme
Programme
Programme
Programme
Programme
Programme
Programme
Programme Programme
organisation
organisation
organisation
organisation
organisation
organisation

Business Case needs to be evaluated by the Business Change Manager. Is the
change merely deferred or is it fundamentally diﬀerent?
Beneﬁts management is a key task for the Business Change Manager. The
Business Case will state particular beneﬁts that the programme is expected to
bring about, and the Business Change Manager will be looking to ensure that
each completed project is actually bringing about its expected beneﬁts. If not,
he or she will need to calculate the shortfall and decide whether an additional
project is needed to ﬁll the gap.
Keeping an eye on beneﬁts is much easier in a programme than in a single
project, since the programme continues after projects have been completed. In
single projects, beneﬁts management is often a diluted exercise after the project team
has been disbanded. True beneﬁts are often not realised until many months
after project completion. (Chapter 7 gives more detail on this important role
for the Business Change Manager.)
Since communication is an important function for a programme, the Busi-
ness Change Manager will liaise with any appointed Communication Manager
or make recommendations to the Programme Executive concerning commu-
nications. These may be internal or external communications. The Business
Change Manager is in a good position to make these recommendations
through his or her relationship with stakeholders.
The Design Manager
The Design Manager is eﬀectively the Quality Controller for the programme.
He or she manages the Programme Design and ensures that standards, proce-
dures and quality are maintained throughout the programme. The Design Man-
ager will also link to any independent quality functions outside the programme
to ensure that company or legally required audits take place.
The Programme Design includes many aspects that need controlling, from
the programme scope and organisation to programme support facilities and
working space. Many of these are administered on a daily basis by the Programme
Oﬃce, so the Design Manager will need to maintain a close relationship with
its staﬀ.
The Design Manager is thus guardian of the Programme Design, evaluating
technical and business change requests against it to ensure that there is no
dilution of beneﬁts. In this work, the Design Manager works closely with the
Business Change Manager.
The Design Manager also acts as consultant to the programme’s projects,
assisting them to establish their own quality plans and dispensing advice con-
cerning the management of quality. He or she will commission quality reviews
and audits, as required, involving independent or third-party reviewers as
necessary. An initial piece of work will be to set quality standards to which
projects should comply, and to establish an overall Programme Quality Plan.
Quality appears in many forms throughout a programme, and the Design
Manager needs to have a good understanding of its many guises. Table 4.1
32
Organising a programme

shows where quality may appear, for example, in a business programme in
which information technology plays a strong role.
Testing is a fundamental proof of quality, and the Design Manager will want
to ensure that individual test plans are adequate for the level of quality desired.
Testing will either be ongoing for each project or concentrated in discrete test
phases. Prototyping and pilots are usually discrete test phases and may have a
particular eﬀect on the Programme Design. The Design may have to be
adjusted to account for problems arising during these phases.
In an IT or manufacturing programme, the Design Manager may well
assume a more technical role. He or she might be an engineer, requiring a
speciﬁc knowledge of safety-critical operations or systems.
Besides addressing quality, the Design Manager should monitor consistency
of standards across projects in their scope and organisation, ensuring that change
and issue control is adequately undertaken. He or she will need to ensure that
dependencies between projects are mapped and that no duplication of work is
undertaken.
In a large programme the Design Manager may retain a small staﬀ, but
many programmes will be able to utilise Programme Administrators in the
Programme Oﬃce to perform administrative design management tasks.
The Risk Manager
The scope of a programme, its close alignment to Business Strategy and the scale
of change that it aims to deliver mean that risk management is an essential
Table 4.1 Typical quality areas in a business and IT programme
Quality focus
Quality aspects
Business
requirements
in terms of clearly stated and fully agreed requirements and
statements of work
Objectives
project objectives, suﬃciently quantiﬁed and achievable
Beneﬁts
realistic, understood and achievable
Systems
in terms of defect-free hardware, software, etc., thoroughly tested
to agreed standards by developers and users, and installed to
required safety standards
Marketing and
communications
through the need to set user expectations thoroughly of what will
be implemented
Contracts
suﬃciently legal, including clear documents of understanding
with suppliers and contractors
Training
focused on audience needs and capabilities
Documentation
in terms of training, support and user manuals that are both
readable and usable
Support
providing adequately staﬀed and trained help desks
Project
management
providing for a properly estimated, planned and organised project
through the use of reliable methodologies
Organising a programme
33

activity for any programme, large or small. Too often, risk management is
undertaken in an amateur and half-hearted manner, usually because there is no
particular expertise available to accomplish it eﬀectively. The appointment of
an experienced Risk Manager ensures that risk is taken seriously and that it has
a professional focus.
The emphasis of the role will change depending on the type of programme.
For example, a global trading programme carries high-risk implications for
business by default, so the Risk Manager may well need to establish an
augmented management function.
In a programme there are many types of risk, from technical and safety risk
to business and ﬁnancial risk, and each manifests a diﬀerent perspective.
Understanding these perspectives is diﬃcult for one person, so the Risk Man-
ager needs to rely on experts in their specialist ﬁelds. (Regrettably, the author
regularly ﬁnds that risk identiﬁcation, assessment and management in large
programmes are carried out by a single person making personal assumptions
about risk, without reference to specialist expertise.)
Therefore, the Risk Manager must be able to engage expertise in the iden-
tiﬁcation and assessment of risk and to take a balanced view of its management,
advising the Programme Manager of suitable risk containment and contingency
plans. Expertise may be drawn from within the programme, the company, or
from outside the company. The Risk Manager needs to be able to act as a
consultant to each project in its identiﬁcation, assessment and management of
risk, oﬀering to facilitate risk identiﬁcation workshops, and ensuring consistency
in the risk management process.
The Risk Manager deﬁnes the risk management process for the programme
and ensures that the Programme Oﬃce is able to administer the programme
risk register. He or she also ensures that risks are analysed to deﬁned levels of
quality and decides whether qualitative or quantitative analysis techniques are
used.
The role is complex and can be taxing. In a construction programme, it
may be dealing with life-threatening possibilities. If a building collapses, the
architect is blamed, but the Risk Manager may also be to blame if due
warning was not given. Often, however, a Risk Manager is not appointed, and
others, such as an architect, assume a risk management role. They may be
experts in their ﬁelds but they are not always able to see the whole picture and
take a balanced viewpoint. This latter is the particular expertise of the Risk
Manager.
When the famous hurricane hit the south-east of Britain in October 1987,
people were quick to blame the weather forecaster. “How could he not have
foreseen it?” they said. Yet foresight is regrettably a gift with which most Risk
Managers are not endowed. Instead, the Risk Manager has to rely on good
judgement and a good supply of precedence data, plus some sophisticated
analysis techniques and metrics. Risk management is discussed in detail in
Chapter 6.
34
Organising a programme

The Programme Manager
The Programme Manager is the key day-to-day management role for the
programme. Those who believe a Programme Manager to be a form of super
Project Manager are deluding themselves. The role has more to do with
managing a business than managing a project, and represents one of the fun-
damental diﬀerences between a project and a programme. There are Project
Managers who could assume the role of Programme Manager without diﬃ-
culty, and knowledge of project management is certainly valuable. However,
the mindset is diﬀerent, and to some Project Managers it would be alien. If
anything, the role of Programme Manager is closer to that of Project Director;
neither is scheduling the detailed work of others. The day-to-day work is
focused through the constituent projects and their managers.
Managing a programme is, therefore, a particular skill. In no circumstances is
this a technical role. Programmes are often cross-functional and cross-divisional,
requiring high diplomacy and negotiation skills. The Programme Manager advi-
ses, analyses and applies management techniques to the resolution of problems
and the progression of plans.
In many ways, the Programme Manager is performing a balancing operation.
He or she is attempting to achieve eﬀective cost management, resourcing
capacity, work eﬃciency, quality and risk coverage, without diluting the
beneﬁts. The objectives of the programme need to be constantly monitored to
ensure that they are all adequately covered and that the Blueprint is not
exposed.
The Programme Manager owns the programme integrated plan, which is a
rolled-up summary of each project’s plan, including dependencies. This plan is
used to steer the programme, and is discussed in Chapter 5.
In balancing the resourcing requirements for the programme, the Pro-
gramme Manager needs to be able to secure commitment from line managers
and equally be able to negotiate for resource with contractors and third parties.
Both aspects are subject to frustration. On the one hand there is often conﬂict
between the programme and business operation, and on the other there are
questions of loyalty and staﬀassimilation. The eﬃcient use of resources is a
constant concern for the Programme Manager.
The Programme Manager is, therefore, reliant on timely and accurate man-
agement information. This could come from a variety of sources both from
within the programme and outside it. Most should come, however, from the
Programme Oﬃce, and the Programme Manager needs to consider information
requirements carefully at an early stage in the programme lifespan.
Information software and analysis skills are costly, and need to be considered
during the Programme Design stage if the budget is not to be compromised
later by unplanned requirements. The author has seen some unfortunate
attempts to implement complicated and novel analysis tools after a programme
has got underway in order to satisfy a perceived information requirement. All
that resulted was a considerable amount of time and eﬀort spent in learning and
Organising a programme
35

Table 4.2 Summary of Programme Executive roles
Risk Manager
Business Change Manager
Design Manager
Programme Manager

Manage risk

Deﬁne and own the risk
management processes

Advise the projects on risk
identiﬁcation, assessment and
containment

Analyse risks

Advise the Programme
Manager and Steering Group
on best courses of action

Own and manage the
Business Case

Manage the beneﬁts

Manage user and business
expectations

Prepare business operations
for change

Validate business requirements

Recommend
communications

Own and manage the
Programme Design

Manage quality and testing

Evaluate change requests that
impact the programme

Map project and programme
dependencies

Ensure compliance to quality

Manage the day-to-day
programme

Own the programme plans

Set personal objectives

Monitor programme
objectives

Report progress, risks, issues
and changes to the Steering
Group

Chair programme reviews

Monitor the Blueprint

Balance programme resources

Negotiate resource
requirements

Balance the budget

experimentation as Programme Oﬃce staﬀattempted to understand the new
software that had been implemented!
Relationship with the Programme Executive
The Programme Manager needs to form a close team with those in the other
roles in the Programme Executive. Table 4.2 summarises the tasks of each role.
Ultimately, the Programme Manager is accountable for the day-to-day
management of the programme, though the other members of the Executive
are accountable for particular processes.
This is not management by committee, and the regular meetings that the
Executive will hold are more like opportunities to communicate progress and
discuss mutual activities, rather than agree policy.
From the Business Change Manager, the Programme Manager needs to
know how the acceptance of change is progressing. The Business Change
Manager will discuss with the Programme Manager the preparation of change
for particular areas. Typical questions are:

Have expectations been adequately set?

Are departments gearing up adequately for the expected change, in terms of resources,
facilities, etc.?

Is the amount and type of end-user training adequate?

How is the take-up of training progressing?

Are any of the business requirements likely to change?

What are the best ways to communicate to programme stakeholders and how
frequently?
As projects are completed and deliverables are implemented in the relevant
parts of the company, the Business Change Manager needs to know how suc-
cessful these have been. The Programme Manager may need to plan additional
projects or change vehicles in order to correct unexpected problems in particular
areas where projects have been implemented.
For the Programme Manager, the Business Change Manager is a vital link to
the business of the company. It is through the Business Change Manager
that the Programme Manager can receive intelligence on important events
outside the programme.
From the Risk Manager, the Programme Manager needs to understand the
risk exposure to the programme and whether risks are increasing or decreasing
in particular areas. The eﬀect of mitigation actions needs to be determined and
the state of current risk reserves against eventualities. Typical questions are:

Is risk being actively managed in all parts of the programme?

Are mitigating actions having an eﬀect on the total risk exposure?
Organising a programme
37

From the Design Manager, the Programme Manager needs to understand
progress against the Programme Design and whether proposed changes will
aﬀect the original design concept. The status of testing and deliverable quality
will also need to be understood. Typical questions are:

What is the current status of changes?

What is the status of programme dependencies and has the way they aﬀect the
programme changed?

Is the desired level of quality being achieved?
Relationship with the Project Managers
The Programme Manager will meet regularly with the Project Managers cur-
rently in place. This is not just to understand how each project is progressing,
but to be able to give each project the advantages of economies of scale. Each
Project Manager will be focused on his or her own project, but needs to
understand the programme view and take advantage of common facilities.
These will include:

common planning and quality standards

resourcing opportunities and management

inter-project dependencies

common risks and issues: programme resolution possibilities as opposed to
individual project resolutions

common equipment and facilities

common communications plan

reporting requirements

project review requirements
Chapter 5 covers the reporting requirements from project to programme,
but each Programme Manager will want to establish his or her own reporting
package with the Project Managers, either formally or informally. The Pro-
gramme Manager may also want to set budget tolerances for each project and
suggest performance objectives.
The programme should be able to provide guidance and consultancy to each
project for such aspects as risk management, project planning and quality man-
agement, via skills in the Programme Executive and Programme Oﬃce. Cer-
tainly, common project functions such as deliverables management and testing
can be “packaged” by the programme to a large extent, such that projects need
not have to spend signiﬁcant time establishing them.
The Programme Oﬃce will maintain a regular detailed link with each pro-
ject, whilst the Programme Manager will maintain a more strategic relationship.
38
Organising a programme

The Programme Director and Steering Group
The Programme Executive is usually directed by a Programme Director. This is
often a part-time role, and ensures the link between the company executive
team and the Programme Executive. The Programme Director might well
perform the same role for other programmes within the Change Blueprint,
depending on his or her capacity.
The Programme Director ﬁnds and allocates Sponsors for each of the pro-
jects commissioned within the programme, and will assist in the justiﬁcation
and priority of the projects within the overall business. The programme itself
needs a Sponsor, which may or may not be the Programme Director. Large or
whole-company programmes may have both a Sponsor and a Programme
Director. Chapter 6 gives more information on the role of Sponsor.
In a busy programme there will be regular dialogue between the Programme
Manager and Programme Director concerning such things as the direction of the
programme, the resolution of issues, the containment of risks, the apportionment of
funds and deployment of resources.
A key role for the Programme Director is to ensure that the programme
remains in line with the Change Blueprint and Business Strategy, and to ensure
that the programme is accorded the correct level of priority within the Blueprint.
This steering of the programme is accomplished most beneﬁcially via a Steering
Group, which is chaired by the Programme Director. The Steering Group will
comprise representation from key business functions (including Sponsors of
current projects) plus the Programme Executive, and will meet at frequent
intervals, depending on the programme’s priority. Monthly, six-weekly or
quarterly seem to be typical intervals.
It is important to ensure that the terms of reference for the Steering Group
are drawn up during Programme Design. These include the limits of its decision-
making powers and the boundaries of its involvement. The Group should not
become involved in the mundane management of the programme. This is the work
of the Programme Manager and Programme Executive. Instead, the Group
should give guidance on direction, and sanction or refuse initiatives that are out-
side the Programme Manager’s ﬁnancial or decision-making remit. The Group
should also act as a channel between the programme and the business operation.
A typical Steering Group agenda might comprise:

Programme progress to date

Project completions and new projects to be commissioned

Budget status

Resourcing status

Major programme issues

Major programme risks

Change requests for approval

Actions for Steering Group approval

Business status
Organising a programme
39

Steering Group members should be fully aware of their role. It is all too easy
for the Steering Group meetings to become talking shops rather than a body
for direction and sanction. The author has witnessed several situations where
this has occurred. To prevent this from happening the Group needs to have
something to discuss. It should not meet just for the sake of it, i.e. because a
meeting date has been ﬁxed. Steering Group members are busy, senior people,
and should not have their time wasted. The Programme Director needs to
ensure that there is an agenda worthy of discussion.
If Steering Group meetings are tied to a reporting cycle, then a “package” of
information can be produced for information and debate. Each Steering Group
meeting can then be the ultimate in a series of scheduled reviews, culminating
in a roll-up of data from each project.
Projects within a programme
The programme organisation structure is not complete without its constituent
projects. Their link to the programme on a day-to-day basis is via the Programme
Oﬃce (described in Chapter 5). Potential projects will be identiﬁed during the
Programme Design stage, but each one needs to undergo its own separate scop-
ing. As the programme progresses, new projects will be conceived. The Programme
Oﬃce should set management standards for these projects, enabling them to ﬁt
into the programme reporting structure. In the Corporate Programme Oﬃce
example of the retail ﬁnance company mentioned in Chapter 2, all projects
conformed to a company standard controlled by the Programme Oﬃce. This
greatly simpliﬁed the recording and reporting of information to a central place
and ensured that each project knew its place in the corporate strategy.
An important early task for the Programme Oﬃce is to construct, circulate
and keep up to date a programme organisation chart. The organisation chart is
a vital communications vehicle for both those within the programme and those
outside it. Figure 4.2 shows a typical organisation chart for a large programme.
The Programme Manager will appoint Project Managers for each project
when it is commissioned, and the Programme Director will appoint a Sponsor
for each, ensuring buy-in from the business area concerned. It is important that
these projects lock into the common reporting style and cycle established for the
programme. Consistency of reporting (common software, house style, accounting
conventions, etc.) saves considerable time and eﬀort, yet surprisingly few pro-
grammes manage to achieve it. It is certainly more diﬃcult to achieve if one or
more projects are operated by sub-contractors oﬀ-site. It may be costly for them
to adhere to, say, common software standards, and so they may attempt to seek a
compromise. Contractual terms can, of course, specify such requirements,
though in the heat of negotiation these things can be inadvertently omitted.
A question that often arises is how autonomous can projects be within a pro-
gramme? Clearly, the programme should not attempt to establish a bureaucracy,
with a Programme Oﬃce operating strict control over the day-to-day
40
Organising a programme

operations of each project. The Programme Manager should ensure that each
Project Manager is given a wide degree of authority and accountability for his
or her project, which extends to budget, resource recruitment and manage-
ment, and other operational requirements. However, the Programme Execu-
tive and Programme Oﬃce are able to see the big picture and take advantage
of critical mass in terms of resourcing, balancing the overall budget and mana-
ging an integrated plan, so particular information from each project at particular
times is a valid and essential requirement. The balance to be achieved is not to
make this requirement an interference or perceived as a chore.
Conversely, there is no point duplicating project work by recording every
project issue, risk and change at the programme level. (The author has seen this
happen on several occasions.) The Programme Executive needs to be able to
trust each project to manage its work eﬀectively and properly, reporting only
the items essential for the management of the programme. Indeed, there could
be thousands of tasks at project level that would be superﬂuous at the pro-
gramme level. In the 1998 Inland Revenue Self-Assessment Programme, for
example, 170 planned events were recorded at programme level, representing
160,000 tasks over 42 projects. Selection of the 170 key events was a critical
success criterion for adequate programme planning.
How each Project Manager relates to the programme in terms of reporting
and meetings attendance needs to be considered during Programme Design.
Some projects will be of short duration, whilst others may last the complete lifespan
of the programme. Some projects may merely be diﬀerent phases of the same
Figure 4.2 Typical large programme organisation
Organising a programme
41
programme
programme
programme
programme
programmeprogramme
programme
programme
programme
programme
programme
programme
programme
programme
programme
programme
programme
programme
programme
programme

piece of work. Thus, any regular meeting of Project Managers and the Programme
Executive may comprise diﬀerent persons as the programme progresses.
Summary
The choice of organisation and roles must depend on the nature of the pro-
gramme. This chapter suggests a generic template that the author has used to
good advantage on occasions. This template can be adapted for particular types
of programme, bearing in mind the need to fulﬁl the important management
activities described.
Programme organisation and design are complex operations. The appoint-
ment of an experienced programme management consultant should ensure that
the programme is established on a ﬁrm footing, and should save valuable time
in the Design stage.
42
Organising a programme

5
Supporting the programme
In many ways, a programme is like a business. It has staﬀ, an organisation,
ﬁnances, facilities and usually requires space in which to operate. Like all busi-
nesses, it needs support. The choice of support largely depends on how the
programme resides within the company or owner organisation. If, for example,
a corporate programme structure exists, such as that described in Figure 3.2,
then a Corporate Programme Oﬃce would provide support. Otherwise there
may be functions already existing within a company that can be utilised for
certain aspects of programme support, such as resourcing, administration or
ﬁnance. This may be more cost eﬀective than establishing a unique support
organisation for a programme.
Most programme management frameworks allow for a speciﬁc Programme
Oﬃce as a support function. This could be small or large depending on the
scope, size and breadth of a programme. It is important, though, to establish
only the support functions that are needed for the type of programme. If there
are to be lower-level Project Oﬃces there should not be duplication of work.
The Programme Oﬃce concept is explained below.
As a programme is designed for change, there needs to be up-to-the-minute
information on programme progress and status. This enables a programme to
react to sudden changes imposed by the company, clients or marketplace. In
order to have this ﬂexibility there needs to be readily available information
from all parts of a programme.
A possible area of conﬂict that the author has noticed on several occasions is
between a programme and the organisation in which it resides. A programme is
an exceptional operation, but some programmes may exist for a considerable
time. The cultural acceptance of a programme by the rest of the business is
therefore important. Diﬀerences between a programme and a line of business
will be evident in terms of special privileges, pace of operation and perceived
importance. It is less of a problem in a programme-oriented business but there
needs to be a good rapport between the two. A programme’s sponsorship will
need to ensure that the programme ﬁts well within the company or organisation
as a whole and that any conﬂict is minimised.

The Programme Oﬃce – concept and role
Purpose
The Programme Oﬃce is the programme’s administrative nerve centre. It
supports the Programme Executive by undertaking such activities as:

programme reporting

programme resourcing

programme planning

management of the programme risk register

management of programme issues and changes

control of the programme budget

procurement of equipment across the programme

management of programme objectives and beneﬁts

maintenance of standards across the programme

administration of programme quality plans
Each project within the programme is responsible for managing its own local
plans, budget, risks, issues and changes, etc., and, depending upon its size and
scope, may establish its own supporting administrative organisation in the form
of a Project Oﬃce. While some of the projects in the programme may be
small, short-lived undertakings, others may be signiﬁcant in terms of resources
and scope. However, in order to take advantage of economies of scale, the
Programme Oﬃce may undertake certain activities centrally on behalf of the
projects, such as equipment procurement.
The Programme Oﬃce must not become a bureaucratic organisation. It
needs to exert control of standards across each project and compile valuable
information, but at the same time it needs to be supportive, both of individual
projects and Project Oﬃces, and of the Programme Executive.
Some of the activities of a Programme Oﬃce are larger implementations of
Project Oﬃce tasks, but there are fundamental diﬀerences between the two
functions. The Programme Oﬃce has a much wider scope and is focused more
on analysis work as well as purely administrative activities. Considerations such
as resource utilisation, risks, funding and expenditure are considered across the
whole programme, and project interdependencies play a large part in balancing
these and other competing priorities.
Usually, companies that have had experience of using a Programme Oﬃce
are sold on its beneﬁts. However, those that have not may need to understand
the signiﬁcant advantages.
Organisation
Organisationally, the Programme Oﬃce supports the Programme Executive
and the programme’s projects, though each project may have its own Project
44
Supporting the programme

Oﬃce. Roles tend to be a mixture of full- and part-time appointments. It is
recommended that the Programme Oﬃce be sited close to the Programme
Executive in order to receive and convey information rapidly.
As well as providing support and information to the Programme Manager
and his Executive, the roles in the Programme Oﬃce need to complement the
role of each Project Manager. Table 5.1 shows how the role of the Project
Manager is complemented through activities in the Programme Oﬃce. The
Project Manager directs his or her project both within the boundaries of
authority and to the standards established by the programme. The Programme
Oﬃce administers these standards.
The Programme Oﬃce will have a staﬀcomplement that grows with the
programme. As each project is commissioned, support demands of the Pro-
gramme Oﬃce need to be re-assessed. The Programme Oﬃce only needs to be
as large as the demand on its functional abilities.
Table 5.1 Complementary activities of a Project Manager and the Programme Oﬃce
Project Manager’s role
Programme Oﬃce roles
for the project:
for the programme:
direct the project; be responsible for its
success
administer the programme management
system and advise on process
review and report project progress
track and analyse programme progress; roll
up project progress
make decisions for the containment of
risk; resolve issues; approve changes
log issues, risks and changes, and analyse at
programme level
manage resources
prioritise programme resourcing
validate task durations and eﬀort
receive data from projects and collate for
overall reporting
validate and own project plans
roll up and analyse project plan data
chair project reviews
call formal reviews
liaise with business and third-party
management
be a centre of information for the
programme
manage contractual relationships
provide administrative support to the
Programme Executive
be accountable for the project budget;
approve costs and expenses
administer the overall programme budget
ensure project standards are correctly
implemented
set management standards for the programme
and each project
monitor resource eﬀectiveness
administer programme timesheets and
analyse earned value
understand user and business
requirements
administer programme business objectives
create team objectives
advise on overall programme standards for
team working
Supporting the programme
45

A typical set-up might comprise:

Programme Oﬃce Manager

Full-time Secretary

Planning Analysts

Programme Administrators

Financial Controller
In a programme that has a scarcity of project management skills, the Pro-
gramme Oﬃce might also undertake or procure project management training.
A methods consultant could also be employed to ensure the integrity of the
management methods throughout the programme. The Programme Oﬃce is
an excellent training ground for acquiring programme and project management
skills, such that many organisations like to include trainee project managers to
work alongside skilled Programme Oﬃce staﬀ.
Programme Oﬃce roles
The roles outlined below are representative of a typical Programme Oﬃce.
Depending on the size, nature and scope of the programme these activities
could take on greater or lesser signiﬁcance, so that each job description may not
need to equate to a single role. For example, it is quite conceivable for a Pro-
gramme Administrator also to assume the activities of a Systems and Documentation
Administrator, or a Planning Analyst to assume the activities of a Methods Analyst.
Programme Oﬃce Manager
A senior appointment, the Programme Oﬃce Manager manages the day-to-
day operation of the Programme Oﬃce. Ideally he or she is responsible for
setting up the function, so an early appointment in the programme’s lifespan is
desirable.
Typical tasks are:

be responsible for the set-up and operation of the Programme Oﬃce

manage Programme Oﬃce resourcing, equipment, facilities, funding

manage Programme Oﬃce personnel, setting personal objectives and
performance targets

advise the Programme Manager and Executive of out-of-line project and
programme situations

provide management information to members of the Programme Execu-
tive in support of their control of the programme, and be accountable for
the accuracy of data in monthly progress reports, etc.

be responsible for the provision of relevant programme and project
management training
46
Supporting the programme


be accountable for the interpretation of the programme management
system and management methods utilised across the projects

deputise for the Programme Manager, where applicable
Planning Analyst/Consultant
The Planning Analyst is an important technical role in a Programme Oﬃce,
and may be supported by one or more Planning Administrators. The Planning
Analyst is concerned with the accuracy of plans and the adequate coverage of
tasks by resources and eﬀort. This is a skilled role and carries a degree of consultancy
through the need to give advice to individual projects in their planning and
estimating.
Typical tasks are:

set and maintain standards for programme, project and sub-project
planning

advise on estimating and planning techniques and use of planning
software

run occasional training in planning and estimating

roll up and analyse plans received from projects

validate task and resource estimates

monitor task dependencies and plan interdependencies

monitor milestones

monitor project interdependencies with the Design Manager

prepare and maintain an integrated programme plan

report plan status

assist with the design of programme phases
Programme Oﬃce Administrator
A programme may need one or more Programme Administrators to administer
day-to-day tasks. Much of the work involves collecting data, recording it,
logging it and compiling reports for the Programme Executive and Steering
Group.
Typical tasks are:

maintain programme exceptions logs and registers (risks, issues, changes)

progress and analyse exceptions and report status

manage the programme time-recording system

maintain central ﬁling for vital programme information (e.g. vendor
contracts)

collate monthly progress reports and regular information from projects

prepare information for the monthly programme report

schedule and arrange formal project reviews
Supporting the programme
47

Programme Financial Controller
The Programme Financial Controller is a necessary role for any large pro-
gramme. The scale of such programmes is usually such that they represent a
sizeable investment for a company or business. In order to ensure that the
programme operates to optimum cost eﬀectiveness, the Financial Controller
will be an experienced accountant, able to record and analyse costs and
expenditure to a high degree of accuracy.
Typical tasks are:

maintain programme budget

validate expenses and costs

reconcile expenses and costs

monitor and forecast expenses and costs against budget and contracts

analyse expenses and costs, report their status and compile earned value
trends

prepare ﬁnancial input for the monthly programme report
In a smaller programme the Programme Manager may well assume this role.
Quality Administrator/Controller
The Quality Administrator or Controller is a role that supports the Design
Manager and may or may not be sited in the Programme Oﬃce. In a small
programme, the administrative aspect of the role could be taken by a Pro-
gramme Administrator, and the more analytical aspect of the role could be
accomplished by the Design Manager. For some programmes, however, quality
is of prime importance, justifying the establishment of a separate role.
Typical tasks are:

provide administrative support to the Design Manager

assist in the production of the overall programme Quality Plan

advise and assist projects in establishing their Quality and Test Plans

schedule Quality Reviews and Project Audits
Systems and Documentation Administrator
This role may not be a full-time role, and in a small programme the tasks could
be supported through a line operation. It is best not to be too inventive in
establishing systems for the Programme Oﬃce, as there are usually enough set-up
problems with even the most standard of software.
Typical tasks are:

organise electronic ﬁling and retrieval of programme documentation

conﬁgure Programme Oﬃce hardware and software
48
Supporting the programme


set up and maintain communications links

advise projects on systems and document management
Programme Secretariat
The Programme Secretariat may be thought of as the glue that holds the Pro-
gramme Oﬃce together. The Secretariat is often the ﬁrst link for information
requirements from either within or outside the programme, so has a key
communications role to play.
Typical tasks are:

respond to incoming calls, and route information requests to the right
persons

support the Programme Executive and Programme Oﬃce Manager with
secretarial duties

arrange programme meetings and take minutes

provide a ﬁling and document production service

arrange oﬀ-site accommodation for contractors, etc.
It is easy to underestimate the size of these tasks. So many programmes set
out with half a head in this role. Others try to fulﬁl other Programme Oﬃce
roles through the Secretariat. It is important, though, not to dilute Programme
Oﬃce roles, merely for the sake of cost saving.
Establishing a Programme Oﬃce
In establishing a Programme Oﬃce the size, nature and scope of the programme
need to be considered. Typical questions to ask are:

Is the programme spread across geographical boundaries, i.e. Europe, United States,
global?

Will communication between projects and the Programme Oﬃce be manual or
electronic?

Are existing electronic links in place, e.g. email, EDI, LAN, WAN, Wi-Fi?

Where will the Programme Executive reside?

Is there physical space for the Programme Oﬃce close to the Programme Executive?

What local or networked computing exists currently?

Will the programme use social networking in any shape or form?

Are standards already established in the company for personal computing hardware
and software, e.g. for word processing, spreadsheets, project planning, databases?

Are company project management standards already in place?

Are company programme management standards already in place?

Are there people in the company with the necessary Programme Oﬃce skills, or will
resources need to be brought in?

Will the concept of the Programme Oﬃce need to be sold to a sceptical organisation?
Supporting the programme
49

The Programme Oﬃce will be a busy environment. People will need phy-
sical access as well as electronic access. A local area network (LAN) or secure
Wi-Fi will be an important requirement. The Programme Executive will need
regular and often instant information on the status of various parts of the pro-
gramme. A half-hearted approach will only cause frustration and result in an
unproductive and low-quality service. The investment in Programme Oﬃce
support is a signiﬁcant part of the overall programme Business Case, and should
not be considered an afterthought. Allowance should be made for people,
computer equipment, software, telecommunications, storage space, oﬃce space,
desks and facilities – all growing with the programme.
Set-up of the Programme Oﬃce should begin during Programme Design,
allowing time for recruitment of staﬀand provision of oﬃce facilities. The
Programme Oﬃce Manager is one of the key roles that should be recruited
during the early part of Programme Design.
Operation of a Programme Oﬃce
Programme Oﬃce tasks are generally split between administrative, analytical
and educational. The range of skill levels required, such as from secretarial to
consultant, therefore, is large.
Activities tend to centre around a need to support the Programme Executive
with statistical information and a need to support each project with advice and
guidance on programme standards. Day-to-day activities are concerned with
collating and analysing information and reporting it. This usually occurs on a
regular cycle. Figure 5.1 summarises these activities.
Exceptional activities occur with, for example, the commissioning of a new
project, when assistance will be required in setting up its standards and infor-
mation protocols. Also, the Programme Oﬃce will be involved in periodic
audits of projects for compliance to standards.
The information cycle
Most programmes work on a monthly cycle of reporting information. Data are
submitted fortnightly from each project at summary level, and plans are rolled
up into a monthly integrated programme plan. A register of projects is usually
maintained, which typically records the following information:

project name and manager

key objectives

key milestones

key deliverables

position and priority within programme

key dependencies

number of resources

capital value
50
Supporting the programme

In addition to the register (which is largely static and does not require con-
tinual updating), there is the monthly reporting package, which typically
records each month the following for each project:

current status (e.g. red, amber, green) in terms of work against schedule
and costs

current key risks

current key issues

major changes requested and outstanding

a brief résumé of achievements over the previous month

a forecast of key activity for the coming month
The monthly package will usually be supported by analyses of earned value,
expenses and risks. Based upon information in the monthly package, the Programme
Executive will make judgements concerning the apportionment of resources and
funding across the programme, the resolution of issues and containment of
risks, the approval of changes against the Blueprint and the prioritisation of
projects in line with current business requirements.
Figure 5.1 Summary of common Programme Oﬃce elements
Supporting the programme
51
Programm
Schedule
Programm
Design
Registers
Programme
Standards
Resources
& Facilities
Plan
Exceptions
Exceptions
Exceptions
Exceptions
Exceptions
Exceptions
Exceptions
Exceptions
Exceptions

Clearly, in order to be eﬀective, each project must report information in an
identical format, and plans must be submitted to consistent standards.
Exceptions management
The Programme Oﬃce needs to identify and record key exceptions from each
project. These are generally risks, issues and changes, though additional exceptions
may be relevant for particular programmes (e.g. software errors, production
errors).
A process for managing exceptions needs to be ﬁrmly established during
Programme Design. This should include levels of authority and approvals
needed, as well as who records what and when. In general, each project
maintains its own exceptions register (whether it has a Project Oﬃce or not),
and the Programme Oﬃce acts as a high-level ﬁlter for rolling up data for
analysis and reporting exceptions that are critical to the programme. It is impor-
tant not to duplicate the work undertaken in this area by each project, but in
practice, the Programme Oﬃce needs to be able to inspect exceptions registers
in order to analyse their impact across the programme, and to ensure con-
sistency of recording. Several projects may have a similar issue or be recording
the same risk. This information is particularly valuable to the Programme
Oﬃce, who may be able to implement a programme-wide resolution.
The Risk Manager will probably want to use the Programme Oﬃce to keep
the programme risk register, and may also wish to delegate certain risk analysis
tasks. If so, the results of any risk identiﬁcation or evaluation sessions run by the
Risk Manager can be fed to the Programme Oﬃce for inclusion in the register
and subsequent analysis.
The longevity of a programme will inevitably mean changes arising from
market forces, business direction, legislation, technology, etc. Few programmes
are completed exactly as envisaged in terms of scope and delivery. A pro-
gramme, therefore, needs to be prepared for change and be ﬂexibly structured
in order to react eﬃciently to change. A ﬁrmly managed change management
process needs to be in place, to which there is commitment from all those
involved in the programme. This includes sub-contractors, whose terms and
conditions of engagement must bind their commitment to the process. It also
includes commitment from the Programme Executive and Steering Group to
honour the process and make it work, as there will be considerable pressures
applied in reaching decisions on change.
Take technological change, for example, now occurring at a logarithmic rate.
Decisions whether to take advantage of new technology must be well under-
stood in terms of cost, beneﬁt, schedule upheaval and technical stability. It is
easy to be convinced that the latest piece of technology is a change for the best
for a programme, but experience shows that pioneering new technology is a
regular contributor to project and programme failure. The ill-fated 2004
National Programme for IT1 across the UK National Health Service (NHS)
was a victim in part of pioneering technology and a failure by stakeholders to
52
Supporting the programme

agree on its installation and usage. Many programmes that attempt to unite,
through technology, disparate groups within an organisation sail a stormy sea.
The role of Business Change Manager and a strong communication plan for
stakeholders are absolutely essential for such programmes.
Analysis
The ability of the Programme Oﬃce to see the whole programme enables it to
provide early warning to individual projects on aspects such as resourcing, costs,
interdependencies and risks. Analysis of plans, resource loadings, exceptions and
costs allows the Programme Oﬃce to recommend approaches to the Pro-
gramme Executive that will enable the programme to be more eﬃcient and
cost eﬀective.
Access to prior data is important when analysing trends and, therefore, the
employment of analysts with previous programme experience is useful. Certain
regular analyses of data will be required for the monthly package. The Pro-
gramme Executive needs to decide which analyses it requires the Programme
Oﬃce to perform.
Typically, the programme will be looking to examine and show:

the utilisation of resources across the programme

earned value of work by project

cost and expense trends (e.g. payments outstanding, performance against
project budgets)

analysis of programme risk (construction of cause-and-eﬀect diagrams,
radar charts, risk exposure, Monte Carlo simulations, impact modelling)

position year to date against the Business Case (funding, milestones, beneﬁts,
business change)

performance of work groups (e.g. sub-contractors) and time recording
This is a strong departure from a typical Project Oﬃce, which has a greater
administrative role.
Documentation
The programme will accumulate signiﬁcant amounts of documentation. Its
ﬁling and retrieval capabilities need to be particularly eﬃcient. The Programme
Oﬃce is responsible for maintaining master programme documentation, such as
the Programme Design. Much of the material will be held online and will
involve data sharing.
During the establishment of the Programme Oﬃce particular consideration
needs to be given to:

what data need to be accessed and how frequently

who needs to share what data
Supporting the programme
53


who owns what data

how data will be communicated

how data will be rolled up from the projects (e.g. project plans, exceptions
information)

how data will be secured and backed up

how each version of data will be controlled
Retrieval of documentation needs to be fast and convenient, so systems and
applications need to be selected which can support a high retrieval perfor-
mance. Too many programmes fail to consider these requirements during
Programme Design and, as mentioned previously, a costly form of ﬁre ﬁghting
ensues when it is realised later how important they really are.
Newly commissioned projects
The Programme Oﬃce plays a key role in the establishment of new projects
within the programme, ensuring that:

a project manager is assigned

resources are allocated

space is found and equipment is procured

training is given in the management methods

standards are established correctly in each project
Of course, guidance is required from the Programme Executive in many of
these areas, but the Programme Oﬃce acts as the administrative function for
ensuring new projects are welcomed aboard.
Not only will new projects be commissioned but also staﬀwill be joining
various parts of the programme from time to time. It is useful, therefore, to be
able to provide a roadmap of the programme for new personnel, which
includes programme objectives, an up-to-date organisation chart, facilities,
processes and standards. It is essential that new personnel and sub-contractors
subscribe to the processes deﬁned for the programme. Lack of consistency is one
of the biggest time wasters for programmes, and too often personnel spend
time trying to extract data from incompatible levels of software. A particular
problem is that everyone has their own favourite brand of software application
(especially planning software) and there can be ﬁerce resistance to using anything
else.
Summary
Establishing support for a programme is an important consideration, since many
will see it as a costly overhead. A well-run support function is essential for both
maintaining control and for being able to produce a continual, up-to-the-minute
big picture of a programme.
54
Supporting the programme

If the Programme Executive is the bridge for steering the programme, the
Programme Oﬃce is the engine room. Without it the programme has no
driving force. Establishing a Programme Oﬃce is a professional job. It needs to
be done well, and thoroughly (not half-heartedly) if it is to be eﬀective. It will
not be inexpensive, but it is usually consistent in its requirements, so a good
Programme Oﬃce can be used again on other programmes in terms of its
processes and systems. It is also a good training ground for personnel. The
range of roles is large and there are plenty of analytical tasks as well as purely
administrative and educational tasks.
Several consultancies now oﬀer Programme Oﬃce design and set-up services,
and many also provide Programme Oﬃce resources and systems.
Note
1 Sean Brennan, The NHS IT Project – The Biggest Computer Programme in the World …
Ever! Milton Keynes: Radcliﬀe Publishing, 2005. ISBN 1-85775-732-7.
Supporting the programme
55

6
Managing risk
The role of risk management in programmes
A programme of change is usually a wide-ranging and lengthy undertaking,
commanding a high priority and focus. The risks of scale, therefore, are already
enough to diﬀerentiate it from a singularly focused project. Add to this the
number of inter-relationships, the cost of resources and the risks of being closely
aligned to a Business Strategy, and it is not diﬃcult to envisage the importance
of risk management to the overall programme.
A programme needs to make an investment in risk management. It cannot
be a half-hearted aﬀair, practised once a quarter or only at programme outset.
For example, a Programme Manager has to make far-reaching decisions
regarding the proﬁtability of a programme, and has to balance the cost of risk
reduction against the potential cost of impacts. These are diﬃcult decisions.
Reducing risk is not cheap, but neither is the cost of dealing with an impact.
However, not all risks can be reduced by spending money, and a certain
amount of risk is acceptable: the question is how much?
In projects, the identiﬁcation of risk tends to be closely focused on the work to be
done, with some consideration being given to the environment in which the project
is positioned. In programmes, the focus on risk in the business environment and
marketplace usually has greater signiﬁcance. This is partly due to the importance a
programme holds within an overall Business Strategy, but also to the vulnerability
of a programme in today’s rapidly changing markets and business priorities.
Risk management at the programme level plays an important role in strategic
decision making. Decisions concerning changes to the programme in terms of
such aspects as funding, resourcing, direction, quality of deliverables, priority
and timescale, frequently require a sound risk management approach. Risk
management techniques can support these decisions, whilst promoting a culture
of forward thinking in the team through their regular use.
Risk management should play a part across all phases of a programme:

During Programme Feasibility it should conﬁrm the viability of the pro-
gramme and provide the basis for judgements concerning the required
investment and expected beneﬁts.


During Programme Design it should support the establishment of a ﬁrm
foundation, building the conﬁdence and assurance required to get the
programme oﬀto a good start.

During the operation of the programme it should provide a sound basis for
ongoing management of the total programme risk exposure, and support
the requirements for problem resolution and programme changes. It
should also support the successful transfer to the business of completed
projects, the achievement of projected beneﬁts and performance levels, the
redeployment of resources, and feedback of “lessons learned”.
The programme at risk
What sort of things can go wrong in a programme? A programme is at risk
from many areas, but the common factor across all is people – people under-
taking the programme and people external to the programme (in the business,
in suppliers, in customers, in government, etc.). Human failings tend to out-
weigh technical failings, yet curiously many programme risk registers record
more technical risks than people risks. This may be because the people risks are
diﬃcult to state, or perhaps in some environments it is politic to suppress them.
The people risks are commonly:

Poor or unclear expectations: caused through insuﬃcient Programme Design
or poor communication of the Programme Design.

Poor or no change control: caused through lack of ﬁrm sponsorship or
commitment to a structured change control process.

Poor commitment of resources: caused through unsound positioning within the
business.
Besides people risks, a programme is usually susceptible to technical and
business risks. Generally, there is good understanding of the technical chal-
lenges in programmes; less so the business challenges. For example, constructing
the Channel Tunnel involved enormous technical risk which was fairly well
understood from the early stages. In hindsight, however, the business risk
seemed to be either poorly understood, or understood but poorly commu-
nicated, resulting in the venture regularly running out of money throughout its
life cycle. When these challenges are both well understood, as was the case in
the construction of the London Olympic Park and the hosting of the London
Olympic Games in 2012, managing the risks becomes that much easier.
The business challenges present themselves in a few discrete ways, and there
is no programme that is not susceptible to them. The diﬃculty is recognising
their sources, knock-on eﬀects and knowing how to manage them. For
example, a project to implement point-of-sale terminals in retail outlets could
well be susceptible to local, regional and corporate initiatives concerning those
outlets. If, say, an initiative was being planned elsewhere in the company to
Managing risk
57

rationalise the number and layout of outlets, this would have a direct impact on
the point-of-sale project. This example is fairly commonplace, and the author
has exposed these so-called collision course projects in several companies through
the use of structured risk identiﬁcation workshops.
The best way to tackle the people, technical and business challenges is
through the application of good practice. Concentrating on the things to get
right is a positive approach to risk, and more rewarding than just focusing on
the negative aspects of risk. Figure 6.1 shows eight things to get right in a
programme, and presents them as linked requirements. Because they are linked
to each other it is necessary to establish all eight correctly, in order to have a
chance at achieving programme success.
These requirements can be important triggers for risk, some of which can be
the causes of spectacular programme failings. The requirements are examined in
some detail in the next few pages, and can be remembered as the mnemonic
“PREPARED”:
P – partnership; R – resources; E – expectations; P – plans; A – achievable
requirements and beneﬁts; R – result; E – eﬀective Sponsor; D – deliverables.
Lack of partnership
Many programmes suﬀer from protracted conﬂicts with suppliers and third
parties, arising from confusion over scope and deliverables, for example, or
misunderstandings concerning resources and timescales. The prime instrument
in dealing with third parties is the contract. This is usually the source of any
conﬂict, and is the thing that needs to be got right. Legally binding, it is a
necessary document, but it can easily sour an otherwise good client/supplier
Figure 6.1 Eight things to get right
58
Managing risk
Skilled resources,
Effective plans and
contracted and committed:
control processes, to
Partnership between
programme, business
and third parties
contractedcontracted
contracted and committed:
contracted and committed:
contracted and committed:
contracted and committed:
control processes, toand
Skilled resources,
Effective plans and
resources,
resources,
expectations
Deliverables implemented
to time, cost and quality
expectations

relationship. The enthusiasm of early negotiations between a client and supplier
can quickly be dimmed in protracted contractual argument.
Ideally, contracts with third-party suppliers should be drawn up which allow
open working arrangements. If suppliers feel the need to refer regularly to their
contracts then the contracts have become a barrier to operating as a partnership.
Risk-reward contracts or joint-venture arrangements are preferable to standard
terms for suppliers providing the major part of services to a programme. At the
very least, documents of understanding should be drawn up that commit sup-
pliers to subscribing to the management processes of the programme (i.e. the
timely submission of progress reports, proper use of and commitment to the excep-
tions processes). Figure 6.2 shows the contractual divide between procurer and
supplier, and suggests that a contract need not be a business barrier.
The programme cannot aﬀord to carry conﬂicts of management or politics,
yet every large programme seems to have its share of these. They are often
symptomatic of the business culture and merely transferred to the programme
environment. The ability to work together for the greater good of the pro-
gramme, without conﬂict, is a challenging goal, and every Programme Man-
ager’s dream, but there are techniques that can help it along. Some of these are:

good expectations management, through regular and informed communications

documents of understanding between programme and business

roadmaps of the programme for suppliers and new starters

plenary meetings, associated with social events

team objectives and rewards

proper deployment of resources

good working conditions and environment
Figure 6.2 The contractual divide
Managing risk
59
0::
(J)
W
c
0::
(J)
0::
CONTRACT
"'U
W
=>
"'U
0::
c
U
r
"'U
0
=>
"'U
m
U
r
0::
::u
0
m
a..
0::
::u
a..
Contract as barrier
Contract as partnership

Poor commitment of resources
Often cited as the single largest cause of project failure, the failure to commit
resources for the time required is common in large programmes, and is usually
a sign of inexperienced programme organisation and management.
A programme will consume large numbers of resources, some of which will
be re-directed from existing business operations. This is where the conﬂicts
usually occur, and the risks of resource de-commitments are high. Much is due
to poor expectation setting, and line managers can feel a lack of ownership
with a programme that is currently stealing the limelight.
The Programme Director needs to establish the right priority of a programme
within the lines of business, and set expectations of resource requirements. Project
Managers should be appointed with experience of managing project teams, and
documents of understanding need to be drawn up (between line management and pro-
gramme) for all projects in order to commit resources and establish their availability
without ambiguity. There must be no doubt between the lines of business and the
programme as to the importance and priority of committed resources’ work.
Increasingly, resources are being utilised externally to programmes, with
work being contracted out to third parties. Resources are also contracted in, and
eﬀective use of this type of resource requires active monitoring. The author has
seen contractors whose contracts have terminated but who are performing key
roles. Uncertainties or delays to contract renewal cause loss of productivity. If
contractors are spending time looking for their next engagement instead of
concentrating on the work in hand then they are not being managed.
Resources can easily be lost within a large programme, and the Programme
Oﬃce needs to perform capacity planning of resources across all constituent
projects to ensure their eﬃcient and cost-eﬀective use.
Poor or unclear expectations
The construction of the Millennium Dome is a good topical example of
unclear expectations. It is symptomatic of a “build ﬁrst then decide what should
go in it” mentality. Under such circumstances, how can the end result be
adequately satisﬁed? Sponsors were expected to put up funds without knowing
what they were backing. No wonder few came forward to take up the original
challenges. The business expectation was that the public would view the Dome
as a major construction achievement to which they would ﬂock in vast num-
bers. Whilst many visited, the anticipated large numbers never came and so
ticket revenue fell well below expectations.
Expectation setting is all about marketing, and is diﬃcult because it is subject
to changes in mood and temperament of the targeted audience. For example,
in terms of engineering alone the Channel Tunnel is a marvellous feat. How-
ever, the feat of engineering was overshadowed by the enormous ﬁnancial
diﬃculties experienced, to the extent that the positive feelings of national pride
it sought to exalt were soured by the many negative feelings of a project in
deep ﬁnancial trouble.
60
Managing risk

The National Health Service (NHS) National Programme for IT, which
sought to link functions of the NHS with various joined-up IT applications,
failed to convince the many stakeholder groups involved, many of which had
quite disparate existing operations. Billed at the time as the world’s largest IT
programme, it perhaps was a step too far in its expectations.
On a brighter note, though, the 2012 London Olympics Programme fully
recognised all stakeholder groups and successfully marketed to them. The
communications cost was considerable, but the view was that it was essential
for this type of programme.
Chapter 7 gives an indication of the importance of expectations management
in the light of beneﬁts achievement.
Ineﬀective plans and control processes
The managers of projects and programmes generally understand the need to
establish plans and control processes, but the way in which they are utilised
makes all the diﬀerence. Merely to establish processes and plans and keep
records is inadequate. They have to be eﬀective. That is, the information they
contain must be of use to the general operation of the programme.
There are many examples of elegant plans being drawn up that fail to alert a
Project or Programme Manager to signs of trouble. This is often because the
plans are not analysed or planning analysis skills are not present. At the pro-
gramme level, analysis is fundamental to the tracking operation. The business
cannot aﬀord to make decisions slowly, so accurate, up-to-the-minute
management information is vital for steering the programme.
A common problem in projects and programmes is the lack of buy-in to
standard processes by suppliers and sub-contractors. This results in the failure by
third parties to submit regular progress data and to subscribe to the common
planning process. Much time is wasted cajoling suppliers for vital information
or converting data from inadequate software formats. This is very much a fail-
ure by the Programme Manager in persuading suppliers to the importance of
the programme and their part in its success.
The problem can also commonly extend to projects within the programme’s
own enterprise, and requires a strong Programme Oﬃce to ensure homo-
geneity of progress reporting and process management. However, the pro-
gramme ought not to act in a dictatorial manner, and in the interests of
partnership, could oﬀer expertise to projects in the compilation of their plans to
standard formats.
Requirements and beneﬁts not achievable
Chapter 7 explores the achievability of beneﬁts, of which much also applies to
the attainment of achievable requirements. Important considerations for both
requirements and beneﬁts are:

that it is possible to achieve them

that business and user communities comprehend them
Managing risk
61


that they are accepted and signed oﬀas viable

that a rigorous change control process exists
However, it is often requirements that cause the most friction in programmes
and projects. They are more vulnerable to change, and managing requirements
change is a particular challenge for the Design Manager.
The achievability of requirements and beneﬁts often relates to how realistic
they are. “Blue sky” requirements are a venture into the unknown, often
because few but the visionaries understand them. “Act-of-faith” programmes
are regularly commissioned, and many have been born out of the nineties
vogue for globalisation. These programmes stem from an ideal of global trad-
ing, cutting across country boundaries and traditions to create the truly inter-
national company. Few can say they have been successful, and many have cut
their losses to embark on more realistic undertakings.
In the IT sector, many projects and programmes are pioneering in nature,
but enlightened organisations have learned to keep such undertakings simple
and implement them step by step.
Comprehension of the requirements by all participants in a programme is
vital, if their translation into completed deliverables is to be eﬀected to the
correct design. Sign-oﬀs to design documents and acceptance criteria are also
vital, and the principles of change control need to be communicated to
everyone involved. The author has witnessed ludicrous situations where a
project has reached the end of its development phase and requirements have
still not been signed oﬀby the business owners.
Lack of faith in the result
The question of faith applies equally to all those who work on a programme. A
determination to succeed is an important requirement not only for those at the
centre but also among the projects and external suppliers. A programme whose
people have faith in its outcome has a deﬁnite buzz. Teams are excited about what
they are accomplishing and clearly enjoy being part of it. When teams lose faith in
their ability to deliver the change as planned, morale becomes low and pro-
ductivity suﬀers. No amount of incentive can make up for this, and the Programme
Manager needs to take regular soundings of morale across the programme.
Often, loss of faith emanates from quite mundane things. The author once
asked a programme team member why he was dissatisﬁed with working on a
particular programme. He replied that the journey to work every day was
stressful and fraught with diﬃculty, and that when he arrived he was accom-
modated in little more than a shack! This had nothing to do with the nature of
the work, which did not get a mention, but the physical environment was
rated highly for job satisfaction.
Morale can vary within individual projects, and short-lived projects suﬀer less
from poor morale than longer-term projects. Work on a long-term programme
can be wearing. Some programmes can span several years, and ten-year pro-
grammes are not rare, particularly in the public sector, such as military
62
Managing risk

hardware development. In these situations, there needs to be variety of work
and a continual sense of achievement.
Ineﬀective or unclear sponsorship
The Channel Tunnel is widely referenced in this book, but the scale of the
undertaking has presented many lessons to be learned from the people, tech-
nical and business challenges. It was not, for example, immune to ineﬀective or
unclear sponsorship. Certainly, the government’s insistence on private spon-
sorship meant that for the crucial early years of the programme there was no
single backer or sponsor.
Without a single champion for a programme there can be no single vision.
Divided visions, from many stakeholders, often mean squabbling, awkward
compromises, reduced authority and longer time for decision making.
The role of Sponsor is much misunderstood, and the author has witnessed
many examples of Sponsors appearing in name only. Many programmes aim
too high in selecting their Sponsors. An eﬀective Sponsor is not necessarily the
Chief Executive, who may be far too preoccupied to become involved in a
programme. However, the Chief Executive may be the ideal choice for a
company-wide programme, since everyone in the company needs to under-
stand that the change is being sanctioned from the very top. At the very least it
is essential that a programme be positioned within the portfolio of change that
a company or organisation is currently eﬀecting, in order that it can adequately
compete for resources.
The Sponsor endorses the programme and acts as a sort of godfather. The
Sponsor might appear in publicity material endorsing the programme’s con-
cepts, or be the ﬁrst to take delivery of an end product and demonstrate that if
it works for him or her then it is good for the business. More importantly, the
Sponsor champions the cause of the programme within the context of the
business as a whole. If the Sponsor loses faith then the programme loses its
ﬁgurehead, and its direction may be far from secure.
Whilst a programme beneﬁts from an overall Sponsor, each project needs to
have its own Sponsor. This should ideally be a senior management appoint-
ment in the business area concerned, in order to ensure buy-in from that
business. Projects that do not have such a Sponsor can suﬀer from a lack of
commitment from their business area, which will be tested when, for example,
resources are required for user testing tasks.
Deliverables not implemented to planned time, cost and quality
The trio of time, cost and quality are traditional measures of project success, but
the question of whether a project is a failure if all three are not met is a ques-
tion of perception. Certainly, other essential success criteria have been explored
in this book, and the example has been cited of the high-quality, cost-eﬀective
and on-target IT solution that users could not utilise. However, even if the
trio are not the ultimate criteria for project success, they are strong contributors,
and for many, extremely desirable.
Managing risk
63

Good planning and estimating will keep a grip on time, and good change
control will ensure that “scope creep” is kept at bay. Scope creep, or the con-
tinual piecemeal accommodation of requirements outside change control, is
also a contributor to run-away costs. Scope creep is often a contributor to the
enormous diﬀerences between planned costs and actual costs in several widely
reported public programmes world-wide. The key question is could these costs
have been forecast at planning stage, and if so, would any of these programmes ever have
left the drawing board?
Calculating the risk exposure of a project or programme is a useful activity
that can make sizeable inroads into forecasting costs. The technique is described
later in this chapter in the section on “risk analysis”. It is an attempt at calcu-
lating the total project or programme cost, and is most useful in providing a
contingency fund for hidden costs:
Resource costs + equipment and materials costs + risk exposure = total cost
So many projects and programmes fail to account for the risk exposure in set-
ting their budgets and seem happy with projecting just project cost and bene-
ﬁts. Yet, adding the risk dimension, even though it is not absolute, can
contribute to the greater understanding of cost.
Figure 6.3 shows the risk exposures calculated for a product deliverable, in
this case a new mobile phone product, and the choice between launching the
product early to achieve a competitive edge or delaying launch until further testing
had been carried out. The pressures from the business on the project team for
the former option were considerable, but the result shows the latter option
carried the least risk, even though the margin of error in calculating the risk
exposures was great. Only the summary risk factors are shown for each option.
In the top line of each pathway is quality. Quality is often a product of both
cost and time, and is a particularly elusive goal. Many link the availability of
increased time with the opportunity to increase quality, but attach a high cost
to achieving it. The perception of quality as high cost is, of course, false, since
quality is merely the meeting of expected standards. The old adage that “the
best things are achieved with time” may have some truth, but there is usually a
limit to the amount of testing that any project can undertake, when a decision
has to be made that the right quality standard has been reached. The classic
project dilemma of whether to increase project time to accommodate increased time for
testing or to release the deliverables as completed can only be resolved by analysis of
the contributing factors.
The ﬁrst three lines of each pathway are about time but the bottom two
pathways are about costs and revenue. The loss of market share would be an
important risk for a mobile phone company, so the opportunity to gain faster
entry to the market would impose huge pressure from the business on the
programme. Figure 6.3 shows that some of the risks can be political, which is
itself a risk to the programme.
64
Managing risk

Establishing risk management
The appointment of a Risk Manager will ensure that risk management is ﬁrmly
established within a programme. A skilled Risk Manager can advise on the
establishment of risk registers and supporting software as well as the approach to
be taken for identifying and containing risk across the programme.
Each project will need its own risk register, which has the ability to be
viewed at least in summary at the programme level. It is important, however,
not to take the management of risk out of context. Risk is as much a pro-
gramme exception as is an issue or change. If a risk impacts, it becomes an
issue, requiring urgent or immediate attention, and often some sort of change is
required to resolve the issue. Risk management is, therefore, the ability to
forecast potential issues and take appropriate early action, avoiding the need for
costly changes. Figure 6.4 shows the link between programme or project
exceptions and the relative cost of dealing with each type.
Choosing software that can manage all three exceptions is preferable to
holding separate registers. This ensures that exceptions are managed relative to
each type, and that the factors common to each type, i.e. actions, are appropriately
applied and monitored.
The Risk Manager will want to establish a relevant risk management process
and oﬀer assistance to each project in accomplishing it. To undertake risk man-
agement well is no easy task, and it is easy for any project to lapse into a state of
routine “lip service” for the programme. The Risk Manager needs to ensure that
Figure 6.3 Example of using risk analysis for deciding the best of two options
Managing risk
65
Less
Risk
Decision
Risk exposure £m
More
Risk
Calculated £m RE
Decision
Decision
Decision
Decision
Decision
Decision
Decision
Decision
Decision
Decision
Decision
Decision

the process is simple to operate and that each part of the programme sees real value in
subscribing to it. For guidance on establishing risk see the author’s book
Managing Risk for Projects and Programmes, which complements this book.
The process employed must be able to support the necessary decisions
required for risk by the Programme Executive. These include whether to
accept a risk and its consequences, whether to allocate funding and resources to
contain a risk, whether to provide contingency, whether to avoid a risk by
working round it or whether to mitigate the consequences of impact. At the
programme level these are solid business decisions, such that the base data must
be presented in a format that favours such decisions. For example, an analysis of
the distribution of risks on the risk register is of less value to a Programme
Manager than an analysis of the cost-beneﬁt options of tackling the risks.
The Risk Manager will establish the number and type of risk reviews needed
throughout the programme, leading regular group risk identiﬁcation and risk
assessment sessions. He or she will ensure that the relevant expertise is brought
in to advise on the mitigation of particular risks. Often I have heard team
Figure 6.4 The link between exceptions and the relative cost of dealing with each
66
Managing risk
Changes
Changes
Changes

members describe a risk as out of their sphere of involvement, exclaiming it to
be a business risk and so nothing they can do anything about. At the very least,
the Risk Manager would have the ability to ensure that these types of risk are
adequately dealt with.
Risk analysis
Risk analysis is an important undertaking for a programme, and is a sophisti-
cated skill. So much so that the Risk Manager ought to devote a considerable
amount of time to analysis work. A good Risk Manager can save a programme
signiﬁcant cost by predicting issues and recommending action to avoid them.
Nonetheless, such expertise does not come cheaply, and is in particular demand.
The most important measure that needs to be calculated for a programme is
its risk exposure. This is a measure of cost that is particularly important when
programme changes need to be considered. The cost of risk needs to be
weighed against the perceived programme beneﬁts. So many managers fail to
take into account the cost of risk when valuing their projects or programmes.
Even in cases where it is considered, the cost of risk is often an arbitrary per-
centage added to the programme cost for good measure. Yet there are simple
ways in which the cost of risk can be calculated, and for very little eﬀort.
A useful technique for calculating a simple risk exposure (£RE) is to esti-
mate the cost of impact (£IC) and multiply this by the percentage probability
(%P) of the impact occurring. (The cost of impact is an estimate of the impact
repair cost.) The resulting risk exposure is eﬀectively the insurance premium
that needs to be set aside in the event of the risk occurring: £IC × %P = £RE.
Estimating the cost of impact is usually subjective, but since many impacts
result in things such as project delay, it is possible to estimate the cost of delay
without undue diﬃculty. The value of being able to show the risk exposure for
each project within a programme is immense.
Valuable risk management techniques for use at the programme level which
can assist the decision-making and forecasting process include soft systems thinking
techniques (see Chapter 8), decision trees and cause-and-eﬀect diagrams.
Capacity planning of risk is both possible and desirable at the programme
level. The opportunity to save containment costs presents itself by taking a
wide view of risk across a programme’s projects. The wider picture presents a
diﬀerent view of how risks can be mitigated or contained from that seen at the
project level. However, it is reliant on being able to roll up relevant data from
each project and quantify those data in order to form opinions. Some options
available are:

compare risks of a similar nature in order to understand causes and eﬀects

prioritise containment actions to maximum eﬀect and cost beneﬁt for the
programme

recommend the realignment of work packages or project scopes in order
to avoid interdependent risks
Managing risk
67

Summary
The key messages are:

Risk management at the programme level is on a diﬀerent scale from that
at the project level, and therefore requires particular approaches.

A successful programme makes an investment in risk management and uses
it to positive advantage, making it an inherent part of the programme
management process.

There are eight things to get right in order to reduce risk, memorable as
the mnemonic PREPARED.

Putting a value on risk and calculating risk exposures enables a better
understanding of the real cost of programmes.
68
Managing risk

7
Beneﬁts management
A key diﬀerentiator between a programme and a stand-alone project is the
activity of beneﬁts management. A project is not equipped to manage beneﬁts
since it is usually disbanded soon after delivery. This means that the beneﬁts to
be attained from the project deliverables must be managed by the business. Few
organisations set this up correctly. It is often many months since the inaugura-
tion of the Project Business Case and memories seem to fade quickly about the
vital beneﬁts that need to be attained.
A programme, however, has the ability to manage beneﬁts since it is
designed to fulﬁl a strategic objective. The end point of a programme is, in fact,
the successful attainment of beneﬁts as stated in the strategy. Throughout the
life of a programme projects come and go. They deliver the capability to
achieve beneﬁts and it is the programme that needs to verify this capability and
track the beneﬁts attained. Because projects are commissioned and decommis-
sioned throughout a programme’s life, there is time for the beneﬁts of those
projects to be realised and for the programme to be re-tuned if necessary to take
account of any beneﬁts not realised. Further projects may be commissioned to
account for any beneﬁts capability not being as expected.
So, beneﬁts management is an operation that spans the entire lifespan of a
programme, and is crucial to the attainment of programme success. Surprisingly,
though, it is rarely given the attention deserved, and it is rarely undertaken
properly.
The practical management of beneﬁts seems to be diﬃcult for many pro-
grammes, and may be due to a lack of understanding of the contributors to
beneﬁts achievement and the techniques available to manage beneﬁts.
Lack of beneﬁts management can be a root cause of programme failure. It
also needs to be undertaken well and the contributors to beneﬁts success need
to be understood. The task is, therefore, complex, and demands a wide span of
control.
In terms of method, beneﬁts management usually comprises:

the identiﬁcation of beneﬁts

the establishment of measurable success criteria

comprehension of the key contributors to beneﬁts achievement


the monitoring of expectations, requirements, deliverables and quality

the measurement of the achievement of beneﬁts against established success
criteria
The sections that follow describe these tasks.
Identiﬁcation of beneﬁts
The beneﬁts of a programme usually emerge from the Business Strategy, and
should be summarised in the Blueprint for Change. At the Business Strategy stage,
however, beneﬁts are very much a perception of what might be achievable, and
need to be properly quantiﬁed before they can move from being mere
requirements. The Blueprint for Change apportions the desired beneﬁts to
relevant change vehicles (see Chapter 3), and each change vehicle needs to
undergo some sort of feasibility assessment. Within a programme, this is a dis-
crete stage – Programme Feasibility – and the point at which its apportioned
beneﬁts need to be validated and quantiﬁed.
The vital preparatory work for beneﬁts management, therefore, should be
conducted during Programme Feasibility. Later, during Programme Design, a
beneﬁts management method should be approved. Thereafter, the work
involves monitoring and measuring the achievement of beneﬁts as projects are
decommissioned and their deliverables transferred into the business.
If only it were as simple as that! In practice, there are many things that work
against the achievement of perceived beneﬁts, such that they become diluted or
radically changed, and compromise becomes a much employed option. The
problem is that beneﬁts management cannot be broken oﬀas a stand-alone
piece of management. It is bound up with deliverables management, quality
management and expectations management. Beneﬁts accrue from deliverables,
which are acceptable to the business dependent upon an expectation of their
quality and business improvement.
Various methods can be employed to identify and quantify programme
beneﬁts, from extrapolating from achievable goals to projecting forwards
from deliverable sources. Figure 7.1 is a systemigram or conceptual map for an
e-commerce programme which gives an example of how mapping contributors
to end goals can assist the identiﬁcation of beneﬁts. It shows contributors as
actions, subsequent events, assumptions and end goals. (For the key to the
shapes, refer to Chapter 8.) The map is shown at its top or summary level.
Various lower-level maps of increasing detail may be drawn from each of the
summary activities.
This approach can test the solidity of goals through the mapping of a com-
plete pathway, or not, to their realisation. Those goals with weak or few con-
tributors may not be realistically achievable. The density of the mapping is up to
the individual, but quite revealing charts can be produced, using only summary
information.
70
Beneﬁts management

It is important to distinguish between the end beneﬁts and interim beneﬁts
that may be achieved along the way. As the map is built up, interim beneﬁts
may be revealed that had not previously been thought of. They might be by-
products of executing particular initiatives. Figure 7.1 shows some interim
beneﬁts, such as “improved sales forecasting” and “lower-cost invoices”, leading
to end beneﬁts. Many of these interim beneﬁts may be designated as projects
within the programme.
Once beneﬁts have been identiﬁed it is important to be able to quantify
them. Without quantiﬁcation there can be no ability to measure their achieve-
ment. (Refer to the section on “measuring the achievement of beneﬁts”, below.)
Establishing measurable success criteria
The measure of success for beneﬁts is their acceptance by the business against
expectations articulated in the Business Strategy. Simple in concept, but often
diﬃcult to achieve in practice.
Success, like quality, is a perception. It means diﬀerent things to diﬀerent
people. To say a programme is successful depends on a person’s perspective. To
some people, there is success in programmes commonly held up to be failures.
For example, the construction of an innovative software program might be
perceived as a success by programmers and technicians, but if it does not do
what its users want it to do then it could obviously be viewed as a failure.
Figure 7.1 Beneﬁts systemigram for part of an e-commerce programme
Beneﬁts management
71
Establish
web-enabled
EDI
Publish
brochures
directly
Establish
extranet-enabled
orderingproceS$
Assumes
customer
confidence
Decrease
overheads
and
resources
Establish
extranet-enabled
Establish
web-enabled
EDI
Establish
extranet-enabled
orderingproceS$
Assumes
customer
confidence
Assumes
customer
confidence
Publish
brochures
directly
Establish
extranet-enabled
orderingproceS$
Assumes
customer
confidence
confidence
Establish
extranet-enabled
Establish
extranet-enabled
Assumes
customer
confidence
confidence
confidence
Publish
brochures
directly
Establish
orderingproceS$
extranet-enabled
Establish
extranet-enabled
Publish
brochures
directly
Publish
brochures
directly
Publish
brochures
directly
Publish
brochures
directly
Publish
brochures
directly

A programme must, therefore, establish measurable success criteria for its deli-
verable elements, and this work should be accomplished during Programme
Feasibility and endorsed during Programme Design. Success criteria must state
quite clearly how a particular project or deliverable will be deemed a success.
Examples of success criteria are:
1
An acceptance of the new way of working by employees, measured by the
complete cessation of the use of manual process 457, and an increase in
productivity of 25 per cent.
2
A reduction in calls to the XYZ help desk of 15 per cent for XYZ-related
problems.
3
The winding-up of the XYZ administration function within 18 months of
programme completion.
4
The transfer of 200 employees from the outsourced ABC function to the
new company within nine months of project ABC completion.
Many success criteria are cost or productivity related (cf. number 1, above).
Others are quality related (cf. number 2).
Some programmes have been perceived as bringing no beneﬁts, since they
have to be undertaken. These might be infrastructure projects or those that
need to comply with new government legislation. Preparation for the euro and
the Year 2000 have been perceived as zero-beneﬁt programmes, though some
might say that the very act of making the changes must be of ultimate beneﬁt.
The beneﬁts are often diﬃcult to quantify, however, and end up being quoted
as fairly intangible things, such as “to remain in business” or “to be able to trade in
Eastern Europe”.
The success criteria may need to be incorporated into the test plans for the
programme. The Design Manager would need to understand what forms of
test would be relevant.
Understanding the key contributors to beneﬁts achievement
It is not enough merely to specify the beneﬁts to be achieved and their success
criteria. Many actions during the life of a programme will aﬀect the nature and
quality of desired beneﬁts.
Figure 7.2 summarises the key contributors to beneﬁts achievement, and
Chapter 6 highlights the risk of having unachievable requirements and beneﬁts.
The ﬁrst of the key contributors are programme changes. A programme is
designed for change so it should be expected that changes could have a knock-
on eﬀect on its beneﬁts requirement. The Design Manager has a responsibility
to ensure that change requests are examined for all possible eﬀects, including
beneﬁts. In this respect, he or she would discuss change situations with the Business
Change Manager, who will evaluate the risks to the beneﬁts requirement.
The Business Change Manager will also be looking to understand the pro-
gress of other contributors from the Design Manager, such as the quality and
72
Beneﬁts management

performance of deliverables. These contributors can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the
required beneﬁts, either by diluting or augmenting them. A project test phase,
for example, can produce problems that could mean that the quality of certain
deliverables cannot be attained as originally desired, thus diluting the beneﬁts.
Conversely, the need to ﬁnd alternative ways of producing a deliverable might
actually augment the quality of a deliverable at no additional cost, thus aug-
menting the beneﬁts. Project test phases and quality assurance reviews are
important activities for the Business Change Manager in beneﬁts management.
Close liaison with the Design Manager during these activities will be necessary.
How successful test phases are will aﬀect the measurement of the success
criteria. Any change to the success criteria is eﬀectively subject to change con-
trol, since it will impact deliverable performance, quality and testing, and,
therefore, beneﬁts.
Finally, the business users themselves will have expectations of what the
beneﬁts will be, against their requirements. These need to be continually
monitored by the Business Change Manager against programme activities that
may aﬀect them. In this context, it will be helpful for the Business Change
Manager to compile a map of key beneﬁts and their dependencies. Many
dependent actions will occur at particular times during a programme’s life, so
the map could include trigger points to alert the Business Change Manager of a
possible impact to beneﬁts.
Monitoring expectations, requirements, deliverables and quality
The management of beneﬁts in a programme is the especial concern of the
Business Change Manager. If, for resourcing reasons, this role is not imple-
mented, then the management of beneﬁts falls to the Programme Manager and
Figure 7.2 Contributors to beneﬁts achievement
Beneﬁts management
73
Success
criteria ~
measurements
BENEFITS
expectations / requirements
Business
users
Programme
Design
changes
peiformance/quality
Deliverables
Success
Success

Programme Director. This is not desirable, though, since beneﬁts management
needs a strong focus, and the Business Change Manager role is ideally suited to
this task through its focus on expectations setting and preparation for change.
The Business Change Manager will monitor the progress of beneﬁts against
the beneﬁts stated in the Programme Design, taking into account the success
criteria speciﬁed. Any shortfalls or unexpected beneﬁt enhancements need to
be noted. Any diﬀerences can be debated by the Programme Executive.
For all this to work, though, there must be real authority vested in the
Programme Executive. To soldier on, knowing that a beneﬁt is not going to be
achieved and not feeling empowered to recommend a programme change, is a
failure of command. The value of beneﬁts will change over time, not least
during the life of the programme. It is important, therefore, to be able to have
the authority to steer the programme to maximise beneﬁts achievement.
Monitoring user expectations and requirements is a busy task for the Business
Change Manager. He or she will be regularly testing user perception of the
programme. It requires good knowledge of the aﬀected business areas, and
the Business Change Manager needs to be on good terms with individuals who
are important to the acceptance of the change.
Managing communications with various stakeholders will be a regular task
for the Business Change Manager. Chapter 10 indicates what needs to be done,
with or without the additional role of Communications Manager.
Measuring the achievement of beneﬁts
As projects are decommissioned, there is an opportunity to capture formally
any lessons learned. The Business Change Manager will want to know several
things, including, but not exclusively:

How successful was the communication of progress to the business?

How successful was the testing of deliverables against desired quality and
speciﬁcation?

Have all deliverables been implemented as planned, or with what changes?

How has the business environment changed during the course of the project?
This information, together with the success criteria and original beneﬁts
statement will help the Business Change Manager decide the baseline for the
measurement of each project’s subsequent beneﬁt.
It is important to know the expected timespan for the achievement of ben-
eﬁts. Are some beneﬁts expected to be achieved immediately upon imple-
mentation of a project or are some expected to accrue over a period of time,
and if so, what period? I remember when IBM was implementing a pro-
gramme in the early 1980s that delivered email and word processing capability
to its UK staﬀ. Many of the beneﬁts were perceived as productivity gains.
Measurements were taken for at least two years and the achievements regularly
published to the workforce.
74
Beneﬁts management

Measurements of productivity are notoriously diﬃcult to obtain, and it is
important to gain a consensus on how productivity will be measured. For
example, considered thought will be needed in deﬁning success criteria for a
beneﬁt claiming a workforce productivity increase of 20 per cent. Existing
measurements of productivity need to be well known, with agreed accounting
conventions, otherwise there will be no obvious baseline against which to
measure an improvement. A key question, therefore, for the Business Change
Manager at the Programme Feasibility stage, when beneﬁts are being proposed,
is to ask: “Can this beneﬁt be measured?”
Consider a programme that aims to reduce the number of project failures in
its project management community. The beneﬁt is the reduction of project
failures by 25 per cent. Several projects and initiatives have been devised to
contribute to the achievement of this beneﬁt. One of these is the development
of a “lessons learned” database, so that project managers may append their
experience and retrieve it for re-use on other projects. How can this project be
measured in terms of success criteria and beneﬁt achievement?
First, the beneﬁt itself needs to be clariﬁed. What is project failure? One
could express the beneﬁt as “the reduction of project cost overruns by 25 per cent”,
which would make it more speciﬁc. Some measurements for success criteria
might be:
1
The percentage of “lessons learned” from completed projects, appended to
the database.
2
The number of times the database is searched by project managers per month.
3
The number of projects overrunning on cost during a 12-month period.
Others could be deﬁned. Note that the measurement closely linked to the
beneﬁt itself (number 3) would not be appropriate on its own. Project cost
overruns could have diminished in their own right without any assistance from
the database. Measurement 3 needs measurements 1 and 2 to prove that use of
the database is contributing to the beneﬁt.
What can go wrong?
Many of the things that go wrong in a programme in terms of beneﬁts are to
do with expectations management, and Chapter 6 cites this as a common
source of programme risk.
A key hindrance to the achievement of beneﬁts is company culture, and
some attention to this is given later in this chapter. The culture of a company
and its existing business base are powerful inﬂuences for or against the success-
ful achievement of beneﬁts. Culture is a particular challenge, especially since it
is unusual for company culture to be taken into consideration when deciding
the potential beneﬁts at programme inception. Beneﬁts are, therefore, often
assumed to be achievable in spite of a particular company culture.
Beneﬁts management
75

Another problem is that beneﬁts might not be correctly translated from the
Programme Feasibility document to the Programme Design, causing their
potency to be diluted. The method for managing them may also not be ade-
quate, such that they are not properly quantiﬁed or linked to programme
deliverables. More commonly, beneﬁts are the victims of programme longevity,
and their perception changes within the business. This is very much the result
of inadequate expectations management.
Programmes of business change are more diﬃcult environments for the suc-
cessful achievement of beneﬁts than programmes that construct something
brand new. The former can encounter continual resistance to change, since
existing processes and ways of working (which staﬀmight perceive to be totally
adequate) will end up being changed. With the latter, resistance usually comes
only at the planning stage.
There is also often a technical diﬀerence. For example, e-commerce pro-
grammes are relatively simple technically, but diﬃcult to manage, since they
change the business base. Conversely, construction of the Millennium Dome
was technically diﬃcult, but simpler to manage, since there was no existing
construction to work around.
Change is a very ﬁckle phenomenon. On the one hand, some people com-
plain there is too much at any one time; on the other hand, some complain
there is not enough. Often, in order to change something for the better,
something has to get worse. This has been a common complaint against IT,
where, for example, the replacement of a complex mechanised process has
often meant that the ﬁrst releases of the new process are not able to perform all
the tasks that the original process could do (it being too diﬃcult, too risky or
too costly to make all the desired change in one go). Consequently, the users
complain of their missing functions, but the technologists laud their own
wisdom in not implementing too much change at once: another example of
the diﬃculty of managing beneﬁts when changing an established base.
This diﬀering perception of beneﬁts is a common cause of dissatisfaction.
Those planning the implementation of programmes of business change need to
understand these diﬀerences at the outset, together with their implications. A
good example is the current popularity of decreasing oﬃce space by enabling
a mobile workforce. Here, executive management perceives a very real
saving in the size of premises against a relatively low-cost implementation of
laptops and communications facilities. The perception from the users of such
technology, however, is very diﬀerent. They perceive a major change to their
working habits, and often receive poor expectation setting of the beneﬁts. Not
surprisingly, there is conﬂict. Often the technology does not work as expected,
and the very real needs of the mobile workforce have not been thoroughly
investigated. The prime business reason for this considerable change is usually
to save costs on valuable oﬃce space, but is that enough for the disruption
required?
The balance between too much change and not enough change is diﬃcult to
manage. Would the worker who longs for his ageing personal computer to be
76
Beneﬁts management

replaced (not enough change) be willing to accept a brand-new, state-of-the-art
laptop and the mobile working pattern that goes with it (too much change)?
Managing expectations is, therefore, an art. It requires in-depth reasoning,
great powers of persuasion and argument, diplomacy and subtle negotiation.
Few organisations plan for this in their programmes – yet this is the role of the
Business Change Manager!
Mapping the culture
A useful preliminary task that the Business Change Manager can carry out is the
mapping of an organisation’s culture. It is particularly relevant where an orga-
nisation’s culture has caused problems previously in the implementation of
change, and will equip the programme with the necessary information to
manage the transition between the current business state and the projected
business state. Understanding an organisation’s culture will enable the rate of
change to be sympathetically adjusted. It will also provide a gauge for deter-
mining the support or opposition to the proposed change. However, the map-
ping is best done before the programme is even conceived, i.e. at the Business
Strategy stage, since there can be a better gauge at this point for determining
whether the proposed change may ever be accepted by the workforce.
Several programmes have been the victims of culture in the past. For example,
the merger failure of the two consultancy companies KPMG and Ernst &
Young was cited as being caused by a “clash of cultures”, and many other
major companies have struggled with cultural issues in their mergers and take-
overs. What a shame that culture maps were not seriously considered by many
of these companies prior to serious decision making.
Culture or “the way we do things round here” can be mapped either for the
whole company or department by department. We often talk of the Civil Ser-
vice culture or the retail mentality, but what are the characteristics of these cul-
tures? A culture’s characteristics can be mapped to state whether, for example,
it is rule based, risk averse or risk taking, aggressive or defensive, team based or
individualistic, creative, caring, competitive or restrained, dynamic, pioneering,
autocratic, etc. Against these characteristics can be asked questions that concern
various operational aspects, for example:

Does the company have a good track record in embracing change?

Is project management a strong discipline within the company?

Is the company regularly embarking on high-risk ventures?

Does the company subscribe to total quality management, and is the
company certiﬁcated to the ISO9001 standard?

Is the company viewed as a “hire-and-ﬁre” organisation?

Is the company viewed as “lean and mean”?

Is the company used to developing its own ideas or used to bringing in
external expertise?

How autonomous is each division?
Beneﬁts management
77


How supportive is management?

Is there a strong track record of training?

Is meetings discipline good?

Is individual performance measured?

Are communications viewed as good?
There are specialist consultants who have developed proﬁles for mapping
culture, but simple models can be readily developed in-house, using such attri-
butes as attitudes, power, levels of authority, decision making, risk taking, education,
skills, values, lifestyles, etc. Figure 7.3 gives a simple example.
For the Business Change Manager, the key questions that need to be set
against a cultural response are:

What is the state of contentment with the current operation and processes?

What resistance to change might be expected, from past experience?

What is the general approach to training and learning new things?
Figure 7.3 Proﬁle of departmental track record
78
Beneﬁts management
VERY
GOOD
GOOD
FAIR
POOR
BAD
e
~
0-
8
~.
.~
~.
..s
~
~
~Oj
~
~Oj
t'
§
!
.~
u
&
~
CJ
§
~
~
.~
.~
~
.~
&
.~
t
§
.s
-:::::
~
~
g
~
Q.
e
::::;
0'
.f
R.
()o
~
0


Who in the business operation will actively support the change, or who
will resist it?

Whose buy-in to the change is critical?

What politics are at work?
There are, of course, other considerations. The Business Change Manager
does need to have a view of the total company environment, since the pro-
gramme could be at risk from competing initiatives, a changing marketplace,
new products and services, changing technology, etc.
Summary
Beneﬁts management is a serious undertaking within a programme. It is diﬃ-
cult to accomplish because beneﬁts are often diﬃcult to quantify. Recognition
of the contributors to beneﬁts achievement will help to focus on the things to
get right. Many of these are bound up with risk management, and the same
cause-and-eﬀect type of techniques employed in risk management can be utilised
to identify and map beneﬁts achievement.
The role of the Business Change Manager is important for beneﬁts man-
agement. Beneﬁts have to be managed actively. They do not accrue auto-
matically. Monitoring and measurement of their achievement is essential to
avoid beneﬁts dilution, loss of quality or, more extremely, loss of appropriate-
ness. Refer to Chapter 10 for additional work in which the Business Change
Manager may be involved in order to undertake beneﬁts management.
Beneﬁts management
79

8
Using soft systems thinking in
programme management
This chapter shares some of the author’s experience in using soft systems
thinking to create Change Blueprints, beneﬁts maps and risk pathways for
business change programmes.
Enlightened management consultants have for a number of years believed
that in order to solve business problems in the “real world” it is necessary to
enter a “conceptual world”. In a conceptual world there are no constraints,
only those limited by the imagination. Business models can be produced that
show the pathways to major change. These models can then be compared to
the current business state in the real world and the diﬀerences identiﬁed. With
the addition of real-world constraints the model’s feasibility can be tested.
Programme management is a very receptive ground for such modelling. Stra-
tegic thinking is a fundamental requirement for the planning and design of
programmes.
Pioneering work in this ﬁeld of modelling was undertaken by Professor Peter
Checkland of Lancaster University and the term soft systems thinking was coined
for the techniques utilised to solve “soft” problems, such as business change.
Readers interested in the detailed application of the techniques are recom-
mended to read Brian Wilson’s book Systems: Concepts, Methodologies and
Applications, and Peter Checkland’s Systems Thinking, Systems Practice (see
Bibliography).
For programme management, the techniques oﬀer the ability to construct
structured business goals in the form of root deﬁnitions, plus conceptual models
of the strategic direction of a programme or risk consequences.
Strategic mapping
Figure 8.1 shows an example of a conceptual map of a programme blueprint.
The programme is concerned with making strategic changes to a services
business. The map, reading from left to right, shows assumed pathways from a
Business Strategy to perceived goals. The goals are quantiﬁed, but their full
description is not shown. The map is built up using group planning sessions,
where members of the business contribute their assumptions of the actions and
outcomes needed to get from the strategy to the goals. The squares are actions

or initiatives. They lead to outcomes of the actions or sub-goals (circles). They
lead in turn to either further actions (squares) or directly to further goals.
Actions leading to actions are disallowed. All actions need a stated outcome.
Various assumptions may be made concerning the actions or outcomes, and
these are represented by hexagons.
Using this simple approach (pioneered by DMR Consulting Ltd from the
work of Lancaster University and described in the book The Information Paradox
by John Thorp – see Bibliography) an overall picture may be built up. The
map is not time based, but shows the shape of what is to be achieved, together
with contributors and dependencies. The intensity of mapping is open to sug-
gestion. A simple high-level chart may be compiled, complemented by lower-
level charts for each of the outcomes shown, or denser mapping may be
achieved that shows clearly deﬁned clusters of activity (such as resources, tech-
nology, legal activities). Some evidence of clustering is shown in Figure 8.1.
For example, quality and resources appear in groups, but this map is really too
high-level to show clusters adequately.
The strategic map is particularly useful in support of a programme blueprint,
since it represents graphically the shape of the programme. It can show which
pathways are stronger contributors to the end goals. It is also possible to give an
indication of the projects that need to be commissioned. Each outcome could
be a single project or group of projects and change initiatives. Management
Figure 8.1 Example of a conceptual model for a programme blueprint for changing a
services business
Using soft systems thinking
81
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need
need

responsibilities may be assigned to each outcome, with a task to produce fur-
ther concept maps. A portfolio of maps may be compiled, each complementing
the overall strategic map.
A good way to build the map is by group session, using large sheets of paper
(A0 size) or a large whiteboard (preferably an electronic whiteboard with
printer attached). Participants should feel unrestricted in their contributions. In
the conceptual world there are no constraints, so the imagination can be given
free rein. It is best to start with plotting the goals and gaining consensus on them.
Actions to achieve the goals can then be devised. At ﬁrst, there may be just
actions leading directly to goals, but as a session gathers pace, participants begin
to add interim initiatives and outcomes.
Root deﬁnitions
In arriving at end goals it is important to be consistent and disciplined in the
approach. Soft systems thinking advocates root deﬁnitions, which eﬀectively
underwrite the goals through actions. A root deﬁnition states the objective, the
person or persons who need to achieve it, the person or persons to whom it
applies, the means of achieving it, and the environment to which it relates.
An example of a corporate goal is:
Be number one in the ﬁnancial network services market by achieving a 40
per cent market share in 2020.
A programme to implement this goal might have a root deﬁnition such as:
Devise and implement in the Customer Services Division best-of-breed net-
work service oﬀerings to blue-chip ﬁnancial organisations through the acqui-
sition of one or more global network consultancy ﬁrms and the
certiﬁcation of more than 60 per cent of current network consultants.
One or more of the elements of this root deﬁnition might also appear in the
corporate goal. In this case, the root deﬁnition shows that the company will
achieve its goal partly through acquisition and certiﬁcation, and partly through
the creation and implementation of best-of-breed network service oﬀerings.
The root deﬁnition interprets the work to be done. It shows that within the
boundaries of the ﬁnancial services market the means of achieving the goal is
stated (implementation of best-of-breed oﬀerings and the acquisition of consultancy ﬁrms).
It also shows the customer for the action (blue-chip ﬁnancial organisations), the
organisation in which the work will be carried out (Customer Services Division)
and the people who will carry out the work (certiﬁed network consultants). A
deﬁnition of “best of breed” is desirable. Presumably, it would not be diﬃcult
for a network services ﬁrm to articulate what this should be and to quantify it.
The attractiveness of constructing root deﬁnitions to underwrite goals is that
the transformation part (the means of achieving the goal) is a fast start to
82
Using soft systems thinking

constructing the conceptual map. In the example above, the map would show
the root deﬁnition objective “implement in the Customer Services Division best-of-
breed network service oﬀerings to blue-chip ﬁnancial organisations” with three action
squares, each leading to it: “Acquire one or more global network consultancy ﬁrms”,
“achieve certiﬁcation of more than 60 per cent of current network consultants” and
“devise best-of-breed network service oﬀerings”. The root deﬁnition objectives lead
to the corporate goal “achieve a 40 per cent market share in 2020”. Figure 8.2
shows this graphically.
The construction of root deﬁnitions is also a good discipline. They become a
sort of meta-language for stating the work to be done in a meaningful and
consistent way. They can also be linked to beneﬁts, as in the corporate goal
above (“achieve a 40 per cent market share in 2020”).
Risk forecasting
Soft systems thinking can be used to good eﬀect in forecasting the outcome of
risk from cause to eﬀect. Figure 8.4 shows a conceptual map of possible risk
drivers leading to increasing degrees of risk outcomes or impacts. The risk dri-
vers are not risks themselves but possible environments or trigger points for
risk. It is very much an event map, since each outcome is an event that has an
impact. Attached to these events are one or more risks. These risks are
Figure 8.2 Using root deﬁnition components as a foundation for a conceptual map
Using soft systems thinking
83
Acquire one or
more global
network
consultancy firms
Devise best of
breed network
service offerings
Certify more than
60% of current
network
consultants
Implement in the
Customer Services
Division best of breed
network service
offerings to blue-chip
financial
organisations
consultancy
consultancy
consultancy

represented by risk numbers correlating to a risk log. Depicting them graphically
rather than just as a log enables the context of each risk to be shown.
The map is built up from left to right and is best constructed in a group
session. Again, it is not time based, but represents participants’ assumptions of
the events that could occur in an unconstrained environment. Once a map is
constructed and the level of detail decided it may be compared to the real
world. The outcomes are adjusted accordingly and additional risks may be
added as they are identiﬁed. Although additional risks are added to the out-
comes, the outcomes themselves tend to become stable, requiring little altera-
tion over time. This provides conﬁdence that the correct picture of risk has
been identiﬁed.
It is feasible to add overall probabilities to the risk outcomes. An outcome
may have several risks associated with it. Each of these will have its own
probability of occurrence, but an average could be calculated for the outcome
itself.
A variation of this map may be constructed whereby the hexagons represent
assumptions instead of risk numbers. Using assumptions provides more sup-
portive information to the outcomes. Risk numbers may still be added if
required and Figure 8.3 shows how these may be included.
Used in conjunction with cause-and-eﬀect diagrams, conceptual risk maps
can be a useful means of showing the overall risk picture for a programme.
Figure 8.3 Alternative approach to mapping risk pathways
84
Using soft systems thinking
process
process
process
process
process
process
process
process
process
process
process
process
process
process
process
process
process
process
process
processprocess
process
process

Figure 8.4 Example of a risk pathway from cause to consequences
service
quality
Projed
Management
Shortage 01
resources
Customer
dependencies
Equipment
reliability
service
quality
service
quality
service
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
quality
quality
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
quality
service
quality
quality
service
quality
quality

Summary
Producing conceptual maps enables key programme management elements to
be viewed together in context. Thus goals, beneﬁts, risk and quality can all be
shown as part of an overall programme picture, rather than simply being
viewed as isolated elements. All team members can visualise the contributors
and dependencies for the programme, relating their own activities to the wider
picture.
Conceptual mapping has the ability to gain early consensus by involving
team members in interactive sessions. Constructing maps in a conceptual world
allows for greater freedom of expression and fosters creativity. People generally
feel more able to contribute assumptions using this method than using a linear
approach. Having an overall picture or roadmap as a base also enables better
information sharing, since all team members can relate information to its context
directly it is received.
86
Using soft systems thinking

9
Programme governance
Steering a programme of business change requires particular focus. It needs an
organisation structure that can allow governance and controls to operate, with-
out being a major overhead. Chapter 4 shows how a Steering Group, Programme
Director and Programme Executive ﬁt into a typical programme organisation.
These roles include a strong responsibility for direction and governance.
Governance is of no value if there is no structure to support the governance
process. An early task for the Programme Executive is to agree upon a structure
that will allow cyclical reporting, various types of programme and project
approvals, and rapid decision making. This structure has to contain clear terms
of reference and accountabilities that everyone understands. If too bureaucratic
a structure is established, there is a danger of decision-making bottlenecks. For
example, the author has seen PRINCE-type1 project boards established where
roles have not been well deﬁned. This resulted in slow decision making, since
board members were seemingly unwilling to make decisions outside monthly
board meetings. The board meetings themselves became discussion shops, with
ever-increasing agendas.
Figure 9.1 Outline governance information ﬂow
@1:illil5
Steering Group
Monthly package
build progress
Programme
Director
Monthly package
Information
demand
Programme
Executive
Weekly package
nformation on
demand
pr/
meeting reports
Steering Group
@1:illil5

Whatever structure is employed, it must be documented as a programme
process and communicated. Many governance processes have failed because
few have understood the roles and needs of each party in a process.
Governance is not a substitution for management. It is a common mistake to
misinterpret the control aspects of governance and for various governing boards
to wrest control from Project Managers. The process of governance should create
the right environment for Project Managers and other decision makers within a
programme, so that they are not inhibited from making day-to-day decisions.
Information types and ﬂow
Governance is concerned with extracting just enough information from the
programme to enable decisions and approvals to be made. It should not
develop into an audit process or stray from a very speciﬁc remit. The infor-
mation needed for governance should be built into the information reporting
cycle mentioned in Chapter 5. The Programme Oﬃce will play a key role in
obtaining and collating this information. Large programmes will beneﬁt from
constructing a governance scenario, which shows what information is required
from various parties and for what purpose. Figure 9.1 gives an example. If a
change structure has been established similar to Figure 3.2, then reporting to a
Corporate Programme Oﬃce will be needed as well.
Whatever type of data is captured, it is important to be consistent. The
Programme Oﬃce will not want to be spending time converting data from
diﬀerent formats. Volume of data is another important consideration. The
Figure 9.2 Sample dashboard page
88
Programme governance

Steering Group, Programme Director and Programme Executive will not
usually require detail, unless it is necessary to support a particular approval or an
underlying problem. These governing bodies will normally require only summary-
level data for governance purposes. The more consistently this is presented
month on month, the better the decision-making process will be. Monthly
dashboards are increasingly popular ways to present governance data, as seen in
the example in Figure 9.2. Here indicators of governance elements can be
compared easily each month.
Common sense needs to be applied when deciding on the volume of data
presented for governance purposes. In a major public sector programme I
directed, there was a contractual requirement for the client to receive detailed
plans from each project on a monthly basis. This involved the rolling up and
printing of almost 100,000 lines of activities each month. Quite apart from the
eﬀort of producing this material, the eﬀort in verifying it was also substantial.
Not surprisingly, the client’s resources soon proved inadequate for the task of
reviewing the data, and so a contract change was suggested by the client at the
earliest possible convenience.
The data that are presented for governance need to be reliable and forward
looking. In many cases, the governing bodies will expect the Programme
Oﬃce to have analysed the data before it is presented, in order to show particular
trends or highlight problems.
Interpretation of the data is vital. Catching problems early enough in order
to tackle them eﬀectively is a key concern for the governing bodies. Reporting
only at formal stage gates (see below) is often inadequate. It is important to
avoid reporting for reporting’s sake. Reporting underwrites decision making,
and so must be timely, accurate and purposeful.
All those involved in the governance process must understand what data are
required for what particular governance purpose. Some aspects of governance are ad
hoc or singular requirements, such as the granting of approvals or the release of
funds and resources. Some are tied to speciﬁc project life cycles, such as stage gate
appraisals. Some are longer-term assessments of achievement, such as the attain-
ment of beneﬁts. All of these require diﬀerent types of data, relating to diﬀering
reporting cycles. A governance process or guidelines should make it quite clear
what these requirements are and who is involved in what type of governance.
Types of governance
Various types of governance may be planned for a programme. A few of the
more common types are reviewed below. Some governance aspects may be
tied to a client contract; others may be required for internal purposes.
Progress reporting
The most common governance requirement is for the reporting of progress.
Reporting may be internal or to an external client. The purpose is to provide
Programme governance
89

conﬁdence to key stakeholders that everything is proceeding to requirements,
typically considering time, cost and quality.
Stakeholders also require early warning of things that are going adrift. Scope
creep, duration expansions, missed milestones, and schedule and cost variance
are typical warning signs that governing stakeholders should consider.
Stakeholders are involved in progress governance at diﬀerent levels. At the
project level, each Project Manager needs regular information from the project
team, suppliers and client functions in order to manage the project on a day-to-
day basis. Progress is usually formally reviewed at weekly progress meetings.
Risks, issues, changes, milestones, resources and budget are typical of the things
discussed at this level.
At the programme level, the Programme Manager and Programme Execu-
tive need progress information to manage the programme as a whole on a day-
to-day basis. The Steering Group (or Programme Board) and Programme
Director need progress information to give direction to the programme. Their
concerns are typically related to the programme scope, funding, beneﬁts and
the Business Strategy that the programme is executing.
Approvals and sanctions
Approvals and sanctions are also given at diﬀerent levels within a programme.
At the project level, a Project Manager may sanction requests within project
tolerances. At a programme level, a Programme Manager may sanction requests
within programme tolerances. The Steering Group may sanction requests out-
side the tolerances of the programme. The diﬃculty arises when requests are
urgent. A programme needs to allow for ﬂexibility of approvals outside
monthly or quarterly governance sessions.
Common types of approval at a programme level are such things as resour-
ces, capital spending and sub-contractor contracts. As a general rule, it is eﬃ-
cient to localise approvals where possible. The more approvals individual
projects are allowed to make, the less burdened will be the programme. Where
a programme requires seeing and approving project overseas travel requests and
training requirements, the administrative overhead of engaging in that level of
control must be understood. It is better to give the right level of tolerances and
authority to lower levels, where possible.
Stage gate appraisals
It is common for assessments to be made when projects reach particular stages
or phases. Some require formal review at various stage gates, so that a project
may proceed to the next gate. At a programme level, such appraisals tend to
occur mainly during programme start-up, unless there are discrete phases
speciﬁed, as in Table 3.4.
Appraisals usually result in a formal sign-oﬀ, and can be arranged around
Steering Group or project board meetings, when relevant signatories are present.
90
Programme governance

Beneﬁts monitoring
Beneﬁts monitoring is a long cycle. It starts with beneﬁts planning and ends with
beneﬁts realisation. The beneﬁts stated in a programme’s Business Case are the
result of an often protracted period of beneﬁts planning. By the time the Business
Case has been signed oﬀ, the beneﬁts as originally conceived may have been
signiﬁcantly diluted. There is a danger of further dilution before beneﬁts are
ﬁnally realised. This is why beneﬁts governance is an important function for
programmes, and why the Business Change Manager is a key stakeholder for its
successful operation. Figure 9.3 shows the challenge and Chapter 7 discusses
the whole concept of beneﬁts management.
The Business Change Manager monitors the achievement of beneﬁts from
the signed-oﬀBusiness Case through to targeted realisation. The Steering
Group must decide not only whether the planned achievement of beneﬁts is
suﬃcient to fulﬁl the business requirements but also whether the programme
can deliver the capability to achieve them.
Beneﬁts capability delivered by a programme’s projects may be considerably
less than that required in the Business Case, as Figure 9.3 shows. The challenge
Figure 9.3 Beneﬁts dilution from planned beneﬁts to realisation
Programme governance
91
Level of
Benefits
l>
~
~
~
()f1i
.....
CV
0)
Jf
~
~
~
tfi
0·
•.;s;
~
..l..0
..l..0
..l..0
Q):::i
Q0
PROGRAMME CONTROL
Benefits
Benefits

is to redress the shortfall, but even if it is redressed, the take-up of beneﬁts after
project implementation may also fall short of expectations in the Business Case.
Successful beneﬁts governance is only achievable if meaningful data can be
collected from the programme and the business. Metrics need to be speciﬁed
for the collection of beneﬁts data after projects have been implemented. This
presupposes that all beneﬁts can be quantiﬁed. Tangible beneﬁts such as rev-
enue, cost savings and productivity may usually be tracked without too much
diﬃculty, but intangible beneﬁts may not be capable of being tracked.
Data collected from the planning and execution phases of projects will be
varied. Variations in scope, functionality and quality will give clues to whether
beneﬁts take-up after implementation will be as planned.
Framework for governance
It will be useful to construct a framework of the governance aspects that the
programme seeks to control. In my experience, this is best constructed with
relation to the intended audience. Table 9.1 shows a grid of ﬁve governance
aspects in relation to an audience that is both internal and external to the
programme.
The ﬁrst aspect, Strategic alignment, should be mandatory, since it enables
you to record how the programme will support the business change strategy at
every level. At the project level, for example, it would be essential for a project’s
goals to align with the goals of the strategy, via the programme. Project goals
would, therefore, be a valid entry in the grid for Projects under this aspect.
The second aspect, Compliance, would be relevant where both company
and external compliance is necessary to the programme. There may be many
types of compliance. Technical regulatory, external audit, contract terms and
conditions, quality standards, documentation standards, health and safety, ﬁnancial
tolerances and security are just some of the possible compliance elements.
The third aspect, Progress, is where many of the reporting elements shown
in Figure 9.1 can be logged. Whilst Figure 9.1 can show a visual summary of
the reporting information ﬂow, the framework in Table 9.1 can show more
detail, so is better for control purposes. Typical progress elements are milestones,
budget, risks, issues, changes and progress against contract.
The fourth aspect, Beneﬁts, represents more than the mere reporting of
beneﬁts that would be included under Progress. Here typical entries relate to
the nature of the beneﬁts relevant to the audience, including types of metrics
and measurement processes.
The ﬁfth aspect, Integrity, is designed to state how the programme will be
managed for due diligence. Elements such as ethics, communication protocol,
personnel performance, management style, negotiation protocol, supplier rela-
tions, customer relations and ﬁnancial accountability are typical. Integrity is a
softer form of Compliance and in some countries certain integrity elements are
a legal requirement.
92
Programme governance

Table 9.1 Framework for governance
Governance aspects:
audience
Strategic alignment
Compliance
Progress
Beneﬁts
Integrity
Internal to programme
Sponsor(s)
Steering Group
Programme
Executive
Programme Oﬃce
Projects
External to programme
Customer
Business users
Business functions
Senior
management

Table 9.2 Sample ﬁlled framework
Governance aspects:
audience
Strategic alignment
Compliance
Progress
Beneﬁts
Integrity
Internal to programme
Sponsor(s)
Business Strategy,
Business Case
RAG status
beneﬁts achievement
Steering Group
Business Strategy,
Business Case
stage gate approvals
RAG status
beneﬁts achievement
due diligence
Programme
Executive
programme goals,
programme charter
sign-oﬀs, approvals,
tolerances
monthly dashboard
beneﬁts monitoring
TCQ, risk, P&L
Programme Oﬃce
programme standards
progress roll-up
beneﬁts measurement,
beneﬁts reporting
Programme Oﬃce
service level
Projects
project goals, project
charter
sign-oﬀs, tolerances,
contract terms
progress reporting
scope and deliverable
status
change control,
lessons learned, EV,
TCQ
External to programme
Customer
acceptance criteria,
handover
progress status
beneﬁts measurement,
beneﬁts monitoring
Business users
operating standards
progress status
beneﬁts achievement
version control
Business functions
operational ﬁt
training, maintenance,
support
progress status as
required
payback, beneﬁt
metrics
Senior
management
operational ﬁt
progress status as
required
Note: EV = earned value; P&L = proﬁt and loss; RAG = Red, Amber, Green; TCQ = Time, Cost, Quality.

It is not necessary to complete every box in the grid. Indeed, it may not be
possible to do so. The framework should act as a controlling summary that
points to relevant detail held elsewhere. Table 9.2 shows a worked example for
one programme. It shows summary-level information only and is not complete.
Summary
A programme, like any business operation, needs to be managed to account-
ability and integrity. Governance is a key consideration. The governance
aspects need only be created once, and then re-used for subsequent pro-
grammes. Each governance aspect needs to be considered against a relevant
audience type. Clear lines of responsibility need to be deﬁned, with supporting
tolerances and authority.
In terms of collecting and reporting information, the principle of “just
enough” should be used. The over-collection and -reporting of data is bur-
densome and ineﬃcient. Centring information ﬂow on an organisation chart
will help all stakeholders understand the cycle of regular communication of
information.
Governance and due diligence are becoming increasingly mandatory for
businesses in some countries. Building a governance framework will help a
Programme Manager maintain control and not lose sight of important
elements.
Note
1 The Projects in Controlled Environments methodology.
Programme governance
95

10 Communication management
Communication management is an important activity for all projects but even
more so for programmes. A programme, after all, looks up to an organisation’s
executive management and down to its business operations via its projects, so
requires a considerable breadth of communication.
Some programmes have the luxury of ﬁlling the role of Communication
Manager but for others the Business Change Manager will assume part of the
communications role. The Programme Manager will also be involved. Either
way, a Communication Plan needs to be constructed for the programme and
this plan needs to include the main aspects of communication for each project.
This latter will achieve economies of scale, since many projects may have
similar communication requirements. Of course, some projects will have
unique requirements, such as the production of a video or development of a
showcase.
A Communication Plan will also help the Business Change Manager market
the programme to the user community and establish a process for capturing
user views and ongoing requirements. The Communication Plan will show
what needs to be communicated to whom and when.
Understanding stakeholder communication needs
An initial piece of work is to map the programme’s stakeholders and plan their
communication needs. Each project needs to be involved in this, but because
not all projects will have been commissioned at the start of the programme the
Business Change Manager and/or Communication Manager need to take an
initial view. The programme budget will indicate what can and cannot be
expensed on communications. There are clearly some approaches that could
result in considerable expense, such as various forms of advertising, TV and
video production. On the other hand, powerful communication vehicles are
available today via the Internet that can cost very little but may require sig-
niﬁcant eﬀort in their production. It is important not to forget that resources
and eﬀort need to be considered when building a Communication Plan.
An initial map of requirements will give a “nice to have” picture. Agreement
then has to be made on what is practicable within budget and what is essential.

One of the biggest criticisms of projects and programmes from stakeholder
groups relates to communication. Not knowing what is going to happen, when
and where has been a regular source of frustration.
Selecting the right communication method
A programme oﬃce once sent an email to everyone in a programme announ-
cing that the risk management procedure was now available and that everyone
should read it and comply. Attached was a 200-page document. Few read it
and even fewer complied. It was an easy announcement to make but one that
had little eﬀect.
How should the risk management procedure have been announced? First,
everyone in the programme did not need to know about this. Second, few
would have had the time to read through a 200-page document. Risk man-
agement is an important activity but, for many in a programme, it is required
on a “need-to-know” basis. Perhaps a summary of the process for those need-
ing it would have been useful. For several of the programmes I directed we
produced an illustrated fanfold card containing the relevant points of the risk
management process and we also pointed to the detail on a shared drive for
those who needed to see it. In fact, we did this for all the major programme
oﬃce procedures, such as change control and issue management.
Table 10.1 Typical contents of a Communication Plan
Component
Description
Communication Brief
Purpose of the Communication Plan; management of and
resources for the Communication Plan
Projects
Current and planned projects within the programme and any
unusual or atypical project communication needs
Target Audience
Who will be aﬀected by the Communication Plan
Stakeholder List
A description of the programme stakeholders, as a speciﬁc
target audience
Stakeholder Map
A plot of stakeholder attitudes and relationships to the
programme
Stakeholder
Expectations
Assumptions regarding particular expectations of stakeholders
Communication
elements
Particular aspects that need communicating
Communication
vehicles
Communication approaches in relation to the various
stakeholders and audiences
Glossary of terms
A description of common technical items, acronyms and
abbreviations that may be found in the programme and its
projects
Communication management
97

Reaching an audience often requires novel approaches. Communicating to
busy people needs approaches that do not unnecessarily steal their time but
ensures that a particular message is conveyed. “Brown bag” lunchtime sessions
have proved useful, allowing people to eat while they listen to a short pre-
sentation. Display stands in a company restaurant can also convey a message
whilst people queue for food or sit and eat lunch.
Some elegant solutions can be devised for communicating to a mass audi-
ence. Recently, as I travelled up the escalator at a London Tube station, I
noticed advertising concerning a major programme to refurbish many London
Tube stations. There were about 30 advertisements placed at a regular distance
up the escalator and, because of the constant speed of the escalator, there was
enough information on each one for me to read, so that when I reached the
top I had received a complete update of the programme’s progress!
Communications that require a response can be more diﬃcult to achieve.
Questionnaires tend to have a poor return rate, as do web surveys. More formal
sessions, such as workshops, require careful planning and may be more relevant
to particular project phases, such as requirements planning or risk identiﬁcation.
Prototyping of deliverables is another formal method of receiving feedback. It
can be something small and low cost or an expensive major construction. The
ﬁrst entry in Table 10.2 is something that could be suited to prototyping. A
mock-up of the new layout could be produced. Prototyping is an excellent
opportunity for testing existing expectations and setting future expectations.
A programme can be a busy place, such that it is easy to forget that com-
munication needs to be directed inwards as well as outwards. The Programme
Manager who neglects to visit the teams and remains behind closed doors is not
managing the programme. A programme needs direction but it also needs
encouragement and inspiration. The programme governance plan (outlined in
Chapter 9) sets out the formal review meetings required, but there also needs
to be informal discussion. This is more than just a checkpoint that various
things have been accomplished. It is much more, for example, about instilling a
sense of pride in the work being undertaken.
The Communication Plan
Each project within a programme should have its own Communication Plan.
The programme should have a separate one, but it makes sense to share
resources for the execution of the plans. There is no point each project sepa-
rately procuring things such as mass marketing or video production. The pro-
gramme should have greater buying power and also needs to ensure
consistency. There also needs to be agreement between the projects and the
programme concerning who is contacted, how and when. It is easy to over-
communicate, which could frustrate stakeholders and result in mixed messages.
It is also important to treat a Communication Plan as an active document rather
than something produced once and then shelved. In this sense it does not need
to be a weighty volume. Table 10.1 shows a summary of typical contents.
98
Communication management

The Communication Brief should be a statement that can be applied across
the programme into its component projects. It will contribute to the pro-
gramme budget so should be established at programme outset. It may not be
possible to feature all the planned projects in a programme when producing the
programme Communication Plan, but since it is a living document, additions
and changes will need to be made.
The Target Audience is a vital part of any Communication Plan. It should be
accompanied by a detailed Stakeholder List. Several stakeholders may occur in
more than one of the programme’s projects, so it is useful to know at the
programme level where similarities occur and where economies of scale may be
achieved, for example.
A Stakeholder Map or Inﬂuence Grid may be constructed to show the
importance of particular stakeholders and groups, their attitudes and relation-
ships to the programme. Such a map can be a sensitive document, so should
not be widely communicated. Knowing your stakeholder is akin to knowing
your customer for a salesperson. Their expectations will be partially set by a
programme’s communication. This ties in well to the Programme Quality Plan
and Quality Plans for the projects.
The level of communication is set from the communication elements.
Communication overkill has already been mentioned, so it is important to state
how much needs to be communicated and why. Staging is one such element.
For example, does every phase of a project need to be sent to all stakeholders?
Probably not. Programme changes are another element. Should all stakeholders
receive these? Again, probably not, since change can be speciﬁc to certain
stakeholder groups.
The communication vehicles represent how the programme will commu-
nicate to the target audience. Many companies and organisations will have their
own communication departments with favoured ways of communicating to
various audiences, internally and externally. It will probably be cost eﬀective for
a programme to tap into these. Some programmes, however, will have special
requirements and it should be remembered that both the communication ele-
ments and communication vehicles will have an eﬀect on the programme
budget. Some of the vehicles are mentioned in the section “selecting the right
communication method”, above.
Table 10.2 Example of summary activities from a Communication Plan
Date
Communication
element
Audience
Project
Milestone
Vehicle
Test
01.06.2017 New oﬃce
layout
All of Customer
Orders
Department
Premises
Initial
design
Display in
coﬀee
lounge
User reaction;
prepared
response sheet;
web responses
15.07.2017 Employee
reaction
Selected
employees
Premises
Initial
design
Divisional
magazine
Interviews;
editorial
Communication management
99

A Communication Plan for a programme should ensure consistency of things
like language and terminology. I have seen various inconsistencies sent to sup-
pliers and other stakeholders which a naming convention could have prevented.
A glossary of programme terms is often a useful addition to the Plan.
Table 10.2 shows in summary how some of the Plan contents come toge-
ther. It is a log of actions. The Communication Plan for a premises project
should contain a lot more detail for each entry. The level of detail that the
programme holds should only be that suﬃcient to address questions that may
arise. The project would manage its own Plan, but in practice the programme
may well have to ﬁeld questions regarding communication actions that come to
itself, typically from the company executive or externally.
In assessing the audience for a particular type of communication, the pro-
gramme needs to ensure that the communication is correctly and appropriately
targeted. As already mentioned, over-communication can be frustrating, but so
can under-communication. The Test column in Table 10.2 shows whether the
communication has been eﬀective. Its importance will depend on the type of
programme or component project. The development of land for new housing,
for example, will require considerable understanding from local groups, so it is
important that the right messages are conveyed, not just to the planning
authorities.
Summary
A Programme Communication Plan is something that should be constructed at
programme outset, as it will have an inﬂuence on the programme budget.
Above all, it is a living document. Since stakeholders will need to accept the
change that a programme will bring, their expectations need to be thoroughly
understood and the right level of communication targeted to them.
It is also important for the programme to establish an audit trail for com-
munication, as inevitably there will be disagreements about what was committed
to whom and when. The Communication Plan will eﬀect this.
100
Communication management

11 Conclusion
A railway company once said to me: “We know all about railways, running
trains and building track. What we are not good at is seeing the big picture
when we are considering change. This is where you come in, John, helping us
to see the wood for the trees.” I’d like to think that my soft systems mapping
helped them organise their change more eﬃciently by bringing their hitherto
stand-alone projects into programmes. Certainly, this is where programme
management is so useful. The big picture within a business perspective brings
change to a new level of understanding and control.
A programme is like a business. It has ﬁnance and administration. It exerts
control and has suppliers and customers. Whether a high-speed rail link is being
constructed or whether a company merger is being eﬀected, the same principles
for strategic change apply. A programme is designed to be end-to-end in order
to fulﬁl its strategy. Although programme management is a discipline well
suited to change, it is best undertaken within a culture that has corporate buy-
in to the management of change. There is no point implementing a company
programme management method without addressing the complete corporate
requirements for the management of change, though many of the techniques
demonstrated in this book could be used to construct a full programme
management methodology.
Today’s programmes are increasingly far-reaching and global, and may involve
consortia of many organisations. There are still small and well-contained pro-
grammes, though, and I hope this book will give a practical insight at a low
enough level for all those embarking on any type of strategic change.
In the UK, the Association for Project Management (www.apm.org.uk) is a
valuable source of information for both project and programme management. Its
Programme Management Speciﬁc Interest Group meets to debate current techniques
and experiences in the subject, and articles appear regularly in its journal Project.
In the United States and within chapters throughout the world, the Project
Management Institute (PMI) provides similar opportunities for debate on
programme management, and also oﬀers certiﬁcation for programme managers.
The magazine Project Manager Today features regular programme manage-
ment articles, and programme management is often a focus on its well-stocked
website: www.pmtoday.co.uk

A programme management website, sponsored by GeoﬀReiss, provides
useful contacts, articles, a multi-lingual glossary of terms and details of the UK
Programme Management Special Interest Group: www.e-programme.com
102
Conclusion

Bibliography
Bartlett, John (2000) Managing Change as a Corporate Asset. Proceedings of the 15th.
World Congress on Project Management, June (includes corporate programme oﬃce
examples).
Bartlett, John (2002) Using Risk Concept Maps in a Project or Programme. Proceedings
of the 5th European Project Management Conference, Cannes (PMI Europe).
Bartlett, John (2002, 2006, 2008) Managing Risk for Projects and Programmes. Sutton:
Project Manager Today. 2nd edn. ISBN: 978-1-900391-17-7.
Bartlett, John (2005) Right First and Every Time: Managing Quality in Projects and Programmes.
Sutton: Project Manager Today. ISBN: 1-900391-13-9.
Cabinet Oﬃce (2011) Managing Successful Programmes. 4th edn. London: TSO. ISBN:
9780113313273.
CCTA (1993a) An Introduction to Programme Management. London: HMSO. ISBN:
9780113306114.
CCTA (1993b) Managing Programmes of Large Scale Change. London: HMSO. Leaﬂet.
CCTA (1994) Programme Management Case Studies Volume 1. London: HMSO. ISBN:
9780113306664.
CCTA (1995) Management of Programme Risk (John Bartlett for CCTA). London:
HMSO. ISBN: 9780113306725.
CCTA (1995) Programme Management Case Studies Volume 2. London: HMSO. ISBN:
9780113306770.
Checkland, P.B. (1981) Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. Chichester: John Wiley.
Thorp, John (1998, 2003) The Information Paradox. London: McGraw Hill. ISBN:
9780070926981.
Wilson, Brian (2000) Systems: Concepts, Methodologies and Applications. Chichester: John
Wiley & Sons Ltd. ISBN: 0-471-92716-3.
Wilson, Brian (2001) Soft Systems Methodology – Concept Model Building and its Contribution.
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

Index
Analysis of the programme 53
beneﬁts 5, 15, 44, 69–79, 91
budget 14–15, 44
Business Case 21, 69, 91
Business Change Manager 30–2, 36–7,
41, 53, 72–9, 91, 96
Business Strategy 9–10, 14, 18–28, 38, 70, 80
Change Blueprint 14, 18–20, 23–5, 38,
70, 80–2
change management 9–11
change vehicle 2
Communication Brief 98–9
Communications Manager 74, 96
Communication Plan 76–100
corporate change function 18–19, 27–8
Corporate Programme Oﬃce 10–14, 18,
40, 43
costs 14–15
culture of company/organisation 77–9
deﬁnition of a programme 2–7
Design Manager 32–3, 36, 38, 62, 72
documentation 54–5
Documentation Administrator 46, 48
duration of programmes 11–12, 26
expectations management 52, 59
Future Business Operation 21
goals 2, 22–4, 82–3
governance 87–93
issue management 52
methodology 1–2, 15–16, 27, 101
organisation 22, 26, 29–42
planning 44
Planning Analyst 46–7
Programme Board 30
Programme Design 14, 18–28, 38, 41, 57
Programme Director 38–41, 60, 88
Programme Executive 30–1, 37–8, 41,
44–5, 65, 74, 87–8
Programme Feasibility 14–15, 18, 28, 56,
70, 72
Programme Financial Controller 48
Programme Manager 29–31, 35–8, 45,
56, 62
Programme Oﬃce 34–5, 38, 40–1, 43–55,
87–8
Programme Oﬃce Administrator 46–7
Programme Oﬃce Manager 46
Programme Secretariat 46, 49
Project Managers 38, 41, 60, 87
Project Oﬃces 43–4, 52
projects 4–7, 40, 50, 54, 69, 75
quality 32–3, 99
Quality Controller 32–3, 48
reporting 44, 51, 89–90
resourcing 44
risk analysis 44, 67
risk management 22, 27, 44, 56–68, 83–85
Risk Exposure 64–5, 67
Risk Manager 33–4, 36–7, 41, 52, 65–7
roles 29–42
scope 5, 22–3, 64
Sponsor 38–40, 43, 63
Steering Group 38–41, 88, 90
success criteria 71–2
support to the programme 22, 26, 43–55
Systems Administrator 46, 48
testing 33
timescale 22, 26
tranches 12, 26
work elements 25

