THE WEB DESIGNER’S
IDEA BOOK  
PATRICK McNEIL, creator of designmeltdown.com
volume 4
inspiration from the best web design trends, themes and styles

inspiration from today’s best web design trends, themes and styles
THE WEB DESIGNER’S
IDEA BOOK
volume 4
PATRICK McNEIL, creator of designmeltdown.com
Cincinnati, Ohio
www.howdesign.com

The Mobile Web Designer’s Idea Book, Volume 4. Copyright © 2014 by Patrick 
McNeil. Manufactured in the United States of America. All rights reserved. No other part 
of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical means 
including information storage and retrieval systems without permission in writing from 
the publisher, except by a reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a review. Published 
by HOW Books, an imprint of F+W Media, Inc., 10151 Carver Road, Suite 200, Blue Ash, 
Ohio 45242. (800) 289-0963. First edition.
For more excellent books and resources for designers, visit www.howdesign.com.
17  16  15  14  13      5  4  3  2  1
ISBN-13: 978-1-4403-3315-6
Distributed in Canada by Fraser Direct
100 Armstrong Avenue
Georgetown, Ontario, Canada  L7G 5S4
Tel: (905) 877-4411
Distributed in the U.K. and Europe by F&W Media International, LTD
Brunel House, Forde Close, Newton Abbot, TQ12 4PU, UK
Tel: (+44) 1626 323200, Fax: (+44) 1626 323319
Email: enquiries@fwmedia.com
Distributed in Australia by Capricorn Link
P.O. Box 704, Windsor, NSW 2756 Australia
Tel: (02) 4560-1600
Edited by Scott Francis
Designed by Claudean Wheeler
Production coordinated by Greg Nock

Dedication
For Angela, my biggest builder.
About the Author
To say that Patrick McNeil is obsessed with web design is a bit of 
an understatement. What began as a simple exploration of design 
on his blog, www.designmeltdown.com, eventually turned into a 
bestselling series of books. With a passion for technology and 
design, Patrick has found himself at home on the web—where these 
two areas merge. His love of design drives him to obsess over the 
trends and patterns you see collected in this book. Beyond observ-
ing trends, Patrick is focused on front-end development techniques, 
user-centered design practices and teaching designers to effectively leverage the web 
as a design medium. Patrick teaches in the graphic design department at the University 
of Missouri in St. Louis where he focuses on the interactive design component of the 
program. For more information about Patrick, visit his personal site, www.pmcneil.com, 
or follow him on Twitter @designmeltdown.

Word From the Author ..........................001
Portfolio Sites ...................................... 002
01 /  PORTFOLIO STYLES 
AND TRENDS 
003
Super Clean ......................................... 004
Illustrated Designs ................................007
Masonry Styles .....................................010
One Page Folios ....................................013
Front and Center ...................................016
Atypical Portfolios ................................019
Thematic Portfolios ..............................022
Landing Page Portfolios .......................025
Responsive Portfolios ..........................028
02 / PORTFOLIOS BY REGION 
034
European Union ................................... 035
Eastern Europe .................................... 036
North America .......................................037
South America ..................................... 038
Asia ...................................................... 039
Oceana ................................................. 040
Middle East ...........................................041
03 /  PORTFOLIOS BY 
AGENCY SIZE 
042
One Man Show .................................... 044
The Micro Agency 
(fewer than 10 people).................... 045
Medium agencies (10 to 50 people) .... 046
Large agencies (50+ people) ................047
04 /  PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE 
OF WORK 
048
Interactive and Web ..............................049
User Interface and 
User Experience Design .................052
Mobile App Design and Development 054
Developers and Programmers ............ 056
Icon Design .......................................... 058
Animation and Motion Graphics ......... 060
Branding and Logo Work .................... 062
Print Design ......................................... 064
Typography .......................................... 066
Photography ........................................ 068
Fine Art ..................................................070
Illustration .............................................072
Advertising ............................................074
Other Types of Work .............................076
05 / DESIGN STYLES 
079
Flat Designs ......................................... 080
Anti-Flat Designs ................................. 086
3-D Designs ......................................... 090
Minimal ................................................. 094
Chromeless ...........................................100
White Text On a Photo ..........................104
Vector-Style Illustrations ......................109
Storytelling ............................................113
The Super Hero .....................................118
Chalkboards..........................................123
Vertical Divides .....................................126
06 / DESIGN THEMES 
131
Monochromatic Plus One .....................132
Rainbow of Colors ................................136
Nature ...................................................140
Sketchy .................................................144
Vintage ..................................................148
Extreme .................................................152
Futuristic ...............................................156
Holiday ..................................................159
07 / DESIGN ELEMENTS 
164
Navicons On the Desktop ....................165
Jumbo Animated Sidebars ...................169
Teaser Screen .......................................173
Decorative Text .....................................177
Atypical Navigation ...............................181
Icons ......................................................186
Instant Sign-Up .....................................190
Transparency ........................................194
Ribbons .................................................198
Prompt to Scroll ....................................202
In-Page Navigation ...............................207
Ornamental ...........................................211
Video Backgrounds ..............................215
Geometric Shapes ................................219
08 / RESPONSIVE ELEMENTS 
224
Responsive Images ..............................225
Responsive Galleries ............................229
Responsive Navigation .........................234
Responsive Select Menus ....................238
Responsive Checkouts .........................240
Responsive Logins ...............................244
Responsive Priorities ............................248
Responsive Bands of Content .............253
Responsive Reformatting Layouts .......257
Contents

001
QR CODES
Throughout this book you will ﬁ nd QR codes. 
Each chapter will have one at the beginning. 
If you scan these codes, they will take you 
to landing pages where you can find links 
to all of the samples presented in the given 
chapter. This means you can scan the code 
and quickly launch and try out the sites I have 
selected without having to type the URL into 
your device.
In time, many of these sites will change, 
and some will disappear all together, but this 
is the nature of the web and my books are but 
a snapshot in time. However, I do believe the 
majority will remain the same and accessible. 
Eventually I may update the landing pages 
with full size images as presented in the book. 
This way, sometime long in the future the QR 
codes will still serve a useful purpose.
For those of you that have no idea what a 
QR code is, it is essentially a special type of 
barcode. You can install a QR code scanner 
on your smartphone or tablet that will allow 
you to scan the tag and it will take you to a 
URL. This prevents you from having to key 
the URL into your phone. It is actually a really 
handy way to get a URL loaded onto a phone 
or tablet. Note that many bar code scanner 
apps also scan QR codes. In fact, my favor-
ite bar code scanner on my Android device 
scans QR codes as well: the app is creatively 
titled Barcode Scanner.
As you read this book, keep your smart-
phone handy. If you see a design you like, you 
can simply scan the code and browse the live 
site. This is particularly handy given the ever-
increasing importance of mobile and how 
annoying it is to try to key a URL into a phone.
Word From the Author
I always save thi s little section for the very end, as the very last thing I write in my books. 
I do this because it is easy to sum up a book right as you ﬁ nish it. It is bittersweet. Obvi-
ously, it is fun and exciting to ﬁ nish something big, but at the same time, it means I have 
to go do other stuff. And frankly, writing these books is about as much fun I can imagine 
having while doing something that can be called “work.” 
What I love about the web more than anything is that it is always changing. Year to 
year things are never the same: new technologies, new tools, new trends, new styles, new 
designers and so on. Through the process of creating these books I get to dig into all of 
that, look at thousands of websites and ultimately pick out all the gems I love. Can you 
imagine a better gig? I sure can’t.
I am really excited to introduce a new feature that comes with this book. As you may or 
may not know, I have written three previous volumes—plus a mobile idea book. There are 
a handful of topics that I have touched on in pretty much every volume, and other themes 
that are related to material appearing across the books, though not the same exact topic. 
For example, retro themed designs have taken on several forms over the years and have 
appeared in different ways in several of my books. Because of this I have created a cross 
reference tool which you can ﬁ nd at the link below. This will point you to chapters in my 
other books that you might ﬁ nd relevant given the topic you’re looking at. 
Thank you again for picking up this latest volume, and I sincerely hope it gives you the 
inspiration you seek. 
Cross Reference
Many of the design patterns referenced in this book can also be found in other volumes 
from this series. Even better, many of the topics are interrelated and are great to view in 
combination. With this in mind I have put together a free, printable index available on www.
thewebdesignersideabook.com/index. Just look up the topic your viewing and it will point 
you to related material across all of my books. As I publish new books I will continue to 
update this free resource.
Future Books
If you would like to submit your designs for possible use in future books, please 
visit www.thewebdesignersideabook.com to sign up for my mailing list. You will be 
informed of book releases, calls for entries and other information directly related 
to the books.  

002
PORTFOLIO SITES
As with each previous volume of my Idea Books, I like to focus the ﬁ rst portion of the book 
on a secondary topic. Volume 1 featured colors, Volume 2 featured the basic elements 
of design, and Volume 3 featured various technologies that impact web design. This new 
volume focuses on taking an in-depth look at online portfolio sites. 
It may not be all that surprising, but the most common types of sites people submit 
for my books are agency and portfolio sites. This is also an area that I am asked about 
very frequently. With this in mind, I am excited to analyze trends and patterns more 
extensively in this speciﬁ c area.
Even if you don’t need to design a portfolio site, I believe you will ﬁ nd the categories 
very interesting. Many of the topics I have collected for this section are entirely new to 
me and represent some interesting ways to look at design patterns. For example, I am 
particularly intrigued by the regional chapter that shows the differences in portfolios from 
around the world. 
While I completely understand that we think of an individual person when we think of a 
portfolio, I am also including agencies in this section. Though most of the sites presented 
here are for a single person, there are some collections here dedicated to agencies of dif-
ferent types. You will also see some agency sites peppered throughout the other sections.
Finally, I want to point out that the sites collected here are not limited to those in the 
design world. I have attempted to collect a wide range of sites that fall into many areas 
that require an online portfolio. These include portfolios for designers, photographers, 
painters and even sports ﬁ gures. 

003
/
01
Super Clean • Illustrated Designs • Masonry Styles • One Page Folios • Front 
and Center • Atypical Portfolios • Thematic Portfolios • Landing Page Portfolios • 
Responsive Portfolios
At the heart of my Idea Books are design styles and trends. With this in mind I want to lead 
off this section on these topics. You will perhaps recognize many of these approaches 
from my previous books. The difference here, of course, is that they are 100% portfolio 
sites. At ﬁ rst I thought it would be hard to build out this section, but once I got going it 
was actually really hard to stop. I could ﬁ ll volumes of books with categories of styles in 
just the portfolio genre. 
I think there is real value in looking at a speciﬁ c niche of web design in such a detailed 
way. It is amazing to see just how many patterns emerge. As a result, we can focus on 
the common ways in which people solve various problems. In the end you will hopefully 
ﬁ nd some fresh ideas to inspire your portfolio designs and any other type of work as well.
PORTFOLIO STYLES 
AND TRENDS

004
01/ Super Clean
The Super Clean chapter is one I include in all of my Idea Books. As I have said in the 
past, this style embodies all of my favorite qualities and the sites here are typically the 
ones I admire the most. Sites that ﬁ t in here must display the cleanest and most beautiful 
designs. And most often they contain a clean, spacious layout that is easy to consume. 
Let’s dissect a few examples to see what I mean. 
A perfect example is the MING Labs website (FIGURE 1). This site embraces a minimalist 
approach and is void of any structural design elements. This allows the designer to focus 
the user’s attention through a clear (and beautiful) typographic hierarchy. Though the site 
might appear simple, its detailed nuances are gorgeous and leave nothing undone. Notice 
how clean the design feels. It is full of space and one can easily digest its content—a 
perfect example of the super clean style at work. 
Another example that easily ﬁ ts into this category—and is equally easy to love—is the 
Heikopaiko site (FIGURE 2). Again the site leans toward the minimalist mindset, as most Super 
Clean sites do. But here, it feels less sparse, and yet it still has a clarity to it that is very 
welcome. Notice how you have no trouble scanning the site and consuming its content. 
There is no confusion in the ﬂ ow of the document, no mixed messages, and no details left 
unattended. Super Clean sites like this one are so reﬁ ned that it is almost annoying; annoy-
ing because it shows just how perfect a website can be. Frankly, this site feels so spot on 
that you feel like you’re looking at a Photoshop comp and not a live website. 
Finally, let’s look at the portfolio site of Aaron Smith (FIGURE 3). Again we ﬁ nd that the 
site is full of space and relies on a really strong typographic hierarchy. Another pattern 
starts to emerge, though. Many of the sites I consider Super Clean make use of a single 
stream of content: rather than having sidebar elements and extra things that confuse the 
layout, they rely on a single column. This reinforces the content hierarchy and is a power-
ful component of making something feel clean. It seems that this would also be a great 
way to make a site easy to translate into a mobile structure. Perhaps some of these sites 
even took a mobile-ﬁ rst approach, which would explain the pattern. 

005
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
Super Clean
01
FIGURE 1: www.minglabs.com
FIGURE 3: http://adesignerd.com
FIGURE 2: www.heikopaiko.com 
http://jasonjam.es

006
http://robdavisdesigner.co.uk
www.pixerience.com
http://lukaslinden.net
www.mrbava.com

007
01/ Illustrated Designs
I have long been an advocate of illustration in design if only for a single reason: It almost 
always leads to a really unique design. Want to blend in with the herd? Rely on stock 
photos or artwork that anyone can use (and everyone does). Want to completely stand 
out? Make original artwork a component of your design. No one will have your exact style 
combined with your ideas. It is a great way to make your work pop. Granted, we aren’t all 
great illustrators, but I believe that we can all create something from scratch. 
Another huge potential perk to this style is the current popularity of what is known 
as the Flat Design style (see page 080 in this book). A ﬂ at design is void of depth and 
decoration and is very minimalist. By working in some unique illustrated elements our 
work can really pop. So, again, illustrations can really make your work stand out, and 
given the current style that is so popular, it can stand out even more. 
Symphony Online (FIGURE 1) is a lovely example of this. It uses beautiful type, subtle 
textures, solid colors and decorated edge treatments (all of those topics, by the way, 
are covered in The Web Designer’s Idea Book, Volume 3). All of these elements are very 
popular and in style. The site genuinely feels relevant in the current design world. But 
notice how the illustration adds uniqueness to the design that makes it stand on its own. 
The site doesn’t at all feel like yet another “me too!” design. In my humble opinion, the 
illustrations are what make this site really pop. 
Next I want to look at the portfolio site of William Cole (FIGURE 2). In this case, I would 
say that the site doesn’t ﬁ t into the current style at all. In fact, the fundamental design of 
the site goes right against everything that is trendy and popular right now. In some ways 
this works against the site—or at least creates an uphill battle for the site’s designer. If 
you break with convention, and even go opposite of convention, you have to really bring 
your A game. In this case, I think the designer successfully did just that. Yes, the site isn’t 
trendy, but it feels extremely unique. Even more, it seems that the site’s style reﬂ ects that 
of the artist behind it. It has more character, and you get the sense that an artist made 
it. Look through his work and I think you will agree that this resonates perfectly with his 
body of work and personal style.
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
Illustrated Designs
01

FIGURE 1: www.symphonyonline.co.uk
FIGURE 2: www.perpetuo.it
http://enniscreates.com
www.secretkey.it
008

www.creativemints.com
www.ipolecat.com
www.socialforces.com
009
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
Illustrated Designs
01
www.thesearethings.com

010
01/ Masonry Styles
This style is named for a jQuery plug-in that is largely responsible for the results you see 
here. The Masonry plug-in1 organizes rectangular items that vary in size and dimension 
by laying them out in such a way that they all ﬁ t together perfectly. It rearranges them 
like stones in a wall and the result is a solid structure of images or other content. Though 
this is not a new thing, it is incredibly prominent in the world of portfolio design. As such, 
I thought it was appropriate to highlight the approach here. Another popular plug-in that 
does pretty much the same thing but with a few other options is Isotope2.
The portfolio of Alexa Falcone (FIGURE 1) is a perfect example of this. On this site you 
can clearly see the collage of images with a variety of sizes and dimensions. If you open 
the site and resize your browser, you will quickly notice that the elements rearrange to ﬁ ll 
the available space. Using the Masonry plug-in, the content perfectly ﬁ lls up any screen 
size and best of all, the plug-in does all the hard work for you.
Another great example is Glauce Cerveira’s (FIGURE 2) portfolio site. Here you also see 
a grid of images neatly arranged into a solid wall of content. In this case, you will also see 
that the “bricks” being arranged in this way can include any type of content—you are not 
limited to images alone. Instead you can have a series of containers that get positioned 
magically, whether they contain images, text or articles.
If you are considering this approach, there is perhaps a single gotcha you may encoun-
ter. Since the plug-in is arranging the elements in the grid system, you have little control 
over what goes where. You can sort of place things generally based on the order you 
put them into the page. But as the screen size changes it will move things around. So, 
if the exact order or placement of the elements is critical to you, this may be a problem. 
Finally, I want to mention a simpler alternative. If you are going to use this style and you 
ﬁ nd that all of your items have the same width (height can vary), you need not use a plug-in to 
get the same results. Simply look into using CSS-based text columns with the column-count 
CSS property3. This turns a block of content (including images) in a container into multiple 
columns inside of the same container. The results look the same as the Masonry style 
(when the items are equal width), but without the complications of using a jQuery plug-in.
1 The Masonry plug-in: http://masonry.desandro.com
2 The Isotope plug-in: http://isotope.metaﬁ zzy.co
3 A great article on CSS based content columns: http://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/multiple-columns

011
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
Masonry Styles
01
FIGURE 2: www.glauce.com
FIGURE 1: www.alexafalcone.com
http://jamesnash.net
www.poddapontiarchitetti.it

012
www.indubitablee.com
www.balinov.com
www.danielmillroy.com
www.vbg.si/en

013
The one page folio is certainly not a new phenomenon, and yet it is rather easy to ﬁ nd 
examples of one page portfolio sites with styles and trends all their own. In fact, there are 
so many approaches to the one page folio that I was tempted to do multiple chapters on 
the topic, each highlighting a different subsection. Rather than go overboard, let’s instead 
dissect a few common examples from this carefully selected collection. 
Cody Eason’s one page site (FIGURE 1) demonstrates many trends at once—which 
is really remarkable given the rather sparse design. For starters, he begins his site with 
an extremely short introduction. When we think about recruiters looking at potential job 
candidates, it is not hard to imagine how welcome such a statement is. There is power in 
knowing your core identity—especially in an industry with such closely related and diverse 
roles to ﬁ ll. It is tempting to draw back and not want to pigeonhole yourself. Tempting 
though it may be, I can’t express how much I appreciate concise and speciﬁ c statements. 
Short of showing your best work, I think this is perhaps one of the most important ele-
ments you can put into your portfolio site. And with a one-pager like this, you guarantee 
that everyone hitting your site will see this intro and know what you are all about. 
Second, Cody’s site makes use of somewhat unusual navigation. It isn’t the typical 
list of links across the top. Instead, we ﬁ nd that the links are listed along the side. This is 
actually a pattern that we are ﬁ nding on many sites and it works really well, especially for 
in-page navigation such as this. 
Finally, the site embraces the ﬂ at design model, resulting in a prime example of yet 
another current trend. The site lacks depth and decorative elements (or ornate contain-
ers for content) for the structure. This is not an insult but rather a compliment. Designers 
can be really tempted into making monstrosities of portfolio sites, packed with all the 
things they wish they could do for clients. In contrast, Cody’s portfolio is super clean and 
to the point. His work is showcased beautifully and the site portrays him well. Frankly, it 
is amazing how effective such a simple approach can be. And perhaps that is the rub: 
“Simple” isn’t always so easy to come by; and instead it requires a great deal of effort. 
01/One Page Folios
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
One Page Folios
01

014
www.bwmedia.be
http://thenutone.com
FIGURE 1: www.ceasondesign.com
www.kocha.com.au

015
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
One Page Folios
01
www.davegarwacke.com
www.socketstudios.com
www.kokodigital.co.uk
www.colincoolidge.com/worksamples

016
01/ Front and Center
For this chapter, I want to highlight portfolio sites that don’t hide the portfolio pieces 
away on sub pages; instead they push them to the front page. But these sites don’t stop 
there—they make the work the primary focus of the home page by placing images front 
and center. Most often this is done through placement on the page and usually with very 
large images. As a result, the work becomes the primary focus. If your work is amazing 
this is a great way to structure your site. Rather than mess around with sales pitches or 
fancy introductions you just get to the point. In many cases the work is so outstanding 
that you hardly need to say anything else. It is the hook that draws people in and makes 
them really want to work with the individual or agency that did the work. 
My favorite example here is the Hidden Depth website (FIGURE 1). This agency website 
is an extremely minimalist design that is essentially void of any decoration. As you can see 
in the screenshot, a large sample portfolio piece is placed near the top of the home page. 
This single portfolio piece serves as a gateway to the portfolio as a whole, which is packed 
with diverse and beautiful work. (It always helps when you have a great body of work to 
back things up.) Another interesting aspect of the large and prominent portfolio piece is 
the way the site handles as the screen changes size. On large screens, it is a collection 
of devices and computers. As the screen shrinks, it becomes a single laptop image with 
a website on it. Finally, as it condenses down to the mobile version, it showcases a trio 
of iPhones with mobile websites. It is a small detail, but I think it is ingenious how they 
have tailored the space to ﬁ t the medium. 
Another common approach in this section is to provide a very large grid of work with 
almost no supportive content or elements. Sarah Coulton’s portfolio (FIGURE 2) is a prime 
example of this approach. This bare bones site gives the viewer almost nothing beyond 
the portfolio pieces. Again, if you have really great work, this is a great way to simply let 
the art speak for you. In this case, we get a glimpse into Sarah’s work and her overall 
style. The one risk here is that there is not a lot of information, so be darn sure your work 
is saying what you need it to! It is also important to give people a way to reach you. Don’t 
get so carried away with being minimalist that you leave out your contact info.

FIGURE 2: http://sarahcoulton.com
http://milee.co/works.html
FIGURE 1: http://hiddendepth.ie
www.orcunkilic.com/works
017
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
Front and Center
01

http://alexaraujo.co
http://evanﬂ etcher.com
http://zindustry.com
http://sosweetcreative.com
018

019
01/ Atypical Portfolios
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
Atypical Portfolios
01
In each of my books I feature a section on atypical sites. For this volume, I decided to 
dedicate the chapter to atypical portfolio sites. However, portfolio sites as a whole are 
pretty much atypical. Though we ﬁ nd common patterns, there is such an extreme range 
of approaches that the sites here don’t feel too much off-the-beaten-path. That said, each 
of these sites is unique and puts a rather distinct spin on the portfolio. 
A lovely example of this is the agency site for Creanet (FIGURE 1). In general, most web-
sites lean toward a vertical orientation. That is, they tend to be tall with content stacked 
on top of itself. From time to time we ﬁ nd a horizontal scrolling site (something that has 
fallen out of style for the most part). This site is not a horizontal scroller, yet it is horizontally 
oriented. This is why I placed it into this particular category: It just felt atypical and distinct. 
The animations on the home page also make this site worth a visit. Though the design is 
extremely restrained, it is a joy to browse.
The basic building blocks of the web are rectangular in shape, which makes the 
organic and unusual shapes found on AltSpace (FIGURE 2) all the more interesting and atypi-
cal. What I ﬁ nd even more amazing is that these unusual shapes scale to ﬁ t the browser. 
Not only do they scale, they actually change shape so they ﬁ ll the space (much like the 
Masonry-based sites found on page 010). The developer has accomplished this using 
Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG)—the web’s version of vector graphics. I am intrigued with 
how the site balances showcasing an incredible body of work and a unique interface that 
shows off their coding skills. This is a lethal combo that is remarkably effective. 
While I do not advocate doing something atypical simply for the sake of being differ-
ent, I do advocate for thinking creatively, pushing boundaries and generally testing the 
limits of the web—especially when this can be done in concert with beautiful design. It is 
hard to argue with an extremely functional site that demonstrates progressive, forward-
thinking results. 
In my opinion, the best way to arrive at atypical results is to simply focus on the needs 
of the content. Carefully consider the content and how the audience will engage with it 
to discover the details of the individual (or company) behind the site. From there, form 
a solution without regard to the many assumed norms that constrain us. In theory, the 
results will be unique (and perhaps even atypical), but will retain an extremely functional 
core, which is far more important than being different. 

020
http://progetty.it
http://www.ideator.si
FIGURE 2: http://altspace.com
FIGURE 1: www.creanet.es

021
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
Atypical Portfolios
01
http://marisapassos.com
http://theeggs.biz
http://pgrdesign.net
http://ryancutter.co.uk

022
01/ Thematic Portfolios
As you will ﬁ nd in several places throughout this book, the modern design aesthetic 
based on ﬂ at designs leaves a lot of room for anything contrasting to stand out. Thematic 
design is one design approach that leaves a lasting impression and can help one stand 
out from the crowd. 
As much as I love a super clean and minimalist approach to design it can be such 
a relief to see something new and different. A pattern I’ve noticed is that the individuals 
with “fancy” portfolios typically have weaker work, and those with crazy simple ones have 
the best work. So it might seem that going a bit over the top with a thematic portfolio is 
a mistake. It’s not, though. I think it makes good sense to leverage your creative skills to 
make a portfolio site that stands out.
Case in point, take a look at the portfolio site for Robby Leonardi (FIGURE 1). He turned 
his site into a fully interactive theme based on Super Mario Brothers. It is nothing short 
of incredible, and this site received a lot of fanfare. I recall noticing it showing up in email 
newsletters from many of the biggest names in web design (Smashing Magazine, Web-
Designer Depot and more). The site certainly places the focus on the form of the portfolio 
and far less on the design work. But it is hard to argue with the amount of exposure the 
site received (and continues to receive). I guarantee if you produce yet another ﬂ at mini-
malistic design based on solid colors and monochromatic photos with white text on the 
top—that you will not be getting such attention. Not that your site will suck, it just won’t 
stand out and warrant this level of attention. 
Another example that really stands out to me is Matthew Jordan’s portfolio site (FIGURE 
2). His site is extremely thematic and seems to pretty much ignore just about every mod-
ern design trend imaginable. In a way, it feels a bit dated in that the style harkens back to 
what was rather popular about six years ago. And yet, it doesn’t feel entirely trapped in 
that world. Somehow it transcends the style that was and applies the same approach in 
a modern way. For example, the site is a single page, it doesn’t have a traditional header, 
and most importantly it doesn’t have the decorative frame that would give it a ﬁ xed size. I 
applaud Matthew for using such a rich visual style that is not the norm. In the end, I think 
it is true to his personality and the style of work he produces. And isn’t that the point 
of a portfolio in the ﬁ rst place, to share your own personal style, whatever that may be? 

FIGURE 2: www.matthewdjordan.com
http://elegantseagulls.com
FIGURE 1: www.rleonardi.com/interactive-resume
http://speed-motion.com.ua
023
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
Thematic Portfolios
01

http://bornin82.com
www.designzillas.com
www.twistedstudio.com
www.cla-ude.net
024

025
01/ Landing Page 
Portfolios
For some designers a simple landing page is sufﬁ cient; for others it is a good starting point. 
Online landing pages are kind of like business cards but with a digital twist. Most often 
they point to various destinations, like social networks or portfolio services like Behance. 
Though these super simple landing pages are light on content, they can still provide a 
glimpse into the individual they represent. 
For example, consider these two landing pages: Vlad Rodriguez (FIGURE 1)  and Minnix 
(FIGURE 2). Vlad is a painter, while Minnix is user experience (UX) designer and front-end 
developer. Certainly these two career ﬁ elds contrast rather sharply, and I would say that 
the incredibly simple landing pages each of them has accurately reﬂ ects their respective 
types of work. 
It’s also really hard not to love Manuel Moreale’s crazy simple landing page site (FIGURE 
3). As you can see in the screenshot he is a designer that fully embraces the minimalist 
mindset. If you visit the live site, you will see that the darker text after his e-mail address 
rotates through various statements. What a simple yet interesting way to create a unique 
experience—and perhaps even a memorable one for those visiting. Again, I am ﬂ oored at 
how something so simple can convey so much. In some ways, it is a real demonstration 
of the power of design. The more I see how so little can perform so well I am reminded 
just how meaningful every last aspect of a design should be. 
If you lack an online presence, I challenge you to start with a simple page such as this. 
You should be able to put it together in a very short amount of time. As a result, you will 
have a single place to refer people to for information all about you, even if it just directs 
users to Twitter and Behance. It is still beneﬁ cial and gives you a starting point for building 
your own online presence. 
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
Landing Page Portfolios
01

FIGURE 3: http://manuelmoreale.com
www.janixpacle.com
FIGURE 1: www.vladrodriguez.com
FIGURE 2: http://minnixio.com

http://ryansrich.com
http://tylersanguinette.com
http://fuelthemes.net
www.andrewkapish.com
027
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
Landing Page Portfolios
01

028
01/ Responsive 
Portfolios
Perhaps the biggest challenge designers and developers face right now is sorting through 
the madness we call responsive web design. Designing and creating a site that will work 
on any screen size is nothing short of an epic challenge. As such, I really wanted to show 
a lot of variety in this section. So collected here is the largest set of images you will ﬁ nd 
in this book. This is an area where inspiration can pay off in a big way. Dig through the 
samples here and discover how others have faced the very problems you will face when 
building an online portfolio. 
In most cases, like the portfolio of Michael Sevilla (FIGURE 1), the ﬂ ow from large screen 
to small is natural and nearly obvious. The grid of images slowly condenses down to 
a single column and the navigation ﬁ nds its way just below the logo. It feels natural 
and almost like it was meant to be. We ﬁ nd much the same results on the Applove site 
(FIGURE 2). Here, bands of horizontal content naturally transition to a single stacked set 
of elements as the contents of each row slowly condense into a single column. This is 
the type of approach we ﬁ nd often, and it is an example of what I consider the single 
biggest structural pattern of modern web design.
Flash back about ten years ago, and the basic structure of the web was marked by 
clear headers for logos and navigation, sidebars for sub navigation, an obvious content 
region, and a footer to ﬁ nish it off. Quite often, the design was uniﬁ ed by some sort of 
containing structure that framed everything in place. These containers uniﬁ ed all the ele-
ments and created pockets to place everything into. Jump back into the present, and we 
ﬁ nd that responsive design has pretty much sealed the fate of this approach. Those fancy 
containers and holders of content are a nightmare to style in a responsive world. Instead, 
we ﬁ nd that horizontal bands of content do this job wonderfully. Each band can adjust 
as needed and can continue to stack on top of each other. These bands of content are 
the modern day standard for how to structure content. Look through the samples in this 
chapter, and throughout the book, you will ﬁ nd it over and over again. 

029
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
Responsive Portfolios
01
FIGURE 1: http://svla.co
FIGURE 2: www.applove.se

http://janne.me
www.asylummarketing.com

031
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
Responsive Portfolios
01
http://doabackﬂ ip.com
www.scottmccarthydesign.com

http://residence-mixte.com
http://ﬁ xate.it

033
PORTFOLIO STYLES AND TRENDS
Responsive Portfolios
01
www.philippehong.com
www.antro.ca/en

034
02
PORTFOLIOS 
BY REGION 
European Union • Eastern Europe • North America • South America • Asia • 
Oceana • Middle East
/
In all my years of collecting websites and categorizing them I have never attempted to analyze 
styles or patterns based on geographic region. Naturally we ﬁ nd that there is a huge range 
of styles and ideas at work in locations around the world. Aesthetics and culture play a sig-
niﬁ cant role in design, and this is revealed in the design of portfolio sites from various regions.
There is a dynamic to analyzing sites based on region that is perplexing. If my intention is 
to showcase beautiful web design, and I am looking at web designs based on regions, and 
each region of the world has its own deﬁ nition of beauty—what aesthetic parameters do I base 
my selections on? A choice must be made, and so I choose focus on sites that are beautiful 
to me and the audience I speak to. This is a necessary distinction to point out.
To be honest, I expected to ﬁ nd a radical range of styles—each one vividly connected to a 
speciﬁ c part of the world. It seems to me that ten years ago, the web was more divided, and 
it was easier to notice a difference based on region. But as you browse the sites collected 
here, on ﬁ rst look you will likely have no idea where in the world the sites originated from! I 
ﬁ nd it fascinating as you focus in on the details of these sites, you will notice small details that 
distinguish one from the other and give subtle hints as to the region of the world represented. 
A fantastic example of this is the small set of sites from Asia. My expectation with this 
particular section was that they would somehow ﬁ t into a stereotype of the region. The funny 
thing is that I am not even sure what that means! Stereotypes are kind of like that, and as you 
dig into them you may ﬁ nd your expectations overturned.
The question this naturally leads to is puzzling: Are these simply agencies in the Asian 
region that are attempting to appeal to Western audiences? If so, then mission accomplished. 
Or do these sites ﬁ t into expectations within Asian culture, which has gravitated towards the 
same styles as the West?

035
02/ European Union  
www.jenslehmann.com
http://radziu.org
www.attitudedesign.co.uk
www.min-style.de
PORTFOLIOS BY REGION
European Union
02

http://cheesebanana.com
www.pageinteractive.pl
http://porcupinecolors.com
02/ Eastern Europe
www.sasahuzjak.com
036

037
02/ North America
www.geekybeaver.ca
http://pauljohns.com
www.thisisgrow.com
http://burciaga.co
PORTFOLIOS BY REGION
North America
02

02/ South America
www.publer.com.br
http://leozakour.com
http://igorodrigues.com.br
http://isabelarodrigues.org
038

039
02/ Asia
www.hasrimy.com
www.cleancutcrew.com
http://webcoursesagency.com
http://arunpattnaik.com
PORTFOLIOS BY REGION
Asia
02

02/Oceana
www.alexanderbyrne.com
www.alingham.com
040

041
http://url.com.tr
http://simpleia.com
www.pixelwrapped.com
02/Middle East
PORTFOLIOS BY REGION
Middle East
02

042
/
One Man Show • The Micro Agency (fewer than 10 people) • Medium Agencies 
(10 to 50 people) • Large Agencies (50 people or more)
03
PORTFOLIOS BY 
AGENCY SIZE
One Man Show • The Micro Agency (fewer than 10 people) • Medium Agencies 
(10 to 50 people) • Large Agencies (50 people or more)
03
PORTFOLIOS BY 
AGENCY SIZE
Much like the portfolio sites by region, I have never really assessed portfolio styles 
based on the size of the agency. In the following four sets I showcase portfolios of 
individuals, micro agencies (which I deﬁ ne as fewer than 10 people), medium agencies 
(10 to 50 people) and large agencies (with 50 or more people). In this case we can 
observe some clear differences. 
It seems that as we go from the smallest to the largest of agency websites, the portfo-
lios go from very stylized to much more generic. I think this is because individuals reﬂ ect 
their own individual styles and capabilities—and smaller agencies have fewer personali-
ties to represent. A large agency has so many people and teams that it is likely they can 
take on many more types of work and produce a tremendous range of styles. As such, 
it just doesn’t make as much sense to put on the facade of a single style so they tend 
to gravitate toward minimalist and very streamlined designs. Scan through the sample 
sets from small to large and you will no doubt notice this. At ﬁ rst I thought this was a 
coincidence based on the sites I happened to collect. But as I looked further it held true 
in most cases. What I found was that often times the smaller shops and individuals tried 
to look more stylistic, while the larger shops almost never tried to type cast themselves 
with a single style or niche and instead lean towards generic design styles. 
Another interesting contrast I found was that the smaller the group, the more promi-
nent the sales pitch was. The larger shops seem to often rely on simply showing work 

043
on an epic scale while smaller organizations sell you on their process and particular skill 
set. I think this is makes sense. Larger shops with big-name clients can rely on a, “If it 
is good enough for them, it is good enough for me” mentality. After all, if a shop can do 
incredible work for Nike or any other mega corporation, they can likely handle my job of 
an equal or smaller scale. 
Dig into the following examples and consider how the scale of each shop is reﬂ ected 
in the design. I think it is an important consideration as you create your own portfolio site 
or one for an agency. My suggestion is to simply stay true to what you are—don’t try to 
look bigger then you are. 

044
03/ One Man Show
www.mickael-girault.fr
www.frootdesign.com
www.pierrekarter.be
http://mattvojacek.com

www.higher.sk/en
http://11beats.co.uk
http://anthemdesignlab.com
www.enrichcreative.com
03/The Micro Agency
 
(fewer than 10 people)
045
PORTFOLIOS BY AGENCY SIZE
The Micro Agency
03

046
03/ Medium Agencies 
 
(10 to 50 people)
http://rno1.com
http://integritystl.com
www.driftinteractive.com
http://worryfreelabs.com

047
http://vladimirjones.com
www.hugeinc.com
www.rga.com
www.bigspaceship.com
03/ Large Agencies 
 
(50 people or more)
PORTFOLIOS BY AGENCY SIZE
Large Agencies
03

048
/
Interactive and Web • User Interface and User Experience Design • Mobile App 
Design and Development • Developers and Programmers • Icon Design • Animation 
and Motion Graphics • Branding and Logo Work • Print Design • Typography • 
Photography • Fine Art • Illustration • Advertising • Other Types of Work
04
PORTFOLIOS BY 
TYPE OF WORK
Another really interesting way to break down portfolio sites is by the type of work show-
cased in them. This is by no means an exact science due to the fact that many people 
do various types of work. As a result, many of the samples here would likely ﬁ t into many 
other niches. I did work hard to show examples that focus on the topic at hand. That said, 
I still feel it is really interesting to see how web designers in common ﬁ elds have chosen to 
differentiate themselves. 
In particular I think you will ﬁ nd some interesting ideas in the section ﬁ lled with portfolios 
for non-design work (page 067). Here you will ﬁ nd examples from wide-ranging professions 
such as tattoo artist, barber, comedian and videographer. Each of these has a speciﬁ c type 
of work to showcase and certain skills to highlight. 
One of my favorite techniques for getting fresh ideas is to simply look outside my chosen 
ﬁ eld of work. In this section, you should ﬁ nd a wealth of ideas in each of the categories 
presented. My work falls under the user experience design bucket (page 052); so I found 
great inspiration in looking at how ﬁ ne artists showcase their work (page 070). Interestingly 
there is a lot of common ground between these two chapters. I can’t help but notice many 
small details that get me thinking about how I would approach my own portfolio.
Another section here that really catches my personal attention is the one for icon designs 
(page 058). Icons like the ones shown create a beautiful experience and it got me thinking 
about how I could utilize icons of the work I do. To me this perfectly demonstrates the point 
of my Idea Books. You can easily take ideas from designers in other specialties and use 
them to inspire your own work. As a result you can introduce fresh ideas that solve your 
problems instead of simply taking a “me-too” approach and running with the current trend. 

049
04/ Interactive and Web
http://robinclediere.com
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Interactive and Web
04

www.jonjon.tv
050

http://velthy.net
www.grondecki.pl
051
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Interactive and Web
04

052
04/User Interface and 
User Experience Design
www.seanhermandesign.com

www.kylethacker.com
http://pavelhuza.com
www.leeannpica.com
053
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
User Interface and Experience Design
04

054
04/ Mobile App Design 
and Development
www.softfacade.com/

http://kollectivemobile.com
http://attackpattern.com
http://fueled.com
055
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Mobile App Design and Development
04

056
04/ Developers and 
Programmers
http://chriswinch.me

www.fogcreek.com
www.adhamdannaway.com
http://minimalmonkey.com
057
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Developers and Programmers
04

058
04/ Icon Design
www.icondesigner.net

www.taylorcarrigan.com
http://annapaschenko.com
www.midtonedesign.com
059
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Icon Design
04

060
04/ Animation and 
Motion Graphics
www.studiopigeon.com

http://berd.tv
https://modio.tv
www.oniric-creative.com
061
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Animation and Motion Graphics
04

062
04/ Branding and 
Logo Work
www.picturesandtext.co.uk

www.werklig.com
www.jeroenvaneerden.nl
www.helveticbrands.ch
063
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Branding and Logo Work
04

064
04/ Print Design
www.mooi-design.com

http://2xelliott.co.uk
http://pointbarre.ca/en
www.moodley.at/de/willkommen.html
065
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Print Design
04

066
04/ Typography
www.bmddesign.fr

www.rafagoicoechea.info
http://typefounding.com
www.lukeritchie.co.za
067
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Typography
04

068
04/ Photography
www.timtadder.com

www.lena-sanz.com
http://mamochotena.pl
www.levonbiss.com
069
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Photography
04

070
04/Fine Art
www.turksworks.co.uk

http://michalsawtyruk.com
www.ivanpopovic.com
www.jefﬂ angevin.com
071
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Fine Art
04

072
04/ Illustration
www.visio-art.de

www.nabilnezzar.com
http://kerbyrosanes.com
www.beatrizsanches.com
073
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Illustration
04

074
04/ Advertising
www.factoria.me

http://grey.com
www.rizon.be
http://storylark.com
075
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Advertising
04

076
04/Other Types of Work
http://empirestatestudios.com

www.davidfechner.de/barber
http://justweddings.ie
www.kenhoffa.com
077
PORTFOLIOS BY TYPE OF WORK
Other Types of Work
04

http://parsons.me
www.mikecampau.com
http://builtthings.com
www.michellebuteau.com
078

079
DESIGN STYLES
05/
Flat Designs • Anti-Flat Design • 3-D Designs • Minimal • 
Chromeless • White Text On a Photo • Vector-Style Illustrations • 
Storytelling • The Super Hero • Chalkboards • Vertical Divides
Design styles tend to represent larger movements and patterns in the design world. 
Styles don’t typically have speciﬁ c elements associated with them, but rather are found 
in more of a common visual approach. These could be deﬁ ned as overall theories in the 
approach to design. Minimalism is a prime example of how a type of design can drive 
what the artist produces. This style deﬁ nes how it will look and feel, but doesn’t create 
a formula for speciﬁ c imagery, colors, type styles and so on. In contrast, designs sorted 
by themes do strike up speciﬁ cs that can drive the overall direction of the design. The 
current love affair the world has with ﬂ at design is a perfect example of this. Carefully 
think through the style you select for your site and ensure that it plays into the overall 
brand and message of the site.

080
05/ Flat Designs
I have mentioned ﬂ at design several times already in this book, sometimes in a negative 
manner. But don’t get me wrong, the sites presented here are gorgeous, and frankly I 
would be happy if I could say I had designed any of them. The sites are beautiful and 
vividly display the style that is currently extremely popular. My biggest beef with this style 
is that it feels so generic at times. In many cases, you could take the logo off one site and 
slap it on any other ﬂ at design. With this in mind, I very carefully selected the set of sites 
you see here. In my opinion, these sites leverage the ﬂ at aesthetic, but do so in a way that 
avoids an overly generic result. The sites feel distinct and perfectly matched to the content.
Cotton Bureau (FIGURE 1) is a lovely example of this. The site clearly relies on a ﬂ at style 
and easily ﬁ ts into the trendy design approach. And yet, there is nothing about the design 
that feels generic. Instead the design feels clearly connected to the product and style of 
the brand as a whole. They could have gone overboard with cotton and fabric textures. It 
would have been easy to justify and would have felt rather natural. Instead, they followed 
the visual style of the current age but with their own touches. For example, the pattern 
of t-shirts in the background helps give the site a unique visual twist.
 I must caution though: Before you jump on the bandwagon with this style, be sure 
to think it through. Does the style resonate with the brand you need to showcase? Will 
it reinforce what the site needs to communicate? If so, the biggest question is: How can 
you tweak the style? What other style can you blend it with? How can you integrate the 
concept of your site with the design? In other words, what can you do to make your ﬂ at 
design different from all the other ﬂ at designs out there?

FIGURE 1: https://cottonbureau.com
FIGURE 2: www.scribd.com
www.namesforchange.org
081
DESIGN STYLES
Flat Designs
05

http://nballstats.com
www.meetingresult.com
http://poncho.is/register
http://sponsormybook.com
082

http://danielladraper.com
http://why.az
http://canopy.co
083
DESIGN STYLES
Flat Designs
05

http://thezoomproject.com
https://burnformule1.com
www.prosperity.com
084

http://bradleyhaynes.com/freelance
https://pillpack.com
http://jims-scarf.co.uk
085
DESIGN STYLES
Flat Designs
05

086
Quite often ﬂ at design is described as the opposite of a skeuomorphic approach to 
design. Skeuomophic design is when a digital interface emulates its real world counter 
part. For example, a digital on/off switch that is made to look like a real world switch. 
This contrast between ﬂ at and skeuomorphism is most likely due to the evolution that 
has occurred on Apple devices. They are transitioning away from the skeuomorphic 
approaches Steve Jobs endorsed. While I understand the connection between these 
two styles, it is a contrast that makes the most sense in the world of native mobile apps 
and mobile operating systems. Look to the web and you will ﬁ nd that web designers very 
rarely rely on skeuomorphs—at least to the degree they did in previous versions of iOS. 
This got me thinking: what is the real opposite of ﬂ at design? I have not-so-cleverly 
dubbed it anti-ﬂ at design. This approach doesn’t rely on over-the-top skeuomorphs, but 
does manage to essentially ignore the ﬂ at style. The samples collected here have depth 
and visual richness that disconnects them from the ﬂ at and minimalistic styles quite vividly. 
A fantastic example of this is the Maryland Brewers’ Harvest website (FIGURE 1). If you 
were to remove the various textures used in the site and substitute the dynamic deco-
rative type with ﬂ at text, this example easily could have been ﬂ at. And yet it is not. As 
you consider the topic and content of the site, the visual richness they have opted for is 
perfect. It ﬁ ts the organic colors and various textures we associate with beer—as seen 
in the imagery on the site.
Another example of this approach is the Dash site (FIGURE 2). Again, this could have 
oh-so-easily been yet another ﬂ at design. Instead it has gradients (gasp!) and even some 
shadows (don’t faint). I know, it is really shocking isn’t it? Interestingly, the site relies on 
things that are shunned right now, and yet the site feels completely fresh and modern. I 
don’t feel that it is dated or out of place at all. It feels perfectly natural and has a unique 
and beautiful style. After an overdose of ﬂ at design, the buttons do in fact feel more click-
able, and the action items on the site feel just a bit more obvious. 
As always, consider what you can take away from this. Perhaps the answer is to take 
an otherwise ﬂ at design and put a small touch of non-ﬂ at back into it. Through this the 
design takes on a fresh feel, and the action items can be extremely obvious. Frankly, this 
is pretty much what all of the examples here have done. They take the same overall feel 
of ﬂ at design and add a dash of anti-ﬂ at design back in. 
05/ Anti-Flat Designs

FIGURE 1: http://mdbrewersharvest.com
FIGURE 2: www.thedash.com
www.tantefanny.at
www.getdrip.com
087
DESIGN STYLES
Anti-Flat Designs
05

www.pwdo.org/ffc-2013
www.localsapparel.se
www.athenos.com
http://good-morning.no/casestudies/good-morning-breakfast
088

www.rentalengine.com
http://cervezaaustral.cl/viajealorigen
https://spacebox.io
http://mailplaneapp.com
089
DESIGN STYLES
Anti-Flat Designs
05

090
05/ 3-D Designs
The 3-D design style is another trend that has a bit of a anti-ﬂ at design feel to it. Before your 
mind gets carried away, I am not describing sites that make use of radical 3-D environments 
in which you move around. I am focused here on sites that make small use of the approach. 
For example, the Safebyte (FIGURE 1) site uses a very subtle effect in the background to create 
a small sense of dimension. The images are at an angle and have a shadow, so you feel they 
recede into the background. The depth-of-ﬁ eld effect plays a signiﬁ cant role in the style as 
well. The point here is that the site has a sense of depth—achieved through imagery—but 
it does not attempt to be overly three-dimensional in nature.
Another fun example is The Design Files Open House website (FIGURE 2). Here a simple 
photograph is placed behind the content (a rather popular approach, as found in the White 
Text on a Photograph chapter on page 104). In fact, the home page is a series of photos 
that all support this dimensional effect. The site is incredibly minimal, and yet the careful 
use of beautiful photographs gives the site a unique sense of depth. 
The Greats site (FIGURE 3) has a beautiful holiday-themed element at the top of the page. 
Here the overlap of the ornaments combined with the shadows below them creates a 
simple 3-D effect. The results are simple but beautiful and captivating. 
Overlapping elements is such a simple way to create depth and can result in some 
gorgeous results. A lovely example is the G-Star RAW home page (FIGURE 4). In cases like 
this you can get away with the user not being able to read the full text. This won’t always 
work, but here it does beautifully. The site has a gorgeous illusion of depth. 
A few years ago the web was bonkers over the use of parallax elements. Every now 
and again you still ﬁ nd it at work (and most often in brilliant ways). The usage on LaTabla-
DeGisela.com certainly ﬁ ts this description. The colored elements at the bottom move in 
a parallax way, which is further reinforced by the out-of-focus elements that enhance the 
notion of depth. The results are animated as you move the mouse around the screen. It 
is a simple detail, but one that catches your attention and draws you in.
The use of depth brings a sense of life to these otherwise streamlined sites. Again, 
it feels a lot like these would be classic ﬂ at designs, but the designer has added some 
vividly non-ﬂ at elements to give the sites a depth they would otherwise lack. The sites are 
unique, gorgeous and stand on their own as distinct styles and brands. 

FIGURE 1: www.safebyte.com
FIGURE 3: http://greatsbrand.com
FIGURE 2: www.thedesignﬁ lesopenhouse.com
FIGURE 4: www.g-star.com
091
DESIGN STYLES
3-D Designs
05

www.themobileindex.com
www.siaperitivos.com/en/home
http://one.htc.com/experienceit
http://tablet.fubiz.net
092

www.sweez.com.br
www.mixd.co.uk
www.latabladegisela.com
http://180g.co/vellum
093
DESIGN STYLES
3-D Designs
05

094
05/ Minimal
One of my favorite categories—one that has found its way into all of my Idea Books—is 
the minimal style. This style has been around for ages and has its roots clearly in the 
modern design movement, which of course easily predates the web. The work of Dieter 
Rams and his 10 principles of good design vividly communicate the principles at work 
in the sites shown here. I encourage you to read more about Dieter and his principles1.
Consider one of Dieter Rams’s principles: “Good design makes a product under-
standable.” Think of this as you consider the IndMusic website (FIGURE 1). The product 
this company offers is vividly clear and the minimalistic approach allows the clear value 
proposition to stand out. This approach can easily be found in many of the other examples 
as well, such as the Fiiinta website (FIGURE 2) or the Just Us site (FIGURE 3).
Another of the principles states that “Good design is long-lasting.” One could interpret 
this on the web as a timeless style that doesn’t need to be updated simply because the 
visual aesthetic has changed. I think Howard Yount (FIGURE 4) embodies this perfectly. The 
site could have been made ten years ago, and I see no reason why it will feel out of date 
ten years from now. Except for the product they sell, the design of the site is timeless. 
Part of the reason for this leads me to the ﬁ nal principle I want to consider.
“Good design is as little design as possible” perfectly reﬂ ects the essence of the mini-
malist style. This is, in fact, one of the most effective ways to achieve a solid, long-lasting 
design that relies on very little supporting design, as we noticed on the Howard Yount 
site. As a result, the true beauty of this design is that it is both long lasting and minimalist 
in nature. I won’t say it will be timeless forever, but many of the sites you would place in 
this category are close to that. The Molly & Me Pecans website (FIGURE 5) demonstrates 
this effectively. The site most certainly has as little as possible, and it is hard not to sug-
gest that the design is timeless. 
1  Dieter Rams on Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dieter_Rams

FIGURE 1: www.indmusicnetwork.com
FIGURE 2: http://ﬁ iinta.com
FIGURE 3: www.justusdesigncollective.com
FIGURE 4: www.howardyount.com
095
DESIGN STYLES
Minimal
05

FIGURE 5: http://mollyandmepecans.com
http://awbymary.com
http://madebyfriends.co/citibike
096

http://siiiimple.eu.pn
www.usepeak.com
www.swissted.com
097
DESIGN STYLES
Minimal
05

http://gcwatches.com/en
www.harrys.com
http://teacakedesign.com
098

www.cmyk-tower.com
www.dandad.org
http://openin.gs
099
DESIGN STYLES
Minimal
05

100
05/ Chromeless
This chapter follows the minimal one because as you will quickly see, they have a lot in 
common. In fact, this chapter is essentially a subsection of the minimal style. As usual, let’s 
start by deﬁ ning the style. Chromeless sites are those that are essentially void of any chrome, 
and by chrome I mean any sort of decorative containers. In the current web design trends it 
has become rather commonplace to avoid containers that frame content. Naturally, design-
ers don’t stick to this religiously, but it is still a common mentality. That said, the sites here 
make rather vivid use of the style and for the most part are completely void of any chrome. 
A natural example that clearly shows its minimalistic roots is the Carrera Races site 
(FIGURE 1). The site of course is minimalist, but note that there is just a logo, navigation and 
content. There are no frames to contain things. This example is perhaps the simplest of 
the ones I have collected. For the most part, the rest of them rely on more complex visual 
styles where the lack of chrome is less noticeable. And though I believe the other sites 
could also be considered minimal, they are not what people typically think of when the 
minimal style comes to mind.
Take for example the TekRok (FIGURE 2), the Hosoi Kaban (FIGURE 3) and Natalie Sklob-
ovskaya’s (FIGURE 4) sites. Though these sites essentially look nothing alike, they all lack the 
same element: structural decoration. The sites clearly do not lack in the area of style, and 
are each quite beautiful for their own reasons. But none of them rely on the structure of the 
site to create the beauty. Instead the focus is essentially on the content, so much so that 
pretty much anything that is not content has been removed. And though this description 
sounds like a minimalist style, I think you will agree when you view the screenshots that 
they are not your stereotypical minimal designs.
Some of the designs come really close to stepping beyond my deﬁ nition of this style. For 
example The London Distillery site (FIGURE 5) has what might be considered chrome—the 
box of buttons, for example. However, I would argue that the buttons are the container, 
and therefore there is no container. It is for this reason that the style is somewhat elusive. 
At times it appears there is in fact a supporting structure that deﬁ nes and decorates the 
layout. But as you focus on it more intently and break it apart you realize the content is the 
decoration. The results are a lovely step away from minimalism. 

FIGURE 1: http://carreraworld.com/us
FIGURE 2: http://tekroc.com
FIGURE 3: http://kabanhosoi.com
FIGURE 4: www.sklobovskaya.com
101
DESIGN STYLES
Chromeless
05

FIGURE 5: www.thelondondistillerycompany.com
http://lenotre.chateauversailles.fr/entries_en.html
http://andy-wolf.at/onelove
http://melanie-f.com
102

www.reachpartners.ch
http://appdock.co
http://museekly.com
www.queenslandballet.com.au
103
DESIGN STYLES
Chromeless
05

104
05/ White Text On a Photo
You know you’re onto a popular trend when you deﬁ ne the topic, start collecting sites, and 
about ﬁ ve minutes later you have enough to ﬁ ll a chapter. This is exactly the case with the 
trend of placing white text over a photograph. Most often the photos are stylized in some 
way so that the white text clearly pops out. Once you notice this, you will ﬁ nd this recipe at 
work in countless sites. I actually had to work hard to avoid putting too many sites with this 
formula throughout this book.  
Some trends, like this one, are simply not as exciting and can often feel mundane, even 
useless. I would concur that if you simply use this because it is a visual approach that looks 
nice, it can become a crutch. Instead, I propose you keep it in mind as a useful formula to 
bust out when the time is right. Though it is simple—and seriously overused—this trend does 
have its useful points.
For example, the combination of text and image results in a set of supporting elements. 
Consider the Tiny Footprint Coffee (FIGURE 1) website. One quick look and you no doubt know 
exactly what the site is about. The image and text work together to create a cohesive message. 
This, to me, is the saving grace for this formula: the results can be very meaningful through a 
repeated message. Though coffee beans on a coffee site is a bit obvious, and probably way 
overdone, the results are beautiful and it is hard to argue with the clarity of purpose. 
Another example I ﬁ nd to be particularly effective is the Curt’s Special Recipe site (FIGURE 
2). Here the imagery isn’t just some stylized stock photo—instead it is a shot of the actual 
product combined with some beautiful textures. The results are not only gorgeous, even 
yummy, but also extremely helpful to the design of the site. Again, the combined messages of 
the text and photos work to reinforce and drive home the point of the site. No confusion here. 
What this approach can also do is set a clear tone for a site. Compare the Seattle Cider 
Co. site (FIGURE 3)  with the Martina Sperl site (FIGURE 4). Both use the same basic approach, 
and yet each has an extremely distinct feel. This is a very powerful approach that can really 
shape the feel of your site.
As with many trends, on the surface, this one is easy to discard. But as you dig in, I think 
you will ﬁ nd it is a rather effective tool. Just save it for the perfect scenario when it makes 
really good sense. 

FIGURE 1: www.tinyfootprintcoffee.com
FIGURE 3: www.seattlecidercompany.com
FIGURE 2: http://curtsspecialrecipe.com
FIGURE 4: www.martinasperl.at
105
DESIGN STYLES
White Text On a Photo
05

http://tribalmedia.co.uk
http://jellyreader.com
http://viewﬂ ux.com
http://heavyapp.com
106

http://lesson.ly
www.formentini.it/en
www.hellohired.com
www.springloops.io
107
DESIGN STYLES
White Text On a Photo
05

http://lifeandthyme.com
www.andremaurice.it
www.webuildrail.com
www.glasvasen.se
108

109
05/ Vector-Style 
Illustrations 
The use of illustrations in web design is something I have talked about for many years. As 
I reﬂ ect on it, I could easily create a timeline of various illustration styles the web has used 
over the years. These types of illustrations represent trends and tend to date a site. As you 
have likely guessed, the visual trend in illustration right now is toward a vector look and feel. 
A quick scan of the samples collected here demonstrates this. As with many of the trends 
in this book, you will notice this style in numerous other examples throughout this book.
I think the core reason this style started is because of the responsive web design 
movement. As designers started creating designs that could adapt to any screen size, 
they needed to put artwork with the designs. And if you want artwork that scales well, 
it only makes sense to use vector-oriented artwork. (Though ironically, an image of an 
illustration that is not vector-style will scale just as well. There literally is no difference.) 
Another aspect of the responsive movement was the rise of the ﬂ at design. This is most 
likely the second catalyst that drove this to be a popular style, as the results match really 
well with this other visual approach (check page 080 for more sites built with the ﬂ at style). 
As you will notice, many of the sites here make vivid usage of the ﬂ at style in combination 
with the vector illustrations. 
As always, illustrations provide a way for designers to establish a unique visual style 
for a site. Even though all of the sites here use a similar basic approach, the results are 
truly diverse. One of my favorite examples is the Liberio artwork (FIGURE 1). The device 
in the illustration sets the context for the product, but it does so in a fairly unique way. 
Rather than a photorealistic style that would match countless other sites, they relied on 
a stylized version that gets the point across. 
Another example that I really love is the Battle of the Sexes site (FIGURE 2). In a case 
like this, it is hard to imagine the site without the unique illustrations. Even if the site had 
a more typical structure, the illustrations really create a unique feel. And given the topic, 
it would be easy for this to fall apart. Instead, the unique vector-style illustrations give 
the site an appeal it would otherwise completely lack. The illustrations bring it to life and 
make it interesting. 
DESIGN STYLES
Vector-Style Illustrations
05

FIGURE 1: http://liber.io
FIGURE 2: https://towncentrecarparks.com/battle-of-the-sexes
www.pressking.com
http://campnothing.goodfornothing.com
110

http://slideme.luigiferraresi.it
www.leedsbuildingsociety.co.uk/resources/kick-my-habits
http://musegrid-shelﬁ e.businesscatalyst.com
http://altered.cc
111
DESIGN STYLES
Vector-Style Illustrations
05

http://sitedrop.com
http://brace.io
http://startupnotes.org
www.pixelbazaar.com
112

113
05/ Storytelling
A shift that has been happening in web design for some time now is from a static informational 
format to more of a storytelling approach. Though it is obviously not universal, some sites 
avoid just presenting the facts, and instead weave a more interesting and compelling story 
around the product. 
Great examples of this can be found on many software websites. In some cases the actual 
product is not so obvious, though the story the site presents is targeted at capturing a speciﬁ c 
audience’s attention. Naturally the people they seek to captivate are their target audience to 
buy the software. Rather than start with screenshots and feature lists, many applications lead 
in with a story of some sorts. 
Perhaps it is obvious, but in most cases the story is not over the top, but rather established 
with a tiny bit of mystery. In contrast, most of the samples collected here create storytelling 
approaches in a far more extreme way. They go about this in different ways, but together the 
results tell an interesting story about the trend. 
All of the examples here are great and well worth a visit, but a few do stand out to me. First 
up is ContextAd (FIGURE 1). This beautiful site is yet another online advertising outlet. They used 
a story-like approach to help dispel assumptions about the product and to help clarify the 
need for their distinct service. It’s a storytelling approach, but ultimately it is really a sales pitch. 
Another example that is really interesting to me is the OgilvyOne Big Data site (FIGURE 2). 
Let’s be honest, big data is not an exciting topic. In order to make it interesting, compelling 
and ultimately successful this site uses a very clear story-based approach to present the site’s 
core message. And guess what? They made a really boring topic engaging and interesting. 
Finally, this minisite from Golden Submarine (FIGURE 3) uses a story-based structure to 
sell them as a solid web agency. Essentially the story seeks to establish them as experts in 
their ﬁ eld. In this case it works really well. In the sea of portfolio sites I reviewed for this book, 
I have to admit that this one caught my attention. In fact, I was determined to leave agency 
and portfolio sites out of the rest of this book due to the dense set of them at the front, but 
this one was just too beautiful to pass up (I am such a sucker for gorgeous web design.) 
DESIGN STYLES
Storytelling
05

FIGURE 1: www.freeger.com/projects/contextad
FIGURE 3: http://whaternet.com
www.f-i.com/ﬁ /airlines
FIGURE 2: http://adayinbigdata.com
114

www.dangersoffracking.com
http://doyouimpress.com
http://futureofcarsharing.com
http://benthebodyguard.com
115
DESIGN STYLES
Storytelling
05

www.uppercup.com.au
http://nasaprospect.com
www.welldoneteamgb.com
http://startupsthisishowdesignworks.com
116

www.rodney.com
www.reverenddanger.com
www.theﬂ owapp.com
http://bellroy.com/pages/slim-your-wallet
117
DESIGN STYLES
Storytelling
05

118
05/ The Super Hero
The almighty content slider has been a go-to element for web designers over the last four 
years or so. At times it seemed like a timeless element that would be around forever. And 
though we still ﬁ nd it at work on many home pages, it seems that this particular element 
is losing traction. In its place, we ﬁ nd that a new home page leader element is ﬁ nding its 
way into countless designs. I lovingly refer to it as the Super Hero. Those in marketing are 
likely familiar with the typical “hero shot.” The alcohol industry is notorious for these with 
their super-sized and nearly glamorous shots of liquor bottles. The format I am referring 
to here is a situation where the home page is dominated by a hero section that summa-
rizes a product. Noticeably gone is the content slider offering up multiple perspectives on 
the same product. Instead, we ﬁ nd a single super-sized section with the most succinct 
positioning possible for the product.
An absolutely perfect demonstration of this is the Goldee site (FIGURE 1). Here we ﬁ nd 
a single large image of the product, a three-word summary of what it does and a call to 
action to get your own. You will also no doubt notice the large button in the middle of 
all this that allows you to watch a video of the product. This super hero section, were it 
made a few years ago, would have likely been a slider with about four frames, each frame 
showing some aspect of the product that makes it super cool. 
I would propose that in many cases, the content slider is a crutch that allows designers 
to appease many people involved in a product. It lets them highlight many aspects of a 
product, each perhaps from a different person’s perspective. Imagine how the follow-
ing people might want to market a product differently: the CEO, marketing, developers, 
designers and so on. Each might think a different aspect is the best way to sell it. The 
end result is a muddled mess that works harder than it should. Instead the super hero 
approach works to ﬁ nd the single best and most concise sales angle. The results are 
simpler to use, easier to maintain, and just feel better for the consumer. As you noticed 
on the Goldee site, the video is the more full-blown sales pitch. But rather then put it 
front and center, they make you click to get it. As such, you aren’t forced into it if you 
don’t need it. If you’re tired of the worn out content slider, give the super hero a chance. 

http://realtii.com
www.pinkanova.com/en
http://wondergiant.com
FIGURE 1: http://getgoldee.com
119
DESIGN STYLES
The Super Hero
05

www.impactbnd.com
www.oursky.com
http://bondistaycations.com.au
www.sarahevansdesign.co.uk
120

www.thebentbullet.com
www.thezebra.com
www.braintreepayments.com
https://stickygram.com
121
DESIGN STYLES
The Super Hero
05

https://squareup.com
http://procreate.si
www.audreyazoura.fr
www.boldking.com
122

123
05/ Chalkboards
Though this book, as with all of my books, tries to focus on the most popular trends and 
styles, there are at times styles and approaches that get used by multiple people, but 
are somehow far less commonplace. This chapter is just such a situation. Though I have 
collected eight sites that rely on a chalkboard theme or element, it is not a pervasive style. 
If you look into print design you will ﬁ nd that the chalkboard theme is obnoxiously popular 
and it seems that almost every last magazine has taken a turn at applying the style to 
their cover, from O, The Oprah Magazine to Time magazine and countless publications 
in between1. I had previously noticed this style in print as I prepared lessons regarding 
editorial design for the graphic design program where I teach. When I spotted the style 
in the web world, I presumed it was equally popular. Much to my surprise there were but 
a few samples to ﬁ nd. I actually doubted for a while that I would have enough to create a 
chapter here. That said, I am happy to have ﬁ lled this chapter and perhaps spark some 
new ideas. Frankly, it always feels good to highlight some lesser used styles and trends. 
This particular style manifests itself in a variety of ways, the most common of which is 
as a background element. A prime example of this is the personal site of Carmen Rose 
(FIGURE 1). Here the element is essentially a decorative element that contributes to a hip and 
stylish design. I suspect that this is perhaps a photograph of the photographer’s studio. 
If so, it not only decorates the site but also serves as a sort of landmark for the artist and 
her space. It is an interesting way of connecting reality with the website. On a side note, 
this sort of glimpse into the reality of an artist is a really great way to minimize the technical 
aspect of the web and drive the focus toward the human side. It is a rather effective tool 
to communicate the mood and the tone of the site (and therefore those behind the site). 
In other cases, such as with the BootBe website (FIGURE 2), we ﬁ nd that the element is 
more than a simple background. Here the content is rendered as part of the chalkboard. 
In this way the element takes on a much more thematic approach. It is really interesting 
to contrast these two examples and see how such a vividly deﬁ ned element as this can 
still take on numerous roles in a design. 
1 A Google image search to prove the point: http://bit.ly/1a2z5vU
DESIGN STYLES
Chalkboards
05

FIGURE 1: http://lovecarmenrose.com
FIGURE 2: www.bootb.com/en
http://poppiesﬂ owers.com.au
www.heritagechickens.ca
124

www.pastini.com
http://colabwork.com
http://jacksonvilleartwalk.com
http://nativesunjax.com
125
DESIGN STYLES
Chalkboards
05

126
05/ Vertical Divides
As I collect the examples used in my books, I browse many thousands of sites (yes, 
thousands). It takes a remarkable amount of work to collect the sites you ﬁ nd here. In 
fact, I would suggest that collecting the samples is at least 80 percent of the overall work. 
Along the way I can’t help but notice a few lesser used approaches. Sites that make use 
of a center vertical divide are an example of this. Probably 75 percent of the way through 
collecting sites I realized I had seen quite a few sites doing this. I ﬁ nally decided to make 
a chapter out of it. As a result, I scoured the web and my database of sites to collect 
the examples you see here. Perhaps this makes me sound a bit nuts; at a minimum it 
highlights the obsessive nature these books support. 
As I observe the sites in this category, it strikes me that having a perfectly centered 
divide in a design is not the most likely of things. Given the horizontal nature of computer 
screens it isn’t the easiest design format to choose. For this reason I personally ﬁ nd it to 
be an interesting and inspiring approach. It fascinates me to see how various designers 
have used the structure, as shown here. You will no doubt notice that I also squeezed in 
a few examples that don’t quite ﬁ t the perfect 50/50 divide.
In some cases, such as the Wevseen site (FIGURE 1), the divide separates what appears 
to be two equal elements of content. Neither seems to have the priority in the design. On 
ﬁ rst look I couldn’t imagine that this was legit. After all, something just has to be more 
important. Then I remembered the site The News (FIGURE 2) that also features two perfectly 
equal chunks of content. It seems that in some isolated cases two pieces of content 
genuinely do have equal weight. A perfect split is a logical solution to this. 
What I didn’t expect to ﬁ nd was sites with this divide where the two sides of content 
scroll independently. However, such is the case with the Reveillon Absoluto site (FIGURE 3). 
Visit this site and you will ﬁ nd that the content in the two sides is independent of the other 
side. Frankly, this seems rather bizarre and really confusing. But given the content and 
the purpose of the site, it actually really works. I love how this challenges my assumptions 
and gets me thinking in ways I would have never considered.

FIGURE 1: www.wevseen.com
FIGURE 2: http://thenews.im
FIGURE 3: www.reveillonabsoluto.com.br
http://rencontres-arles-photo.tv/en
127
DESIGN STYLES
Vertical Divides
05

http://ahmetsulek.com
http://pakadlabezdomniaka.pl
www.colehaan.com/wingtip-or-saddle.html
www.desktimeapp.com
128

www.newvision-opticien.com
www.loworks.co.jp
http://eightandfour.com
www.ﬁ fty-ﬁ ve.com
129
DESIGN STYLES
Vertical Divides
05

www.poisoncenterapp.com
http://instastox.com
www.avonesestilorcn.com/concurso/quintafase
http://2013.beatﬁ lmfestival.ru
130

131
/
Monochromatic Plus One • Rainbow of Colors • Nature • Sketchy • 
Vintage • Extreme • Futuristic • Holiday Branding
06
DESIGN THEMES
Themes and styles are closely related, but there is a difference. When it comes to themes 
there are speciﬁ c visual elements and patterns that are easily connected to any given 
theme. It should also be noted that themes can be subtly woven into a site, or it can be 
completely over-the-top and dominate the entire design. A perfect example is the sketchy 
style. Once you settle on this as an approach, you drive yourself toward a speciﬁ c type 
of visual. Sure there is a lot of latitude in that space, but the theme locks you in. Contrast 
this with something like a minimalist style. In that case there is no visual language that 
is prescribed other than the basic philosophy of the style. Themes can be a really fun 
design direction, leading to an almost infectious trail of ideas.

132
06/ Monochromatic 
Plus One
Another style that is a sort of subset of the ﬂ at style is reducing the color palette to varia-
tions of a single color with one vivid contrasting color (almost universally white). This style 
runs the risk of being rather generic. The upside is that, for the most part, each of the 
sites here using the style have an extremely narrowed focus. This focus is further reﬂ ected 
in the minimalist color palette. There is just something about it that works really well. It 
allows the singular function of the sites to shine. 
A few of the examples demonstrate this in a rather extreme way, doCapture (FIGURE 1) 
and Font Awesome (FIGURE 2) in particular. These sites have a very simple purpose and 
essentially one thing to offer to the world. As such, the super tight color palette and clear 
structure of the page reﬂ ects this simplicity. It really is an amazingly beautiful and effective 
approach. The Font Awesome site packs as much style as possible into the little bit of 
content that the site ends up with a really unique style, despite its minimalist approach. 
I think this is a style that can be underestimated in terms of difﬁ culty. If you don’t put 
the extra work into it, your results will be generic. You have to work hard to add the extra 
details and touches that make your design unique. Anyone can take a solid color and 
slap some text on it. So what can you do to make it unique and give it the pop it needs? 
It seems that in this case, the devil truly is in the details. 
If you have scanned the samples here you no doubt noticed that one of the sites 
stands out as a misﬁ t: the Zegna site (FIGURE 3). This site doesn’t quite ﬁ t this style perfectly, 
but I included it here nonetheless. One of my favorite things about trends in general is to 
see how you can take one and push it just beyond what it is expected. This site is essen-
tially black and white using a single accent color (gold tones). Black and white isn’t quite 
the monochromatic style you see in the other samples, but it does come close. What I 
love is that the site feels full color, and yet it has a very narrow palette of colors. I think 
this is a clever and gorgeous use of the style. I know that I seldom consider creating a 
narrowed color palette when photographs of objects are involved. And yet the results 
are just amazing.

FIGURE 1: http://skakunmedia.com/docapture
FIGURE 3: www.zegna.com/us
FIGURE 2: http://fontawesome.pro
http://throttleapp.me
133
DESIGN THEMES
Monochromatic Plus One
06

www.breakitdown.ie
www.vgraﬁ ks.com
www.partmedia.ru/en
www.3coasts.com
134

www.terminalplanning.aero
www.getuikit.com
www.huxtaburger.com.au
www.runthegap.com
135
DESIGN THEMES
Monochromatic Plus One
06

136
06/ Rainbow of Colors 
A side effect of the ﬂ at pixel design craze has been a reduction in the variety of color we 
ﬁ nd in layouts. It seems that a monochromatic mentality has become the norm. As such, 
the sites presented here tend to stand out. These sites simply rely on a much wider range 
of colors. Naturally, they do so in a wide variety of ways. But most of them have used 
color variety as an aspect of the fundamental design of the site and not just in the content.
A great example to start with is this international site Beebeebazaar (FIGURE 1). As you 
will notice, the site does indeed rely on a rainbow of colors. What I appreciate about this 
example is that it uses a wide variety of colors while avoiding two obvious paths. For 
starters, it doesn’t feel like the stereotypical rainbow. Instead, it simply feels colorful. Don’t 
pigeonhole this style as one that must feel like a bright intense rainbow. Secondly, the 
site doesn’t feel kid-like. One of the most annoying limitations of the full-blown rainbow 
style is that it inevitably has a kid-like feel to it. Here you will notice the color palette feels 
vibrant and alive; it feels refreshing and fun. Yet it still feels professional and designed. It’s 
a lovely demonstration of the style. 
In stark contrast, the Carrefour Kid’s Club site (FIGURE 2) pretty much fulﬁ lls the stereo-
types I had in mind (and I suspect you can easily relate). That said, it works really well. If 
you seek to engage children, I can testify to the effectiveness of this approach. At the time 
of this writing my children are 2 and 5 and I can afﬁ rm that this simply works; it is easy to 
observe the site’s appeal to my children. As such, in cases like this it makes good sense 
to leverage a stereotype. If it works, why ﬁ ght it?
An interesting middle ground can be found at work on the Drishti website (FIGURE 3). 
Though the site uses a typical rainbow of colors, it somehow doesn’t feel like a rainbow. 
It just feels colorful. And though the color palette might resonate with children, the site 
avoids this by going with a modern design. Aside from the illustration, the design feels 
more adult. The end results are an interesting mix of the beneﬁ ts of this style. 

FIGURE 1: www.beebeebazaar.be
FIGURE 2: www.carrefourkidsclub.fr
FIGURE 3: http://cetdrishti.com
http://beurreandsel.com
137
DESIGN THEMES
Rainbow of Colors
06

138
www.gridbooks.com
http://purecss.io
www.triplagent.com
http://websites-for-artists.com

139
DESIGN THEMES
Rainbow of Colors
06
www.minttwist.com
www.freelancelift.com
www.ﬁ tbit.com
http://giphy.com

140
06/ Nature
Some themes are what I consider more extreme than others, and the nature theme is 
one of them. As you can see from the examples here, you can make a more subtle use 
of it. But all the same, the nature theme is one that tends to lead to more extreme results. 
A perfect example of this is the Cups site (FIGURE 1). Here the theme completely deﬁ nes 
the entire design of the site. It isn’t a supporting element, it is the design. In this case, it 
works well and turns an otherwise slightly boring topic into an interesting one. But notice 
that the theme isn’t mindlessly applied. There is a connection to the content that is 
meaningful and ensures that the style of the site reinforces the message. It isn’t a useless 
decoration. The site works to help others learn to help themselves. With people learning 
to ﬁ sh the nature theme works really well and plays into a commonly known idea. 
In other cases, the theme is far simpler. Take the Bonﬁ re coming soon page (FIGURE 
2) for example. Here it isn’t so much a theme as a simple photograph. All the same, the 
photo plays into the feel of the site and the general vibe you get from it. The nature photo 
connects with the brand name and primarly serves as a decorative element. 
At times a theme is almost handed to you. As an example, look at the Tillamook 
minisite (FIGURE 3). This site represents a dairy farm that produces cheese. The nature 
theme is kind of obvious. In this case, the illustration style they used for the theme helps 
the site stand out. Best of all it avoids cliché images of cows or blocks of cheese. 
If you are working on a design and it simply isn’t coming to life, you should consider 
an extreme theme. It is by no means a universal solution. But if you are working with 
something dull, a theme like this can be a fantastic way to make it fun again. Let’s face it, 
if you the designer are bored with it, the intended audience is even more likely to be bored. 
After all, you’re being paid to look at it; the audience will be much less tolerant. Themes 
are a really fun way to breathe life back into an otherwise lifeless design. 

FIGURE 2: http://joinbonﬁ re.com
FIGURE 3: www.tillamook.com/tillamook-story/our-story.html
http://cclfuture.org
FIGURE 1: www.cupsannual.ca
141
DESIGN THEMES
Nature
06

www.zanggroeptimeless.nl
http://buryyoursecrets.se/en
www.annapurnarecruitment.com
www.nutcache.com
142

www.shiner.com
www.globeview.nl
http://caitlinwicker.com
http://chichesterdesign.co.uk
143
DESIGN THEMES
Nature
06

144
06/ Sketchy
The use of sketchy design elements on the web is a trend I fully expect to stand the test 
of time. As an illustration style, it is a natural option that comes with some interesting 
nuances, and these nuances can be put to good work in many ways. A prime reason 
to use this approach is to simply break the trap of the digital realm. By this I mean that 
we can help people forget they are using digital media and create something that feels 
more organic and natural. One reason to this that I see over and over is to disconnect 
with some stereotype of being overly technical: Render something in a sketchy way and 
it will simply feel more approachable. 
A good example to start with is Fruux (FIGURE 1). This contact, calendar and tasks util-
ity uses a sketchy style for the home page illustrations. Sure it looks nice, but that isn’t 
reason enough to use a style—somehow, the style actually gives the impression that the 
software will be easy to use. It doesn’t look technical and complicated. The sketchy style 
implies that it will be easy. I know the trick, and yet I can’t help but think that the app 
really must be dead simple to use. 
Most online maps are vector-style illustrations that seem straightforward, even if they 
contain some unique colors or artwork. The map found on this Greenpeace minisite 
(FIGURE 2), however, feels nothing like that. Instead it uses rich textures and alludes to a 
sketchy style. Ironically, it is barely hinting at the sketch and rough lines; they are nearly 
perfect, with only a few subtle variations. And the lines on the map are clearly based 
on vector paths and not hand-rendered lines. Even with these more polished parts, the 
design feels sketchy and organic. As a result the map evokes a different mood. I will leave 
you to speculate on the purpose of the design as it relates to the site; I know for me it 
feels like a reasonable and effective pairing. 

FIGURE 1: https://fruux.com
http://4pinesbeer.com.au
http://candccoffee.com
FIGURE 2: http://myboat.gp/en
145
DESIGN THEMES
Sketchy
06

http://jacquico.com
http://packdog.com
www.adline.ro
www.served-mcr.com
146

http://direnduvar.com
www.kezjukebox.com
www.numero10.ch/fr
http://chalkythecat.com
147
DESIGN THEMES
Sketchy
06

148
06/ Vintage
In the past, retro design was connected to a particular over-the-top style. This is some-
thing I featured in my ﬁ rst Idea Book. Look at the designs there and you will see some 
rather extreme theme-based sites. Fast forward to Volume 3 and you will ﬁ nd a section 
on 19th-century design where the sites weave in elements from that time period. In this 
chapter, which I am titling Vintage, I want to feature sites that ﬁ t the modern format and 
structural style—the twist being that they are decorated and styled using type, imagery 
and colors with a vintage feel to them. In a few cases the theme is a bit more extreme 
than others, but generally speaking, the approach is more subtle and woven into what 
are otherwise very normal sites. Missing here are overly thematic interfaces that rely on 
quirky retro elements to get users to engage with the content. 
A lovely example to start with is S’s vintage fashion website (FIGURE 1). It would be 
tempting for such a product line to get really carried away with making a vintage site. 
Fortunately, the designers thought better, and we ﬁ nd a site that ﬁ ts the modern age. The 
type and color all feel very much at home on the modern web, but these elements have 
a vintage feel to them—a dated look that connects with the products in a more subtle 
way. I ﬁ nd the results to be amazing and the end product feels much higher-end than a 
more retro style might have resulted in. 
Others, like the Tradestone Confections (FIGURE 2) site, the Wootten site (FIGURE 3) and 
the HAG (FIGURE 4) site are perhaps even a bit more subtle. With understated textures and 
carefully selected colors and fonts, the results are visibly vintage. If I could, I would do 
a whole book of sites in this style, as many are simply gorgeous. These sites need not 
rely on overly thematic designs to get the point across, and doing so would only serve 
to cheapen the design.
In contrast, a few of the sites, like The Peanut Gallery (FIGURE 5) and Stall & Dean (FIGURE 
6) use far more striking and thematic elements. The approach is more heavy-handed, but 
overall effectively merges with modern takes on various design elements. Frankly, the sites 
are a breath of fresh air in a web world so narrowly focused on ﬂ at designs void of decora-
tion. These sites suddenly feel rich, ornate and dramatic with such a contrast of styles.

FIGURE 3: http://wootten.com.au
FIGURE 2: http://tradestoneconfections.com
FIGURE 1: http://stiinas.myshopify.com
149
DESIGN THEMES
Vintage 
06

FIGURE 6: www.stallanddean.com
http://connary.com/
http://milkeverymoment.ca
FIGURE 5: www.peanutgalleryﬁ lms.com
FIGURE 4: www.hag.ch/de
150

www.mustasj.no
www.sweez.com.br
www.kinderfotograﬁ e-evihermans.be
http://pulpﬁ ngers.com
151
DESIGN THEMES
Vintage
06

152
06/ Extreme 
Extreme is the term I use to describe themes that are more than a small aspect of a design. 
In many cases the extreme theme takes over the entire design process and transforms 
everything into a thematic element. Due to the ultraconservative nature of ﬂ at design, the 
benchmark for an extreme theme is much lower than normal. Generally speaking, themes 
like this have fallen out of popularity, though not entirely out of use. I imagine that as with 
all things this will change over time as designers shift back toward more literal styles. 
A perfect demonstration of this is the Pigeon site (FIGURE 1), which relies on a pigeon 
theme. The design isn’t based on an immersive, thematic experience where you navigate 
literal elements of the theme. Instead, it relies on artwork and language that reﬂ ects the 
theme. The design strikes a nice balance between thematic design and ease of use. The 
site’s navigation and content are perfectly accessible and the theme serves as a layer 
of decoration to bring it to life. I think this is a real key to embrace: Don’t sacriﬁ ce the 
usability of your website for the sake of theme. Once the theme starts getting in the way, 
you need to dial it back a bit as the sites here have done. 
The PNC Gift Maker site (FIGURE 2) is perhaps the most extreme of the sites presented 
here. In this interface, the theme entirely takes over and there is little about this that feels 
normal. The design and interface harkens back to the era of Flash-based websites. But 
in this case, the entire creation has been crafted with good old-fashioned HTML and 
CSS. This is an example of when taking a theme to the extreme is a good thing. It can 
be risky, but the results can be amazing. When I say risky, I mean that the results can be 
painful to use. This site, however, is super easy and very intuitive. It is clear they made it a 
priority to ensure that people could easily use the wacky creation that they came up with. 
In other examples like Jamcouver (FIGURE 3) and Cuisines Schmidt (FIGURE 4), we ﬁ nd 
that the theme has been woven into structures and interface elements in a comfortable 
way. In fact, you could replace many of the extremely thematic elements with ﬂ at ones 
and have a site that functions quite well under a different style. The point is that the fun-
damental structure of the sites is entirely sound and relies on time-tested approaches. 
If you’re considering an extreme theme I urge you to carefully consider how it impacts 
usability. Sacriﬁ cing this for the sake of a theme is a mistake. 

FIGURE 3: www.jamcouver.com
FIGURE 2: www.pncchristmaspriceindex.com
FIGURE 4: www.une-cuisine-astucieuse.fr
FIGURE 1: www.studiopigeon.com
153
DESIGN THEMES
Extreme 
06

154
www.loveless-shop.jp
http://themesquad.com
www.trezee.com
www.exsus.com/highway-one-roadtrip

155
DESIGN THEMES
Extreme 
06
www.thetownthatcameinfromthecold.com
http://w-not.ru
www.impero-festive-meter.com
http://islreview.com

156
06/ Futuristic
In this chapter I want to highlight a rather fringe thematic style: the futuristic landscape. 
At times it makes sense to create a futuristic theme, especially when the content is 
speciﬁ cally futuristic. Such is the case with sites like the Smithsonian Channel’s Rise of 
the Robots (FIGURE 1). The theme makes perfect sense as the content is intended to be 
futuristic. In this case the theme is obvious and not surprising in the least. 
This obvious connection works really well. On the opposite end of the spectrum, it can 
be really interesting when a theme runs counter to our presumptions. For example, the TV 
show Fireﬂ y features a futuristic version of cowboys. At ﬁ rst this strikes most people as 
ridiculous, but the show was a hit and has a huge cult following despite its short lifespan. 
The point is that unexpected juxtapositions can be powerful.
Though we can’t ﬁ nd such extreme contrast in the examples I have provided here, 
the theme does have an interesting power that Fireﬂ y highlights. It can bring new life and 
a modern twist to just about anything. For example, ﬁ nding premade designs is not all 
that hard. There are numerous websites where one can purchase countless designs 
for just about anything—all premade. The Inﬁ nity (FIGURE 2) product is essentially a set 
of premade design assets for the web. However, it has its own subtle twist that sets it 
apart—essentially it is more modular. In this case the futuristic space theme establishes 
the mentality that this is something new, that it is somehow different. It is an interesting 
way to leverage the theme to set one’s site apart. 
In other cases, the theme is simply used for fun or decoration. The Kojo site (FIGURE 3)  
is an example of pure decoration. In this case, the theme is rather subtle and one might 
argue that there is no theme at all. Contrast this with CoolApps (FIGURE 4) where the theme 
is simply fun. I don’t get an industry-changing-vibe as much as I get that the folks behind 
the site are probably easygoing and fun to work with. 
This particular approach is rather ﬂ exible. It might seem out of place at ﬁ rst, but a 
theme like this can transform a boring topic into a fun one. 

FIGURE 4: www.coolappse.com
FIGURE 1: www.smithsonianchannel.com/sc_assets/html/bionicman
FIGURE 3: http://kojo.com.au
FIGURE 2: http://originalmockups.com/bundles/inﬁ nity-bundle 
157
DESIGN THEMES
Futuristic
06

www.srgint.com
http://blinkss.com
http://kari-na.com
http://mooncampapp.com
158

159
06/ Holiday 
Although it might seem at ﬁ rst that a section on holiday branding will be extremely limited 
in use, I disagree. In contrast, I think we can learn a lot from the holiday-themed examples 
provided here. It strikes me that some of the samples demonstrate what happens when 
designers get a little bit of room to work, when the reigns are loosened and they are 
allowed to more freely explore. Some of the samples are simply demonstrations of how 
a little holiday decoration can be added. In other cases, we ﬁ nd thematic skins on top of 
the normal design. Finally, many of the samples are actually niche microsites intended as 
marketing and promotional assets targeting the holidays. This is obviously a lot of ground 
to cover. As a result I have collected a few more samples here than I normally do. This is 
particularly useful given that many of these sites will be gone or changed after the holiday. 
In the e-commerce world, it has become commonplace to apply simple holiday ele-
ments to a site. Sites like Blueﬂ y (FIGURE 1), REI (FIGURE 2) and Gifts.com (FIGURE 3) are but a 
few examples of this approach. In all of these, the site fundamentally remains unchanged. 
Holiday elements have simply been woven into the design. Some tweak the logo; others 
simply add a background image. I actually go back and forth on whether this matters at 
all to consumers. I fully understand that I am overly observant of these things and that I 
am perhaps overthinking things. That said, I really do wonder if consumers notice it—or 
care—at all. I am sure that if you applied such a theme in the middle of summer you would 
get some serious grief for it and it would certainly be noticed. Keep in mind that during 
the holidays we are bombarded with images of holly, Christmas trees, Santa Claus and 
so on. A usability study to dissect this would be really interesting. 
In other cases, the entire purpose of the site is related to the holidays. Consider for 
example the Flying X-Mas Trees (FIGURE 4) and the Why You Love Christmas (FIGURE 5) 
websites. Both of these exist as promotional sites related to the holiday. I would be really 
eager to see statistics on these sites and how they help an agency. It seems that these 
are the modern day equivalent to a Christmas card to the world. 
At the end of the day, these thematic sites are interesting to consider. And I really 
believe you can glean some interesting ideas from them, even if it happens to be the 
middle of the summer!
DESIGN THEMES
Holiday 
06

FIGURE 1: www.blueﬂ y.com/
FIGURE 3: www.gifts.com
FIGURE 2: www.rei.com
FIGURE 4: http://2014.studio38.ru
160

FIGURE 5: http://xmas.acc.cc
www.holidaysineverett.com
www.barnesandnoble.com
www.rakuten.com
161
DESIGN THEMES
Holiday 
06

http://tasarimgezegeni.com/2014/en
http://oldnavy.gap.com
www.landsend.com
www.wizfactorystudios.com
162

http://ainsworthelementary.org/hometour
http://www.cafepress.com/
www.sears.com
http://arketi.com/holiday2013/
163
DESIGN THEMES
Holiday 
06

164
/
07
Navicons On the Desktop • Jumbo Animated Sidebars • Teaser Screen • 
Decorative Text • Atypical Navigation • Icons • Instant Sign-Up • Transparency • 
Ribbons • Prompt to Scroll • In-Page Navigation • Ornamental • Video 
Backgrounds • Geometric Shapes
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Design elements come in a wide array of shapes, sizes and styles. Some reﬂ ect purely 
trendy approaches, while others are the result of necessity. What is truly fascinating about 
these groupings is that each and every one of them has a purpose. Each of them has a 
way of being used that elevates it from randomness to a clear purpose. And yet, each 
of these elements can be wasted and reduced to a worthless role when used without 
intent. Even worse, when neglected, these design elements actually detract from the 
design they are a part of. The moral of the story is to not just blindly follow what others 
are doing. Perhaps you presume you need to use a navicon as part of your navigation. 
This might be true, but don’t just assume so because it is what everyone is doing. Instead, 
step back and consider what makes the most sense. Sometimes the best solution isn’t 
what everyone else is doing. 

165
07/ Navicons On 
the Desktop
One trend that is interesting to observe is how mobile web design is taking precedence 
over the desktop. In days gone by we designed for the desktop and maybe, if we were 
lucky, we would design a mobile alternative. With responsive design we started by taking 
our desktop sites and mashing them into smaller screens. Now the industry seems to 
be rapidly shifting toward a mobile-ﬁ rst mentality. In this world we design for the mobile 
web and then as an afterthought (a bit of an overstatement for drama’s sake) we consider 
what it will look like on the desktop. This particular trend, the use of navicons on desktop 
sites, is a natural result of the inﬂ uence of the mobile web. 
Navicons started out as an element for mobile web designers to use. It was a conve-
nient way to tuck a large amount of content (typically navigation) into a hidden element. 
One touch and out pops a large set of navigation. When you’re dealing with tiny screens, 
you really have to get creative with how you use the space available to you. So in this 
chapter we look at situations where the navicon is not only on the mobile version, but 
also is in use on the desktop. It seems that designers have found it useful for stufﬁ ng 
navigation and other bits into hiding—and bringing it back out via a handy dandy navicon. 
I will say that one thing about this annoys me, and it has little to do with the use of 
them on the desktop: I strongly encourage you to consider labeling your navicon. I know 
that adding the word “menu” next to it really clutters things up. But I have observed many 
times that users are still not aware of what a navicon is and does. Believe it or not, the 
rest of the world is not obsessed with the navigation patterns on the mobile web. The 
Younger website (FIGURE 1) does exactly this: they have the navicon with a label next to it. 
The icon itself is simply not well known enough to function entirely on its own. Naturally, 
we can easily ﬁ nd sites that don’t do this, and ironically some of them work really well. 
The Nine site (FIGURE 2) is a great example. Here the navicon is not labeled. I can’t help 
but notice, though, that the site is insanely simple, and there is not much else to click on, 
and as a result the navicon is not easily lost in the design. 
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Navicons On the Desktop
07

FIGURE 2: www.nine.is
http://paywhatyouwant.eu
FIGURE 1: www.theyounger.co.uk
www.bloomberg.com
166

http://wandaprint.com/home
www.kennedyandoswald.com
http://mymail.my.com
http://aleeforoughi.com
167
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Navicons On the Desktop
07

http://litbloc.com
www.julianabicycles.com
http://adcade.com
www.positiveadvertising.co.uk
168

169
07/ Jumbo Animated 
Sidebars
Another trend that has found its way from the world of mobile web design into that of 
the desktop is the animated, jumbo-sized slide-out sidebar. Most often these elements 
contain an assortment of navigation elements, but as you can see in the examples it is 
not limited to a boring list of links. Instead, many designers take this opportunity to create 
a beautiful atypical navigation element that works really well. 
What I ﬁ nd interesting about these is that they give the user access to the site’s 
navigation at any time, but don’t interfere with the content of the page. Some sites lend 
themselves to random browsing, but in other cases you want to direct users. This tool 
can be used to guide users based on the content of the page, but allow them access to 
navigation tools when they want to take control.
My favorite example among the sites collected here is the Dr. Woe website (FIGURE 1). 
When closed, the sidebar provides access to a few key elements: audio controls, a link to 
home and a link to open the menu. I thought it was particularly clever to make a portion of 
the sidebar visible at all times and provide access to key elements. Click on the navicon 
and out slides a larger panel of tools. This includes the site’s navigation, the owner’s con-
tact information and links to various social media. The navigation is kind of obvious and is 
what people typically put into these panels. However, the latter two elements are typically 
placed in the content of a page. Hiding them in the sidebar cleans up the design and 
presents an interesting way to simplify a page. This is the sort of discovery that compels 
me to keep writing my books. I am constantly amazed that designers continue to ﬁ nd 
innovative approaches to building webpages, and it is truly inspiring. 
The 96 Elephants website (FIGURE 2) also uses this element in a creative way. The site 
actually makes use of two jumbo animated sidebars (though the screenshot only shows 
the one on the left). The right side contains the petition form for users to complete. I 
thought this was an interesting way to bring the actual desired action of the site directly 
to the user. When the page ﬁ rsts loads the panel is revealed. Users can then hide it away 
and reopen it at any time. It is a clever way to get the user to see and acknowledge the 
action item of the site. 
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Jumbo Animated Sidebars
07

FIGURE 1: http://drwoe.nl
FIGURE 2: http://96elephants.org
170

www.evver.com
www.allesistgut.ru
171
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Jumbo Animated Sidebars
07

http://squidcompression.com
http://davidboyero.com
172

173
07/ Teaser Screen
It isn’t all that surprising to ﬁ nd that a trend rises from the past to ﬁ nd its way into the 
modern designer’s tool belt. Such is the case with the teaser screen. At the height of the 
Macromedia Flash boom (2007ish) there were countless sites that used preloaders. These 
preloaders were often entertaining hooks that attempted to get you interested in the site 
while the remainder of the content (a ﬂ ash movie as it were) loaded. We sometimes see a 
hint of this in modern web design. I have titled this section teaser screens instead of pre-
loaders because they do not function as a waiting screen for something to load. Instead, 
they serve as a doormat that welcomes people to the site and entices them to dig further. 
While I am a proponent of putting the content front and center and forgoing such an 
approach, the format does have some interesting potential. One thing that occurs to me 
is that you could use these as a way to get people interested enough to keep digging; just 
give them some tantalizing nugget that makes them want more. I can’t help but wonder 
if the investment the user makes at this point will make them more likely to stay on the 
site and ﬁ nd out exactly what it is all about. It is an interesting theory anyway, but one 
that would require testing to verify or disclaim. 
Another interesting aspect of this approach is the ability to set a stage for some-
thing—in particular, if you are competing in a crowded marketplace. In fact, if you look at 
the samples here, they are almost entirely from industries and niches that are extremely 
saturated. I think a real potential of this approach is to try to put a different twist, tone or 
spin on your product before people ﬁ nd out exactly what it is. By doing so, you attempt 
to genuinely look and feel different. Do you have yet another portfolio site in competition 
with thousands upon thousands of others? Perhaps an entryway teaser page with a 
compelling message is what you need. 
Consider the Rainjar website (FIGURE 1). This site represents a to-do list application. 
Certainly this is nothing new. In fact, it is perhaps one of the most redundant type of app 
ever. You could easily ﬁ nd hundreds of alternatives. And on a basic level, it is hard to imag-
ine that any one of them is really more than checking items off. But I am not here to argue 
if the Rainjar app is better or unique: I am only proposing that their site and the layout 
they have chosen sets them apart. It is a vivid use of the approach in very intentional way.
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Teaser Screen
07

http://reducing-the-obvious.de
www.vacheron-constantin.com/en/metiers-d-art-ﬂ orilege
www.dearmum.org
FIGURE 1: http://rainjar.co
174

http://makeyourmoneymatter.org
www.justrightforchildren.com
http://150px.com
www.mijlo.com/essentials
175
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Teaser Screen
07

www.atomkyrkan.se
www.cultivatedwit.com
http://themeat.in
www.hioscar.com
176

177
07/ Decorative Text
Most designers agree that text can be beautiful. In so many ways text and typography 
are the most critical element to any form of design. Text is a necessary component of 
design, and fortunately it is often something of beauty. In the samples I have collected 
here, the sites go beyond simply beautiful text. They have truly transformed elements of 
text into small works of art that are gorgeous and beautiful all on their own. Their ability 
to communicate while providing a level of decorating and beauty to the page only makes 
them that much more amazing. If you are interested in turning some text into a focal point 
or an almost illustrated element for your site, be sure to analyze the samples provided 
here. Let’s look more closely at a few of the sites I have collected.
I love all of the sites in this chapter, but a few stand out. The Serve Seattle site (FIGURE 1)  
is one such site. Though the decorative text over the image appears to be hand rendered, 
it is actually a decorative typeface. When I was in design school I drove my teachers nuts 
because I was always ﬁ nding ways to work in decorative typefaces such as this one. While 
designers often rely on a variety of classic typefaces, there is always room for the niche 
decorative typefaces. The trick, as with any design element, is to make sure it ﬁ ts perfectly 
and that it serves to reinforce the message of the site. I fully admit that I have a bit of a 
bias toward this style; all the same, I think it is a legitimate pattern worth commenting on. 
I believe the Serve Seattle site executes this beautifully.
Another example here that I really love is The Pete Design site (FIGURE 2). In this case, 
the design certainly uses decorative text to create an overall beautiful design. But here 
the typefaces used are not at all decorative. In contrast, they are relatively conservative 
typefaces. The beauty of the text is achieved through a delicate structure, color and 
decoration. The result is that the text not only decorates the page, but also serves as the 
primary communication point. This multifunctional solution is elegant and useful. 
In some cases, such as the Fillet website (FIGURE 3), the text transcends mere decora-
tion and becomes small works of art. In this case the elements are less informational and 
more decorative. Scroll through this gem of a site and you get a feel for just how artistic 
type can be—it is genuinely inspiring.
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Decorative Text
07

FIGURE 2: www.thepetedesign.com
www.ridebarstow.com
FIGURE 1: http://serveseattle.org
FIGURE 3: www.ﬁ llet.com.br
178

www.stefaneguilbaud.com
http://mattiecsboy.com
www.jkdesign.com
www.lattrapereve.fr
179
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Decorative Text
07

http://newmansﬁ sh.com
www.knucklesindustries.com
http://rule-of-three.co.uk
http://gutsandgloryand.us
180

181
07/ Atypical Navigation
For as much as I encourage designers to follow common design patterns, I equally love 
and appreciate it when they throw them out the window. The sites collected here do just 
that; in particular they each put their own unique twist on site navigation. Trying out alter-
native approaches to navigation certainly seems like an endeavor with some serious risks 
involved. What if your navigation is not easily understood or does not match the mental 
model users have of your content? What if your creativity makes the site worse and even 
possibly entirely unusable? A lot of what-ifs, to be certain. Most of the time, I would highly 
recommend you not experiment with navigation—just rely on the tried and true models. 
The only way beyond this, in my humble opinion, is if you are willing to do user testing. 
If you are willing and able to test your designs on actual users, you are welcome to try 
anything you want. In fact, if you are able to do so, you can try just about anything! User 
testing will either show it performs better or worse. Users will either accomplish the goals 
you give them or they won’t. Shape your unique solution to ﬁ t the exact purpose of the 
site and you will naturally ﬂ ow towards the best—and perhaps most elegant—solution. 
Frankly, this sums up the entire idea behind any user-centered design model. In such a 
world, norms and patterns are starting points to build on. 
One of my favorites collected here is the Adidas career site (FIGURE 1). On this site, the 
navigation begins anchored to the bottom of the screen. When you consider the ﬂ ow of 
the site, it is remarkably smart. It might just seem like a clever idea that some designer is 
using to feel creative; I assure you there is much more to it. As you consume the content 
of the home page, the navigation logically follows the main content. You are not likely 
inspired to navigate around until you read a bit, so it makes tremendous sense that the 
navigation would be after the content. What really makes me happy, though, is that they 
moved the navigation to the top once you click through to a sub page. Amazingly it actu-
ally animates from bottom to top: this informs me of the change. Again, one might think 
this is trivial, but there is much more at work. Once I have clicked, the navigation takes on 
more importance—I am invested in navigating the site and it now makes perfect sense 
to be at the top. Typically, I would not be a fan of moving navigation, but here it ﬁ ts the 
content and works brilliantly. 
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Atypical Navigation
07

FIGURE 1: www.adidasretailjobs.com
www.protest.eu/en
www.lacoste.com/polo
www.theforestersmusic.com
182

http://thebotanist.com.au
www.santanarow.com
www.citan.mercedes.fr
http://shopmack.com
183
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Atypical Navigation
07

www.ﬂ uttuo.com
http://remotejobs.io
www.digitalpod.co.uk
http://2013.unknowncroatia.com
184

http://50north5th.com
www.mcdonalds.co.uk/ukhome/promotions/favourites.html
www.wacom.com/en/us
http://transferwindow.info
185
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Atypical Navigation
07

186
07/ Icons
Icons have long been an element of graphic design. In fact, one might even consider them 
among the very oldest. Icons and pictograms have been at work since the very beginning 
of the written word. Some early languages were essentially built on them. It should come 
as no surprise to ﬁ nd them among modern web designs: They are incredibly useful design 
elements that both inform users and decorate a design. Naturally, some sites use them 
in more prominent ways than others.
Among the sites here, a few stand out. One such site is the Calester landing page 
(FIGURE 1). Here the logos serve as landmarks to get you reading the content. They deco-
rate the page and give it beauty, but they also direct your attention. It is really important 
to note the visual consistency of the icons they used; the fact that the icons go together 
perfectly due to a consistent design style cannot be overstated. Many people attempt 
designs like this one, but fail to unify the icons with a single style. The results always look 
half-baked and lame. This is perhaps the most vivid caution I would make with this style. 
If you cannot unify the icons, you should ﬁ nd an alternate design solution. 
I really love the use of icons on the Greyp Bikes site (FIGURE 2). Here the icons add a 
level of style and beauty to the page. But more then this, they reinforce the navigation. 
Though not all of the icons used are literal translations, they have made a tremendous 
effort to ensure that the icons mean something. Through the use of direct references 
to the elements of the bike they completely nail it. It might have been tempting to use a 
wrench for mechanical, for example, but that is detached from the bike. The custom icons 
they made for this design really bring it to life and give it a vividly unique style. 
I like to show my web design students the mediaBOOM site (FIGURE 3). The animated 
icons bring the site to life in a fun and engaging way when you hover over them. The 
icons encourage you to click and explore the contents of the site. They are beautiful and 
blend into the design, but they also hook the user in a unique and creative way. I also 
can’t help but nerd out over the fact that they made them with scalable vector graphics.

FIGURE 1: http://calester.com
FIGURE 2: www.greyp-bikes.com
FIGURE 3: http://mediaboom.com
http://smashingconf.com/ny-2014
187
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Icons
07

http://www.seoulplaza.sk/en
www.teamgeek.co.za
http://www.countryhearthbreads.com/no/
www.vvicrew.com
188

www.yribarren.com/gtsmart
http://pinpointsocial.com
http://sports.canalsat.fr
www.trask-industries.com
189
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Icons
07

190
07/ Instant Sign-Up 
Though I don’t really think this is a new trend, it is the ﬁ rst time I have identiﬁ ed the pattern 
and talked about it. This chapter features sites that offer some sort of service that you 
must register for. Instead of using a call-to-action button that takes users to a registration 
form, these sites place the form right on the landing page. Obviously this approach works 
particularly well when your registration process is extremely simple. 
The approach makes good sense to me. If your sign-up form includes only 1–3 ﬁ elds, 
why bother asking people to click a button to get there? By showing them just how simple 
the form is, you might just entice people to sign up. I think it is a really interesting idea 
worth exploring. If you do want to try this, I strongly recommend that you test the idea 
using some form of A/B testing. This will be the only real way to ﬁ nd out if the approach 
works best for you. 
The biggest contradiction that I can see with this format is that asking someone to 
sign up when they only just got there is a little premature—even too direct. Imagine that 
you meet someone and instead of striking up a conversation, you just immediately ask 
him or her out on a date. It would likely come off as awkward and probably a little creepy. 
Depending on your product or service, putting the sign-up form front and center might 
come off this way. At the end of the day, it is an interesting idea that challenges our pre-
sumptions about what goes where—that is the exact point of this book. Hopefully this 
sparks some ideas that make you reconsider the presumptions you might have about 
your site’s structure. 
In my opinion, it is an approach that lends itself well to casual services like Penﬂ ip 
(FIGURE 1). Though a service like this might become critical to your workﬂ ow, it starts off 
as just a casual tool. That is to say, you sign up and play around with it. It isn’t a big deal. 
For much more serious or signiﬁ cant services, such as Mint (FIGURE 2), it seems like 
asking users to sign up straight away is a bit awkward. This service, after all, hooks into 
your bank account and is not something to do on a whim. But the more I consider the 
site, the more sense it makes. After all, it sounds complicated to set such a thing up. 
But look at that: I can sign up without giving them anything beyond my email address. 
In that way, they ease you into the service, instead of asking for a mountain of personal 
information up front. 

FIGURE 2: www.mint.com
https://basecamp.com
FIGURE 1: www.penﬂ ip.com
https://onor.co
191
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Instant Sign-Up
07

https://creatavist.com/cms
http://atmail.com/cloudnow
https://hootsuite.com
http://sitedrop.com
192

www.cvrater.com
www.getcellarapp.com
www.addpoll.com
www.lodgify.com
193
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Instant Sign-Up
07

194
07/ Transparency
As I have often said, some patterns are exciting and interesting. Transparency is anything 
but exciting. Though it might lack in the excitement category, it is a useful option that is 
used surprisingly infrequently. In fact, the items collected here were not all that easy to 
ﬁ nd and took a considerable amount of hunting to put together. Although there is nothing 
special about the approach, it seems to come and go as a popular element. Right now 
it is actually not all that popular. This is exactly why I ﬁ nd it inspiring and include it here. 
I noticed a few home page forms that made use of the effect on the text entry boxes. 
SEM Compass (FIGURE 1) and Rist Job (FIGURE 2) take slightly different approaches but 
both have worked transaprency into their forms. This is a subtle and decorative touch that 
doesn’t make or break a design. What I do appreciate is how it uniﬁ es the composition 
and makes the form a part of the page, not just something stacked on top of it. 
It seems that the creation of space and depth is another natural use with this tech-
nique. For example, Tony Chester’s site (FIGURE 3) has a container around the content with 
a transparent background. This container, as you can see, is layered between his photo 
and the background. Overall it gives the illusion of depth, which is greatly reinforced by 
the transparency. 
In a few situations, transparency is actually used in rather conceptual and meaning-
ful ways. The best example I found was the Circle website (FIGURE 4). The site is about 
ﬁ nding what’s happening near you. The transparent card the hand is holding up shows 
content as though it is a display of some type. The transparency allows the real world to 
show through it and onto the device. I get the impression that they want you to think of 
it bringing the real world in. Through transparency, they connect an imaginary interface 
with the cityscape. It is an interesting and thoughtful approach. 
In many other cases the element is really just a form of decoration. This is the most 
likely explanation for the usage in at least half of the examples provided here. But don’t 
take that as a ding on the style. I think it is a really useful and subtle tool, especially con-
sidering how easy it is to implement real transparency in code and with PNGs these days. 

FIGURE 1: http://semcompass.com
FIGURE 3: http://tonychester.com
FIGURE 2: www.ristojob.it
FIGURE 4: http://circleapp.com
195
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Transparency 
07

http://tailormade.pl
www.musicaddictdesigner.com
www.bucketlistly.com
www.avalancheranch.com
196

http://insandoutsapp.com
http://www.mehdi-benyounes.cwom/fr/lead-developpeur-webdesigner-
chef-de-projet/index.html
www.suavia.it
www.thehippohouse.com
197
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Transparency 
07

198
07/ Ribbons
In Volume 3 of my Idea Books, I featured a section on ribbons and frankly I thought it was 
a style that had run its course. At the time of that book’s writing, the use of fabric textures 
and fancy edge treatments were both particularly popular. This combination worked well 
and was a deﬁ ning visual of the time period. As I said, I thought the trend was over. But this 
is not the case: it turns out that ribbons are still rather popular, but with a new twist. Instead 
of attempting to create more realistic ribbons with fabric textures, designers have merged 
the element with the ever-popular ﬂ at design style. 
A perfect demonstration of this is the Festival Guide (FIGURE 1). Here the ﬂ at style is at 
work (though the ribbon does have a fairly unrealistic drop shadow that sets it apart from 
the background). Note that it doesn’t attempt to look photorealistic, and the basic shadow 
works well in this design. The most interesting twist here is that the ribbon element is actu-
ally the main call to action. Though it doesn’t look like a button, we understand what it does 
based on the action-oriented text and the placement on the page. It somehow feels like the 
thing a user should go do. I am always impressed with something feels natural and intuitive; 
I tend to think it is an elegant solution when this magic combination happens. 
In other cases like the Timmy Tompkins site (FIGURE 2) or Alkopedia (FIGURE 3) and even 
James Hsu (FIGURE 4), the ribbons are more or less used as decorative elements. In some 
ways, they serve to attract attention to what you might consider the beginning of the content. 
In this way they help drive the user’s focus. But I would only give this element a trivial amount 
of credit for this in these designs. In reality, there is nothing wrong with using something just 
because it is beautiful. It might not be as graceful or minimalist, but who cares? As you can 
see here, the results are beautiful and ﬁ t the modern web nicely. The ribbons work perfectly. 
One of the more unique uses of the element that I have seen can be found on the Super 
Sync website (FIGURE 5). This experimental site from Google has an extremely distinct style 
and its illustration-based design feels unique. It is not surprising that Google would innovate, 
but I am surprised at the creative focus of this site. The story the site tells and the experi-
ence you have discovering it is amazing. The ribbon here simply serves as a supporting 
element in the overall content—there is no deep meaning that gives the element purpose. 
It is just yummy. 

FIGURE 1: http://blog.ticketmaster.co.uk/festival-quiz
FIGURE 2: http://timmytompkinsapp.com
FIGURE 3: http://alkopedia.dareville.com
FIGURE 4: www.hellojameshsu.com
199
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Ribbons
07

FIGURE 5: www.chrome.com/supersyncsports
www.pedalingnowhere.com
www.mrvisual.info
http://bigtop.it
200

www.aprijic.com
www.the53rdparallel.com
www.ejectorseat.co.uk
http://teslathemes.com
201
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Ribbons
07

202
07/ Prompt to Scroll
Like transparency, another somewhat mundane element is the prompt to scroll. Elements 
like this tend to be more subtle elements that come deﬁ ne a slice of time in the web design 
world. For example, snap back to the web 2.0 craze, complete with shiny designs. One 
such detail at that time was the badge. I featured this in Volume 1 of my books. It was a 
trivial element that was a hallmark of the time. Such is the case with the element presented 
in this chapter. Here I showcase a variety of sites that, upon landing on them, entice you 
to scroll down with some sort of element. There is a wide variety in terms of the content 
on the home page: some are void of content, others are packed with it. But all of them 
share an idea—to encourage users to scroll.
On the surface, this seems almost silly. After all, don’t users know to scroll? It isn’t 
as though scrolling is a new thing. On the contrary, I think it is interesting to have such 
an element. Every time I see one of these, I think of a little bell sitting on the counter of a 
store near the register, with a sign that says “Ring for service.” Most people know what 
the bell is for even without the sign. So why label it? I think it is a sort of invitation, a veri-
ﬁ cation of its purpose. Having an invitation to scroll suggests to users that the content 
below has a purpose. 
On the web, a common pattern is to pack the most important content at the top of the 
page, and as you move down the page the content becomes less and less critical. This 
is not too much different from how news articles are written. Perhaps your site makes 
the most sense if you consume all the content. Or perhaps you simply have incredibly 
meaningful content below the fold. If so, entice your users to scroll with a simple invitation.
On many sites, this invitation is nothing more than a downward pointing arrow. Sites 
like the Oakley store (FIGURE 1) demonstrate this approach. It is a method that works, but 
frankly I think it can be improved upon. I tend to gravitate towards the Diesel (FIGURE 2) 
approach that not only points down, but also includes the word scroll. In this case, it is 
vividly clear what the user is supposed to do.

FIGURE 1: http://moto.oakley.com
FIGURE 2: www.diesel.com/collection-diesel-home
http://hthworldwide.net
www.obabyapp.com
203
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Prompt to Scroll
07

http://lookbook.bolia.com
www.posterista.co.uk
www.mgo.com/dinner
www.phytech.com
204

www.mahedineyahia.fr
www.sosglobal.eu/en
www.paperandpaint.dk
http://pacelaw.com
205
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Prompt to Scroll
07

http://www.urbotip.com/
http://aynibrigade.com/
http://www.librotecaelgatodecheshire.es/
http://go.angrybirds.com/
206

207
07/ In-Page Navigation
An extremely popular approach to designing pages is the single page site. In this model, an 
entire multipage website is packed into a single page. This might be an entire site, or it might 
be an entire section. For example, many product pages on major manufacturer’s websites 
are really huge, singular pages used as a modern day brochure to sell the product. Inside 
of these pages there is a need for navigation. Even though it is a single page, quite often 
there are multiple blocks of content that can be treated as separate pages. Two common 
approaches have emerged as solutions to this need. The ﬁ rst is to have a navigation bar 
across the top that sticks to the top of the page as you scroll. The second is to place some 
sort of vertical navigation bar along the side of the site. This second approach is what I 
want to focus on here. 
The main reason I have singled out this approach is that it tends to be less typical. The 
web has long relied on horizontal navigation systems at the top of sites. Therefore, I ﬁ nd 
this trend more interesting and inspiring to analyze as a potential solution. 
I believe that the ﬁ rst version of this trend emerged as an adaptation of the typical 
content slider. More speciﬁ cally, many sites rely on a series of dots where each represents 
a portion of the content. Clicking these dots scrolls you to that part of the page. This is an 
extremely popular approach and many of the examples here rely on this method. While 
the solution works, I have a few thoughts on it. First and foremost, I have a real concern 
about the lack of labels. Mystery navigation like this means the user has no clue what they 
are clicking on. And if they ﬁ nd something they like how do they ﬁ nd it again? Users would 
have to randomly click until they ﬁ nd it again. The usability of these sites would be enhanced 
with some sort of labeling system.
This naturally brings us to the second subset of sites found in this chapter. These sites 
also rely on the sidebar navigation approach. In contrast, they provide additional information 
about each block of content. From icons to text labels, the exact solutions vary, but the 
result is a much more clear navigation system. You can more easily ﬁ nd your way around, 
focusing on the content you care about most. And, as described above, you can ﬁ nd your 
way back to content you previously discovered. In my opinion, this is a much stronger use 
of the technique. Naturally, it takes more work to build, but I think the results are well worth 
the effort. 
DESIGN ELEMENTS
In-Page Navigation
07

www.designeat.com
www.altek.com.tw/cubic
www.kitchenaid.com.br
http://lookbook.bolia.com/
208

www.bagigia.com
http://unabridgedsoftware.com
http://ﬁ xedagency.com
www.parrot.com/ﬂ owerpower/en
209
DESIGN ELEMENTS
In-Page Navigation
07

http://ayr.com
http://blood-and-water.animalplanet.com
http://ganau.com
http://sustainability.bam.co.uk
210

211
07/ Ornamental
Ornamental elements in web design are something I have observed and talked about 
since my ﬁ rst book, all the way back in 2008. And though designers have long relied on 
decorative elements, the use of ornament in web design has signiﬁ cantly changed over 
the years. If I had to sum up the change, I would suggest that the modern usage of the 
element is more subdued. It is part of the overall design, but not the main point. It supports 
and reinforces the brand, but the designs are not fundamentally set up to be ornate. Let’s 
dissect a few examples to see how this might work.
Merchants On Long (FIGURE 1), Healing Histories (FIGURE 2) and The Fudge House (FIG-
URE 3) are all perfect examples. In each of these (and even a few other samples here) the 
ornate elements are prominent and highly visible. However, they are not the focus. They 
accent the design. They help drive the user’s attention. For example, the ornate framing 
of the logo on The Fudge House website gives it a more prominent place in the hierarchy 
of the design. In all of these, the use of ornament gives the design a speciﬁ c style that 
sets the tone for the brand. 
Please don’t misinterpret my commentary on this style. I actually ﬁ nd it to be rather 
gorgeous and extremely effective. I would even argue that it is perhaps one of the oldest 
and most proven forms of decoration. I consider this to be among the most timeless of 
approaches. Consider that minimalism is a product of the twentieth-century; in contrast 
ornate design elements go back thousands of years. We ﬁ nd ornament in countless 
forms in the world’s long history of art. This certainly seems like an element worth having 
in your toolbox. 
In some of the examples here we ﬁ nd what might be considered more extensive usage 
of the style. The Ready to Inspire (FIGURE 4) website is a perfect example. Here the ornate 
style becomes a sort of theme. I could easily tag this as a nineteenth-century-style design, 
but in reality it is just built on a foundation of ornament. 
Finally, you will ﬁ nd that many sites still simply use ornaments as repeating background 
patterns. Again, this is a tried and true approach that can be really beautiful. Ensuring 
that the pattern ﬂ ows well with the foreground of the site is the most important thing to 
consider. This uniﬁ cation is critical in the success of the design. Then again, this is the 
case with any background element or pattern. 
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Ornamental 
07

FIGURE 4: http://2014.inspireconf.com
FIGURE 2: www.healinghistories.org
FIGURE 3: http://fudgehouse.co.uk
FIGURE 1: www.merchantsonlong.com
212

www.lulamag.com
www.villagrazioli.com
http://alicia-aubry.com
http://jrichardhill.com
213
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Ornamental 
07

https://hobancards.com
www.lizsbooksnuggery.com
http://thebarrelhouseﬂ at.com
www.giardinopollensa.com
214

215
07/ Video Backgrounds
A really interesting pattern that has been growing for some time now is the use of video as 
a background element. This approach has been around for quite some time. I can recall it 
being a common element of many all-Flash sites around 2008. With the implosion of Flash, 
web designers and developers let this one go. But as the web has progressed and we have 
slowly moved away from the traditional page format, this element has once again become 
popular. 
There are two other factors that also contribute to the rise of this approach. First is the 
fact that high-speed Internet has become almost universal. I know not everyone has it, but 
stats show that as many as 72 percent of U.S. households have high speed Internet1. As 
such, large background videos (and the large ﬁ le sizes they demand) are not as impracti-
cal as they once were. Secondly, there are several jQuery plug-ins that make adding large 
background videos to a site relatively easy. Video on the whole has become a much more 
prominent aspect of web design. In my opinion, this is a trend that will continue to take hold 
and only become more prominent with time. 
This style could be used simply as decoration, which it sometimes is. You will ﬁ nd this 
true of several of the examples here. Personally though, I ﬁ nd it much more interesting 
when the technique is used for a greater purpose. Video has the potential to tell a story that 
reinforces the brand’s purpose.
A fantastic example of this is the Spotify landing page (FIGURE 1) that uses a large back-
ground video. The message here is rather simple, and we can fully understand it even from 
this static image. The detail you are missing is that the video shows people in many settings 
listening to music. As a result, we get the idea that they provide music for every moment of 
life. This is an important message for the company. They are a digital music service, and most 
people probably presume it works best from a computer or perhaps an iPad. My instinct 
would be to not associate it with anything on the go. And yet, this is what almost all of the 
scenarios show: users on the go. I have no doubt this is intentional. 
Don’t use this style ﬂ ippantly. Instead, carefully consider what it can do for you. If you just 
need some decoration for your site, there are much simpler ways to get there. And of course, 
to fully appreciate the samples here you really must visit the real sites!
1 http://www.ntia.doc.gov/blog/2013/household-broadband-adoption-climbs-724-percent
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Video Backgrounds
07

FIGURE 1: www.spotify.com/uk/video-splash
http://ony.ru
http://whenwasthelasttimeyoudidsomethingfortheﬁ rsttime.eastpak.com
http://couleecreative.com
216

http://riskeverything.us
www.whiteroomuk.com
www.lattrapereve.fr
http://whiteboard.is
217
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Video Backgrounds
07

http://telly.com/about
www.nike.com/us/en_us/c/jordan/nike-jordan
www.dadaabstories.org
www.lifeofpimovie.com
218

219
07/ Geometric Shapes
For several chapters in this book, once I identiﬁ ed a topic, it took but a few minutes to 
ﬁ nd plenty of examples. Geometric patterns and shapes in web design is exactly such a 
topic. Obviously, if you can quickly identify a huge number of sites using a technique, it 
is a rather popular trend. There are two ways to approach this. You might consider this a 
sign that this is a good method. After all, it is very popular, and your site will feel at home 
among these other sites. This is perfect for brands that really need to look modern in 
order to break consumer assumptions. The second possibility is that this is an overused 
technique that should be taken out to pasture and is therefore to be avoided.
Perhaps it is obvious, but neither response is correct. In reality, this style, much like 
any other style we might latch onto, is just another tool in our arsenal. I would never sug-
gest you build your personal style on a single trend like this. Instead, learn to work it to 
your beneﬁ t. 
I really love this style. It has sort of become a minimalist version of ornamental design. 
The geometric shapes and patterns are often used as decorative ﬂ ourishes, background 
elements and as containers for content in various ways. The results can be remarkably 
beautiful. I love how geometric shapes can give sites such beauty and style without 
becoming too much of a focal point. 
Consider the personal site of Nate Navasca (FIGURE 1). Here the pattern is extremely 
prominent. It serves as an eye-catching element that sets the site apart. Without this pat-
tern the site would be yet another minimal site with solid colors. Instead, the pattern gives 
the site a distinct ﬂ avor. The best twist is this: the ornate background doesn’t distract users 
from the main point of the site: the content. I am really intrigued by the way this element 
can be so prominent and yet not distracting. In fact, this strange correlation is something 
we ﬁ nd over and over again in the samples here. 
For example, take a look at Perspective (FIGURE 2), NEO (FIGURE 3) and Passeig de Gràcia 
(FIGURE 4). All three of these rely on geometric patterns that are extremely prominent in 
the design. You just can’t miss it. And yet, they don’t keep us from the content for even 
a second. It seems to me that there are few ways to decorate a site without creating 
distractions. Perhaps this is why designers have fallen in love with it. It works so well as 
a supporting element. 
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Geometric Shapes
07

FIGURE 1: http://navasca.com/nate
FIGURE 3: http://neolab.no
FIGURE 2: http://perspectivewoodworks.com
FIGURE 4: www.paseodegracia.com/en
220

www.lp-sf.com
www.bellecour.fr
www.iamyuna.com
www.mosne.it
221
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Geometric Shapes
07

www.hihayk.com
www.case-3d.com
www.acheproducciones.com
http://builtbybuffalo.com
222

http://hellohikimori.com
http://webey.eu
www.anet-design.cz
www.elrecibidor.com/es/home
223
DESIGN ELEMENTS
Geometric Shapes
07

224
/
Responsive Images • Responsive Galleries • Responsive Navigation • 
Responsive Select Menus • Responsive Checkouts • 
Responsive Logins • Responsive Priorities • Responsive Bands 
of Content • Responsive Reformatting Layouts
08
RESPONSIVE 
ELEMENTS
It is hard to describe responsive design as a trend. Trends, after all, come and go. Though 
I have no doubt our approach to building websites will in time change, I am reasonably 
certain responsive design is here to stay for the foreseeable future. For those who are not 
yet aware of this approach, it is actually really simple to explain. Basically a responsive 
site adapts and changes the layout based on the screen size. For example, a site might 
have two columns of elements on the desktop version and then condense down to a 
single column for mobile devices. The content remains the same (for the most part), but 
the way the content is formatted changes. 
One of the main reasons I started collecting sites by various categories (be it a trend, 
a style or a structure) was rather simple: I was intrigued by how various people solved 
the same problem. Though I seldom talk about it, this is perhaps the true purpose of my 
books: to see how others solve the same problem; to see how others use the same trend; 
to compare how others implement the same style and so on. Through this process of 
comparison, we inevitably ﬁ nd nuggets we love. Even better, we often piece together our 
own solutions that perfectly ﬁ t the problem at hand.

225
08/ Responsive Images
Planning images for responsive layouts is a headache. It’s hard enough to get good photos 
from clients. Getting them to work well in multiple layouts and formats is even harder. But 
as you will see in this section, a little creativity can result in some interesting solutions.
Those addressing responsive images seem to take one of three approaches. First, 
there is the “do nothing” camp, where the images simply scale up and down. Second, 
we have sites that replace all the images with different ones optimized to the layout at 
hand. Finally, there are sites that have a sort of sliding crop effect—where the crop of 
the photo changes as the size of the page changes. It is easy to understand why many 
people rely on the ﬁ rst approach; doing nothing is just much easier. The second two are 
more complex, but can result in images more suited to a device. 
It’s common sense that smaller screens need images with less detail, while larger 
screens, with more pixels to work with, can accommodate larger images containing 
more information. It is also common to ﬁ nd that desktop sites use taller images, while 
many mobile sites rely on horizontal images. A perfect demonstration of this is the Cad-
dis website (FIGURE 1). On the desktop version of this site, the images are in fact vertical. 
On the mobile version, they are displayed as horizontal. If you slowly resize your browser, 
you can watch how the images are simply cropped in a ﬂ uid way so as to ﬁ t the screen 
size. The technique here is hinged on the primary meat of the photo being placed inside 
a safe zone to the top left region of the photo. 
The Lincoln Now (FIGURE 2) and Curadmír (FIGURE 3) sites are also excellent examples of 
what I would call responsive cropping. As you have no doubt realized, things get compli-
cated fast and careful planning is key. With responsive design we must reconsider every 
single element of a website as we adapt it to each screen size. 
One site that caught my eye for this category was the Somewhat site (FIGURE 4), in 
particular their case study pages. On this site you will ﬁ nd a seldom-used fourth solution 
to this problem. Instead of adapting the image, they just make it go away. On the sample 
provided, they are showcasing a mobile app they built and the large background photo 
plays a supportive role. Rather than scaling or otherwise changing it, they simply remove 
it from the mobile design. At ﬁ rst this seems like a cop-out, but I think there is more to 
this approach than we might think. 
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Images
08

FIGURE 1: www.caddis.co
FIGURE 2: http://now.lincoln.com
226

FIGURE 3: www.curadmir.com/home
FIGURE 4: www.somewhat.cc/case-study/lsn-global-app
227
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Images
08

http://longsrx.com
www.sketchin.ch/en
228

229
08/ Responsive Galleries
If you thought dealing with single images in a responsive way is complicated, wait until 
you have to deal with a photo gallery. Things just get even more painful. It seems that the 
most common solution here is to simply scale things up and down to ﬁ t the screen. The 
secondary part of this is that the layouts change and reformat as the screen changes 
size. At smaller sizes, things tend to move toward a single column of photos while at larger 
screens they might have a mix of formats. 
I Love Dust (FIGURE 1) demonstrates this approach perfectly. The desktop version 
highlights a single image by making it large, and below is a grid of other images. As you 
can see, the aspect ratio of the images means that on mobile devices, the ﬁ rst image is 
dominant. This is somewhat inconsequential to this site, but it is something that should 
be considered—in many cases, the images will have speciﬁ c priorities that need to be 
respected. In this case, a great deal of ﬂ exibility means the site is probably a bit easier to 
maintain. Simply scaling image sizes will always be the easiest approach. 
Another example that stuck out to me was the RSQ site (FIGURE 2). I am intrigued that 
on the desktop and tablet versions of this site, the logos on each portfolio piece are 
simple white silhouettes. But once it snaps to the mobile version, the logos get a semi 
transparent blue circle around them. Clearly the logos pop out better with this extra ele-
ment. I contemplated this design for a long time to ﬁ gure this out: My best guess is that 
by making the logos more visible the user might navigate the list more rapidly. This makes 
me wonder, if the circles make navigation on a mobile device easier, why not keep them 
on the desktop? After all, don’t we want navigation there to be as easy as possible as 
well? Another thing to notice is that the images have a sliding crop effect. In this case, 
the meat of the image is in the middle. Once again, careful planning saves the day and 
ensures a maintainable site. Whatever the reasons behind this design, it is good for us to 
consider the results and how they might apply to our own work. 
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Galleries
08

FIGURE 1: http://ilovedust.com
FIGURE 2: http://rsq.com/work/projects
230

http://rodmclean.com
www.erikford.me
231
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Galleries
08

http://regentaucher.com/portfolio/portraits
http://mamochotena.pl
232

www.usm.com/en-us
www.emmytwenty.com
233
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Galleries
08

234
08/ Responsive 
Navigation
Second to the actual content of a web page, I can’t imagine a more critical element than 
navigation. The Internet is, of course, a web of pages interconnected. And navigation 
serves as the most prominent and important method of linking pages together. As with all 
other elements, responsive design has made designing site navigation a huge challenge. 
In fact, this is probably the one that demonstrates the most radical changes. Early on, 
designers just scaled the navigation. But this often meant that the ﬁ rst view of every page 
on a mobile device was a giant list of links for the navigation, and not the content. This had 
to change. As a result, we have seen a greater variety of solutions to this single problem 
than almost any other aspect of responsive design. Scan the samples here and you will 
notice a large range of methods at work. Let’s dissect a few and see what is happening.
The Herschel Supply Co. site (FIGURE 1) demonstrates the most common approach. 
Here, the site has a relatively simple navigation system with just four items (plus the logo 
link to the home page). On mobile devices, they changed the horizontal list of links to a 
vertical one and hid it behind a navicon. 
Other sites, such as Football as Football (FIGURE 2), have far more complex navigation 
to wrangle into place. In this case, a massive menu is hidden behind a navicon on both 
desktop and mobile devices. It is based on four columns of links (as seen on the desk-
top version) and it condenses to a single column for mobile screens. Interestingly, the 
approach is useful in making both versions easier to navigate. It allows the content to be 
the primary focus, but gives the user access to navigation when they need it. 
Another interesting approach can be found on the World Wildlife Fund site (FIGURE 3). 
Here the desktop site has three levels of navigation in the main header: a main menu, a 
secondary menu and a set of call-to-action items. As the screen shrinks, they opted to 
hide most of the navigation behind a navicon while keeping the call-to-action items vis-
ible at all times. I appreciate that this demonstrates ﬂ exibility in any solution. They have 
adapted the method to perfectly ﬁ t their needs. 
Finally, I want to focus your attention on The Japan Times website (FIGURE 4). Once 
again, the site relies on an extremely complex navigation system that provides access to 
a wide range of content. As you can see in the mobile interface, they have translated the 
drop-down navigation system into a single column of links. 

FIGURE 1: www.herschelsupply.com
FIGURE 2: www.footballasfootball.com
235
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Navigation
08

FIGURE 3: http://worldwildlife.org
FIGURE 4: www.japantimes.co.jp
236

www.oztera.com
www.whisperism.com
237
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Navigation
08

238
08/ Responsive Select 
Menus
One of the ﬁ rst solutions to responsive navigation was the use of select menus. In this 
model, a normal band of navigation options folds into a drop-down select control. Frankly, 
this approach has mostly fallen out of popularity. That said, I did happen upon a couple 
of examples that sort of used the approach. I say “sort of” because they put their own 
twist on it—they don’t exactly have an actual HTML drop down control. 
Despite an extremely small sample set, I opted to include this chapter because it 
inspired me. I was reminded of an approach that is no longer popular. In many cases, it 
was a terrible solution and I much prefer other approaches we use now. That said, I think 
it is always good to keep in mind the full range of options available to us so that we can 
always pick the best one. You might seldom use this approach, but that doesn’t make it 
a bad option to keep on tap.
The Hudson’s Bay Company (HBC) site (FIGURE 1) demonstrates a rather unusual prob-
lem. The navigation for this site is a single dropdown with an extensive list of links. This 
isn’t your typical ﬁ ve-page site; it contains dozens of pages. Sure it isn’t the biggest site, 
but the navigation they set up makes it an interesting site to work with. On the mobile 
version this remains a drop-down, but it has more of a select control feel to it. Again, it 
isn’t what I would expect, but the results work well as I browse the site. The simplicity of 
packing all the menu items into a single drop-down is compelling. 
The other example here, the Louis XIV site (FIGURE 2) demonstrates a more typical 
usage of the approach. Here a simple list of eight links is displayed as a single row of 
items on desktop and tablet computers. When it shifts to mobile, this row of links turns 
into a drop-down selection menu. 
This approach in general stands in stark contrast to the frequent usage of navicons 
and menus that slide out from the side. I think the community has really settled in on these 
two options. I can’t help but wonder what else we will come up with. The ﬁ eld is still wide 
open in my opinion, and we have yet to fully explore the possibilities. 

FIGURE 2: www.louisxivenergy.com
FIGURE 1: www3.hbc.com
239
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Select Menus
08

240
08/ Responsive 
Checkouts
There is no question: responsive design makes things far more complex to design and 
build. We have already seen how complicated it can get just ﬁ guring out how to show 
images in changing layouts. As I sort through the contents for this chapter on responsive 
checkouts, I suddenly feel like images are the least of our worries. E-commerce systems 
are extremely complex and involve so many situations and events. Transforming these 
interfaces into responsive things of beauty is a daunting challenge. 
An intrinsic difference I keep coming back to is how users on desktops rely on clicks 
while mobile users rely on touches. This fundamental shift in interface methods is a sig-
niﬁ cant to consider. It’s also important to realize that the desktop version might be used 
in a more focused way at a desktop computer. In contrast, the mobile version might get 
used while someone is on the go and not giving it their full attention. Creating a single 
interface that accommodates all of this and optimizes the number of people completing 
the checkout is a considerable challenge. Frankly, it is no wonder that the community as 
a whole is really focused on a minimalist and simple style. 
One thing that stands out to me with these samples is the “proceed to checkout” 
buttons. Not surprisingly, these buttons are styled to catch your attention. Most of them 
leap off the page and are impossible to miss. But something else stands out to me even 
more. I notice that on the mobile versions, many of the sites work hard to ensure that 
this key button is near the top of the page. This ensures that the button is visible on the 
default view from a mobile device. 
Suitsupply (FIGURE 1) is a lovely example of this. As with many sites, the checkout button 
is both above and below the list of cart contents. And notice that the button remains very 
near the top of the page, helping to draw people into the process.
Another thing to observe is how the interfaces feel simpler, the smaller the screen gets. 
In most cases elements are just being moved down and end up off screen. The result is 
that the interface feels simpler and more focused. I can’t help but wonder if a narrowed 
focus and reduction of clutter would beneﬁ t every screen size. 

FIGURE 1: https://us.suitsupply.com/on/demandware.store/Sites-US-Site/en_US/Cart-Show
www.currys.co.uk/gbuk/o/initorder/basket-conﬁ rmation.html
241
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Checkouts
08

www.motelrocks.com/cart.php
www.ofﬁ cialhtcstore.com/uk/p_htc_store_basket.aspx
242

http://kershaw.kaiusaltd.com/cart
www.buru-buru.com/checkout/cart
243
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Checkouts
08

244
08/ Responsive Logins
Login forms are not nearly as complex as checkout systems, and therefore lend them-
selves to more exploration. I believe this is evident in the samples provided here. The 
most obvious approach is to essentially keep things the same, just shrink it down. This 
is exactly what the Whil website (FIGURE 1) does. The form is center-aligned and simply 
shrinks to ﬁ t the width of the screen. And guess what? It works really well. Sometimes 
the simplest approach is the best one. 
The Salesforce login (FIGURE 2) page really caught my attention. The desktop version 
contains the normal login stuff, but it also includes links to some useful resources that help 
you maximize the system. I would propose that these resources are ideal for the desktop 
user exploring the application. In contrast, the mobile version hides these elements and 
just shows the login form (which, interestingly, didn’t have to be reformatted or resized at 
all). On the mobile version, I suspect users are more interested in using the app and not 
in learning to use it. As such, the lack of distractions is reasonable and desirable. 
Another example that got me thinking was the Campﬁ re login (FIGURE 3). On the mobile 
version, they opted to leave the logo out. On ﬁ rst take, this is almost shocking to think 
about. How could they not have their awesome little logo in there? And yet, it isn’t there, 
and it actually works really well without it. I really appreciate their willingness to do some-
thing outside of convention for the sake of usability. 
There are countless approaches to logins—which is kind of surprising considering 
what simple forms they are. The Starbucks site (FIGURE 4) presents another interesting 
concept. Here the desktop version has action buttons spread over two columns. It also 
includes a list of reasons to register an account. In contrast, the mobile version condenses 
the form into a neat little stack of action buttons and hides the beneﬁ ts of joining. I can’t 
help but assume that mobile users are more easily distracted and therefore it is logical 
to keep the path clear of shiny objects that might stop them. It also makes sense that 
someone selecting to visit the login page is already a customer, and therefore doesn’t 
need to be sold on the product at all.
For me, the lesson I learn here is simple. Login forms (or any other fundamental part 
of a website) might be easy to ignore. But at the end of the day, our users can beneﬁ t 
greatly from some carefully thought-out design work. In fact, testing these interfaces with 
real users will likely provide extremely helpful insights. 

FIGURE 1: http://whil.com
FIGURE 2: https://login.salesforce.com
245
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Logins
08

FIGURE 3: https://launchpad.37signals.com/campﬁ re/signin
FIGURE 4: www.starbucks.com/account/signin
246

www.naspa.org/login
https://vllg.com/login
247
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Logins
08

248
08/ Responsive 
Priorities
Designers are slowly giving more attention to how needs change at different screen sizes. 
A user on a mobile site may have different reasons for visiting the site than a user on a 
desktop computer. The best example that comes to mind is someone visiting a restau-
rant’s website. The desktop user might be exploring the idea of going there. They will need 
a wide range of information, such as location, menu items, photos to determine ambience, 
etc. In contrast, a mobile user might have sought out the destination’s website to ﬁ nd 
what hours it is open, or to get directions. In other words, I suspect that many desktop 
users require more of a sales pitch, while mobile users just need the facts, as they are 
already interested in coming and may be on their way. Obviously, this is speculation, but 
it is easy to imagine. To fully understand users, it helps to observe them using your site. 
One site that seems to embody the notion of responsive priorities is Jim ‘n Nick’s Bar-
B-Q (FIGURE 1). Contrast the mobile and desktop versions and I believe you will notice the 
difference rather quickly. The mobile version is a super-condensed set of buttons void of 
much distraction. I get the sense that they changed the priorities of the site as it adapted 
to different screen sizes. 
Another example that vividly demonstrates this idea is the Kiwibank website (FIGURE 
2). The mobile version features three key action items front and center. These are very 
much focused on the tasks mobile users would be interested in doing. Contrast this with 
the more marketing-oriented desktop version of the site. It is clear that each version has 
a different priority and purpose for users, so adapting only makes sense. 
The Garmin site (FIGURE 3) has its own interesting take on this concept. The desktop 
version features your typical marketing-type content. The mobile version, though it is 
there to sell the product, has a different approach to the same goal. The mobile site is 
ﬁ rst interested in the context users plan to use the product. I am intrigued that the mobile 
version takes this approach, but the desktop site does not. 
An intimate understanding of your users and their goals will always be of use. The 
samples here remind us that those goals can (and likely will) change as the user changes 
modes. An on-the-go mobile phone user is almost guaranteed to have different goals 
then a desktop user stuck at the ofﬁ ce. 

FIGURE 1: www.jimnnicks.com
FIGURE 2: www.kiwibank.co.nz
249
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Priorities
08

http://outpostdallas.com
FIGURE 3: www.garmin.com
250

http://cir.ca
www.dixieﬁ sh.com
251
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Priorities
08

http://2013.ampersandconf.com
www.khanacademy.org
252

253
08/ Responsive Bands 
of Content
I want to consider the structural strategies designers are using to create responsive sites. 
The ﬁ rst approach that the community gravitated toward was to create bands of content 
stacked on top of each other. Inside of these bands, the content would typically shift from 
multiple columns to a single stack of items. These bands of content would remain in the 
same stacking order across all screen sizes. In essence, this means that each band is 
operating independently of the others. Naturally, this makes designing, developing and 
maintaining sites like this much easier. Look at a few responsive sites and you will quickly 
spot this pattern, as it is tremendously popular. 
The Stowe, Vermont website (FIGURE 1) is visually rich, and in this case, the bands of 
content don’t feel overly simplistic at all. It feels natural and works really well. As the site 
condenses, each of the bands of content (I count ﬁ ve) simply adapts to ﬁ t the space 
available to it. There is no interaction between the bands of content; each functions on 
its own. The modular approach works well and it seems to me that maintenance on such 
a creation should be reasonable. 
The pattern is pretty obvious once you notice. Consider the Hiut Denim Co. website 
(FIGURE 2). Here the bands of content are even more obvious, as they are separated by 
heavy lines. Notice that the content never crosses these boundaries and again, each 
operates on its own. This stacked approach presents an interesting opportunity to vividly 
prioritize your content. If you consciously decide the order of things, important things will 
naturally rise to the top.
In some cases the structure is not obvious at ﬁ rst because the content and design 
of the site stand out so vividly. The Marco Grill site (FIGURE 3) demonstrates this. I imme-
diately loved the site, but it took me a long while to realize that it used this pattern. I was 
captivated by the contents and not the layout. 
Bands of content is what I would call a go-to style. It works remarkably well and 
ports nicely to code. What really gets interesting is how each of these individual bands 
are styled. They can be as visually rich and diverse as you want. Also, with the modular 
nature of the designs, I could easily imagine building a library of fundamental structures 
that can be reused and re-skinned for different purposes. 
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Bands of Content
08

FIGURE 1: www.gostowe.com
FIGURE 2: http://hiutdenim.co.uk
254

FIGURE 3: www.marcogrill.com
http://82birds.com
255
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Bands of Content
08

http://bunq.co.uk
http://hlynnphoto.com
256

257
08/ Responsive 
Reformatting Layouts
I want to highlight responsive sites that change as the screen shrinks. But these sites do 
more than simply stack bands of content. In this case, the layouts are more complex, 
with the content interrelating in more complex ways. As the designs shift to mobile, there 
are more radical adjustments to the content. For me, this suggests a reprioritization of 
the content to suit each set of users. This very much relates to the responsive priorities 
chapter (page 248), but in this case, the layouts are all changing radically in fundamental 
ways. At times the two sites hardly even look like they go together. 
A nice place to start is The University of Vermont website (FIGURE 1). Here the two ver-
sions clearly represent the same organization, but the structures are radically different. 
Regardless of size, the page serves as a launching point to countless other pages and 
subsites. Notice the various ways the content was rearranged and re-factored to ﬁ t the 
smaller screen. These are not simple bands of content shrinking down. 
The Advising Center of The University of Hawaii at Hilo (FIGURE 2) is another university 
site that also happens to demonstrate this idea. Not only does the focus of the site change, 
but the overall structure shifts to accommodate it. This one is really close to being bands 
of content, but for me there is a vivid change that goes beyond just packing things into 
smaller and smaller spaces. 
The Oxo Tower Wharf website (FIGURE 3) is a rather unusual website to begin with. 
As it adapts to mobile, it undergoes some fairly radical changes. It’s kind of funny, the 
more you look at it, the less radical it feels: I think the reality is that so much of the web 
right now is focused on a banded content approach that a more complex reformatting of 
the page feels so much more radical. I suspect that in time, layouts like this one will feel 
simple compared to what we will create. I believe the needs of mobile and desktop users 
are so far apart that soon reformatting layouts will be more common and extravagant.
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Reformatting Layouts
08

FIGURE 1: www.uvm.edu
FIGURE 2: http://hilo.hawaii.edu/~advising
258

FIGURE 3: www.oxotower.co.uk
http://zioneceramica.es
259
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Reformatting Layouts
08

http://justoneeye.com
http://muumilaakso.tampere.ﬁ 
260

www.operadeparis.fr
http://adrianstourdefrance.com/event/tdf
261
RESPONSIVE ELEMENT 
Responsive Reformatting Layouts
08

INDEX
p. 005 www.minglabs.com MING Labs © 2013
p. 005 http://adesignerd.com © 2013
p. 005 http://jasonjam.es © 2013
p. 005 www.heikopaiko.com HEIKOPAIKO © 2013
p. 006 www.mrbava.com Robert Bava © 2013
p. 006 www.pixerience.com Daniel Máslo © 2013
p. 006 http://lukaslinden.net © 2013
p. 006 http://robdavisdesigner.co.uk Rob Davis
p. 008 http://enniscreates.com © 2013 Ennis Creates
p. 008 www.perpetuo.it Will Cole © 2013
p. 008 www.symphonyonline.co.uk 
Symphony Online © 2013
p. 008 www.secretkey.it Secret Key Digital Agency
p. 009 www.creativemints.com © 2013
p. 009 www.socialforces.com © 2013
p. 009 www.ipolecat.com © 2013
p. 009 www.thesearethings.com © 2013
p. 011 www.poddapontiarchitetti.it 
Podda Ponti Architetti © 2013
p. 011 http://jamesnash.net James Nash © 2013
p. 011 www.alexafalcone.com Alexa Falcone © 2013
p. 011 www.glauce.com © 2013
p. 012 www.danielmillroy.com Daniel Millroy © 2013
p. 012 www.balinov.com Balinov.com © 2013
p. 012 www.indubitablee.com © 2013
p. 012 www.vbg.si/en © 2013
p. 014 www.ceasondesign.com Cody Glenn Eason © 2013
p. 014 www.bwmedia.be bwmedia © 2013
p. 014 http://thenutone.com ©2013 Nutone & Binalogue
p. 014 www.kocha.com.au © 2013
p. 015 www.colincoolidge.com/worksamples 
Colin Coolidge © 2013
p. 015 www.kokodigital.co.uk Koko Digital © 2013
p. 015 www.davegarwacke.com © 2013
p. 015 www.socketstudios.com © 2013
p. 017 http://hiddendepth.ie Hidden Depth
p. 017 http://sarahcoulton.com Sarah Coulton © 2013
p. 017 http://milee.coworks.html © 2013
p. 017 www.orcunkilic.com/works Orcun KILIC © 2013
p. 018 http://sosweetcreative.com 
SoSweet! Creative © 2013
p. 018 http://evanﬂ etcher.com Evan Fletcher © 2013
p. 018 http://zindustry.com © zindustry
p. 018 http://alexaraujo.co © 2013
p. 020 www.creanet.es CREANET © 2013
p. 020 http://altspace.com © 2013
p. 020 http://progetty.it Progetty design studio
p. 020 www.ideator.si David Praznik, ideator s.p. © 2013
p. 021 http://ryancutter.co.uk Ryan Cutter © 2013
p. 021 http://marisapassos.com Marisa Passos © 2013
p. 021 http://pgrdesign.net PGRdesign © 2013
p. 021 http://theeggs.biz © 2013
p. 023 www.matthewdjordan.com 
Copyright © Matthew D. Jordan
p. 023 www.rleonardi.com/interactive-resume © 2013
p. 023 http://elegantseagulls.com 
Elegant Seagulls, Inc © 2013
p. 023 http://speed-motion.com.ua © 2013
p. 024 www.twistedstudio.com Daniel Pereira © 2013
p. 024 http://bornin82.com © 2013
p. 024 www.designzillas.com © 2013
p. 024 www.cla-ude.net © 2013
p. 026 www.vladrodriguez.com © 2013
p. 026 http://minnixio.com © 2013
p. 026 http://manuelmoreale.com © 2013
p. 026 www.janixpacle.com © 2013
p. 027 http://ryansrich.com Ryan Rich © 2013
p. 027 www.andrewkapish.com © 2013
p. 027 http://tylersanguinette.com © 2013
p. 027 http://fuelthemes.net © 2013
p. 029 http://svla.co Michael Sevilla : SVLA : © 2012-Present
p. 029 www.applove.se © 2013
p. 030 www.asylummarketing.com © 2013
p. 030 http://janne.me © 2013
p. 031 http://doabackﬂ ip.com © 2013
p. 031 www.scottmccarthydesign.com © 2013
p. 032 http://ﬁ xate.it © 2013
p. 032 http://residence-mixte.com © 2013
p. 033 www.antro.ca/en © 2013
p. 033 www.philippehong.com © 2013
p. 035 www.min-style.de Jann de Vries © 2013
p. 035 www.jenslehmann.com MING Labs © 2013
p. 035 www.attitudedesign.co.uk 
Attitude Design Ltd © 2013
p. 035 http://radziu.org Radek Skrzypczak © 2013
p. 036 www.pageinteractive.pl PAGE Interactive ©2013
p. 036 http://cheesebanana.com CHEESEBANANA © 2013
p. 036 http://porcupinecolors.com porcupine colors © 2013
p. 036 www.sasahuzjak.com Plastikfantastik © 2013
p. 037 www.geekybeaver.ca geekybeaver.ca © 2013
p. 037 http://burciaga.co © 2013
p. 037 http://pauljohns.com Paul Johns © 2013
p. 037 www.thisisgrow.com Grow © 2013
p. 038 http://isabelarodrigues.org Isabela Rodrigues - 
Sweety Branding Studio  © 2013
p. 038 www.publer.com.br Publer © 2013
p. 038 http://igorodrigues.com.br Igo Rodrigues © 2013
p. 038 http://leozakour.com Leonardo Zakour © 2013
p. 039 http://webcoursesagency.com 
WCB Design Agency Bangkok - 2013
p. 039 www.hasrimy.com 
Hasrimy Technologies Sdn Bhd © 2013
p. 039 www.cleancutcrew.com Clean Cut © 2012
p. 039 http://arunpattnaik.com © Arun Pattnaik
p. 040 www.alexanderbyrne.com 
Alex Byrne. Copyright. 2013
p. 040 www.alingham.com Copyright (C) 2013 Al Ingham
p. 041 http://url.com.tr url ltd sti (c) 2013
p. 041 http://simpleia.com Simpleia.com © 2013
p. 041 www.pixelwrapped.com Pixelwrapped  © 2103
p. 044 http://mattvojacek.com Running with Scissors 
Designs (rwsd.net) © 2013
p. 044 www.frootdesign.com Froot Design © 2014
p. 044 www.pierrekarter.be Pierre Hubin
p. 044 www.mickael-girault.fr Girault mickaël © 2013
p. 045 http://11beats.co.uk 11beats © 2013
p. 045 http://anthemdesignlab.com 
Anthem Design Lab © 2013
p. 045 www.enrichcreative.com 
©2013 Enrich Creative. All rights reserved
262

p. 045 www.higher.sk/en Higher © 2013
p. 046 www.driftinteractive.com Copyright © 2013 Drift 
Interactive Design + Development
p. 046 http://rno1.com © 2013
p. 046 http://worryfreelabs.com © 2013
p. 046 http://integritystl.com © 2013
p. 047 http://vladimirjones.com © 2013
p. 047 www.bigspaceship.com © 2013
p. 047 www.rga.com © 2013
p. 047 www.hugeinc.com © 2013
p. 049 http://robinclediere.com Robin Clediere © 2013
p. 050 www.jonjon.tv Jon Montenegro © 2013
p. 051 http://velthy.net © 2013 Stefan Velthuys
p. 051 www.grondecki.pl PAGE Interactive 2013
p. 052 www.seanhermandesign.com HRMN © 2013
p. 053 www.kylethacker.com Kyle Thacker © 2013
p. 053 www.leeannpica.com © 2013
p. 053 http://pavelhuza.com © 2013
p. 054 www.softfacade.com © 2013
p. 055 http://attackpattern.com SoSweet! Creative © 2013
p. 055 http://fueled.com © 2013
p. 055 http://kollectivemobile.com © 2013
p. 056 http://chriswinch.me Chris Winch © 2013
p. 057 http://minimalmonkey.com © 2013
p. 057 www.fogcreek.com © 2013
p. 057 www.adhamdannaway.com © 2013
p. 058 www.icondesigner.net © 2013
p. 058 www.midtonedesign.com © 2013
p. 059 http://annapaschenko.com © 2013
p. 059 www.taylorcarrigan.com © 2013
p. 060 www.studiopigeon.com All Rights Reserved 
© 2013 PIGEON GROUP SP. Z O.O.
p. 061 http://berd.tv BERD © 2013
p. 061 www.oniric-creative.com 
Oniric Creative Studios © 2013
p. 061 https://modio.tv  © 2013
p. 062 www.picturesandtext.co.uk NICK BARRY © 2013
p. 063 www.helveticbrands.ch  © Helvetic Brands
p. 063 www.jeroenvaneerden.nl © 2013
p. 063 www.werklig.com © 2013
p. 064 www.mooi-design.com © 2013
p. 065 http://pointbarre.ca/en © 2013
p. 065 www.moodley.at/de/willkommen.html © 2013
p. 065 http://2xelliott.co.uk © 2013
p. 066 www.bmddesign.fr © 2013
p. 067 www.rafagoicoechea.info © 2013
p. 067 http://typefounding.com © 2013
p. 067 www.lukeritchie.co.za © 2013
p. 068 www.timtadder.com © 2013
p. 069 http://mamochotena.pl © 2013
p. 069 www.lena-sanz.com © 2013
p. 069 www.levonbiss.com © 2013
p. 070 www.turksworks.co.uk © 2013
p. 071 www.ivanpopovic.com 
Jacques Maes & Lise Braekers © 2012
p. 071 www.jefﬂ angevin.com © 2013
p. 071 http://michalsawtyruk.com © 2013
p. 072 www.visio-art.de Aleksei Kostyuk © 2013
p. 073 www.nabilnezzar.com 
All rights reserved © 2013 Nabil Nezzar
p. 073 www.beatrizsanches.com 
Beatriz Sanches and Alexa Falcone © 2013
p. 073 http://kerbyrosanes.com © 2013
p. 074 www.factoria.me Factoria Crossmedia © 2013
p. 075 http://storylark.com © 2013 Benek Limited
p. 075 www.rizon.be © 2013
p. 075 http://grey.com © 2013
p. 076 http://empirestatestudios.com 
empire state studio © 2013
p. 077 www.davidfechner.de/barber 
malthe luda - art direction © 2013
p. 077 http://justweddings.ie Hidden Depth © 2013
p. 077 www.kenhoffa.com © 2013
p. 078 http://parsons.me Copyright 2013 James Parsons
p. 078 www.mikecampau.com © 2013
p. 078 www.michellebuteau.com © 2013
p. 078 http://builtthings.com © 2013
p. 081 www.namesforchange.org © 2013
p. 081 https://cottonbureau.com © 2013
p. 081 www.scribd.com © 2013
p. 082 http://sponsormybook.com © 2013
p. 082 http://poncho.is/register © 2013
p. 082 http://nballstats.com © 2013
p. 082 www.meetingresult.com © 2013
p. 083 http://why.az © 2013
p. 083 http://danielladraper.com © 2013
p. 083 http://canopy.co © 2013
p. 084 www.prosperity.com © 2013
p. 084 http://thezoomproject.com © 2013
p. 084 https://burnformule1.com © 2013
p. 085 http://jims-scarf.co.uk © 2013
p. 085 http://bradleyhaynes.com/freelance © 2013
p. 085 https://pillpack.com © 2013
p. 087 www.thedash.com © 2013
p. 087 www.getdrip.com © 2013
p. 087 www.tantefanny.at © 2013
p. 087 http://mdbrewersharvest.com © 2013
p. 088 www.pwdo.org/ffc-2013 © 2013
p. 088 http://good-morning.no/casestudies/good-
morning-breakfast © 2013
p. 088 www.athenos.com © 2013
p. 088 www.localsapparel.se © 2013
p. 089 https://spacebox.io © 2013
p. 089 http://cervezaaustral.cl/viajealorigen © 2013
p. 089 www.rentalengine.com © 2013
p. 089 http://mailplaneapp.com © 2013
p. 091 www.safebyte.com © 2013
p. 091 www.thedesignﬁ lesopenhouse.com © 2013
p. 091 http://greatsbrand.com © 2013
p. 091 www.g-star.com © 2013
p. 092 www.themobileindex.com © 2013
p. 092 http://tablet.fubiz.net © 2013
p. 092 www.siaperitivos.com/en/home © 2013
p. 092 http://one.htc.com/experienceit © 2013
p. 093 www.mixd.co.uk © 2013
p. 093 www.latabladegisela.com © 2013
p. 093 www.sweez.com.br © 2013
p. 093 http://180g.co/vellum © 2013
p. 095 www.howardyount.com © 2013
p. 095 www.indmusicnetwork.com © 2013
p. 095 http://ﬁ iinta.com © 2013
p. 095 www.justusdesigncollective.com © 2013
p. 096 http://madebyfriends.co/citibike © 2013
p. 096 http://awbymary.com © 2013
263
INDEX

p. 096 http://mollyandmepecans.com © 2013
p. 097 http://siiiimple.eu.pn © 2013
p. 097 www.usepeak.com © 2013
p. 097 www.swissted.com © 2013
p. 098 http://gcwatches.com/en © 2013
p. 098 www.harrys.com © 2013
p. 098 http://teacakedesign.com © 2013
p. 099 www.cmyk-tower.com © 2013
p. 099 www.dandad.org © 2013
p. 099 http://openin.gs © 2013
p. 101 www.sklobovskaya.com © 2013
p. 101 http://tekroc.com © 2013
p. 101 http://carreraworld.com/us © 2013
p. 101 http://kabanhosoi.com © 2013
p. 102 http://lenotre.chateauversailles.fr/
entries_en.html © 2013
p. 102 www.thelondondistillerycompany.com © 2013
p. 102 http://andy-wolf.at/onelove © 2013
p. 102 http://melanie-f.com © 2013
p. 103 http://museekly.com © 2013
p. 103 www.queenslandballet.com.au © 2013
p. 103 www.reachpartners.ch © 2013
p. 103 http://appdock.co © 2013
p. 105 www.tinyfootprintcoffee.com © 2013
p. 105 http://curtsspecialrecipe.com © 2013
p. 105 www.seattlecidercompany.com © 2013
p. 105 www.martinasperl.at © 2013
p. 106 http://tribalmedia.co.uk © 2013
p. 106 http://jellyreader.com © 2013
p. 106 http://heavyapp.com © 2013
p. 106 http://viewﬂ ux.com © 2013
p. 107 http://lesson.ly © 2013
p. 107 www.springloops.io © 2013
p. 107 www.hellohired.com © 2013
p. 107 www.formentini.it/en © 2013
p. 108 http://lifeandthyme.com © 2013
p. 108 www.glasvasen.se © 2013
p. 108 www.andremaurice.it © 2013
p. 108 www.webuildrail.com © 2013
p. 110 https://towncentrecarparks.com/
battle-of-the-sexes © 2013
p. 110 http://liber.io © 2013
p. 110 www.pressking.com © 2013
p. 110 http://campnothing.goodfornothing.com © 2013
p. 111 http://altered.cc © 2013
p. 111 http://slideme.luigiferraresi.it © 2013
p. 111 http://musegrid-shelﬁ e.businesscatalyst.com 
© 2013
p. 111 www.leedsbuildingsociety.co.uk/resources/
kick-my-habits © 2013
p. 112 http://sitedrop.com © 2013
p. 112 http://startupnotes.org © 2013
p. 112 www.pixelbazaar.com © 2013
p. 112 http://brace.io © 2013
p. 114 www.f-i.comﬁ airlines © 2013
p. 114 http://adayinbigdata.com © 2013
p. 114 www.freeger.com/projects/contextad © 2013
p. 114 http://whaternet.com © 2013
p. 115 www.dangersoffracking.com © 2013
p. 115 http://benthebodyguard.com © 2013
p. 115 http://doyouimpress.com © 2013
p. 115 http://futureofcarsharing.com © 2013
p. 116 http://nasaprospect.com © 2013
p. 116 http://startupsthisishowdesignworks.com © 2013
p. 116 www.welldoneteamgb.com © 2013
p. 116 www.uppercup.com.au © 2013
p. 117 www.rodney.com © 2013
p. 117 www.theﬂ owapp.com © 2013
p. 117 http://bellroy.com/pages/slim-your-wallet © 2013
p. 117 www.reverenddanger.com © 2013
p. 119 http://realtii.com © 2013
p. 119 http://getgoldee.com © 2013
p. 119 www.pinkanova.com/en © 2013
p. 119 http://wondergiant.com © 2013
p. 120 www.sarahevansdesign.co.uk © 2013
p. 120 www.impactbnd.com © 2013
p. 120 www.oursky.com © 2013
p. 120 http://bondistaycations.com.au © 2013
p. 121 www.braintreepayments.com © 2013
p. 121 https://stickygram.com © 2013
p. 121 www.thezebra.com © 2013
p. 121 www.thebentbullet.com © 2013
p. 122 https://squareup.com © 2013
p. 122 http://procreate.si © 2013
p. 122 www.boldking.com © 2013
p. 122 www.audreyazoura.fr © 2013
p. 124 http://lovecarmenrose.com © 2013
p. 124 http://poppiesﬂ owers.com.au © 2013
p. 124 www.heritagechickens.ca © 2013
p. 124 www.bootb.com/en © 2013
p. 125 http://nativesunjax.com © 2013
p. 125 www.pastini.com © 2013
p. 125 http://colabwork.com © 2013
p. 125 http://jacksonvilleartwalk.com © 2013
p. 127 http://rencontres-arles-photo.tv/en © 2013
p. 127 www.reveillonabsoluto.com.br © 2013
p. 127 http://thenews.im © 2013
p. 127 www.wevseen.com © 2013
p. 128 http://ahmetsulek.com © 2013
p. 128 http://pakadlabezdomniaka.pl © 2013
p. 128 www.colehaan.com/
wingtip-or-saddle.html © 2013
p. 128 www.desktimeapp.com © 2013
p. 129 www.newvision-opticien.com © 2013
p. 129 http://eightandfour.com © 2013
p. 129 www.loworks.co.jp © 2013
p. 129 www.ﬁ fty-ﬁ ve.com © 2013
p. 130 www.poisoncenterapp.com © 2013
p. 130 http://2013.beatﬁ lmfestival.ru © 2013
p. 130 www.avonesestilorcn.com/concurso/
quintafase © 2013
p. 130 http://instastox.com © 2013
p. 133 http://throttleapp.me © 2013
p. 133 http://skakunmedia.com/docapture © 2013
p. 133 http://fontawesome.pro © 2013
p. 133 www.zegna.com/us © 2013
p. 134 www.breakitdown.ie © 2013
p. 134 www.partmedia.ru/en © 2013
p. 134 www.vgraﬁ ks.com © 2013
p. 134 www.3coasts.com © 2013
p. 135 http://runthegap.com © 2013
p. 135 www.getuikit.com © 2013
p. 135 http://terminalplanning.aero © 2013
264

p. 135 www.huxtaburger.com.au © 2013
p. 137 http://beurreandsel.com © 2013
p. 137 www.beebeebazaar.be © 2013
p. 137 www.carrefourkidsclub.fr © 2013
p. 137 http://cetdrishti.com © 2013
p. 138 www.gridbooks.com © 2013
p. 138 www.triplagent.com © 2013
p. 138 http://purecss.io © 2013
p. 138 http://websites-for-artists.com © 2013
p. 139 www.minttwist.com © 2013
p. 139 http://giphy.com © 2013
p. 139 www.ﬁ tbit.com © 2013
p. 139 www.freelancelift.com © 2013
p. 141 www.cupsannual.ca © 2013
p. 141 http://joinbonﬁ re.com © 2013
p. 141 www.tillamook.com/tillamook-story/
our-story.html © 2013
p. 141 http://cclfuture.org © 2013
p. 142 http://buryyoursecrets.se/en © 2013
p. 142 www.nutcache.com © 2013
p. 142 www.zanggroeptimeless.nl © 2013
p. 142 www.annapurnarecruitment.com © 2013
p. 143 www.globeview.nl © 2013
p. 143 www.shiner.com © 2013
p. 143 http://caitlinwicker.com © 2013
p. 143 http://chichesterdesign.co.uk © 2013
p. 145 https://fruux.com © 2013
p. 145 http://myboat.gp/en © 2013
p. 145 http://4pinesbeer.com.au © 2013
p. 145 http://candccoffee.com © 2013
p. 146 http://packdog.com © 2013
p. 146 www.served-mcr.com © 2013
p. 146 www.adline.ro © 2013
p. 146 www.jacquico.com © 2013
p. 147 http://direnduvar.com © 2013
p. 147 www.numero10.ch/fr © 2013
p. 147 http://chalkythecat.com © 2013
p. 147 www.kezjukebox.com © 2013
p. 149 http://tradestoneconfections.com © 2013
p. 149 http://wootten.com.au © 2013
p. 150 www.hag.ch/de © 2013
p. 150 www.peanutgalleryﬁ lms.com © 2013
p. 149 http://stiinas.myshopify.com © 2013
p. 150 http://connary.com © 2013
p. 150 http://milkeverymoment.ca © 2013
p. 150 www.stallanddean.com © 2013
p. 151 www.sweez.com.br © 2013
p. 151 www.kinderfotograﬁ e-evihermans.be © 2013
p. 151 www.mustasj.no © 2013
p. 151 http://pulpﬁ ngers.com © 2013
p. 153 www.studiopigeon.com All Rights Reserved 
© 2013 PIGEON GROUP SP. Z O.O.
p. 153 www.jamcouver.com © 2013
p. 153 www.pncchristmaspriceindex.com © 2013
p. 153 www.une-cuisine-astucieuse.fr © 2013
p. 154 www.exsus.com/highway-one-roadtrip © 2013
p. 154 http://themesquad.com © 2013
p. 154 www.loveless-shop.jp © 2013
p. 154 www.trezee.com © 2013
p. 155 http://w-not.ru © 2013
p. 155 www.impero-festive-meter.com © 2013
p. 155 www.thetownthatcameinfromthecold.com © 2013
p. 155 http://islreview.com © 2013
p. 156 http://kari-na.com © 2013
p. 156 http://blinkss.com © 2013
p. 156 http://mooncampapp.com © 2013
p. 156 www.srgint.com © 2013
p. 157 www.smithsonianchannel.com/
sc_assets/html/bionicman © 2013
p. 157 http://originalmockups.com/
bundles/inﬁ nity-bundle © 2013
p. 157 http://kojo.com.au © 2013
p. 157 www.coolappse.com © 2013
p. 160 www.blueﬂ y.com © 2013
p. 160 http://2014.studio38.ru © 2013
p. 160 www.rei.com © 2013
p. 160 www.gifts.com © 2013
p. 161 www.rakuten.com © 2013
p. 161 www.barnesandnoble.com © 2013
p. 161 www.holidaysineverett.com © 2013
p. 162 www.wizfactorystudios.com © 2013
p. 162 www.landsend.com © 2013
p. 162 http://oldnavy.gap.com © 2013
p. 162 http://tasarimgezegeni.com/2014/en © 2013
p. 163 www.sears.com © 2013
p. 163 www.cafepress.com © 2013
p. 163 http://ainsworthelementary.org/hometour © 2013
p. 163 http://arketi.com/holiday2013 © 2013
p. 166 www.theyounger.co.uk © 2013
p. 166 www.nine.is © 2013
p. 166 http://paywhatyouwant.eu © 2013
p. 166 www.bloomberg.com © 2013
p. 167 www.kennedyandoswald.com © 2013
p. 167 http://mymail.my.com © 2013
p. 167 http://aleeforoughi.com © 2013
p. 167 http://wandaprint.com/home © 2013
p. 168 www.positiveadvertising.co.uk © 2013
p. 168 http://litbloc.com © 2013
p. 168 http://adcade.com © 2013
p. 168 www.julianabicycles.com © 2013
p. 170 http://drwoe.nl © 2013
p. 170 http://96elephants.org © 2013
p. 171 www.allesistgut.ru © 2013
p. 171 www.evver.com © 2013
p. 172 http://squidcompression.com © 2013
p. 172 http://davidboyero.com © 2013
p. 174 http://rainjar.co © 2013
p. 174 www.dearmum.org © 2013
p. 174 www.vacheron-constantin.co/m/en/
metiers-d-art-ﬂ orilege © 2013
p. 174 http://reducing-the-obvious.de © 2013
p. 175 www.mijlo.com/essentials © 2013
p. 175 www.justrightforchildren.com © 2013
p. 175 http://makeyourmoneymatter.org © 2013
p. 175 http://150px.com © 2013
p. 176 http://themeat.in © 2013
p. 176 www.atomkyrkan.se © 2013
p. 176 www.hioscar.com © 2013
p. 176 www.cultivatedwit.com © 2013
p. 178 http://serveseattle.org © 2013
p. 178 www.thepetedesign.com © 2013
p. 178 www.ridebarstow.com © 2013
p. 178 www.ﬁ llet.com.br © 2013
265
INDEX

p. 179 www.jkdesign.com © 2013
p. 179 www.stefaneguilbaud.com © 2013
p. 179 http://mattiecsboy.com © 2013
p. 179 www.lattrapereve.fr © 2013
p. 180 http://gutsandgloryand.us © 2013
p. 180 http://rule-of-three.co.uk © 2013
p. 180 www.knucklesindustries.com © 2013
p. 180 http://newmansﬁ sh.com © 2013
p. 182 www.theforestersmusic.com © 2013
p. 182 www.adidasretailjobs.com © 2013
p. 182 www.protest.eu/en © 2013
p. 182 www.lacoste.com/polo © 2013
p. 183 www.santanarow.com © 2013
p. 183 http://thebotanist.com.au © 2013
p. 183 www.citan.mercedes.fr © 2013
p. 183 http://shopmack.com © 2013
p. 184 http://remotejobs.io © 2013
p. 184 www.digitalpod.co.uk © 2013
p. 184 http://2013.unknowncroatia.com © 2013
p. 184 www.ﬂ uttuo.com © 2013
p. 185 http://50north5th.com © 2013
p. 185 www.mcdonalds.co.uk/ukhome/promotions/
favourites.html © 2013
p. 185 www.wacom.com/en/us © 2013
p. 185 http://transferwindow.info © 2013
p. 187 http://calester.com © 2013
p. 187 www.greyp-bikes.com © 2013
p. 187 http://mediaboom.com © 2013
p. 187 http://smashingconf.com/ny-2014 © 2013
p. 188 www.seoulplaza.sk/en © 2013
p. 188 www.teamgeek.co.za © 2013
p. 188 http://vvicrew.com © 2013
p. 188 www.countryhearthbreads.com/no © 2013
p. 189 http://sports.canalsat.fr © 2013
p. 189 www.yribarren.com/gtsmart © 2013
p. 189 www.trask-industries.com © 2013
p. 189 www.pinpointsocial.com © 2013
p. 191 https://basecamp.com © 2013
p. 191 www.mint.com © 2013
p. 191 www.penﬂ ip.com © 2013
p. 191 https://onor.co © 2013
p. 192 https://hootsuite.com © 2013
p. 192 https://creatavist.com/cms © 2013
p. 192 http://atmail.com/cloudnow © 2013
p. 192 http://sitedrop.com © 2013
p. 193 www.lodgify.com © 2013
p. 193 www.cvrater.com © 2013
p. 193 www.getcellarapp.com © 2013
p. 193 www.addpoll.com © 2013
p. 195 http://circleapp.com © 2013
p. 195 http://semcompass.com © 2013
p. 195 www.ristojob.it © 2013
p. 195 http://tonychester.com © 2013
p. 196 www.avalancheranch.com © 2013
p. 196 http://tailormade.pl © 2013
p. 196 www.bucketlistly.com © 2013
p. 196 www.musicaddictdesigner.com © 2013
p. 197 http://insandoutsapp.com © 2013
p. 197 www.mehdi-benyounes.com/fr © 2013
p. 197 www.thehippohouse.com © 2013
p. 197 www.suavia.it © 2013
p. 199 http://blog.ticketmaster.co.uk/festival-quiz © 2013
p. 199 http://timmytompkinsapp.com © 2013
p. 199 http://alkopedia.dareville.com © 2013
p. 199 www.hellojameshsu.com © 2013
p. 200 www.chrome.com/supersyncsports © 2013
p. 200 www.pedalingnowhere.com © 2013
p. 200 www.mrvisual.info © 2013
p. 200 http://bigtop.it © 2013
p. 201 www.the53rdparallel.com © 2013
p. 201 www.aprijic.com © 2013
p. 201 www.ejectorseat.co.uk © 2013
p. 201 http://teslathemes.com © 2013
p. 203 www.diesel.com/collection-diesel-home © 2013
p. 203 http://moto.oakley.com © 2013
p. 203 www.obabyapp.com © 2013
p. 203 http://hthworldwide.net © 2013
p. 204 www.phytech.com © 2013
p. 204 www.mgo.com/dinner © 2013
p. 204 http://lookbook.bolia.com © 2013
p. 204 www.posterista.co.uk © 2013
p. 205 www.mahedineyahia.fr © 2013
p. 205 www.paperandpaint.dk © 2013
p. 205 http://pacelaw.com © 2013
p. 205 www.sosglobal.eu/en © 2013
p. 206 www.urbotip.com © 2013
p. 206 http://aynibrigade.com © 2013
p. 206 http://go.angrybirds.com © 2013
p. 206 www.librotecaelgatodecheshire.es © 2013
p. 208 www.designeat.com © 2013
p. 208 www.altek.com.tw/cubic © 2013
p. 208 www.kitchenaid.com.br © 2013
p. 208 http://lookbook.bolia.com © 2013
p. 209 www.bagigia.com © 2013
p. 209 www.parrot.com/ﬂ owerpower/en © 2013
p. 209 http://ﬁ xedagency.com © 2013
p. 209 http://unabridgedsoftware.com © 2013
p. 210 http://blood-and-water.animalplanet.com © 2013
p. 210 http://ayr.com © 2013
p. 210 http://ganau.com © 2013
p. 210 http://sustainability.bam.co.uk © 2013
p. 212 www.healinghistories.org © 2013
p. 212 http://fudgehouse.co.uk © 2013
p. 212 http://2014.inspireconf.com © 2013
p. 212 www.merchantsonlong.com © 2013
p. 213 www.lulamag.com © 2013
p. 213 www.villagrazioli.com © 2013
p. 213 http://jrichardhill.com © 2013
p. 213 http://alicia-aubry.com © 2013
p. 214 http://thebarrelhouseﬂ at.com © 2013
p. 214 www.lizsbooksnuggery.com © 2013
p. 214 https://hobancards.com © 2013
p. 214 www.giardinopollensa.com © 2013
p. 216 http://couleecreative.com © 2013
p. 216 www.spotify.com/uk/video-splash © 2013
p. 216 http://ony.ru © 2013
p. 216 http://whenwasthelasttimeyoudidsomethingfor
theﬁ rsttime.eastpak.com © 2013
p. 217 http://riskeverything.us © 2013
p. 217 www.lattrapereve.fr © 2013
p. 217 www.whiteroomuk.com © 2013
p. 217 http://whiteboard.is © 2013
266

p. 218 http://telly.comabout © 2013
p. 218 www.lifeofpimovie.com © 2013
p. 218 www.dadaabstories.org © 2013
p. 218 www.nike.com/us/en_us/c/jordan/
nike-jordan © 2013
p. 220 http://navasca.com/nate © 2013
p. 220 http://perspectivewoodworks.com © 2013
p. 220 http://neolab.no © 2013
p. 220 www.paseodegracia.com/en © 2013
p. 221 www.lp-sf.com © 2013
p. 221 www.iamyuna.com © 2013
p. 221 www.mosne.it © 2013
p. 221 www.bellecour.fr © 2013
p. 222 www.hihayk.com © 2013
p. 222 www.case-3d.com © 2013
p. 222 http://builtbybuffalo.com © 2013
p. 222 www.acheproducciones.com © 2013
p. 223 www.anet-design.cz © 2013
p. 223 http://webey.eu © 2013
p. 223 http://hellohikimori.com © 2013
p. 223 www.elrecibidor.com/es/home © 2013
p. 226 www.caddis.co © 2013
p. 226 http://now.lincoln.com © 2013
p. 227 www.curadmir.com/home © 2013
p. 227 www.somewhat.cc/case-study/
lsn-global-app © 2013
p. 228 http://longsrx.com © 2013
p. 228 www.sketchin.ch/en © 2013
p. 230 http://ilovedust.com © 2013
p. 230 http://rsq.com/work/projects © 2013
p. 231 www.erikford.me © 2013
p. 231 http://rodmclean.com © 2013
p. 232 http://regentaucher.com/portfolio/portraits © 2013
p. 232 http://mamochotena.pl © 2013
p. 233 www.usm.com/en-us © 2013
p. 233 www.emmytwenty.com © 2013
p. 235 www.herschelsupply.com © 2013
p. 235 www.footballasfootball.com © 2013
p. 236 http://worldwildlife.org © 2013
p. 236 www.japantimes.co.jp © 2013
p. 237 www.whisperism.com © 2013
p. 237 www.oztera.com © 2013
p. 239 www.louisxivenergy.com © 2013
p. 239 http://www3.hbc.com © 2013
p. 241 www.currys.co.uk/gbuk/o/initorder/
basket-conﬁ rmation.html © 2013
p. 241 https://us.suitsupply.com/ondemandware.store/
Sites-US-Site/en_US/Cart-Show © 2013
p. 242 www.ofﬁ cialhtcstore.com
/uk/p_htc_store_basket.aspx © 2013
p. 242 www.motelrocks.com/cart.php © 2013
p. 243 http://kershaw.kaiusaltd.com/cart © 2013
p. 243 www.buru-buru.com/checkout/cart © 2013
p. 245 http://whil.com © 2013
p. 245 https://login.salesforce.com © 2013
p. 246 www.starbucks.com/account/signin © 2013
p. 246 https://launchpad.37signals.com/
campﬁ re/signin © 2013
p. 247 www.naspa.org/login © 2013
p. 247 https://vllg.com/login © 2013
p. 249 www.jimnnicks.com © 2013
p. 250 www.garmin.com © 2013
p. 251 http://cir.ca © 2013
p. 250 http://outpostdallas.com © 2013
p. 251 www.dixieﬁ sh.com © 2013
p. 249 www.kiwibank.co.nz © 2013
p. 252 http://2013.ampersandconf.com © 2013
p. 252 www.khanacademy.org © 2013
p. 254 www.gostowe.com © 2013
p. 254 http://hiutdenim.co.uk © 2013
p. 255 http://82birds.com © 2013
p. 255 www.marcogrill.com © 2013
p. 256 http://hlynnphoto.com © 2013
p. 256 http://bunq.co.uk © 2013
p. 258 www.uvm.edu © 2013
p. 258 http://hilo.hawaii.edu/~advising © 2013
p. 259 http://zioneceramica.es © 2013
p. 259 www.oxotower.co.uk © 2013
p. 260 http://muumilaakso.tampere.ﬁ  © 2013
p. 260 http://justoneeye.com © 2013
p. 261 http://adrianstourdefrance.com/event/tdf © 2013
p. 261 www.operadeparis.fr © 2013
267
INDEX

More Great Titles from HOW Books
the ultimate guide to trends, themes and styles in mobile web design
MOBILE WEB
DESIGNER’S IDEA BOOK
PATRICK McNEIL, bestselling author of The Web Designer’s Idea Book series
The Mobile Web Designer’s Idea Book
| Patrick McNeil
The Mobile Web Designer’s Idea Book takes a close 
look at trends, styles, themes and patterns in mobile 
web design. You’ll ﬁ nd the inspiration you need for 
your web design project as well as advice for analyz-
ing trends and patterns that you can use to achieve 
the best mobile websites around. You’ll ﬁ nd over 550 
web design examples of the best mobile ebsites on 
the web today, along with commentary about what 
makes each of them great.
Above the Fold, Revised Edition
| Brian Miller
Above the Fold, Revised Edition breaks down the 
timeless fundamentals of effective communication 
within the context of web design, and presents them 
in an easy-to-understand format. Setting itself apart 
from other books on technology trends or timely de-
sign, this edition explores the essential aspects of 
good web design that won’t go out of style, in order 
to effectively explain the thought process web design-
ers go through when developing a successful web site.
Special Offer From 
HOW Books!
You can get 15% off your entire 
order at MyDesignShop.com! 
All you have to do is go to www.
howdesign.com/howbooks-offer 
and sign up for our free 
e-newsletter on graphic design. 
You’ll also get a free digital 
download of HOW magazine.
For more news, tips and 
articles, follow us at 
Twitter.com/HOWbrand
For behind-the-scenes 
information and special offers, 
become a fan at Facebook.
com/HOWmagazine
For visual inspiration, follow us 
at Pinterest.com/HOWbrand
Find these books and many others at MyDesignShop.com or your local bookstore.

WEB DESIGN
DISCOVER THE LATEST TRENDS IN WEB DESIGN
Looking for inspiration for your latest web design project? Expert Patrick McNeil, author of 
the popular Web Designer’s Idea Book series, is back with all new examples of today’s best 
website design. Featuring more than 650 examples of the latest trends, this forth volume of The Web 
Designer’s Idea Book is overfl owing with visual inspiration. 
Arranged categorically, this fully illustrated guide puts important topics like design styles, elements, 
themes and responsive design at your fi ngertips. This new volume also includes a detailed discussion 
of portfolios to help you stay ahead of the pack and keep your portfolio fresh and relevant. 
The world of web design is constantly reinventing itself. Stay on top of what’s hot  with the latest 
installment of this indispensable reference. 
EAN
U7581
 FnL1 04 0124 
01 JUYrVyBQdWJsaWNhdGlvbnMsIEluYyAo 
02 SW9sYSBkaXZpc2lvbikPR3JlZ29yeSBL 
03 cnVlZ2VyAFPWOdQEMTAuNAI4MAExBkVB 
04 Ti0xMw05NzgxNDQwMzMzMTU2AA== 
781440
333156
9
53500
ISBN-10: 1-4403-3315-7
ISBN-13: 978-1-4403-3315-6
US $35.00
(CAN $39.99)
 FnL1 04 0120 
01 JUYrVyBQdWJsaWNhdGlvbnMsIEluYyAo 
02 SW9sYSBkaXZpc2lvbikPR3JlZ29yeSBL 
03 cnVlZ2VyAFPWOmICMTMDMTAwATEFVVBD 
04 LUEMMDM1MzEzNjU5MDcyWA== 
35313 65907
0
2
UPC

