The Third Wave of Agile
By Charlie Rudd

THE THIRD WAVE OF AGILE
2
www.SolutionsIQ.com | @SolutionsIQ | #AgileUP
By Charlie Rudd
By Charlie Rudd
We can view the history of Agile as a social movement comprising three waves. Each 
wave represents a developmental phase in the practice of Agile that has changed the 
nature of the movement, while increasing the sweep of its influence. A wave begins 
when people begin to organize around innovative practices to solve a problem and as 
it grows in magnitude a distinct community of practice begins to emerge. At first, as the 
emergent community searches for answers, divergent opinion grows. Later on, when 
the community assimilates differences, opinions converge. When practices stabilize 
and a consensus forms on how to use them to consistently achieve good results, the 
wave is complete. A new wave begins and the cycle is repeated when the community of 
practice shifts its attention to a new problem.
Below is a simple illustration of the three waves of the Agile social movement.
The Third Wave of Agile
The Third Wave of Agile
Agile Teams
Agile at Scale
Business Agility
2000
Convergent Opinion
Divergent Opinion
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2009
2010
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Agile Manifesto published
1
The Enterprise and Scrum
2
Scaling Lean and Agile Development
3
The Principles of Product Development FLOW
4
“Leader’s Guide to Radical Management”
Management 3.0
5
Agile Coaching Institute founded
6
PMI-ACP Certification launched
7
SAFe released
8
“Why Lean Startup Changes Everything”
9
Three-Wave Milestones

THE THIRD WAVE OF AGILE
3
www.SolutionsIQ.com | @SolutionsIQ | #AgileUP
The objective of the first wave was to stand up 
a small Agile team to produce better software. 
It began when the Agile industry began, with 
the publication of the Agile Manifesto in 2001. 
Although initially what constituted an effective 
team practice was furiously debated, over time 
a consensus emerged. Today there is general 
agreement within the Agile industry that by 
properly using practices such as Scrum and 
Extreme Programming we can establish an 
effective Agile software delivery team pretty 
much anywhere, we can say the first wave is 
complete.
Let’s note two events that signaled the end 
of the first wave. The first was the founding 
of the Agile Coaching Institute (ACI) in 2010. 
Before the Agile industry, there was no such 
thing as team coaching for knowledge workers 
in a business setting. Today team coaching 
is widely accepted as the most effective way 
to develop an Agile team. The ACI’s mission 
is to establish team coaching as an industry 
competency. The warm reception that the ACI’s 
efforts have received by the team coaching 
segment of the Agile community demonstrates 
industry agreement on what constitutes the 
practice of team coaching.
The second was the introduction of the PMI 
ACP Agile certification in 2012. The nature 
of the PMI organization makes it a lagging 
indicator. When the PMI institutionalizes a set 
of practices, they have by then largely been 
accepted by the global project management 
community.
Two work domains are within the scope of the 
first wave: software development and project 
management, which respectively correspond 
to the dominant Agile team practices, Extreme 
Programming and Scrum. Although it’s true 
that the mission for the Scrum Alliance and 
the PMI extends to all projects and there are 
examples of Agile teams outside of software 
development, when compared to the software 
development industry, where Agile is rapidly 
becoming the standard practice, Agile in other 
domains is still early in their respective wave 
cycles. The software industry, however, has 
progressed well into the second wave of Agile, 
Agile at Scale.
The First Wave: Agile Teams
The First Wave: Agile Teams
The objective of the first 
wave was to stand up a 
small Agile team to produce 
better software. It began... 
with the publication of the 
Agile Manifesto.

THE THIRD WAVE OF AGILE
4
www.SolutionsIQ.com | @SolutionsIQ | #AgileUP
The objective of the second wave is to 
integrate and coordinate work across 
Agile teams, while sustaining Agile teams 
in an institutional setting. Scaling Agile is 
fundamentally different from standing up an 
Agile team, since what works well for a small 
group of people does not easily translate to a 
large group of people.
I’ll peg the start of the second wave at about 
2007, the year that The Enterprise and Scrum 
was published by Ken Schwaber. Although 
this book was not particularly influential at 
the time, it did signal that the community 
of practice had begun to seriously grapple 
with issues regarding the use of Agile in 
larger organizations. In 2008 Larman and 
Bodde published Scaling Lean and Agile 
Development, a more comprehensive 
approach that reflects a maturing industry view. 
More recently, the Scaled Agile Framework 
(SAFe), a set of practices gleaned from the 
Agile community and packaged as “best 
practices” for scaling Agile, was published 
in 2011 by Dean Leffingwell. SAFe took off 
like a rocket demonstrating that the industry 
attention had decidedly shifted from teams 
to scaling. Although adopted at least in part 
by many, SAFe remains controversial. Broadly 
speaking, community opinion has yet to 
converge. The second wave is still building.
As we might expect, the work domains of the 
first wave (software development and project 
management) are within the scope of scaled 
Agile initiatives. However, what sometimes 
comes as a surprise to the sponsors of these 
initiatives is that their scope extends beyond 
software development to include other kinds 
of work—at least when they are successful. 
Additional work domains include business 
analysis, product management, operations, 
as well as a variety of middle management 
roles. In fact, as organizations pursue Agile 
transformations, the scope of the initiative 
tends to increase over time to include more 
and more of the value stream of which software 
development is merely one part. In addition, 
corporate functions that support value stream 
such as HR, PMO, Operations and Facilities are 
also affected if not transformed.
The Second Wave:
Agile at Scale
The Second Wave:
Agile at Scale
As 
organizations 
pursue 
Agile transformations, the 
scope of the initiative tends 
to increase over time to 
include more and more of 
the value stream.

THE THIRD WAVE OF AGILE
5
www.SolutionsIQ.com | @SolutionsIQ | #AgileUP
We discussed how the first wave gave birth to a 
new discipline: team coaching. A new discipline 
is also emerging from the second wave: Agile 
organizational change management (OCM). What 
makes Agile OCM different from its predecessors 
is the encapsulation of core Agile principles such 
as transparency, empowerment and feedback-
driven adaptation into the change management 
process. When the community of practice 
establishes a consensus regarding the practice of 
Agile OCM, we will have a solid indicator that the 
cycle of the second wave is nearing completion.
The expanding scope of scaled Agile 
transformations points us toward the emergence 
of the third wave of Agile: Business Agility.
The Agile Transformation begins with Delivery Teams and over time incorporates
more and more of the value stream and ripples across the broader organization.
BROADER ORGANIZATION
DELIVERY
TEAMS
STREAM
VALUE
Finance
Governance
Human Resources
Facilities

THE THIRD WAVE OF AGILE
6
www.SolutionsIQ.com | @SolutionsIQ | #AgileUP
The objective of the third wave is to 
transform how we charter, lead and manage 
organizations by shifting to an Agile mindset, 
fostering a culture of organizational learning, 
and adopting organization-wide Agile 
operations. As we shift our attention to general 
management and leadership practices, our 
subject broadens to include all knowledge 
work domains and the entire organization.
We can identify several crossover events that 
signal a shift of attention toward Business 
Agility. Jurgen Appelo’s Management 3.0 
published in 2010 discusses how the role of 
manager needs to change to support the 
emerging needs of empowered Agile teams. 
Management 3.0 can be seen as part of the 
Agile at Scale wave, since it addresses the 
need to redraft the manager role, which 
is caused by the growth of Agile teams. 
Nevertheless it can also be seen as a step 
towards Business Agility since it’s focused 
exclusively on the domain of management, 
which has largely fallen outside the Agile 
at Scale purview. In The Leader’s Guide to 
Radical Management also published in 2010, 
Steve Denning abstracts from Agile practices 
(especially from Scrum) new patterns to be 
applied to the work of general management, 
business strategy and business operations. 
And then there is The Lean Startup, which took 
the world by storm when it was published in 
2011. Although Eric Ries was writing about his 
experience at a software startup where Agile 
software development practices were used, 
initially it had a bigger impact outside the Agile 
movement than within it. In fact it spawned 
a movement of its own, which draws not just 
from the venture community but also from 
well established, large organizations, most 
notably GE. Even more relevant was the 2013 
publication of “Why The Lean Startup Changes 
Everything” in the Harvard Business Review by 
Ries’ mentor Steven Blank. Blank makes the 
case to the general management audience 
that Lean Startup principles—essentially Agile 
principles—should and will broadly change 
business and management practices.
The Third Wave:
Business Agility
The Third Wave:
Business Agility
As we shift our attention to 
general management and 
leadership practices, our 
subject broadens to include 
all knowledge work domains 
and the entire organization.

THE THIRD WAVE OF AGILE
7
www.SolutionsIQ.com | @SolutionsIQ | #AgileUP
With each new wave, the scope of the Agile 
movement has broadened to include new 
work and problem domains. The initial focus 
on software development has expanded 
to include all forms of knowledge work 
including design, engineering, marketing 
and management. And the initial focus on 
teams has expanded to encompass the 
entire organization. What unifies the Agile 
movement even as it changes and grows is a 
commitment to Agile principles and values. 
Over time, these have been abstracted from 
their origins in Scrum, Extreme Programming 
and the Agile Manifesto to have broader 
applicability and relevance, while remaining 
essentially unchanged. As mentioned above, 
these include concepts such as transparency, 
empowerment, collaboration and feedback-
driven adaptation, which reorganize our 
knowledge work into human-centered learning 
systems that inspire creativity and innovation.
Standing on the crest of the third wave, we 
remove our “software-tinted-glasses” and 
see an expanded horizon. One of the first 
things we see is our very own Agile principles 
reflecting back at us from other fields. A 
sampling of sympatico works that originated 
outside the Agile movement that are devoted 
to how knowledge work is transforming our 
ideas about work, creativity and management 
include Change By Design (Tim Brown, 2009), 
The Principles of Product Development FLOW 
(Donald G. Reinertsen, 2009), Where Good 
Ideas Come From (Steven Johnson, 2010), and 
Drive (Dan Pink, 2011). A different sampling 
that reflects what we have come to understand 
as Agile principles discusses how complexity 
science is transforming our views of leadership, 
markets and organizations, if not our view of 
the world. This includes A Leader’s Framework 
for Decision-Making (Snowden & Boone, 
2007), The Tipping Point (Malcolm Gladwell, 
2000), and Antifragility (Nassim Taleb, 2012). 
Going back to the 1990’s, it’s a no-brainer to 
cite Peter Senge’s The Fifth Discipline: the 
Art and Practice of the Learning Organization 
as well. We can now look into our back yard 
and more easily recognize that the previously 
noted Steve Denning was a proponent of Agile 
The Evolution of the Agile
Movement
The Evolution of the Agile
Movement
What 
unifies 
the 
Agile 
movement even as it changes 
and grows is a commitment 
to 
Agile 
principles 
and 
values.

THE THIRD WAVE OF AGILE
8
www.SolutionsIQ.com | @SolutionsIQ | #AgileUP
principles (by another name) in his home field of 
business management long before he became 
part of the Agile movement (and probably before 
it existed).
Once we in the Agile movement get outside of 
ourselves, we can see that the software industry 
is only one of many fields that are converging 
on a common set of new values, principles and 
methods that are transforming the world of 
business.

THE THIRD WAVE OF AGILE
9
www.SolutionsIQ.com | @SolutionsIQ | #AgileUP
References and Resources
References and Resources
The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization. Senge, Peter. 
1990.
The Tipping Point. Gladwell, Malcolm. 2000.
The Enterprise and Scrum. Schwaber, Ken. 2007.
“A Leader’s Framework for Decision-Making.” Snowden, David J. & Boone, Mary E. 
2007. Harvard Business Review.
Scaling Lean and Agile Development. Larman, Craig & Vodde, Bas. 2008.
Change By Design. Brown, Tim. 2009.
Drive. Pink, Daniel H. 2009.
Where Good Ideas Come From. Johnson, Steven. 2011.
The Principles of Product Development FLOW: Second Generation Lean Product 
Development. Reinertsen, Donald G. 2009.
Management 3.0. Appelo, Jurgen. 2010.
“The Leader’s Guide to Radical Management.” Denning, Steve. 2010.
The Lean Startup. Ries, Eric. 2011.
Antifragility. Taleb, Nassim. 2012.
“Why the Lean Startup Changes Everything.” Blank, Steve. 2013. Harvard Business 
Review.
The Third Wave of Agile
The Third Wave of Agile

THE THIRD WAVE OF AGILE
10
10
The Third Wave 
of Agile
www.SolutionsIQ.com | @SolutionsIQ | #AgileUP
Want to learn more?
Visit SolutionsIQ.com!
EMAIL: info@solutionsiq.com
TOLL-FREE: 1-800-235-4091
DIRECT: 1-425-451-2727
Want to learn more?
Visit SolutionsIQ.com!
EMAIL: info@solutionsiq.com
TOLL-FREE: 1-800-235-4091
DIRECT: 1-425-451-2727

