THE EVOLUTION 
OF DEVELOPMENT 
THINKING
POLITICS, 
ECONOMICS, 
AND INCLUSIVE 
DEVELOPMENT
William Ascher
Garry D. Brewer
G. Shabbir Cheema
and John M. Heﬀ ron
Governance, Economics, 
Assistance, and Security

 The Evolution of Development Thinking 

 POLITICS, ECONOMICS, AND INCLUSIVE DEVELOPMENT 
 Series E ditors 
 William Ascher, Claremont McKenna College 
 Natalia Mirovitskaya, Duke University 
 Shane Joshua Barter, Soka University of America 
 Politics, Economics, and Inclusive Development focuses on promoting humanistic development by publishing 
single- or multi-authored monographs. Th ese books use an interdisciplinary approach to understand 
the current challenges facing individual nations, world regions, or the entire global system in pursuing 
peaceful, democratic, and technically sound approaches to sustainable development. 
 Economic Development Strategies and the Evolution of Violence in Latin America 
 Edited by William Ascher and Natalia Mirovitskaya 
 Development Strategies, Identities, and Confl ict in Asia 
 Edited by William Ascher and Natalia Mirovitskaya 
 Th e Economic Roots of Confl ict and Cooperation in Africa 
 Edited by William Ascher and Natalia Mirovitskaya 
 Civilian Strategy in Civil War: Insights from Indonesia, Th ailand, and the Philippines 
 Shane Joshua Barter 
 Smallholders and the Non-Farm Transition in Latin America 
 Isabel H arbaugh 
 Development Strategies and Inter-Group Violence: Insights on Confl ict-Sensitive Development 
 William Ascher and Natalia Mirovitskaya 
 Th e Evolution of Development Th inking: Governance, Economics, Assistance, and Security 
 William Ascher, Garry D. Brewer, G. Shabbir Cheema, and John M. Heff ron 

 The Evolution of Development 
Thinking 
 Governance, Economics, Assistance, 
and Security 
Prepared under the auspices of the
Pacific Basin Research Center,
Soka University of America
 
 
 William  Ascher ,  Garry D.  Brewer ,  G. Shabbir  Cheema , and 
 John M.  Heffron 

 THE EVOLUTION OF DEVELOPMENT THINKING
Copyright © William Ascher, Garry D. Brewer, G. Shabbir Cheema, and 
John M. Heffron 2016
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this publication 
may be made without written permission. No portion of this publication 
may be reproduced, copied or transmitted save with written permission. In 
accordance with the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 
1988, or under the terms of any licence permitting limited copying issued by 
the Copyright Licensing Agency, Saffron House, 6-10 Kirby Street, London 
EC1N 8TS.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication 
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
First published 2016 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN
The authors have asserted their rights to be identified as the authors of this 
work in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited, 
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke, 
Hampshire, RG21 6XS. 
Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of Nature America, Inc., One 
New York Plaza, Suite 4500, New York, NY 10004-1562.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies 
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
ISBN: 978-1-349-57539-8
E-PDF ISBN: 978–1–137–56039–1
DOI: 10.1057/9781137560391
Distribution in the UK, Europe and the rest of the world is by Palgrave 
Macmillan®, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited, registered in England, 
company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Ascher, William.
Title: The evolution of development thinking : governance, economics, 
assistance, and security / William Ascher, Garry Brewer, Shabbir Cheema, 
and John M. Heffron.
Description: New York City : Palgrave Macmillan, [2015] | Includes 
bibliographical references.
Identifiers: LCCN 2015022379
Subjects: LCSH: Economic development—Developing countries. | Economic 
assistance—Developing countries. | Internal security—Developing 
countries. | Developing countries—Economic conditions.
Classification: LCC HC59.7 .A8339 2015 | DDC 338.9009172/4—dc23 LC 
record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2015022379
A catalogue record for the book is available from the British Library.  
 Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 2016 978-1-137-56038-4

 To future generations of development scholars and practitioners 
who will take the lead in advancing human dignity.


Contents 
 List of Illustrations 
 ix
Preface 
xi
Acknowledgments 
xiii 
 Chapter 1  Introduction 
 1 
 Chapter 2  Evolution of Economic Development Theories and 
Doctrines since World War II 
 15 
 Chapter 3  Economic Policy and Program Practice 
 41 
 Chapter 4  Evolution of Governance and Development Administration 
Theory 
 67 
 Chapter 5  Evolution of Governance and Development Administration 
Practice 
 85 
 Chapter 6  Evolving Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries 
 107 
 Chapter 7  Evolution of Foreign Assistance Theories and Doctrines 
 133 
 Chapter 8  International Development in the American Grain: From 
Point Four to the Present 
 149 
 Chapter 9  Evolving Roles of the Military in Developing Countries 
 167 
 Chapter 10  Complementarity of Security and Development Doctrines: 
Historical Cases and Aftermaths 
 189 
 Chapter 11  Conclusion: Linkages and Challenges 
 209 
 Notes 
 221 
 References 
 235 
 Index 
 263 


 Illustrations 
 Figure 
 4.1 Shifts in the paradigms of development and government 
 76 
 Tables 
 2.1  Growth rates of developing regions, GDP, and GDP per capita in 
constant (1990) dollars, 1950–1999 
 21 
 3.1  Proportions of population living below $1.25 and $2 per day in 
developing regions 
 44 
 5.1  Generic examples of UNDP grants through the service lines/entry 
points of democratic governance 
 99 
 5.2 Governance perspectives of donors and international organizations 
 102 
 6.1 Eras of NGO emphases 
 108 
 6.2 NGO mission and organizational spectrum 
 116 
 8.1 US foreign aid, 1946–2012 
 151 
 9.1 Eras of military roles and civil-military relations 
 168


Preface
T
his book, the eighth in the Palgrave Macmillan’s Politics, Economics, and 
Inclusive Development series, shares with the other volumes the commitment 
to explore the complex task of simultaneously pursuing economic growth, 
broad participation and equity, democratic peace, and sustainability.
The collaboration that produced this book was motivated by the recognition that 
progress in addressing the aspirations of people in developing countries has been very 
mixed, in terms of both the soundness of approaches and the results. A broad assess-
ment, recognizing both achievements and faltering, is needed to determine why some 
very promising theories have not been translated into doctrines and why some sound 
doctrines have not been in evidence in development practice.
But rather than just rail against the slippage from theories to doctrines to prac-
tice, we try to understand the dynamics that stand in the way of sound practice. 
We explore, for example, how fundamental goals of enhancing human dignity in its 
multiple dimensions give way to lesser objectives, how development objectives are 
often dominated by security concerns, and how technical uncertainty allows political 
decisions to masquerade as simply technical.
The unusual length of this book reflects our realization, based on our combined 
experience of more than 200 years of studying policy and policy processes, that the 
specialization on each of the constituent themes (governance, economic develop-
ment, foreign assistance, the roles of the military, and the roles of nongovernmental 
organizations) has largely neglected the interconnections among these challenges. 
Economic strategies have to take into account the limitations of governance; gov-
ernance must take into account the economic constraints on state capacity; foreign 
assistance must recognize the issues of security, economic needs, and governance. 
Nongovernmental organizations have to navigate the governance institutions, con-
tribute to economic development, and often collaborate with military initiatives or 
try to salvage people’s well-being in the aftermath of military actions.
Assessing the impact of development approaches across multiple world regions 
does yield many insights, but it should not be taken to mean that we have discov-
ered the one and only strategy that applies in all cases. The importance of context 
makes that aspiration foolish indeed. Rather, we hope that our readers will become 
more aware of the dynamics that have supported or thwarted progress and recognize 
that what may at first seem novel in development approaches would turn out not to 

xii  
●  Preface
be—this should lead to a fuller appreciation of the obstacles to mounting develop-
ment approaches. We have tried to emphasize the remaining challenges: fundamental 
disagreements about the theoretical and methodological bases for economic develop-
ment strategies; the tensions between governments and civil society; painful trade-
offs among the objectives of foreign assistance; and the uncertain future of the role 
of the military. It is most troubling that for many countries, economic policies and 
governance still limit meaningful participation, reinforce the systematic deprivation 
of marginalized people, and undermine personal security.

Acknowledgments
W
e gratefully recognize the support each of us has received over the 
years from our home institutions: Claremont McKenna College, Yale 
University, the East-West Center, and Soka University of America. We 
are especially thankful to the Pacific Basin Research Center of Soka University of 
America, whose financial and staff support made this collaboration possible. 

 CHAPTER 1 
 Introduction 
 T
his book assesses the trends in development theories, doctrines, and practices 
for developing countries since World War II (WWII). Development think-
ing and practice span a wide range of areas. The broadest are development 
economics and economic management, and governance and development admin-
istration. No less important are the foreign assistance theories and approaches and 
the roles of key institutions within and beyond conventional government entities, 
particularly the armed forces and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). 
 Our assessment will show that compelling theories and doctrines have been devel-
oped and applied at various times in various places. The agenda has expanded to 
address a much broader range of the dimensions of human development than what 
prevailed prior to the 1970s. More robust mechanisms for citizen participation and 
more effective and inclusive governance now characterize the development process. 
Foreign aid doctrines have shed some of their more problematic aspects. NGOs have 
refined their missions to more clearly distinguish themselves from governmental ini-
tiatives and, consequently, have more constructive interactions with governments. 
Yet the most troubling conclusions are that some compelling approaches, both old 
and new, have been abandoned, ignored, or distorted, and thorny issues remain unre-
solved. The balance between economic efficiency and the protection of vulnerable 
people, when not tilting in favor of the former, is often elusive, as are constructive 
roles of the armed forces. Foreign assistance is often caught between humanitarian 
and geopolitical motives and faces uncertainties regarding its effectiveness. 
 For this introduction, it is useful first to clarify our standpoint for assessing the 
progress and challenges of development. Success or failure, progress or regression, 
depends on the goals we seek. Unrealistic goals lead to unrealistic expectations, which 
almost always lead to poor results. 
 Next we outline key factors that drive the evolution of theories, doctrines, and 
practice. It is not enough simply to document changes and remaining challenges—
further progress requires understanding of how theories, doctrines, and practices 
change and how constraints on them arise. To make sense of the complex changes 
and obstacles that have emerged over the past half century, we devote most of this 

2  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
introduction to the dynamics involved in the evolution of theories and doctrines and 
then to the translation of doctrines into practices, across all spheres covered in the 
book. 
 We define development theory as a body of causal propositions that in principle 
anticipate the consequences of specific policies, strategies, or other actions. Behind 
many development theories are analytic methods that are employed to generate the 
projected consequences. This is particularly relevant for the applications of devel-
opment economics. A doctrine is a set of principles that can guide the selection of 
particular policies, strategies, or other actions. Practice consists of these policies, strat-
egies, and other actions undertaken by government officials or other actors. 
 Our Standpoint 
 Recounting the patterns of development thought and action could be conducted as a 
straightforward history, to put the broader history of the developing world into con-
text or to honor brilliant thinkers who revolutionized approaches to development. 
Many histories of development thinking have already been written (e.g., Chenery 
1975; Dorfman 1991; Bevir, Rhodes, and Weller 2003; Meier 2004). However, few 
satisfy the requirements to be both problem-oriented and diagnostic—limitations we 
attempt to rectify.  1 Our concern is to recast and contextualize the obstacles to pro-
viding greater material and nonmaterial benefits to the broadest range of people and 
to identify approaches to overcome these obstacles. Undoubtedly, impressive prog-
ress has been made in improving the robustness of development theories, whether 
addressing economics, governance, or the roles of particular institutions. Yet there is 
also no doubt that social, political, and economic development has faltered badly in 
many countries. These facts raise crucial questions. If breakthroughs in theory and 
doctrine have been made, why have improvements in practice been so limited? Why 
has the identification of effective development approaches been so difficult? Why has 
so much slippage occurred between the creation of compelling approaches and the 
policies and programs that have been enacted? If the goal is greater human dignity, 
what further conceptual and intellectual breakthroughs, effectively enacted, would 
lead to its achievement? 
 Our intent is not to condemn; we mean to be as alert to development successes as 
to failures. Some Millennium goals have been exceeded, and some very poor coun-
tries as of 1950, such as South Korea or Norway, are now significant foreign assis-
tance donors, although such countries are often overlooked in studies that excoriate 
development efforts. 
 Uncertainty about how to evaluate the development record of particular coun-
tries extends to evaluating external institutions tasked with providing development 
guidance and operations. Bilateral aid agencies and international financial institu-
tions come under heavy fire for every subpar development effort undertaken. One 
conspicuous failure may well overshadow dozens of successes. Accusations that the 
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund are pawns of Western govern-
ments in imposing unwanted conditions overlook the fact that both institutions (and 
others like them) usually work hand in glove with the economic ministries, planning 
agencies, and development institutions within developing country governments. 

Introduction  ●  3
 Our Goals 
 To understand and assess the results of this evolution of development thinking and 
practice, it is crucial to specify the goals of development that guide our evaluation. 
This is separate from determining the goals that guide the decisions of particular 
policymakers. The policy sciences approach offers useful guidance:  We seek and value 
anything that contributes to the broadest shaping and sharing of valued human out-
comes. This guidance is sometimes summarized as  working to do whatever is possible to 
increase human dignity (Lasswell and McDougal 1992, 195). 
 Understanding the Evolution: Theories and Doctrines 
 The evolution of theory and doctrines emerges from many dynamics. At the base of 
this evolution is the formulation, acceptance, or rejection of theories about develop-
ment and the roles of policies and institutions. These theories may be rooted in expe-
rience, in general theories developed for other contexts (such as developed nations), 
or in the interests that various actors are pursuing. 
 Theories and doctrines may originate domestically or internationally. External 
institutions—foreign governments, militaries, NGOs, and international organiza-
tions—play multiple roles in developing and disseminating theories and doctrines 
and in advising and pressuring governments to adopt particular doctrines and prac-
tices. Their impacts reflect both direct actions, such as providing resources, and their 
influence on perspectives within the country. For example, Latin American mili-
tary officers trained in the US Inter-American Defense College are more likely to 
adopt the security doctrines presented in this institution. Economists from the same 
country trained in the same foreign university may carry back that university’s dis-
tinctive economic orientation: the so-called Chicago Boys in Chile or the Berkeley 
Mafia in Indonesia. Based on varying combinations of prestige, funding, personal 
connections, political pressure, and threats of coercion, these external actors often 
have major impacts on the adoption of theories and doctrines. Yet their influence is 
frequently contested by both internal and external actors. 
 The Constraints of Limited Information and Analysis 
 Theory development depends on information that is available  and reaches the focus of 
attention of those involved in thinking about development. In the early post-WWII 
period, fundamental information about crucial factors such as historical growth rates 
and income distribution was sparse even for developed nations. This is epitomized by 
the title of Wolfgang Stolper’s 1966 book on Nigerian economic policies,  Planning 
without Facts . There was only a dim understanding of Nigeria’s income distribution, 
the productivity of various economic activities, or how the governance and economic 
institutions would perform postindependence. Therefore, theories and doctrines 
were based on highly stylized, often simplistic depictions of political and economic 
dynamics. Even today, with poorly monitored informal economies in many develop-
ing countries, it is difficult to know with any degree of precision how the economy 
is doing and hence whether the doctrines underlying economic policy or foreign 

4  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
assistance need to be rethought. The same is true for informal governance—the ad 
hoc decisions on how to distribute government benefits, the unreported transactions 
between government officials and others—that makes it so difficult to assess whether 
governance approaches need to be changed. 
 In some cases, the plight of certain peoples is beyond the ken of experts and poli-
cymakers. For decades the Chilean census lacked any questions that could gauge the 
portion of the population comprised of indigenous Mapuches whose language and 
geographic isolation warranted special attention. 
 Theory and doctrine development is often severely challenged by the difficulty 
of recognizing problems that either emerge in changed circumstances or had been 
ignored in the past. The analytic limits to determine where a group’s interests lie, 
and to mount arguments in favor of particular doctrines or policies, often put low-
income people at a serious disadvantage. The growing efforts to offset this deficit, by 
NGOs, government agencies, and international organizations, constitute an impor-
tant part of the evolution of development practice. 
 The vacuum created by sparse knowledge regarding particular countries leads to 
dependence on importing theories and doctrines from other areas, frequently with 
perverse impacts. Without solid contextual knowledge, judging the appropriateness 
of imported theories and doctrines tends to be a futile exercise. A notorious example 
was the wholesale adoption of Latin American constitutions mimicking the US con-
stitution, in countries with radically different political cultures and socioeconomic 
challenges. Today the East Asian Economic Miracle, with its latest Chinese incar-
nation, heavily influences many policymakers, just as the now-discredited Japanese 
model did in the 1970s and 1980s. Some prominent successes in radically decen-
tralized governance such as Indonesia have spurred a large and growing number of 
decentralization initiatives, with mixed results. 
 Similarly, ignorance of local conditions can impart serious biases in theories devel-
oped at great distance. Governance and economic theories often focus on national-
level patterns and embrace an implicit assumption that citizens have a more broad 
national identification than is the case in such countries as Afghanistan, Iraq, and 
Myanmar, and that the economy is more integrated than the on-the-ground reality 
warrants. 
 The Sway of Interests and Ideologies 
 Theories and doctrines reflect not only technical analysis but also the values and 
interests of the advocates. The generation of theories and decision routines is the 
province of development experts of many stripes who advance their careers, profes-
sional standing, and programmatic objectives in a competition for recognition, fund-
ing, and the standing of their institutions. Many suffer from the insularity of their 
academic disciplines and inability to undertake interdisciplinary analysis. 
 Within developing countries, the endorsement of theories and doctrines invariably 
involves advocacy efforts by stakeholders of different levels of influence, depending 
on the country’s governance arrangements. The same holds for theories and doctrines 
formulated in developed nations. Thus, although the capital output ratio approach 
to estimate the volume of foreign assistance required for a given country to achieve 

Introduction  ●  5
self-sustaining growth rested on the simplistic premise that capital would straightfor-
wardly generate output, ignoring institutional obstacles, it was decisive in convincing 
US officials to pour resources into big-push foreign aid. 
 Sometimes the link between interests and the support of theories and doctrines 
is obvious, as in the case of industrialists promoting a proindustry economic strat-
egy. Yet sometimes the commitment to theories and doctrines reflects deep-seated 
aspects of cultural immersion or professional training that is perceived as technical 
but has underlying value implications. People of different cultural or professional 
backgrounds often find opposing views to be patently wrong, or even unethical, in 
terms of their own paradigms. The professional and institutional origins of the theo-
rists can have major impacts on their theories and doctrines. Thus, the World Bank 
and International Monetary Fund largely recruit their economists from universities 
with neoclassical economics departments, while the UN agencies addressing eco-
nomic development (UN regional economic commissions, the UN Development 
Programme, the Secretariat of the UN Conference on Trade and Development, etc.) 
are more likely to recruit from universities with heterodox economics, political sci-
ence, and public administration departments. Governance theories reflect even more 
disparate origins and ideologies of the theorists, from Maoist enclaves that still exist 
in the People’s Republic of China to the Heritage Foundation and other highly con-
servative think tanks. Programs on peace and conflict resolution studies produce very 
different mindsets than military academies. 
 Given the remarkable variety of outlooks, development theories—whether in 
general or in application—will be contested. Different conceptions of whether 
other approaches could have done better, different attributions of which policies 
are responsible for success or failure, and different goals preclude consensus on the 
appropriateness of a theory and related doctrine. At no point in the post-WWII 
period has universal acceptance been enjoyed by any theory of development econom-
ics, governance, civil society, national security, or foreign assistance. In the case of 
governance, shifts have taken place from traditional public administration to new 
public management, engagement of civil society and democratic (good) governance. 
Of course, given the varying contexts of developing countries and the complexity of 
the relevant processes, this openness is not necessarily bad. Yet interests at odds with 
maximizing human dignity may hide behind theories and their related doctrines even 
when inappropriate in a given situation. Evaluations are no less contested than the 
theories and doctrines. 
 The F iltering Dyn amics 
 Whether particular theories or methods are translated into development doctrines 
depends crucially on yet other institutions and individuals who transmit this knowl-
edge through journals, books, reports, teaching, etc. This transmission process 
diminishes the sway of some theories by filtering out knowledge that might support 
them and endorses others simply by transmitting them. Even the explicit labeling of a 
development initiative heightens the theories and doctrines associated with the labels: 
a  Basic Needs Program endorses the theories behind the basic needs approach, though 
it may discredit the approach if the program fails or is perceived as failing. 

6  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 The image of each institution developing or disseminating doctrines through 
advice or application may play a profound role in supporting or discrediting these 
doctrines. These images are often severely distorted, particularly through negative 
stereotyping by opponents. The doctrines of the International Monetary Fund and 
the World Bank are widely reviled because of their images as servants of the West-
dominated global economic system. Some government officials reject NGOs’ poverty 
alleviation strategies because they see NGOs as soft-hearted and soft-headed—or as 
intrinsically antigovernment. Many developing country governments prefer to work 
with UN agencies because of their perceived neutrality and partnership approaches, 
even though bilateral donors and international financial institutions often question 
their analysis. Nationalist Latin American military officers may look askance at doc-
trines of civil-military relations formulated at the Washington-based Inter-American 
Defense College. Many nationalist or leftist leaders may also reject a governance 
doctrine developed by the US Agency for International Development. The question 
is not whether these doctrines are appropriate but rather whether they would get a 
fair hearing. Whether they get a fair hearing or not, some special interest is always 
willing to advocate these doctrines. 
 Assumption D rag 
 After WWII, the developing world was remarkably unknown to development theo-
rists, practitioners, and policymakers. The challenges these nations presented became 
somewhat clearer in the 1950s, though not quickly enough to avoid premature short-
cuts and unfortunate misconceptions by development professionals. Consequently, 
certain questionable assumptions were established early, became anchored, and then 
persisted for years, misinforming and misdirecting development practice. Taking 
these anchored assumptions as givens inhibited sufficient examination and honest 
evaluation. A powerful and influential assumption in the early days of development 
theory held that industrialization was the obvious path to success. The premise was 
that agriculture was not promising except to finance industrial development. The 
possibility of a successful Green Revolution was neglected, and the bias against agri-
culture has persisted in many countries to this day. 
 Another persistent assumption was the reliance on modernization theory that 
presumed that economic growth would be self-sustaining and would bring poverty 
reduction and democratic governance in its wake. This view persisted in the face of 
mounting contrary evidence, and even today it may seem natural that industrializa-
tion is economic advancement and that a more advanced economy ought to bring 
a more advanced state of democracy. Another example is the tenacious premise that 
strong centralized governance is optimal to transform underdeveloped economies. 
Centralized natural resource management has been disastrous in many countries, as 
indicated by rampant deforestation. In Indonesia, for example, central government 
control over the nationalized forests led to excessive logging by private companies in 
violation of customary user rights of local communities that in many circumstances 
would have husbanded the forests more responsibly. In Vietnam, for example, the 
highly centralized funding for schools, health clinics, roads, and other inputs has 
often failed to meet the priority needs of communes and districts. 

Introduction  ●  7
 Bandwagon Dyn amics 
 Yet old assumptions are sometimes replaced with new ones that may also be too 
broadly accepted to the neglect of specific conditions. In some circles the pendulum 
now has swung in favor of decentralization, which in many contexts is viewed as a 
panacea, without taking into account that whether a particular service ought to be 
provided by the national government or by subnational governments depends on a 
complex mix of considerations of efficiency, effectiveness, responsiveness, fairness, 
and conflict sensitivity. Agrawal and Ribot (1999, 2006) note the predominance of 
decentralization efforts and the paltry success in devolving meaningful authority to 
the local levels. 
 Dilemmas of Integrating Technical and Normative Considerations 
 No matter how technical the derivation of a development theory may seem, it inevi-
tably has implications for value outcomes that development produces and the dis-
tribution of benefits. These implications may be only dimly recognized by analysts 
and others. Some theories and the doctrines derived from them seem particularly 
attractive because they are cast in noncontextual terms that seem to promise broad 
generalizability. Yet, rigid, context-ignoring theories in fishery or forestry (e.g., maxi-
mum sustainable yield management theories presuming that existing stocks ought 
to be maintained) neglect many factors, ranging from environmental implications 
to whether other species should replace the current ones. In other cases, theorists 
willfully disregard technical constraints and means-ends rationality as unworthy of 
ideological com mitment. 
 From Doctrine to Practice 
 A development doctrine has to go through a tortuous path to become practice, and 
the resulting practice is often highly problematic in terms of the goals that motivated 
the doctrine. Some of the same dynamics that account for the patterns and problems 
of translating theories into doctrines also hold for the translation of doctrines into 
practice. Concrete development decision making is particularly demanding, due to 
the multiple layers and numerous specific parties involved in collaborative efforts. 
For large-scale and consequential problems, finding an acceptable solution may take 
inordinate amounts of time, attention, and resources as compromises are hammered 
out and modifications made to account for specific contextual details. 
 Impacts of Weak Analytic Capacity 
 Informational and analytic deficits are just as important to the translation of doc-
trines to practice as they are to the translation of theories to doctrines. For example, 
the feasibility of a combatant reintegration doctrine depends on the uncertain predic-
tion of whether demobilized militias would be willing to take appropriate advantage 
of reintegration incentives. By the time a theory that is sound under one set of con-
ditions finds its way from doctrine to practice, the original circumstances may have 

8  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
changed dramatically. For example, in Chile the theory that crucial groups would 
accept a constitutional land reform amendment may have been correct before the 
1960s, but was a disaster after faith in government eroded. 
 Another problematic analytic issue arises in the translation from general policy to 
case-by-case application. Details matter—which requires a clear comprehension of con-
text and may call for rethinking theories and doctrines. For example, ignorance of the 
incomes of families that may or may not meet the means test for eligibility for cash 
transfers can introduce arbitrariness in granting the transfers, creating resentment among 
those excluded, thereby undermining the cash transfer policies and the social safety net 
doctrines that are the bases of these policies (World Bank 2014a). By the same token, 
trying to prevent forest destruction in developing (usually tropical) lands demands clear 
knowledge about what motivates subsistence in or nearby the forests. Putting a payment 
for environmental services program into practice to save a forest, without provision for a 
fair and transparent sharing of the payments themselves, is bound to fail. 
 Some of these details pertain to the individual and organizational expectations and 
demands of stakeholders. Theories and doctrines developed for different locales or time 
periods are likely to be challenged in this respect. For example, economic policy liber-
alization doctrines may depend on high levels of labor mobility, but sometimes local 
attachments reduce the willingness of people to move to where jobs are available. 
 The transitions from doctrines to broad policies to specific applications are fur-
ther complicated by the gaps between formulating policies and deciding  which policy 
should be applied to specific cases. For example, in countries with race-based affirma-
tive action, decisions, often ad hoc, must be made to determine whether a particular 
individual has enough of the racial characteristics to qualify for benefits. Similarly, 
if one budget rule has been formulated to benefit economically backward areas, and 
another is to allocate resources on strict population proportionality, a decision must 
be made as to which rule ought to be applied for each case. 
 Restricting the Full Force of Doctrines 
 One prominent dynamic is the widespread pattern of restriction by partial incorpo-
ration: the incomplete embrace of a doctrine despite an ostensible commitment to 
it. Two examples illustrate this pattern. First, as mentioned above, although many 
governments claim to embrace the democracy-enhancing governance doctrine of 
decentralization, often they have not provided the financial wherewithal for decen-
tralized governance to be effective. The emphasis has been on the deconcentration of 
government officials into local areas and the delegation to semiautonomous develop-
ment authorities, instead of devolution of political authority to elected local govern-
ments. For example, if decentralization requires subnational authorities to provide 
services for their communities, success is unlikely unless national authorities engage 
in fiscal decentralization as well, as has been done in Brazil, Indonesia, and China. 
In many instances, decentralization amounts to unfunded mandates—great fanfare 
about empowering local authorities. 
 Second (as discussed in  chapter 9 ), the military in several countries seem to 
accede to the doctrine of civilian governance, yet the operational doctrines fall short. 
Some military leaders claim the role of safeguarding democracy by ousting a civilian 

Introduction  ●  9
government they deem threatening to democracy, as in Argentina in the 1950s 
through the 1980s (O’Donnell 1973). 
 The Technical Covering up the Political 
 Decisions with crucial normative and political implications often appear as simply 
technical. The valuations required for benefit-cost analysis, ostensibly the gold stan-
dard for selecting projects and programs, boil down to estimates of what people are 
willing to pay. Similarly, the World Trade Organization’s highly detailed, seemingly 
technical trade rules reflect years of bargaining and politicking among national gov-
ernments. It is common that apparently technical routines benefit those with enough 
power to establish these routines. 
 Promotion through the Manipulation of Expectations 
 Evaluating the applicability of theories and doctrines depends not only on experience 
but also on expectations, which are often subject to manipulation. For example, the 
need for military build-up may be promoted through exaggerated claims about secu-
rity threats, sometimes reinforced by exaggerated assumptions of the effectiveness of 
the build-up. Best case assumptions regarding the effectiveness of foreign assistance, 
ignoring the weakness of institutions, supported the use of simplistic models of for-
eign aid magnitudes and economic growth. 
 This does not mean that all best and worst case inquiries should be avoided. Some 
problems or threats demand consideration of likely extreme events. Preparing for 
devastating, once-in-a-thousand-year natural occurrences is clearly more important 
in the Anthropocene Age.  Thinking about the Unthinkable during the Cold War, as 
Herman Kahn (1962) and other nuclear strategists did, examined the worst possible 
case of nuclear war to reinforce the folly of mutual assured destruction. 
 The D ynamics o f Termination 
 Unlike theories that last indefinitely whether embraced or rejected, doctrines and 
specific applications often warrant termination, as policies, programs, or organiza-
tions become dysfunctional, redundant, or outmoded. Terminations also encom-
pass eliminating or reducing benefits for particular individuals and groups. Since 
existing commitments involve people whose lives are invested in past decisions and 
practices, termination often invites hostility, provoking passionate behaviors of 
those who stand to lose. Attempts to terminate may mobilize the masses, but often 
more importantly the educated elites. The developing world’s educated individuals 
may be key resistors to loss of opportunities, especially when they are employed in 
bureaucracies. This explains the enormous difficulties that policymakers and plan-
ners face in enacting some interventions, even if they are based on rigorous analysis 
or are simply commonsense solutions. The costs and burdens of termination must 
be assessed according to many different human values, not simply wealth. Some ter-
minations are unwarranted, often resulting from a change in government whose new 
leaders want to distance themselves from policies or programs associated with their 

10  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
predecessors. Certain terminations, such as disbanding environmental agencies or 
independent central banks that had disciplined macroeconomic policy, may set back 
sound development for many years. Many policymakers have notoriously short-term 
perspectives, often linking their policy choices with the electoral cycle. Long-term 
commitment to specific doctrines and policies is particularly weak in countries such 
as Myanmar, Indonesia, and Pakistan, which are going through political transitions 
from long periods of military-led government to civilian oversight of the military. 
Thus, some applications ought to be insulated from termination. 
 Preview of the Book 
 To explore how relevant actors can formulate and implement development strategies in 
the service of both growth and human dignity, we identify five major challenges, each 
highlighting interactions among government officials, civil society, and other actors. 
Effective government and equitable economic development are obvious, perennial 
challenges. The three remaining challenges involve the crucial roles of NGOs, the 
military, and international development assistance agencies. While these actors also 
play significant roles in shaping economic policies and governance, their interactions 
with government and the population in general are critical in themselves. 
 Economic D evelopment 
 One challenge is to enact economic policies that promote economic growth and pov-
erty alleviation while keeping environmental damage and income inequality within 
reasonable bounds. As  chapters 2 and  3 chronicle, early doctrines for accomplishing 
these intertwined goals did not prove to be viable. The parallel political and admin-
istrative challenge is to improve governance and public administration so that citi-
zens can participate meaningfully in shaping government policies and policies can be 
enacted with efficiency and fidelity. The early optimism that economic development 
would bring democracy, high levels of citizen participation, and more responsive 
policies has clearly given way to more skeptical understandings of political change. 
Thus the pursuit of economic growth and justice must be accompanied by the active 
pursuit of democracy and responsiveness. 
 The bewildering expansion of goals and considerations that development econom-
ics must incorporate has profoundly changed the challenges of balancing objectives 
and the complexity of the whole set of economic policy initiatives. Even if recently 
enacted policies are progressive, will the more privileged still be able to extract other 
assets and opportunities from the less privileged, offsetting the progressive policies? 
To what degree are legislative commitments to equity eroded by deliberate or inad-
vertent weaknesses of implementation? 
 A progressive government faces the dilemma that poverty alleviation in the long 
run requires economic growth, yet growth with equity requires a delicate suite of eco-
nomic policies that require political forbearance by the many groups that face risks 
and uncertainty from such policies. No consensus on economic doctrines will prevail 
as long as shortcomings of any approach are regarded by some as perfectible defects 
but by others as insurmountable flaws. 

Introduction  ●  11
 Public leaders face a series of development challenges to promote growth with 
poverty reduction: vested interests that limit policy choices, rising expectations for 
both rapid democratization and economic dividends, and the need to accommodate 
diverse ideological, ethnic, and religious groups. This requires institutions that can 
mediate differences and promote outcomes considered by most to be sufficiently fair. 
Equally important are the personal integrity of political and administrative leaders 
and their commitment to political and economic reforms. 
 Governance 
 The governance challenge must take into account the particularly difficult path for 
progressive policies.  Chapters 4 and  5 describe how the evolution of governance has 
entailed a greater role of civil society in public affairs, which increases the need for 
institutions that can channel representation into constructive discourse and decision 
making and constrain the advantages that wealthier groups typically have to influ-
ence the outcomes. It requires mechanisms to develop and implement policies and 
programs based on the principles of transparency, access, accountability, checks and 
balances, and appropriate balances of centralized and decentralized authority. Will 
policies approved legislatively be able to avoid diversions of attention and resources, 
corruption, or ineffective implementation? Can the legal system protect the poor? 
Does the court system have the integrity to enforce the rule of law; does the Supreme 
Court have enough power to check executive or legislative overreaching? Insofar as 
civil society can play a major role advocating just policies, how can civil society orga-
nizations constructively stand up to the demand for control pressed by many govern-
ment lea ders? 
 Nongovernmental O rganizations 
 Following the euphoria over the initial rise of NGOs, development practitioners have 
become much more guarded about the potentials of both domestic and international 
NGOs. The roles and challenges of NGOs are critical to development: NGOs oper-
ating domestically constitute a major component of civil society engaged in efforts 
to enhance citizen participation and provide services.  Chapter 6 examines whether 
NGO-provided services strangle the state’s capacity to develop its capacity to provide 
services, whether the NGOs truly serve to maximize human dignity, and whether the 
NGOs’ stance toward government—often highly critical—is constructive or destruc-
tive. International NGOs may also provide important services, bringing resources 
from developed to developing countries, guiding efforts to strengthen democracy, 
and protecting vulnerable domestic NGOs from repression. Yet international NGOs 
may not share the priorities of the population or the domestic NGOs and may also 
undercut the development of state capacity. 
 Foreign Assi stance 
 Assistance doctrines have undergone considerable change, reflecting the end of the 
Cold War, the greater availability of private capital and nongovernmental donations, 

12  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
and the limited capacity of international actors to shape domestic economies. Yet 
external aid still provides the financial resources and expertise badly needed by many 
developing countries, and in some instances, foreign assistance has been an enabling 
factor in strengthening civil society and democracy. However, as  chapters 7 through 
8 document, the potential for divergent interests between foreign assistance agencies 
and recipient nations has been highlighted by critics of these agencies. The doctrines 
linking economic assistance and political-military commitments of recipient govern-
ments fluctuate in often problematic ways, according to the threat levels perceived by 
donor governments. Different approaches to economic policy have pitted domestic 
groups and often their governments against the assistance agencies requiring compli-
ance with particular political positions or economic reforms. International security 
interests and the domestic economic interests of the nations of bilateral foreign assis-
tance agencies have frequently colored the targets of foreign assistance. How have 
bilateral assistance agencies learned (or not learned) to navigate among these pres-
sures? What roles should they play? Finally, how, in otherwise highly organized donor 
countries like the United States, has interagency and bureaucratic infighting colored 
practice, sometimes dooming even the best intentions? 
 Some multilateral financial institutions have had to cope with the successful defi-
ance by recipient governments regarding the conditions that these institutions pose in 
exchange for their support and face possible tradeoffs between protecting the global 
economy and the interests of particular developing nations. Insofar as the doctrines 
espoused by international development agencies diverge, it is important to determine 
whether this provides a healthy opportunity to test different development approaches 
or simply adds to the confusion about best practices. 
 The M ilitary 
 The optimal roles of the armed forces remain elusive.  Chapter 9 demonstrates that 
this is not simply a matter of the varying contexts in different countries, though that 
must be taken into account for efforts to avoid overgeneralizing theories and doc-
trines. The more direct problems are the conflicts of objectives between the military 
and other institutions, such as civilian officials, civil society, and international actors, 
but also within the armed forces itself. 
 The military may be the institution mandated to protect democratic constitu-
tions, but in many instances, it has intervened against democratically elected gov-
ernments. That these risks remain despite the widespread decline in interstate wars 
brings into question whether the military forces should have any significant role in 
countries free of serious external threats. Perhaps a lightly armed police force would 
suffice for maintaining domestic order, yet few military leaders willingly consent to 
the dismantling of the armed forces, and without their acquiescence, the military 
will remain. If the military is a major drain on a nation’s resources, should it be “put 
to work”? The question is whether the military should provide services outside of 
the conventional military roles: engage in training and socialization beyond military 
preparedness, or undertake nondefense infrastructure projects. In many countries 
the military is among the most effective institutions, sometimes  the most effective 
institution. Yet serving these functions may drain the economy, threaten democracy, 

Introduction  ●  13
and retard the capacity building of civilian government and other service-providing 
institutions. Even if a nation’s military can provide a global public good of serving as 
international peacekeepers in other countries, any nonconventional role ensconces 
the armed forces even if its size ought to be reduced. Eventually, civilian oversight of 
the military, willingly accepted by military leaders, is the most sustainable option to 
promote development and build democratic institutions. How should civil-military 
be managed to achieve the twin objectives of national security and reinforcing demo-
cratic institutions? How can the military’s professional role be promoted without giv-
ing it undue role in influencing political decisions? What is the impact of the military 
engagement in economic activities? 
 On the international level, military concerns have played a highly significant role 
in the volume and shaping of foreign assistance.  Chapter 10 demonstrates the inter-
twining of US national security and foreign assistance doctrines in three of the most 
crucial cases: Chile, Korea, and Vietnam. The more recent developments in these 
countries and parallel challenges reflect responses in foreign assistance and security 
doctrines in the dramatically changed global context. 
 While the assessments covered in this book reveal daunting challenges, progress 
made thus far and lessons that can improve better practices in the future are cause for 
cautious optimism. Our final  chapter 11 takes stock and proposes recommendations 
for goi ng for ward. 
 

 CHAPTER 2 
 Evolution of Economic Development 
Theories and Doctrines since 
World War II 
 Introduction 
 Economic thinking and practice in developing countries have gone through strik-
ing changes in theories, doctrines, and practices over the post-WWII period. Yet 
many of the same issues and obstacles remain. To begin to assess this evolution, this 
chapter explores the linkages between theories and doctrines. These doctrines are 
only partially shaped by economic theories; they also reflect changing goals, political 
considerations, and administrative constraints. 
 The goals, evolving in the face of both gains and disappointments, have evolved 
from a predominant focus on aggregate economic growth to a vastly broader agenda. 
On the one hand, without economic growth, the opportunities to further human 
dignity, including alleviating poverty, are highly limited. There has been growing 
acceptance of the finding, most prominently reflected in the work of Dollar and 
Kraay (2001), that poverty alleviation largely proceeds in lockstep with aggregate 
economic growth. Thus, the United Nations, despite its enormously broad purview, 
emphasized growth in its several Development Decades, beginning with 1961–1970. 
Fukuda-Parr (2013, 8) notes that “the four decadal agendas up to the 1990s included 
social objectives but were dominated by economic growth priorities and focused 
particularly on issues of the international economic environment.” Remarkably, the 
Development Decade economic growth targets were increasingly ambitious, despite 
mounting evidence of the daunting obstacles to rapid and sustained aggregate 
growth. 1 Roberts (2005, 114) writes that “The UN Development Decades of the 
1960s, 1970s and 1980s proclaimed objectives that were over ambitious, and were 
known well before time to be unattainable.” Perhaps the ambition was an exhortation 
to the developed countries to reduce barriers to developing country exports and to 
increase foreign assistance, investment, and technology transfer. Whether exhortative 
or simply na ï ve, the primacy of growth was apparent. 

16  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 To understand the evolution requires identifying the relevant actors. Economic 
policymakers of developing countries are obviously relevant, but they must be divided 
into at least four sets: the highest political leaders of the government, the officials of 
the spending ministries and their agencies, the top executives of state enterprises, and 
the officials of the central economic, finance, and planning ministries who oversee 
the economy as a whole. The domestic actors outside of the government include 
business groups, labor unions, NGOs, and the general public. 
 The international actors include officials of bilateral foreign assistance agencies; 
the staffs of international financial institutions, principally the IMF, the World Bank, 
and the regional development banks; various agencies such as the UN economic 
commissions in each world region; and universities and other training institutions. 
Other international actors include global businesses and international NGOs. 
 While government officials at the highest levels of economic policymaking have to 
make the critical decisions on development strategies and the policies to enact them, 
the officials of external agencies that provide substantial economic support often 
penetrate the internal decision-making structures. Others influence policy by giving 
advice or exerting pressure to adopt particular economic measures. An underappreci-
ated influence is imparted by the educational entities that shape the outlooks and 
analytic frameworks of their graduates, whether in technical or policymaking roles. 
 Economic theories and doctrines address two analytically separable issues. The mac-
roeconomic questions address the optimal money supply, savings rates, government 
spending, government deficits, investment levels, interest rates, balance of trade, levels 
of inflation, and so on. While many of these are not directly controllable through gov-
ernment policy, they are certainly shaped by policy. Macroeconomic policies determine 
how much the economy is stimulated, at the risk of excessive inflation and decline in 
foreign exchange. The more specific microeconomic questions focus on which projects 
and programs, of which economic sectors, ought to be financed. Different methods, 
theories, debates, doctrines, and practices hold for each of these issues. 
 It is not surprising that many efforts have summarized the history of economic 
approaches in developing countries. 2 Our assessment is distinctive in two respects. 
First, we explore how theories are undergirded by analytic methods that orient and 
sometimes constrain the theories, doctrines, and decisions that policymakers take. 
We have discovered that the application of development thinking depends, to a sur-
prising extent, on whether various considerations can be situated within the analytic 
and decision routines employed by policymakers and their advisors. The theories 
need to be operationalized within the decision routines that underlie policymaking. 
In addition, even if particular methods accurately reflect an embraced theory or doc-
trine, their use may be neglected because of the effort involved in employing it, or 
the vulnerability of those who do so. We shall see that some of the most compelling 
methods for incorporating income distribution considerations in the evaluation of 
development projects have been rejected or simply ignored because of these chal-
lenges. Thus, we examine how development economics theory and doctrines have 
evolved to address the two major challenges of economic development: overall eco-
nomic growth and alleviating poverty. We also emphasize the continuity of the con-
troversies between the mainstream neoclassical approach, which clearly dominates 
the training of development economists, and alternative perspectives. 

Economic Development Theories and Doctrines  ●  17
 Neoclassical Economics and Alternatives 
 It is important to clarify the meaning and implications of the neoclassical approach, 
which dominates in professional economics in general, and the structuralist alter-
native. The neoclassical approach posits that powerful mechanisms, based on the 
rational pursuit of profits by firms and greater welfare by individuals, will oper-
ate constructively if they are unconstrained as long as property rights are secure. 3 
Through this pursuit of maximization, resources will be fully used through market 
signals that, if allowed to operate freely, would induce capital and labor to be fully 
supplied and their output fully purchased. The market will permit the economy to 
approach full employment, as long as the government does not distort wages or prices 
for goods and services. Investment will be optimally deployed, as long as impedi-
ments to savings and productive investment are not erected. According to neoclassi-
cal assumptions, if an economy does not behave in these ways, it is because market 
forces are not permitted to operate—the government’s interventions break down the 
pursuit of maximum efficiency, maximum wealth generation, and full utilization of 
resources, including labor. 
 Structuralists see more need for government intervention. In seeing bottlenecks in 
production, the structuralist remedy may concentrate on instruments that stimulate 
supply as much as demand; these may include subsidizing promising opportuni-
ties for expanding production or engaging in state economic activity to fill the gap 
left by sluggish private sector supply. State economic activity, rather than crowding 
out private investment, may reinforce private investment by establishing reinforcing 
clusters to enhance productivity and by increasing confidence that an industry will 
grow. Rather than assuming that savings will be invested productively in the domestic 
economy, structuralists may assume that savings would be diverted overseas or locked 
up into unproductive investments that may provide social standing (such as owning 
a large estate) rather than the highest returns. Therefore, the government would have 
an important role in directing savings. 
 The Challenge of Economic Growth 
 In the early post-WWII period, three explanations—not necessarily mutually 
 exclusive—seemed plausible to account for the low levels of economic development 
of the bulk of nations in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. Perhaps these economies 
lacked the resources—capital, technology, infrastructure, and so on—needed for 
growth. Perhaps the economies were locked into particular activities, such as raw 
material exports, that limited the potential for growth. Finally, perhaps the economic 
structures had rigidities that inhibited full and efficient use of resources. The econo-
mists who devoted their efforts to stimulating economic development applied the 
economic thinking that had emerged from the Great Depression to sort out the 
dilemmas of stubborn underdevelopment. 
 Macroeconomic Approaches to Growth in Developing Countries 
 This emphasis on the general stimulation of the economy directly engaged the differ-
ing perspectives on how to manage the macroeconomic aspects of an economy. Not 

18  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
surprisingly, the disagreements among economists in the studies of Keynesianism, 
monetarism, and so on in developed countries reverberated in the debates over devel-
opment economics. Yet, for the sake of conciseness, it is necessary to confine this 
brief history to the most prominent shifts in dominant theories and doctrines. 
 One highly prevalent view was that the most important shortage was financial 
capital. The earliest preoccupation that drove development economists post-WWII 
was how to mobilize both international and domestic sources of capital. This situ-
ation was shared with war-ravaged Western Europe, for which the injection of aid 
through the US Marshall Plan was remarkably successful, as well as with the long-
poor developing countries, some of which were just reaching independence. The 
belief was that poor countries lacked the savings to generate sufficient investment 
for economic growth. Although in some cases savings later proved to be greater than 
anticipated, it was often in forms that were not investible, such as the gold jewelry 
held by Indians. Outside transfers of capital would be the most direct way of propel-
ling economic growth. Yet, for the transfer of capital to produce more than a short-
lived effect, a theory of overall economic stimulus was desired. Several of the earliest 
post-WWII theorists provided reassuring models. Paul Rosenstein-Rodan (1944), 
later to become an early World Bank economist, argued that investors needed to 
see a substantial amount of investment in a particular sector before they would join 
in; a “big push” was needed to provide sufficient momentum. To determine how 
much external capital would be required to generate a sufficient degree of economic 
growth, the Harrod-Domar model 4 was developed to determine the financing gap—
the amount of capital to be provided by foreign assistance to join the country’s inter-
nal savings rate (assumed to be available for investment) to stimulate growth. Only 
the effectiveness of capital to generate growth was invoked, due to the assumption 
that labor shortages would not be a constraint. Given an estimate of the domestic sav-
ings rate, the Harrod-Domar model would estimate how much more capital would 
be needed to achieve a particular GDP growth target. 
 The priority given to dramatically increasing the level of investment dictated other 
macroeconomic doctrines. Some structuralists believed that the capital needed to 
finance sufficient expansion of key sectors would be provided neither by the private 
sector (which lacked either sufficient capital or the incentives to invest in the appro-
priate sectors) nor from tax revenues that could feasibly be extracted by governments 
(Felix 1961). Yet, if the sheer lack of savings and investable capital was a crucial (if 
not necessarily permanent) problem for developing countries, heavy international 
borrowing, deficit spending, easy money, and the resulting inflation may be neces-
sary evils. 
 However, emphasizing the sociopolitical changes required for sustained economic 
growth, Walt W. Rostow, a key figure in US foreign assistance and security policy, 
posited his theory of economic takeoff: the economy could maintain its own momen-
tum, culminating in sustained growth, but only after profound social, political, and 
institutional changes occur:
 Initial changes . . . require that some group in the society have the will and the 
authority to install and diffuse new production techniques; and a perpetuation of 
the growth process requires that such a leading group expand in authority and that 

Economic Development Theories and Doctrines  ●  19
the society as a whole respond to the impulses set up by the initial changes, includ-
ing the potentialities for external economies . . . The take-off requires, therefore, a 
society prepared to respond actively to new possibilities for productive enterprise; 
and it is likely to require political, social and institutional changes which will both 
perpetuate an initial increase in the scale of investment and result in the regular 
acceptance and absorption of innovations. (1956, 25) 
 Rostow acknowledged that this process changes power relations and entails conflict 
over societal goals, yet he added a soothing caveat: “because nationalism can be a 
social solvent as well as a diversionary force—the victory can assume forms of mutual 
accommodation, rather than the destruction of the traditional groups by the more 
modern” (1960, 7). It is telling that Rostow saw nationalism as a social solvent with-
out anticipating the highly contentious impact that nation building would have in 
the relations between majority and minority populations. 
 Killick notes that another institutional demand of the “big push” was the belief 
that government planning and direction are essential: “Under the influence of the 
‘big push’ school of thought, planning was also seen as the only way to mobilize 
resources on the scale necessary for a successful development effort, and as the only 
practical means of binding the various strands of economic policy into a consistent 
whole” (1976, 3). This was reflected in the requirement for Latin American gov-
ernments to submit medium-term (e.g., four to six years) comprehensive economic 
plans to qualify for aid under the 1960s’ US Alliance for Progress. 
 The remarkable recovery of Western Europe under the Marshall Plan, which per-
mitted Western European leaders to develop their own comprehensive economic 
recovery plans, seemed to promise that the will could be mobilized and a direction 
charted for developing nations to take advantage of available capital through institu-
tional changes. Of course, the stable economic and political institutions that prevailed 
in most developed nations during their most successful economic growth periods 
were largely lacking for developing countries in the 1940s and 1950s. It was most 
insightfully recognized that preexisting economic, political, and social institutions 
had often been rigidly stable, but industrialization, wars, independence, and other 
political phenomena would undermine these institutions, resulting in economic and 
political instability.  5   Nevertheless, institutions in the nations defeated in WWII were 
working, despite the instability or complete lack of democracy prior to the war; it 
was not clear that the hopes for developing countries were worse. In many countries, 
these institutional changes entailed dramatic expansions of government involvement 
in the economy. According to the much acclaimed work on Western and Eastern 
Europe by economic historian Alexander Gerschenkron (1957), the more backward 
the economy, the more coercive the policies must be to reduce consumption in order 
to increase the savings needed to finance the new industries. In some nations, such 
as China, Cuba, and Tanzania, the government instituted an explicitly socialist struc-
ture. In many others, including most Latin American nations, state direction involved 
establishing or expanding state-owned enterprises, establishing development corpo-
rations to subsidize state and private firms, and dominating the supply of credit to 
favored firms. These efforts were frequently accompanied by government policies that 
controlled the prices of goods and services, regulated wages, and set interest rates. 

20  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 Along with a strong role of the state in directing or undertaking economic activ-
ity was a structuralist rejection of the free trade doctrine and the classic premise that 
nations would prosper most if they pursued the economic activities that they currently 
could do most productively. This comparative advantage principle was challenged on 
several grounds. Harvard economist Hollis Chenery (1961), later World Bank Vice 
President for Development Policy, argued that static comparative advantage theory 
had to be converted into a dynamic conception, allowing for future changes in a 
nation’s economic strengths. Gerschenkron also argued that economies had to remain 
open to new opportunities for comparative advantage; this was interpreted to mean 
that new comparative advantages should be created through state action. 
 The most direct attack on developing countries’ existing specialization in raw 
material exporting was articulated through the so-called Singer-Prebisch thesis that 
raw material producers face deteriorating value of their exports in relation to their 
purchasing power for manufactured goods (Prebisch 1949; Singer 1950). Pessimism 
was based partially on theoretical grounds; unlike raw materials, technology adds to 
the value of manufactured products, with higher profits for the manufacturers and 
higher wages for the well-organized manufacturing workers. Others reinforced this 
pessimism by asserting the likelihood of more sluggish demand for raw than for fin-
ished products. 6 Moreover, agriculture, forestry, and other important aspects of raw 
materials face physical constraints to their future growth. 
 The concept of  potential comparative advantage provided a rationale for “infant 
industry” subsidization or protection even if no measurable price signals were avail-
able. In terms of industrial strategy in the early post-WWII era, the most attractive 
industrial strategy was light manufacturing to replace the need to import these goods. 
This import substitution industrialization (ISI) typically protected industries through 
high import tariffs or outright import restrictions, as well as subsidies to the manufac-
turers. Similar advantages were extended to several nations adopting a heavy industry 
promotion strategy (see  chapter 3 ). Self-sufficiency for national security was another 
consideration, as wasthe strategy of initially supporting domestic  market-oriented 
manufacturing through protectionism and subsidies, widely prevalent at least through 
the 1970s. Although it has become far less explicit as a heralded strategy in the wake 
of severe criticism of the logic and record of ISI, its vestiges remain through a host of 
subsidies (e.g., in energy pricing and access to cheap capital). 
 Initially the critiques were few and far between. Peter Bauer (1957/1965; Bauer 
and Yamey 1957) epitomized the skepticism, asserting that state economic direction 
distorts prices and incentives, sapping efficiency and worsening poverty. The critique 
focused on both the intrinsic problems of undermining the efficiencies of market 
forces and the self-serving behavior of government and state officials. 
 The scarcity of criticism of policies violating mainstream neoclassical principles has 
several explanations. Invoking infant industries calls for patience before judging the 
strategy as a failure. Low economic growth could be attributed to the political turmoil 
that struck many developing countries. And the strategy seemed to have the legiti-
macy of expertise through the endorsement of several UN regional economic com-
missions. Raul Prebisch directed the UN Economic Commission for Latin America; 
Hans Singer directed the Economic Division of the UN Industrial Development 
Organization. The UN Economic Commission for Africa espoused the same doctrine 

Economic Development Theories and Doctrines  ●  21
(Owusu 2003, 1655). Finally, even into the 1970s, hope persisted because of an abun-
dance of capital originating from oil-exporting nations following increases in world oil 
prices. International borrowing fueled industrial expansion in many countries, even if 
the industries survived only on protection, subsidies, and borrowing. 
 As state-dominated economies faltered, criticism mounted. While some industries 
failed prior to the 1980s because of intrinsic inefficiencies or small markets, the dras-
tic implosion occurred for the many heavily indebted countries in the 1980s, as real-
world interest rates skyrocketed. Previously manageable debt service burdens became 
unmanageable; hard currency reserves evaporated; the threat of default deterred fur-
ther lending.  Table 2.1 demonstrates the 1980s’ meltdown, but also illustrates the 
disappointing earlier growth rates of Africa and Latin America. 
 The 1980s, widely regarded as the “lost decade,” brought enormous suffering as 
governments were compelled to cut back social services and employment opportu-
nities contracted. The contrasting experiences among countries of vastly different 
exposures to indebtedness (e.g., India had eschewed international borrowing) carried 
a lesson of financial dependence as powerful as the lessons of trade dependence. 
 As lenders and borrowers wrestled with the risks of default, the retrenchments in 
heavily indebted countries were often overseen by the international financial institu-
tions. The IMF and the World Bank have been the major international entities in 
establishing the mainstream doctrine for addressing the debt crisis and the problems 
of inflation, budget deficits, and bankruptcies. The importance of these institutions 
is magnified beyond their own funds, as their willingness to lend to indebted govern-
ments bolsters the confidence that other lenders have in the creditworthiness of these 
governments. 
 The “structural adjustment” advocated by these institutions was concisely sum-
marized by Williamson (1990; 1999, 252) under the label “Washington Consensus”: 
(1) fiscal discipline; (2) redirection of public expenditure priorities toward sectors 
with both high economic returns and the potential to improve income distribu-
tion; (3) tax reform; (4) interest rate liberalization; (5) competitive exchange rates; 
(6) trade liberalization; (7) liberalization of inflows of foreign direct investment; 
 Table 2.1  Growth rates of developing regions, GDP, and GDP per capita in constant (1990) 
dollars, 1950–1999 
1950s
1960s
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000s
Africa
GDP (%)
3.8
4.6
4.4
2.5
2.5
4.8
GDP per capita (%)
2.1
2.9
2.6
0.8
0.7
3.1
Asia
GDP (%)
3.8
4.6
4.4
2.5
2.5
6.2
GDP per capita (%)
3.3
4.1
3.8
3.1
2.9
4.4
Latin America
GDP (%)
4.9
5.2
5.7
1.8
2.9
3.6
GDP per capita (%)
3.2
3.5
4.0
0.1
1.2
1.8
World
GDP (%)
4.3
5.0
4.1
3.1
2.8
4.3
GDP per capita (%)
2.6
3.3
2.4
1.4
1.1
2.5
 Source : The M addison-Project, http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/maddison-project/home.htm . 

22  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
(8) privatization of state-owned enterprises; (9) deregulation to abolish barriers to 
entry and exit; and (10) secure property rights. 
 Some of these goals run counter to structuralist doctrines. Inflationary govern-
ment spending and heavy borrowing to spur economic activity challenge fiscal disci-
pline. The requirement of high (current) returns on public spending runs counter to 
investments in the long-term pursuit of new comparative advantages. Tax reform, 7 
interest and exchange rates free of government manipulation, and trade liberaliza-
tion reduce the means to favor particular industries through tax exemptions, cheap 
capital, exchange rate manipulations, or import tariffs. State enterprise privatization 
reduces the capacity of the state to direct investment into areas of potential future 
comparative advantage. Foreign investment and eliminating barriers to entry would 
also reduce the protection of favored industries. 
 Nevertheless, Williamson (1999) forcefully asserted that these objectives do not 
entail market fundamentalism or rigid adherence to narrow neoliberalism; they 
reflect a convergence of economic policy views rather than simply or predominantly 
the views held and imposed by these international financial institutions. 
 Although only one of these objectives, fiscal discipline, is specific to financial 
crisis, the time of greatest leverage that the international financial institutions and 
other stakeholders have on borrowing country governments comes when the finan-
cial crisis puts the greatest pressure on the governments to comply with the condi-
tionalities of the international financial institutions. And because the crisis almost 
always requires reducing the drains on foreign reserves, and often requires reducing 
domestic demand to counter inflation, the conditionalities entail not only structural 
adjustments but also austerity measures. This important distinction is often lost on 
critics of the conditionalities, as structural adjustment comes to be equated with the 
pain of economic contraction. 
 The criticisms of the structural adjustment conditionalities, often heavily colored 
by the conflation of structural adjustment with austerity, have spawned numerous 
counterdoctrines proposed to offset various perceived weaknesses. We later review 
efforts to protect the poor from the ravages of austerity; here we examine the two 
arguments regarding economic growth that have dominated. One argument is that 
conventional neoclassical analysis, especially as practiced by the IMF, underestimates 
the optimal levels of money supply, spending, debt ceilings, and so on. Thus, the pain 
of austerity is greater than necessary, economic recovery is delayed, and economic 
growth is weaker. Nobel Prize laureate Joseph Stiglitz (2000), former chief economist 
at the World Bank, launched a withering attack on the IMF staff who formulated 
the conditionality packages required of the Southeast Asian governments in the after-
math of the 1997 East Asian economic crisis. 
 Williamson’s insistence that the Washington Consensus should not be taken as 
narrowly neoliberal has been challenged in many quarters. Mavroudeas and Papadatos 
(2007, 46–47) articulate the typical critique:
  Washington Consensus’ macroeconomic discipline . . . [i]n almost all cases [has] 
led to austerity budgets and policies that favoured the wealthier and worsen the 
position of the lower strata. The same holds for the push towards a market econ-
omy and the opening of the economy. The first stems from a neoconservative 

Economic Development Theories and Doctrines  ●  23
conception of the economic role of the state and of its alleged inability to manage 
properly the economy. The second has the same origins complimented with the 
simplistic belief that it will lead to increased competition and thus consumers will 
in the end be better off. 
 The reference to the alleged inability of state economic management has a certain 
irony, coming from Greek economists, but the message is clear that the opponents of 
the Washington Consensus question both the free market premise and the impacts 
of the austerity measures. Again, structural adjustment and austerity measures are 
treated as one. 
 The second argument is that structural adjustment fails when the government 
fails to embrace it. The checkered compliance with conditionalities (reviewed in 
 chapter 3 ) led to the “country ownership” doctrine. Boughton (2003, 3), of the IMF, 
reported:
 When the IMF embarked on a reexamination of it policies on conditionality in 
the millennium year 2000, a key objective was to promote national ownership of 
policy adjustments and structural reforms. It was clear from experience and from 
formal studies . . . that the main reason for failure of Fund-supported programs 
to achieve their objectives was that governments too often did not implement 
policies to which they had committed. Whatever could be done to deepen and 
strengthen commitment was likely to improve implementation and raise the suc-
cess r ate. 
 Boughton (2003, 3) acknowledges that “national ownership” is difficult to define 
“with sufficient precision to make it operational”; however, the IMF developed a 
working definition: “Ownership is a willing assumption of responsibility for an 
agreed program of policies, by officials in a borrowing country who have the respon-
sibility to formulate and carry out those policies, based on an understanding that the 
program is achievable and is in the country’s own interest.” 
 However, ownership by the government is not an all-or-nothing. Typically, gov-
ernment officials mandated to maintain economic stability have already sided with 
the international financial institution pressing for the reforms. Yet the government’s 
political leaders and spending ministry officials usually have different incentives than 
the financial managers. Political leaders may prefer the reforms if not for political 
consequences, but reneging will result if political costs are regarded as too high. 
Political leaders often state opposition to conditionalities, to reduce their account-
ability for the unpopular aspects of the reforms, even if they welcome being forced 
to accept them. Leaders of spending ministries typically pursue their mandates by 
spending more. Moreover, national ownership should involve consensus among key 
stakeholders, including the private sector and civil society. Officials of the ministries 
and departments may “own” these programs but lack the capacity to carry them out if 
political leaders cannot gain the support of political and economic forces in the soci-
ety. Finally, the international financial institution may conclude that no technically 
acceptable set of conditionalities would produce sufficient commitment, resulting in 
the refusal of the institution to lend. 

24  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 Macroeconomic M odeling 
 While the Washington Consensus and competing doctrines concern general mac-
roeconomic management, the question of how to determine appropriate macroeco-
nomic parameters is on a more technical level. Disputes over doctrines are reflected 
in disagreements about analytic tools. Initially, there was a general agreement that 
the development of a coherent national accounts framework for relating the vari-
ous aggregate measures of economic activity was a great advance, followed by the 
input-output matrix approach, 8 which, based on tracking existing material flows, 
could link the flows of economic activity comprehensively (if somewhat statically) 
throughout the economy and even capture the flows of international trade. By the 
1960s, these yielded the social accounting matrix, encompassing national accounts 
variables to represent all economic transactions at some level of aggregation. In prin-
ciple, analysts could extend the intersectoral analysis to project the impacts of macro-
economic changes (e.g., increases in money supply) as well as expansions in particular 
subsectors. 
 The social accounting matrix is the basis for computable general equilibrium 
(CGE) models, intended to trace out economy-wide effects of policy changes. Yet, 
this methodological advance has not unified economic theory; CGE models reflect 
contrasting development theories. Some have a strong neoclassical pedigree, reflect-
ing the conceptually simple equilibrium assumptions of mainstream economics. 9 In 
contrast, Mitra-Kahn (2008, 6) argues that true CGE models are not neoclassical, 
and although some CGE models are faithful to neoclassical assumptions, other devel-
opment economists incorporate more complex relationships, beyond the simpler 
equilibrium assumptions of the neoclassical framework. In rejecting the validity of 
some neoclassical assumptions, these structuralist economists have tried to model the 
consequences of inefficient markets, immobile labor, the differences between effec-
tive demand and potential demand, and so on. These models are controversial in 
general (Acheson 2005). Nicholas Stern, who served as chief economist at both the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the World Bank, judged 
that “[s]uch models are no doubt useful tools, although due to their large appetite for 
assumptions and data and their lack of transparency, their usefulness should not be 
exaggerated” (Stern and Ferreira 1997, 556–557). Yet, the structuralist CGE models 
are controversial on distinctive grounds. The additional relationships they represent 
reflect the modeler’s beliefs about how the particular economy under examination 
diverges from the neoclassical assumptions. Different economies, whether developing 
or developed, would be expected to have different rigidities violating the neoclassical 
equilibria. Minford (2011, 290), assessing the recent work by well-known structural-
ist Lance Taylor (2011), expressed the following reservations about the assumptions 
represented in the latter’s structuralist model: “The trouble is that these ideas are 
frequently untestable as proposed because they have too many elements that can 
be fixed to suit the data . . . Where attempts have been made to set up such models 
in properly testable form and compare them with the data, they do not seem to do 
well.” The ad hoc nature is likely to be even greater for developing economies, insofar 
as they have more—and more varied—deviations from the fluidity of the market 
economy. 

Economic Development Theories and Doctrines  ●  25
 This controversy reflects fundamental differences in the conception of the pur-
poses of economic analysis. The development of neoclassical economics—theory and 
method—is dedicated to general applicability. Both neoclassical and structural CGE 
models require heavy data-gathering and estimation of constants. Yet, the neoclassi-
cal template provides rather clear guidance on how to proceed, at the risk of missing 
relevant complications, whereas structuralists must adapt as they see fit. Structuralists 
are far less concerned about the capacity to generalize than to identify and model 
the distinctive nature of each economy to project the impacts of alternative policy 
options. 
 Sectoral S trategies 
 The analytic challenge of determining how to invest in the most potentially dynamic 
sectors and subsectors is the bridge between macroeconomic and microeconomic 
strategies. Sectoral development consists of supporting or discouraging myriad 
ventures, but its goals often encompass enhancing or stabilizing macroeconomic 
balances. 
 The early post-WWII period witnessed heavily theory-dependent debates over 
which sectors had the greatest promise of dynamism and the sectors from which 
capital (and suitable labor) could be drawn. Some argued that economic growth (and 
therefore investments to stimulate growth) ought to be balanced among sectors. 10 
 However, the dominant view was to pursue growth by stimulating industry rest-
ing on several beliefs. First, scarce capital and entrepreneurial expertise (Hirschman 
1958) and capacity for technological innovation (Streeten 1959) implied that these 
scarce resources ought to be concentrated where they were believed to be most effec-
tive. Second, if “unbalanced growth” was necessary, structuralist views tilted toward 
industrialization: if free trade penalizes developing countries that follow the neo-
classical doctrine of pursuing current comparative advantage through raw material 
export, industrial promotion was needed to surmount the expected deteriorating 
terms of trade of raw materials. The confidence in rapid industrial expansion was also 
reinforced by the belief that agriculture typically had underemployed labor that could 
be directed into industry and that agricultural growth was severely constrained by 
relatively fixed amounts of land and soil quality. Therefore, the industrial promotion 
doctrine called for reinforcing external capital with capital drained from the agricul-
tural sector, directly (taxes on agro-exports, ranging from beef- and grain-exporting 
Argentina to cocoa-exporting Ghana) or indirectly (ceilings on food prices as in Brazil 
in 1950–1970; Adams 1971, 48). Agricultural taxation could underwrite cheap gov-
ernment credit to manufacturers; low food prices permitted manufacturers to lower 
industrial wages. Despite rhetoric about the importance of agriculture because of the 
huge proportion of labor devoted to this sector, the proindustry, antiagricultural bias 
was w idespread. 11 
 This perspective eroded sharply by the 1980s. Protected industrialization stalled, 
agricultural bottlenecks arose, rural poverty increased, and uncontrolled urbaniza-
tion occurred in many countries. It became clear that agriculture had more potential 
than the conventional wisdom had assumed and that beggaring agriculture would 
lead to its deterioration as well as the general stagnation of exports (Vald é s 1983, 

26  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
97–98). Additional factors caused delays in recognizing and addressing this danger, 
attributing disappointing growth to the necessarily slow gestation of new industries 
or to external economic shocks. The precipitous decline of Sub-Saharan Africa’s agri-
culture in the 1960s and 1970s reflected not only weather and civil war but also 
widespread biases against agriculture in pricing, investment, and capital-extracting 
institutions such as marketing boards. 12 Southeast Asian discrimination against agri-
culture was strong in the 1970s and 1980s, though declining since then (Anderson 
1994, 21–22). Krueger, Schiff, and Valdes (1991) document similar patterns in Latin 
America. Today, the antiagricultural bias is largely dismissed. Bezemer and Headey 
(2008, 1345) conclude that 
 there is overwhelming evidence from theory, history, and contemporary analysis 
that agricultural growth is a precondition to broader growth . . . agricultural growth 
is quintessentially pro-poor growth . . . agriculture is generally labor intensive and 
skill-extensive, so that agricultural growth creates additional employment with 
low entry barriers. Increased agricultural productivity also lowers food prices for 
both the rural and the urban poor, who typically spend most of their household 
budgets on food. Especially productivity growth on small family farms is very 
pro-poor. 
 Whereas the ISI strategy clearly emphasized light industry, several countries adopted 
a heavy industry promotion strategy. India, faced with grave security concerns, tried 
to pioneer a heavy industry strategy (the “Mahalanobis strategy”) emphasizing such 
industries as steel production, machine tools, cement, and chemicals. This strat-
egy dominated the First National Plan (with a largely symbolic emphasis on the 
micro-cottage industry in homage to Gandhi). South Korea’s heavy industry strategy 
promoted steel production and ship-building. In both countries, security concerns 
seemed to justify mobilizing resources for industries needed for national defense. 
 Both industry promotion strategies precluded export promotion, as protectionism 
was met with retaliatory tariffs by potential importers. The thinking was that once 
the infant industries were nurtured and well established, protection could be removed 
and export possibilities would open at some point. This doctrine was convenient for 
industrialists and other business leaders. Their political influence, reinforced by the 
political costs to governments that allow once-favored businesses to fail, prolonged 
many industrial promotion policies that had outlived their relevance. 
 A proindustry sectoral strategy calls for investments in the physical infrastructure 
subsectors (transportation, energy, water, and communications) supporting manu-
facturing. Some infrastructure development might be devoted to support rural indus-
trialization, but few countries emphasized rural industrialization in light of apparent 
economies of scale, and locational advantages had favored existing cities. Evidence 
(Duranton 2009) bears out the long tradition of viewing cities as engines of growth, 
because of economies of scale, industrial clustering, more effective matching of fac-
tors of production, greater opportunities for learning, efficiency service provision, 
and so on. Combined with the typically greater political power of urbanites over 
rural residents, urban-oriented infrastructure development, whether connecting cit-
ies or serving individual cities, generally strengthened the urban over rural areas. For 

Economic Development Theories and Doctrines  ●  27
example, in the early 1980s, Kenya and Liberia had urban electricity coverage of over 
80 percent, but rural coverage of only 4 and 12 percent, respectively. In the mid-
1990s, 99 percent of urban Ethiopians had access to telephone main lines, compared 
to only 1 percent of rural Ethiopians (Lanjouw and Feder 2001, 32). 
 International aid agencies found funding infrastructure projects to be particularly 
attractive. Large-scale projects facilitate industrialization generally, without having to 
bet on particular firms; large sums could be transferred efficiently; and engineering 
and project planning skills seemed eminently transferable to developing countries. 
Infrastructure development was also spurred by the preference of bilateral donors for 
infrastructure projects that required heavy equipment and engineering services from 
the donor country.  13   However, infrastructure was often compromised by subsidization 
through underpricing of infrastructure access and outputs, undermining cost recovery, 
and thereby weakening the capacity to maintain and expand infrastructure systems. 
 The widespread failures of inward-directed industrialization reflected neglect of a 
basic insight: protected and subsidized firms have little incentive to become efficient, 
as long as the government lacks the capacity or willingness to punish inefficiency or 
credibly threaten the withdrawal of privileged treatment. The exception was South 
Korea, where General Park provided both capital and protection to Korean industri-
alists but credibly threatened dire consequences for those who might take unproduc-
tive advantage of the privileges. 
 In the early post-WWII period, the social sectors (education, health, nutrition, 
family planning) received little direct attention, reflecting the presumption that 
abundant labor from rural areas—where education and health deficits were often 
the greatest—could easily be absorbed into industry where on-the-job training could 
upgrade worker skills. However, East Asian countries took another path, with South 
Korea, Taiwan, and Malaysia following the Japanese approach of human resource 
development. These Northeast Asian countries are rather homogeneous ethnically, 
and Malaysia’s poorer, less-well-educated Malays are a politically dominant majority. 
This suggests that human resource development strategies may hinge politically on 
whether the poorer population segments are part of the majority ethnicity. 
 Project and Program Levels 
 The alternative to theorizing about sectoral priorities is through the methodologies of 
individual project or program selection. The logic underlying the methodologies of 
project-specific societal profitability (societal rate of return) would seem to challenge 
the broader theories of sectoral priorities. Rate-of-return analysis (or benefit-cost 
analysis) estimates the value of costs and benefits (not confined to narrow economic 
outcomes; e.g., a project may improve the population’s health) for each year into the 
future. This income stream yields the return on investment, which typically has to 
exceed a minimum “hurdle rate.” 14 Despite debates on how to value benefits and 
costs, and the technical details of calculating the rate of return, every organization 
assessing proposals for development assistance had worked out similar procedures. 
 One major contribution to valuing a project’s benefits or costs was the introduc-
tion of “shadow prices” into the analysis. Price-controlled goods and services do not 
reflect their true values; estimating what the “shadow” prices would have been in 

28  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
a free market in principle offsets the distortions (Little and Mirrlees 1969, 1990; 
Squire and van der Tak 1975). This demonstrates that the mainstream economic 
approach does not have to pretend that markets are operating freely in order to assess 
the merit of specific projects. 
 It might seem that if the rate of return is the criterion for selecting projects or 
programs, broader sectoral theories would be unnecessary. Yet, a comprehensive 
assessment of benefits and costs requires understanding the interconnections of the 
economy. In principle, models could be devised to trace out both direct and second-
ary impacts. Rate-of-return analysis and theorizing about the myriad interactions 
within the economy can be linked—at least in theory. 
 However, the challenge became far more complex as the development agenda 
expanded. The narrowly defined economic rate of return is no longer a sufficient 
metric if poverty alleviation, health, environmental protection, respect for human 
rights, enhancement of women’s roles, and so on, are additional goals of develop-
ment, justified on the grounds of both their intrinsic value and their contribution 
to economic growth. Even if the analysis could estimate the contribution to growth 
from each of these improvements with reasonable accuracy, estimating the intrinsic 
value of each improvement is extremely daunting. For this reason, certain types of 
projects and programs are typically excluded from rate-of-return analysis. Even the 
World Bank’s project appraisals typically do not apply economic rate-of-return analy-
ses to education, environment, finance and private sector development, health, nutri-
tion, population planning, public sector governance, and social protection. World 
Bank practice is to confine economic rate-of-return analysis largely to agriculture and 
rural development, energy and mining, transport, urban development, and water 
projects (World Bank Independent Evaluation Group 2010, 7). 
 However, even for projects where rate-of-return analysis is expected to be con-
ducted, the challenge remains to account for impacts on goals other than the directly 
economic ones. For example, a road project may provide greater health service access 
for low-income people, but it is likely to have environmental impacts and may dis-
place people from cherished sites or enable outsiders to enter the area, thus increasing 
the potential for intergroup conflict. Estimating these societal benefits and costs, 
typically characterized by highly uncertain probabilities and magnitudes of impacts, 
is often daunting. Therefore, the usual approach to evaluating projects with these 
possible impacts is a hybrid of benefit-cost analysis, qualitative invocations of the 
potential added benefits, and a separate assessment of whether the potential negative 
impacts are great enough to kill the project. To incorporate the potential governance 
impacts of programs and projects, as well as how they ought to be formulated, the 
UN Development Programme has developed a governance assessment framework to 
identify or anticipate the consequences for inclusive, participatory, and responsive 
governance (Hyd é n 2007), going far beyond traditional cost-benefit analysis. 
 Equity Issues and the Poverty Alleviation Imperative 
 While increasing overall prosperity is easily embraced as a consensual goal—all other 
things being equal—the distributional question of who gets what is inevitably con-
tentious. Five distributional questions have preoccupied development economics 

Economic Development Theories and Doctrines  ●  29
since the 1970s. The first is how to define the general relationship between equity 
and growth—a concern that has pitted those who believe that a country prospering 
through unequal income and wealth distributions will ultimately find the means to 
lift up the poorest segments of the population against those who either reject the 
effectiveness of growth strategies based on highly unequal distributions or demand 
more equitable distribution even at the cost of aggregate economic growth. Second, 
how should the objectives of addressing equity issues be defined? Third, for those 
who are intent on addressing income disparities immediately, how can this be incor-
porated into technical methods of assessing policy alternatives (the “methodology of 
macroeconomic planning and policy formulation”; Ahluwalia and Chenery 1974, 
39) and what doctrines would accomplish this effectively? Fourth, what ought to be 
the role of the state in shaping the income distribution? Fifth, what are the existing 
structural inequalities, whether economic, political, or social, that impede propoor, 
equity-oriented interventions? These last two questions raise the methodological 
question of whether the economist’s toolkit underestimates the political economy 
constraints—such as local and national power structures, centrifugal forces in the 
society, and ethnic and cultural differences. 
 The G rowth-Equity R elationship 
 As mentioned above, one reason why the early post-WWII development thinking 
paid relatively little attention to income distribution was the presumption that over-
all economic growth would lift the poor along with everyone else. One of the most 
influential concepts in this regard was the dual-sector model, positing two largely 
independent sectors. The traditional, low-technology, predominantly rural sector is 
characterized by low productivity and therefore low incomes. It was thought to be 
commonly plagued by severe underemployment. The modern sector, employing more 
advanced technology, generally urban-centered, and with more interaction with the 
international system, enjoys higher productivity and compensation. Workers in the 
modern sector, largely employed in medium- and large-scale private and state firms, 
are more likely to be organized vis- à -vis their firms. 
 Within this clearly simplified conception, positive development entails the expan-
sion of the modern sector and consequently the movement of people from the tra-
ditional sector to the modern sector. As this process unfolds, the overall economy 
expands. The optimistic expectation in terms of income distribution is that compe-
tition to hire sufficiently skilled modern sector workers, or workers’ organizational 
strength, will elevate their wages. Income would increase for the population segment 
transitioning from the traditional to the modern sector. 
 The potentially problematic assumptions underlying this scenario include the need 
for incentives for employers to add labor as firms expand, which may not prevail if high 
wages provoke the substitution of machinery for labor. This also hinges on whether 
the expansion of the modern sector labor demand can keep up with the expansion 
of the workforce to absorb sufficient labor such that employers must compete for 
workers. Rapidly expanding populations in developing countries have often exceeded 
workforce expansion. Finally, the existence of surplus labor does not guarantee that 
these workers have the skills or geographical access to take on modern sector jobs. 

30  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 Moreover, even if this transition from the traditional to the modern sector does 
occur, the short- and medium-term implication is a deterioration in income distri-
bution. This was foreshadowed by Simon Kuznets’s (1955) demonstration that the 
poorest and the richest countries of the day had more equal income distributions than 
the countries of intermediate per capita income levels. While Kuznets did not have 
time series data to trace the income distribution patterns over time, his analysis is con-
sistent with the dual-sector theory, 15 with the countries with intermediate per capital 
income levels reflecting the inequality resulting from the income differences between 
the traditional sector and the modern sector. In short, even if the healthy process of 
expanding the modern sector proceeds, income inequality will increase for at least a 
while. Relative inequality rises, even as the poverty of traditional sector workers is alle-
viated as they move into the modern sector. From a doctrinal perspective, this model 
also implies that the transition can be hastened by directing investment and policy 
advantages to the modern sector, which is largely the industrial sector. 
 In many countries, the transition did not go as hoped: industrialization faltered or 
other factors undermined economic growth, industrial firms were reluctant to hire, or 
industrial wages stagnated because of an ample unemployed urban labor. Therefore, 
even in some of the most dynamic developing countries, with the exception of South 
Korea and Taiwan, the overall income distribution became more skewed. This was 
particularly acute in Latin America, where it was not until the decade of the 2000s 
that the fastest growing nations (i.e., Brazil and Chile) finally experienced improve-
ments (Solt 2010). 
 The overall implications of the distribution of income remain heavily disputed. 
One argument is that high-income individuals can be a boon to the overall growth 
of the economy, because they have a higher propensity to save and invest. It is ironic 
that this proposition—derogatorily labeled the trickle-down approach and widely 
attributed to neoclassical development economists—was originally a creation of the 
structuralists, such as Arthur Lewis (1954), who saw the top income-earning decile as 
the key to domestic investment. If the government does not throw impediments such 
as distorting taxes, expensive licensing, or administrative red tape, domestic invest-
ments would be embraced. Because developing countries typically have underem-
ployed labor, labor inputs will be competitively attractive for investors, thus bringing 
the poor into more remunerative employment. 
 A sharply opposing argument is that the luxury goods and services demanded by 
the wealthy draw savings and investment away from production that would make 
goods more available and affordable for the poor. The wealthy are also more likely to 
seek imported goods, attractive in part because they are imported, sending earnings 
out of the domestic economy and undermining the potential of domestic production 
of these goods. For goods and services that the upper- and middle-income households 
do seek from the domestic economy, the capital tied up in producing them underfi-
nances the production of “inferior goods” that only the poor would consume. 
 Framing the Objectives of Addressing Equity Issues 
 The framing of distributional issues has been a crucial aspect of how development 
economics has addressed these questions. The more provocative framing focuses 

Economic Development Theories and Doctrines  ●  31
directly on the relative distribution of income, wealth, and other aspects of well-
being within a society, thereby emphasizing the differences. Even if complete equality 
is not a widely held goal, the call for greater equity is widely shared. The question 
is how drastic the efforts to achieve equity ought to be. The most extreme efforts at 
direct redistribution, ranging from land reform without full and immediate compen-
sation to confiscation of factories and savings, have often led to long-term economic 
stagnation (China, Cuba) or even civil war. Even less extreme efforts, if they strongly 
deter investment and production, will not provide the productivity needed to sustain 
the gains of the poor. Therefore, the doctrine that emerged from the development 
agencies in the 1970s, led by the World Bank, was to promote strategies that would 
not wrench away income already earned by wealthier people, but rather would favor 
the economic growth of lower income groups. World Bank Vice President Hollis 
Chenery asserted that “distribution is not simply a concern with income shares but 
rather with the level and growth of income in lower-income groups. Distributional 
objectives therefore cannot be viewed independently of growth objectives. Instead 
they should be expressed dynamically in terms of desired rates of growth of income 
of different groups” (Ahluwalia and Chenery 1974, 38). 
 The challenge, then, is to devise macroeconomic policies that favor productivity 
gains by lower income people and to target them for programs and projects that increase 
their incomes. The structuralist approach endorsed by Chenery and others emphasized 
asset distribution as key to income distribution. Such policies would include: direct-
ing government spending to improve the human capital (essentially health and educa-
tion) of the poor, benefiting them directly while improving the overall capacity of the 
economy; land reform and other policies to enhance the productivity of small-scale 
agriculture; and promotion of the urban informal sector rather than capital-intensive 
industries (Chenery 1974, vii, xvii). This is clearly a more gradualist approach than 
direct redistribution, reflecting caution in light of the risk of political backlash. 
 Political resistance to asset redistribution makes this approach unlikely to succeed 
on any large scale in most countries. However, in areas such as land ownership and 
security of tenure, some degree of asset redistribution is essential for any program to 
make the rural poor more productive (see  chapter 3 ). Beyond this essential minimum, 
a vigorous policy of investment reallocation in a rapidly growing economy may be more 
effective in increasing the productive capacity of the poor than redistribution of exist-
ing assets, which would have a high cost in social and political disruption (Ahluwalia 
and Chenery 1974, 49). Yet there is even milder framing of the challenge as poverty 
alleviation. Whether or not the incomes of the rich are growing faster than those of the 
poor, the focus can be simply to lift the poor out of poverty. This absolute rather than 
relative conception has a far more consensual normative appeal. Many policies hold the 
promise of reducing poverty without undermining the incomes of the nonpoor even in 
the short run and may enhance the income potential of all in the long run. 
 Macroeconomics of Distribution and Poverty Alleviation 
 On the macroeconomic level, most of the attention has been focused on the impacts 
of the combined austerity and structural adjustment programs, because of their 
short-term impacts on the poor. This is a misleading focus, because the whole range 

32  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
of macroeconomic policies shapes the income distribution. For example, macro-
economic policies that trigger inflation differentially affect the savings of different 
groups, with lower income families generally less able to buffer their incomes from 
inflation. Tax policies that provide special privileges for the wealthy (and typically 
well-connected) reduce the tax revenues that the government could use to finance 
social services for the poor. Trade policies increase or decrease the protection of par-
ticular subsectors. Yet the structural adjustment programs that have largely been 
introduced along with austerity measures during economic crisis have borne the 
brunt of attention and criticism. 
 During the 1980s, the Washington Consensus approach to resolving macroeco-
nomic imbalances through the combination of austerity packages as well as structural 
adjustment measures reinforced the perception that mainstream, largely neoclassical 
economics was associated with income regressivity. In the long run, structural adjust-
ment is progressive, insofar as it dismantles the distortions offering special advantage 
to the well-connected (Mikesell 1983). However, austerity programs reduce two very 
visible indicators often regarded as addressing the poor: social spending and wage 
policy. In fact, for many countries, both affect not the poorest segments of the popu-
lation but rather the higher (if not highest) income recipients of government benefits 
and of wages directly influenced by government policy. Their objections to austerity 
programs make such programs seem highly regressive. 
 By the mid-1980s, the realization that austerity measures were having highly 
adverse impacts on the poor, especially poor children, gave rise to an explicit doctrine 
of “adjustment with a human face” (Cornia, Jolly, and Stewart 1987). The liberal-
ization initiatives and general cutbacks would be accompanied by social services or 
cash transfers targeted to the poor. The most current variation is the conditional cash 
transfer, entailing payments to low-income families as long as the families’ children 
are enrolled in school and receive regular health care. Conditional cash transfer pro-
grams were employed in conjunction with Argentina’s drastic austerity program in 
2002, Indonesia’s fuel price liberalization in 2005, and the broader Brazilian liber-
alization undertaken by President Lula da Silva throughout 2000–2009 (Widianto 
2007; Grosh et al. 2008). Additional benefits are the improvements in human capital 
and the potential reduction in unrest by the poor. 
 Microeconomic Approaches to Poverty Alleviation 
 Quite diverse approaches have been proposed to select and enact poverty alleviation 
programs and projects: emphasizing sectors that redound more to the poor, integrat-
ing the provision of goods and services through “integrated rural development,” the 
“basic needs” approach of direct targeting of goods and services to the poor, adjusting 
the calculated rates of return to favor propoor projects, and exempting poverty alle-
viation projects from meeting minimal rate-of-return standards. Intergovernmental 
organizations, such as the international financial institutions, have played a leading 
role in advancing, debating, and implementing these microeconomic approaches to 
poverty alleviation. 
 Sectoral strategy as poverty alleviation strategy. The World Bank, explicitly embrac-
ing poverty alleviation as its first priority following President Robert McNamara’s 

Economic Development Theories and Doctrines  ●  33
highly publicized Nairobi speech in 1973, increased its emphasis on rural projects, 
particularly agriculture, explicitly to enhance the productivity of the rural poor. A dis-
tinction was made between rural development projects, requiring at least half of the 
benefits targeted to households below the poverty line, and other projects (including 
agriculture projects). Projects designated as “rural development” were favored over 
“agricultural” projects. 
 Integrated rural development. Recognizing that the rural poor lack a broad but vary-
ing range of assets, bilateral and multilateral aid agencies experimented with a new 
doctrine of “integrated rural development” to provide the full set of interventions 
in rural areas, from retail outlets for farm inputs and production credit to extension 
education and family planning programs (Mosher 1976, 54). It typically entailed 
the coordinative mechanism of a dedicated project administration, often specifically 
designated and recruited, to secure inputs from higher level mainline administrative 
units, such as the national or subnational ministries. In some cases, the initiative 
included efforts to help organize the poor so that they could exert pressure from 
below to ensure that government programs and facilities are accessible to them. 
 Because urbanization in many countries has involved the movement of rural people 
with few assets, governments have been compelled to formulate doctrines to address 
the urbanization of poverty. In keeping with the structuralist doctrine of strengthen-
ing the assets of the poor in order to generate more income, one prominent initiative 
was to develop microenterprise programs—with direct government funding, or com-
mitments of state banks to earmark funds for micro-borrowers, or requirements that 
private banks do so. 16 However, it was—and remains—controversial as to whether 
credit should be subsidized and whether NGOs are more appropriate for organizing 
and supporting microenterprise programs. 
 Another painful dilemma that arises from the urbanization of poverty is how to 
address the tendency of the poor to occupy fragile peri-urban land that the gov-
ernment has declared off-limits for residence. The common initial reaction, out of 
concern for health, safety, and environmental concerns, was to ban unauthorized 
settlements, forcibly move migrants back to rural areas, and bulldoze the illegal settle-
ments. The ineffectiveness of this reaction, as well as the conflicts that it created, 
typically led to more “accommodationist” approaches of contributing to upgrading 
of the settlement sites, developing peri-urban satellite settlements, and other policies 
recognizing the futility of forcibly limiting urbanization (Laquian 1981). 
 Basic needs . In the mid-1970s, several international organizations (the International 
Labour Office, the World Bank, the UN Development Programme, the World Health 
Organization, and the UN Food and Agriculture Organization) and the major bilat-
eral donors formally embraced the “basic needs” doctrine, which Hoadley (1981, 
150) defined as “the acceptance of the goal of providing all persons with a certain 
minimum standard of these basic needs as a central priority of development. A basic 
needs strategy is the deliberate adoption of a set of policies designed to provide, or help 
people provide for themselves, these basic needs.” Meeting basic needs could enhance 
the productivity of the poor through improvements in human capital, but basic needs 
advocates were adamant that this is secondary to fulfilling consumption needs. 17  
 The two obvious questions regarding basic needs are who should be targeted and 
how much expenditure is needed to meet their needs. No technical definition exists 

34  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
to address either question. While it is possible to determine some of the minimal 
standards of nutrition and (more arguably) housing, the other elements are unavoid-
ably subjective. Paul Streeten and Shahid Burki (1978, 413), prominent basic needs 
proponents, acknowledged that 
 there are no objective criteria for defining the contents of a basic needs bundle. 
While certain minimum physiological conditions are necessary to sustain life, 
basic needs vary between geographical regions, climates, cultures and periods. 
Even such a basic requirement as nutrition for the same sex, the same age and the 
same activity varies between different people. Housing requirements also show 
wide variations and so do all other basic needs. 
 One approach to addressing this dilemma is to leave the judgment to whoever is 
regarded as reflecting the preference of the society as a whole. 18 In practice, an external 
foreign assistance agency would have to rely on either the government as the voice of 
the society or on domestic NGOs through which the agency is channeling its assis-
tance. For a government, a calculation of the required expenditure to meet some level 
of basic needs would require identifying the total resources (domestic and external), 
but also to examine tradeoffs with other objectives (Streeten and Burki 1978, 415). 
One example that illustrates the logic is a calculation of the resources required to meet 
the basic needs of the poor in Bangladesh—an enormous challenge given the abject 
poverty in that country. Following an analysis of the resources needed to overcome the 
lack of adequate nutrition, clothing, sanitation, housing, and power, Streeten and Burki 
(1978, 471) concluded that “[if] the basic needs target were to be met in the next ten 
years, within the present structures, this would imply an 8% rate of real growth in the 
 average incomes of the absolutely poor. Meeting the target over a period of 25 years 
implies a real growth in personal incomes of the absolute poor at the rate of 3.1% per 
annum.” 19   However, from this analysis, they concluded that “such high rates of growth 
in incomes do not seem possible without a fundamental change in development poli-
cies” and require a “global compact” among wealthy and poor countries that requires 
not only the mobilization of sufficient resources but also changes in the “domestic poli-
cies of recipient nations” (418–419). Although domestic policies have changed in many 
developing countries, the global compact has certainly not emerged. 
 These macro-implications of the basic needs doctrine focused attention on con-
sumption deficits rather than on aggregate economic growth targets. Although in 
theory it was to apply “wherever people were found who fell below certain standards 
of basic needs” (Hoadley 1981, 152), in practice the resource limitations meant that 
it was largely applied on the project level. Working back from consumption targets 
rather than from growth objectives, “the consumption targets are translated into spe-
cific programme goals[, for example] a life expectancy of 65 years or more; a literacy 
rate of at least 75%; an infant mortality rate of 50 or less per 1000 births; and a 
birth rate of 25 or less per 1000 population” (Ruttan 1984, 397). Thus, the analytic 
approach is to specify targets for the project area, not necessarily to bring all of the 
poor in the area out of the throes of basic needs deficits. 
 Conditional cash transfers. Although the basic needs approach as initially conceived 
soon fell out of favor, the normative commitment to the lowest income families 

Economic Development Theories and Doctrines  ●  35
resurfaced in the doctrine of cash transfers, calling for regular payments to eligible 
low-income families. Rather than having to coordinate inputs from multiple provid-
ers for myriad local projects, cash transfer programs can be mounted on a broad 
basis, and the recipients have greater choice over the benefits they receive. Behind 
unconditional cash transfer programs is a consumer sovereignty theory that the fam-
ily decision makers are in the best position to meet the family’s needs. When cash 
transfer programs are conditional, in requiring families to engage in training or work-
fare programs, keep their children in school, or provide them health care, they offer 
explicit promise of greater productivity for the society as a whole. This is also a means 
of avoiding the problem of unconditional transfers that families may end up spend-
ing the cash on nonproductive activities (e.g., dowries, drinking, or gambling). 
 In transferring the cash to the female head of household, the typical cash transfer 
program also engages one corner of the complex challenge of recognizing and enhanc-
ing the role of women in development, which emerged as a focus around 1980. 
Recognizing the previously undervalued role of women in economic development 
as well as in family well-being was straightforward enough, but recognizing—and 
addressing—the negative outcomes of  intrafamily politics between male and female 
family members (Agarwal 1997) created demands for policies to strength the power 
of women within families, a sphere commonly regarded as off-limits to government 
policy. Yet targeting cash transfers exclusively to mothers, despite criticism that this is 
cultural interference, reflects the recognition of these dynamics. 
 Deciding the amount of cash transfer also engages the issue of how much resources 
ought to be devoted to poverty alleviation. Rather than establishing a target such as 
increasing average life expectancy, the magnitude of conditional cash transfer could, 
in principle, be based on how much each eligible family would require to obtain 
proper nutrition and health care. In practice, however, the government must also 
consider the magnitude of available budgetary resources, often less than a given basic 
needs target. 
 Amartya Sen’s capability approach has a clear linkage to the basic needs doctrine; 
it is cast in terms of fulfilling what is needed for individuals to have meaningful 
choices regarding both physical well-being and social interactions (including political 
participation). The doctrine emphasizes the capacity of the individual more than on 
the inputs (according to Sen [1985, 7], “a functioning is an achievement of a person: 
what she or he manages to do or be, such as being nourished or participating in the 
political process”). However, there is significant overlap—Streeten and others empha-
sized both the capacity to engage in the full range of social activities and the indi-
vidual’s centrality in determining what these capabilities are. Sen also agrees that the 
ranking of capabilities depends on the particular society and, therefore, must be left 
to public discourse. In essence, the capability approach embraces the same imperative 
of bringing the poorest segments of the society up to a satisfactory level. 
 The technical manifestation of the capability approach has been a series of com-
posite indicators, developed by Sen, Mahbub ul Haq (former World Bank official 
and Pakistani finance minister), and others for the UN Development Programme’s 
annual  Human Development Reports . The most publicized is the Human Development 
Index, which ranks nations according to a composite measure of indicators (aggregate 
levels of health, education, and standard of living), but neglects the far richer set of 

36  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
needs. Far more enlightening is the Poverty Index, a composite measure of deficits 
in education, nutrition, child survival, electricity, potable water, sanitation, nondirt 
flooring, clean cooking fuel, transport vehicles, and appliances (UN Development 
Programme 2011, 172–173). 
 Second, the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), endorsed by most national 
governments and the major international development organizations in 2000, estab-
lished time-specific targets for specific countries and for the international develop-
ment community: eradication of extreme poverty and hunger; universal primary 
education; gender equality; reduction of child mortality; improvement of maternal 
health; combating HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases; ensuring environmental 
sustainability; and developing a global partnership for development. 
 Both the capabilities approach through the development indices and the MDGs 
strongly convey a poverty alleviation doctrine. Although many countries have fallen 
short of the targets, the consumption focus rather than aggregate economic growth 
focus has endured. 
 Social benefit-cost analysis. The rate-of-return analysis for assessing development 
projects or programs can also be directed to equity and poverty alleviation consider-
ations. Beginning in the mid-1970s, the World Bank’s management tried to imple-
ment poverty-alleviating approach to calculating the rates of return of projects. 20 The 
conventional approach is to regard every unit of benefit the same regardless of the 
beneficiary. Yet the poverty alleviation emphasis that arose in the 1970s moved devel-
opment agencies toward benefit-cost analysis that favored projects targeting the poor. 
Several prominent development economists associated with the World Bank tried to 
introduce “social benefit-cost analysis”: “the impact of a Project on income distribu-
tion is estimated by giving weights to the incremental consumption accruing to each 
income group benefitting from the Project, including labor” (Cleaver 1980, 14). 
 The rationale for attributing different weights to incomes received by people of 
different income levels is based on the welfare economics principle of maximizing 
utility rather than income, and a given unit of income typically has greater utility to 
a poor person. Therefore, a project that directs income to the poor contributes more 
utility than one that directs the same income to the wealthy. Squire and van der Tak 
(1975) developed an approach based on the work by Little and Mirrlees (1969) to 
explicitly adjust the rate of return of projects targeting more of their benefits to the 
poor. 21 To make the adjustment, the analyst would have to posit the income level at 
which the actual and adjusted benefit are equal and how steeply the adjusted benefit 
increases or decreases according to the beneficiaries’ income levels. 
 However, several challenges arose. First, any effort by the World Bank or other 
international organization to set the adjustment factors independently would be 
condemned as far too heavy-handed. The only viable alternative was to infer the 
distributional preferences within the target country, possibly from examining the 
nation’s expenditures on welfare, the distribution of tax burdens, or other indications 
of redistributive preferences. Cleaver (1980, 14–15) implemented the World Bank’s 
premise that the weights ought to “reflect Government’s income distribution objec-
tives.” Yet these “revealed preferences” hinge on often volatile governmental policies 
that certainly do not necessarily reflect the society’s ideal distributions of benefits or 
burdens, even assuming the meaningfulness of the concept of societal preference. 

Economic Development Theories and Doctrines  ●  37
Second, the analysis of who would receive how much of the project benefits, and 
what their incomes are, is typically prone to high levels of uncertainty. Third, the 
time-consuming analysis and the professional risk of making the heroic assumptions 
required for the analysis were regarded as unwarranted burdens if the results do not 
determine project approval (Leff 1985b). The approach was basically abandoned. 
 The Ongoing Evolution of Goals 
 The substantial success in meeting the poverty reduction objectives of the UN-led 
initiative MDGs has generated another round of goal-setting beyond the MDG tar-
get year of 2015. The UN Secretary General’s “High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons 
on the Post-2015 Development Agenda,” after lauding the MDGs for reducing abso-
lute poverty, raised the same question of how to address the expanding development 
agenda that has challenged theory and practice since the 1980s:
 But to fulfil our vision of promoting sustainable development, we must go 
beyond the MDGs. They did not focus enough on reaching the poorest and most 
excluded people. They were silent on the devastating effects of conflict and vio-
lence on development. The importance to development of good governance and 
institutions that guarantee the rule of law, free speech and open and accountable 
government was not included, nor the need for inclusive growth to provide jobs. 
Most seriously, the MDGs fell short by not integrating the economic, social, and 
environmental aspects of sustainable development as envisaged in the Millennium 
Declaration, and by not addressing the need to promote sustainable patterns of 
consumption and production. The result was that environment and development 
were never properly brought together. (United Nations 2013, i) 
 The Post-2015 Development Agenda, recently approved by the UN member states, 
proposes eradicating absolute poverty completely by 2030, but also shifting interna-
tional efforts from short-term, sectoral approaches to systemic treatment of inclu-
sion, participation, environmental quality, and human rights. This obviously requires 
stronger institutions, to which we now turn. 
 Institutions and the Role of the State 
 The “discovery” of institutions.  Aside from external factors, positive or negative 
economic performance rests on the quality of economic policies and their imple-
mentation, in turn depending on the quality of policymaking and administrative 
institutions, which in turn depends on the quality of governance and overall soci-
etal institutions. 22 Daniel Kaufmann, a World Bank researcher in the 1990s, dem-
onstrated that sound macroeconomic policies are essential for productive projects 
and programs; by the 2000s, as the director of the World Bank Institute’s Global 
Programs, Kaufmann’s focus shifted upstream to the importance of sound gover-
nance as essential for sound macroeconomic policies as well as sound projects and 
programs (Kaufmann 1992, 2009; Kaufmann and Wang 1995; Isham and Kaufmann 
1999). Indeed, all economic development approaches have come to recognize the 

38  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
importance of “good governance,” which is considered in more detail in  chapters 4 
and  5 . Nevertheless, alternative approaches define and try to address institutional 
inadequacies differently. 
 Within the neoclassical paradigm, many of the failures of economies to behave 
according to neoclassical assumptions are attributed to weak institutions that under-
mine efficiency. Poor institutions may channel factors of production into efforts 
of lower societal returns; the interactions of hiring, production decisions, financial 
exchange, trade, and so on, may be unnecessarily costly. The question is whether the 
inefficiencies are caused by the interventions of the state or whether these interven-
tions can, at least in principle, resolve inefficiencies. 
 The neoclassical position is that unwise government policies and inefficient state 
structures interfere with market forces. From this perspective, the problem is not that 
neoclassical equilibrating mechanisms of supply, demand, price, wages, etc., would 
fail to operate if left to their own devices, but rather that these mechanisms are blocked 
by policy failures. 23 Therefore, the doctrine consistent with neoclassical economics 
calls for the reduction of the role of government and state institutions in obstructing 
the operation of the market or even dismantling some of these institutions. 
 In contrast, structuralists emphasize that the rigidities attributable to the socioeco-
nomic characteristics—such as immobile labor, poor information, or unwillingness to 
put savings into productive investment—unresolvable without governmental action. 
They also emphasize how national and local power structures constrain the ability of 
the poorest segments of the society to adequately benefit from market mechanisms, 
calling for interventions to level the playing field. 
 The most prominent challenge to the neoclassical perspective is the new insti-
tutional economics, enjoying the prestige of Nobel Prizes awarded to theorists who 
inspired the approach. 24 This perspective emphasizes interactions among economic 
actors, particularly the costs of arranging contracts broadly conceived (transac-
tion costs 25 ) and the importance of institutions that determine these costs. Oliver 
Williamson (2002, 178) controversially claims that “[t]he contract/private ordering/
governance (hereafter governance) approach maintains that structure [of firms] arises 
mainly in the service of economizing on transaction costs.” If arranging transaction 
cost-minimizing structures were simply at private actors’ discretion, state interven-
tion would not only be unhelpful but also stifling of the private sector’s flexibility in 
moving to these structures. For example, some regulations on firms, such as mini-
mum wage requirements or greater auditing burdens, may discourage the formation 
of more efficient firm structures. On the other hand, some potentially beneficial 
transactions may not be feasible because of high transaction costs imposed by the 
overall structure. Institutions beyond the control of the firm may be suboptimal 
because of poor information, unclear property rights, or other impediments; there-
fore, revamping the relevant institutions becomes compelling. Government (which 
Williamson [2002, 175–76] calls hierarchy) could be instrumental in restructuring 
so that firms can reduce their transaction costs: “The problem of economic organiza-
tion is properly posed not as markets or hierarchies, but rather as markets and hier-
archies. A predictive theory of economic organization will recognize how and why 
transactions differ in their adaptive needs, whence the use of the market to supply 
some transactions and recourse to hierarchy for others.” 

Economic Development Theories and Doctrines  ●  39
 The new institutional critique of neoclassical economics is that the neoclassical 
framework cannot identify the institutional arrangements that would raise or lower 
transaction costs. Eggertsson (1990, 14–15) asserts that the narrowness of the “fric-
tionless” neoclassical approach limits the capacity to identify optimal arrangements. 
The broader perspective requires multiple demanding tasks: securing information 
about prices and quality of materials and labor; searching for potential trading part-
ners and information about them; bargaining among potential partners; making, 
monitoring, and enforcing contracts; and protecting property rights, whether from 
private actors or the government itself. 
 Yet the debate on the roles of state institutions in developing countries has not 
changed in practical terms. Government and the state institutions (e.g., state-owned 
enterprises and quasi-governmental corporations) have the potential to reduce 
transactions costs. Yet, they often set prices at variance with market prices, make 
unprofitable investments with less constraint than profit-maximizing private firms, 
and unjustifiably favor some economic activities over others through subsidies or tax 
policies. Government and state officials, from high to low, may extract payments 
from private actors seeking excessive profits through restrictions to competition that 
these officials enact; this rent-seeking both squanders firms’ resources and distorts 
markets. While some theorists of rent-seeking are within the new institutional eco-
nomics tradition, 26 the prevalence of corruption based on rent-seeking in developing 
countries supplements the neoclassical doctrine of freeing markets from government 
intervention. 
 Conclusion 
 Policymakers are left with ambiguous guidance in terms of both theory and doctrine. 
Economic patterns are far better known than at the beginning of the post-WWII 
period, when national accounts were in their infancy, but the means for selecting 
optimal poverty alleviation strategies lack consensus. Technical ambiguity leaves 
open the choice of economic strategy and practice to whatever ideological stance and 
political calculations top political leaders may have. In the next chapter, we examine 
the r ecord of p ractice. 

 CHAPTER 3 
 Economic Policy and 
Program Practice 
 Introduction 
 We have seen that economic policy doctrines often do not correspond with the latest 
theories of development economics. Yet, to an even greater extent, economic policy 
 practice has departed from theories and doctrines. Examining how and why these 
departures have occurred will build our understanding of the challenges that policy-
makers continue to face. We shall see that the decision-aiding methods derived from 
economic theory do not provide the guidance required to select optimal economic 
policies, programs, or projects. We shall also see the faltering progress of the major 
policy reform designed to further both equity and efficiency. These include liber-
alizing the economy to reduce rent-seeking, reforming or privatizing state-owned 
enterprises, enhancing tax collection, creating propoor social safety nets, extending 
social services, stimulating propoor regional development without provoking vio-
lence, managing natural resources soundly, redressing the bias against agriculture, 
developing sound physical infrastructure, and decentralizing economic decision mak-
ing. While poverty alleviation has made progress in most developing countries, the 
full potential to redress poverty has been hampered by the failure to translate these 
propoor doctrines into practice. Finally, the inability to specify technically which 
sectors to promote for greatest societal gain leaves the field open to organized interest 
groups, often at the expense of the most vulnerable families. 
 The Uneven Path of Liberalization 
 Although liberalization has been the most important global trend in economic 
doctrines in the modern era, in many instances liberalization reforms throughout 
the developing world have been stalled or even partially reversed. The movement 
to greater market openness has been limited despite the long-standing consensus 
among professionally trained economists that trade openness, market pricing, mac-
roeconomic stability, tax reform, privatization (or at least reform of inefficient state 

42  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
enterprises), and a competitive but well-regulated banking system are all necessary 
for economic growth. 
 The adoption of liberalized policies such as deregulation and trade openness varies 
widely from country to country. Yet the Economic Freedom of the World assessment 
(Gwartney, Hall, and Lawson 2014) reveals that developing countries in general have 
undertaken far less liberalization than developed nations or transitional European 
nations. Of the 98 developing countries in the data set, excluding Hong Kong and 
Singapore and the oil-rich Gulf states and Brunei, only 18 were scored at or above the 
median for developed countries in terms of deregulation; only ten were at or above 
the developed country median for trade openness. 
 Over the post-WWII period, the greatest liberalization was among Northeast 
Asian nations. Their dismantling of impediments to trade and business operations 
in general and the promotion of an export orientation have clearly been a key to the 
rapid economic growth and poverty alleviation, even if state direction and (in the case 
of Japan) protectionism remain prominent. 
 Substantial—though less dramatic—liberalization occurred in Latin America in 
the 1990s and 2000s. Lora (2007) notes that orthodox approaches prominent in 
the 1980s gave way to more flexible policy reform, with broader stakeholder partici-
pation, targeting specific market and government failures. These second-generation 
reforms began with fiscal reforms of the early 1990s, followed by mid-1990s’ pension 
reforms, and fiscal responsibility reforms in the 2000s. 1 The fact that more reform 
occurred in the 1990s than the 1980s, despite the high visibility of structural adjust-
ment and austerity agreements in the 1980s, reflects the hostility created by a com-
bination of structural adjustment and austerity in the 1980s. Yet with a few notable 
exceptions, 2 liberalization in Latin America never reached developed world levels. 
Only five of the 23 Latin American nations in the Economic Freedom rankings are 
at or above the developed country median rank on deregulation, and only six are at 
or above the developed country median in trade openness. Moreover, several Latin 
American nations have seen dramatic reversals, particularly the populist regimes of 
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, and Venezuela. 3 
 African nations have liberalized the least. The Economic Freedom assessment 
ranks 11 African countries 4 in the 20 lowest ranked countries among the 152 nations 
in the study, despite the rhetorical commitment to the New Partnership for Africa’s 
Development (NEPAD). The North African nations do no better than the Sub-
Saharan countries. 5 The World Bank Group’s Doing Business survey, with broader 
coverage (189 nations) to include smaller African nations and focusing on liberalized 
economic activity in practice, shows similar results. Only seven of 54 African nations 
are above the overall median in overall ease of doing business; nearly two-thirds are 
in the bottom quartile (World Bank Group 2014, 4). Nevertheless, the assessment 
notes that in 2013/2014 alone, 39 Sub-Saharan African countries conducted regula-
tory reforms to reduce “the complexity and cost of regulatory processes” (5) and 36 
countries reformed business-related legal institutions. 
 Africa’s lack of trade openness is particularly striking. Only four of the 40 African 
countries are above the Economic Freedom median, and 11 are in the bottom 20.  6 
Of the 54 African nations in the World Bank assessment, only five are at or above 
the median of all 184 countries, with 12 African countries among the bottom 

Economic Policy and Program Practice  ●  43
20 countries. 7 All North African nations were below the median in their formal 
policies as gauged by the Economic Freedom rankings, yet the World Bank Group 
assesses the North African nations as relatively more open in practice.  8 This contrast 
implies that the formal bureaucratic and regulatory trade rules are less constraining 
in practice. 
 The major Asian oil-exporting countries (Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, 
Qatar, Bahrain, and Oman), with the exception of Kuwait, have high liberalization 
rankings and trade openness. Oil exporters can count on hard currency flows regard-
less of their degree of protectionism and have relatively little domestic manufacturing 
to protect. Yet of other Arab Asian nations, the most telling ranking was Syria’s in the 
2010 assessment (Syria was excluded in the most recent assessment). Its extremely 
low rankings in both openness and general liberalization may reflect the protection 
of Assad supporters’ businesses. 
 The poorest Asian nations have made the least movement toward deregulation. 
The persistence of heavy regulation in South Asia and the poorest nations of Southeast 
Asia is counterintuitive—why are their leaders the least eager to try new approaches 
or more compelled to accept liberalization directives from the international financial 
institutions? However, it is plausible that in very poor nations the limited number 
of stakeholders with the opportunity to capture the limited economic surplus would 
cling tenaciously to the privileges that permit this capture. 
 The discrepancies between assessments of formal regulations and the survey-based 
Doing Business evaluations reveal how red tape can be used to favor insiders. The 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (2010), in evaluating liberaliza-
tion in Mongolia, Turkey, and the former Soviet republics, gave Armenia, Azerbaijan, 
Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, and Turkey the maximum score for movement 
toward liberalized trade policies. Yet the Doing Business rankings reveal Azerbaijan, 
Kyrgyzstan, and Mongolia still face severe trade obstacles, reflecting regulations and 
bureaucratic processes that can be used to facilitate rent-seeking or favoritism. 
 Finally, liberalization timing in Asia compared to Latin America illuminates the 
importance of global events in shaping orientations toward liberalization. The 1980s’ 
Latin American debt crisis produced more sound and fury than real change. Yet in 
Southeast Asia, liberalization during the 1980s and into the 1990s was rapid, but the 
1997 Asian financial crisis stalled it. Sally and Sen (2011, 574) observe that “Southeast 
Asia fits the developing-world pattern of fast trade-and-FDI [foreign direct invest-
ment] liberalisation through the 1980s and first half of the 1990s, followed by a slow-
down of momentum after the Asian crisis,” but they note that “with the exception of 
Singapore, government enthusiasm for further liberalisation declined markedly.” 
 Impact on the Poor 
 The most controversial aspect of liberalization is its impact on poverty and income 
distribution. It is crucial to understand that poverty trends and income distribution 
trends can run in opposite directions.  In some contexts, poor people get richer even 
while wealthier people gain more than the poor do.  If liberalization succeeds in free-
ing markets from competition-inhibiting policies, it can unleash economic growth 
that alleviates poverty through employment, as well as increase resources for propoor 

44  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
social programs. Even the limited liberalization has spurred economic growth across 
the developing world. From 2000 to 2014, Latin America’s real GDP per capita in 
purchasing power parity terms increased at an annual rate of 4 percent, Sub-Saharan 
Africa by over 5 percent, the Middle East and North Africa by 4.5 percent, and 
 developing Asia by an astonishing 9 percent. 9 
 Even more dramatic than economic growth has been the decline in severe poverty 
in some regions. As  table 3.1 illustrates, from 1990 to 2005 and projected to 2015, 
severe poverty (the proportion of population living on less than $1.25 per day) has 
shrunk in every developing region. The most impressive decline by far has been in East 
Asia and the Pacific: 55.2 percent in 1990 to a projected 5.5 percent in 2015—largely 
because of Chinese growth. Likewise, those living on less than $2 per day declined to 
21.6 percent from 81.0 percent. For Latin America and the Caribbean, with far less 
severe poverty to begin with, the proportions are on track to decline to less than half 
from 1990 to 2015 and nearly half for the population living on less than $2 per day. 
Similar declines are projected for the Middle East and North Africa. For South Asia 
and Sub-Saharan Africa, both with over half their populations living in severe poverty 
in 1990, this poverty level has been projected to be less than a quarter in 2015 for 
South Asia, though the proportion in Sub-Saharan Africa will remain above 42 per-
cent. For populations living on less than $2 per day, the proportions for both regions 
will still exceed half. This combination of economic growth and poverty alleviation 
is accompanied by varying patterns of income distribution trends, complicated by 
conflicting results that reflect the use of different measures of inequality (e.g., shares 
of deciles vs. the overall Gini index), how regions are defined, and which countries 
are excluded. Nevertheless, the patterns vary within each category; Alvarado and 
Gasparini (2013, 25) caution that “even in this [2000] decade of widespread social 
improvement, the country performances in terms of inequality reduction were quite 
heterogeneous.” A global UNICEF study (Ortiz and Cummins 2011) concludes that 
 Table 3.1  Proportions of population living below $1.25 and $2 per day in developing regions 
Percentage of population 
at poverty levels (in 2005 
purchasing power parity)
1990
2005
2015 projected
East Asia and Pacific
<$1.25/day
55.2
17.1
5.5
<$2/day
81.0
39.0
21.6
Latin America & 
Caribbean
<$1.25/day
12.2
8.7
4.9
<$2/day
22.4
16.7
11.8
Middle East and North 
Africa
<$1.25/day
5.8
3.5
2.6
<$2/day
23.5
17.4
9.3
South Asia
<$1.25/day
53.8
39.4
23.2
<$2/day
83.6
74.1
56.6
Sub-Saharan Africa
<$1.25/day
56.5
52.3
42.3
<$2/day
76.2
74.1
60.8
 Sources : World Bank (2012a, 2014b); World Bank PovcalNet databank. 

Economic Policy and Program Practice  ●  45
the 1990–2007 period was marked by growing income inequality in low-income 
countries but declining inequality in middle-income countries. 10 
 Regional trends largely confirm this pattern. For relatively low-income regions, 
Alvarado and Gasparini found generally rising inequality from 1990 to 2010 for 
South Asia, the second poorest region, but almost no change overall in Sub-Saharan 
Africa, the poorest region. For middle-income regions, Latin America experienced a 
substantial increase in inequality until the new millennium, when inequality began 
to decline substantially. They report that 95 percent of Latin American countries had 
declining inequality in the 2000–2010 decade, and inequality in the Middle East and 
North Africa region declined substantially over the 1990–2010 period (Alvarado and 
Gasparini 2013, 29). 
 This may mean that the low-income countries are entering the same classic growth 
pattern that first separates the income levels of workers with higher productivity from 
those still in traditional economic roles; later the growing proportion of modern sec-
tor jobs restores some degree of equality. Whatever the explanation, it is clear that 
despite the fears that liberalization would worsen income distribution, the more vig-
orous pursuit of liberalization in the middle-income countries has not coincided with 
either greater poverty or greater distributional disadvantage for the poor. 
 While these trends alone do not demonstrate that liberalization contributes to 
poverty alleviation, Graham (2002, 3) notes that liberalization reforms did translate 
into important material improvements for the poor in Latin America:
 In the 1980’s and 1990’s, market reformers focused on getting the macroeco-
nomic fundamentals right, and on narrowing the scope and increasing the effi-
ciency of public expenditures. This included a major effort to target public social 
expenditure to the poorest groups, an effort which was very effective at protecting 
the poor during crisis and adjustment in many countries . . . At a time when gov-
ernments were stabilizing high and hyper levels of inflation and reversing years of 
negative economic growth, the focus on the poorest made economic and political 
sense, and in many cases resulted in the poor benefiting substantially from public 
social expenditures for the first time. 
 However, Graham also notes that these reforms also increased the economic inse-
curity of low-income Latin Americans, insofar as reduced regulation increases the 
exposure to competition. 
 Explaining Li mited Li beralization 
 The Economic Freedom assessment, going back to 1970 for many countries, shows 
an overall liberalization trend, but also oscillation between liberalizing efforts and 
illiberal policies. We can conclude that liberalization has been highly contested, as its 
impacts differentially affect different groups. The churning itself often triggers fierce 
confrontations among presumed winners and losers, reflecting several factors. 
 First, as mentioned in  chapter 2 , governments when most in need of international 
loans and grants are most likely to consent to strong liberalization via structural 
adjustment programs. This need is typically greatest when the economy is in disarray, 

46  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
requiring strong austerity measures. Therefore, the conditionalities required by the 
international financial institutions are often a combination of structural adjustment 
and painful austerity. The structural adjustment may be seen as punitive along with 
the austerity measures. The pain and political unpopularity of austerity provide gov-
ernment leaders with strong incentives to renege on the commitments to condition-
alities, including some structural adjustments. 
 Second, no economic policy approach can escape unscathed from the external 
shocks that undermine economic progress—global recessions, natural disasters, sharp 
increases in crucial import prices, technological advances that undermine the nation’s 
exports, etc. The openness of the liberalized economy exposes it to the fluctuations 
of the world economy, even if overall economic growth is superior to that of the 
closed economy. During the downturn periods, the pressures for government to do 
something can be irresistible. This has given rise to a permanent tension between the 
liberalization commitment and the perceived need to recapture control. Obviously 
the periodic global economic crises provoke these efforts to recapture control by the 
government by reversing some of the liberalization reforms, whether or not the real 
problem resides in liberalized policies. These efforts provide opportunities for eco-
nomic actors who benefit from protectionism and subsidies. 
 Third, the economic policy regime following liberalization is typically subject to 
piecemeal erosion as a progression of concessions to interest groups is introduced. 
These special incentives are typically rationalized on the grounds that the favored 
industries are promising for the long term. Tax exemptions and credits are frequently 
reintroduced after a liberalizing tax reform; fundamental tax reforms often have a 
surprisingly short half-life. 
 In addition, doctrinal opposition to liberalization persists. Even as Japan’s cred-
ibility as a thought leader on development strategy has declined along with the dyna-
mism of the Japanese economy, the rise of the state-directed economies of China 
and India has received enormous attention. And some multilateral international 
organizations have not abandoned important aspects of the statist positions they 
held in the 1960s. For example, the Secretariat of the UN Conference on Trade and 
Development (2007, 10–11) recently made the following appeal regarding the role 
of the state in Sub-Saharan Africa:
 African countries need a “strong State” to carry out the continent’s development 
agenda. States should re-engage in the development business from which they 
have been marginalized . . . Strategic intervention combines subsidies, protection 
and free trade in proportions that are determined in accordance with the specific 
national situation. All industrialized and industrializing economies implemented 
various forms of protection of their infant industry in early stages of development. 
However, there should be time limits to protection so that, once an industry 
becomes reasonably competitive, it should be allowed to face world competition. 
 The promise that infant industries would become reasonably competitive was the 
trap that led to so much wasted investment and economic distortions since the 1950s. 
The fact that it is still invoked in this era is quite remarkable. 

Economic Policy and Program Practice  ●  47
 It is also important to note that the rethinking by international financial organiza-
tions regarding the pace and maintenance of liberalization has reduced the friction 
between these organizations and governments, but has also reduced the pressure to 
pursue structural adjustment reforms. The IMF has embraced a doctrine of country 
ownership—that the adjustment package must be owned by the government of the 
country. This implies that the government officials involved in the negotiations and 
higher officials who are concerned with the ultimate agreement have to signal explic-
itly that they are responsible for the reform package. Boughton (2003, 9) notes that 
“[t]he new guidelines affirm the principle that the country authorities are responsible 
for the design of their own policies, subject to the understanding that those policies 
much be acceptable to the Fund if the country is to qualify for financial support.” In 
theory, the IMF could deny the support unless the government is willing to accept 
the stringent conditionalities that the IMF would have required under the earlier 
doctrine. In practice, however, the pressure on the IMF to reach agreements tends to 
lessen the stringency of the conditionalities. 
 Another major factor is the vulnerability of those hurt most by the special privi-
leges of an illiberal economic policy regime. The sad irony of the persistence of sub-
sidies is that the benefits typically go largely to higher income beneficiaries, and yet 
the elimination or reduction of subsidies is often resisted by lower income people, 
through riots over hikes in bus fare, food prices, electricity rates, and so on. These 
reactions have often led to the restoration of subsidies to quell the disruptions. This 
reversal has been common, even though freed-up budget resources could be devoted 
to propoor social services. The explanations typically lie in the lack of awareness that 
the resources could be used to provide benefits to the poor, the skepticism that the 
resources would be used for them, or the vulnerability of the poor to higher immedi-
ate costs that price liberalization would bring. 
 Finally, the potential of political disruption unleashed by strong liberalization 
efforts often deters government leaders from enacting these efforts. Many countries 
have lacked so-called adjustment-with-a-human-face measures that would protect 
lower income groups from serious losses. In these cases, the threat of disruption can 
be a powerful deterrent to strong structural adjustment efforts. Later in this chapter, 
we review the social safety net measures that in some countries have provided cred-
ibility that the potentially disruptive low-income group will be shielded from heavy 
losses due to structural adjustment programs. 
 Still Losing the Rhetorical Battle 
 In the twenty-first century, somewhat liberalized China and India have grown dra-
matically. Sub-Saharan Africa, finally partially embracing the free market doctrine of 
the NEPAD, beginning in 2001, has grown at an unprecedented rate. Yet liberaliza-
tion arouses deep suspicion and hostility, among low-income groups as well as leftist 
intellectuals. Undoubtedly, skepticism arises from privatizations that benefit wealthy 
cronies of government leaders and from structural adjustment programs that provide 
little protection for the poor. However, the continued rejection of even the principle 
of liberalization reflects a failure by its advocates to convey the long-run benefits to 

48  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
low-income populations. Although government manipulation of the economy has 
often been defended as the most direct way for government leaders to channel ben-
efits to lower income populations, this premise ignores the unfortunate fact in most 
developing countries that the wealthy have more resources to influence policy. Many 
if not all state interventions—preferential tax treatments, protective tariffs, price sub-
sidies, subsidized credit, state enterprise actions diverted from profit maximization, 
minimum wages for limited segments of the working population, etc.—privilege the 
well-off at the expense of the rest of society  and distort the economy at the expense 
of long-term growth. These points have long been recognized in the mainstream 
economics li terature. 11 
 Surprising Reversals of Privatization 
 The sale, elimination, or partial ownership reform of state-owned enterprises has 
often been associated with broad liberalization initiatives, but privatization has its 
own logic and dynamics. John Nellis, who served as one of the World Bank’s fore-
most experts and policymakers on privatization, asserted in 2001 that “[p]rivatiza-
tion has swept the field and won the day.” 12 Yet in 2012 he concluded that “[f]rom 
a triumphant high in the late 20th century, esteem for privatization has significantly 
declined, post-2000” (Nellis 2012, i). This retrenchment varies across sectors. State 
enterprises in manufacturing (unless controlled by powerful armed forces) have been 
privatized in many countries. Perkins (2001, 268), though pointing selectively to “a 
number of highly efficient state enterprises in Asia” (citing South Korea, Singapore, 
and Taiwan), also points to the difficulties of achieving the essential needs of state 
enterprise autonomy and profit orientation:
 Stringent conditions were needed to achieve success with these state firms . . . All 
enjoyed a high degree of autonomy. Management’s performance was judged 
mainly or even solely on its ability to generate long-term profits for the company. 
The multiple objectives—so often imposed on state enterprises elsewhere in the 
world—were mostly absent. Autonomy and profit orientation were difficult to 
achieve. POSCO [of South Korea] was run by an individual politically more pow-
erful than most government ministers at the time. Singapore was able to isolate 
these enterprises completely from local politics. 
 The difficulty of making state enterprises profitable and the allure of revenues from 
selling off the enterprises can explain why manufacturing privatization proceeded 
and has largely not been reversed. For physical infrastructure, often entailing enor-
mous costs, many governments have adopted public-private partnerships that place 
financing, building, and operating into private hands. The eventual transfer of con-
trol back to the government at a predetermined date and the attractiveness of not 
having to raise taxes to finance infrastructure projects have minimized opposition to 
this form of privatization. 
 However, privatization of natural monopoly services, such as electricity and pota-
ble water, has often been rolled back. Private providers are typically sought initially 
because subsidized state provision of these services, undermining cost recovery, leaves 

Economic Policy and Program Practice  ●  49
systems degraded and of limited coverage. Private companies are presumed to provide 
greater efficiency and relieve the government of blame for poor service. The possibil-
ity that privatized services would improve reliability and coverage, without greatly 
increasing the vulnerability of the poor, rests on the premises that (a) the govern-
ment would provide vouchers or cash transfers for low-income users or permit service 
providers to use differential pricing, generally on the basis of consumption levels, 
to make the service affordable for low-demand users; and (b) the revenues of the 
provider would be enough to expand the system to previously uncovered areas and 
maintain overall quality. However, when governments permit higher rates but not 
steeply differentiated pricing to protect the poor and do not compensate the poor, 
the private providers are castigated as exploitative. When governments squeeze the 
rates that private providers are permitted to charge, coverage expansions and service 
improvements cannot occur. In short, the reversals lay in the absence of compensa-
tion mechanisms for the most vulnerable to higher prices and restricted coverage 
required by the private company to cover its costs plus a reasonable profit. 
 Similarly, many governments have reversed privatizations of extractive industries. 
Privatizations intended to increase investment and technical expertise in oil or min-
ing sectors typically also reflected the logic that developing countries should not 
devote scarce capital to risky resource extraction investments that diversified inter-
national firms can more easily tolerate, nor should they place major revenue-earning 
activities in the hands of less transparent, easily corruptible parastatals. These advan-
tages are sacrificed by renationalization, which often also deters foreign investment 
overall. 
 The reversal typically has several origins. Private companies may lose interest in 
further exploration and extraction in a given country, if world prices decline or other 
countries’ resources are regarded as more promising, whereas state enterprises can 
often be directed to continue exploration and extraction. Second, governments often 
use state enterprises to serve distributional functions, such as providing services or 
choosing locations for operations where the government can gain political support. 
Finally, “resource nationalism” often has a potent appeal when populist leaders argue 
that the nation’s patrimony will be stolen by foreigners, even though the government 
can capture the value of the extracted resources by charging appropriate royalties. 
 This costly oscillation may be avoided through mixed ownership. Brazil’s Vale 
mining company, the world’s second largest, was partially privatized in 1997, but 
with de facto control by the national government. Private mining companies also 
operate in Brazil’s mining sector, while Vale expanded rapidly internationally. Even 
Brazil’s leftist leaders have resisted demands to renationalize Vale, in part because 
the government maintains substantial influence over the company. The government, 
directly and through the shares of the state development bank and the state pen-
sion funds, controls a majority of shares, and has a golden share that gives it the 
power to demand or veto changes in Vale’s administration. Although technically the 
government is not to interfere in strategic decisions, it has pressured Vale to reduce 
layoffs and increase investment in Brazil. The Brazilian government has a majority 
stake in the huge Brazilian oil company Petrobras, also partially privatized in 1997. 
In Chile, the state copper company Codelco shares the mining sector with private 
multinational companies. These hybrids of state and private participation convey the 

50  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
important lesson that when multiple objectives animate policies, pragmatic compro-
mises may hold the key to stable and effective arrangements. 
 Strengthening Tax Effort 
 To combine efficiency and equity, governments must be able to finance benefits for 
people who do not have the assets to compete for higher incomes against those who 
are better endowed. Unless huge revenues from natural resource royalties come to the 
central treasury—which is not guaranteed even in resource-rich  countries—equity 
requires a strong tax effort, relative to the country’s tax capacity. 13 Yet this is a chronic 
weakness in most developing countries. Low tax effort precludes the capacity to 
enhance equity through services or income support for the poor. Bird, Martinez 
Vazquez and Torgler (2008, 55) note that “[m]any developing countries need to 
spend more on public infrastructure, education, health services and so on, and hence 
they need to increase their tax effort—tax revenue as a percentage of gross domestic 
product (GDP)—if they want to grow and to be less poor.” 
 Of the 96—54 developing and 42 developed—countries included in the tax effort 
study by Pessino and Fenochietto (2010), all but one in the lowest third of the rank-
ings are developing countries (the exception, Singapore, is the second lowest of all, 
reflecting the city-state’s reliance on revenues from foreign corporations with regional 
headquarters there). Forty-two of the 48 countries below the median are developing 
countries, and only 12 of the 48 above the median are developing countries. 14 
 Even if taxing capacity is constrained by the feasibility of collecting more reve-
nues—for example, because of widespread poverty or a largely agricultural econo-
my—the weakness of tax effort can typically be traced to tax policies as well. The 
advice of tax policy experts—broaden the tax base, reduce marginal rates, eliminate 
exemptions, reduce reliance on evadable or avoidable income taxes, and simplify the 
tax system—often falls on deaf ears, particularly when government leaders try to 
convey an impression of progressivity by emphasizing income taxes even if they are 
ineffective and are not progressive due to legal avoidance or illegal evasion. 
 It is striking that countries more heavily dependent on natural resource exports 
tend to have weak domestic tax effort (Henry and Springborg 2001; Devarajan, Le, 
and Raballand 2010). Although Pessino and Fenochietto’s (2010) rankings do not 
cover the major Middle Eastern oil-exporting countries, they do reveal low domes-
tic tax effort in the hydrocarbon-exporting nations of Egypt, Indonesia, Malaysia, 
Mexico, and Peru. Only Syria, with rather modest net oil exports, was above the 
median, ranked at 52. 
 Many analysts interpret predominant reliance on resource export revenues as a 
governance problem as well: governments may be less accountable to their citizenry 
if government revenues do not come from the citizen’s pockets (Bates and Lien 1985; 
Moore 2004, 2007; Bornhorst, Gupta, and Thornton 2009; Fjeldstad and Moore 
2008). However, this premise presumes that citizens are less aware, or less caring, 
about what happens to revenues coming from raw material exports. Yet in countries 
that are heavily dependent on these exports, the focus of attention may be strongly 
centered on how export revenues are used. For example, few Venezuelans are unaware 
that the disposition of oil revenues is crucial to their prosperity. 

Economic Policy and Program Practice  ●  51
 Second, governments beholden to taxpayer may be more restrained in providing 
services to the poor. Ravallion (2002), examining the Argentine case, points out that 
when budgets are tight, budget allocations for propoor programs may be hit harder 
than other programs. In contrast, in Indonesia, a huge expansion in propoor social 
service and income support programs occurred in the mid-2000s when the govern-
ment could rely more heavily on hydrocarbon exports following the reduction of 
regressive energy subsidies. Put simply, while accountability to citizens is desirable, all 
other things being equal, accountability to the tax-paying subset of citizens does not 
always dovetail with progressive policies, particularly when their attitudes toward the 
poor are more critical than sympathetic (Graham 2002). 
 Social Safety Nets 
 The goal of poverty alleviation depends heavily on providing social safety nets for 
the poor, most constructively going beyond providing education and health care by 
supplementing income directly. This is especially true when austerity programs and 
structural adjustment are underway, because the poor often have less maneuverability 
to protect their incomes in times of change and have less economic cushion against 
state service cutbacks. 
 Social safety nets require government spending, which would seem to entail 
progressive redistribution. However, safety nets—whether direct income support, 
vouchers for goods or services, designated food assistance, pensions, etc.—are often 
regressive. Without modern sector jobs, many of the poor are ineligible for contribu-
tory pension plans or minimum wages. They may benefit to a certain degree from 
subsidized energy, food, or other goods and services, but wealthier people generally 
consume more energy and often more of the other subsidized items. Efforts to target 
subsidies to the poor often fail due to corruption, difficulty in identifying eligible 
people, or resale to wealthier people. If contributory programs such as pensions are 
included, government spending on social protection often favors higher income ben-
eficiaries insofar as retirement funds are subsidized. Lindert, Skoufias, and Shapiro 
(2006) report that the transfers to cover the deficits run by Latin American pen-
sion plans exceed the government funds dedicated to social assistance for the poor. 
Government spending on social protection is regressive for all eight countries they 
examined (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, 
Mexico, and Peru). They note that for Brazil, despite the vaunted Bolsa Familia 
Program of conditional cash transfers for low-income families, government spending 
to cover the deficits in the federal pension plan in 2006 dwarfed the spending on 
Bolsa Familia—3.7 percent of GDP vs. 0.4 percent—and more than half of these 
benefits go to the wealthiest 20 percent of the population (Lindert, Skoufias, and 
Shapiro 2006, 7–8). Grosh et al. (2008, 32) conclude more generally:
 The idea that governments cannot afford to redistribute income to the poor must 
be contrasted with the evidence that they regularly redistribute income to the 
non-poor. Energy subsidies are highly regressive and often more costly than safety 
nets. The Arab Republic of Egypt spent 8 percent of its GDP on several energy 
subsidies in 2004 . . . and Indonesia spent up to 4 percent of GDP between 2001 

52  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
and 2005 on fuel subsidies . . . Similarly, countries dedicate resources to bailouts of 
insolvent contributory pension funds by transferring general revenues to support 
them. 
 Therefore, in many countries the doctrine of poverty alleviation targeting has hardly 
been followed. 
 Conditional C ash Transfers 
 However, an emerging initiative may redress this neglect through a combination of 
multiple objectives served by conditional cash transfer programs. These programs, 
providing cash transfers to families that comply with conditions typically requiring 
school enrollment and healthcare visits for the children, are an increasingly promi-
nent type of social safety net. They directly alleviate poverty through the cash trans-
fer, but they also enhance human capital. Even without conditions, cash transfers 
targeted to vulnerable populations have special significance in their potential to link 
social spending with the political feasibility of macroeconomic reform. Government 
leaders—otherwise reluctant to initiate sound policy reforms out of fear of disrup-
tion by economically threatened people—may be emboldened if well-publicized cash 
transfers reduce the potential for disruption. 
 Yet another generally salutary effect of conditional cash transfer programs from a 
poverty alleviation perspective is that they often put greater pressure on governments 
to expand educational and healthcare capacities to meet the increased demand. In 
Indonesia, for example, the conditional cash transfer program coincided with signifi-
cant increases in education and healthcare spending (both financed in large part by 
severely reducing energy subsidies). The overall social service improvements for the 
poor will occur as long as the government does not simply permit the deterioration 
of service quality by capping education and healthcare spending. 
 In light of these many virtues of conditional cash transfers and the concerted 
efforts of the international development banks to promote these programs, 15 the 
number of programs has expanded dramatically. From 28 programs as of 2008, by 
2013 there were 52 (World Bank 2014a, xiii). However, given the dependence of 
these programs on government budgets, their sustainability and the magnitude of 
transfers are often uncertain. 
 Extending Social Services 
 Despite the grave difficulties (discussed later in this chapter) in demonstrating the 
value of the intrinsic benefits and greater productivity induced by providing more 
education, health care, and income support for the poor, there is compelling evidence 
that the social sectors have been neglected in many developing countries. 
 Education 
 In light of the phenomenal success of investment in education in Northeast Asia, 
the neglect of education investment in other regions is striking. Although the rates 

Economic Policy and Program Practice  ●  53
of return on general education spending is greater for developing countries than for 
developed countries (Psacharopoulos and Patrinos 2004), government spending on 
education in developing countries is generally anemic. According to World Bank 
regional statistics, the public spending on education as a percentage of GDP for 
Arab countries, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Latin America is only three-quarters that of 
high-income countries. The percentage for the developing countries of East Asia is 
less than two-thirds that of the rich nations; South Asia’s education spending is only 
slightly under half that of high-income countries. Only the Middle East and North 
African region comes close to the proportional investment as the wealthiest countries 
(World Bank 2012b). Sub-Saharan Africa, with gross secondary school enrollment at 
40 percent, has the lowest educational attainment of any world region; South Asia, 
the next lowest region, has a proportion of 58 percent; North Africa and the Middle 
East are at 77 percent (World Bank 2012c). 
 A 2008 IMF simulation estimated that if average developing country education 
spending had been increased by 1 percent of GDP beginning in 2000, by 2015 it 
would have increased the net enrollment rate from 90 percent to 99 percent and 
reduced the child mortality rate from 76 to 65 per thousand. It would also increase 
GDP per capita by 0.5 percentage points annually 16 (Baldacci et al. 2008, 1335). 
This is a very attractive return on capital. 
 There is also a troubling imbalance in how education spending is allocated, in 
terms of the subsectors of primary, secondary, and tertiary education. Colclough 
(1980, i) enumerated the multiplicity of primary education payoffs: primary edu-
cation “increases productivity in all sectors of the economy . . . [with] economic 
returns . . . in many countries considerably greater than those arising from other levels 
of schooling . . . it reduces fertility, improves health and nutrition, and promotes sig-
nificant behavioral and attitudinal changes at the level of both the individual and the 
community.” 
 Yet while Sub-Saharan Africa’s low spending on education is not surprising in 
light of the region’s low per capita income, it is striking that the governments of the 
region privilege tertiary education far beyond reasonable levels in light of the overall 
educational profile. At least 16 African governments spend more than a fifth of the 
public education budget to the tertiary level; half devote more than a quarter of 
public education funding to this level, with Botswana at a remarkable 43 percent. 17 
To put this into perspective, all of the nations of South Asia, the next poorest region 
in per capita income terms, devote less than a fifth of public education spending to 
higher education. In nations with high levels of functional illiteracy and low levels 
of secondary school enrollments, heavy proportions of education spending going to 
universities entail a questionable neglect of more basic education. The skew favor-
ing higher education also holds in North Africa, despite suffering from high levels 
of unemployment among college-educated people (World Bank 2011a, 3). Marino 
(2011, 24) points out that Tunisian graduates with diplomas had a three to four times 
greater chance of being unemployed than people without diplomas. 
 When tertiary education is heavily promoted through government subsidies, it 
becomes regressive in terms of income distribution by virtue of the fact that higher 
income individuals are far more likely to enroll. For Latin America, Lindert, Skoufias, 
and Shapiro (2006, 31) note that “public spending on tertiary education is highly 

54  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
regressive in all [Latin American and Caribbean] countries in terms of its direct 
absolute incidence . . . The redistributive issue for higher education is whether or not 
public tax resources should be used to finance it, given the high degree of regressiv-
ity (as well as the inefficiencies surrounding publicly-financed and protected higher 
education sy stems).” 
 Health C are 
 The brief for greater spending on health care is based on the premise that higher 
health-care spending yields better health, and better health not only has an intrinsic 
value but also generates greater educational attainment, higher worker productivity, 
lower job absentee rates, and cumulatively greater economic growth. Bloom, Canning, 
and Sevilla (2004) trace out these impacts, concluding that the relatively high levels 
of economic gain demonstrate that health care suffers from underspending. 
 It is certainly true that many countries have failed to meet the health-care spend-
ing targets that their governments embraced as explicit goals. For Sub-Saharan Africa, 
the 2001 Abuja Declaration formally committed 46 African region member states 
of the World Health Organization to allocate at least 15 percent of the national 
budget to health care; other, equally strong statements of commitment followed 
(Harmonization for Health in Africa 2011, 9–10). According to the World Health 
Organization’s latest pan-African data (2014, 142–148), only six of the 48 Sub-
Saharan countries reached the 15 percent level by 2011; the average proportion of 
government budgets was 8.3 percent, only a fraction above the 8.2 percent in 2000. 
Moreover, 14 countries had lower levels than in 2000. 18 
 Regional Development 
 Regional development strategies, typically consisting of favoring a particular region 
through government investment and infrastructure, have proven to be highly com-
plex and problematic when economically backward areas are targeted. They often 
entail resettlement programs or at least large-scale migration of people trying to take 
advantage of the expected opportunities. Natural resource exploitation is frequently 
a component, as is rural industrialization, billed as a multiobjective vehicle for rural 
poverty alleviation, industrial development, and deconcentration of industrial pro-
duction away from overcrowded metropolitan areas, reducing environmental stress 
and stemming urbanization. The argument is that with apparently abundant land, 
natural resources, less costly labor, and new capital, less developed regions can out-
strip more developed regions. 
 The problems encountered by these programs have centered on the risk of eco-
nomic failure whenever investment is at variance with market signals and, perhaps 
surprisingly, the resistance of local residents within the favored areas. While in some 
cases an economic argument can be made that economically backward regions have 
the potential for much greater growth that thus far has gone untapped because of 
market failures, poor economic policies or lack of physical infrastructure, whatever 
obstacles to productivity exist, can be quite daunting. For example, in Thailand, 
despite efforts to deconcentrate economic activity away from the much wealthier 

Economic Policy and Program Practice  ●  55
central region, Pansuwan and Routray (2011, 40) note that “[t]he very high level of 
industrial development pattern is still scattered around the [Bangkok Metropolitan 
Region] because of its comparative advantages. Interestingly, almost all provinces 
falling within the very low industrial development level are located in the northeast-
ern and northern regions of the country mainly due to lack of physical and human 
as well as capital resources.” Moreover, the areas selected for regional development 
promotion may be chosen for reasons that depart from, or even run counter to, 
economic growth potential: they may be poor areas in need of poverty alleviation, 
border regions targeted for geopolitical reasons, areas with secessionist movements, 
or jurisdictions to which government leaders wish to attract newcomers who support 
the government. 
 Rural industrialization—in principle a promising centerpiece of regional develop-
ment strategies targeting economically backward areas—has had surprisingly little 
traction outside of China. The most intensive efforts have been in Asia, in such 
countries as India, Turkey, Indonesia, and Thailand. Shifting population and pollu-
tion to economically backward areas puts greater pressure on the infrastructure and 
the environment; the question is whether the area’s growth will generate sufficient 
resources and willingness to address these stresses. An additional source of conten-
tion arises from the need to provide more energy and transport infrastructure to the 
backward area, when this displaces local people to make way of hydroelectric dams, 
highways, or other infrastructure (Fernholz 2010). 
 An often unanticipated obstacle to regional development programs is the inter-
group conflict that arises in many countries as outsiders flock to the targeted areas, 
provoking resentment and defensive reactions from existing residents threatened by 
encroachments on their property rights, environmental degradation, greater com-
petition over public goods, and so on. Rigg (2003, 229) argues that rural indus-
trialization also frequently displaces local people if they sell their land; he suggests 
conceiving of rural industrialization as “industrial extension and rural displacement.” 
The antagonism is likely to be even stronger when the original residents suspect that 
bringing in outsiders has the political motive of diluting the power of the original 
residents. 
 Natural Resources 
 Government investment and other means of promoting natural resource exploitation 
are complicated by the fact that typically the resources already exist. The question for 
both renewable and nonrenewable resources is whether the government should invest 
in (or otherwise encourage) the development of the capacity to extract the resources. 
For renewable resources, the additional question is whether the government ought to 
discourage their extraction to some degree in order to maintain a more sustainable 
supply of the resource and the environmental services that it provides. 
 The guidance that policymakers have received regarding government promotion 
of natural resource exploitation has been severely muddied by the neglect of crucial 
distinctions between resource abundance and resource dependence, by confusion 
between whether resource wealth is an advantage and whether government should 
encourage the exploitation of resources to be had. Resource dependence can signify 

56  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
resource wealth, as in the case of major oil exporters such as Saudi Arabia or Kuwait, 
but it can also signify the relative weakness of other economic activities, as in the case 
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), which heavily relies on mineral 
exports even though its per capita subsoil  assets  (as distinct from annual revenues) 
have been estimated at less than US$80 in 2005 dollars, ranking the DRC in 89th 
out of 141 nations for which the World Bank developed subsoil asset estimates. The 
DRC’s rank for total natural assets is 138th out of 149. 19 
 If governments invest directly in natural resource extraction, it could take the 
form of supporting the discovery of resources (e.g., by financing geological surveys), 
providing capital to state-owned resource extractive enterprises, or devoting funds to 
purchase resource output to make exploitation more attractive. As mentioned earlier, 
financing state-owned exploration and production may prove risky to a developing 
country, when international corporations are prepared to provide capital, expertise, 
and marketing chains. Yet from 2000 through 2013, 18 developing countries expro-
priated international hydrocarbon holdings, mining holdings, or both (JLT Specialty 
Limited 2014), and this figure does not include the instances of governments simply 
buying out the international holdings without resorting to expropriation or unilateral 
cancellation of contracts. This vacillation between state and private ownership erodes 
efficiency and investor confidence. 
 Whereas the economic theory pertaining to state ownership of natural resources is 
straightforward in calling for payments to the state equivalent to the intrinsic value of 
the resource before extraction and processing (the resource rent), rent capture often 
falls far short, becoming a major trigger of nationalizations. Manzano, Monaldi, and 
Sturznegger (2008, 96), in reviewing “some of the main factors that help explain the 
recent wave of nationalizations and tax hikes in the Latin American hydrocarbon 
sector,” note the following:
 A key force behind these trends is the distributive conflicts that arise between the 
governments and the producing firms. These conflicts occur, to a large extent, 
because the tax systems used in the region have not taken into account fundamen-
tal contingencies—in particular, price changes. As a result, the producers retain an 
increasing share of oil rents when oil prices rise significantly. This generates pow-
erful incentives for governments to renegotiate, renege on contracts, or nationalize 
the sector. The optimal contract properly should include price contingencies. The 
policymaker may consider tax and royalty rates that vary according to the price, 
but implementing such a scheme is not easy. 
 The key point is that the failure to build in contractual contingencies for surprisingly 
high prices or unexpectedly high production has undermined the stability of extrac-
tive governance vis- à -vis the private sector, which has the resources to keep hydrocar-
bon extraction from being undercapitalized. 
 When oil and gas extraction is conducted by state enterprises, additional problems 
arise from manipulations that are not among the professed rationales. The temp-
tation to borrow beyond a nation’s sovereign debt ceiling through the state enter-
prise has resulted in massive borrowing in such oil-exporting countries as Indonesia, 
Mexico, Nigeria, and Venezuela. When the government taxes the state enterprise 

Economic Policy and Program Practice  ●  57
to gain control over the additional funds or directs the enterprise to finance opera-
tions beyond the extractive industry, the enterprises become undercapitalized in their 
primary activities. This is one of the key reasons why state extractive enterprises are 
often inefficient and why they are frequently compelled to bring in international 
companies to do much of the operational work. 
 These problems are not confined to subsoil assets; they also hold for forestry, with 
additional complications. While in the bulk of developing countries the subsoil assets 
are constitutionally reserved to the state, the control over forests is usually heavily 
contested. When the state succeeds in controlling commercially exploitable forests, 
the risk is that it will award concession rights without fully capturing the value of the 
timber. The failure of the state to achieve full rent capture not only denies the nation’s 
riches to the people, it also prompts overexploitation. Inadequate rent capture is 
problematic for forestry for an additional reason: low rent capture from state forests 
provokes overexploitation that often degrades the ecosystem. In many cases, the con-
cession fees are less than half of the value of the extracted timber. The causes of low 
concession rates range from successful rent-seeking by timber companies, whether 
domestic or foreign, to the government’s desperation to bring in some revenues when 
the other nations have more attractive forestry prospects. 
 A final problem with forestry policies frequently occurs when governments return 
control over forests to the local communities, sometimes out of genuine recognition 
of the virtues of local control, sometimes out of the cynical effort to shed responsi-
bility for degraded lands. If the community is not well defined (after all, in many 
circumstances, multiple decades have passed since government took control over the 
forests), conflicts may well ensue. If the resources for sound forest management are 
not transferred along with the responsibility, the forests may degrade even further. 
This risk is one manifestation of the risks of decentralization that amounts to under-
funded m andates. 
 Industry vs. Agriculture 
 In the classic tradeoff between investing in industry vs. agriculture, public investment 
in industry is still widely favored even when the productivity of additional investment 
is considerably less favorable. For Vietnam, Fesselmeyer and Le (2010, 167) note 
that the latest estimate of the agricultural capital-output ratio was four times more 
favorable than that for industry, and yet the government investment in industry was 
twice that of agriculture. Murty and Soumya (2006, 10) estimate India’s capital-
output ratio for agriculture as more than eight times as favorable as that of industry. 
Anderson, Cockburn, and Martin (2010) summarize the long-standing antiagricul-
tural bias due to price distortions, though the biases have been reduced to a degree in 
many countries. More generally, Eswaran and Kotwal (2006, 117), noting that the 
agricultural “sector has been much neglected in developing countries,” enumerate the 
multiple mechanisms for favoring industry at the expense of agriculture. The neglect 
of agriculture is also indicated by the fact that many small-scale agricultural promo-
tion programs remain unfunded even though the programs that have been funded 
often yield strikingly high rates of return. Alston et al. (2000, x, 59) found that the 
returns on agricultural research and on extension—two of the most important drivers 

58  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
of agricultural productivity—had a mean of 60 percent for developing countries, 
with no evidence that the rates were declining over time. 20 In short, assuming that 
the existence of project possibilities with such high rates of return means that other 
projects with high rates of return are still to be had, attractive agricultural investments 
have been neglected, as capital is still directed toward industry. In addition, huge 
investments in agriculture over the next decades are needed to wean Sub-Saharan 
Africa from the labor-intensive agriculture that has been holding back their produc-
tivity and incomes (Schmidhuber, Bruinsma, and Boedeker 2009). 
 What is perplexing is that the neglect of agricultural opportunities was recognized 
decades ago as an enormous impediment to the success of broad development initia-
tives. Ruttan (1984, 398) concluded that:
 By the early 1980s the new “basic needs” and “integrated” approaches to devel-
opment were coming under severe questioning. The decline of integrated rural 
development and basic needs programmes did not reflect a retreat on equity goals 
as much as growing recognition that the programmes, particularly in Africa, were 
not solving one of the most fundamental rural problems—“achieving a reliable 
food sur plus.” 
 In short, for many countries the initiatives to provide basic necessities, the full range 
of productivity-enhancing input, and greater capacity for community cooperation 
were inadequate in the face of adverse pricing for agricultural outputs, neglect of 
agricultural infrastructure, and other manifestations of the proindustry bias. Farm 
incomes clearly suffer under such circumstances, which has been a major consider-
ation in the promotion of cash transfers. 
 In Latin America, small-scale agriculture has suffered the most due to the pro-
motion of industry. By the 1980s, export promotion focused not only on export-
oriented manufacturing but also on agro-exports through cheap credit and lower 
agricultural tariffs. Lastarria-Cornhiel (2006, 17) notes, 
 These policies, particularly trade liberalization policies together with agricultural 
policies that favor export products, stoked the growth of agri-business, particu-
larly in the production of high-value horticultural crops, and agricultural exports, 
provided a growing demand for wage labor. At the same time, liberalization poli-
cies have resulted in higher input costs, lower farmgate prices, and significant cuts 
in access to credit and extension services for the smallholder sector that produces 
mostly food for local and regional markets. 
 Physical Infrastructure 
 Despite the emerging opportunities for the private provision of physical infrastructure 
through build-operate-transfer arrangements with governments, the overall provi-
sion of physical infrastructure—predominantly the responsibility of government—
has fallen disappointingly short in the bulk of developing countries. Latin American 
nations spend, on average, less than 2 percent of GDP on physical infrastructure, 

Economic Policy and Program Practice  ●  59
although the economic returns on improved infrastructure would be enormous. Kohli 
and Basil (2010, 68) estimate that Latin American infrastructure investment would 
have to be 3.8 percent of GDP to maintain business-as-usual growth through 2040, 
and developing Asia would require 6.3 percent of GDP to maintain its business-as-
usual growth. World Bank estimates indicate that if Latin American nations could 
improve infrastructure to the level of South Korea, GDP growth would increase by 
nearly 4 percent annually and reduce income inequality by 10–20 percent (Fay and 
Morrison 2007, 4). Rioja (2003) estimated that Latin America’s productivity losses 
due to poor infrastructure  quality are equivalent to 40 percent of real per capita 
income. Sub-Saharan Africa’s underinvestment in power and telecommunications 
 alone during the 1980s and 1990s had cost the region an estimated 1.3 percent of 
GDP (Brice ñ o-Garmendia, Estache, and Shafik 2004). 
 The fact that gains can be made by investing more in physical infrastructure—
which is largely in the government’s domain—does not, in and of itself, mean that all 
governments have been remiss by neglecting physical infrastructure. Some countries, 
most notably China (building before demand), 21  have been dramatically expand-
ing physical infrastructure. The question is whether highly productive infrastructure 
projects are being neglected as governments invest in other things. This indeed seems 
to be the case, but only in some countries. Canning and Bennathan (2007) have cal-
culated the rates of return of two major aspects of physical  infrastructure—electricity 
generation and paved roads—with models that capture some, though not all, of 
the contributions that these aspects make to productivity. 22 For the 49 developing 
countries for which sufficient information was available, the mean rate of return on 
investment in electricity was 42 percent, with a median of 36 percent. However, the 
average overall rate of return on capital was 40 percent, and in fact for 29 countries, 
the overall return on capital was greater than the return on electricity expansion. For 
the 25 developing countries with enough information on the returns on road build-
ing, the mean was 213 percent and the median was 104 percent; there was an even 
split between the number of countries with road building having a higher or lower 
return than the overall return on capital. 23 
 One quite disturbing finding on physical infrastructure development is that pub-
lic investment is often highly inefficient even in the ratio of the investment and the 
value of the infrastructure created. Gupta et al. (2011), examining 52 developing 
countries, estimate that the infrastructure value is roughly half the invested capital; 
they cite problems throughout the stages of infrastructure development. 
 This means that government promotion of power generation and road building 
makes sense in some countries, but not in others. The mixed results reflect that physi-
cal infrastructure can be done poorly in some developing countries, with remark-
ably low rates of return. The most compelling diagnoses of these failures entail the 
implementation of major infrastructure projects that are unsound from the start, on 
the one hand, and the neglect of maintenance to retain the usefulness of the project, 
on the other. Flyvbjerg, Bruzelius, and Rothengatter (2003) and Flyvbjerg, Garbuio, 
and Lovallo (2009) point to the general problems (in both developed and developing 
countries) of delusion—the belief that past problems can be cleverly overcome—and 
deception—the tactics of infrastructure entrepreneurs, whether or not in govern-
ment, to make infrastructure projects appear more promising than they really are. 

60  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
The neglect of maintenance is particularly acute in the poorer developing countries, 
where spending on infrastructure building often swamps spending on maintenance, 
as Benmaamar (2006) demonstrates for Sub-Saharan Africa. Here again, the limita-
tions on liberalization reforms calling for cost recovery of the services provided by 
major infrastructure (e.g., electricity, irrigation water, potable water) also erode the 
capacity to maintain the usefulness of physical infrastructure. 
 Uncertainty about Economic Priorities 
 If we dig deeper into why some sectors have been severely neglected, we can identify 
an analytic limitation blocking the capacity to discredit special pleadings by interest 
groups to subsidize their subsectors. In contrast to the clear persistence of the unwar-
ranted bias favoring industry over agriculture, the general challenge of identifying 
which sectors deserve more or less promotion has been beyond the capabilities of 
explicit economic analysis. In theory, government policies, which inevitably encour-
age investments in some sectors over others,  24   ought to direct investment to sectors 
with the greatest positive impact on economic growth and other national objectives. 
In strictly economic terms, public investment and other forms of promotion ought 
to go where the greatest output gains can be achieved per unit of capital, taking into 
account the synergies of indirect impacts (e.g., education promoting greater aware-
ness of healthy behavior). Thus the diagnostic question is whether some sectors are 
neglected in terms of overall investment, such that more government promotion is 
warranted—or less for sectors promising lower social returns. 
 In principle, several measures can indicate whether a particular sector is deserving 
of more promotion. Assuming that a sector deserves more promotion if the returns 
(output) on investment have recently been considerably higher than those of others, a 
favorable incremental capital-output ratio serves to identify where promotion is more 
efficient. For directly productive sectors like industry and agriculture, the incremen-
tal capital-output ratio is a standard (though not widely estimated) measure; lower 
rates indicate more favorable investment prospects in that a given sectoral level of 
investment (capital) would produce more output. For physical infrastructure, which 
largely makes an indirect contribution to productivity, the ratio of overall investment 
to economic growth is a parallel measure. For education and health, the ratio of over-
all spending to economic growth is also relevant, in addition to the direct benefits to 
the individuals with improved education or health. 
 Although for some sectors (e.g., industry vis- à -vis agriculture) it is relatively 
straightforward to determine whether government promotion is misdirected, the 
methods for determining whether other sectors ought to be receiving more or less 
promotion are found wanting. Calculating the societal returns on education 25 or 
health is complicated by the indirectness of the potential impacts. It is obvious that 
more education has the potential to spur innovation, improve the transmission of 
agricultural techniques, improve overall manufacturing productivity, and induce 
more knowledgeable behavior regarding health and nutrition; healthier people are 
likely to be more productive, and for that matter, healthier children are likely to 
have higher educational attainment. Yet, valuing these impacts has been daunting 
for individual countries, and the cross-national correlations between education and 

Economic Policy and Program Practice  ●  61
economic growth, or health and economic growth, have too many potentially con-
founding factors. 
 Thus, some education advocates point to underinvestment in government educa-
tion spending in developing countries by trying to capture the host of potential ben-
efits of higher educational attainment. For example, Appiah and McMahon (2002) 
make rather heroic assumptions to include benefits ranging from longevity and lower 
fertility rates to democratic participation and crime reduction; they estimated that 
for Sub-Saharan Africa, “[t]he direct costs of two per cent of GNP translates into a 
per capita increase of two per cent of per capita income.” Yet Psacharopoulos and 
Patrinos (2004, 118) note that “externalities or spillover benefits . . . are often hard to 
identify and even harder to measure . . . [E]vidence is not unambiguous. In fact, some 
estimates give negative values, while others give very high estimates.” 
 Similar constraints are relevant to the micro-level decisions of project and pro-
gram choices. Education projects and programs with higher rates of return than other 
investments, whether in education or other sectors, ought to be given priority, but the 
benefit-cost analysis necessary to determine rates of return is often absent. Jimenez 
and Patrinos (2008, 2–3) judge that 
 at the micro level, [cost-benefit analysis] has also not been used extensively in justi-
fying specific education projects. Why not? We argue that some key methodologi-
cal shortcomings have been responsible: specifically, the difficulty of estimating 
social, as opposed to private, benefits; the complexity of measuring the costs and 
benefits of other dimensions of education other than access to a year of attending 
an educational institution; and attribution of outcomes to actual interventions. 
 This is a limitation to project selection undertaken not only by governments but also 
by international development agencies. The World Bank’s Independent Evaluation 
Group (2010, 7) found that only 1 percent of the education projects funded by the 
World Bank from 1970 to 2008 was subject to an economic return analysis. 
 Very similar uncertainty pertains to determining the advisability of greater pro-
motion of the health sector in general or individual health programs and projects. 
Some economists (e.g., Bloom and Canning [2003, 47]) assert that governments of 
developing countries typically underspend on health care. One approach using stan-
dard regression analysis is to demonstrate, across a broad set of countries, that those 
with higher health spending have better health indicators, or that countries with 
either higher health spending or better health indicators have had more rapid eco-
nomic growth. The alternative is to simulate the impact of health improvements on 
greater educational attainment, higher productivity due to greater physical capacity, 
lower job absentee rates, and so on. Bloom, Canning, and Sevilla (2004) employ such 
a production function model to argue that underspending on health has sacrificed 
impressive opportunities to increase labor productivity and hence economic growth. 
 Yet Jack and Lewis (2009, 3), pointing to the inconsistency and methodological 
difficulties of both approaches, 
 caution the reader against expecting to find consensus in the empirical literature on 
the links from health to growth or even from health policies to health. A number 

62  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
of papers present unambiguous results but contradict one another . . . [T]he 
literature is a mix of rigorous scientific investigation and well-motivated advo-
cacy on both sides . . . Further, when attempting to untangle the link from health 
to growth, or vice versa, econometric issues of endogeneity and measurement 
error are particularly problematic, and the validity of even the most innovative 
approaches continues to be debated. 
 Thus, as with education, the adequacy of spending in health in the context of scarce 
financial resources across all sectors remains undeterminable unless the direct, clearly 
reliable measures yield rates of return that are much higher than those related to 
investments in other sectors. This does not appear to be the case (Weil 2007). 
 An additional reason why the findings on social returns on education and health 
care are inconsistent is that nations with poor governance and failing economic poli-
cies leave little opportunity for economic improvement even if the workforce is bet-
ter educated and healthier. 26 As mentioned above, several World Bank assessments 
conclude that poor macroeconomic policies can easily undermine otherwise sound 
projects and programs. For cross-national estimates of the returns on efforts to pro-
mote sectors, programs, or projects, the pooling of cases of nations with sound and 
unsound macroeconomic policies will obscure the potential value of social service 
investment—and indeed of the potential returns across all sectors. 
 The lack of definitive, explicit results is not the fault of development econo-
mists; rather it reflects the intrinsic complexity of the linkages and uncertainties as 
to whether even sound sectoral investment can withstand external shocks, changes 
in government priorities, and internal turmoil. However, without definitive determi-
nations of which sectors would use government investment more productively, the 
input from experts of different sectors is often regarded as special pleadings, no differ-
ent from the standard budgetary discourse in which officials of the various ministries 
vie for higher allocations. 
 The most ambitious claim that economists can make to comprehensively trac-
ing out the impact of policies on all levels is the computable general equilibrium 
model. 27 The objective is to project impacts through “completely-specified models 
of an economy or a region, including all production activities, factors and institu-
tions, including the modeling of all markets and macroeconomic components, such as 
investment and savings, balance of payments, and government budget. These models 
incorporate many economic linkages and can be used to try to explain medium- to 
long-term trends and structural responses to changes in development policy” (World 
Bank 2013). There have been claims that these models are widely used; Mitra-Kahn 
(2008, 2) asserts that “Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) models are probably 
the most utilized tool globally for development planning and macro policy analysis.” 
 The phrase completely specified models might seem to imply that the use of these 
models would provide unambiguous, consensually accepted results as to the opti-
mal macroeconomic policies and sectoral promotion strategies. Yet, as mentioned in 
 chapter 2 , Gibson and Van Seventer (2000) demonstrate in an analysis of policy alter-
natives for South Africa that different versions of computable general equilibrium 
models will yield very different policy recommendations. In fact, the practical uses 
of computable general equilibrium models are far more limited than Mitra-Kahn 

Economic Policy and Program Practice  ●  63
presumes. For the reasons outlined in  chapter 2 , the simpler computable general 
equilibrium models may reduce the need for data, yet they rest on assumptions that 
many practitioners would regard as implausibly simplistic. In contrast, the structural-
ist models require more data and more specifications that may be seen as ad hoc. 
 However, one might still hold out hope for country-specific determinations of at 
least the rates of return on specific projects. And the sum total of the projects and 
programs would constitute a major part of the sectoral promotion strategy; if these 
are the optimal projects (i.e., those with the highest rates of return of all potential 
projects), the nation’s portfolio would be the optimal sectoral policy. Yet, as early as 
the mid-1980s, when the use of social benefit-cost analysis was supposed to be the 
method of choice to evaluate potential projects or programs, Leff (1985b, 68) noted 
that “[t]he methodology [of social benefit-cost analysis] was designed for choosing 
the investments with the highest returns, not those that were preselected on other 
criteria but pass minimum standards.” But he then pointed out “that policy-makers 
usually determine the main lines of the investment budget on the basis of  sectoral 
priorities. Thus the de facto approach to investment choice usually involves a two-
stage process: first designation of high-priority sectors, and then selection of projects 
within those sectors. The major allocation decisions, however, are taken on the basis 
of choices between sectors rather than between projects” (1985a, 337). 
 In short, the benefit-cost analysis, if done at all, is applied to justify projects 
selected through a sectoral balance that was not based on explicit methodology. In 
addition, it cannot be determined whether the projects selected to address sectoral 
needs are those with the most favorable social benefit-cost estimates, because project 
identification cannot proceed from calculations of rates of return of all plausible 
projects; it proceeds through the choice of candidate projects selected on the basis of 
essentially implicit economic criteria, political considerations, bureaucratic politics, 
and so on. 
 The neglect of formal project evaluation by governments is, ironically, increas-
ingly reinforced by the international organizations that governments look to for set-
ting the standards for economic analysis. Thus, the World Bank’s own Independent 
Evaluation Group (2010, ix), based on a sweeping examination of the Bank’s project 
evaluation process, very recently came to the following conclusion:
 Cost-benefit analysis used to be one of the World Bank’s signature issues. It helped 
establish the World Bank’s reputation as a knowledge bank and served to demon-
strate its commitment to measuring results and ensuring accountability to taxpay-
ers . . . The percentage of Bank projects that are justified by cost-benefit analysis has 
been declining for several decades, owing to a decline in adherence to standards 
and to difficulty in applying cost-benefit analysis. Where cost-benefit analysis is 
applied to justify projects, the analysis is excellent in some cases, but in many cases 
there is a lack of attention to fundamental analytical issues such as the public sec-
tor rationale and comparison of the chosen project against alternatives. 
 The Independent Evaluation Group’s (2010, ix) assessment also provides a crucial 
insight into why the benefit-cost analysis is frequently neglected or sloppy: “The 
Bank’s use of cost-benefit analysis for decisions is limited because the analysis is 

64  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
usually prepared after the decision to proceed with the project has been made.” This 
limited use of the analysis in decision making would be less serious if the role of the 
World Bank were simply to approve or reject funding requests that meet the mini-
mum rate of return. 28 The World Bank, like the regional development banks, works 
closely with governments in identifying and shaping projects and programs, often 
eschewing explicit benefit-cost analysis in selecting projects or programs. 29 
 Economic Aspects of Decentralization 
 The issue of decentralization is obviously a concern of governance, as discussed in 
 chapters 4 and  5 , but the choices of which services ought to be provided at which 
levels, and how the services would be funded, are important economic decisions as 
well. Economic policies and programs can be scaled from the smallest units, such as 
funding particular initiatives within a neighborhood, to the national or even inter-
national levels, with implications for the breadth of policy application and, often 
more importantly, whether the fiscal resources transferred to the subnational level 
are adequate. 
 One reaction to the demand to reduce the central government’s budget (a key 
component of many austerity packages) has been to devolve responsibility for ser-
vices to subnational governments, but without the commensurate transfer of fiscal 
resources to undertake these services at the same level of scope or quality. We have 
already seen this with respect to natural resource management, but it is often severe 
for social services as well. Three adverse consequences for the poor have been noted. 
First, the services may simply deteriorate and the poor, who are least capable of find-
ing supplementary sources for these services, typically suffer the most. Second, in 
order to keep up with the service requirements (generally scope rather than quality 
requirements, such as number of years of schooling), the subnational governments 
may impose additional taxes and fees. Bossert and Beauvais (2002) report that the 
decentralization of health care in the Philippines and Uganda shifted health care 
away from the most vulnerable populations. Bernstein and L ü (2008, 90) report 
that poor peasants in China were subjected to illegal taxes in order for rural schools 
to meet the unfunded mandate of lengthening the number of years of mandatory 
schooling. A hybrid of these two patterns was seen in rural Vietnam, where low cen-
tral budgetary support for schools provoked the imposition of fees and the de facto 
partial privatization of primary education as teachers truncated the formal school day 
in order to provide “private tutoring” in the afternoon. 30 In short, decentralization 
without adequate financial support often imposes greater burdens on families that 
had received social benefits from the central government. In short, the economic 
parallel to the governance aspects of decentralization may beggar the poor insofar as 
the local authorities in poorer areas may lack both the resources and the willingness 
to channel benefits to the most disadvantaged. 
 Conclusions 
 Where definitive technical analysis is lacking, other considerations hold sway. 
Although the theories and doctrines developed during the post-WWII period were 

Economic Policy and Program Practice  ●  65
molded to pursue poverty alleviation while still recognizing the importance of eco-
nomic efficiency, the deviations from these theories and doctrines, reinforced by the 
lack of definitive methods to identify optimal policies, limited how the quite impres-
sive economic growth over the past decade contributed to elevating the most vulner-
able populations. 
 The failure to do more for these most vulnerable populations lies, in large part, on 
the persistent weaknesses in governance. We now turn to these governance issues to 
identify the theories and doctrines that have shaped governance practice. 

 CHAPTER 4 
 Evolution of Governance and 
Development Administration Theory  
 T
his chapter examines the evolution of theories and doctrines of governance 
and development administration, especially over the post-WWII period. 
Because sound governance is the bedrock of responsive and effective policy, 
no other aspect of development, whether economic, political, or social, can escape 
the ravages of poor governance. As mentioned in  chapter 2 , economists have joined 
other social scientists and all shrewd practitioners—that institutions matter. This is 
certainly the province of governance. 
 Our review of governance and development administration theories captures the 
evolution of thinking on public administration reform, development administration, 
public sector management, the New Public Management (NPM), and democratic 
governance. This evolution has not occurred in a vacuum; it reflects the influence of 
academic fields (public administration, political science, international relations, and 
economics), but more directly, we demonstrate the linkages between theories and 
doctrines of socioeconomic development and the theories and doctrines of gover-
nance and development administration 
 For the past three decades, the term governance has been a significant part of the 
national and international development discourse among academics, policymakers, 
and development practitioners (United Nations 2011). Yet, the term and its mul-
tifarious practices across the globe are ridden with theoretical ambiguities, elusive 
meanings, and policy incongruities. 
 It continues to be used by different actors to mean different things ranging from 
a set of tools and mechanisms to improve public management, to political reforms 
and the engagement of diverse stakeholders with conflicting political objectives. Over 
the years, the concept has been redefined by scholars and development practitioners 
along with the paradigm shift in our thinking about development. Furthermore, 
the new definitions of governance have often reflected a narrow disciplinary focus 
of the academics or national and international development partners. The term is, 
therefore, und ertheorized. 

68  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 Rethinking Development and the Linkage with Governance 
 Theories of development governance have focused on a broad range of topics, includ-
ing the structure of formal institutions involved in economic and social policymak-
ing, public administration, and citizen participation. Because of the colonial heritage 
of emerging African and Asian nations, and the pressures for economic growth in 
Latin America, governance theory of the early post-WWII period presumed that 
strong development initiatives required a strong state. The corollaries were limited 
public participation, centralized governance, and the administrative challenge of 
strengthening and rationalizing the central governmental apparatus, relying on the 
standard, preexisting ministerial structures. Elsewhere, corporatist theories—giving 
formal standing to economic segments such as industry confederations and labor 
unions but designating the government as the ultimate authority 1 —were developed 
to justify authoritarian governance, in many instances through military dominance 
based on a convergence of developmental and national security concerns. Regarding 
development administration, the norms of professionalism, policy neutrality, impar-
tiality, etc., were adopted straightforwardly from the Wilsonian model of public 
administration that simply implements directives from higher authorities. 2 One of 
the assumptions was that professional training would provide both the expertise and 
socialization to create competent and honest administrators. 
 The evolution of governance theories is linked with the shift in the theories and 
practice of development over the past 50 years. Different dimensions of development 
have been emphasized by scholars and practitioners over the years reflecting national 
and international priorities. In light of the vast network of UN-affiliated develop-
ment institutions, it is useful to adopt the UN emphases as a lens for understanding 
the context in which governance and administrative doctrines were developed. 
 While each of the UN Development Decades has included main dimensions of 
development—economic, social, and political—their foci shifted from the trickle-
down theories of economic growth to growth with equity and participatory and sus-
tainable development. This has been accompanied by four phases in the evolution of 
governance: (1) traditional public administration to maintain law and order and pro-
mote national integration after independence; (2) development administration, pub-
lic sector management, and NPM to improve effectiveness of  government-initiated 
programs and projects and allow greater role of the market and competitiveness 
among the government entities; (3) from government to governance—to facilitate 
the engagement of the actors from the government, civil society, and private sector in 
managing public affairs; and (4) democratic governance to infuse the principles and 
values of democracy in the governance systems and processes. 
 Economic Growth F ocus 
 By the 1960s, the importance of economic development was rising on the UN agenda, 
greatly stimulated by the many newly independent countries that had become or were 
about to become UN members. The first UN Development Decade was launched by 
the General Assembly in December 1961 (United Nations 1962, 10–11). It called on 
all member states to intensify their efforts to mobilize support for measures required 

Governance and Development Administration Theory  ●  69
to accelerate progress toward self-sustaining economic growth and social advance-
ment in the developing countries. With each developing country setting its own tar-
get, the objective would be a minimum annual growth rate of 5 percent in aggregate 
national income by the end of the decade. 
 A notable feature of development policy, as it emerged during the 1960s and 
1970s, under the influence of both structuralism (see  chapter 2 ) and socialist-ori-
ented models of development, was the need for the state to play an active role in the 
development process by orchestrating wide-ranging interventions in the economic 
sphere aimed at accelerating the pace of development. Indeed, this had become an 
important article of faith not only of the developing countries, but the concept of 
a developmental state was also embraced by international development institutions, 
such as the World Bank, as well as the regional development banks (Streeten et al. 
1981). The emphasis on the role of government in the development process was also 
reflected in the formulation of five- and ten-year development plans that were pre-
mised on government intervention aimed at stimulating and regulating investment, 
particularly in the industrial sector, designed to achieve higher levels of growth. 
 Pairing Social and Economic Development 
 Despite these efforts, the UN Secretary General acknowledged at the midpoint 
assessment of the First Development Decade that only limited progress had been 
made, with the ultimate goals still distant. In light of this shortcoming and in recog-
nition of the growing needs of the developing countries, the objectives of the Second 
Development Decade were to promote sustained economic growth, ensure a higher 
standard of living, improve social services, and facilitate the process of narrowing the 
gap between developed and developing countries. 
 Social development was conceived as best pursued if governments actively pro-
moted empowerment and participation in a democratic and pluralistic system respect-
ful of all human rights and fundamental freedoms. Efforts to sustain broad-based 
economic growth have to reinforce the promotion of social development. It was also 
declared that processes to promote increased and equal economic opportunities, to 
avoid exclusion and overcome socially divisive disparities while respecting diversity, 
are also part of an enabling environment for social development (Ishikawa 1967). 
 International Economic Order and Human Development 
 In the new international development strategy adopted by the General Assembly 
for the Third Development Decade, beginning on January 1, 1981, governments 
pledged to fulfill their commitment to the concept of a new international economic 
order based on justice and equity. They agreed (though compliance was checkered at 
best) to subscribe to the goals of the strategy and to translate them into a coherent 
set of interrelated policy measures. The concreteness of the strategy was indicated by 
such targets as reaching, by the year 2000, full employment, universal primary school 
enrollment, and life expectancy of 60 years as a minimum, with infant mortality rates 
no higher than 50 per 1,000 live births. 

70  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 Sustainable D evelopment 
 The concept of sustainable development was a major milestone in rethinking devel-
opment. The 1987 Brundtland Commission defined sustainable development as 
“development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability 
of future generations to meet their own needs” (United Nations 1987, 154). The 
objectives of sustainable development have been summarized as a virtuous cycle with 
five components: (1) promoting equality, (2) improving the quality of life and well-
being, (3) sustaining natural resources—along with sustainable jobs, communities, 
and industries, (4) protecting human and ecosystem health, and (5) meeting interna-
tional obligations (Khator 1998). 
 Compared with the strategies of the first four Development Decades, which clearly 
emphasized the importance of economic growth in the overall development equa-
tion, the Strategy for the Fourth Decade (1991–2000) placed much greater emphasis 
on poverty eradication and social development. Quite significantly, it stated that 
while growth is desirable, developing countries need not wait for high per capita 
income to do away with poverty (Labini 2000). Moreover, notwithstanding the fact 
that during the 1990s the United Nations sponsored a series of global conferences on 
issues such as human rights, population, gender, and social development, it has failed 
to recapture its previous holistic conception of development. Indeed, the MDGs 
summarized in  chapter 2 fall within a social development universe rather than within 
the narrower development conception that the UN system had previously embraced. 
Qualitative concerns replaced older quantitative ones as development projects moved 
from absolute to relative measures of poverty. 
 Human D evelopment R eports 
 One UN initiative deserving special comment is the publication of the annual UN 
Human Development Report (HDR) (UNDP 1990). Published since 1990, the 
HDR seeks to advance the concept of human development as an overarching philos-
ophy. It posits a substitute perspective on development, compared to the traditional 
growth-oriented development models based on per capita GNP. 
 At the heart of the original HDR is the Human Development Index (HDI), a 
composite index comprising three elements: life expectancy, educational attainment, 
and an income element, measured in terms of purchasing power parity to control 
for the costs of living across countries. Over the years, a number of other indices 
have been added to the original HDI, including a human poverty index, a gender-
related development index, a gender empowerment measurement, and a technology 
achievement index, intended to measure technological progress based on four criteria 
(indigenous creation of technology, diffusion of old technology, diffusion of new 
technology, and human resources development). 
 The HDI, as articulated by Mahbub ul Haq and Amartya Sen, is underpinned by a 
new conception of development as a process of enlarging people’s choices and ensuring 
greater freedom. Successive HDRs over the 1990s broadened further the development 
agenda by exploring what a human development approach would mean for a number of 
priority areas: the concept and measurement of development, development financing, 
human security, women’s equality and gender, economic growth, poverty, consumption, 

Governance and Development Administration Theory  ●  71
globalization, deepening democracy, and human rights. Although various international 
organizations had focused on each of these issues previously (e.g., UN agencies, funds, 
and programs dating back to the 1960s or even earlier; the World Bank with its explicit 
commitment to poverty alleviation and its office on women in development in the 
1970s), each of these was regarded not as an add-on to orthodox economic develop-
ment but as part of a more integrated conception of human development, resting on 
fundamentally different foundations (Sen 2000). This concept of human development 
emphasized specific principles of people-centered governance, that is, accountability 
and transparency, access, social justice, human rights, and inclusion in the political and 
economic processes. The  National Human Development Reports are published annually 
in over 100 countries. The World Bank programs have built on Robert McNamara’s 
redirection of the Bank to poverty alleviation in the 1970s; they have incorporated par-
ticipatory mechanisms for developing country assistance documents, governance indi-
cators for estimating the magnitude of loans and grants that can be constructively used, 
and conditional cash transfer programs that address children’s education and health in 
addition to straightforward increases in income (see  chapters 2 and  3 ). 
 Toward the end of the 1990s, developing countries had taken steps to liberalize 
their economies and integrate them into the world economy. Against that backdrop, 
international attention was focused on the benefits of globalization and the growing 
interdependence in the world economy. The focus had shifted to a number of insti-
tutional preconditions for development, including good governance, transparency 
and accountability, decentralization and participation, and social security. When the 
UN General Assembly adopted the Millennium Declaration in 2000, the goals and 
targets it set in the section on development ultimately became known as the MDGs. 
However, the MDGs were not part of a new agenda, but an attempt to refocus years 
of debate, efforts, and struggle to advance the economic and social development of 
the world’s poorest nations. The MDGs represented a more concentrated attempt to 
bring together all those activities, undertakings, and initiatives in a common focus, 
underlining their interrelationships and the need to make progress on all of them in 
order to succeed in any one of them. 
 Governance-Poverty L inkage 
 The HDRs promoted the idea that governance is the necessary condition for people-
centered development. However, the contents of what is regarded as governance and 
development administration have been changing with shifts in development think-
ing. During the early post-WWII period, it was widely recognized that many of the 
problems that developing countries were facing at the time resulted from deficits in 
state capacity. This refers to poorly managed public institutions; inadequate public 
sector human capacities in terms of knowledge, skills, motivation, and commitment; 
inability to collect and manage public financial resources; and lack of knowledge, 
innovation, and technology strategies. With the evolution of development theories, 
scholars and development practitioners began to recognize the need for the capacity 
of the state to create an enabling environment for private sector development and for 
the full participation of civil society in policymaking processes. 
 The focus on human development and poverty alleviation required a holistic and 
multisector approach, because poverty is related not only to employment and income 

72  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
but also to access to basic public services. Access to safe drinking water and sanitation 
facilities is vital and requires efficient water management. Access to and the promo-
tion of universal education, especially for women, is crucial in giving people the 
means to emerge from poverty and requires that the state administer these services 
efficiently. Access to health services is another fundamental ingredient in the fight 
against poverty in which the state has a pivotal role to play. In brief, how the pub-
lic sector is structured, administered, and operated; what policies and programs are 
adopted; and the extent to which civil society is engaged in development processes 
have a great impact on people’s well-being (UN Development Programme 2002). 
 Human development and poverty alleviation are facilitated by effective and trans-
parent legislative bodies that can represent the demands of the citizens and check 
the powers of the executives through oversight and participatory local government 
systems that can facilitate active engagement of community-based groups. Effective 
local administration and community-level mechanisms are necessary conditions for 
the implementation of universal primary education. 
 To sum up, as the contents of the theories of development changed over the years, 
so did the concept of governance and development administration—from a techno-
cratic, public administration focus to a broader concept encompassing the partici-
pation of all actors to achieve economic and political development. Hyd é n (2011) 
identified six shifts in the global discourse about governance: from technical/mana-
gerial to political aspects, global to country level, numerical indicators to narrative 
trajectories, quantitative to qualitative methods, top-down to bottom-up approaches, 
and representative to monitory aspects of democracy. 
 From Public Administration to Democratic Governance 
 With the paradigm shift of the theory and practice of development, the concept of 
public administration has gone through four interrelated phases: traditional public 
administration, development administration including public sector management 
and NPM, governance, and democratic governance. This section presents the evolu-
tion of theoretical perspectives. 
 Traditional P ublic A dministration 
 After WWII, policymakers and scholars of development focused on the maintenance 
of law and order, the provision of basic infrastructure and services, and the promo-
tion of national integration. This led to a strong role for the state and government 
bureaucracies. It also entailed centralized, legal-rational, and hierarchical bureaucratic 
systems. The separation of the political from the administrative was the key. Because of 
the prominence of Wilson’s advocacy and implementation of these ideas, and the more 
general appeal to scientific management, public administration was considered the most 
efficient mode of organizing the public and the private sectors during the industrializa-
tion era in the developed world. This approach argued for insulating administration 
from politics, the need to improve efficiency, and the importance of improving public 
services through training civil servants and merit-based assessments (Wilson 1887, 74). 
 Thus, core elements of traditional public administration were deemed as suit-
able to achieve economic growth, with social and economic development as the core 

Governance and Development Administration Theory  ●  73
development objective. Furthermore, the provision of basic social services and the 
promotion of national integration by curtailing centrifugal political forces required 
apolitical public administration structures and processes. Neutral public administra-
tion structures and processes for day-to-day interactions with citizens were regarded 
as essential to promote trust in government. 
 Development A dministration 
 Faced with the mammoth tasks of nation building, newly independent states in 
Asia and Africa needed a civil service with the skills to undertake core development 
functions, including the generation of policy and program alternatives in different 
sectors, program planning, implementation monitoring, and service delivery and 
access. Public administration institutes were established in most of these countries, 
with technical and financial support of the donors, including the United States and 
the United Kingdom, to introduce management skills and tools that had been suc-
cessfully applied in these countries. The Development Administration Group of 
the American Society of Public Administration and the UN Division for Public 
Administration initiated technical assistance programs to strengthen the capacity of 
these new institutions. 
 It also became apparent, both in developed and developing countries, that the 
Wilsonian conception was seriously flawed in assuming that policymaking and its 
implementation are separable. Administrators have to determine which laws and 
regulations are appropriately invoked for each case; they make policy in each instance 
and establish precedents for future cases. Countries adopting the British practice pass-
ing minimalist skeleton laws leave even more discretion in administrator’s hands, and 
unstable governments leave the public administration with even more responsibility 
to govern in the midst of instability. Thus, if public administrators are policymakers 
as well as just implementers, their training ought to include policy analysis to be able 
to anticipate the consequences of their decisions. It is striking that the premier US 
public administration programs that traditionally have played a major role in training 
civil servants of developing countries, such as Syracuse University and the University 
of Southern California, have been converted into public policy schools. 3 
 Closely related to development administration, the public sector management 
approaches emphasized people-centered development processes. It dealt with such 
aspects as leadership training and development, team building, and motivation. It 
also addressed macro-organizational issues such as agency structures and interagency 
arrangements. Theories and practices of public sector management could be divided 
into two sets of issues: (1) intraorganizational issues, such as civil service reform, 
accountability, institution building, management training, and strategic manage-
ment; and (2) interorganizational issues, including decentralization and the engage-
ment of civil society and the private sector in government-initiated programs (UNDP 
1995; Blunt and Jones 1992). 
 The post-1980 NPM paradigm addressed the limitations of the top-down, line 
ministry approach. In light of interagency rivalries resulting in mutual undermin-
ing rather than healthy competition, and the absence of incentives for hard work or 
creativity, the NPM paradigm called for smaller, more autonomous mission-oriented 

74  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
units, greater flexibility for innovation, deliberately structured competition among 
agencies, and use of incentives for public administration personnel. 
 The NPM professed to respond to the challenges posed by the top-down forms of 
governing, in both political and economic fields. It involved reorganizing public sector 
bodies to bring their management, reporting, and accounting approaches closer to busi-
ness methods and making them more competitive, efficient, and effective (Dunleavy 
and Hood 1994, 9). Proactive managers as opposed to reactive bureaucrats were 
favored. Accountability as compliance to preset rules was substituted with account-
ability based on performance management toward benchmarks of success (Rondinelli 
1990, 43–59). The boundaries between the administrative and the political, and the 
public and the private, became blurry as governments undertook public-private joint 
ownership and management of certain public services. Centralized bureaucracies were 
foregone to give preference to smaller, decentralized units with direct links to citizens, 
who were now perceived as consumers of public services (Falconer 1997). The six core 
characteristics of NPM, based on the business model of governance, were enumerated 
as: (1) productivity, (2) marketization, (3) service orientation, (4) decentralization, (5) 
policy orientation, and (6) accountability for results (Kettle 2000, 59). 
 From Government to Governance 
 Since the early 1990s, the concept of governance has been predominant in the discourse 
on local, national, and international development. The shift from development admin-
istration to governance is based on the premise that three sets of actors are engaged in 
the public policy process—state actors are responsible for creating enabling legal and 
political environments; private sector actors create jobs, income, goods, and services; 
and civil society actors facilitate political and social interactions. Thus, the governance 
concept comprises complex processes, relationships, and institutions through which 
citizens and groups articulate their interests, exercise their rights and obligations, and 
mediate their differences. The key elements of governance include public administra-
tion inclusive of the civil service, systems and processes of partnerships between differ-
ent levels of government and administration, legal and judicial systems, parliamentary 
processes, and the mechanisms for the engagement of private sector and civil society 
to achieve national objectives. It should be added that the process of governance is not 
always orderly but one of accommodation, resistance, conflict, and assimilation. 
 Theories of bureaucratic corruption influenced the doctrines that emerged in the 
conceptual transition from government to governance. These theories converge on 
one central point: corruption increases where there is administrative discretion with-
out accountability and control. There are, however, different theories about determi-
nants of corruption (Halim 2008, 236–237). The “informal control” theory posits 
that institutions within the bureaucracy, including the presence or absence of merit-
based recruitment, explain the degree of corruption. The “formal control” theory 
emphasizes the role of political institutions, including electoral and parliamentary 
bodies and checks and balances of power, in combating corruption and ensuring 
the accountability of politicians. The cultural control theory focuses on the role of 
civic engagement in reducing corruption through citizens’ responsibility to press for 
honest government and bureaucrats’ awareness of their obligations. The intertwining 
of factors makes it impossible to determine which theory is correct even for a single 

Governance and Development Administration Theory  ●  75
case, and the cross-national comparisons deny the possibility of knowing how much 
corruption undermines meritocratic recruitment, civic engagement, and political 
institutions. For example, one cross-national statistical study concluded that formal 
control “via electoral accountability and judicial efficacy” constrains bureaucratic cor-
ruption, whereas informal control and cultural control do not. Yet, uncertainty about 
causal directions renders the results only “suggestive” (Halim 2008, 253–254, 244). 
 With the recognition of the concept of governance as necessary to achieve devel-
opment objectives, the advocates of decentralization argued that decentralization 
could help accelerate economic development, increase political accountability, and 
enhance public participation in local economic development. Furthermore, it is 
argued, decentralization could help break bottlenecks in hierarchical bureaucracies 
and assist local officials and the private sector to cut through complex procedures 
and get decisions made and implemented more quickly. Under certain conditions, 
decentralization could increase the financial resources of local governments and pro-
vide flexibility to respond more effectively to local needs and demands (Cheema 
and Rondinelli 2007). In the broader context of governance, those who promote 
decentralization see it as increasing the capacity not only of local governments but 
also of the private sector and civil society organizations to extend services to larger 
numbers of people. It was also seen as giving greater political representation to diverse 
political, ethnic, religious, and cultural groups without destabilizing the state. In 
addition, many proponents now see decentralization as an instrument for building 
institutional capacity within local governments and NGOs to achieve the MDGs and 
improve the chances of successfully implementing propoor policies that depend on 
local communities taking ownership of poverty alleviation programs. 
 However, governance experts recognize that several factors can undermine the 
gains from decentralization (Hyd é n 2007; Rondinelli 2007; Wekwete 2007). The 
subnational jurisdictions may lack the technical capacity to provide certain goods 
or services efficiently. Some goods and services may be provided more efficiently by 
taking advantage of higher level governments’ economies of scale. Resource control 
by wealthier jurisdictions may reduce the overall equity of receiving state benefits 
across the country. The central government may put the burden of provision of goods 
or undertaking certain services onto lower levels of government without transfer-
ring the budget resources or the capacity to collect the resources through taxation or 
other means; underfunding can undermine the standing of subnational governments 
held accountable for providing the goods and services. Subnational authorities may 
be more corrupt than national officials. Placing responsibility for regulation in the 
hands of subnational governments may worsen the negative impacts that one juris-
diction imposes upon another, such as downstream water pollution. The current 
thinking is that different goods or services can be provided best by different levels of 
government, best in terms of efficiency, equity, accountability, responsiveness, and 
minimizing negative externalities (Cheema and Rondinelli 2007). 
 Democratic G overnance 
 The current focus on democratic governance embraced by Western nations, some 
developing nations, and enshrined in the bulk of constitutions worldwide brings 
together two dimensions of managing public affairs: the interaction among actors 

76  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
(i.e., governance) and universally recognized core values (democracy). Governance 
is a means to an end. Democracy is both a means to an end and an end in itself. 
Democracy entails broad participation, rule of law, transparency and accountability, 
representation, and a system of checks and balances (Cheema 2005). Democratic gov-
ernance entails the translation of these principles into tangible practices and formal 
institutions—such as free, fair, and frequent elections; a representative and account-
able legislature to make laws and provide oversight; and an independent judiciary 
to interpret and enforce laws. They also translate into prosecutions for violations 
of human rights and the rule of law. Good democratic governance also decentral-
izes  some authority and resources to local governments to give citizens a more direct 
role in governance. Finally, good governance ensures that civil society plays an active 
role in setting priorities and making known the needs of the most vulnerable. Thus, 
governance is good if it supports a society in which people can expand their choices 
in the way they live; promotes freedom from poverty, deprivation, fear, and violence; 
and sustains the environment and women’s advancement. 
 The evolution of democratic governance doctrines has been influenced by liberal 
democratic theory. A liberal democratic political system is defined as one where regu-
lar elections determine the legislative and executive power of the government; there 
is the protection of civil liberties by law and constitutional safeguards that are impar-
tially enforced by the judicial system; and the powers of and relationships among 
branches of government and public offices are specified (Wintrop 1983, 83–132; 
Dryzek and Dunleavy 2009, 18–32). The shift from governance as simply effec-
tive administration to democratic governance reflects the changing dynamics within 
developing countries that are presently electoral democracies. Some pressures for the 
shift to democratic governance have emanated from internal factors in developing 
countries, such as higher education and income levels and a more active civil society. 
These are reinforced by external factors, including the need for the rule of law in the 
context of globalization, and external pressures from donor community, including 
foreign aid conditionalities and democracy assistance programs ( figure 4.1 ). 
Pairing Social and
Economic Development
Sustainable
Development
Human Development
and Poverty Alleviation
New Public Management
From Government to 
Governance
Democratic Governance
Timeline
Development and Governance Theories
Economic Growth
Traditional Public 
Administration
 Figure 4.1  Shifts in the paradigms of development and government. 

Governance and Development Administration Theory  ●  77
 Concept-Driven Analysis: Definitions across Disciplines 
 This section describes the striking convergence of thinking about governance across 
multiple academic disciplines, demonstrating that there is now far less disagreement 
about what should be done to improve governance, though accomplishing the improve-
ments is, of course, another challenge. Currently, the scope of what is considered gover-
nance can be as broad as all dimensions that shape who gets what, when, and how—as 
an umbrella term covering different schemes of collaborative efforts, policy entrepre-
neurship, and participatory initiatives (Duit and Galaz 2008). A more substantive defi-
nition is the sum of ways that individuals and institutions in both public and private 
spheres manage their affairs (Commission on Global Governance 1995; Knio 2010). 
Some focus on an instrumental conception of governance such as the method of public 
sector management, including financial accountability and the creation of internal and 
external control mechanisms (Thirkell-White 2003; Hout 2010). Many scholars have 
approached the concept from the perspective of a decision-making process character-
ized by interorganizational relationships and dependencies requiring multilevel and 
multiorganizational responses to societal problems (Lasswell 1971; Kooiman 1993). 
 Discipline-oriented definitions can be grouped along the following dimensions:
 Public administration sees governance as efficient, effective, and citizen-centric 
 
●
public sector management and service delivery based on capacity development and 
toward transparent, accountable, participatory, and inclusive state-society relations.  
 Public policy views governance as the process, institutions, and distribution of 
 
●
authority that shape policy outcomes. As the most comprehensive public policy 
framework, the policy sciences (Lasswell 1971) note the political and technical 
issues involved in each of the functions involved in policymaking and define the 
ultimate humanistic objective of human dignity as the broadest shaping and shar-
ing of valued outcomes (Lasswell and McDougal 1992, 720). This framework, 
dating back to the 1950s, anticipated both the equity and the participatory goals.  
 Political science views governance from the perspectives of regime type and qual-
 
●
ity, particularly vis- à -vis democratization, and the issues of sovereignty of the 
nation-state and global governance when it comes to international relations. 
 Economics emphasizes the relevance of transactions costs in how governance is 
 
●
structured (more details and implications are provided in  chapter 2 ). 
 Sociology applies governance to social movements of newly emerging power 
 
●
groups, such as NGOs, civil and noncivil society activists, and grassroots 
organizations. 
  Anthropology and philosophy offer perspectives on governance via their focus 
 
●
on power discourses, subjectivity, and governmentality. 4 
 Business administration uses governance to understand and improve the run-
 
●
ning of corporate entities, organizational departments, and sectors based on 
open a nd v isionary m anagement. 
 Public Administration and Public Policy 
 The public administration literature views governance as the art of directing, guid-
ing, and regulating individuals, organizations, and nations. When applied to public 

78  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
administration and public policymaking, it encompasses ordered rules of the govern-
ment, its exercise of authority, patterns of decision making, and collective action 
undertaken along with its partners. In this understanding, governance is a statecraft 
with government as its principal actor (Robichau 2011, 116). The nature and scope 
of action assigned to government as opposed to nongovernment actors in the exercise 
of this art have been discussed extensively. As the central theory of public adminis-
tration moved from old public administration to NPM, and from there to public 
governance or new public governance, these debates around the nature and scope of 
government’s role within governance have shifted with significant consequences for 
practitioners (Osborne 2010, 9). 
 The traditional (Weberian or classic) public administration advocacy of central-
ized, legal-rational, hierarchical bureaucracy sees bureaucratic routine and impartial-
ity as crucial advances of modernization beyond the ad hoc favoritism exercised by 
many governments (Gerth and Mills 1946). Accordingly, rule-following bureaucrats 
execute the orders received by their superiors to whom they are accountable, based 
on a set of clear rules and regulations flowing from public law where the separation 
of the administrative from the political is the key aspect (Pfiffner 2004). 
 In this conception, governance denotes legal frameworks through which contracts 
are negotiated, monitored, adapted, enforced, and terminated. Its major character-
istics are (1) an apolitical civil service, (2) hierarchy and rules, (3) permanence and 
stability, (4) institutionalized civil service, (5) internal regulation, and (5) equality 
(Peters 2001). As early as 1925, scholars studied the best methods to make compre-
hensive empire-running policies in Great Britain, pointing to a series of resolutions 
as governance steps (Guest 1925). This legalistic approach gradually yielded to a 
more organizational perspective on governance. The variables of agency judgment, 
planning personnel’s commitment to the implementation of the project, and more 
general social conditions such as crime and health hazards pointed to the growing 
importance of positivism and behavioralism in the 1960s. 
 From 1948 until approximately 1970, public administration equated effec-
tive administration with the state, which was seen as the most important engine 
of socioeconomic development. By the 1970s, given the fiscal and financial bottle-
necks at both national and international spheres, drawbacks of this state-dominated 
and administrative approach became apparent (UN Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs 2009). Then the focus shifted from administration to management, 
and reducing the size of the state became the goal of almost all policymakers. The 
new term governance was explicitly used by Cleveland (1972) to denote the horizon-
tal bonds of consultative forms of governing. 
 Following Cleveland and the incipient NPM wave, governance was increasingly used 
synonymously with this new paradigm of public administration. Progovernment schol-
ars favor the state-centric approach of the traditional public administration paradigm, 
maintaining that despite fiscal belt-tightening, government still occupied the central 
role. They regard the diatribe against the primary role of government as misleading, 
because governance cannot take place without government. The progovernance schol-
ars are more society-centric in emphasizing the roles of nonstate actors in the provision 
and delivery of services. For them, governance is a new form of government. Only a few 
scholars position themselves between the two camps, creating the  state-centric relational 

Governance and Development Administration Theory  ●  79
path, maintaining that the state was not governing less but differently (Robichau 2011, 
120). These middle-ground scholars prefer more in-depth analysis of new tools and 
modalities of state administration, as opposed to joining the debate over the primacy of 
administration versus the markets, or government versus governance. 
 The “4P approach” to governance (public-private-people partnerships) and the 
increasing disenchantment with the Washington Consensus led scholars and poli-
cymakers to look for new and more eclectic understandings of governance. Asian 
policymakers talked about the need to maintain a healthy balance between the invis-
ible hand of markets and the visible hand of good governance. The solution was 
not a return to old public administration and its sole reliance on state, but a more 
balanced approach between the heavy touch of central planning and the light touch 
of laissez-faire markets (MacAuslan and Addison 2010). These evolving debates and 
the continual demands of civil society groups for the broadest possible humanistic 
agenda and the broadest participation by civil society 5   exemplify challenges to the 
conventional public administration approach. The basic premise of 4P or network-
based governance is collaborative networks and partnerships formed around policy 
issues (Stoker 2006). In this system, governance is no longer dominated by a central 
government or free markets, but is co-produced and co-shared along with NGOs, 
businesses, and citizens (Castells 2006, 16) for the creation and implementation of 
policies using negotiation, persuasion, and collaboration. 
 Using the concept of regime, governance can be viewed as resting on the develop-
ment of shared expectations about acceptable behavior: the convergence to “sets of 
principles, norms, roles, and decision making procedures” (Frederickson 2004, 18). 
The regime concept focuses attention on how governance must create cooperation to 
overcome the collective action problems of reluctance to provide public goods when 
other actors are not trusted to cooperate. Achieving the common good is feasible if 
government agencies fulfill the expectations of responsiveness, interest groups behave 
responsibly within reasonable legal limits, and NGOs act according to the norms of 
constructive engagement rather than obstruction. This depends on instituting and 
sustaining regimes aimed at establishing shared expectations about desired behav-
ior. However, this broader range of goals accounts for the tensions that arise in the 
purposes and design of governance institutions. Hyd é n (2011, 8–10) points out the 
tensions between the concerns over effectiveness—the traditional preoccupation of 
public administration—and the concerns over participation and legitimacy: the dis-
tinction between getting things done, to be judged by  accomplishments , vs. the  process 
dimensions that encompass the politics of the policymaking. Yet a crucial intersec-
tion of these concerns has been embraced by international development agencies: 
inclusive socioeconomic development, sound public finance management, building 
democratic institutions, promoting social justice, and strengthening human rights. 
 Comparative Politics and International Relations: Dimensions 
of Democratic Governance 
 In political science, governance has been used to refer to democratization, emphasiz-
ing the principles of participation, transparency, accountability, rule of law, effective-
ness, and equity (Cheema 2005). For Hyd é n (2011), democratic governance goes 

80  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
beyond the implementation of specific policies to encompass the normative frame-
work—the regime—within which policies are formed and executed. To illustrate the 
integration of the political and technical aspects of democratic governance, one only 
has to recognize that transparency and accountability to the public require strong 
technical capabilities to monitor, assess, and communicate. 
 However, other elements of good governance go beyond democracy and efficiency, 
to preclude the risks of majoritarian democracy dominating minorities or imposing 
controversial moralistic strictures that impinge upon individual rights. Because both 
representative and direct majority pose these risks, inclusive democratization must 
strike a difficult balance between protecting the rights of the privileged—after all, 
secure property rights are key to both economic growth and personal security—and 
concern for the less privileged (Hyd é n 2012). 
 In contrast, Bang and Esmark (2009, 20–23), addressing the increasingly complex 
and contentious issues facing the European Union, point to the danger that if good 
governance is taken to mean technically effective policies and their implementation, 
democracy may be rejected out of the frustration that politics is getting in the way of 
sound decisions. This leaves open what constitutes a sound decision unless interests 
are articulated in an open, democratic process. Good democratic governance accepts 
“policy-politics,” but it is best when based on negotiation, communication, trust, and 
solidarity (Castells 2006, 17). The attack, then, is not on politics per se but rather on 
exclusionary, poorly informed, excessively confrontational politics, often leveled at the 
formal party systems and politics. The assumed shift from democratic to good gov-
ernance is one from decisions to action, politics to policy, input to output, and from 
legitimacy to the more specific concept of legitimacy as policy acceptance by citizens. 
 On the other side, international relations theory has examined governance from the 
perspective of state sovereignty and the changing role of the nation-state in the interna-
tional system. Global governance has emerged to denote dissatisfaction with the con-
ventional realist and liberal institutionalist theories dominating international relations 
theory from the 1970s to the end of the 1980s. Accordingly, global governance has 
been defined as the fragmentation and integration of societal interactions and author-
ity patterns (Weiss 2000) or as the “burgeoning information, communication, mar-
ket, finance, networking, business activities” (Finkelstein 1995, 368). Initially, it was 
equated with the increasing impact of nonstate actors, leading to the realization that 
the international system is no longer dominated by nation-states. 6 Later, more elaborate 
definitions of global governance evolved as a system of rule at all levels of human activ-
ity with transnational repercussions, or as a multilateral system of policy domains from 
the subnational to the transnational converge via the multiscalar relational organiza-
tion of networks of governance (Weiss 2000; Campbell, Kumar, and Slagle 2010). In 
international relations, governance is essentially considered as the shared understanding 
of regime behavior, which entails managing principles, norms, and decision-making 
procedures that facilitate the maintenance of an international order.  
 Sociology: Civil Society and Social Movements 
 With the end of state-centric conceptions of power in the 1970s and the growing 
distrust of citizens in their government institutions and representatives, scholars and 

Governance and Development Administration Theory  ●  81
practitioners increasingly turned to civil society as a new actor needed for democratic 
and effective governance. Of course, this reflected the growing role and activism by 
nongovernmental actors, including civil society and citizen groups as well as diverse 
social and protest movements. The shift in focus from management, efficiency and 
performance to everyday societal problems faced by citizens as the nucleus of gover-
nance issues has gone in tandem with sociological studies in governance. In sociology, 
governance was defined as the newly emerging models of joint and continuous action 
by social actors from diverse milieus acting to influence policies in line with their 
shared values (Swyngedouw 2005). 
 In this sociological perspective, ideal governance arrangements are based on: (1) 
horizontal interaction among equal participants without distinction between their 
private and public status; (2) citizen-led initiatives to empower the poor and the 
disadvantaged; and (3) learning by doing and by discourse through regular and itera-
tive exchanges among interdependent actors. In this process, civil society and social 
movements have been the two leading actors in forming networks of governance 
among themselves and with the state and the private sector. 
 As is apparent in the long-standing dichotomy of the liberal tradition of indi-
vidual autonomy and the republican tradition calling for the state to lead the effort 
to establish civic and ethical responsibility, the controversy revolves around whether 
a vibrant and healthy civil society can transpire without a strong and facilitative state 
structure in place (Skocpol 1996). Others are zealous advocates for an independent 
and autonomous civil society (Hyd é n and Samuel 2011). The state-centric civil soci-
ety scholars are also structuralists in maintaining that organized civil society cannot 
flourish apart from an active government genuinely interested in the strengthening 
of civil society through inclusive democratic politics. The structuralists find support-
ing evidence for their argument in US political history, where the openness of the 
Congress and state legislatures in organizing petition drives, the spread of public 
schooling, and the establishment of US post offices in towns and cities were essen-
tial in building and strengthening civil society organizations. In the opposite camp, 
some political scientists and sociologists cite examples from the Latin American and 
Eastern European experiences to flesh out the pernicious impact of authoritarian 
governments on civil society, and how the latter was formed and grew independent 
of, and sometimes despite, the state. The roles and activities of mass organizations in 
transitions to democracy, such as the trade union movement against the Uruguayan 
dictatorship and Poland’s Solidarity movement, are examples of this second new 
social movement that scholars draw on (Blind 2009). 
 Scholars who have emphasized the increasing partnership between civil society 
and markets have proposed a third approach of reinventing the state. Reinventing 
the state meant conceiving government as a catalyst and facilitator between all sorts 
of actors and in finding solutions outside the public sector. In this approach, gov-
ernment should not necessarily privatize or work to reduce the state at all costs. 
Nor should it simply follow a recipe of redistribution of wealth toward the mitiga-
tion or elimination of inequity. Government should do what it does best: raising 
resources and setting societal priorities through a democratic political process while 
creating the conditions auspicious for the private sector to organize the production 
of goods and services. In that process, government should be both customer-driven 

82  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
and community-owned. Customer-driven government means an open, transparent, 
and accountable government. Community-owned government signifies an inclusive, 
participatory, and engaging government. A government that is catalytic, customer-
driven, and community-owned is also holistic. It values entrepreneurship, markets, 
and the third sector composed of voluntary associations, civic communities and non-
profit organizations (Osborne and Gaebler 1993). 
 Social movements and mass-based nonprofit organizations have also contributed 
to civic engagement and democratic governance. Globalization and the emergence of 
new social movements asking for greater political and social rights and freedom have 
gone hand in hand (Tarrow 1994). In their new role as channeling agencies of inter-
national aid, many NGOs are now representing interests, building participation and 
checking the state all at the same time. In other words, they are doing what political 
parties do to seek power. Special interest groups gradually replace civil society organi-
zations, raising the dilemma of whether civil society should be nonpartisan or not. 
 Social movements like Brazil’s Rural Landless Workers Movement, the 
Unemployed Workers’ Movement of Argentina, the Zapatista National Liberation 
Army, and Mothers’ movements, although sporadic and at times chaotic, have also 
contributed to both the building of social capital among the clusters of their mem-
bers and the building and consolidation of democracy, as have labor unions in France 
and burial societies in South Africa. The impact has considerably increased as these 
movements have been interlinked with each other and with other societal actors, such 
as NGOs, women’s organizations, and academic research institutions. Through the 
UN World Summit for Social Development in 1995, Social Watch brought together 
these movements and organizations through a network architecture of social watchers 
who mobilize societal action in the field. 
 Michel Foucault, a philosopher and historian of ideas, has coined a new term to 
describe the changes noted in governance. Governmentality, a broad term denoting 
the expansion of government and sources of governance, along with the set of beliefs 
about government and governance, entails a particular rationality of governing com-
bined with new technologies, instruments, and tactics of conducting processes of col-
lective rule-setting, implementing, evaluating, and monitoring (Foucault et al. 1991). 
The governmentality approach stresses the implicit irony that the socially innovative 
forms of governance were encouraged and supported by the very same agencies that 
have pursued a neoliberal—market-dominated—agenda and that they are still oper-
ating within a broadly liberal political economic order (Swyngedouw 2005). 
 A parallel vocabulary within this same field is humane governance, defined as a 
type of human rights-oriented governance that supports the creation of participa-
tory, responsive, accountable polities embedded in competitive, nondiscriminatory, 
yet equitable economies (Ul Haq 1999). Components of humane governance were 
enumerated as broad ownership, decency, accountability; its objectives are freedom, 
genuine participation, and sustainable human development. 
 Conclusion 
 From the 1960s until the 1980s, central state administration based on legal-rational 
bureaucracies was believed to be the engine of growth and prosperity. The decade 

Governance and Development Administration Theory  ●  83
from the mid-1980s to the mid-1990s, dismantling centralized administrations, top-
down management, and state enterprises, was the governance reform parallel to the 
economic liberalization reforms. Competition among agencies was encouraged, in 
keeping with the strong market orientation of the period. This was largely focused 
on efficiency in accomplishing goals set in the conventional representative policy 
process. Starting with the mid-1990s, a gradual shift occurred in foreign assistance 
approaches, away from the priority of efficiency to a greater sensitivity to governance 
concerns like human rights, legislative support, judicial reform, and corruption. The 
concept of good governance, at both turning points, acted as the tipping point. It 
reversed the state-dominated socioeconomic development patterns in the 1980s. It 
then reversed the hegemony of the markets in the mid-1990s. Then, it gradually 
coupled its socioeconomic agenda with political leadership and democracy followed 
by foci on human rights, human dignity in general, and accountability. For foreign 
assistance approaches, governance has thus taken on humanistic qualities, increas-
ingly abandoning its more mechanistic face as aid conditionality. 
 The common debates and concerns of policymaking and administration across 
disciplines in academia show that governance emerges as the interdisciplinary bridge 
linking the different variables of interest embraced by each discipline. It does so 
through a genuine focus on the “how to govern” question, but also with a parallel 
concern for broad sharing of benefits. In this sense, governance can be defined as the 
willingness and ability of governments, along with its national and local partners, to 
respond effectively and legitimately to citizen needs, wants, wishes, and concerns. 
 As we have seen, over the past few decades, academics have been making addi-
tional contributions to our understanding of the governance concept. However, 
the practice of governance has moved ahead of the theoretical analyses. Faced with 
daunting social and economic problems—including inadequate access to services, 
rising income disparities, and exclusion of the poor from the political processes—
policymakers in developing countries, international development partners, and civil 
society organizations have been experimenting with new doctrines and tools to pro-
mote greater citizen engagement for an inclusive and responsive state. This has led to 
a series of proposals of governance best practices and the development of innovations 
at the national, subnational, and local levels. Governance today involves deliberative 
efforts and multilevel solutions from myriad actors. It includes boundary-spanning 
policy regimes with a multitude of actors collaborating around their needs- and 
rights-based issues. Governance, as such, can best be described as an interdisciplin-
ary bridge, while its myriad context-dependent practices can safely be likened to a 
panoply of statecraft. The actual practice of governance in the developing world over 
the past few decades is the focus of the next chapter. 

 CHAPTER 5 
 Evolution of Governance and 
Development Administration Practice  
 T
he feasibility of applying abstract theories and doctrines of governance and 
administration to the complex realities, limited resources, and political polar-
ization of many developing countries has generated various approaches and 
strategies that are frequently at variance with the classic conceptions and aspirations 
of the theories. Democratic rhetoric has often been accompanied by autocratic rule. 
Principles based on idealized conceptions of development management have been 
replaced by more pragmatic approaches to cope with the messiness of bureaucratic 
politics, local power structures, and administrative shortcomings. 
 The experience in developing countries suggests that practices of governance and 
development administration, driven by economic and political pressures, often were 
privileged over the theory and doctrines. There is great diversity in the nature of 
development institutions in developing countries. Yet, important trends are discern-
able. In particular, the structures and practices of foreign assistance agencies have 
undergone significant changes. This led to variable results, including uneven forms of 
development, inefficient pooling of resources, and chronic indebtedness. 
 Governance strategies and practices in developing countries have been influenced 
by two sets of factors: (1) internal factors, including greater access to information by 
citizens and demands for greater accountability and participation, and (2) external 
factors such as donor conditionalities and changes emanating from rapid globaliza-
tion, including information and communication technologies and greater movement 
of people, goods, and services. 
 This chapter examines shifts in the strategies and practices of governance pursued 
by three sets of stakeholders: governments in developing countries, civil society orga-
nizations (CSOs), and donors and international organizations. It discusses reforms 
of public administration structures and processes and reviews how practice has dealt 
with the evolving concepts of public administration, NPM, governance, and demo-
cratic governance, including civil service reform, decentralization, electoral and par-
liamentary reform, and the engagement of civil society. The chapter also discusses 

86  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
emerging trends and issues in the practice of governance and the ways in which wide 
gaps between theory and practice are being bridged. 
 Reform Strategies by Governments 
 The evolution of governance doctrine and practices since the 1950s has reflected the 
changing nature of development problems and nation building after independence 
of most of the developing countries. Traditional public administration, moderniza-
tion of the civil service, and militarized modernization strategies reflected the need 
to reconcile centripetal and centrifugal forces within the political system in order 
to promote national integration. Centralized economic planning, administration, 
and political decision making seemed like logical tools to achieve these objectives. 
There were instances where groups representing varying mixes of economic, regional, 
political, and social divisions failed to reconcile the differences among diverse inter-
est groups, leading in many instances to military interventions that blurred the line 
between the civilian government control and the military as a professional force (see 
 chapter 9 ). The early apparent success of centralized planning led to a greater role of 
the state, even in countries such as India that were otherwise characterized by demo-
cratic processes and free enterprise. The Soviet model of centralized planning was 
found to be an attractive approach to the leaders of many countries in Asia, Africa, 
and Latin America to mobilize and allocate resources, promote industrialization, and 
provide access to basic services (see  chapter 2 ). The establishment of independent 
central banks and regulatory commissions was the first necessary step in developing 
countries to promote economic growth and development, although progress in estab-
lishing these institutions as truly independent was stifled in many cases. 
 During this period, the dominant role of the state in identifying development 
policies and designing and implementing development programs was rarely chal-
lenged, and the role of the market in promoting jobs, income, and providing ser-
vices was largely ignored. Concentration of powers and development resources led 
to increased political corruption by politicians and rent-seeking behavior directed 
at the bureaucracy, due to its excessive powers to allocate economic privileges (see 
 chapter 3 ). The resulting top-down approach frequently led to the erosion of politi-
cal support among citizens and an inability of government decision-making struc-
tures to address the interests of different segments of the society to promote balanced 
development. There were insufficient mechanisms for the people to articulate their 
interests through interest groups, unions, civil society, etc. 
 Critical Issues in Public Sector Management Capacity 
 Due to the dominant role of the state, governments in developing countries recog-
nized the significance of strengthening public sector capacity, including civil ser-
vice reforms, to effectively design and implement development projects. Since their 
independence, developing countries have traditionally faced a set of critical issues in 
public sector management. Permanent public administration reform entities (such 
as public service commissions and public services departments) within the central 
government apparatus were created to cope with these issues. Civil service reforms to 

Governance and Development Administration Practice  ●  87
streamline bureaucracy were identified as a priority concern. Initially these programs 
focused on issues of remuneration, number of employees, performance appraisal, 
personnel recruitment, selection, placement, promotion, and related issues (UNDP 
1995, 55). Pressures on governments to provide employment often resulted in over-
staffing of government departments and semiautonomous organizations, especially 
in unskilled and semiskilled grades—in some cases, resulting in ghost workers. Other 
concerns were favoritism in recruitment and promotion processes; inability of the 
central civil service agencies to take action against those performing at subpar levels 
due to political and ethnic pressures; and low salaries that led to low morale, fewer 
incentives to work, and moonlighting (UNDP 1995, 55–57). 
 Reformers also recognized other critical issues for public sector management:
 Good leadership and vision was often lacking for the essential task of mobiliz-
 
●
ing government organizations to produce quality services by identifying clear 
ways to overcome environmental constraints, inspire staff to achieve organiza-
tional objectives, encourage innovation, and adopt a mission-driven rather than 
rule-bound operation (Osborne and Gaebler 1993). 
 Strategic management capacity was frequently critically weak, in terms of plan-
 
●
ning how to achieve the organizational mission and how to direct agency activi-
ties to serve the interests of stakeholders (UNDP 1995, 68). 
 For virtually all developing countries, human resource management and train-
 
●
ing suffered significant weaknesses, in terms of organizational structure and cul-
ture, personnel selection and placement, training and development, job design, 
and performance appraisal. Recognition of the seriousness of these weaknesses 
has led to the establishment of management development institutes, some with 
considerable success such as the Malaysian Institute for Public Administration 
and the Eastern and Southern Africa Management Institute. 
 Many public agencies have also been lax in improving efficiency, delivery, access, 
 
●
timeliness, and customer concern in providing goods and services. 
 Part of this failure in delivering goods and services has been traced to lack of 
 
●
coordination, and in some cases outright conflict, among public administration 
units. Interorganizational and intergovernmental relations needed to be stream-
lined and clarified, including areas of primary and secondary responsibilities of 
each level of government and administration and effective horizontal and verti-
cal coordination among agencies (World Bank 1997, 80–85). 
 The first phase of civil service reforms in developing countries was aimed at improve-
ments within the existing centralized structure to upgrade the skills and knowledge of 
the personnel, changing the culture of the organization and the process of its internal 
management, clarifying missions, and improving the quality and timeliness of public 
services. 
 These reforms were considered necessary but not sufficient by policymakers and 
development practitioners to promote national integration and effective development 
management. Equally important was the need to change administrative and political 
boundaries and create special administrative units to bypass inherent administrative 
capacity deficits and overcome inertia within the administrative machinery. Special 

88  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
regional development authorities were established to promote regional development 
and planning, such as the Narmada Valley Authority in India, the Superintendency 
of the Northeast in Brazil, and land development authorities in eastern Malaysia. 
These administrative units were granted considerable autonomy, separate budget 
lines outside of the ministerial structures, and posting of high-performing officials in 
high managerial positions. The objectives were both political, to gain greater legiti-
macy in less developed areas, and administrative, to deliver quick results by creating 
autonomous decision-making structures that did not have to go through the ponder-
ous standard processes. 
 Another, more micro-level strategy to bypass the standard administrative machin-
ery of government was the establishment of program management units (PMUs), 
often with the support of the bilateral donor agencies, the World Bank, and regional 
development banks. The PMUs were created to implement such programs as the 
Integrated Rural Development Program and the Urban Management Program. Staff 
of these PMUs were recruited from among the most qualified personnel from within 
and outside the civil service and given higher salaries and incentives. In many cases, 
special procedures were identified to give more discretion and flexibility to these units 
to make decisions related to program implementation and monitoring. Funding from 
the donor community was often channeled through these units instead of the con-
ventional administrative machinery of the government. Because of the above factors 
and external technical support, the PMUs contributed to relatively more effective 
implementation of the programs. 
 However, such units had several negative consequences. In some countries such 
as Sri Lanka, channeling more funds for integrated rural development to selected 
districts through the special units than through the normal machinery of government 
weakened the roles and capacities of nation-building departments, such as agricul-
ture and health, and created greater fragmentation of the government machinery. 
Different patterns of district administration and flow of donor resources through 
the different procedures used by the PMUs impeded effective coordination at the 
subnational and local levels. 
 During the 1980s, the introduction of structural adjustment policies supported 
by the IMF, the World Bank, and other international financial institutions led to the 
declining role of the state and its legitimacy in providing access to services to the vast 
majority of the people. In the late 1990s, however, the confidence in market forces 
as the engines of growth and means for allocating resources eroded. The frustrations 
with persistent poverty and environmental degradation contributed to this decline in 
confidence, and the 2008 financial crisis further undermined the legitimacy of the 
market leading to demands for greater regulation (Hyd é n 2011). 
 A strikingly opposing view is that the motives and actions of the state, shorn of 
rhetoric, are not directed to determining how to enhance growth, human dignity, 
or any other public good, but rather to strengthen and reward the state itself. James 
Scott (1998) attributes state action to the imperative of government leaders to shape 
and control society. Some functions must be performed—taxation, monitoring of 
the population, general information gathering, etc.—and these imperatives dictate 
governance structures. Our perspective is that while power certainly covers one set of 

Governance and Development Administration Practice  ●  89
objectives of government leaders, many other values—including the commitment to 
enhance human dignity—cannot be so easily dismissed, especially as democratization 
has spread despite formidable obstacles. 
 Thus, the latest phase in the evolution of governance practice emanated from the 
rapid pace of democratization over the past three decades. Scholars and development 
practitioners began to assess governance from the perspectives of three interrelated 
doctrines—responsive and accountable governance; inclusive governance that pro-
tects the interests of otherwise marginalized people; and participatory governance 
that involves citizens in public policy making. They began to examine not only 
efficiency criteria to assess civil service but also its accountability and transparency, 
inclusiveness, and degree of citizen participation in articulating local demands and 
needs, identifying local projects, and monitoring and evaluating government initia-
tives. Democratic reform programs were introduced to realign powers and resources 
of different branches of government and relationships among different democratic 
institutions in the context of the constitution. These political reforms included:
 Establishment of independent electoral management bodies with suffi-
 
●
cient autonomy and capacity to spur free and fair elections that are insulated 
from potential interventions by the executive branch and the bureaucracy to 
affect electoral outcomes (notably in Argentina, Botswana, Chile, Colombia, 
Indonesia, India, South Korea, and South Africa); 
 Enhanced capacity of the legislature to perform important functions, such as 
 
●
initiating legislation (as opposed to simply endorsing executive initiatives), rep-
resentation and oversight of the executive branch, including the bureaucracy 
(notably in Bangladesh, Ghana, and Mexico); 
 Decentralization of powers and resources from the central government to sub-
 
●
national and local governments, including deconcentration of ministerial func-
tions, delegation to semiautonomous government organizations, devolution to 
local governments, and transfer to NGOs (notably in Bangladesh, Brazil, India, 
and Indonesia); all require competent subnational and local authorities, struc-
tures ensuring that local elites do not capture the bulk of the benefits under 
their control, and restraints on the tendency of some central governments to 
use deconcentration to penetrate local affairs through the increased presence of 
officials reporting to the central government (Schou and Haug 2005, 18); 1 
 Reform programs to promote the rule of law, judicial independence, and access 
 
●
to justice in order to ensure checks and balances among different branches of 
government, check abuses of authority, and take advantage of opportunities 
provided by the rapid pace of globalization (notably in Malaysia, Nigeria, and 
the P hilippines); 
 Programs to enhance the enforcement capacity of government agencies and 
 
●
human rights institutions to make people aware of their rights, enforce national 
and international legislative frameworks, protect against human rights viola-
tions, and promote inclusive development policies that take into consideration 
the interests of minorities, women, and marginalized groups (notably Chile, 
India, a nd South A frica). 

90  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 Roles and Perspectives of Civil Society 
 Over the past few decades, civil society engagement in the process of governance 
practice has expanded considerably (Cheema 2010). This increased role emanated 
from the inherent weaknesses of government-dominated doctrines as well as changes 
within developing countries that created demand for greater participation (such as 
the Arab Spring), inclusiveness, and accountability. These domestic pressures have 
been reinforced by pressures from the global community, including bilateral donors 
and multilateral agencies such as UN Development Program and the World Bank, 
to engage all segments of the society in making decisions that affect people. The 
work undertaken through the UN Human Development Reports, the rights-based 
approach to development, and the MDGs hastened the process of CSO engagement 
in political and economic development processes. Thus, the need for increased space 
for civil society has been a key component of the evolving democratic governance 
agenda and practice. However, the simultaneous proliferation and fragmentation of 
CSOs makes it increasingly difficult to assess their impact or to see them overall as 
barometer of change. 
 Definitions of civil society have evolved from two interrelated traditions—one 
rooted in democracy promotion and the other to development practice (Cohen and 
Arato 1994, ix; Diamond 1994, 5; White 1994, 379; Carothers 1999; Alagappa 
2004, 32; Cheema 2010; Levy 2010). The United Nations, the World Bank, and 
the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development define civil society 
to include community groups, NGOs, labor unions, indigenous groups, charitable 
organizations, faith-based organizations, professional associations, and foundations 
(Cheema 2010, 3). 
 Social movements and activist groups have been instrumental in the global dis-
course on the role of civil society in governance (Cheema and Popovski 2010; Hyd é n 
and Samuel 2011). Among others, they have emphasized social issues, human rights, 
fair wages and working conditions, and environmental concerns. People-centered 
local initiatives in countries such as India (social audit), Brazil (participatory budget-
ing), and Kenya (citizen tribunal) provide many lessons about the potential roles for 
CSOs in ensuring that government is responsive and accountable through the active 
engagement of civil society. 
 CSOs are playing increasingly important and expanding roles at the local, national, 
and global levels to improve the quality of democratic governance, provide access to 
basic services, and protect the rights of minorities and marginalized groups through 
their advocacy functions (Cheema and Popovski 2010). At the local level, CSOs are 
now actively engaged in community development, skill improvements for sustain-
able livelihoods, and access to basic social services. At the national level, CSOs often 
perform a watchdog function to improve the quality of electoral and parliamen-
tary process, promote access of the poor to justice through paralegal services, and 
seek the accountability of public officials by informing media about violations by 
public officials. In Abra, the Philippines, the Concerned Citizens of Abra for Good 
Governance, an NGO, investigates projects for substandard materials, poor con-
struction techniques, and fraudulent contracting procedures. In Bangalore, India, the 
Public Affairs Center has established and released Citizens Report Cards that rated 

Governance and Development Administration Practice  ●  91
and compared agencies on the basis of public satisfaction and responsiveness. CSO 
accountability functions are not limited to direct monitoring, as shown by the capac-
ity building of the Philippine Centre for Investigative Journalism (PCIJ). The PCIJ 
is an independent, nonprofit media agency specializing in investigative journalism, 
which provides training for investigative reporting to full-time reporters, freelance 
journalists, and academics. The Local Governance Barometer in South Africa was 
aimed at increasing citizen engagement and at assessing the impact of policy on local 
issues at the district level. In Vietnam, a governance and public administration index 
was established to assess the citizen demand for better governance performance. In 
India, there were many local initiatives led by citizen activists and civic movements, 
through such participatory instruments as social audits and watch measures, policy 
score cards, and budget monitoring at the local level. Finally, the Philippines Report 
Card on Pro-Poor Services, a pilot project, was supported by the World Bank to get 
feedback of citizens concerning the performance of government services, including 
basic health, elementary education, housing, potable water, and food distribution 
(Cheema 2010). 
 It is worth noting that despite the potential for rivalry between government and 
civil society in determining societal directions, some governments have actively 
encouraged a greater governance role for CSOs. The Porto Alegre experiment of 
participatory budgeting obviously could not have proceeded without government 
support. In Mongolia, the government led assessments of governance programs 
involving multiple stakeholders. The African Peer Review Mechanism engaged actors 
from government and civil society to assess governance programs and strengthen 
democratic process in the region (Hyd é n and Samuel 2011). 
 At the same time, assessing how well civil society undertakes its roles has also 
been a major task of CSOs themselves, particularly NGOs. CIVICUS in South 
Africa, the Philippines Rural Reconstruction Movement, the Centre for Budget and 
Governance Accountability in India, the Centre for Governance at BRAC University 
in Bangladesh, and the Brazilian Institute of Social Analysis have not only launched 
civil society initiatives shaping governance processes at the local, national, and global 
levels but have also focused on the accountability and transparency of CSOs, their 
capacity, their roles in democratic change, their internal codes of conduct, their advo-
cacy roles on behalf of minorities and marginalized groups, and their role in improv-
ing access to basic social services. This introspective aspect of CSOs is key to their 
evolution. 
 The roles of CSOs have expanded at the global and regional levels as well. 
International CSOs are also addressing issues that transcend national boundar-
ies such as human trafficking and cross-boundary water management. CSOs also 
perform advocacy functions for global public goods, such as debt relief for highly 
indebted and least developed countries; greater awareness of climate change; and 
implementation of UN conventions and treaty bodies dealing with civil and politi-
cal rights, transparency in global governance, and increased foreign assistance from 
the donor community (Clark 2010). In 1996, the Economic and Social Council 
of the United Nations launched the accreditation process that enables a number of 
CSOs to be associated with it and thus be able to influence intergovernmental pro-
cesses. In 2004, the Panel of Eminent Persons on the UN-Civil Society Relations 

92  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
recommended an enhanced civil society participation in various UN bodies such 
as UNICEF, UN Development Program, World Food Program, and the UN High 
Commission for Refugees. It facilitated CSO engagement in the design and monitor-
ing for the MDGs. Today, CSOs are playing an important role in global advocacy, 
normative intergovernmental processes of the United Nations, and the programs of 
various UN entities promoting the global public goods including the environment 
and climate change, human rights protection, and refugees. They pose a challenge to 
traditional notions of state and national sovereignty with implications for governance 
and stability (Popovski 2010). 
 However, understanding the dynamics of civil society engagement in governance 
and its strengths and weaknesses requires an analysis of their specific contexts, histo-
ries, and patterns of growth; the legal framework under which they are established; 
their capacity to deliver on their mission; and their upward and downward account-
ability. The pattern of CSO growth in China, for example, reveals the massive influ-
ence of political orientation, socioeconomic history, cultural influences, and the 
forces of globalization on the sphere (Roy 2009). The new but still limited space 
for civil society in China emanated from the need for a new social safety net as the 
liquidation of many state-owned enterprises left millions of Chinese unemployed and 
without health care, while the state’s role in providing social welfare shrunk as part 
of the marketization of the economic system. Chinese who have migrated from their 
home province are often denied the free or heavily subsidized health care in their new 
locations (Roy 2009). 
 The opening for civil society in China also grew out of the slight loosening of 
restrictions on political discussion, demonstrating the correlation between the degree 
of permitted political participation and the growth of CSOs. Unlike China, Indonesia 
has undergone a complete transition from authoritarianism to democracy, with CSOs 
playing a prominent role in promoting democratic governance. In turn, the demo-
cratic government and decentralization reforms have facilitated further growth of 
CSOs and embedded them in the political and social landscape. 
 This increased presence of CSOs of different types does not necessarily provide a 
united front. For example, the efforts of Latin American NGOs to coordinate across 
the entire region in order to formulate and implement strategies for “transforming 
the current reality of inequality, injustice and exclusion” (Asociaci ó n Latinoamericana 
de Organizaciones de Promoci ó n al Desarrollo 2010, 5) through a highly publicized, 
UN-backed series of national dialogues and panregional interactions were boycotted 
by labor unions. The CSO leaders acknowledged that “[i]t continues to be difficult 
to coordinate trade unions with other social movements. Although trade unions were 
invited and a previous global agreement for their participation had been reached, 
not a single one participated (Asociaci ó n Latinoamericana de Organizaciones de 
Promoci ó n al” Desarrollo 2010, 11). 
 Legal F ramework 
 Another factor that has influenced the degree of CSO space is the legal basis for their 
establishment and the legal framework in which they operate. Malaysia is a prime 
example of a highly regulated legal process for the organization of civil society, such 

Governance and Development Administration Practice  ●  93
as to provide many avenues for state oversight and control. In a political system that 
is dominated by a coalition of ethnic-based political parties, and in which race-based 
affirmative action is well entrenched in the development policymaking and imple-
mentation processes, advocacy-based issues such as human rights and transparency 
are considered highly sensitive. The legislative framework, thus, is not an enabling 
one, nor is it conducive for advocacy-based CSOs. However, as had been the case of 
the Republic of Korea, Malaysia’s rapid pace of economic development and expand-
ing middle class has been coupled with increased demand for space for civil society 
(Jayasooria 2010) . 
 Capacity of Civil Society 
 Experience suggests that the technical capacities of CSOs (fundraising and financial 
management, information gathering and research techniques, and communication 
skills to attract the attention of citizens) are essential for them to utilize the available 
space to engage in political and developmental processes. CSOs need networking 
skills to develop coordinated advocacy, document and adopt best practices, cultivate 
professionalism and trust building to educate citizens, and develop a willingness and 
ability to speak truth to power. Bangladesh, for example, has some world-renowned 
and highly successful large NGOs, but many others face a host of capacity prob-
lems, including inadequate technical and managerial skills, high levels of corruption, 
and weak monitoring and evaluation systems for project activities. Corruption and 
nepotism weaken the quality of management capacity. Many NGOs have too loose 
a structure, often with limited accountability to beneficiaries and are unduly influ-
enced by donors’ interests (for further elaboration, see Cheema and Popovski 2010). 
 Accountability of Civil Society 
 Many CSOs lack clear, enforceable rules that govern the ways in which their officials 
relate to beneficiaries. Furthermore, some NGOs are highly dependent on interna-
tional donors whose program priorities can overlook or undermine the needs and aspi-
rations of their intended beneficiaries. The Malaysian case shows the weakness of civil 
society in ensuring its own accountability and transparency of funding sources, uti-
lization, and financial management practices. Often they lack published and audited 
accounts that can be shared publically. Moreover, few CSOs have a common position 
on external audits or impact assessment of their activities. No accountability or audit 
panel is available to certify that CSOs observe universally accepted standards of gov-
ernance practices or are accountable for their funding. In contrast, Philippine CSOs 
have their own code of conduct to ensure their accountability (Cheema 2010). 
 Civil Society and Democratic Change 
 In some countries civil society is now playing a vital role in stimulating democratic 
change, indeed through multiple ways: CSOs are directly involved in all stages of the 
electoral process, including voter registration, voter education, and electoral moni-
toring. In Indonesia and India they are monitoring the performance of human rights 

94  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
institutions; in India they are also holding local government officials accountable 
for access to services. CSOs are engaged with parliamentarians and local govern-
ment leaders to communicate the concerns of citizens, such as the Pakistan Institute 
for Legislative Development and Transparency. They provide paralegal aid and other 
support mechanisms for access to justice and highlight abuses of power, especially by 
the local elite, through media and other channels. 
 CSOs have also influenced democratic governance practice through the protec-
tion of rights of minorities and marginalized groups, supporting the independence 
of the judiciary, and holding local officials accountable to improve access to services. 
In Latin America a combination of Bolivian, Ecuadorean, and Peruvian CSOs and 
international NGOs has pushed to strengthen indigenous rights, successfully mobi-
lizing the indigenous identity as distinct from alternative nonethnic identities such 
as peasant or citizen (Lucero 2008, 91–95, 147). Each of these aspects is crucial to 
promote and sustain democratic local governance. However, in order to ensure that 
they remain effective advocates of public goods, CSOs must strengthen their linkages 
with other organizations, address issues related to their legitimacy, and strengthen 
their accountability through various measures, without subtracting from their orga-
nizational flexibility and improved capacities. 
 The degree of citizen activism and the role of CSOs in promoting democratic 
change, however, is strongly influenced by the national political structures that 
provide them with opportunities to be actively engaged. Countries such as India, 
the Republic of Korea, Indonesia, South Africa, and Brazil all have relatively stable 
national-level political institutions that are conducive to CSO engagement at a sys-
temic level. In countries that are still going through democratic transitions, CSOs 
contribute to mobilization of pressures from below for greater political pluralism 
(Hyd é n 2010) . 
 Perspectives of Donors and International Organizations 
 Over the past two decades, the role of the external partners in promoting governance 
has expanded due to several factors (Schmitter 1996; Cheema 2005; Hyd é n and 
Samuel 2011). First, with the end of the Cold War and the failure of many of the 
top-down policies, developing countries have been more willing to seek the support 
and advice of external partners to improve state capacity and effective functioning of 
electoral systems, parliaments, human rights institutions, local government systems, 
the judiciary, and public sector management. 
 Second, pressures for democratic governance have emerged from within develop-
ing countries, with the Arab Spring as the latest example. With increasing access 
to information and economic opportunities, there is a growing citizen demand for 
transparent and effective governance to achieve national objectives. 
 Third, the United Nations and all of its associated organizations have been impor-
tant global advocates of human rights, a participatory approach to development, an 
increased role of nonstate actors, and respect for fundamental freedoms as reflected 
in the Secretary General’s Agenda for Peace and Agenda for Development (United 
Nations 1997, 66). The UN conferences and summits on key issues of global concern, 
including the environment, human rights, human settlements, social development, 

Governance and Development Administration Practice  ●  95
the status of women and children, and financing for development, have emphasized 
the central role of governance systems and institutions in promoting sustainable and 
human development. Specifically, the UN Millennium Summit was a landmark 
event leading to the UN Millennium Declaration and the MDGs. The central role of 
core governance functions continues to be seen as a critical component of the Post-
2015 Development Agenda of the United Nations. Each of these intergovernmental 
processes emphasized the role of governance in achieving development objectives. 
 Finally, CSOs are assuming the role of advocate, watchdog, and interlocutor 
between the government and the people in the accountability and transparency of 
governance process. Through their global membership, they provide direct support 
to developing countries and also monitor and evaluate the donor-assisted democratic 
governance programs. 
 Despite their expanding support for governance, however, donor support has often 
been accompanied by the conditionalities, mentioned in earlier chapters, requiring 
social, political, and economic policy reforms that may not be acceptable to the gov-
ernment or CSOs. Donors have advanced three arguments in favor of conditionali-
ties: development effectiveness requires efficient and transparent governance systems 
and process; democratic governance is based on a set of universally recognized values 
even though their practice could vary from one country to another; and donors need 
to show results to their own constituents and tax payers, which requires monitoring 
to show effective use of assistance (Cheema 2005). 
 Donors and international development agencies, however, are not monolithic. While 
bilateral donors and the World Bank typically explicitly frame the governance reform 
requirements as conditionalities, the UN Development Program and other UN pro-
grams frame their relationships with governments as partnerships with their country-
level counterparts and strengthening their capacity to design and implement governance 
reform. In practice, however, the distinction is less sharp, because in both cases there 
must be a meeting of the minds in terms of mutual expectations and obligations. 
 The various international development organizations have anchored their programs 
somewhere along the continuum between effectiveness and political legitimacy depend-
ing upon their mandates and missions (Hyd é n 2011). The World Bank and other pre-
dominantly economically focused entities largely focus their governance programs on 
such issues as fighting corruption, promoting transparency in government agencies, and 
reduction of transaction costs. For private firms, compliance with anticorruption laws 
in their headquarter countries motivates reform efforts to reduce demands for bribes 
and other corrupt practices. For the World Bank and the regional development banks, 
the degree of democratic practice is one component of the country evaluations and by 
extension a factor in determining the magnitude of support for each recipient govern-
ment, but this macro-governance focus is less relevant in making funding decisions on 
development projects and programs. Many other bilateral and multilateral agencies, in 
contrast, emphasize the legitimacy dimension of governance practice including politi-
cal pluralism, inclusiveness, accountability and transparency, and engagement of civil 
society. The UN Development Program takes a two-pronged approach: strengthening 
of political institutions such as election commissions and parliaments; and improving 
the administration and management capacities of the government at various levels to 
effectively design and implement development policies and programs. 

96  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 World B ank 
 Governance as a concept and decision-making criterion was not explicitly prominent 
at the World Bank prior to the late 1980s, basically because of the stricture in the 
World Bank Articles of Agreement prohibiting it from taking political considerations 
into account in its loan and grant decisions. The quality of governance was, of course, 
taken into account indirectly in the annual decisions on the total volume of loans 
and grants designated for each recipient country, in terms of the absorptive capacity 
of the country to use World Bank funding constructively. However, the elevation of 
governance as an explicit criterion was first announced in 1987 (Shihata 1997), then 
applied to specific contexts (e.g., a 1989 World Bank study “Sub-Saharan Africa: 
From Crisis to Sustainable Growth”). This study argued that institutional reform 
toward a more efficient public sector (a key dimension of governance) could support 
the right economic policies (meaning structural adjustment programs) in bringing 
about economic growth and development. In that study, governance was defined as 
“the exercise of political power to manage a nation’s affairs.” 
 At birth, governance practice was largely technocratic because the goal of the 
World Bank was and has been economic growth and development, even though 
many World Bank staff were committed to understanding deeper causes of develop-
ment failures. Governance was assumed to be one of the key means to achieve this 
aim. As a means, governance has been mostly concerned about design, sequencing, 
implementation, or enforcement of institutional reform. As such, mechanisms of 
anticorruption, decentralization, transparency, performance-based view of account-
ability, and rule of law have been used to complement and strengthen the efficiency 
of market institutions (Maldonado 2010). 
 With time, this instrumental/technocratic understanding of governance practice 
gave way to more substantive/societal insights. In 1994, the World Bank expanded 
the scope of governance practice to include a transparent process of policymaking, a 
bureaucracy imbued with professionalism and internal codes of conduct, an account-
able executive branch of government, and a strong civil society participating in public 
affairs. In 1997, the World Bank’s  World Development Report embraced more elements 
in its governance definition, including the role of state and citizen participation, 
thereby moving closer to a more political understanding of governance (Doornbos 
2004). A recent World Bank report on governance approached the concept from 
the problem-driven governance and political economy (PGPE) approach, emphasiz-
ing the good-enough-governance perspective for feasibility purposes. Accordingly, 
a PGPE analysis comprises three layers: (1) identifying the problem, opportunity, 
or vulnerability to be addressed; (2) mapping out the institutional and governance 
arrangements and weaknesses; and (3) drilling down to the political economy drivers, 
both to identify obstacles to progressive change and to understand where a drive for 
positive change could emerge from (Fritz, Kaiser, and Levy 2009, ix). 
 Thus, governance reform is now at the forefront of the World Bank’s agenda. Over 
the years, the World Bank has developed its internal capacity and partnerships in the 
public sector and structure of government arena, including fiscal decentralization, 
administrative and civil service reform, public expenditure analysis, anticorruption 
measures, legal and judicial reform, and institution building in such sectors as educa-
tion, health, and water. As one of the key players in international development, its 

Governance and Development Administration Practice  ●  97
role in promoting transparency in government and combating corruption has signifi-
cantly influenced the governance practice in developing countries. 
 The World Bank’s position on when it can invoke human rights violations as 
explicit reasons for denying financial support to a government, however, has been 
limited and sketchy, even though the importance attached to context and culture 
has increased. The World Bank contends that it takes human rights into consider-
ation in making decisions about the projects it funds if (i) the borrowing country 
asks; (ii) human right violations have economic consequences; and (iii) the human 
right violations in question would lead to a breach of the World Bank’s international 
obligations, such as those created under the binding decisions of the UN Security 
Council (Dani ñ o 2006; Sarfaty 2012). 
 Regional D evelopment B anks 
 Regional development banks, most prominently the Asian Development Bank, the 
African Development Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank, have been 
supporting their member states to strengthen their governance capacities and promote 
economic development, facilitate service delivery, and improve infrastructure. For exam-
ple, Asian Development Bank’s (2010)  Strategy 2020  has identified governance as one 
of the “drivers of change.” Asian Development Bank funding in governance and public 
sector management is provided to achieve six governance outcomes: accountability for 
economic performance; effectiveness of policy formulation and implementation; effec-
tive use of public resources; participation of the poor; predictability and transparency of 
regulations and decisions on cross-border issues; and combating corruption.  
 United N ations 
 The UN system, in particular the UN Development Program, has played a signifi-
cant role in making good governance more humane, while putting it on equal footing 
with economic development rather than simply an appendage to it. The 1995 Social 
Summit in Copenhagen and the creation of UNDP’s  Human Development Reports 
and Human Development Index have revolutionized the developmental logic that 
economic well-being is not equal to human progress and that the content of domestic 
policies is crucial to both. 
 To varying degrees, all parts of the UN system are involved in supporting the mem-
ber states in strengthening governance capacity at the local, national, regional, and 
global levels. The UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs leads the UN sys-
tem in supporting the normative, intergovernmental processes of the UN system with 
a focus on public sector management and civil service reform. Specialized agencies 
including UNICEF, UN-HABITAT, UNIDO, and FAO examine governance issues 
in the context of their respective missions and mandates. The UN regional commis-
sions focus on cross-border governance issues such as water management, migration, 
and trade that require cooperation of the countries in the region and globally. 
 The United Nations has followed a two-pronged approach to governance practice: 
a sectoral governance approach to promote processes and mechanisms in such sectors 
as health (World Health Organization) and education (UNESCO), and a holistic 

98  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
governance that examines systemic processes and mechanisms. For example, UNDP’s 
holistic approach to governance defined it in terms of administrative, economic, and 
political governance, usually within a democratic framework (UNDP 2011). 
 UNDP is recognized by the member states as the central entity of the UN system 
with the mandate of expanding governance capacity. In recent years, grant funding 
from UNDP to strengthen governance in developing countries has materialized in 
three distinctive phases or generations. The first generation of governance projects 
(from the 1960s to the 1980s) addressed the need for the improvement of public 
sector capacity in policymaking, implementation, and evaluation at both systemic 
and sectoral levels. UNDP played a key role in supporting developing countries to 
strengthen their public administration capacities. This included support to indepen-
dent central banks and regulatory commissions to facilitate the political insulation 
doctrine for economic policymaking institutions, overcome the skill deficits of the 
mainline bureaucracy, and establish permanent public administration reform entities 
within the central government apparatus. During this period, UNDP also supported 
the creation of administrative units with separate budget lines and administrative 
autonomy to undertake such tasks as integrated rural and urban development pro-
grams, enhancing the capacity of the planning bodies, and providing grant funding 
for the preparation of feasibility studies for infrastructure projects to elicit invest-
ments from the World Bank, donors, and the private sector. 
 In the second generation of governance projects, as mentioned in  chapter 4 , a 
shift occurred in UNDP grant funding that is best encapsulated as from government 
to governance. To act on the recognition of the increasingly overlapping spheres of 
interest of government, civil society, and the private sector and to find new methods 
of encouraging participatory and transparent governance, the UNDP took the lead 
for the UN system. It prepared and mainstreamed its first policy papers on gover-
nance for sustainable human development in 1997 and the integration of human 
rights with human development in 1998. The 2002 report  Deepening Democracy in 
a Fragmented World (UNDP 2002) set the stage for a dramatic increase in UNDP 
grant funding to strengthen parliaments, electoral management bodies, and electoral 
processes; engage CSOs; improve local governance and decentralization processes; 
promote access to justice; and strengthen accountability and transparency. 
 The third generation of governance projects represents a natural progression in the 
understanding of ways to improve governance in line with changing global and regional 
conditions and takes into account the lessons learned during the previous generations. 
The examples of these are cross-border issues in Asia and other regions of the world such 
as human trafficking, water management, and infectious disease and response. Rapid 
globalization has led to increased flows of goods, services, capital, ideas, information, 
and people between countries. Furthermore, for the first time in history, an overwhelm-
ing majority of countries are electoral democracies. Within this context, two dimen-
sions of governance have assumed prominence: governance infused with the universally 
recognized principles and values of democracy, and cross-border governance issues that 
can be addressed more successfully through regional and global cooperation. 
 To bridge the gap between theory and practice, UNDP identified several service 
lines or entry points to support different aspects of democratic governance.  Table 5.1 
shows examples of these entry points. 

 Table 5.1  Generic examples of UNDP grants through the service lines/entry points of 
 democratic go vernance 
Entry points
Examples of assistance
Electoral and 
parliamentary 
process
To strengthen electoral and parliamentary processes through 
voter registration and education, election monitoring, support 
to electoral bodies, legislative drafting, committee systems, 
constituent relations, etc.
Public administration 
and civil service 
reform
 Programs to reform the civil service into an effective, transparent, 
and accountable institution that helps to promote growth and 
private sector development including policies and procedures 
for recruitment, compensation, promotion, human resource 
development, and motivation and performance management 
 Programs to strengthen capacities of central government 
ministries and departments to support policy analysis and 
development 
Judicial and legal 
reform
 Training for judges and prosecutors to strengthen capacities to 
restructure and reform legal and judicial systems; undertake legal 
drafting in commercial, tax, trade, investment, labor, and human 
rights law; and create and maintain independent lawyers’ associations 
 Programs to support legal reforms that ensure the security of 
foreign investments, and legal and regulatory frameworks for the 
engagement of CSOs and paralegal groups to increase citizen 
access to constitutional justice 
Accountability and 
transparency
 To strengthen the capacity of supreme audit institutions and 
related national financial control and management institutions 
 Support to community awareness and education programs to 
combat corruption and strengthen the capacity and resources of 
national anticorruption bodies 
 Decentralization a nd 
 local go vernance 
Programs to support the devolution of financial and political 
authority and local government capacities for participatory 
planning and management; strengthen data and information 
systems; improve people’s participation in the development 
process; and raise awareness among legislators and policymakers 
on the importance of local-level planning
Civil society 
organizations and 
media
 Programs that support the engagement of civil society in free and 
fair elections through voter education and registration, holding 
the members of the parliament accountable, supporting local-level 
development projects, and advocating access to information and 
transparency of governance process 
 Programs to develop the capacity of women to participate in 
political processes and national governance at all levels 
Human rights
To develop human rights capacity in institutions of governance 
and in institutions specially devoted to the promotion of human 
rights, ombudsman offices, police, etc.
 Source : Adapted from Cheema (2005). 

100  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 The United Nations has complemented and broadened the World Bank’s concep-
tion of governance: (1) good governance encompasses all structures and processes 
for determining the use of resources for public goods; (2) it has, as such, emphasized 
the sociopolitical nature of governance as well as its public welfare aspect, beyond 
democratic symbols. In addition to the emphases on transparent public agencies, 
accountable public officials, local governance, and citizen engagement in public poli-
cies and decisions, these theoretical additions have meant in practice the inclusion 
of the universal protection of human rights and nondiscriminatory laws into the 
concept and practice of governance. UNDP country offices and their counterparts 
increasingly pilot-tested project-level modalities and approaches to promote “gover-
nance for human development and poverty alleviation,” that is, governance that is 
inclusive and responsive to the full range of needs and aspirations of the vast majority 
of the poor and marginalized groups. 
 European U nion 
 The governance practice of the European Union has been diverse and opaque. Three 
main perspectives have dominated European Union’s governance support to develop-
ing countries: (i) the main accent on well-functioning government institutions and 
transparent and accountable mechanisms; (ii) the main focus on enforcing human 
rights, particularly through well-functioning judicial systems and democratic struc-
tures; and (iii) the governance approach with a concentration on poverty reduction 
and citizen engagement (Hoebink 2006, 155). The European Union does not clearly 
distinguish between good and democratic governance and uses the two terms inter-
changeably. However, the European Union conditionalities for governance support 
are clearly specified in two articles of the Cotonou Agreement that governs the rela-
tionships between the European Union and developing countries (Slocum-Bradley 
and Bradley 2010, 37). 
 US Agency for International Development 
 The US Agency for International Development (USAID) is one of the largest 
donors of democracy promotion and governance projects in developing countries. 
Its “Democracy, Human Rights, and Governance Strategy” consists of five areas of 
concentration: rule of law and respect for human rights, promoting competitive elec-
tions and political processes, strengthening a politically active civil society, trans-
parent and accountable governance, and promoting free and independent media. 
In practice, USAID programs have pursued five strategic goals: (1) anticorruption 
activities such as civic education and advocacy for the reform of laws and practice 
to promote transparent and accountable governance institutions, processes, and 
policies; (2)  democratic governance of the security sector through such activities 
as public sector reform and public management, strategic planning, and oversight; 
(3) decentralization and democratic local governance to improve subnational public 
administration, citizen participation, and fiscal performance and economic growth; 
(4) strengthening legislative function and processes focused on the quality and effec-
tiveness of laws and regulations, ensuring the accountability of the legislative and 

Governance and Development Administration Practice  ●  101
executive branches and overseeing the government budget and laws; and (5) pol-
icy reform through strengthened executive and public sector performance, includ-
ing capacity development of executive offices, ministries, and government bodies, 
to facilitate the implementation and enforcement of laws and policies, civil service 
reforms, public-private partnerships, and linkages between and among branches, lev-
els, and functions of government (USAID 2013). 
 Nordic C ountries 
 Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden have over the years been the strongest advo-
cates of democratic governance. A unique feature of their funding of governance sup-
port is that most of their assistance is channeled through such multilateral entities as 
the World Bank, UNDP, regional development banks, and the European Union. Often 
their democratic governance assistance is not guided by economic and military interests. 
The areas of their support include capacity development of political parties, legal educa-
tion, electoral and parliamentary process, civil society, and promotion of human rights. 
 All of the Nordic countries have prepared policy papers on good governance prac-
tice. They played an important role in the creation of the International Institute for 
Democracy and Electoral Assistance, which focuses on the consolidation of democ-
racy at the country level by providing a forum to academic institutions, governments, 
and NGOs. Norway has been playing an active role in supporting conflict resolution 
initiatives such as the case of Sri Lanka. UNDP and the Government of Norway 
jointly established the Oslo Center on Governance to support the exchange and shar-
ing of experiences and good practices in governance, including access to justice. 
 As  table 5.2 shows, various bilateral and multilateral agencies have defined gover-
nance practice in order to undertake their respective mandates and missions and fund 
governance ca pacity d evelopment p rograms. 
 The perspectives of the international organizations on governance, although 
nowhere near monolithic, have suffered from comparable biases as in the academic 
field. For instance, they all have conceived governance at the macro-level, applying 
to the entire political, administrative, and economic systems and having the state as 
their main interlocutor. This has meant a managerial and top-down approach as the 
dominant rationale of the donor community. Likewise, formal institutions of rule 
have been prioritized over the underlying forces, such as informal formations and 
societal forces that often determine implementation and outcomes. 
 Other issues with the donor perspectives on good governance have included: 
(1) the assumption that things are broken and need fixing in the Global South and 
the underestimation of the capacity of existing local institutions; (2) the generaliza-
tion that entire sectors need fixing, implying broad civil service reforms, legal sector 
overhauling, and local government makeovers; (3) the presumption that good gover-
nance will bring development or that bad governance will impede it, thus leading to 
the imposition of institutions sometimes out of touch with the socioeconomic reali-
ties in the field; (4) the inclination toward quick fixes and results-based approaches 
as opposed to the perceived needs and rights; (5) the preference for large data sets 
of governance indicators (such as the World Bank’s World Governance Indicators), 
often based on perceptions, to the detriment of specific policy issues and diagnostic 

102  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
tools drawing on local practices; (6) the lack of effective, reliable, uniform, and evi-
dence-based measurement, monitoring, and assessment tools for many sensitive gov-
ernance issues, such as human rights violations; and (7) the tendency to plug Western 
institutions into the local rules and practices, thus leading to analogies being drawn 
with colonialism or the development administration movement of the 1960s. 
 Emerging Trends in Governance Practice 
 Recently, there has been a clear path in governance practice toward adopting a rights-
based approach, centered particularly on human rights. This has been termed humane 
governance—governance that supports the creation of participatory, responsive, 
 Table 5.2  Governance perspectives of donors and international organizations 
United Nations—Good governance is ensuring respect for human rights and the rule of law; 
strengthening democracy; and promoting transparency and capacity in public administration.
World Bank (1992, 1994, 1997)—Governance is the manner in which power is exercised in 
the management of a country’s economic and social resources for development. The World 
Bank has identified three distinct aspects of governance: (i) the form of political regime, 
(ii) the process by which authority is exercised in the management of a country’s economic 
and social resources for development, and (iii) the capacity of governments to design, 
formulate, and implement policies and discharge functions.
Asian Development Bank (1997)—“Good governance . . . is synonymous with sound 
development management.”
IMF (2002)—The term governance encompasses all aspects of the way a country is 
governed, including its economic policies and regulatory framework.
UNDP (1997)—Governance is viewed as the exercise of economic, political, and 
administrative authority to manage a country’s affairs at all levels. It comprises mechanisms, 
processes, and institutions through which citizens and groups articulate their interests, 
exercise their legal rights, meet their obligations, and mediate their differences.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (1995)—Governance is the 
process or method by which society is governed. It denotes the use of political authority and 
exercise of control in a society in relation to the management of its resources for social and 
economic development. This broad definition encompasses the role of public authorities in 
establishing the environment in which economic operators function and in determining the 
distribution of benefits and the nature of the relationship between the ruler and the ruled.
Commission on Global Governance (1995)—Governance is the sum of the many ways 
individuals and institutions, public and private, manage their common affairs. It is a 
continuing process through which conflicting or diverse interests may be accommodated and 
cooperative action may be taken. It includes formal institutions and regimes empowered to 
enforce compliance, as well as informal arrangements that people and institutions either have 
agreed to or perceive to be in their interest.
International Institute of Administrative Sciences (Rampersad and Saleh 2014)—Governance 
refers to the process whereby elements in society wield power and authority and influence 
and enact policies and decisions concerning public life and socioeconomic development.
 Note : Compiled from Singh (2003), Weiss (2000), Cheema (2005), and Hyd é n (2011). 

Governance and Development Administration Practice  ●  103
accountable polities embedded in a competitive, nondiscriminatory, yet equitable 
economies (Ul Haq 1999). Components of humane governance were enumerated 
as broad ownership, decency, and accountability; its objectives are freedom, genuine 
participation, and sustainable human development. 
 Over the past few decades, governance has become one of the core themes of the 
global discourse on political and economic development. Governments have identi-
fied different strategies and doctrines based on the prevailing development paradigms 
and their country’s peculiarities. Donors and international organizations have played 
an important role in shaping governance practice, though there have been signifi-
cant differences among their respective approaches. The most visible change in the 
discourse on governance practice has been the increasing roles of civil society and 
activists in promoting citizen engagement in the process of governance at the local, 
national, and global levels. Cumulatively, each of these sets of actors has contributed 
to the state of present governance practice. 
 Presently, several new trends are discernible in the governance practice in develop-
ing countries. 
 Quest fo r Leg itimacy 
 During the early phases of governance practice, the focus was on managerial effective-
ness in order to cope with specific development problems. Now the quest for legiti-
macy has become one of the core goals of governance. In most countries, legitimacy is 
sought through democratic governance that includes systems of checks and balances 
among different branches of government, the rule of law and independence of the 
judiciary, and free, fair, and regular elections. Thus, the shift has taken place from 
managerial to political aspects of governance. It is widely recognized by policymakers 
and development practitioners that governance is political in the sense that it deals 
with politically sensitive issues such as the distribution of power and the allocation 
of resources to different segments of society and regions of the country. Regarding 
political legitimacy, although political pluralism is still the predominant model in the 
world today, some countries such as China and Vietnam are attempting to promote 
legitimacy though government programs that increase the income levels of citizens 
and provide services to them effectively. This, in turn, has enhanced the legitimacy 2 
of the government. The citizen trust in the government in China, for example, is 
higher than in most other countries in Asia, which is largely attributed to the ability 
of the Chinese government to reduce poverty on a massive scale and improve the 
standard of living of the majority of the people. 
 Decentralizing G overnance 
 There is an emerging consensus that governance requires not only building of 
national-level political institutions, such as parliaments and electoral management 
bodies, and administrative structures and processes to effectively implement poli-
cies and programs, but also the devolution of powers and resources to subnational 
and local units of government and administration (Cheema and Rondinelli 2007). 
Administrative capacity is needed at the local levels to implement projects. The UN 

104  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
Capital Development Fund (2005) has, through a set of case studies in developing 
countries, shown that where local government plays an active role, it becomes easier 
to engage local actors in development processes and more effectively coordinate local 
economic development. In order to capture the shift from top-down to bottom-up 
approach, a new set of tools has been developed to examine the perspectives of dif-
ferent sets of governance actors at the national, subregional, and local levels. These 
include UNDP’s governance assessment methodology that includes the perspectives 
of different stakeholders at multilevels, Afro- or Latino-barometers focused on a 
broad range of issues and institutions, and the Africa Peer Review Mechanism that 
focuses on self-assessment (Hyd é n and Samuel 2011). 
 Delivering S ervices 
 It is widely recognized that effective access to such services as education, shelter, and 
health is a true test of governance effectiveness. In contrast with the first generation of 
democratic governance initiatives focusing on building institutions of democracy, the 
focus during the present phase of democratic governance reforms is on democratic 
dividend, especially coping with the deficits in access to services for the majority of 
the rural and urban poor. 
 Promoting C ountry-Driven S trategies 
 The global community, including bilateral donors and international organizations, 
played an important role in the general advocacy for democratic local governance, delin-
eation of global norms and standards, and, in some cases, general blueprints. This has 
now changed to the need for a country focus, recognizing that democratic governance 
is inherently a political process and thus is determined by various political interests in 
the society. Context does matter a great deal in terms of institutional reform options 
that countries effectively design and implement. The World Bank’s Problem-Driven 
Governance and Political Economy Analysis, the UK Department for International 
Development’s Drivers for Change methodology, and the Swedish International 
Development Agency’s Power Analysis approach are some of the examples of gover-
nance practice frameworks promoted by the international development community 
to ensure that governance interventions take into consideration such factors as history, 
social and cultural norms, and political power structures and processes. Because each 
society has distinctive characteristics of underdevelopment and governance deficits, 
it is logical to identify institutional reform options based on a clear understanding of 
these characteristics and deficits. Furthermore, it is essential to ensure that reform pro-
cesses are country-owned and -driven, with external development partners providing 
technical and financial support. The 2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness was 
an attempt by donor countries, multilateral donors, and recipient or partner countries 
to create new international norms of cooperation. Regarding country ownership, the 
Declaration highlighted the need for partner countries to exercise effective leadership 
over their development policies and strategies and to coordinate development actions, 
It also called for the donor community to base its overall support on partner countries’ 
national development strategies, institutions, and procedures. 

Governance and Development Administration Practice  ●  105
 Enhancing Citizen Monitoring of Government 
 Representation though elections at various levels of government continues to be one of 
the core elements of democratic governance practice. Increasingly, however, citizens seek 
greater participation in the process of policymaking and program implementation. New 
opportunities for civil society entail institutional mechanisms beyond the formal repre-
sentative institutions to enable citizens to monitor the implementation of government 
policies and projects. The monitory democracy utilizes mechanisms that go beyond the 
traditional institutions of accountability, such as anticorruption commissions, codes 
of conduct, offices of the auditor general, the conventional media, and parliamentary 
oversight of the executive. Examples of extraparliamentary power-monitoring institu-
tions are workplace tribunals, youth parliaments, associations of minorities, citizens’ 
assemblies, independent public inquiries, expert reports, participatory budgeting, and 
new forms of media oversight such as blogging (Hyd é n and Samuel 2011). 
 Focusing on Process and Qualitative Data 
 With the ascendency of the global discourse on governance and the rapid increase in 
external funding for governance reform programs, a series of quantitative indicators to 
measure governance was identified. These include the World Bank’s World Governance 
Indicators, Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index, Freedom 
House’s State of Freedom in the World, the Ibrahim Index of African Governance, and 
the Millennium Challenge Corporation’s three democracy indicators. Each of these indi-
cators serves useful purposes such as global advocacy, mobilizing country-level support, 
and undertaking comparative analysis. They serve the growing demand for indicators 
to cope with corruption and transparency issues. Quantitative indicators, however, have 
been criticized by academics and development practitioners and challenged for “norma-
tive, legitimacy and methodological reasons” (Hyd é n 2011). Some developing countries 
perceive these to be biased toward market-oriented liberalization. Others contend that 
quantitative indicators fail to show the complexity of social, economic, and political 
processes in the country. These concerns have given rise to the development of qualita-
tive indicators. Qualitative governance assessments focus on process as the entry point to 
empower local stakeholders. Hyd é n has identified three characteristics of the new phase 
of governance assessments: Bottom up, citizen-initiated approaches that emphasize dia-
logue and social accountability; the application of basic principles of the rights-based 
approach (especially strengthening accountability relationships); and the influence of the 
aid effectiveness agenda with its emphasis on national ownership of development and 
capacity development (Hyd é n 2011). Examples of the process-focused approaches are the 
State of Democracy assessment initiated by the International Institute for Electoral and 
Democracy Assistance, the Urban Governance Index supported by the UN HABITAT, 
and UNDP’s Global Program on Democratic Governance Assessments. 
 Conclusion 
 From the 1960s until the 1980s, central state administration based on legal-rational 
bureaucracies was believed to be the engine of growth and prosperity. The decade 
from the mid-1980s to the mid-1990s entailed more citizen participation, but 

106  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
maintained the emphasis on outcomes than on process; on assessing what people 
want and need than on full authority of the citizenry to determine government poli-
cies; on relying on market liberalization than on state intervention. Starting with the 
mid-1990s, a gradual shift away from this mentality to sensitive governance areas like 
human rights, legislative support, judicial reform, and corruption started to occur. 
This could also be attributed in significant ways to changes within developing coun-
tries such as increased access to information, expanding urbanization, and pressures 
to reduce economic disparities. It could also be attributed to changes in the donor 
approaches and strategies to reflect changing social, political, and economic contexts 
of developing countries. Good governance, at both turning points, acted as the tip-
ping point. It reversed the state-dominated socioeconomic development patterns in 
the 1980s and softened the dominance of the markets in the mid-1990s. Then, it 
gradually coupled its socioeconomic agenda with political leadership and democracy, 
followed by a focus on human rights and accountability. Governance practice has 
thus taken on humanistic qualities, increasingly abandoning its more technical face 
in government policy and aid conditionality. 

 CHAPTER 6 
 Evolving Roles of NGOs in 
Developing Countries 
 Introduction 
 Expanding on the governance focus on the emergence of civil society institutions, 
this chapter examines the evolution of the theories and doctrines that have guided 
NGOs operating in developing countries and how, in light of this evolution, NGO 
practices have themselves evolved. The roles and influences of NGOs have increased 
considerably since the end of WWII. Their sheer number is huge and probably still 
growing, but what that number might be is basically unknown and probably even 
unknowable (Salamon, Sokolowski, and Associates 2004, 15–17). Despite the con-
fusing terminology of nongovernmental organization, nonprofit organization, private 
voluntary organization, etc., it is clear that entities that are not part of government, 
business firms, or families number well above fifty thousand. For the purpose of this 
chapter, it is useful to confine our definition and inquiry to such organizations that 
are ostensibly dedicated to serving the public good in some way. Therefore, labor 
unions, business groups, and grassroots organizations that unite people explicitly to 
pursue their own interests are not within the purview of this chapter. 
 NGOs existed well before the United Nations reportedly coined the term in 
1945. 1 Although conventional wisdom holds that NGOs is a relatively recent phe-
nomenon (Stokke 2009, Part I), Thomas Davis argues persuasively that “interna-
tional NGOs have a long and turbulent history, which has often placed these actors 
at the center of key transformations shaping international society over the last  two 
centuries ” (2013; emphasis added). 2 The transformative and turbulent constants that 
characterize this long history are notable, persistent, and guide what follows in this 
chapter. The approach taken here focuses on the core or prevalent development theo-
ries evident at different times and locations and how these theories are applied to 
achieve ends or goals. These means are represented by the realistic practices that 
do not necessarily conform precisely to the theoretical expectations driving them. 
Exceptions, changes, outliers, and failures are as interesting as the successes sought. 
Indeed, learning from collisions of theoretical expectations and doctrinal wishes with 

108  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
realities more complex than can be imagined is an additional goal of this chapter and 
the volume more generally. 
 The Evolving Context of NGO Operations 
 Eras of the Analysis 
 To summarize the context in which NGOs have operated over the past seven decades, 
it is helpful to segment this period to better grasp major events and the developmental 
trends thus created. Korten (1990) and, subsequently, Lewis and Kanji (2009) offer 
their own perspectives of the early eras of NGOs as agents of development ( table 6.1 ).  
 Thus, NGOs can serve a host of functions, including provision of basic services, 
improving access through local accountability mechanisms, and advocacy functions 
usually for the poor and marginalized and global public goods (Salamon and Anheier 
1992a, 1992b). The theory of global public goods triggered both the evolution of 
various development theories and the role of NGOs at higher levels as well. These 
include debt relief, anticorruption movements, human rights, gender equality, and 
climate change issues. 
 Era 1 covers the immediate post-WWII period of humanitarian relief, relocation, 
reconstruction, the Marshall Plan, and the settling in of the Cold War antagonisms 
with various food, development, and military assistance programs meant to combat 
Communism around the world. While much of this effort was governmental, NGOs, 
particularly those based in the United States, played a major role in assisting refugees 
and restoring services in war-ravaged areas (McCleary and Barro 2008). The shift in 
 Table 6.1  Eras of N GO em phases 
Era 1 
(1945–1963)
Era 2 
(1963–1980)
Era 3 
(1980–2000)
Era 4 
(2000–2015)
Era 5 
(2015–)
Relief/basics
 Community 
 development 
Technology/
fall of iron 
curtain
Overreach/
Push Back
Social impact/
balanced 
systems
Focus
Specific
Local/specific
Regional/
national
National/
global
Ecosystem/
mega-cities
Time frame
Immediate
Project life
10–20 years
Open-ended
Variable
Scope
Individual
 Neighbor hood/
village 
Region/
nation
Nation
Ecosystems 
(natural/
constructed)
Participants
 NGO 
 members 
 NGO/
com munities 
“Everyone”
Networks
Super 
networks
NGO role
Primary/
central
Mobilize/direct
Catalyze/
innovate
 Active/direct 
 involved 
Educational/
tech support
 Sources : Adapted and extended from Korten (1990) and Lewis and Kanji (2009). 

Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries  ●  109
focus from recovery to development, and the emergence of Kennedy-era develop-
ment programs, ends this era and opens up many new possibilities for NGOs. 
 Era 2 begins with newly elected President John F. Kennedy’s stirring call to action 
to Americans and also to citizens of the world. The familiar line—“And so, my fellow 
Americans: ask not what your country can do for you—ask what you can for your 
country”—is followed by another less familiar but still important one: “My fellow 
citizens of the world: ask not what America will do for you, but what together we can 
do for the freedom of man.” 3 
 Local development, specific projects, areas targeted around the world, and inno-
vative organizational forms all characterize and help define this era (Lasswell 1965). 
However, early in Era 2 the roles and influences of NGOs were marginal as compared 
to the dominance of governments as the Cold War took greater hold. The Peace Corps, 
the US Agency for International Development (USAID), the Alliance for Progress 
with Latin America, and financial means such as the World Bank, United Nations, 
and others focusing on regional development enable a variety of new programs and 
possibilities to emerge in this era. Indeed, development activities routinely supported 
military objectives. Various insurgencies, wars of national liberation, coups, revolu-
tions, and the underlying specter of communist aggression defined the early phase of 
this era. Winding down Vietnam in the late 1970s was for the United States a time 
when many military instruments were replaced by nongovernmental ones. 
 Era 2 in retrospect foreshadows contemporary environmental movements—
sources of much NGO activity. Rachel Carson’s  Silent Spring (1962) and the 1972 
Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment, along with concerns about 
feeding and supporting a burgeoning world population, signaled this emergence 
(Bickel 1974; Cullather 2010). 
 The 20-year span of Era 3 began in 1980 and is characterized by increases in 
the number of NGOs and in various missions they undertook. In nations freeing 
themselves of Soviet domination, such as Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Poland, 
NGOs sprouted and flourished as an accepted form of political opposition. Human 
rights, the environment, good government, and other specific mission-driven orga-
nizations came into being just before and after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989. 
Their roles varied as widely as their putative missions, although a general constancy 
of purposes—to catalyze, innovate, and generally transform moribund and failing 
states—pertained. 
 By Era 3 the division of labor between official organizations and NGOs had 
become apparent. As  chapter 7  on official foreign assistance notes, governments and 
multilateral development institutions such as the World Bank and the regional devel-
opment banks were committed to large-scale projects such as physical infrastruc-
ture that would move substantial amounts of funds. These organizations eventually 
acknowledged the importance of social services and microfinance, but have had no 
comparative advantage in establishing small-scale interactions with local commu-
nities or mobilizing other elements of civil society. Governmental and multilateral 
entities (owned by the governments in the nations in which they work, as well as 
by donor governments) are generally less prepared to side with community groups 
against government policy. Therefore, several niches have been open for NGOs, even 
if some of their funding is from governmental or intergovernmental sources. 

110  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 The environmental agenda took more concrete form with the 1992 UN Conference 
on Environment and Development. The Rio Conference or “Earth Summit” stimu-
lated the subsequent launch of hundreds of NGOs committed to environmental 
improvement and what lately has been labeled sustainable development. 4 
 Early and promising successes of the Green Revolution to expand food production 
through technological means, such as genetically modified crops, synthetic forms of 
fertilizer, selective breeding, and many other innovations, did much to feed a growing 
world population and also to sustain an increasing number of consumers whose posi-
tive impacts on growing economies made a substantial difference in millions of lives. 
Much of the impetus behind the Green Revolution came from the planning and finan-
cial support of the Rockefeller Foundation and the Ford Foundation (Jain 2010). 
 The importance of institutions, especially in terms of the managerial and techni-
cal competences required to operate effectively, emerged with growing urgency in the 
early 1980s and continues to this day in numerous NGO efforts for capacity build-
ing. (Esman and Uphoff 1984; Austin and Ickis 1986; Ickis, de Jesus, and Rushikesh 
1986; Korten 1987). 
 Era 3 also encompasses the so-called Washington Consensus, an effort in 1989 to 
come to terms with the increased complexity of development programs and policies 
around the world. Much debate surrounds this effort to simplify and focus economic 
theoretical ideas in the interest of development practice (Williamson 1990; Stiglitz 
2002). Many NGO leaders, believing that they were advocating on behalf of the 
poor, railed against this development approach. Usually lost in the technical and 
personal back and forth is the fact that most of the empirical referents were from 
Latin America, and claims to be general and global were seldom made (Kuczynski 
and Williamson 2003). 
 The consensus itself is usually summarized by the principles reviewed in  chap-
ter 2 , 5 which include market-freeing prescriptions based largely on neoclassical eco-
nomic concepts and practices. 
 The complexity of possible causal links between these liberalization reforms and 
the trends of growth and equity has resulted in enormous ambiguity as to their merits, 
especially because, as  chapter 3 reviews, they were only partially implemented in most 
developing countries—but in many cases when economic conditions had become so 
adverse that austerity measures were required alongside of structural reforms. Many 
NGO leaders focused on the painful austerity measures rather than on the structural 
reforms 
 Several other important trends became more evident in retrospect. The Washington 
Consensus is best seen as an effort to simplify a complex collection of circumstances 
and activities careening out of the familiar control decision makers relied on in 
the 1945–1980 eras. The specter of Everyone being able to participate during the 
1980–2000 stretch of Era 3, often in the form of numerous, independent NGOs, is 
indicative. 
 Even if an economy is stripped of the special privileges enjoyed by the already 
wealthy and powerful, assets are still the major determinants of economic returns. 
Therefore, an essential challenge to poverty alleviation is to provide assets to the 
poor through multiple channels: security of physical capital, access to financial capi-
tal, and opportunities to increase human capital through education, job skills, and 
health. Williamson (2004, 13) argues that “The solution is not to abolish the market 

Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries  ●  111
economy, which was tried in the communist countries for 70 years and proved a 
disastrous dead end, but to give the poor access to assets that will enable them to 
make and sell things that others will pay to buy. That means: Education. Titling 
Programs. Land Reform. Microcredit.” Each of these initiatives provides fertile 
ground for NGOs to operate worldwide. The creative linkage of financial institu-
tions and means with philanthropic sources in creative ways is of special interest as 
the world moves forward into Era 5 and beyond. 
 The relationships between state authorities and civil society became more com-
plex and confusing in the late 1990s and into the 2000–2015 (Era 4). Globalization, 
sheer increases in the numbers of NGOs, and several other developments all contrib-
uted to what Indian author and political commenter Arundhati Roy (2002) termed 
the “NGO-isation” of politics. 6 
 In India, for instance, the funded NGO boom began in the late 1980s and 1990s. 
It coincided with the opening of India’s markets to neoliberalism. At the same 
time, the Indian state, in keeping with the requirements of structural adjustment, 
was withdrawing funding from rural development, agriculture, energy, transport, 
and public health. As the state abdicated its traditional role, NGOs moved in to 
work in these very areas. The difference, of course, is that the funds available to 
them are a miniscule fraction of the actual cut in public spending. Most large-
funded NGOs are financed and patronized by aid and development agencies, 
which are, in turn, funded by Western governments, the World Bank, the UN and 
some multinational corporations. 
 . . . They have become the arbitrators, the interpreters, the facilitators. In the 
long run, NGOs are accountable to their funders, not to the people they work 
among . . . It’s almost as though the greater the devastation caused by neoliberal-
ism, the greater the outbreak of NGOs. 
 This was also the period in which a paradigm shift took place in the way develop-
ment was defined. The UN HDR, first published in 1990, led by Amartya Sen and 
Mahboob ul Haq, presented the HDI to move the focus beyond from economic 
growth. The need for expanded space for NGOs and other civil society organizations 
was a critical part of this. The HDRs, now published annually in over 150 countries, 
transformed the perspectives on state-civil society relations by emphasizing more 
dimensions of welfare. In addition, as outlined in  chapters 4 and  5 , development 
took on a much stronger emphasis on governance and administration. In concert 
with the various UN agencies, NGOs took on a greater role in assisting local grass-
roots organizations to strengthen their institutions. 
 By Era 5, NGOs had to face intense criticism regarding their relation to the state, 
as the quote above by Roy vividly illustrates, and concerns that they were overreach-
ing. These concerns were already articulated by concerned academics and practitio-
ners in the late 1980s and 1990s (Clark 1991; Tandon 1992; Edwards and Hulme 
1996), but they culminated in strong pushback during Era 5. Many criticisms of the 
NGOs fell into five general categories: effectiveness, accountability, autonomy, com-
mercialization, and ideological/political objections to their rising influence (Reimann 
2005). Many of these specific matters emphasize c redibility as a collective concept 
(Gourevitch, Lake, and Gross Stein 2012). The concern over NGO effectiveness has 

112  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
been exacerbated by the fact that NGO performance evaluation typically involves 
unclear or nonexistent measures of effectiveness. In a world where much more than a 
simple profit-and-loss statement exists to keep score, it is little wonder that questions 
about effectiveness would occur. Is the NGO promoting democracy, development, 
innovation, popular participation, poverty alleviation, peace, or what? Assessment 
of NGO efforts to promote sustainability or political empowerment is often over-
whelmed by the lack of any commonly accepted and operational definitions of those 
objectives. Even when goals are relatively clear, such as providing humanitarian assis-
tance or ending internal conflicts, questions remain as to whether NGOs are doing 
“more harm than good” (de Waal 1997; Maren 1997; Anderson 1999; Katz 2013). 7 
 NGOs have also been under scrutiny over concerns of accountability, ranging 
from keeping track of fund flows to obeying regulations at different operational 
levels. Transparency and legitimacy are also at issue (Edwards and Hulme 1996). 
Questions about what proportion of an NGO’s funds went toward program goals 
versus paying big salaries and supporting lavish lifestyles arise, and often for good 
reasons (Buffett 2013). NGOs have responded to these concerns about accountabil-
ity through various mechanisms such as the codes of conduct, the Global Chapter of 
CSO Accountability, and so on. 
 The worry is that some NGOs become virtual extensions of their primary donor 
or donors, and in so doing they lose their independence and—some believe—their 
legitimacy as well. Dependence on official governmental sources, as is often the case 
for development NGOs, may open them up to criticisms of donor capture or, for 
example, becoming agents of imperialism. Criticisms of commercialization occur 
when the NGO becomes more and more like a private business whose main objec-
tives are to raise funds and generate surpluses—a euphemism for profit in the non-
profit world. This issue becomes more problematic with the increasing size of a given 
NGO and its operations. Paradoxically, efforts to improve the professionalism and 
effectiveness of NGOs by building their capacity may work in some sense but at the 
cost of lost focus on an organization’s core mission and as it seeks commercial gains 
and economic efficiencies. Powell and DiMaggio (1991) first identified this problem 
in the late 1980s and labeled it institutional isomorphism. In the Era 4 world of 
increasing numbers of large NGOs, commercialization is, if anything, even more 
significant and troubling (Ritzer 2000; Cooley and Ron 2002). 
 Ideological and political pushbacks run the gamut from the far left to the far right 
on the political spectrum. Long-running fears among the US conservatives, among 
others, focus on the specter of potential domination of the United Nations through 
global governance. Others see NGOs as an arm of US imperialism, or the real inten-
tions of those promoting social responsibility, population control, or food security. Or 
even the inevitable disasters looming somewhere down the road related to technologies, 
such as genetically modified organisms, biotechnology, nuclear power, and so on. 
 Whatever the specific circumstances, the Era of Overreach and Pushback took 
increasing hold as we entered the twenty-first century. 8 The four eras spanning the 
decades from 1945 until 2015 have been anchored in and conditioned by the past, 
even though they bring us up to the present (and a couple of years beyond). The 
question for the twenty-first century is whether new roles for NGOs can be both 
imagined and put into practice. We return to some of the possibilities after discussing 

Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries  ●  113
core theoretical models that help one understand the construction and operations of 
NGOs between 1945 and 2015. 
 Theories and Doctrines 
 There are no hard-and-fast rules to rely on in summarizing and constructing theoreti-
cal models of NGOs in the last 70 years. Nor is there much to be gained by refining 
or sharpening this or that theoretical point for its own sake. We offer what follows 
mostly as a guide to help one understand—and thus appreciate—NGOs as they 
operate in developing countries. These theories must also be considered from the 
temporal perspectives of the four eras just characterized. None of the theories oper-
ates independently of context, most specifically the spatial and temporal, cultural, 
and unique individual and institutional settings where development occurs. 
 Theory of Beneficent Charity 
 The simplest explanation of NGOs is that they are motivated by beneficent charity. 
As a doctrine it means that organizations comprising people with no direct personal 
stake in the outcomes provide assistance to the people affected by adverse conditions, 
where other sources and institutions are unable to do so without the collaboration 
of NGOs. Beneficent charity may be engaged in temporary crises: the typical events 
prompting beneficent charity are both natural and human-caused disasters result-
ing in starvation, displacement, destroyed homes and communities, and refugees. 
The main issues are related to finding food, medical supplies, and shelter and then 
figuring out ways to deliver them to desperate people. Hurricanes, earthquakes, and 
displacements caused by war are obvious examples. 
 However, the impetus of beneficent charity may be conjoined with other motives. 
A vivid example from the immediate post-WWII period is the fabled Berlin Airlift, 
where military and NGOs combined to save Berliners from a drastic Soviet power play 
(Shlaim 1983). This is also an early example of ways in which military and humanitar-
ian objectives could combine for mutual benefit. Many challenging logistical problems 
were confronted, thus forming a valuable collection of procedural and scheduling tools 
for subsequent humanitarian crises. The focus of beneficent charity was and continues 
to be straightforward, immediate, and relatively simple help and humanitarian relief 
 For NGO assistance motivated by beneficent charity that addresses more chronic 
problems, such as endemic malnutrition or long-term refugee camps, deeper explana-
tions are needed to account for why problems deserving charity persist. 
 Theory of Community Development 
 The importance of unmet needs of individuals and the communities in which they 
live and work gains prominence in theories of community development. 9 The theory 
is that local capabilities are necessary for improvements to be sustainable; institu-
tions and skills, and perhaps attitudes as well, must be transformed to break out of 
stagnant patterns. Widespread poverty and alarming population growth, especially 
in the world’s poorest countries and regions, have stimulated efforts to work at the 

114  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
community level to improve health, education, food supplies and security, and other 
basic human needs and requirements. A focus on the community as a collective with 
medium to longer term goals, rather than on individuals with immediate needs, is 
noteworthy. Thus, the main premise of this theory is that communities are unable to 
provide for themselves in important ways, such as education, simple infrastructure 
provision, communal self-help, and boot-strap operations. 
 The orientation of the doctrine, therefore, is very much from the bottom-up to 
develop local and specific neighborhoods and villages, project by project. Departing 
from the focus on overall national development invites NGOs to design projects, 
whether or not in collaboration with other types of institutions, on a scale they can 
manage and for which they can also take responsibility and credit. 
 The doctrine offers up bite-sized and specifically grounded projects that are often 
ideal tasks for NGOs to take on. There is a long history of NGOs being called upon 
to implement the community development projects that the major international 
development agencies, such as USAID and the World Bank, have funded. 
 However, another noteworthy premise of the theory is the rejection of the hypoth-
esis that what to the outsider appear to be abject conditions may in fact serve essen-
tial societal interests that outsiders may not adequately appreciate. The practice of 
rural women walking substantial distances to wells may seem like a failure to provide 
potable water directly to small villages, but it may also provide the women with an 
otherwise lacking opportunity to socialize beyond the few residents of their villages. 
It may be that piped water would indeed turn out to be a boon for all, but the ques-
tion is whether the NGOs have the capacity to determine whether this is the case. 
 Theory of System Failure 
 The premise behind this theory is that the complexities of a nation’s systems are 
beyond the constituted authority’s coping abilities. Corruption is often a central 
feature underlying the diagnosis. Doctrines based on the system failure theory call 
for clean, intelligent, transparent, well-meaning, and morally superior agencies—
all best provided by something other than the formally constituted authorities. In 
other words, NGOs to the rescue! Capacity-building prescriptions—to improve the 
managerial abilities of the NGO’s clients such as other civil society institutions and, 
on occasion, the public institutions—are sometimes encountered in circumstances 
diagnosed as system failure. 
 Failure to innovate and otherwise transform whole societies to make them more 
transparent, more efficient, less corrupt, legitimate, more effective, more demo-
cratic—the list of rationales accounting for system failure is long and often very 
creative—usually underpins both doctrine and practice when theories of system fail-
ure are invoked. If a disaster explanation or story is part of the failure theory, then 
the doors open wide for a collection of NGOs to surface and conspire to replace the 
ineffective, corrupt, inefficient institutions that are most liable and responsible for 
the failures. Of course, replacement may not mean that NGOs are better or best able 
to deliver the goods and services. 
 The recent dramatic rise of private sources of funding accelerates the clash of 
extant political power and authority with outside and alien forces—mainly cloaked 

Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries  ●  115
as simple and benign NGOs. The William and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Soros 
Foundation, and the Billionaire Challenge are illustrative ( Christian Science Monitor 
2010). The magnitude of the resources and the global reputation of success of the 
individuals who literally personify many of these NGOs elevate their ambition. 
 With even modest success, initial practices based on the system failure theory and 
doctrines may result in community-level successes being promoted and taken to higher, 
regional, national, and international arenas. However, the premises accounting for sub-
national failures are often different than those pertaining to national problems, if only 
because the local initiatives are constrained by national regulations, legal recognition, 
and other factors. In addition, a typical limitation of local capacity is the scarcity of 
personnel, whereas the typical national problem is the bureaucratic bloat. These differ-
ences challenge the presumption that capitalizing on initial smaller scale successes and 
trying to recreate them in other circumstances, or to scale them up in greater numbers 
and larger sizes, proves often to be problematic (Dees and Anderson 2004). 
 Finally, system failures open up the time horizons of both problems and expected 
measures to deal with them well beyond the normal ones embraced in project con-
tracts or even public policies and programs. Now, with the specter of failure looming 
large, prescriptions and solutions often emerge unbounded with completion dates or 
other management constraints. System failures, in effect, require endless open-ended 
solutions. 
 Because the system failure diagnosis puts some blame on national governments, 
local governments, or both, there is a risk that governments will be cut out too much. 
This is a serious problem not only because partnerships between NGOs and govern-
ments are often essential, as each has a different set of capabilities, but also because 
NGOs that shun government involvement frequently provoke reprisals by the gov-
ernment. Increased space for NGOs is an important need, but there are some things 
that governments must do, including establishing the legal status and regulatory 
framework of the NGOs themselves. 
 Theory of Social Enterprises/Social Impact 
 The newly emergent and rapidly evolving fields variously identified as social entre-
preneurship/social enterprise/social impact provide another set of theories and related 
doctrines that affect development practices—practices that often rely on NGO and 
NGO-like organizations. As is the case with emerging fields, basic definitions are 
hard to come by (Martin and Osberg 2007). Nonetheless, it is still possible to iden-
tify and roughly characterize many core aspects, and by doing so, doctrinal precepts 
begin to emerge:
 Unmet needs, especially those felt and expressed by individuals who are disad-
 
●
vantaged, exist and persist in large part because of extreme poverty and scant 
political influence, in addition to the failure to properly define the problem as 
lack of opportunities for greater productivity for the poor. 10 
 Opportunities to innovate and even transform exist but require a creative 
 
●
approach that includes value creation in other dimensions than just economic 
ones (Brooks 2008). 

116  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 Beyond value creation, social enterprises are concerned with creating a more 
 
●
equitable sharing of these new values. 
 Ultimately, the social entrepreneur is in the business of shaping and sharing a 
 
●
range of human values in the interest of improving human dignity—a summary 
idea defined in terms of distinctive human needs for respect, well-being, affection, 
enlightenment, skill, rectitude, wealth, and power (Lasswell and Kaplan 1950). 
 Social entrepreneurship as a practical matter is where most activity occurs, with social 
assistance combined with business initiatives directly involving the poor: microenter-
prises, savings groups, community infrastructure self-help programs, and so on. In a 
most optimistic formulation of this point, Muhammad Yunus, Nobel Prize winner 
for his creative microfinancial Grameen Bank, describes it through the title of one 
of his publications:  Building Social Businesses: The New Kind of Capitalism that Serves 
Humanity’s Most Pressing Needs ( 2010). 
 Yet the theoretical underpinnings and certainty about the future trajectory of the 
social entrepreneurship movement are slight, because of the blurring of distinctions 
between seeking profit and providing for social needs. 11 
 It is very hard to know with any certainty exactly how social enterprises and social 
impact activities will eventually play out in the development realm. We do know that 
many different kinds of organizational forms are involved and that these range essen-
tially from traditional for-profit operations all the way to traditional nonprofit ones. 
It is the space between these anchoring extremes that creates both excitement and 
confusions. NGOs figure in somehow, but at the moment it is unclear just exactly 
how and where the NGO form will contribute and offer a comparative advantage 
over alternatives. Perhaps that is just the point: NGOs are so highly diverse and vari-
able that they readily become tools for many different social enterprises. 
 To simplify, we offer the following simple sketch of the organizational spectrum to 
situate social enterprises and variants. The inspiration for this comes from an article 
by Dees (2011) on using different social ventures as learning laboratories, which 
combines theory and practice so as to learn by doing ( table 6.2 ). 
 Table 6.2  NGO m ission a nd or ganizational sp ectrum 
Traditional 
nonprofit
Nonprofit 
with 
income-
generating 
activities
Nonprofit 
practicing 
social 
innovation
Social 
enterprise
Socially 
responsible 
business
Corporation 
with strong 
corporate 
social 
responsibility 
program
Traditional 
for-profit
Dimensions
Mission motive
Profit motive
• Stakeholder accountability
• Shareholder accountability
•  Income reinvested in social programs or 
operational costs
• Profit redistributed
 Sources : Adapted from Dees (2009) by Isadora Tang and Tony Sheldon, Yale School of Management. 

Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries  ●  117
 According to the analysis by Tang and Sheldon, different organizations can be 
located along this spectrum. Nonprofits with income-generating activities are rep-
resented by many museums, arts, and cultural organizations. But they can also be 
collective enterprises for the poor in standard business ventures, with auxiliary social 
services, training, and community-building efforts. Those practicing social innova-
tion to enhance social services include Teach for America and Kiva. Social enterprises 
in a very clear form are represented by the Acumen Fund, SELCO, and the Grameen 
Bank. Stonyfield Farms, striving to keep as much of its dairy products from organic 
milk producers, and Seventh Generation, with its adherence to biodegradable and 
hydrocarbon-free cleaning and other household products, are socially responsible 
businesses. These have a stronger social commitment and presence than corpora-
tions with a strong Corporate Social Responsibility program such as Ben and Jerry’s, 
Timberland, and Burt’s Bees. 12 
 Theory of Global Necessity 
 The prospect of addressing the mounting global challenges, such as climate change, 
exceeds the governance capacities of conventional and constituted authority. The 
argument is that these globally rooted challenges exceed the governance capacities of 
conventional and constituted authority. Major, even revolutionary, reorganizations 
and reallocations are deemed essential to even have a chance of managing the risks 
presented by these challenges. Much of the thinking on needed reorganization has 
focused on climate change (National Research Council 2010a; 2010b; Field et al. 
2012; Revkin 2013), but other global dislocations may also call for radical changes in 
nongovernmental structures and their interactions with governments. 
 To address these challenges, a global necessity doctrine would posit that tech-
nologically informed and expert scientific sources of information will be in special 
demand, and these demands will be global even for problems that manifest locally 
simply because of the huge scale and numbers of humans involved. National and 
lower level public authorities are simply overwhelmed by the massiveness of the 
demands created and leveled at them. Direct challenges to all constituted authority, 
in the face of their inability to deliver even rudimentary services, will increasingly 
become the norm (Moss et al. 2013). The doctrine calls for high levels of integration 
of nongovernmental and governmental institutions across developed and develop-
ing countries. As the emerging Era 5 looms large and most challenging, question 
is whether institutions and organizations, including nongovernmental ones, will be 
sufficiently adaptive to be able to cope. 
 The evolving theories and practices of governance and development over the past 
50 years have had the most critical impact on the state of theories and practice of 
civil society, including NGOs today. A paradigm shift has taken place from gov-
ernment (with monopoly) to governance as a process co-produced by three sets of 
actors: those from the state, civil society and the private sector (see  chapters 4 and  5 
on governance). 
 Another important point is the role of the United Nations in providing legiti-
macy to NGOs in the developing world in several ways—by making NGOs active 
participants in global norm-setting process; by restructuring internal mechanisms in 

118  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
the United Nations that provide formal space to NGOs registered with Economic 
and Social Council; by the Secretary General’s Panel on Civil Society led by President 
Cardoso, which enabled the United Nations to engage NGOs (traditionally done 
only through intergovernmental process), and other changes accepted by the General 
Assembly; by the ECOSOC accreditation process, and so on. 
 Key Considerations and Conditioning Factors 
 Considerations and conditioning factors focus attention on activities and processes 
within the context of the problem or considered subject that will, most likely, influ-
ence or impact the flow of outcomes and events. No one can say with certainty which 
of these will matter and by how much. The bet is that, other things being equal, these 
are the issues that loom large. 
 Measurement/Keeping Score 
 Measures of effectiveness and other means to figure out how an NGO functions 
have become fashionable requirements used by philanthropic and donor agencies to 
evaluate NGO performance. In the words of one prominent philanthropist, Gordon 
Moore, it is finally possible to make “a huge push toward measurability” (Hechinger 
and Golden 2006, A-1). This may seem simple, but it  decidedly is not when one tries 
to evaluate an NGO. Well-meaning intentions to add metrics in order to improve 
performance can be challenging, even in some cases counterproductive. NGOs are not 
simple profit-making machines, where a bottom-line score card exists to measure per-
formance. Efficiency and effectiveness are not equivalent, a truism reflected in efforts 
to create Double and Triple Bottom Lines, rather than the standard one based mainly 
on economic efficiency (Elkington 1994; Hacking and Guthrie 2008; Savitz 2013). 
 Efficiency-based assessments dominate the private sector, and profit is what mat-
ters. The often unexamined premise is that when producers compete for a consumer’s 
dollars, the most efficient survive and drive out inefficient competitors. Market inef-
ficiencies attract new producers and encourage them to enter and compete. The driv-
ing force propelling and sustaining globalization is understandable in these terms. 
Producers are gauged according to their profits, and efficiency of operations is a key 
determinant of profitability. 
 The nonprofit sector, like the public sector, differs from the private one in effi-
ciency terms. The public sector manager is not legally allowed to maximize profits 
or to capture residuals, so profit maximization is converted to budget maximization. 
Efficiency in this case may become a negative incentive because economizing could 
lead to a subsequent reduction in one’s budget and, as a consequence, less ability to 
deliver a public good or service. For instance, donors put great emphasis on impact 
measures of effectiveness, but in practice we know how difficult it is to define or 
measure either impacts or effects: “Mission impossible,” in the words of one seasoned 
professional. 13 We also know that adaptability and innovativeness are crucial in any 
organization, and perhaps even especially so for NGOs. 
 The nonprofit and nongovernmental sectors are also not well tuned to efficiency’s 
discipline, although the reasons why differ from the public sector case. Nonprofit/ 

Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries  ●  119
nongovernmental organizations are mission-driven and goal-directed. That is, they 
exist and are driven to accomplish a mission—usually stated in general, strategic 
terms—and operate according to goals set as means to direct and accomplish that mis-
sion. Efficiency may not matter nearly as much, in specific circumstances, as getting 
the job done at any cost, or fulfilling the mission. In matters of life and death, where 
this distinguishing characteristic is most evident, little concern may be accorded bean 
counting or comparison shopping for less expensive ways of doing the job. 
 Innovativeness or being adaptable to changing circumstances—the rise of both 
opportunities and problems—is an essential criterion for nonprofit management. 
However, telling someone to innovate and adapt or trying to teach them how to do 
either is itself chancy. Still, innovativeness clearly counts as a measure of an individual 
and an organization’s performance and effectiveness. 
 Effectiveness may be defined technically and with relative ease if the context does 
not change substantially: It is a ratio measure relating observed output to planned 
output over some time period. Because both planned and realized outputs are mea-
sured in the same units, the ratio expresses the percentage of effectiveness for the 
period. Unless two programs are nearly identical in the mission or goals set for them, 
and the resources allocated to accomplish these goals, comparisons of effectiveness 
between programs will not make much sense. Many foundations and granting agen-
cies fail to appreciate this elemental point. In addition, the measure may create per-
verse incentives. An ambitious program that is also efficient in its production can 
look bad in effectiveness terms when compared with a conservative program that is 
inefficient. Or, setting minimal goals or ambiguous objectives may result in assess-
ments of high effectiveness as contrasted with programs having clear and expansive 
goals that somehow fail in the end to achieve everything promised or sought. Keep 
expectations low so that no one is disappointed is one way of describing this. 
 Agenda Expansion/Mission Creep 
 A pervasive theme throughout this book is that the agenda for development has 
expanded enormously since the end of WWII. It has also become more complex. 
Moving beyond obvious and basic human survival objectives, it now includes a mul-
titude of other goals: human rights, women’s rights, environment, education, food 
security, sustainability—the list goes on and on. Likewise, simple, clear statements of 
an NGO’s mission are becoming increasingly rare, often as a consequence of some-
thing known as mission creep, a term and concept borrowed from military operations 
and activities, including those where initial military objectives open up to and give 
way to civilian, humanitarian, nation-building ones (Siegel 1998). The melding and 
blurring of military and humanitarian missions has long been with us, as the Berlin 
Blockade and Airlift long ago demonstrated (Shlaim 1983). 
 Mission creep for NGOs represents a somewhat special case distinctive from the 
more commonly encountered military one (which we discuss in  chapter 9 ). In the 
American setting, the creation of a nonprofit requires a clear statement of the pro-
posed organization’s mission from its founders and original funders. While there are 
several different provisions of the tax code that possibly legitimate a nonprofit or an 
NGO, a common one is referred to as a 501(c) 3 in which the tasks and prospective 

120  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
benefits of the organization must be specified. For most NGOs operating as nonprof-
its, the first day of their existence is perhaps the last day when mission clarity is so 
evident, for reasons suggested by Wilson (2011). 
 Over time, however, new programs are added. Perhaps because of the lure of new 
efforts and new needs, earlier programs may wither. The original, stated mission 
may become de-emphasized, while new, unstated missions take over. When assets 
and resources are allocated to efforts not related to the organization’s mission—as 
well-intentioned as the efforts may be—the original mission of the nonprofit may 
be obscur ed. 
 Mission creep is not necessarily all bad. Goals may be attained. Other organizations, 
including public sector ones, may assume responsibility for service provision. More 
pressing problems may rise up, demanding attentions and resources. More typically, 
however, mission creep occurs as the tastes and priorities of funders change, some-
times to such an extent that the original mission hardly conforms any more. Creep 
in this case also can mean compromising goals and objectives merely to ensure the 
organization’s survival. This is an era where individual donors expect “engagement 
beyond writing a check; and our organizations aren’t used to that kind of engage-
ment.” The traditional pattern—“They give it, and trust you, and they go away 
until the next time you come”—is over (Silicon Valley Business Journal Staff 2012). 
Donors increasingly want specific outcomes, many of which will not conform to the 
organization’s mission statement and goals. Mission creep to accommodate donor 
wishes is a frequent result. Another reason for mission creep is that in the global-
ized and interconnected world, new global public goods and norms have emerged. 
Human rights, gender equality, inclusiveness and minority rights, debt relief, etc., 
become NGO advocacy missions. In addition to the services provided directly by 
the NGOs, the expanded agenda entails pressuring governments to incorporate these 
global public goods in policy and program interventions. 
 NGOs as Agents to Secure Other Strategic and Political Goals 
 This transformation of many NGOs into political agents, in which usual humani-
tarian and charitable ends are replaced with more overt political ones, is a feature of 
present-day experience. It represents, in a sense, a perverse instance of mission creep. 
That this transformation may not end well for the NGO can be observed in places 
like Egypt, Pakistan, Russia, and China where NGOs are increasingly attacked by 
constituted authorities—and ideological crazies, as in Pakistan where polio techni-
cians were killed by the Taliban simply for giving polio vaccine to children (Murphy 
2013). Of course, the politicization of NGOs depends on the nature of each political 
system and social structure. One need not go so far afield, however, to find evidence 
of this politicization, as the recent proliferation of tax-exempt organizations in the 
United States doing overtly political activities attests. The blurring and consequent 
confusion attending nonprofit/nongovernmental organizations accepting or bending 
to donors’ political goals and agendas have been around for some time, although the 
consequences were not as evident as they have been in recent years. It is also reflected 

Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries  ●  121
in the nonstop confusion about the differences between NGOs, nonprofits, advocacy 
groups, and almost every other kind of organization other than government and con-
ventional business firms. In India, for example, NGOs have so frequently taken criti-
cal positions against the government that some NGOs operate virtually as political 
opposition groups, even if they do not run their own candidates for elective office. 
 Formal Legal Constraints and Opportunities 
 Different countries’ legal traditions and standards create different incentives, con-
straints, and opportunities for the creation and operation of NGOs. Opposite trends 
can be observed in developed and developing countries. Current unsettling changes 
in US law—generated by the Supreme Court cases and decisions diminishing trans-
parency and broadening the scope of acceptable NGO activities, for example, the 
 Citizens United case and several others—stimulated a rush to create so-called 501(c) 
4 Public Benefit Corporations, which are essentially politically enabled NGOs. 14 In 
many developing countries, the ability of NGOs even to survive is challenged by 
governments’ capacity to shut them down through a host of measures. One approach 
has been to deny the NGO the legal status needed to own property or censoring 
the NGO with the threat of doing so. Another, increasing common approach is to 
restrict NGOs from receiving external funding. For example, a 2009 Ethiopian law 
prohibited civil society organizations from accepting more than 10 percent of their 
funding from external sources. In Russia, a 2012 law requires NGOs engaging in 
political activities and receiving any amount of foreign funding to register as foreign 
agents, which, Human Rights Watch (2014a) notes, is “a term generally understood 
in Russia to mean ‘traitor’ or ‘spy.’” The even more draconian approach is simply 
to arrest, or threaten to arrest, NGO members for alleged crimes. In Zimbabwe, 
the Mugabe regime has long practiced arbitrary arrests under a series of vague laws 
against defamation or incitement (Human Rights Watch 2014b). Ironically, heavy-
handed government actions can have the same result of politicization. 
 Also in contrast to the distinctively supportive American approach to beneficial 
institutions, governments ranging from the developed nations of Europe and East Asia 
to the developing world have either been unwilling to downgrade the dominance of the 
state in supplying public goods, or deeply skeptical of the challenges that NGOs pose 
to their authority. European governments do little to encourage private contributions 
to various socially beneficial institutions. Rather, the state itself is expected to supply 
these services and resources; the same holds for the relatively statist governments of 
Japan and South Korea. In Latin America, the statism that has long been invoked to 
defend government dominance in the economy is reinforced by the parallel doctrine 
that the economically powerful state should be responsible for social services as well. 
The problem is that the generally weak tax effort of Latin American governments has 
left major gaps where, if permitted, NGOs have a major role to play. 
 Social, Educational, Humanitarian Goals—Or What? 
 The wide and changing array of goals pursued by the major international NGOs 
dedicated to development issues add to the many challenges of trying to understand 

122  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
and improve NGO performance. Perhaps the best example is provided by the Ford 
Foundation, the largest US foundation until the mid-1990s. 15 It has been a signifi-
cant and important development change agent for many decades now. Established 
in 1936 by Henry Ford, primarily as a means to avoid paying federal estate taxes, the 
vagueness of its original mission statement—“for scientific, educational and charita-
ble purposes, all for the public welfare”—provides scant guidance about what might 
constitute success in any of its programs, much less in whether it was achieving its 
overall mission. The personal goals of the Fords to hold onto the family fortune 
finally began to get clarified in the mid-1950s after Henry Ford II took the company 
public and professionalized the Ford Foundation’s board and staff. He resigned as 
chairman of the board of the Foundation in 1956 and then as a board trustee in 
1976, saying that the Ford Foundation no longer had much to do with the sources of 
the money that created it. 16 He had already created the Ford Motor Company Fund 
(FMCF) as a nonprofit controlled by the company to promote local initiatives and 
projects favorable to corporate ends. 
 The main point is to call attention to the wide and changing array of goals to 
which any particular NGO or nonprofit may aspire and adhere. Such goals also 
include those officially stated and those unofficially but importantly sought. Such 
goals are also linked to those of the donor or funding agencies in often direct and 
telling ways. Thus, the Ford Foundation was roundly criticized in the mid-2000s 
for funding Middle Eastern NGOs that the Foundation claimed were dedicated to 
human rights and dialogue but others castigated as bent on the destruction of Israel. 
Whether this funding was intended to serve either educational or charitable pur-
poses, the contribution to the public welfare has been hotly debated, 
 Sustainability as a Theory—Put into Practice 
 NGOs are turning their attention to sustainable development around the globe. 
Conservation NGOs that began in developed countries have greatly expanded their 
operations into developing countries. For example, the Nature Conservancy, the world’s 
largest conservation NGO with US$6 billion of assets, made its first conservancy pur-
chase in 1955, but only began its International Conservation Program in 1980, focus-
ing on Latin America, with its first expansion beyond Latin America in 1990. It now 
operates in 35 countries. Policy advocacy has impelled the Natural Resource Defense 
Council, a US-centered sustainability NGO, to begin work in China, and now has 30 
staff members in Beijing, focusing largely on climate change and air pollution. 
 Domestic sustainability NGOs in developing countries have also proliferated, 
some within international confederations. 
 Many of these efforts go beyond influencing governments to include businesses 
and the private sector generally. Multinational firms have been targeted, and these 
activities can be observed at the regional and national levels as well. The current status 
of the NGO/business engagement is far from clear. Collaborations with the private 
sector are also controversial, especially in cases where supposed conflicts of interest, 
forthrightness, and even duplicity are open to question and debate (IISD 2013). 
 The practical implications can and will be revealed through the actions of main 
development and nongovernmental organizations, such as the World Bank, UN 

Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries  ●  123
Environment Programme, the UN Development Programme, regional banks, and 
unique entities such as pension and sovereign wealth funds. The niche positioning of 
NGOs such as CERES (Coalition for Environmentally Responsible Economics) as 
a corporate conscience and of CALPERS (California Public Employees Retirement 
System) as a public aggregator for political and financial pressure on corporations 
needs to be monitored in the years to come. 
 The growing movement to include social/cultural and environmental activities 
and measures along with conventional economic ones is especially significant. The 
so-called Double and Triple Bottom Lines attempt to give equal weight to cost/ben-
efit accounting in each of the two or three separate (but related) arenas: economic, 
social/cultural, and environmental (Elkington 1994, 1997; Savitz 2013; Hacking 
and Guthrie 2008). When NGOs in developing countries focus on cultural preserva-
tion, human rights, and the environment, they almost inevitably engage in policy 
advocacy to change government policies that contribute to the problems. The focus 
on poverty alleviation often raises the parallel critique of government policies that 
exacerbate poverty and inequality. It is no wonder, then, that the expansion of NGO 
activities beyond simply providing goods and services has dramatically politicized the 
relationship between NGOs and governments. 
 These considerations and conditioning factors are admittedly selective and at best 
offer only a few of the numerous possibilities. Nonetheless, each of them—alone and 
in different combinations—will likely help shape and direct events in the coming era, 
which for the present purposes we have labeled Social Impact/Balanced Systems. 
 Exploring the Next Era of Development NGOs 
 The historical progression from small and simple NGOs to extremely complex and 
numerous creates a sense that it may be time to pause, take stock, and rethink or rei-
magine the entire NGO phenomenon (Lehmann 2013). While there are occasional 
critiques, usually delivered in anecdotal form, of some specific and not altogether 
successful operation or organization, or as a proposal for a framework to measure 
some aspect of NGO performance (Ebrahim and Rangan 2010), there is nothing 
like a full-scale, comprehensive assessment of NGO experience in the development 
realm. Despite the paucity of rigorous assessment, NGOs continue to hold the public 
trust around the world, but with important exceptions. According to the Edelman 
Trust Barometer (2013), a survey organization that tracks trust and confidence in a 
range of i nstitutions, 
 For the fifth year in a row, NGOs are the most trusted institution in the world, 
and in 16 of the 25 countries surveyed, more trusted than business. Trust in 
NGOs has reached a record high of 79 percent in China among 35 to 64-year 
olds . . . The growth in NGO trust, a by-product of becoming the world’s second-
largest economy, also indicates that China’s people and media outlets are breaking 
long-standing traditions and now relying more heavily on non-traditional sources 
for information. Since 2009, trust in NGOs has surged in India to 68 percent 
among 35–64-year olds. 

124  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 But some countries weren’t as trusting of NGOs. In markets that dealt with 
crises and scandals such as Brazil (down 31 points), Japan (21 points), and Russia 
(14 points), NGOs suffered severe drop-offs in trust. 
 Doing a thorough appraisal of the NGO considered as a social experiment would be 
a monumental undertaking to be sure, but it could help clarify many of the issues, 
conflicts, and considerations we have touched upon so far in this chapter. More 
importantly, taking the measure of the 70-year-old social experiment that the NGO 
institutional form presents could result in its refocusing and realignment to deal bet-
ter with emergent problems of the twenty-first century. Even without such an ambi-
tious project, there are plenty of immediate, basic, and practical questions to answer 
that have become part of an ongoing discourse:
 What roles and purposes could and should NGOs fulfill? 
 
●
 How could/should they be funded? 
 
●
 What are appropriate ways and means to appraise NGOs? And to what extent 
 
●
is public trust and confidence in them subjective and emotional, rather than 
based on solid evidence of the sort determined in assessments? 
 What does effectiveness mean—in general and in specific, important settings 
 
●
where NGOs operate? 
 What does it mean to hold an NGO accountable, and if one is found to be 
 
●
deficient, what sanctions exist to rectify matters? 
 How is globalization affecting the way NGOs emerge? 
 
●
 How are the advocacy functions of NGOs affecting their other missions? 
 
●
  What are the patterns of their relationship with the formal government 
 
●
institutions? 
 What type of pressures do NGOs exert on governments to respond to the revo-
 
●
lution of r ising expectations? 
 There is one additional, possibly transformational, question to ask: 
 Is Development Even the Right Purpose? 
 Poverty continues around the world, of course, but significant progress in some areas 
is evident in reducing the numbers of human beings subjected to its most extreme 
forms. According to different sources, about a billion people worldwide have been 
lifted out of extreme poverty in the last generation. This quote from the  Economist 
(2013c, 11) is representative: “Between 1990 and 2010, their number fell by half as 
a share of the total population in developing countries, from 43% to 21%—a reduc-
tion of almost 1 billion people.” However, over 70 percent of the poverty reduction 
in the world was in China, and the situation in some African and South Asian nations 
is getting worse. 
 As new MDGs are set to replace by 2015 those first established in 2000, the 
degree of dominance of poverty reduction as a discrete focus that guided NGOs since 
the end of WWII, namely providing goods and services directly to the poor, is open 
for debate. Poverty alleviation will and should remain a major focus: the  post-2015 

Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries  ●  125
development agenda of the United Nations emphasizes poverty eradication and 
inclusiveness. The World Bank’s very recent strategy aims to limit its programs to 
the least developed countries in order to alleviate poverty. Indeed, poverty allevia-
tion in the developing and developed world is going to be more prominent as far 
as the global agenda is concerned. However, the growing awareness of the intercon-
nections between poverty and overall economic policy, environmental justice, social 
exclusion, property rights regimes, political rights, and governance has meant that 
for NGOs to contribute most effectively to poverty alleviation, they must sort out 
which of the many potential roles that they should play: providing goods and services 
funded through their own efforts vis- à -vis private donors, delivering either domestic 
government-funded or internationally funded goods and services, or advocacy on any 
of the issues mentioned above. 
 The specific contexts and government orientations obviously make a huge dif-
ference in how NGOs can address poverty and connected challenges. Getting a bil-
lion people out of abject poverty happened for many different reasons. Consider 
China, whose economic success has created the wherewithal to lift more than 
680 million out of extreme poverty, “more than the entire current population of 
Latin America . . . China alone accounts for around three-quarters of the world’s total 
decline in extreme poverty over the last 30 years” ( Economist 2013c, 23). The con-
tributions of NGOs to this remarkable achievement have been mixed and certainly 
are not as important as the force of capitalism and a global market-based economic 
system (Studwell 2013). NGOs have played an important role in filling gaps in social 
safety nets after many of the state enterprises were abolished with the introduction 
of socialist market economy. This is reflected in the number of NGOs over the past 
few decades that have responded to natural disasters such as floods and earthquakes. 
Clearly, NGOs did not have the space to play any political and even advocacy role. 
 In contrast, in many nations of Asia, Africa, and Latin America, the NGOs have 
more space to go beyond the provision of uncontroversial goods and services. Indeed, 
even without going into advocacy and direct criticism of policies and practices, the 
provision of what may seem like straightforward goods and services become contro-
versial. NGOs may provide conventionally Western education in countries where 
the government or others regard this form of education as cultural imperialism or 
sacrilege. NGO-supported health clinics often provide controversial family plan-
ning services. NGOs involved in providing health services in the Pakistan’s Taliban-
dominated Swat Valley have been banned, and polio vaccinations halted. 
 Yet, the central controversy pits the bulk of developing country NGOs against the 
governments that oversee economic growth  and  poverty alleviation through authori-
tarian rule. The Chinese example points to a painful dilemma for progressive NGOs 
committed not only to poverty alleviation but to democracy and also the defense of 
property rights. NGOs cannot quarrel with the pace of poverty alleviation in China, 
but the remarkable transition has been accomplished through suppression of civil 
rights and abrogation of property rights. China’s industrialization has required huge 
inputs of raw materials and energy, prompting major Han incursions into the Uighur 
regions of western China, undermining Uighur property rights. By the same token, 
the energy demands have driven the enormous programs of hydroelectric dam con-
struction, displacing millions. And while China is the most prominent example of 

126  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
authoritarian-led poverty alleviation, it certainly is not the only one. South Korea’s 
remarkable growth and poverty alleviation occurred under authoritarian govern-
ments; Chile’s economic reforms that laid the groundwork for making it the most 
successful Latin American nation were undertaken under a brutal military regime. 
 The most complex paradox is that, as the case of China demonstrates, poverty 
alleviation can go hand in hand with growth income inequality. This is not surpris-
ing in light of the fact that the dynamism that brings previously impoverished people 
into better-paying jobs also, and to a greater degree, benefits those with the greatest 
assets to take advantage of the dynamic growth opportunities. To be sure, sometimes 
the rich grow richer at the expense of the poor, through mechanisms of exclusion, 
such as keeping agricultural prices low so that factory owners can pay lower wages, 
expropriating the user rights of low-income resource extractors, or using tax revenues 
to subsidize capital made available to wealthy business owners As long as NGOs 
are fixated on income inequality per se rather than economic exclusion, they will 
find themselves opposing some government policies and actions that propel poverty-
alleviating economic growth. 
 Where domestic NGOs have the space to choose among roles, they have to decide 
what to emphasize: Provide goods and services, whether controversial or not. Keep 
a low profile to strengthen other civil society organizations. Offer critical advocacy. 
But, of course, none of these functions is monopolized by NGOs. Government agen-
cies, political parties, religious institutions, international organizations, and foreign 
governments all provide different means. A crucial opportunity exists to reconsider 
and rebalance the contributions of private, public, and nonprofit (including NGO) 
participants in decision making around the world. The roles that  international NGOs 
ought to play are conditioned by the decline in NGO funding. 
 World economic considerations, beginning with the global financial crisis of 
2008/2009, are now taking center stage as emerging markets slow down markedly—
“Hitting a Wall,” “The Great Deceleration,” and “When Giants Slow Down,” in the 
colorful terms of three recent reckonings (Cowen 2015;  Economist 2013a, 2013d). 
Figuring out why there is a slowdown matters, but for NGOs an obvious and imme-
diate consequence is a drying up of funds. Ironically, the reductions in funds are 
most evident in countries and in programs where NGOs have been successful. 
“[I]nternational government contributions are drying up. Between 2005 and 2008, 
contributions to NGOs in Latin America grew an average of 37 percent. From 2008 
to 2011, the donations grew just 3 percent, well below the average regional inflation 
of 6.1 percent for 2012” (Brodzinsky 2013). 
 Cutting back funds for NGOs means setting priorities and deciding what to sup-
port and what to terminate. In countries where some measure of economic develop-
ment success exists, this presents serious threats because traditional donors are now 
made to refocus on hard and basket cases while reducing or even ending traditional 
support for their relative successes. To a substantial degree, this will be shaped by the 
governments of wealthy countries. Consider the US context: it is not just the US 
NGOs that determine the magnitudes and contents of NGO assistance to develop-
ing countries; the USAID is a major funder and motivator for many development 
NGOs. Much of the USAID on-the-ground work is conducted or at least managed 
by US NGOs. USAID has been a mainstay, but it has never achieved high levels of 

Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries  ●  127
government support, at least as compared to equivalent foreign aid organizations in 
other developed countries around the world. Sweden, for instance, aims for a 1 per-
cent of GDP allocation to foreign aid and so would have spent some $5.8 billion to 
this end in FY 2014. Were the United States to spend an equivalent proportion or 
fraction in foreign aid, the $156 billion result would far surpass the actual $20.4 bil-
lion requested in the FY 2014 budget. 17 Sweden obviously is not fighting multiple 
wars around the world, nor does it merge military and development goals and objec-
tives in the ways that the United States has done since WWII. 18 Nonetheless, as the 
US public loses its taste for foreign military adventures, the relative importance and 
role for development programs could be reassessed and increased. 
 A large number of possible pathways exist for NGOs as one peers out into the next 
era. No one should dare to know and predict what will happen, although many will 
undoubtedly try as in the past—but with little or no success. 19 
 So how can we at least explore the future and perhaps identify problems that 
might be minimized or averted in the first instance and discover opportunities 
that could be maximized or at least taken advantage of in the second? One way 
is to create scenarios, many of which start with plausible extensions of past trends 
and conditions and then extend these forward. For shorter term and stable sys-
tems, such scenarios are often helpful (Brewer 2007). For the longer term and in 
dynamic and unstable situations—such as what appears to be the case for NGOs 
at the moment—simple extrapolations will not yield much of value. More creative 
uses of scenarios exist and include Best and Worst Case exercises and also explicitly 
normative ones where desired end-state conditions at some specified time in the 
future are postulated and then actions to get from the current “here” to the desired 
“future” are explored. 
 The following brief discussion sketches out four broadly drawn scenarios that are 
constructed in the spirit of exploring future possibilities. It is very important to keep 
in mind various past theories, doctrines, and practices because these will continue 
well into the future if, for no other reason, than the sheer inertia that they exhibit. 
The fabled “sunk costs” that economists tell us to ignore are in reality often with us 
institutionally long after they should be. 
 To illustrate, we imagine and present four different theories of NGOs in a sce-
nario format. These include Economics/Growth, Resiliency, Sustainability, and 
International Rapid Response. 
 Economics/Growth 
 This is built upon the assumption of continuing economic development of the sort 
realized in the last 25 to 30 years. The social safety net component of the Washington 
Consensus—present from the beginning as the international development institu-
tions’ doctrine but often ignored by governments—will continue to grow in impor-
tance, but for many governments, growth is likely to remain a higher priority than 
direct redistribution. The pairing of liberalization and democracy is challenged by 
the so-called Beijing Consensus of state capitalism and authoritarianism ( Economist 
2013b, 10). The attractiveness of this model will wax or wane depending on the 
outcomes of China’s slowing growth and disruption. Population growth—sheer 

128  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
size—matters as it naturally generates its own demand in the form of additional 
consumers. Environment, equity of wealth and other value distributions, and many 
other longer term outcomes and effects are temporarily subordinated to wealth accu-
mulation in the form of high annual growth rates. 
 The roles for NGOs within this set of scenarios continue to be marginalized or 
contested. China, one can see, fits this picture. What of the other so-called BRIC 
(Brazil, Russia, India, China) nations that have received so much attention as the 
rising economic powerhouses? Brazil and India may be seen as promising models of 
growth with democracy, but both are likely to continue to put faith in and so rely on 
growth to a considerable extent. Both have high-profile affirmative action plans (for 
Brazil’s Afro-Brazilians; for India’s dalits [untouchables], adivasi [tribals], and Other 
Backward Castes), and Brazil has a prominent conditional cash transfer program 
for low-income families. However, the income opportunities and affordable social 
services are still low for the very poor in both countries. Moreover, Brazil’s economy 
is slowing down and the political consequences are encouraging politicians to renew 
efforts to stimulate growth. India is the world’s largest democracy, but it is still unable 
to meet basic economic and many other needs of its citizens. This contradiction is 
forcing important policy conversations there about stimulating business growth as a 
way to solve chronic problems. The increasingly free market economies such as India 
and Brazil will continue to provide more space to NGOs in influencing economic 
and political decisions in the future. Fobbing off many public services on NGOs has 
not worked, for many of the reasons Arundhati Roy (2002) anticipated years ago. 
Nor is simply being a democracy the same as simultaneously having an efficient or 
effective public sector (Dr è ze and Sen 2013). Thus, one of the potential challenges 
is that as NGOs continue to expand their influence, government and public sector 
capacities are being weakened. It would lead to more failed and failing states, but 
with strong civil society in the future. 
 The longer term concerns neglected in the pursuit of growth will intrude, often 
dramatically, in the form of extreme pollution events, worker abuses, or climate-
related natural disasters. The traditional way of dealing with such events is on a one-
to-one basis and in such a way so as not to impede economic growth. The rise of 
mega-cities presents a very different longer term concern that will not be so read-
ily addressed. The persistent patterns and problems of a single-minded pursuit of 
growth, and the neglect of the social/cultural and environmental costs and conse-
quences of it, will mount. There are hints that these pressures open up chances for 
NGOs to operate more broadly in contexts like China:
 Society is becoming too complex for the old structures to handle. Hence the 
[Chinese] government’s decision to allow the development of what it calls “social 
organizations.” In essence these are NGOs. The party dislikes the idea of anything 
non-governmental and has long regarded NGOs as a Trojan horse for Western 
political ideas and subversion, but it is coming to realize that they could solve 
some of its problems—caring for the sick, elderly and poor, for instance. The 
growth of civil society is not just important in itself. It is also the bridge to the 
future, linking today’s economic reforms to whatever putative future political 
reform might come. ( Economist 2013a ) 

Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries  ●  129
 In this case, the Overreach and Push Back of what we have labeled the end of Era 4 
could be yielding to a more balanced systemic one, in which many social functions 
and needs are met by social organizations whose impacts are enhanced by technolo-
gies and super networks of social media and scientific support. 
 Resiliency 
 The concept of resiliency owes much to engineering and the ecological sciences, and 
it is the latter version that will dominate in coming years as climate change forces 
societies around the world to adapt and otherwise face an array of challenging out-
comes and effects (National Research Council 2009, 2010a, 2010b). The idea of 
resiliency is not the same as the one of stability, as clarified by noted ecologist C. S. 
Holling (1973, 14), the creator of resiliency theory:
 It is useful to distinguish between two kinds of behavior. One can be termed 
stability, which represents the ability of a system to return to an equilibrium state 
after a temporary disturbance; the more readily it returns and the less it fluctuates, 
the more stable it would be. But there is another property, termed resilience that 
is a measure of the persistence of systems and of their ability to absorb change and 
disturbance and still maintain the same relationships between populations or state 
variables. 
 Climate stability is at risk as a consequence of human-caused perturbations; the 
resilience of ecosystems is thus becoming a matter of increasing concern. The join-
ing of natural and human systems is a defining characteristic of the resiliency sce-
nario, which draws heavily on the Theory of Global Necessity discussed previously. 20 
Among other fears are potential violent conflicts that may result from climate change 
sources (Scheffran et al. 2012). 
 Short-run natural events trigger basic humanitarian relief measures of the sort 
where NGOs have long performed. Disaster relief and taking care of refugees—in 
this case climate refugees displaced by hurricanes/typhoons, flash floods, and pro-
longed heat waves, and other natural events such as tsunamis and fires—will fig-
ure prominently. Longer term natural events such as droughts, crop failures, land 
submergence due to sea level rise, water shortages, and resultant conflicts will also 
demand and stress civil society’s full array of resources. 
 Technological and scientific demands are also considerable and include monitor-
ing and measurement systems, long-range forecasting, computational requirements, 
satellites, computer modeling, early warning systems, and so forth. The informa-
tion technologies required are formidable; many probably have not been conceived. 
Lessons being learned in a cascade of natural disasters in recent years will eventually 
refine responsibilities for all three institutional sectors—public, private, and, most 
especially, nonprofit/nongovernmental ones. 21 
 Developing all these means and then linking them into effective super networks 
capable of monitoring, measuring, and serving decision makers and the public 
around the globe will demand far more from NGOs than they have ever been asked 
to p rovide. 

130  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 Sustainability 
 As discussed previously, sustainability is a strong conditioning factor for many poten-
tial developments in Era 5. Sustainability, taken together with many of the core 
ideas and practices in the social enterprise/social impact fields, is already actively 
involving NGOs in new and interesting ways (IISD 2013). The Triple Bottom Line 
(TBL) approach to sustainability forces businesses to include many others in addition 
to their shareholders and employees. Innovations from the social enterprise/social 
impact fields come at the TBL from a different angle as they start by identifying 
unmet social needs and then devise ways to address and meet them. Governments 
are involved in many different ways, as they set and enforce environmental goals and 
expectations and also oversee and monitor a range of social and cultural activities 
commonly used to describe the social/cultural dimensions of the TBL. 
 A very practical list of what needs to be measured in each of three components 
of the TBL reveals opportunities for NGOs to participate constructively in scenarios 
based on the theory and practices of sustainability—particularly with respect to envi-
ronmental and social/cultural elements (Slaper and Hall 2011). 
 Environmental variables should represent measurements of natural resources and 
reflect potential influences to its viability. It could incorporate air and water qual-
ity, energy consumption, natural resources, solid and toxic waste, and land use/
land cover. Ideally, having long-range trends available for each of the environ-
mental variables would help organizations identify the impacts a project or policy 
would have on the area. 
 Social variables refer to social dimensions of a community or region and could 
include measurements of education, equity, and access to social resources, health 
and well-being, quality of life, and social capital. 
 Many of the specific variables required in the TBL regime are the consequence of 
activities done by NGOs and governments and so present opportunities to work in 
partnership with businesses to elaborate and enrich the strong economic variables 
they have to offer. 
 A rapprochement between neoclassical and ecological economics is a strong pos-
sibility and would be most welcome theoretically to redirect and guide economic 
and business practices around the world. Various new movements and fields, such as 
industrial ecology, urban and regional symbiosis, the Natural Step, Cradle to Cradle, 
the Blue Economy, the Circular Economy, systems thinking, ecosystems, food sys-
tems, and watersheds, will be available to help puzzle through, balance, and manage 
human and natural systems. Partnerships, networks, and closer involvement of edu-
cational and scientific disciplines and practitioners are the expected model character-
istics in the sustainability scenario for Era 5—Social Impact/Balanced Systems. 
 International R apid Response 
 The number, scale, and devastation of natural disasters call for extraordinary mea-
sures in response. War-like images abound in the aftermath of typhoons, hurricanes, 
floods, tsunamis, forest fires, droughts, earthquakes, volcanoes, and other disasters. 

Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries  ●  131
Increasing concerns about human health threats on a large scale present similarly 
huge challenges to conventional organizations. In many of these situations, war-like 
images are reinforced by the presence of regular military forces bringing their own tal-
ents and resources to bear for humanitarian objectives. Good and humane intentions 
aside, the blending of military and humanitarian cultures, people, and organizations 
is seldom easily done. 
 The core idea of the international rapid response scenario is to capitalize on the 
comparative advantages of military, nongovernmental, and private organizations 
in the interests of responding to natural and human-caused disasters. For instance, 
strategies and doctrines based on past lessons learned, preplanning, prepositioning 
materiel, field exercises, C 3 I (communications, command, control, and intelligence), 
and other routine military activities can all be applied to humanitarian and disas-
ter situations. The venerable idea of problem-specific military task forces is almost 
ideally suited to the needs of challenging, very context-specific humanitarian and 
disaster needs. “What is the problem at hand and what needs to be done?” is the first 
question to ask. Next it is necessary to find the personnel and other resources that 
are likely to manage and solve the problem. This is the basic task force. Next, one 
needs to formulate an operational plan that pulls together and creates the processes 
and procedures required to blend forces and resources and provides the steps needed 
to deal with the problem. 
 What distinguishes the Rapid Response scenario from the ad hoc ways disasters 
have typically been handled is that the military is treated as if it were an essential 
partner with the full range of the usual NGO and other organizations we rely on. For 
the military, this means creating, redefining, and then committing to a new doctrine 
and a new way of doing business. It will not be easy, as the peripatetic experiences 
over the years with counterinsurgency as a doctrine to win hearts and minds readily 
attest. Nor will it be simple or easy for traditional lead NGOs such as the Red Cross, 
Doctors without Borders, Save the Children, Oxfam, Direct Relief, and many others 
to accept the military as an equal partner for the long haul. 
 The Intellectual Challenge Ahead: Assessing the Future of NGOs 
 NGOs play many different roles and assume a wide array of forms and functions. 
The past seven decades since the end of WWII present a complex story and a col-
lection of experiences that reveal successes, failures, and everything in between. This 
story has not been adequately told, as our suggestion to mount a full-scale assessment 
of the NGO as social experiment suggests. Now is the time for such reflection and 
redirection for NGOs, and we hope that the present review will encourage many oth-
ers to embrace the future with confidence. 

 CHAPTER 7 
 Evolution of Foreign Assistance 
Theories and Doctrines 
 T
his chapter traces out how foreign assistance has been conceived and rethought 
throughout the post-WWII period. Whether in the hands of the US govern-
ment, the Soviet Union, Western European nations, the East Asian Tigers, or 
international organizations, foreign assistance has served—but also disserved—both 
donors and recipients. 
 The optimistic premise of foreign assistance as a remarkable boon to nations 
in need of development or reconstruction has often been borne out. From the US 
Marshall Plan that restored much of post-WWII Europe to the remarkable suc-
cess of heavily aided Tigers, foreign assistance has had some impressive successes. 
Major recipients such as Japan and South Korea have become major foreign assis-
tance donors themselves. Yet the evolution of theories and doctrines must respond 
to the negative experiences of foreign assistance as well, when the impacts have been 
ineffective, politically disruptive, supportive of undemocratic governments, environ-
mentally destructive, and regressive in terms of income distribution. Critics of for-
eign assistance have also accused both donor governments and multilateral foreign 
assistance agencies of distorting the economies of recipient countries, through policy 
conditions or trade commitments that limit economic opportunities. There are also 
complex questions as to whether foreign assistance funds end up funding the military 
of other purposes beyond humanitarian or developmental assistance. 1 
 Thus, in this chapter we review the evolution of theories that have established, 
and then altered, foreign assistance doctrines. Some of these theories link develop-
ment to democracy; others see foreign assistance as the linchpin to the maintenance 
of international alliances or to induce peace among otherwise belligerent nations; yet 
others relate foreign assistance to strengthening the donor country’s economy. And, 
of course, many of the personnel of foreign assistance agencies ascribe to the belief 
that their role is to aid the residents of the recipient country; different theories have 
been embraced to guide the foreign assistance strategies to accomplish this. 

134  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 It is important to keep in mind that although US bilateral foreign assistance domi-
nated for several post-WWII decades and resumed its leading role when Japanese 
assistance plummeted, 2 foreign assistance from other nations and from multilateral 
institutions has been important in both volume and orientation. Foreign assistance 
from the Soviet Union, Japan, EU countries, other developed nations, and now 
China has had major impacts politically and economically and has shaped US assis-
tance in reaction to the assistance of others. Multilateral assistance, particularly from 
the World Bank and the regional development banks, has had parallel impacts. 
 Theories 
 Despite the eventual relevance of foreign assistance from countries other than the 
United States and the Soviet Union, for at least the first three post-WWII decades the 
primary arenas of theorizing about the purposes and modalities of foreign assistance 
were within the governments of these Cold War rivals. 3 For US policymakers, the 
remarkably successful reconstruction of Western Europe seemed to hold the keys to 
the development of the Third World: a large infusion of foreign assistance,  if properly 
deployed, could spur economic growth and in turn support democracy and positive 
relations with the United States. The European Recovery Program, popularly known 
as the Marshall Plan, was remarkable in its economic support of the vanquished Axis 
countries. 
 The Marshall Plan reveals two early theoretical perspectives on rationales for US 
foreign assistance. Foreign assistance would foster democracy, and it would be an 
essential instrument in the rivalry with the Soviet Union. 
 Foreign Aid and Democracy 
 The disastrous precedent of the treatment of Germany following WWI reinforced 
the logic that avoiding economic adversity would reduce the chances of political 
instability, and political instability runs the risk of undermining the democratic 
progress. Prosperity was seen as necessary to safeguard the democratic constitutions 
resumed by, or imposed on, Western European countries, justifying the infusion of 
foreign assistance. 
 For developing countries, a more complex theory emerged. So-called moderniza-
tion theorists  4   argued that developing country societies were mired in low expecta-
tions, limited political participation, elite dominance, and rigid structures offering 
very limited socioeconomic mobility. Democracy was essential both for its own 
sake and to inspire confidence that broadening the voice of nonelites would raise 
expectations and spur economic mobility. Despite this diagnosis of deep economic, 
political, and social problems, the prognosis was optimistic, at least in the pro-
nouncements of public officials and modernization theorists—if the big push could 
be mounted alongside of proper direction. Progress in social mobility and standards 
of living would reinforce the preference for democracy, associated with these posi-
tive economic patterns because of the tutelage of the United States. This would be 
supported by US funding, calculated according to each country’s absorptive capac-
ity based on targeted investment and growth rates. As mentioned in  chapter 2 , the 

Foreign Assistance Theories and Doctrines  ●  135
volume of capital to achieve a given rate of economic growth could be calculated—
assuming that the capital would be effectively used. To escape the low-level equi-
librium traps, social and economic restructuring was needed, but governments had 
to be induced to engage in this restructuring. 5 This required recipient countries to 
engage in comprehensive development planning with heavy input from US offi-
cials and development experts. This was in stark contrast with the approach of the 
Marshall Plan and subsequent Europe-oriented foreign assistance programs  6 that 
permitted European officials to take the lead in devising the recovery packages. The 
Soviet Union was not the only world power that could offer ambitious, highly vis-
ible plans—so could the United States, despite the prevailing American disdain for 
central planning. 
 The theory-driven differences between the approaches to European reconstruc-
tion and Third World development are worth noting. The Marshall Plan and sub-
sequent Europe-oriented foreign assistance programs were remarkable in the lead 
that the European officials were permitted to take in devising the recovery packages; 
developing countries required externally imposed conditions to overcome the imbal-
ances that the policy elites were otherwise unwilling to address. A long-lasting conse-
quence of this diagnosis has been the highly directive nature of US interactions with 
developing countries in establishing assistance-supported programs. The Kennedy 
administration reinforced the strongly directive approach by insisting that for Latin 
American countries to qualify for foreign assistance through the major Alliance for 
Progress program, they would have to file medium-term (e.g., five-year) national 
economic plans. 
 The striking contrast between the US approach and the Japanese foreign assis-
tance approach that emerged later, once Japanese transfers shifted from reparations 
to aid to other Asian nations, growing dramatically in the 1980s is worth noting. 7 
The Japanese approach was to accept projects as long as they were within the allo-
cation for that country and met technical quality standards. Fairly strong signals 
were sent that physical infrastructure projects would be welcomed, which probably 
induced recipient governments to request funding for such projects. Japan’s strong 
heavy equipment sector and engineering expertise reinforced this orientation, but 
within this sectoral emphasis, Japanese assistance was far more passive in accepting 
the recipient government’s project selection. 
 Foreign Aid and the Cold War Rivalry 
 The rationale of foreign assistance as a Cold War instrument was based on the prem-
ises that strategic countries may be more favorable to the more generous Superpower 
and that allies required support to fend off clients of the other Superpower. In this 
competition over hearts and minds, the logic was that assistance ought to go where 
the security threats were greatest; where support in bodies such as the United Nations 
could be most useful (Rai 1980); and, if the ally had been successful in direct or sur-
rogate wars, much assistance had to go into postwar reconstruction to consolidate 
the victory. Some developing countries permitted US military bases on their soil as a 
deterrent, but foreign assistance has also been an allure for agreeing to host US and 
allied troops, even if increasing the security risk of the host country. 

136  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 In addition, even today some of the economic development funds may be directly 
or indirectly channeled into military assistance. USAID, the primary American for-
eign assistance agency since 1961, has sometimes commingled development assis-
tance and military assistance. In addition, if foreign assistance covers investments that 
the government would have made with its own funds, the freed-up funds can be used 
for other purposes. This fungibility is the development practitioner’s nightmare but 
can be the defense policymaker’s boon. Insofar as officials of recipient countries can 
forgo spending the nation’s foreign exchange on development projects, these funds 
can be devoted to defense materiel and other military-related spending. However, 
fungibility can cut both ways. If a recipient country’s government leaders feel com-
pelled to devote a given amount to security, military and other forms of security 
assistance can free up budget resources for nonsecurity purposes. In Colombia, for 
example, US military support against guerrilla groups, inextricably commingled with 
the antinarcotics initiative, received nearly US$2 billion from 2000 to 2013 directly 
from the US Department of Defense, in addition to more than US$4 billion com-
ing from the US government’s Andean Counterdrug Initiative/Andean Counterdrug 
Program. The total US funding of Plan Colombia, the omnibus plan to combat the 
drug trade and the guerrillas, amounted to over US$9 billion for this period. To com-
plicate the situation even further, some of the monies that would appear to be for the 
antidrug program actually go to USAID. 8 
 The objectives of Soviet foreign assistance were more limited, in part because the 
issue of international trade was less important for the internal trade among Russia, 
Ukraine, the Baltic republics, and many other republics within the Soviet Union. 
Trade with the other Warsaw Pact countries did not need the inducement of for-
eign assistance. Therefore, the Soviet foreign assistance was driven more strictly by 
geopolitical concerns, split between support for the most acute US-Soviet conflict 
areas, particularly Vietnam and Cuba, and overtures to major nonaligned countries, 
particularly Egypt and India. Some of the financing of Soviet foreign assistance was 
accomplished through the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (Comecon), a 
consortium of Warsaw Pact countries, Cuba, Mongolia, and Vietnam. 9 In a sense, 
therefore, Eastern Bloc foreign assistance was multilateral, though with clear domi-
nance by the Soviet Union in contrast to the relatively less influence of any sin-
gle national over the World Bank and major regional development banks (African 
Development Bank, Asian Development Bank, and the Inter-American Development 
Bank). Because of the relative wealth of the Eastern European countries, they bore 
a disproportionate burden in providing assistance to recipient countries: Cuba, 
Vietnam, and, though to a lesser extent, Mongolia. Foreign assistance to Cuba was 
reciprocated by Cuban military activities in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa; 
assistance to Vietnam was but one facet of Soviet rivalry, first with the United States 
and then with China. 
 Comecon foreign assistance beyond the Comecon countries themselves was spread 
very thinly (62 developing countries in 1970, over 100 in 1985 [Goodrich 1989]), 
clearly intended to provide at least a presence and basis for government-government 
relationship in so many countries, but the bulk of the funds going beyond the 
Comecon countries were focused on swaying hitherto nonaligned governments (e.g., 
Egypt received more Soviet aid in the 1960s than any other nation beyond the Soviet 

Foreign Assistance Theories and Doctrines  ●  137
bloc [El Beblawi 2008, 21]) or supporting successful leftist regimes (e.g., the MPLA 
in Angola, the Derg regime in Ethiopia, and the FRELIMO in Mozambique). 
 Post-Cold War G eopolitical O bjectives 
 The demise of the Soviet Union certainly did not put an end to the geopolitical 
and defense rationales of foreign assistance, for the United States and other NATO 
members, resurgent Russia, emerging East Asian nations, and oil-rich Middle Eastern 
nations. The post-9/11 concern with terrorism gripped both East and West. The US 
war on drugs extended from Latin America to Afghanistan. Direct and proxy wars 
in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Syria, and the chronic confrontations in Egypt and Israel, 
have prompted development and military assistance from NATO members, Russia, 
and the Middle Eastern oil exporters. The confrontation over the South China Sea is 
likely to drive the foreign assistance calculations by China, Japan, and South Korea 
vis- à -vis the Southeast Asian nations. In short, the post-Cold War peace dividend has 
not reduced the relevance of geopolitical considerations in foreign assistance. 
 Economic Theories 
 While political and security concerns dominated Cold War bilateral foreign assis-
tance approaches, and still do in significant respects, theories concerning the eco-
nomic impacts on both recipient and donor countries have also been important in 
shaping the targets and modalities of assistance. 
 Dominance of Physical Infrastructure Projects 
 If large volumes of capital were to be transferred, what sectors should be favored? 
The Japanese were not unique in placing heavy emphasis on physical infrastructure. 
Physical infrastructure could remove the bottlenecks holding back productive activity 
by enabling greater transportation, energy, and communications capacity. In prin-
ciple, physical infrastructure can enhance social services (e.g., through greater access 
to rural schools and health clinics) as well as manufacturing, agriculture, extractive 
industries, and banking. Because of the lack of engineering expertise in many devel-
oping countries, aid agencies had expertise as well as money to contribute. 
 For the donor, physical infrastructure projects meant business for its construc-
tion companies, heavy equipment manufacturers, and engineering consulting com-
panies. Reconstruction assistance even more clearly called for physical infrastructure 
assistance to restore what the conflicts had destroyed. Donors with heavy machinery 
industries would have the greatest capacity to maximize ties through construction 
projects as opposed to other sectors within the recipient country. Thus, Soviet assis-
tance also concentrated on physical infrastructure, demonstrating Soviet engineer-
ing prowess and providing outlets for heavy machinery and engineers. Initially the 
industries to benefit both from infrastructure expansion and direct industrial support 
were involved in import substitution industrialization; in the 1970s and 1980s, the 
emphasis shifted to export-oriented industries (Goodrich 1989). 

138  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 Industry Emphasis Giving Way to Agricultural and Social Sector Concerns 
 As reviewed in  chapters 2 and  3 , early post-WWII development thinking strongly 
emphasized manufacturing and other aspects of industrial development, on the 
grounds that industry had more promise than agriculture, with its limits on land area. 
Therefore, the concern over agriculture was largely confined to restructuring land 
holdings rather than directing money to improve agricultural productivity. In fact, 
through price ceilings on food that allowed industrialists to offer lower wages, capital 
was drained out of agriculture. The initial bias in favor of industry was reinforced by 
the attractiveness of infrastructure, inasmuch as many projects such as roads, power 
plants, and ports can be directed to industrial development. In addition, on the 
assumption that industrial jobs would come with training, little external assistance 
was addressed to education. Development assistance for health care has also been 
largely neglected and disorganized, leaving coordination to the poorly funded World 
Health Organization and its regional affiliates. 
 The rethinking of sectoral theory was driven by greater recognition of the multiple 
problems of declining agricultural productivity, famine, rural poverty, inefficient pro-
tected industry, overcrowding of cities due to flight from the countryside, and the loss 
of foreign exchange because of food imports. The new theory was that in light of the 
unwillingness of national leaders to focus adequately on agricultural development, 
foreign assistance was needed to supplement agricultural investment and to influence 
governments to reorient their proindustrial strategy. 
 In addition, the disappointing progress in human resource development in 
many developing countries, linked to industrial stagnation, prompted rethinking of 
whether education and health improvements would come naturally through eco-
nomic growth. The impressive economic performances of Japan, South Korea, and 
Taiwan highlighted the strong commitment of all three countries to education and 
health care—whether or not these countries, with their distinctive nature and his-
tories, would be good parallels to other developing nations. When the World Bank 
under Robert McNamara (1968–1981) and some of the regional development banks 
adopted the poverty alleviation doctrine, reinforced (as noted in  chapter 2 ) by the 
basic needs theory, the multilateral foreign assistance agencies faced a difficult theo-
retical quandary. On the one hand, comparative advantage theory argued that each 
institution ought to concentrate on doing what it did best. On the other hand, inso-
far as these institutions served as exemplars and thought leaders on how development 
ought to be pursued, neglecting particular aspects of the growing agenda of develop-
ment summarized in  chapter 2 might send a signal that neglected aspects ought to be 
neglected by other institutions, including the recipient country governments. With 
the partial exception of the Asian Development Bank, dominated by Japanese fund-
ing and maintaining a predominantly infrastructure focus, the development banks 
have greatly broadened their foci. They diversified their project staffs beyond the 
prior near monopoly of economists and engineers, to include agronomists, education 
specialists, anthropologists, sociologists, environmental experts, and so on. 
 One consequence of the expanded range of the sectors targeted by foreign assis-
tance is the greater difficulty of assessing the degree of project or program success. 
As reviewed in  chapter 2 , the technical means of gauging the societal rate of return 

Foreign Assistance Theories and Doctrines  ●  139
for a particular development initiative is more problematic for social sector efforts 
(Jimenez and Patrinos 2008). While the use of rate-of-return analysis (i.e., benefit-
cost analysis) has been declining across all sectors, it has declined much more precipi-
tously for education and health projects. 10 This means that foreign assistance officials 
are less accountable from a technical perspective, but it also means that they lack the 
opportunity to invoke benefit-cost analysis to defend their efforts. 
 Land R eform 
 One of the major aspects of attempted leverage through foreign assistance was to urge 
governments of countries with high levels of land concentration and landlessness to 
engage in significant land reform. The Japanese, Taiwanese, and South Korean eco-
nomic successes were accompanied by major land redistribution; this seemed to be 
a way of assisting the rural poor in other countries without the need to raise agricul-
tural prices. For Latin American countries, the qualification for USAID Alliance for 
Progress funding had to mount land reform efforts. And although some governments 
passed laws but were lax in implementation (Feder 1965), land reform initiatives 
provoked strong resistance, and even civil wars (Lipton 2009). 
 Political E conomy Theories 
 The political economy considerations faced by foreign assistance donors and recipi-
ents center on different aspects of influence, reciprocity, cooperation, and auton-
omy. Thus, the conditions that assistance providers require—or at least attempt to 
require—of recipients; the actions of recipient governments to protect their auton-
omy; and the tradeoffs between gaining influence through nation-nation assistance 
vs. multidonor collaboration have all strongly shaped foreign assistance doctrines. 
 Fundamental E xchanges 
 The most fundamental political economy premise of foreign assistance is that gov-
ernments of donor countries often exchange economic support, through bilateral or 
multilateral channels, for some combinations of (1) favored status with the govern-
ment and population of the recipient country, (2) greater support from constituents 
within the donor country, and (3) favored status with other donor governments. 
Much paper has been wasted by efforts to determine which objective  generally domi-
nates the motivation of the donor. It should be clear from the fact that both donors 
and recipients face great variation in context that the donor motivations vary as well: 
trade, diplomatic support, security alliance, drug interdiction, and/or access to raw 
materials from the recipient country; political popularity within the donor country 
and/or support for companies exporting to the recipient country; stronger alliances 
with other donor countries, and so on. 
 However, some of these exchanges may backfire. The favorability with the recipi-
ent government may be jeopardized if the aid is perceived as excessively manipulative 
from the perspective of the recipient government or other actors within that coun-
try. Strengthening military alliances may exacerbate tensions with other countries. 

140  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
Constituents within the donor country may resent the fact that their taxes are going 
to other countries, or they may object to the support of governments of which they 
disapprove. 
 Rationales of Multilateral Assistance 
 Because the grants and concessional loans channeled through multilateral foreign 
assistance come predominantly from the funds or guarantees of individual developed 
countries, it may seem irrational for these governments to forgo taking direct credit 
for their transfers. However, collective action theory clarifies that governments inter-
ested in maximizing the total volume of funds for development have an incentive to 
enter into agreements that bind multiple countries, with defection either infeasible or 
costly. A government considering defecting may face criticism from both developed 
and developing countries. It is also possible that a government wishing a recipient 
nation to receive a given level of foreign assistance would be deterred from free riding 
if that meant that the multilateral collective initiative would collapse as other donors 
defect. For example, when the US government moved to withhold its contributions 
to the World Bank Group’s soft-loan International Development Association (IDA) 
facility, other governments enacted triggering mechanisms to reduce their contribu-
tions, jeopardizing the entire IDA initiative until the US government largely relented 
(Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997). 
 The second rationale for contributing to multilateral assistance at the expense 
of losing bilateral credit is that direct bilateral relations may not be as effective as 
the indirect impact through multilateral assistance and influence. Influence from 
multilateral institutions may be more palatable politically within the recipient coun-
try than from a single nation vulnerable to accusations of neoimperialism. By the 
same token, donor country leaders who wish to see a recipient country receive more 
assistance may need to circumvent opposition to direct bilateral assistance within 
the donor country. It may be politically contentious within a donor country to pro-
vide direct assistance to problematic government of a particular recipient country. In 
short, multilateral assistance channels can depoliticize this assistance. The obvious 
tradeoff is that the donor country government loses some leverage based on the threat 
to cut off assistance. 
 NGO Assi stance 
 As  chapter 6 notes, international NGOs devoted to development assistance have 
proliferated, and the financial resources that they command have grown dramatically. 
For the United States, at least, this is a direct consequence of the broad policy doc-
trine of promoting private voluntary contributions through tax exemptions for both 
domestic and international assistance, making the total of US development assis-
tance highly distinct in comparison with the typical state-centered assistance of other 
donor nations. 11   Davis and Gelpern (2010, 1211) concluded that “Foreign assistance 
from private sources is estimated to have reached $49 billion in 2007—just short of 
half of its official counterpart, which stood at nearly $105 billion. By some estimates, 
private aid for development is approaching the level of bilateral official development 

Foreign Assistance Theories and Doctrines  ●  141
assistance.” This reflects the combined effect of US bilateral aid dominance in the 
total volume of assistance and the high proportion of US assistance from private 
donors. While this does not mean that US development assistance is more generous 
on either a per capita basis or as proportion of GDP, it does mean that the emphasis 
of US NGOs on the social sectors has greatly increased the overall contributions 
coming from the United States. 
 Aid C oordination 
 Similar premises and tradeoffs hold for the coordination of aid among bilateral agen-
cies, multilateral intergovernmental institutions, and nongovernmental institutions. 
The dilemma for a bilateral foreign assistance agency begins with the risk that the 
credit to the donor country may be diminished if its aid is not distinctive from that 
of other donors. There is also the administrative burden of coordination. On the 
other hand, uncoordinated aid is often less effective, with fragmented efforts lack-
ing the best scale for maximum effectiveness. In addition, the effort at coordination 
can reinforce the collective action logic, as joint initiatives may entail highly visible 
commitments. 
 Aid coordination has had to include nongovernmental assistance providers as 
well. Moreover, the UN Charter recognizes NGOs as an integral participant in UN 
activities. In addition, emerging theories of aid effectiveness recognize the utility of 
working through civil society, which includes NGOs within the recipient country 
as well as grassroots organizations. Bilateral aid agencies, particularly of Western 
European countries, have long endorsed the premise that working through NGOs, 
both international and those within the recipient country, strengthens civil society 
while also increasing the likelihood that assistance will be responsive to local needs 
and wants. In terms of the multilateral agencies, the UNDP, which has lacked the 
huge financial resources requiring channeling through large infrastructure projects 
under government control, has had a long history of NGO collaboration. When 
James Wolfensohn took over as president of the World Bank in 1995, he gave inter-
national NGOs far more presence in World Bank deliberations. 
 However, the overall coordination imperative has added to the bureaucratic over-
head of foreign assistance. On some issues, such as food security, new multilateral 
entities have been established primarily to coordinate, yet the bureaucratic burden 
and the lack of clear benefit to their efforts have led to their dissolution. For example, 
the World Food Council was disbanded in 1993 as not worth the expense of a sepa-
rate or ganization. 12 
 Theories R egarding NGO s 
 The enthusiasm of foreign assistance agencies toward NGOs has somewhat cooled 
because of growing awareness of the divergence of the interests between NGOs and 
grassroots organizations. 13 Even if leaders and members of international or domestic 
NGOs truly believe that they are acting in the best interests of the societies they serve, 
the time scales may differ dramatically. For example, environmental NGOs typically 
emphasize conservation, which often clashes with the short-term interests of local 

142  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
people. Many domestic NGOs have strongly antigovernment orientations that local 
groups may not share, and the NGO’s confrontations with government may enmesh 
others in dangerous clashes. For bilateral or multilateral assistance agencies, collabo-
rating with NGOs can sour relations with the government of the recipient country. 
Therefore, the emerging doctrine is to work more directly with grassroots organiza-
tions and to work with NGOs that are less contentious. 
 Another consideration regarding working through NGOs is that the political 
credit that a donor government can gain with the government of the recipient coun-
try may well be lower unless the flows are government-government. 
 Theories o f C onditionality 
 The controversies over the bilateral or multilateral conditionalities that impose policy 
reform requirements on recipient countries rest on different political economy theo-
ries that have normative as well as practical implications. No other aspect of the rela-
tionship between donors and recipients has been more contentious than this issue. 
 Defenders of conditionality rely on five premises. First, they must presume that 
the reforms are appropriate. For assistance to be effective, government economic 
policies must be sound (Burnside and Dollar 2000); therefore, the precious foreign 
assistance resources would be wasted unless recipient governments are pressured into 
adopting sounder policies. Second, if government officials do not want to act in 
the best interests of the country, conditionalities can pressure these leaders to accept 
appropriate reforms. It is worth noting that during the debt crisis decade of the 
1980s, when many developing country governments faced difficult economic and 
political conditions that discouraged adopting painful economic policy reforms, the 
conditionalities became far more specific (Kapur and Webb 2000, 2). 
 The third premise is that if appropriate conditionalities are not honored, the gov-
ernment officials may be punished by the failure to secure the assistance. This pre-
sumes that failure to accept or maintain appropriate conditionalities would result in 
withdrawal or reduction of the foreign assistance. 
 Fourth, conditionality communicates to other nations what the foreign assistance 
experts regard as appropriate policy reforms. The validity of this premise depends 
not only on whether the conditionalities are sound but also whether the criticism 
mounted against them erodes their credibility. 
 Fifth, from the perspective of the recipient country, the positive aspect of condi-
tionality is that external pressure by international organizations can reduce the politi-
cal costs that government officials would face in enacting appropriate reforms that 
otherwise may be too controversial to enact. “The World Bank (or the IMF) made us 
do it” is a common refrain. 
 Yet government officials of the recipient countries also recognize that foreign assis-
tance agencies face their own pressures to expend the resources available to them 
and to fulfill their mandates to promote development. As mentioned in  chapter 3 , 
the international entities requiring conditionalities are often loathe to terminate an 
agreement even if the conditionalities are not met; the collapse of an agreement has 
costs to both the people of the country and the conditionality imposer: without an 
agreement, the shortage of borrowing capacity can seriously damage the economy, 

Foreign Assistance Theories and Doctrines  ●  143
and the relationship between the external entity and the government is likely to be 
damaged. Government officials of countries under conditionality constraints know 
that under some circumstances the risk of losing the support because of noncompli-
ance is low. Many agreements over the decades have simply been renegotiated, with 
different, often weaker, conditionalities (Mikesell 1983; Boughton 2003). 
 The critiques of conditionality vary. One argument is that conditionalities are 
likely to be inappropriate. This may rest on the assumption that the recipient gov-
ernment’s actions, without the pressure from assistance providers, would be more 
appropriate, reflecting a deeper presumption that the recipient government acts in 
the interests of the country. This is often paired with the skepticism as to whether 
the donor has the interests of the recipient nation at heart. In addition, a common 
premise of those who are skeptical of the soundness of conditionalities is that external 
actors, even if well-intentioned, do not know enough about the political, economic, 
and social context to judge what is best. 
 If the conditionalities are regarded as appropriate, imposing them may still be 
regarded as counterproductive. From the perspective of the donor government, con-
ditionality may reduce the credit that the recipient government and population will 
grant to the donor government and country, insofar as conditionality is perceived as 
heavy-handed and self-serving. Moreover, as briefly mentioned in  chapter 2 , even if 
the conditionalities are regarded as appropriate, the question of whether the recipi-
ent government has the political will or capacity to enact the conditionalities it has 
formally accepted has led to skepticism toward conditionalities that are not owned 
by the recipient government. 
 This last concern has given rise to two somewhat new doctrines. One is govern-
ment ownership: the government must embrace the reforms enshrined in condition-
alities. For the international financial institutions, this came into prominence in the 
early 2000s. Boughton (2003, 3) of the IMF staff reported, 
 When the IMF embarked on a reexamination of it policies on conditionality in 
the millennium year 2000, a key objective was to promote national ownership of 
policy adjustments and structural reforms. It was clear from experience and from 
formal studies . . . that the main reason for failure of Fund-supported programs 
to achieve their objectives was that governments too often did not implement 
policies to which they had committed. Whatever could be done to deepen and 
strengthen commitment was likely to improve implementation and raise the suc-
cess r ate. 
 Boughton acknowledges that the phrase national ownership is difficult to define “with 
sufficient precision to make it operational”; however, the IMF developed a working 
definition: “Ownership is a willing assumption of responsibility for an agreed pro-
gram of policies, by officials in a borrowing country who have the responsibility to 
formulate and carry out those policies, based on an understanding that the program 
is achievable and is in the country’s own interest” (Boughton 2003, 3). 
 There are, however, several serious complications. For one thing, governments are 
not monolithic, making the concept of government ownership at best ambiguous. 
The ownership by the government can never be totally absent or fully complete. 

144  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
Typically, those government officials mandated to maintain economic stability have 
already sided with the IMF, World Bank, or other international financial institutions 
advocating policy reforms. In contrast, the government’s political leaders, and the 
officials of the spending ministries, may have different sets of incentives than the 
government’s financial managers. The political leaders within the government may 
prefer the reforms were it not for the political consequences, but if ownership means 
making an explicit commitment to them despite the political costs, the public stance 
of criticizing the conditionalities, and perhaps reneging later, will result if these costs 
are regarded as too high. Top government policymakers often state opposition to 
conditionalities, in order to reduce accountability for the unpopular aspects of the 
reforms, even if they welcome being forced to accept them. For their part, the lead-
ers of spending ministries typically wish to pursue their mandates by spending more 
to promote activities within their sectors. Thus, by the time agreements have been 
reached,  some government officials typically have already been collaborating with the 
multilateral institutions, while others have not. Second, the owned reforms must still 
be acceptable to the international financial institution; the difference between the 
preexisting doctrine and the ownership doctrine is far less than one might imagine. 
The requirement of government ownership could result in the failure to reach agree-
ment, if the relevant government officials are unwilling to own an agreement that 
the assistance institution cannot accept. On the other hand, government leaders who 
wish to qualify for support may claim ownership, but renege later. 
 These difficulties have led to proposals, largely targeted to the IMF, to ensure 
country ownership (in the sense of firm commitment) by requiring prequalification 
for eligibility to receive a loan or loan guarantee. The prequalification would require 
meeting specified policy reform criteria (Meltzer 2000). In principle, if this were 
a sufficiently credible approach, it could strengthen the hand of the government 
officials in favor of IMF-favored reforms vis- à -vis government officials who would 
otherwise oppose these reforms were it not for the possibility that the international 
financial institutions would refuse to serve as lender of last resort if a financial cri-
sis occurred. The question is whether the international financial institutions would 
refuse to support a country that had not prequalified, in light of the damage to the 
people of that country and potentially to the international economy, if this support 
is not forthcoming. 
 Governance C onditionality 
 Much of the disappointment of the economic stagnation in many developing coun-
tries came to be attributed to the realization that capital in itself is not enough; how it 
is deployed is crucial, and, as  chapters 4 and  5 address, this depends on the strength of 
institutions of government, markets, and society. As mentioned in  chapter 2 , Rostow 
(1956, 25) had recognized this; development “is likely to require political, social 
and institutional changes which will both perpetuate an initial increase in the scale 
of investment and result in the regular acceptance and absorption of innovations,” 
yet the early foreign assistance magnitudes were not very responsive to the institu-
tional constraints. Currently, admonitions and conditionality regarding governance 
are prominent, but in some quarters, the governance constraints are still disregarded 

Foreign Assistance Theories and Doctrines  ●  145
in terms of absorptive capacity. Matthew Auer cogently derides the initiative urged by 
Jeffrey Sachs to launch a new big push even where, as in Sub-Saharan Africa, institu-
tions are acknowledged by all to be weak. 14 Auer (2007, 180) observes, 
 Sachs . . . presents the problem as a dichotomous choice—either institutional 
development or social investment. From an institutional perspective, this is a 
maddening prescription. Vaccinations are not acquired, distributed, or adminis-
tered without institutions, nor is soil conserved, nor are roads built. Consider the 
latter. Who designates which roads are to be paved and with reference to which 
rules and regulations? Who takes charge of procurement for road building and 
what procedures are invoked? Who audits the bidding and disbursement of road 
building funds? Who maintains the roads, and who trains the professionals who 
perform these functions? Answers to these questions must have institutional refer-
ence p oints. 
 If assistance without adequate institutions cannot reach its potential, assistance 
that requires and accomplishes institutional improvements—that is, governance 
 conditionality—could be a major gain. However, governance conditionality is even 
more contentious than economic policy conditionality. As Kaufmann’s research cited 
in  chapter 2 has demonstrated, economic policy conditionality can be straightfor-
wardly justified by the premise that the loans and grants can be put to good use. 
Governance conditionality, which more directly challenges national sovereignty but 
it also has a powerful but indirect link to economic development, requires a more 
complex supportive theory. 
 Governance conditionality is also premised on the theory that better governance 
enhances both aggregate economic performance and equity. De Janvry and Dethier 
(2012, 6) posit that in poor countries, large-scale financial transfers are unlikely to 
be effective given the limited absorptive capacity of these countries. So what can 
be done? Broadly, the answer likely includes an intense focus on capacity building, 
combined with more direct delivery of human development services and humani-
tarian assistance. Donors should focus on institution building, capacity building, 
and knowledge transfer to facilitate change. Thus, strong governance, as defined by 
broad participation, low corruption, efficient administration, and the rule of law (see 
 chapters 4 and  5 on governance), is presumed to enhance the success of projects and 
programs that foreign assistance supports and lead to more coherent and effective 
policies that provide benefits broadly to the nation’s residents. 
 For multilateral agencies, the argument that sovereignty shields governments 
from external pressure on internal policy issues has seriously eroded in terms of 
international norms, through the extension of the interventionist principle for the 
most serious internal human rights violations, such as genocide, to a much broader 
range of concerns over democratization and human rights in general.  15 Therefore, 
just as US and Western European foreign assistance has long exercised strong though 
informal governance conditionality for recipient countries (though US allies against 
first Communism and currently terrorism have often been exempt from governance 
conditionality), multilateral foreign assistance agencies (e.g., World Bank, regional 
development banks, UNDP) have imposed both formal and informal governance 

146  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
conditionality, despite the fact that the recipient nations share ownership of these 
organizations, with the premise that the pressure is necessary to get the governments 
to do more. In some circumstances, external conditionality is also useful if the relevant 
government officials within the country desire the governance reforms to go through 
despite opposition from others within the country (Kapur and Webb 2000, 8). 
 Conditionality does not have to be formal; bilateral foreign assistance, in particu-
lar, provides an avenue for influence on issues of governance, repression, corruption, 
and conflict. The implicit risk to recipient governments that resist these pressures is 
that aid might to reduced or completely cut off. However, the interests of the assis-
tance-providing nation in maintaining good relations with the recipient nation may 
limit the pressure. For example, Feasel (2013, 222) notes the limitations of Japanese 
pressure on the Vietnamese government:
 Japan has largely played a hands-off role when it comes to the internal decisions 
and workings of the government. It has suggested direction and provided aid and 
expertise, but has not used the potential cessation of assistance as a stick to punish 
lack of speed in implementing market-oriented reforms or government actions 
restricting certain freedoms . . . Other donors and multinational institutions have 
played a more active role in pushing the GoV to increase the pace of reforms. 
 Feasel concludes that “Japan has not placed any conditions on aid based on the gov-
ernment’s treatment of ethnic minority and religious groups” (225). However, nei-
ther have the multilateral agencies. 
 Tied Ai d 
 Physical infrastructure, insofar as it calls for imported construction equipment and 
other imported components, had fed into the doctrine of tied aid as an element of the 
donor country economic rationale. If a nation is transferring funds to another nation, 
it might seem only fair, and not a significant cost to the recipient nation, for foreign 
inputs—both equipment and personnel—to be of the donor nation. However, the 
noncompetitive nature of some procurements seriously reduces the value of the ben-
efit insofar as the goods and services are overpriced, inappropriate, or both. Hans 
Singer (1968, 54) criticized the limitations of tied aid to the recipient country and 
pointed out that while each donor nation would gain from excluding others, each 
would also be excluded from providing inputs funded by the other countries. Jepma 
judged that “tied aid represents only a small percentage of the donor countries’ total 
exports. Thus, it is improbable that aid tying provides significant macroeconomic 
benefits to any donor’s domestic employment or balance of payments aggregates. The 
case for tying is therefore essentially political rather than macro-economic” (1991, 
13). Petermann (2013) extends Jepma’s assessment into the present. The theory of 
tied aid, then, has to focus on the political acceptability of foreign assistance. The 
premise is that resistance to foreign assistance in the donor country budget process 
would be great enough to reduce the assistance program unless the enticement of 
providing benefits for domestic firms is present. 

Foreign Assistance Theories and Doctrines  ●  147
 Collective action theory calls for donor nations to collaborate on limited degree 
to which their assistance is tied aid. The Organisation for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (OECD) has succeeded remarkably in this respect, countering the 
domestic political pressures, at least among OECD donors. Through its Development 
Assistance Committee (DAC), encompassing the major Western European donors, 
Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, South Korea, and the United States, the 
OECD organized several consultations that resulted in accords in 2001 and 2012 
to reduce tied aid. Before the 2001 accord, total DAC untied aid was at roughly 
45 percent; it is now over 75 percent (OECD 2013a), with much of the remaining 
tied aid due to technical assistance that donor nation governments use to design and 
monitor the assistance. In contrast, China, now a significant foreign assistance donor 
through concessional loans, still utilizes tied aid broadly. Wolf, Wang, and Warner 
(2013, 7) note that “Chinese concessional loans also include a stipulation that at least 
50 percent of the loan is tied to the purchase of Chinese goods.” 
 Conclusions 
 The theories underlying the doctrines of foreign assistance for developing countries 
in the post-WWII period have reflected a host of objectives and premises. Some 
of the tradeoffs have created severe challenges, mitigated or exacerbated to varying 
degrees, which have led to changes in theories and doctrines. 
 Several theoretical advances have had rather impressive impacts on foreign assis-
tance doctrines. The fundamental premise that development requires capital is, of 
course, still acknowledged, but the overoptimism of the Big Push has been tempered 
by recognition of the importance of institutions, even if the idea that capital can be 
do wonders still resurfaces periodically. 
 The theory that tied aid would redound to the benefit of individual donor coun-
tries has been undermined sufficiently to diminish the prevalence of this wasteful 
practice, at least among OECD donors. Recognition of the power of collective action 
has generated more aid coordination and increased multilateral assistance as well. 
However, multilateral assistance is no less contested than when its conditionality was 
introduced in the 1980s, and the government ownership doctrine is largely hollow. 
 With the expansion of the sectoral scope of multilateral assistance, and the empha-
sis of NGO assistance on the previously neglected social sectors, development assis-
tance is more capable of addressing the complex web of factors that determine the 
pace and quality of development. 
 In sum, it is fair to say that as the premises behind foreign assistance have been 
tested through experience, the doctrines have matured. Yet further improvements are 
still r equired. 

 CHAPTER 8 
 International Development in 
the American Grain: From 
Point Four to the Present 
 Introduction 
 This chapter recounts the changing institutional and political context of US foreign 
assistance. This evolution is unique, not only in its dominance over the past 70 years 
but also in its major role in the global development assistance effort. The search for 
a stable US foreign assistance institutional structure has largely been accomplished, 
but the broader institutional arrangements have placed development assistance into 
a chronically precarious position. We must also acknowledge that even with a sta-
ble organizational structure, no matter what the organizational chart looks like, the 
funding for USAID and smaller assistance agencies is far too small to make major 
inroads in economic assistance. In FY 2014, total US foreign assistance was roughly 
$34 billion, of which $8.5 billion was for international security assistance and $3 bil-
lion for multilateral institutions. USAID’s economic assistance was only $19.3 bil-
lion, as other US government agencies absorbed $1.3 billion of the rest of the foreign 
assistance budget (US Department of State 2014, 62). The FY 2015 request is to cut 
the USAID foreign assistance budget to less than $18 billion. To put this into per-
spective, the newest US aircraft carrier, the USS Gerald Ford, cost $14 billion. 
 The C urrent D ilemma 
 In early June 2008, six months before the election of US President Barack Obama, 
the Modernizing Foreign Assistance Network (MFAN), a private organization of 
foreign policy specialists counting among its members Larry Diamond and Francis 
Fukuyama, issued a plea to “restore America’s reputation abroad” by combining and 
strengthening defense and diplomatic tools with “equally robust tools of develop-
ment” (MFAN 2008, 1, 3). It was an ironic request. Historically, calls to separate mili-
tary assistance from development aid fell on deaf ears, even when advocated by John 

150  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
F. Kennedy, for example. MFAN also pushed, more pertinently, for a Cabinet-level 
presence and a “whole of government” approach to global development. The historical 
record notwithstanding, strong evidence suggests that President Obama and his advi-
sors heard the MFAN. Responding directly to the “drip-by-drip erosion of USAID” 
but also to forge closer strategic and operational ties among defense, diplomacy, and 
development, the 2010 Presidential Policy Directive on Global Development was 
a sweeping endorsement of the MFAN recommendations (Hyman 2010) and the 
USAID Alumni Association recommendations to revive the Agency to reverse its “pro-
gressive deterioration” (USAID Alumni Association 2008, 1). Secretary of State Hilary 
Clinton agreed, “I think it’s fair to say that USAID . . . has been decimated. It has half 
the staff it used to have. It’s turned into more of a contracting agency than an opera-
tional agency with the ability to deliver.” 1 President Obama declared, “We are rebuild-
ing the United States Agency for International Development as the world’s premier 
development agency.” USAID would regain control of “policy, budget, planning, and 
evaluation capabilities”; recoup its leadership “in the formulation of country and sector 
development strategies”; resume the task of educating the next generation of develop-
ment professionals; and once again become “the U.S. government’s lead development 
agency” (White House Office of the Press Secretary 2010a, 1). According to the White 
House Fact Sheet that followed the pronouncement, the Directive “charts a course 
for development, diplomacy, and defense to mutually reinforce and complement one 
another in an integrated comprehensive approach to national security” (White House 
Office of the Press Secretary 2010b, 3). Not since President Kennedy, speaking before 
the UN General Assembly in 1960, called for a Decade of Development has a sitting 
president elevated development to such a central place. 2  
 This begs a number of questions: What had changed between Kennedy’s decla-
ration in 1960 and Obama’s in 2010? What continuities and discontinuities—in 
development theory, doctrine, and practice—characterize the evolution of US devel-
opment policy? How do we put into context the nearly stagnant real dollar levels of 
foreign aid, as revealed in  table 8.1 , and the precipitous decline in the proportion of 
US GDP devoted to foreign aid since the end of WWII? What problems and chal-
lenges seemingly unique to the postwar world nevertheless survived into the present 
and in what form? What new theories and doctrines would replace them? 
 The fundamental if unavoidable weakness in US aid policy is its vulnerability to 
partisan political demands; to various forms of bureaucratic, interagency infighting; 
and, perhaps most important of all, to changing circumstances on the ground in 
those countries either receiving or designated to receive American aid. The leadership 
of USAID has stabilized since the earlier chronic institutional turnover, but is still 
subject to fairly dramatic shifts in emphasis and relationships with other agencies as 
international crises erupt and domestic political winds change. A system of congres-
sional oversight and annual appropriations that has institutionalized gridlock, sacri-
ficing long-term program sustainability to the demand for immediate results—and 
short-term political interests to a long-term economic vision for the countries that are 
most in need—has created “an output-oriented process favouring short-term results 
over long-term impact” (OECD 2011, 53). 
 Clearly, it is a vastly different world today than in 1960, with new dangers, new 
vistas, and new opportunity costs for American foreign aid policy. It is not simply 

International Development in the American Grain  ●  151
that 9/11 and the War on Terror permanently changed the political landscape; what 
are now transnational problems call loudly for transnational solutions. 
 Notwithstanding Obama’s call for a new “division of labor”—governments, 
multilateral agencies, and NGOs “all working together” with a “sense of common 
purpose”—bilateral US Official Development Assistance (ODA) must account for 
the bulk of total US foreign assistance (94% in 2005, 87% in 2009, and 83% in 
2012) (White House Office of the Press Secretary 2010a, 3; US ODA 2014). 3 The 
major multilateral institutions with significant financial resources (the World Bank 
and regional development banks) have to limit their total capital to maintain the 
creditworthiness of t heir bond s. 
 However, bilateral aid has its virtues. A 2012 Development Assistance Committee 
peer review asserted that US bilateral aid is delivered “more effectively, efficiently and 
professionally” than at any time in its history, especially to those countries most in 
need—Sub-Saharan Africa, for example (OECD 2011, 41). Bilateral aid also appears 
to be the way most Americans want it. 4 And despite lofty sentiments, 5 bilateral aid is 
widely believed to serve the donor nation: President Kennedy stated in 1963 that “an 
early exposure to American goods, American skills, and the American way of doing 
things” was critical to “forming the tastes and desires and customs of these newly 
emerging nations which must be our markets for the future.” 6 Some of the costs of 
providing foreign assistance are offset when the goods and services are procured from 
the United States, though less so now that the United States, like other OECD DAC 
members, has greatly reduced the tied aid practice (see  chapter 7 ). Nevertheless, food 
stuffs and their transshipment are purchased wholly from American-owned farms 
and freight carriers. 7 Most military aid finances equipment purchases and training 
 Table 8.1  US for eign a id, 1946–2012 
Fiscal year
Billion in constant 2012 dollars
As percentage of GDP
1946
33.97
1.4
1950
57.59
2.2
1955
32.59
1.0
1960
36.34
1.0
1965
35.00
0.8
1970
35.06
0.6
1975
27.31
0.4
1980
26.30
0.4
1985
38.09
0.5
1990
25.56
0.3
1995
20.42
0.2
2000
23.06
0.2
2005
27.99
0.2
2010
41.63
0.3
2014 (est.)
34.2
0.2
 Source : US Overseas Loans and Grants (Greenbook); Office of Management and 
Budget Historic Budget Tables, FY 2011; Congressional Research Service (CRS) appro-
priations reports and CRS calculations. 

152  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
personnel in the United States, or by tying aid to exclusive trade agreements (Tarnoff 
and Nowels 2004, 19–20). 
 Since the end of WWII, the effective and efficient delivery of US foreign aid 
has suffered as a result of initially rapid institutional change, increasing complex-
ity of its functions and accounting, the public indifference to assisting developing 
countries, and the convoluted relationship between security and development con-
siderations. 8 The late twentieth century downsizing of USAID, the major source of 
bilateral US ODA, is a good case in point. The Year 1996 saw a major reduction in 
the Agency’s workforce, an attrition in human resources that continued throughout 
the 1990s (Clinton-Gore Administration History Project 2000, 71). By the end of 
2000, USAID was no longer able to meet its compliance requirements under the 
Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990, the Government Management Reform Act 
of 1994, and the Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996, legisla-
tion designed to provide Congress with reliable, timely, and consistent information 
about the management of federal agencies (71–73). USAID “managers could not be 
sure program objectives were being met; resources adequately safeguarded; reliable 
financial and performance data obtained, managed, and reported; and activities com-
plied with laws and regulations” (78–79). The Obama administration’s rehabilitation 
of USAID, while restoring to the Agency its policy, strategic planning, and budget 
management capabilities, has done little to overcome the fragmented aid system. 
That system today includes as many as 27 different public institutions, hampering 
“a more strategic and consolidated approach for U.S. development co-operation” 
(Development Assistance Committee 2011, 54). 
 A second factor in the evolution of US development doctrine is the reordering of 
the relative weight given to specific countries and regions as well as to the five main 
categories of US foreign aid—Bilateral Economic Assistance, including an account 
for political and security assistance; Multilateral Economic Assistance; Humanitarian 
Assistance; Military Assistance; and Law Enforcement Assistance, a new category 
previously buried in the USAID budget under the Office of Public Safety. Civil soci-
ety organizations and the business sector have each in their own way played a part 
in helping to set the agenda for US foreign aid. This is also true of public opinion 
generally, which can be a barometer of what are often very subtle shifts of policy and 
political emphasis within the halls of Congress. While difficult to measure and assess, 
some accounting of these forces is essential to our understanding of the progress of 
development thinking and practice. 
 A history of both overt and covert linkages between military assistance and eco-
nomic aid suggests a third factor in the evolution of development theory and doc-
trine, one that is dealt with at some length in a subsequent chapter of this book, 
drawing on the example of US involvement in Chile, South Korea, and Vietnam. 
 Finally, the activities of other foreign assistance providers, including developing 
nations themselves, have had and continue to have a major impact on how Americans 
think of and respond to the needs of development. Not only other donor nations 
but international finance agencies like the World Bank, the IMF, and the Asian 
Development Bank, as well as intergovernmental bodies like the United Nations 
run programs and tout policies that both parallel and intersect with vital American 
interests. 

International Development in the American Grain  ●  153
 These four factors—institutional turnover and paralysis, changes in the basic 
architecture of US aid, a complementarity doctrine of economic and military assis-
tance, and a growing competition for influence between bilateral and multilateral 
donors as well as between the former and such newly industrialized countries (NICs) 
as Turkey and Brazil—all complicate considerably the task of analyzing the large and 
growing literature of economic aid and development and extracting from it lessons 
for future policymakers. Although researchers have touched on one or more of these 
factors to varying degrees, there is no single comprehensive study of development 
that has taken full advantage of both the primary and secondary sources available to 
the modern development scholar. 9 
 The Revolving Door: Continuity and Discontinuity in 
the Planning and Administration of US 
Foreign Assistance 
 Before being reorganized into the USAID in 1961, the US foreign assistance program 
was a diversified yet piecemeal affair carried out by an alphabet soup of evanescent 
administrative entities: the Economic Cooperation Agency (ECA) (1948–1951), 
which implemented the European Recovery Program (ERP), popularly known as 
the Marshall Plan; its successor the Mutual Security Agency (MSA) (1951–1953), 
established by an Act of Congress in 1951 and extending assistance to Asia and South 
America; the Technical Cooperation Administration (TCA) (1950–1952) estab-
lished within the State Department and charged with implementing and manag-
ing technical assistance; the Foreign Operations Agency (FOA) (1953–1955), which 
superseded the MSA, followed by the establishment of the International Cooperation 
Administration (1955–1961) and its subsidiary Development Loan Fund (DLF) in 
1955. The DLF, signaling a general shift in US foreign aid policy from grants and 
soft-loans to hard-loans payable in dollars, gained institutional independence in 
1959. The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 gave birth if not to the last to the sturdiest 
link in this chain, the USAID. 
 Whether US foreign assistance lost its organizational focus and direction after the 
recovery of Europe and the termination of the Marshall Plan is an important ques-
tion. Certainly it is true that by the 1960s, “criticism,” as James Hagen and Vernon 
Ruttan have pointed out, “became more focused on the administration of aid than 
on its existence” (1987, 7). This was a sea change. President Truman’s new aid initia-
tive, announced in 1949 fresh in the wake of the Truman Doctrine of containment 
and culminating in so-called Point Four, was nothing if not ambitious in scope and 
design. 
 First, said Truman (1949), “we will continue to give unfaltering support to the 
United Nations and related agencies, and we will continue to search for ways to 
strengthen their authority and increase their effectiveness.” The theory here was that 
collective action would serve simultaneously to leverage US development funds and 
to free them up politically for the business of containment. Second, he said, “we will 
continue our programs for world economic recovery.” This was a reference to the 
Marshall Plan but more generally to the logic of US direct involvement in devel-
opment. Third, “we will strengthen freedom-loving nations against the dangers of 

154  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
aggression,” a major strategy in the doctrine of containment. Fourth, said Truman, 
“we must embark on a bold new program for making the benefits of our scien-
tific advances and industrial progress available for the improvement and growth of 
underdeveloped areas.” Science and technology transfer would in theory provide the 
necessary basis for infrastructure development, industrial growth, and agricultural 
productivity with benefits redounding both to recipient countries and the United 
States. 
 In the intervening years leading to the creation of USAID, technical assistance, 
development loans tied to investor incentives and Buy American requirements, and 
manpower support—not direct economic aid and assistance—were the preferred 
forms of US intervention in developing countries. These and other programs, nota-
bly the food aid program, Public Law 480 passed by Congress in 1954, “not only 
channeled security assistance to U.S. allies and potential friends in the developing 
world,” argues Dennis Rondinelli (1987, 2), “but offered countries help in increasing 
their food production, educating their citizens, and industrializing their economies.” 
In spite of such gains, development remained, as Rondinelli suggests, a mixed bag, 
catering to American self-interest no less than to the needs of the developing world 
(as government officials understood them), but prey also to isolationist doubts about 
the value of foreign aid of any kind, including US support of the United Nations. 
The Byzantine administration of aid—in 1951, 23 federal agencies were conducting 
some foreign economic operations—exacerbated these conditions while paving the 
way for structural reforms, especially the creation of USAID (Partners in Progress 
1951, 4). 
 Based upon new models to control waste and inefficiency in government, the 
drive was on to consolidate foreign aid into a single all-encompassing agency with 
broad and inclusive powers. Two aid reports commissioned by President Truman—
the Gray Report, chaired by the Secretary of the Army Gordon Gray, and Partners in 
Progress, a report of the president’s International Advisory Board chaired by Nelson A. 
Rockefeller, the former coordinator of the Institute of Inter-American Affairs, a fore-
runner of the TCA—recommended the creation of “one overall agency” that would 
be independent both of the State Department and the ECA (Partners in Progress 
1951, 2). In Rockefeller’s proposal, a new Overseas Economic Administration would 
be responsible directly to the president; its charge—the centralization of all US for-
eign aid operations, including military assistance. The recent outbreak of war on 
the Korean peninsula made the need for greater unification of aid administration 
especially “acute,” argued Partners in Progress (4). In addition to bringing military 
assistance and economic development under one roof, reducing duplication while 
increasing fungibility, the new agency would take a more proactive approach to work-
ing with private enterprise as well as with civil society organizations and voluntary 
groups already engaged in the business of development. In its current configuration, 
US foreign economic policy lacked “consistency and continuity,” focus and flexibil-
ity, essential qualities that only a central, unifying institution could provide (5). Still 
another rationale for the centralization of aid administration, one with growing rel-
evance up to the present, was the corresponding lack of coordination in recipient 
countries, where government agencies, civil society organizations, and the private sec-
tor often operated independently and at cross purposes with one another. Democracy 

International Development in the American Grain  ●  155
would never follow development, a basic contention of modernization theory, with-
out inclusive, broad-based development administration, of which the United States 
would have to become the model, but an efficient one. 
 The Gray and Rockefeller reports recommended a sweeping reorganization of 
the American foreign aid program, including new responsibilities for the over-
sight of such operations as foreign procurement (traditionally the sole province of 
the General Services Administration), export licensing (under the Department of 
Commerce), foreign mineral imports (Department of the Interior), Export-Import 
Bank and World Bank loans, and UN development agencies. Released within a year 
of one another, both reports garnered considerable attention, if not universal appro-
bation, in the national media. The  New Orleans Times-Picayune had its reservations 
about the need for a new super-agency, seeing it as an “oblique criticism of the State 
Department’s present coordination of foreign economic policies” (US Department 
of State 1950, 4). Truman would ultimately come down on the side of this opinion, 
rejecting the recommendations of Gray, Rockefeller, Hoffman, and others, making 
it clear in a letter of April 5, 1951, to then ECA administrator William Foster that 
“The Secretary of State, under my direction, is the Cabinet officer responsible for the 
formulation of foreign policy and the conduct of foreign relations, and will provide 
leadership and coordination among the executive agencies in carrying out foreign 
policies and programs” (Congressional Quarterly Research 1951, 2). This is another 
example of how presidential politics, never as straightforward and unambiguous as a 
good theory and the doctrines it produces, can subvert the latter at any stage in the 
development process. 
 Geopolitical considerations can also play a role in how successfully even the most 
rational expectations can be helped to see the light of day. State Department officials 
objected vigorously to the Gray and Rockefeller recommendations to take the TCA 
out of it. Security threats arising in Korea and South East Asia made it increasingly 
difficult to disaggregate economic aid, technical assistance, and military prepared-
ness much less to diminish the role of the State Department in the supervision of all 
foreign policy operations. The Korean War and the Cold War paved the way for the 
Mutual Security Act of 1951, which now made political considerations—the willing-
ness of aid recipients (i.e., friendly nations) to enlist in the common struggle against 
international communism and accede to the demands of US security—a litmus test 
for receiving assistance. 10 
 Although the Mutual Security Act provided for the organization a unified program 
of military, economic, and technical assistance under the coordination and supervi-
sion of a “single person,” a director within the Executive Office of the President, it 
also made abundantly clear that “Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed 
to infringe upon the powers or functions of the Secretary of State” (Mutual Security 
Act of 1951, sec. 501a, 505). For Averill Harriman, the new director of the MSA, 
“coordination” was the operative term (Gordon 1975, sec. 162). He kept the MSA 
staff purposefully small, preferring to leave the day-to-day business of development 
assistance to individuals and agencies directly involved in the work or in bringing to 
the Hill annual requests for appropriations. Nearly omitted from the Mutual Security 
Bill but for some frantic back-channel negotiations, TCA survived with a $100 mil-
lion appropriation in FY 1951–1952 for a program that was to be “an attack at the 

156  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
grassroot level on the three basic needs of mankind: food, health, and education” 
(Andrews 1970, 30). The development doctrine of the TCA was first and foremost: 
no big projects, no major new industrial plants, no national airports equipped with 
state-of-the-art airplanes that no one could fly or knew how to repair, no “building 
shit houses that you can see instead of slow educational work” (31). Andrews and his 
predecessor, Henry G. Bennett, envisioned putting in small demonstration plants or 
providing funds for feasibility studies and impact statements for the kinds of resource 
development ideas, even the big ones, which the Third World economies they visited 
(some 29 in two years) had in mind. 
 Harold Stassen, a former governor of Minnesota and twice a candidate for the 
presidency, was appointed by President-elect Eisenhower at first to lead the MSA 
and then in 1953 to administer a new agency replacing the MSA, the FOA. Two 
years later, TCA and FOA were consolidated into the International Cooperation 
Administration also under Stassen, straight out of the take-off and big-push school 
of modernization theory. However, over the course of the Mutual Security Act period 
(1953–1961), the average annual total of all economic assistance declined by nearly 
half compared to the preceding Marshall Plan period (1949–1952), from $36.1 bil-
lion to $17.6 billion in constant 2012 dollars (USAID Greenbook 2014). The overall 
reduction of the foreign aid budget combined with a relative increase in security con-
cerns and large-scale loans and grants for economic assistance meant that the kinds of 
technical assistance programs that Andrews describes (and Stassen abjured) had little 
or no chance of survival (Ruttan 1996, 71–72; USAID 2005, 1). 
 The organizational problem continued to return to haunt the US aid program 
throughout the 1950s as one new federal agency metamorphosed into another. 
Jurisdictional confusion persisted over the respective roles of the Office of the 
Executive, the State, Commerce, and Agriculture departments, and the Export-
Import Bank. It was very easy to conclude, as did the President’s Advisory Committee 
on Government Organization, that development policy was adrift. No longer was a 
“better coordination of existing responsibilities” sufficient to fix the problem, when 
the problem lay instead in the “suitability” of the existing machinery for implement-
ing such policy (President’s Advisory Committee on Government Organization 
1954, 1–2). Urgently needed was a study of ways in which to shore up the Office 
of the Secretary of State to assume full responsibility for all policy considerations 
and for relating foreign economic conditions and US foreign and domestic policies. 
Under the current chaotic state of affairs, “a maximum of overall responsibility is 
coupled with a minimum of direct line authority,” emasculating the authority of 
the president and the State Department (Dodge 1954, 4). In response to these con-
cerns, in 1957 Congress gave undersecretary status to a new central administrative 
unit located within the State Department and responsible directly to the Secretary 
of State. This Undersecretary for Economic Affairs was put in charge of the Mutual 
Security Program now housed within the International Cooperation Agency, made 
chairman of the Board of Directors of the DLF, represented the United States on the 
governing boards of the World Bank and the IMF, served as the State Department’s 
liaison to the Export-Import Bank, provided guidance and direction to Public Law 
480, and represented State Department on the president’s National Advisory Council. 
Congress had solved the problem of decentralization not by rebalancing the many 

International Development in the American Grain  ●  157
forces at work in foreign aid policy and practice, thereby strengthening the hand of 
the president and the State Department, but by once again housing administrative 
oversight of these programs in a single, all-encompassing authority (Dodge 1954, 4). 
 For a young John F. Kennedy (1960, 52) surveying the landscape, anything was 
acceptable but the status quo. 
 The alternative [to reform] is chaos, not economy—a continuing of  ad hoc crisis 
expenditures—a further diffusion and dilution of our efforts—a series of special 
cases and political loans—an over-reliance on inflexible, hard loans through the 
Import-Export and World Bank, with fixed dollar repayment schedules that retard 
instead of stimulate economic development—a lack of confidence and effort in 
the underdeveloped world—and a general pyramiding of overlapping, standard-
less, incentiveless, inefficient aid programs. 
 In the simple organization and administration of aid, there was a deplorable “lack of 
coherence,” according to Kennedy’s Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy (1960). 
“Today it consists of bits and pieces of policy developed at different times by differ-
ent people to meet particular situations” (10–11). Kennedy’s answer, the creation of 
USAID, a single overarching agency led by an administrator with undersecretary-
level access to the president, hardly put an end to “coordination issues” (Task Force 
on International Development 1970, 34). The 1969 Rockefeller Report and the 
Peterson Task Force on International Development in 1970 recommended abolish-
ing USAID and replacing it with one or more alternative institutions. USAID has 
managed over the years to survive such onslaughts but not without a price: tighter 
congressional controls and oversight, new and more onerous reporting requirements, 
periodic internal reorganizations and staff reductions, half of its permanent staff since 
1975, and progressive outsourcing of the design and implementation of its field oper-
ations (Ruttan 1996, 96–97;  USA Today 2009) . 
 From the Nixon through the Obama administration, calls for the reorganization 
of development assistance have remained the one constant in an otherwise fluctuating 
world of strategic giving. Such calls have ranged from demands for greater efficiency 
and less waste to cries for centralization one day, decentralization the next, more or 
less coordination versus more or less authority, to the subordination of project design 
and approval to implementation. In the next section, we examine the evolution of 
doctrine pertaining to the appropriation of aid, funding priorities that have shifted 
dramatically over the years with new alignments in foreign and domestic politics, 
with changing geostrategic forces, with increasingly interdependent private-public 
sector relations, and with changes in popular opinion. 
 Foreign and Domestic Doctrine in the Allocation 
and Distribution of Aid: Who Gets What, 
When, and Why? 
 The ERP was America’s first large-scale bilateral foreign aid operation. Although 
it had contributed far more than any other member government (some $2.66 bil-
lion) to the UN Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA) established 

158  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
in 1943 to provide food, fuel, shelter, and other basic necessities to the victims of 
WWII, nothing could prepare the world for the massive infusion of American dol-
lars—$13.3 billion (94.3 billion in constant or real dollars) in a little over three years 
between 1949 and 1952—to secure the postwar economic recovery and integration 
of Europe (UNRRA 1950, 4; Orme 1995, 15). Sixteen countries, including occupied 
West Germany, formed themselves into the Organization for European Economic 
Cooperation, a precursor to the European Community and today’s European Union 
(Orme 1995, 16). The United States channeled aid into this organization through 
the new ECA, which over the course of the Marshall Plan period poured an addi-
tional $15.3 billion for a total of $28.6 billion into other countries around the world 
where it deemed itself to have “a vital interest”—China, Korea, and Southeast Asia in 
addition to Western Europe (Orme 1995, 25; USAID 2005, 1). 
 According to John Orme, the Marshall Plan was the child of synergistic and con-
flicting forces in the early evolution of foreign aid: “the continuation of postwar 
prosperity in the United States; the relief of distress abroad; the containment of com-
munism; and the reconstruction of Germany at an acceptable cost to U.S. taxpayers” 
(cited in Orme 1995, 35). With the Chinese Revolution of 1948 and the onset of 
the Korean War in 1950, and as Europe itself began to reap the benefits of American 
investment, the work of the International Cooperation Agency devolved to a new 
agency—the MSA—that would increasingly blur the lines between economic and 
military assistance to places then called the Third World (to distinguish them from 
the First World of developed capitalist countries and the Second World of advanced 
communist ones). Military security and economic stability were interchangeable 
parts of a unified theory of democracy building during the heyday of US foreign 
aid and development when obligations and loan authorizations swelled from $43.3 
billion during the period of the Mutual Security Act (1953–1961) to $196.7 billion 
under the Foreign Assistance Act and its amendments (1962–1985), leading up to 
the break-up of the Soviet Union in 1989 (USAID 2005, 1; Tarnoff and Lawson 
2011, 29–30). Although for record-keeping purposes USAID separates economic 
assistance from military assistance, in practice the Military Assistance Program and 
USAID funding for development, including a catchall Economic Support Fund 
(ESF), were coterminous—especially in trouble spots where these forms of assis-
tance tended to pool anyway: Taiwan and Korea in the 1950s; Laos, Indonesia, and 
Vietnam, as well as such nascent, politically unstable Latin American republics as 
Chile and Guatemala in the 1960s; the Middle East generally and Israel and Egypt 
in particular from the 1970s to today; and, of course, such recent hotspots in the 
War on Terror as Iraq, Afghanistan, and Sudan. In these and other areas of the world, 
especially in those countries posing US security threats or facing their own challenges 
of poverty, disease, and instability, humanitarian impulses combine with national 
security objectives to enforce a doctrine of development rooted in the belief that 
political stability, social mobility, and higher standards of living, as well as greater 
political participation would reinforce the preference for democracies friendly to the 
United States. 
 From the funding priorities of the immediate postwar period, when this trend 
was just getting under way, to the current level and distribution of foreign aid in our 
post-Cold War, post-9/11 world of roughly $50 billion of annual US foreign aid 

International Development in the American Grain  ●  159
operations, who gets what, when, and why has involved a complex desideratum of 
the following doctrines, which we examine in their turn:
 US foreign policy entails a response to changing geostrategic conditions in the 
 
●
world, determined by the State Department working closely with the president. 
 Congressional decision-making powers are exercised through authorities and 
 
●
appropriations under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended and after 
1986 through so-called continuing resolutions (CRs) (a euphemism for the cur-
rent practice of congressional earmarking). 
 Domestic as well as international public opinion counts in this process. 
 
●
 National security, a complex calculus of economic, social, and political consid-
 
●
erations including but not limited to questions of military strength, democracy 
building, and economic growth and stability at home and abroad, is the penul-
timate driver of the US foreign assistance program. 
 It should come as no surprise that foreign aid reached an all-time postwar low in 
1988, just a year before the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of the Soviet 
Union (Gimlin 1988, 1). Until then, fears of Soviet expansionism had dominated US 
foreign policy and, with several notable exceptions, dictated the flow and distribution 
of US military and economic support first to the developed world in war-torn areas 
of Europe—emergency aid to the tottering governments of allied Greece and Turkey 
being perhaps the prime example—and then later to large swaths of potential social 
and political influences across the developing world. The dogma of anticommunism, 
the doctrine of containment, and the policy of the “falling domino” first introduced 
by President Eisenhower in 1954 became the filters through which “the United States 
interpreted events in the rest of the world” (Ruttan 1996, 278). Although subsequent 
events have discredited the domino theory, American policymakers remained under 
its thrall for a generation. 11 They worried with George Kennan (1947, 576, 581), 
author of the doctrine of containment, that unless resisted at every turn, unless “con-
tained by the adroit and vigilant application of counter-force at a series of constantly 
shifting geographical and political points, corresponding to the shifts and maneuvers 
of Soviet policy,” communism would gradually but ineluctably metastasize to every 
cell of the free-world body politic, “a cautious, persistent pressure toward the disrup-
tion and weakening of all rival influence and rival power.” 
 Yet as the British historian Eric Hobsbawm (1994, 358) has noted, while Soviet-
American relations may have dominated the interactions between states, “It did not 
entirely control them.” Other forces were at work in the world, more salient for the 
purposes of development than the bipolar competition for influence between the 
United States and the Soviet Union (Walters 1970, 97–98). 12 One of them was a 
population explosion in the Third World, which was placing profound stress and 
strain on already limited physical and human resources. By 1968 most of these 
nations had only completed the first leg of a demographic transition to low birth and 
death rates. Average life expectancy was increasing (thanks in no small part to both 
US and Soviet scientific and technological assistance), but birth rates remained the 
same or rose only gradually. The pressures of population growth came to bear directly 
on economic development. By the 1970s, family planning programs were getting the 

160  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
same public attention, if not funding, as the building of roads and dams and other 
more traditional forms of donor investment (Hobsbawm 1994, Chapter 12; Ruttan 
1996, 125) . 13 
 No less vexing for development officials was the multiplication of new states, 200 
by 1990, many of them former European colonies unschooled in self-government 
and prey to the blandishments less of communist or democratic forms of governance 
than of naked military rule (Hobsbawm 1994, 347–349). Providing economic and 
military assistance to states prone to political corruption, cronyism, and authoritari-
anism in the hope of making friends for your point of view or in the larger illusion 
that strengthening foreign military capabilities would serve as a deterrent to either 
internal subversion or external invasion was a “serious misconception,” according 
to Max Millikan, an old development hand during the Kennedy era. Reproducing 
the colonial dependencies of the past in the guise of development would only leave 
poorly educated and poorly performing countries in “recurrent states of chaos and 
confusion” (Millikan 1955, 11), making the establishment of “milieu goals” (Walters 
1970, 47)—environmental conditions favorable to the social and political ideals, 
not to mention the investment needs, of the major powers—exceedingly difficult, 
if not impossible. By the 1960s, under increasing pressures to explain why the fond 
hopes of the 1950s had not been achieved, development practitioners turned the 
blame onto the recipient countries; development administration (see  chapters 4 and 
 5 ) focused on correcting the mismanagement of aid in recipient countries. USAID 
came to believe that institutional development was “key to promoting sustainable 
economic growth and social progress in poor countries” (Rondinelli 1987, 4). 
 The N onaligned M ovement 
 Another mitigating effect on the organization of foreign policy around Cold War 
exigencies, including challenges to sovereignty that may or may not have the support 
of local elites, has been the presence of a small but growing number of nonaligned, 
neutralist countries committed to political self-determination and to protecting 
from external interference their new-found independence. Meeting in April 1955 in 
Bandung, Indonesia, delegates from 29 countries in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East 
issued a Final Communique calling for greater economic and cultural cooperation, 
human rights and self-determination, and the “promotion of world peace and coop-
eration.” The latter would entail three “abstentions” from the “big powers”: abstention 
from “intervention or interference in the internal affairs of another country”; absten-
tion from “the use of arrangements of collective defense” to advance the interests of 
the First and Second Worlds; and abstention by  any country from “exerting pressures” 
on any other country, an implicit criticism of the foreign influence peddling, oth-
erwise known as “presence aid” (aid in return for establishing a political presence), 
that had become common in the developing world (Asian-African Conference 1955, 
7–9). This is not to say that the countries subscribing to Bandung stopped accept-
ing aid from or trading with either the United States or the Soviet Union or both in 
the case of India, Egypt, and Turkey. Contentious states like India and Afghanistan 
became adept at playing the great powers against each other, taking their money and 
receiving their technical assistance while retaining the right to control and develop 

International Development in the American Grain  ●  161
their own natural and human resources for themselves. At the height of the Cold 
War between 1946 and 1968, India received the bulk of its economic assistance from 
the United States ($7.8 billion), but it also received over a shorter period of time, 
1954–1968, an additional $1.6 billion from the USSR (Walters 1970, 84). 
 The Land Reform Initiative: Neglect of Political Realities 
 With the exception of a few NICs, for the majority of people living within the 
developing world, agriculture is still the primary means of earning a living. And 
for those whose livelihood was tied to the land, land reform took precedence over 
the state-planned industrialization and large-scale structural adjustments favored by 
donors like the United States and Russia. Land reform, however, could mean many 
things, ranging from the outright seizure and redistribution of large estates to milder, 
more gradualist measures such as rent reduction and tenancy reform. As Hobsbawm 
(1994, 356) has written, “what the modernizers saw in [land reform] was not what it 
meant to the peasants . . . whose demand for land was not based on general principle 
(communist or otherwise) but on specific claims.” The Green Revolution of the late 
1960s—touted by American officials as an alternative to a Red Revolution of the 
Soviet-kind or a White Revolution of the Iranian-kind—was a mixed blessing for 
farmers. The new agriculture had demonstrable long-term benefits in the form of 
higher crop yields per hectare of land, but the initial investments were often beyond 
the reach of small farmers. 14 
 Emergent Doctrines 
 As countries around the world turned to urban industrialization, the agricultural sec-
tor contracted. As globalization and integration of markets proceeded, foreign policy-
makers had to admit that Kennan’s bipolar world was simply not a reality. Bipolarity 
was no longer a sound basis for making decisions about who gets what, when, and 
why in land, industrial goods, or investment capital. 
 As this realization began to strike the people at USAID and the State Department, 
Congress took matters into its own hands, moving development in New Directions 
after a disastrous war in Vietnam. In 1973 Congress passed New Directions Legislation 
(NDL) designed to shift its aid package from Southeast Asia to the Middle East and 
from large-scale, capital-intensive infrastructure and investment projects that focused 
on growth and productivity to a new basic human needs agenda that put the stress on 
health, education, family and population planning, and poverty reduction (Ruttan 
1996, Chapter 6). Asia by this time had commenced its economic miracle, the com-
bined result of US foreign assistance, grassroots patterns of saving and investment, 
and years of human capital deepening. Taking this lesson to heart, NDL encouraged 
popular participation by aid recipients, who were to become “agents of change, rather 
than targets of aid” (Cutshall et al. 2009, 8). It spoke of democratic institution build-
ing and of the need for participatory programs that, based on “self-development,” 
were sustainable over the long term (Hellinger, O’Regan, and Hellinger 2009, 15). 
 These hardly new calls for self-help could serve as a convenient pretext for 
public disengagement from development. Grants-in-aid, argued neoconservative 

162  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
development practitioners, created abject dependencies and sapped individual ini-
tiative in aid no less than in social welfare recipients; multilateral lending institu-
tions and private sector investment in labor-generating industry alone could keep 
poor countries dependent on their benefactors. Something very much like it was the 
Nixon Doctrine, whose “central thesis” gave so much impetus to NDL (Ruttan 1996, 
96). While announcing at the beginning of the decade that “We have no intention 
of withdrawing from the world,” Nixon made it clear that “Americans cannot—and 
will not—conceive all the plans, design all the programs, execute all the decisions and 
undertake all the defense of the nations of the free world. We will help where it makes 
a real difference and is considered in our national interest” (98, 102). Such state-
ments have been interpreted as efforts to phase down America’s foreign aid program. 
Title IX of the Foreign Assistance Act as amended in 1967, an important forerunner 
of NDL, enshrined the doctrines of self-help and participatory governance. But if 
under New Directions the United States was to leave the task of economic develop-
ment primarily to host governments, empowering “the poorest of their people” to 
participate, then  more  US involvement would be needed to assure that these respon-
sibilities were met, in such a way, as Nixon had said, that they serve the US national 
interest (Mickelwait, Sweet, and Morss 1979, 2). NDL foundered on these internal 
contradictions. USAID was never able to resolve the fundamental question of how to 
involve the rural poor in their own uplift. An “adequate planning requirement” writ-
ten into the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 paralyzed the approval process in endless 
paperwork—feasibility studies, engineering and financial plans, budget estimates, 
time-on-project predictions, cost-benefit analyses, worst-case scenarios, all prosecuted 
in an office in Washington thousands of miles away from the problem—before any 
funds could be obligated (Mickelwait, Sweet, and Morss 1979, 60). Development 
Alternatives, Inc., subcontracted by USAID in 1975 to aid in the design of 12 rural 
development projects in ten countries with a budget of $65 million, complained 
in a preliminary report that this “blueprint approach” (cited in Mickelwait, Sweet, 
and Morss 1979, xv, 5) militated against good, field-tested practices. The rush to 
design projects that would pass muster with Foreign Assistance Act General Counsel 
caused USAID to create “unrealistic implementation schedules and plans” and to 
ignore the “local environment, culture, and economy” (cited in Mickelwait, Sweet, 
and Morss 1979, 6). The contradictions of an aid program designed to help the 
poorest members of society to help themselves, a congressional gauntlet conducive 
to institutionalized gridlock, and brewing conflicts in the Middle East and Central 
America were enough to doom the war on poverty implicit in the New Directions 
mandate. “Lost Directions” is the name Ruttan (1996, 116) has given to the period 
that followed, when development assistance dropped from 40 percent to 24 per-
cent of the aid budget and the ESF share of the budget increased from 26 percent 
to 42 percent. A 1988 Congressional Quarterly Research report describes ESF as 
 “government-to-government cash transfers that are not earmarked for any particular 
program and require no U.S. accounting for how the money is spent” (Gimlin 1988, 
6). To gain greater latitude in determining aid priorities than the more narrowly 
circumscribed authorizations of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, Congress and 
the executive branch after 1986 resorted to the so-called continuing resolution, a 
stop-gap appropriations measure that only further politicizes the review and approval 

International Development in the American Grain  ●  163
of foreign aid. Budget analysts argue that CRs “restrict program implementation, 
and present operating component managers with the need to delay work and re-plan 
and reprogram repeatedly . . . CRs . . . reduce the efficiency of work processes” (Bockh 
and Blakeslee, n.d.). An ancillary effect of bureaucratized appropriations process is 
to channel a growing share of foreign aid from economic assistance to security pro-
grams in high-profile strategic areas such as the Middle East, Central America and the 
Caribbean, and South and Central Asia (see  chapter 10 ). 
 In the mid-1980s, FOA appropriations began their decline from a peak of $20.7 
billion in FY 1985 to a low of $12.3 billion in FY 1997 followed by an increase in FY 
2000 to $16.5 billion, which included, however, a one-time allocation of $1.8 bil-
lion for Israel, Jordan, and the Palestinians in support of the November 1998 Middle 
East peace accord and $1.9 billion largely to fund Colombia’s antinarcotics initiative 
(Tarnoff and Nowels 2004). In the aftermath of 9/11, these numbers have increased 
substantially. Not including US contributions to multilateral institutions or export 
aid, appropriations for economic and military assistance doubled to $29.4 billion in 
FY 2011 (Lawson, Epstein, and Resler 2011, 23–24). USAID must cope with an 
allocation system extending across a multiplicity of competing accounts (Cutshall 
et al. 2009, ii). Development assistance is but one of those accounts, in FY 2011 
accounting for only 12 percent of the total amount of bilateral economic assistance. 
State Department/USAID officials now seek funding for 19 separate accounts under 
the five broad categories listed at the beginning of this chapter. To do so, each year 
they need to navigate an administrative boondoggle consisting of up to 92 General 
Provisions and another 30 historical objectives embedded in the Foreign Assistance 
Act of 1961 and its amendments (Rennack, Mages, and Chesser 2011, 3). This helps 
explain why, with the exception of military assistance and ESF aid, which vary with 
security threat levels, there is so little relative variation among functional accounts 
that are nevertheless the most politically controversial, the most likely to make a dif-
ference, and traditionally the most underfunded. 15 
 There was plenty of precedence in the Foreign Assistance Act and its amendments 
for the self-help, self-governance, population planning, and basic needs doctrine of 
the New Directions mandate. By contrast, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 
2009–2010, a series of earmarks and CRs, subsumed a narrow doctrine of restrictions 
(Concerning the Palestinian Authority), limitations (on Assistance to Countries in 
Default, and on Availability of Funds for International Organizations and Programs), 
prohibitions (on Funding for Abortions and Involuntary Sterilization), sanctions 
(against Iran), protections (from Impact on Jobs in the United States), and new, 
more onerous eligibility requirements for Assistance generally (Rennack Mages, and 
Chesser 2011). Country earmarks read like a who’s who of the post-Cold War period: 
Saudi Arabia, Colombia, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, etc. Assistance to the former Soviet 
Union nations was, on the other hand, too important to leave to a General Provision; 
Congress established free-standing aid programs under the Support for Eastern 
European Democracy Act of 1989 and the Freedom for Russia and Emerging Eurasian 
Democracies and Open Markets Support Act of 1992 (Tarnoff and Nowels 2004, 
13–14). Reconstruction and security assistance to Iraq, Afghanistan, and Pakistan 
were also covered but under supplemental emergency measures that in FY 2010 alone 
amounted to $4.4 billion, not including Defense Department funding. 16 

164  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 Thus, several trends mark the evolution of development theory and doctrine over 
the last decade. The 9/11 attacks gave new impetus to these trends, but their roots 
lie as much in end-of-the-century events and concerns. A more self-conscious com-
mitment to bilateralism has emerged in recent years in part as a legacy of the Reagan 
administration’s criticism of the multilateral development banks. In the conserva-
tive atmosphere of the 1980s, World Bank President Robert McNamara’s promo-
tion of basic human needs was viewed by some as socialism. 17 In his first term in 
office, Reagan slashed funding to the banks by over 30 percent (Wills 1987; Ruttan 
1996, 130). Bill Clinton’s proposed Peace, Prosperity, and Democracy Act, designed 
to balance a neoliberal aid package of tied trade and investment guarantees with 
humanitarian assistance, including democracy building for “growth with equity,” fell 
victim to budget cuts and to Clinton’s commitment to administrative downsizing. 18 
Between 1994 and 1997, under Vice President Albert Gore’s initiative to “reinvent 
government,” USAID closed more than 44 overseas missions and cut its overall staff 
by close to a third. 
 The new bilateralism finds perhaps its most sophisticated recent expression in the 
Bush administration’s 2002 National Security Strategy. Though affirming support 
for cooperative agreements among the United States, its allies, and the multilateral 
banks, it declared the intention “to act apart when our interests and unique respon-
sibilities require” (White House 2002, 31). Questioning the ability of development 
assistance to stimulate sustained economic growth and reduce poverty “without the 
right national policies,” it proposed a 50 percent increase in aid to countries that could 
demonstrate that their governments “rule justly, invest in their people, and encourage 
economic freedom” (21–22). Bush advocated and Congress enacted the legislation 
to create a new Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC), a performance-based 
assistance program based on these criteria. MCC received an initial appropriation in 
FY 2004 of $994 million, up to $1.5 billion in FY 2005, but declined thereafter. 19 
In the end, compared to the total State Department and USAID budgets of over $33 
billion, MCC appropriations did not amount to much. 
 Thus, despite the challenges that USAID has faced, it clearly held the day with 
three-fourths of all foreign operations appropriations. Six percent of these appropria-
tions go to support multilateral assistance, principally for the World Bank Group’s 
International Development Association for concessional loans to the poorest coun-
tries. The remaining appropriations go largely to military/security assistance, with 
great year-to-year variations reflecting perceived assistance needs of security hotspots 
such as Iraq, Afghanistan, and Colombia (see  chapter 10 on the development assis-
tance-military assistance nexus). New accounts such as Transition Initiatives, the 
Freedom Support Act, and the Support for Eastern Democracy are intended to aid 
the transition of former Soviet Bloc countries and postconflict countries to liberal, 
free-market democracies. The President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, a George 
W. Bush initiative, also has a security dimension with built-in performance indica-
tors. The control of infectious disease risk that “directly affects public health in the 
United States” gave rise to Child Survival and Health Programs. Finally, a set-aside 
for Nonproliferation, Anti-Terrorism, Demining and Related Programs added to the 
expansion of bilateral aid. The cumulative effect of these supplemental accounts has 
been to shift for geopolitical strategic purposes the original priorities of development 

International Development in the American Grain  ●  165
assistance, never wholly altruistic during the Cold War era, development per se was at 
least an equal partner with security concerns. What makes those concerns so different 
today is the problem of terrorism, a transnational, nonstate phenomenon with no 
clear solution except long-term socioeconomic development, a task that no country, 
however powerful, can achieve. 
 Summing Up 
 As defined under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, American aid was originally 
intended to encompass efforts to alleviate poverty, promote sustainable growth with 
equity, ensure civil and economic rights in the development process, integrate devel-
oping countries into the global economy, and promote norms of good governance. 
It still serves these functions but shares them with a growing class of new, ad hoc 
accounts under the general heading of Bilateral Economic Assistance, designed to 
address sources of local and regional instability. Inconsistent priorities degrade the 
content and delivery of economic assistance. 
 The inconsistency of objectives is certainly due to changes in the external environ-
ment—the rise or fall of competing aid providers and shifting geopolitical and secu-
rity challenges. But the problems of inconsistent objectives and poor coordination 
are also rooted in the absence of an effort to clarify goals on a broad strategic level to 
maintain coherence in the face of changing circumstances and a realistic assessment 
of the resources required to achieve the combination of goals. Without such effort, 
US assistance effort will continue to fall prey to the goal displacement described in 
our introductory chapter and the unproductive posturing that has substituted for 
doing it right. 
 Development scholars and practitioners have learned that “there is no apparent 
simple relationship between aid and growth. Some countries that have received large 
amounts of aid have recorded rapid growth, while others have recorded slow or even 
negative growth. At the same time, some countries that have received little aid have 
grown, while others have not” (Radelet 2006, 7–8). Yet this is not a justification for 
doing nothing. Nor has the United States reaped fully the benefits for its generosity: 
greater investment opportunities for American business and a more peaceful, coop-
erative global order. That these goals and the institutional mechanisms for achieving 
them have often been in conflict is a large part of the story of the evolution of devel-
opment assistance and its continuing challenge. 

 CHAPTER 9 
 Evolving Roles of the Military in 
Developing Countries 
 Introduction 
 Military roles in developing countries are numerous, complex, and highly variable—
both in specific details and how these details change through time. Any overall survey 
of these matters is a challenge. Fitting the military as a distinct institutional entity 
into our organizing framework of theory, doctrine, and practice proves helpful. 
 Being clear about the core role of the military in general is also useful, especially 
as we explore many different theories and practical variants linked to them.  Armed 
forces exist to deter external threats to a nation and to deal with these threats if deterrence 
fails . Adding missions and responsibilities to a nation’s armed forces that extend or 
deviate from this core role must be considered carefully. In developing settings, such 
considerations are often hard to exercise, especially when alternative and countervail-
ing institutions are weak or nonexistent. 
 Civil-military relations in development are important. The standpoint or per-
spective one takes matters. Should one focus on a single nation’s military, or will a 
broader perspective of regional or global military powers work better? Where pos-
sible, we focus on the national domestic level, but still recognize influences of exter-
nal powers. 
 Even at the national level, the military does not operate in isolation. Nongovernmental 
organizations (domestic, regional, and global), private sector activities (home-grown 
as well as those linked to increased globalization), foreign direct investors, the World 
Bank, IMF, other lenders, the United Nations, and so forth, all may have impacts on 
military forces. 
 Military doctrine is not static. For example, wars of national liberation relate 
directly to global conditions and events, ranging from the legacy of the Cold War 
to wars on terrorism. Adversaries and alliances shift; so do doctrines to accomplish 
changing military ends. Shifts may be negligible or slow to happen, as when forces 
are balanced or they may be rapid during times of crises, especially those threatening 
a regime or territorial integrity of a country. 

168  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 The theories, doctrines, and practices in play for specific national military forces 
are best understood by attending to local details, not grand theories or strategies. 
Nevertheless, the interplay of national realities with regional and global realities in 
different time periods or eras should not be overlooked, and in making these connec-
tions, larger theoretical and strategic constructs may be helpful. 
 Eras of the Analysis 
 Different cutting points distinguish different eras in civil-military development, and 
we hope our choices clarify some notable trends and provide a guide to civil-military 
relations since the end of WWII ( table 9.1 ). 
 As with NGOs, Era 1 covers the post-WWII period of humanitarian relief, reloca-
tion, reconstruction, the Marshall Plan, and the settling in of the Cold War antago-
nisms around the world. International civil relief organizations and systems were created 
from scratch. The NGO sector hardly existed prior to WWII. The League of Nations’ 
humanitarian efforts prewar were limited; they no longer existed postwar. The United 
Nations was barely underway and offered little. The military was the default institution 
available to confront postwar development challenges in nations around the world. 
 For the Soviet Union and other Eastern Bloc countries, supporting wars of 
national liberation was regarded as separate from whatever progress of d é tente with 
 Table 9.1  Eras of military roles and civil-military relations 
Era 1 
(1945–1960)
Era 2 
(1960–1990)
Era 3 
(1990–2001)
Era 4 
(2001–2015)
Era 5 
(2015–)
Relief/expand/
civil-military 
affairs
Community 
development/
wars of liberation/ 
counterinsurgency
Fall of Iron 
Curtain/
globalization
War on 
terror/China-
Islam
Natural 
events/
resources/
complexity
 Focus 
Specific
Local/specific
Regional/
national
Regional/
global
Ecosystems/
mega-cities/
disaster relief
 Time fr ame 
Immediate/
finite
Project life/war’s 
end
20–50 years
Open-ended Variable
 Scope 
Individual
Local/nation
Region/nation Nation/
region
Ecosystems/
natural 
resources
 Participants 
Militaries
Development 
agencies/military/
NGOs
“Everyone”
Militaries
Super-
networks
 Military r ole Primary/
central
Central/
coordinate
Various
Active/direct 
involved
Technical/
logistical/
security 
support

Roles of the Military in Developing Countries  ●  169
the Western powers was being made. The Soviet doctrine was that “while conclud-
ing agreements on the normalization of relations with the United States, the Soviet 
Union nonetheless would continue to support the struggle of the peoples for their 
social and national liberation” (Trofimenko 1981, 1087). Soviet training, indoctri-
nation, and provision of weapons mirrored that of the United States, to the insur-
rectionist groups and the government these groups established. In border countries 
such as Afghanistan and Mongolia, Soviet military support was also provided, and 
Soviet troops were deployed in the failed attempt to maintain the Afghan govern-
ment. Soviet foreign assistance to Cuba was at least implicitly tied to Cuban military 
activities in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
 Somewhere around 1960, explicit modernization efforts, aided by government 
development programs and the emergence of effective international NGOs, took 
form (Pye 1961). 1 
 Often civil development programs were combined with localized military ones 
to mount counterinsurgency actions against indigenous forces engaging in wars of 
national liberation. The merging of economic assistance and military objectives took 
many forms, including infrastructure projects, pacification and land reform pro-
grams, and training and arming of national military forces to combat revolutionary 
guerilla forces (Lansdale 1962; Walterhouse 1962). US professional military training 
programs educated and shaped the perspectives of thousands of officers from the 
developing world during this period. Fort Benning, the Command and General Staff 
College, the Naval War College, and even the elite service academies at West Point, 
Annapolis, and Colorado Springs took in and indoctrinated elites from developing 
countries around the world (Pye 1964). Hand-me-down weapons (at first) and then 
increasingly sophisticated ones were also distributed, along with the associated tradi-
tions, doctrines, and mores. The USSR was similarly involved in training, indoc-
trinating, acculturating, and transferring weapons to its various client states in the 
developing w orld. 2 
 The fall of the Iron Curtain and the collapse of the USSR opened Era 3, a time of 
emerging American hegemony and high hopes for reduced military expenditures and 
improved economic and social development around the world. This era is marked by 
longer term development initiatives of 20–50 years in the form of massive electrifica-
tion (especially hydropower), transportation, education, and public health projects 
funded by national, regional, and international sources. A flourishing array of NGOs 
came on the scene, as we have noted elsewhere. A confident and integrated Europe 
took on development projects around the globe—collectively as the European Union 
came together and nationally in the form of creative and often generous directed aid 
and assistance programs. True development progress occurred in this period. 
 The jarring experience of the September 11 attack marked a sharp change of state 
for America and the rest of the world. Era 4 is the time of various “Wars On . . . ,” 
especially on terror and drugs. It is also a period when natural disasters seemed to 
happen more frequently and devastatingly. Counterinsurgency and special operations 
military forces teamed up with national police and border control paramilitary forces 
to suppress drug trafficking, fight insurgents, build and support communities, and 
provide humanitarian assistance during natural disasters. Demands on national mili-
tary forces multiplied to do more than simply protect a nation’s sovereignty. Questions 

170  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
surfaced: What is the purpose of a nation’s military? What is its core competence? 
How effectively and efficiently is it delivering this? What other roles can and should 
a nation’s military take on and still not compromise its ability to do its fundamental 
job? What happens when its fundamental job is no longer needed? 
 As Era 4 progressed, around 2010 is a good reference point, China and Russia 
began to assert themselves in two different ways, each having implications for regional 
and national development prospects. 
 Resource-seeking behavior on China’s part grew apace with its remarkable eco-
nomic growth. China’s reach around the world for natural resources to guarantee 
its own future economic success became clear. Development assistance to countries 
providing resources to China began about this time and continued to grow. The use 
of Chinese military assistance to protect resource bases also became evident. Energy-
providing behavior characterized Russia’s reemergence as a significant regional actor 
around the midpoint of Era 4. The protection of sea lanes, pipelines, and transporta-
tion routes for strategic reasons created opportunities to increase the size and capabil-
ities of related military forces. The regional focus in the early stages of Era 4 becomes 
increasingly global as resource-seeking and energy-providing demands began to grow 
in 2014 and beyond. 
 Theories an d D octrines 
 The following is a general guide to understand how militaries operate and contribute 
in developing countries. Specific conditions and details always matter as they shape 
future outcomes. They also do not apply across the board to all countries; they may 
change through time even within one specific country. 
 Theory of Weak Civilian Capacity 
 As WWII ended, leaders around the world realized that their armed forces were among 
the few, often most dominant, organized institutions they had. Nonmilitary institu-
tions were by comparison chaotic, if they existed at all. Relying on the military to take 
on economic and social development seemed obvious under these circumstances. The 
military thus should take the development lead. And it did in some, but not all, cases. 
 The theoretical premises related to the vacuum of other, countervailing civilian 
institutions are key. Deficiencies in nonmilitary institutions urged the imposition of 
order—coercion even—that the military could provide. The underlying and usually 
poorly articulated assumption was that the military as specialists in violence would go 
back to their barracks once civilian institutions came on the scene. This assumption 
often did not work out well. The fundamental responsibility of a military is to protect 
the nation from  external enemies. This is clear and hardly controversial. However, 
protecting a nation from  internal disruptions is also often left to the military. When 
other security institutions such as the local police, Guardia Civil, Carabinero/
Carabiniere, and the national guard are limited or unable to control internal disrup-
tions, the military is called on to perform. This can be problematic. 3 
 A third kind of responsibility, termed  management with respect to the rebuild-
ing of war-torn areas after WWII, often found the military constructing ravaged 

Roles of the Military in Developing Countries  ●  171
infrastructure, housing and feeding refugees and the displaced, and training and 
employing citizens on an interim basis until civilian authorities could assume 
these responsibilities and tasks. The Theory of Weak Civilian Capacity thus has at 
least three different outcomes, only one of which— defend the nation from external 
threats —is clear, fundamental, and uncontroversial. Problems occur when the mili-
tary is  responsible for internal matters —protecting the nation from internal threats 
because of limited police or paramilitary institutions, or fulfilling national manage-
ment needs because of gaps and vacuums in civilian institutions. We next sketch out 
some of these problems beginning with the post-WWII era. 
 Where imperialism was challenged or shattered,  indigenous military remnants 
of British, French, Dutch, and other former colonial powers emerged to fend off 
external threats posed by former colonial masters. New indigenous militaries also 
filled gaps and vacuums in civilian institutions. Military skills indigenous groups 
possessed often became the base of independence and resistance movements. These 
skills also enabled opposing groups in numerous civil wars. China’s civil war between 
Communists and the Kuomintang, long simmering during WWII, took full form 
this way (Westad 2003). 
 In areas savaged by war-fighting, constructive military actions helped rebuild 
war-torn infrastructure. Training and employment also followed and helped restore 
nations. Whatever the specific national experience, the post-WW II era generally 
expanded the concept of civil-military affairs. 
 Post-World War II Europe witnessed what was perhaps the most extensive use 
of the military in civil affairs. It is important to recognize the influence this had 
both on military doctrines of civil involvement and on development of the inter-
national relief system and the approaches that relief agencies have used since that 
time . . . The role of the military was expanded as never before. 
 From the beginning, the objective was to establish martial law in the occupied 
territories, then quickly rebuild indigenous capacity to manage cities, the prov-
inces and, ultimately, the national governments. In Germany, the process took 
longer but the goal was the same—the military role was to shift from  security and 
management to strictly security as quickly as possible. (Cuny 1989, 2; emphasis 
added) 
 Shifting occurred, although not always quickly or without long-lasting consequences. 
Cold War and postcolonial maneuverings of the victorious major powers worked to 
sustain and entrench the military for years in different places around the world. 4 
 A countervailing doctrine to that of expanding professional scope essentially says 
that the military should stay out of everything except responsibilities that are clearly 
and unambiguously  military . Classic treatments of civil-military relations, notably 
Huntington’s  The Soldier and the State: The Theory and Politics of Civil-Military 
Relations (1957), make a compelling case here. Practical, empirical treatments of this 
argument and doctrine provide evidence (Stepan 1971, 1988; Trinkunas 2005). The 
main question is whether eventual civilian control of the military is compromised 
when the military leads and then dominates in matters of internal security and eco-
nomic development (Goodman 1996). 5 

172  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 Theory of Professionalism 
 The hierarchical structure, the capacity to impose discipline, and the capacity to 
train effectively often make the armed forces the most professional organization 
in a specific developing country. The professionalism label is tricky, however. For 
many, being a military professional means doing your military job as well as pos-
sible. Getting involved in political, policy, and development issues is not in the job 
description. Involvement sullies one’s military professional reputation. 6 The theory of 
professionalism thus has two different interpretations, each having different implica-
tions for the role and activities of a nation’s armed forces. 
 The relationships between this theory and the previous one are close. A shared 
premise with doctrinal implications is that since the military is the most competent 
institution in a country, it has a professional duty to take on many more national 
responsibilities (Daalder 1962; Johnson 1962; Jones 1965). 7 Paradoxically, military 
competence enables and encourages them to go beyond what they know how to do. 
 To maintain a good military requires that the ports, airports, air traffic control, 
communications, and roads are in good working order and operate well. In Brazil, 
for instance, airports and air traffic control remain under military control, albeit not 
without issues and controversies (ABAG 2013). 8 Infrastructure is a military respon-
sibility—in theory, at least initially as a country develops. Again, as with airports in 
Brazil, responsibilities outside those only required to fight wars sometimes lead to 
problems. Building roads, bridges, sewers, and communications systems is certainly 
within the scope of military engineers and engineering (Johnson 1962). However, if 
these activities involve complex technological demands beyond the rudimentary ones 
that soldiers need to fight and defend a nation, problems of quality and effective-
ness are inevitable. Beyond competence overreach, huge temptations for corruption 
and personal gain cannot be overlooked. Overreach also occurs when military core 
competencies extend into entirely new kinds of economic activities. Building hotels, 
resorts, ecotourism, and other businesses are illustrative. 9 
 Keeping the military focused on its basic mission is a fundamental political respon-
sibility. Defining fundamental survival threats to the nation and ensuring that the 
military does not stray unnecessarily away from these is essential. 10 This is the basic 
motivation and glue that shapes and guides professional militaries everywhere. One 
version of this is an external threat to national sovereignty by foreign invaders. For 
global powers, especially in the Cold War era of Mutual Assured Destruction, a threat 
to survival was literally true. For many developing countries, focusing on threats 
is not so simple. It might be a border war with a neighbor: Ecuador, Colombia, 
Venezuela, and Peru, and perhaps several other neighbors each fit this pattern. It 
might be an internal revolutionary or guerilla threat. There are too many examples 
around the world. Often what passes for a mortal threat by one group or another 
may not pass muster with the military itself. Doing police work to combat drug traf-
ficking and gain generous US drug suppression money has been less appealing to the 
Colombian military than going after the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia 
(FARC) or National Liberation Army (ELN), where the threat to the nation was 
generally accepted and taken as a given (Jaskoski 2013, Chapter 7). Doing police 
work today turns out to be a different matter in Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala, 

Roles of the Military in Developing Countries  ●  173
Nicaragua, and Mexico, because the scale and violence of drug trafficking pose basic 
threats to these nations. 
 Sustaining a focus on the basic professional mission for a nation’s military is com-
plicated. Deviations and additions are referred to as “mission creep” (Wilson 2011). 
Mission creep is a theoretical and doctrinal quality shared by the military and NGOs 
(Siegel 1998) . 
 Theory of Beneficent Charity and Humanitarian Necessity 
 Natural and human-caused disasters often exceed the capabilities of civil authori-
ties. The manpower, professionalism, and organizational strength found in military 
organizations open opportunities for help. Other national institutions cannot com-
pete, especially if disasters and catastrophes increase in number, scope, and scale. 
Should climate change figure increasingly in natural disasters—as scientific consen-
sus warns—expect increased military as a matter of human necessity (Scheffran et al. 
2012; IPCC 2014). Beneficent charity is not subtle: do whatever is required with 
whatever resources are available to alleviate human suffering. The Ebola epidemic in 
Western Africa in 2014 is so severe that national and international military forces are 
being called into service in the absence of effective responses by national, regional, 
and international health organizations (Walt 2014, 32–37). 
 This theory and derived doctrines have mostly been successful in the post-WWII era. 
However, the dire circumstances in the immediate postwar are not the same as contem-
porary civil wars, famines, and other disasters, both natural and medical, in the develop-
ing world (Rana 2004). A main issue now is to gauge whether, how, and when to use 
military means, particularly to solve fundamental, long-term development needs.  
 Provision of tents to victims of an earthquake or hurricane often delayed recon-
struction and failed to address critical land issues. Construction of refugee camps 
for famine victims drew people away from their land, making agricultural recovery 
nearly impossible and creating an even larger relief requirement . . .  
 The military forces committed to these operations also continued to use the 
same modes and doctrines. Planes are used in ever-increasing instances to deliver 
food and supplies; engineers are still committed to building refugee camps. Yet 
there is increasing concern that these uses are not without costs. (Cuny 1989, 3) 
 Flying large amounts of food and medical supplies into airports capable of receiving 
transport aircrafts is a positive, but only if there are sufficient means to distribute the 
goods into more remote areas where they are needed. When there are no roads, it usu-
ally means finding expensive helicopters to do the job. Military aircrafts are not cheap 
and are often in short supply. Indigenous military forces in general are not all that 
well financed, with the result that paying the bills for military operations in humani-
tarian situations comes out of existing domestic, development, and humanitarian 
budgets (SIPRI 2008). This would not be as consequential except that indigenous 
military forces are more involved in humanitarian relief efforts than ever before. 11 
 Unfortunately, they are often ill-prepared for these responsibilities; the military doc-
trines they relied on are ill-suited to these nonmilitary emergency circumstances; and 

174  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
important details defining the disaster or emergency are seldom considered until boots 
hit the ground and operations become a trial-and-error, learn-by-doing experiment.  
 Theory of Universal Conscription 
 The core idea is that the military has a capability to educate and so to convey infor-
mation, skills, and a sense of political identity and acceptable political behavior. 
Universal conscription or other means to direct or induce service in the armed forces 
creates a national armed force and promotes national loyalty. 12 The military has com-
parative advantage over other institutions in educating, socializing, and controlling 
key demographic groups. Common means are training for skills such as reading, 
preparing for jobs in manufacturing and increasingly in services such as informa-
tion technology (IT), and doing all this by emphasizing order, discipline, and pro-
fessionalism. Developing nations lack advanced educational opportunities, so this 
theory and associated doctrines are rational and often effective. Loyalty and a sense 
of national identity are real, practical outcomes. For other nations, especially those 
relying on highly skilled and technically adept individuals to operate high-tech weap-
ons and systems, more than raw recruits are required. The rise of highly skilled and 
compensated professional armies and proliferation of private military contractors are 
illustrative (Schaub and Franke 2009). Some now realize that these trends run coun-
ter to the national loyalty goal embedded in the theory of conscription. Mercenaries 
are loyal to whoever pays them (Scahill 2007; Prince 2013). 13 
 The crucial importance of context is emphasized for universal conscription in 
Israel, which has evolved and adapted to the needs of a high-tech, information-based 
economy. 
 Each year, Israel’s military puts thousands of teenagers through technical courses, 
melds them into ready-made teams, and then graduates them into a country that 
 attracts more venture capital investment per person than any in the world . Military 
service in Israel is generally compulsory, lasting two or more years. Many would-be 
entrepreneurs apply to the IDF’s [Israeli Defense Force] computer training acad-
emy, known as Mamram [which] acts like a school for startups, teaching program-
ming and project management to cadets in olive-green uniforms. Young hackers 
with proven skills get recruited by specialized intelligence units such as Matzov, 
the army’s cybersecurity division, or units involved in signals intelligence and 
eavesdropping. (Kalman 2013; emphasis added) 
 Israel now has one of the largest concentrations of big-data engineers and analysts in 
the world and is creating and spinning off high-tech start-ups at a phenomenal rate. 
Nevertheless, Israel’s lauded national service has also run afoul of a growing number 
of ultra-conservative religious groups that resist military service entirely. The social-
ization goal of the theory of conscription has evolved in the case of IT and high-tech 
and created domestic conflict in the case of the ultra-orthodox. 
 The specter of mission creep emerges as unbounded lengths of service create 
demands for those in uniform to be involved in different activities than just being a 

Roles of the Military in Developing Countries  ●  175
soldier and defending the country. The People’s Liberation Army (PLA) in China is 
a monumental example of this problem. 
 Structuring means to end military service exist, but do not always succeed. For 
instance, the US military and others modeled on it have clear rules for promotion 
that feature up-or-out options. Steep pyramids to attain top leadership positions are 
coupled with exit and retirement expectations at the end of mandatory service for 
constripted soldiers (one to two years), or for an enlistment (typically three to five 
years) in the first instance and in the second, retirement case, for a fixed period of 
time, typically 20 or 30 years. 
 Theory of Corporatism 
 This theory divides and organizes different functional groups and categories so that 
they are made subordinate to the state. Groups could include business, labor, agri-
culture, military, intellectual/scientific, and other defined interests. Corporate in this 
theory does not solely refer to business corporations; rather it refers to the society as 
a whole body composed of many different, connected, and essential parts. In this 
version, the role of the state is to create conditions that ensure the success of the body 
by maintaining a healthy balance among the essential parts ( Encyclopedia Britannica 
2014). Another source, related directly to our topic of military and development 
(especially in Latin America), summarizes corporatism in terms of structures, subsi-
dies, and controls that a state provides to each constituent group:
 A system of interest representation is defined as corporative to the extent that it 
is characterized by a pattern of state  structuring of representation that produces 
a system of officially sanctioned, noncompetitive interest associations which are 
organized into legally prescribed functional groupings; to the extent that these 
associations are  subsidized  by the state; and to the extent that there is explicit state 
 control over the leadership, demand-making, and internal governance of these 
associations. (Collier and Collier 1977, 493) 
 The theory has had many different manifestations over the years, and, unsurprisingly, 
it has also had varied rationales, interpretations, and practical outcomes. Italy under 
the Fascist Mussolini is commonly noted as a modern illustration of corporatism—
one that obviously did not turn out well. Other European examples post-WWII are 
sometimes identified as Austria, Norway, and Sweden, all of which took aspects of 
the theory to structure, subsidize, and ultimately control conflicts between business 
and labor in the interest of economic development. These experiences turned out 
rather well. 
 In the developing world, corporatism’s notable practical examples are primarily found 
in Latin America, but here too the lessons to be learned about the utility of the theory 
with respect to military involvement in development are at best mixed and at worst 
fraught. 14 In the absence of stable state institutions, the maintenance of control required 
by corporatism resulted in extreme volatility, with a long list of military takeovers, nota-
bly in the 1964 through 1973, for example, Argentina, Peru, Panama, Ecuador, Bolivia, 
Uruguay, and Chile (Chalmers 1977), but continuing into even recent times. 15  

176  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 During the Cold War, a National Security Doctrine provided a rationale to con-
sider the military as  the central state institution. Internal threats to national security 
were often tied to problems of underdevelopment and so enabled the military to 
force whatever government was in power to provide conditions for development. 
This simplistic idea typically justified repression of internal enemies and simultane-
ously revealed military ineptitude along a broad development front. 16 
 While each nation’s experiences differ in detail, a common practical outcome of 
authoritarian military involvement has often been a slowing or constraining of over-
all potential development performance. Political instability does not readily attract 
investments for the long term, especially from foreign sources. Military control of 
state instruments of power and productivity likewise has a poor record of achieving 
economic gains over meaningful periods of time. Soldiers are not the same as business 
people, something we take up in more detail next. 
 As relevant as total economic performance or its lack, equitable distribution of a 
nation’s economic bounty is also problematic and challenging, no matter who is in 
overall control. Again, the Latin American experiences with authoritarian military 
leadership are not encouraging. When the military controls the state and when politi-
cal institutions are nonexistent, volatile, or unreliable, the theory of corporatism and 
its sundry doctrines and practices related to development have been disappointing 
at be st. 
 Theory of Enterprise 
 Considering rationales for military involvement, it is no surprise that militaries in 
developing countries are often active in economic enterprises, too. 
 Different motivations and opportunities justify and explain why the military gets 
into business. Sometimes it is the most competent institution in a country and so 
does business almost by default. The military may find itself in charge of or owning 
valuable lands, precious minerals, oil and natural gas access and rights, or other prof-
itable commodities that can be turned into businesses. Sometimes making money 
is rooted in fears that an impoverished nation will not be able to provide sufficient 
funds (from the perspective of the military) to support defense requirements ade-
quately. Whatever the country specifics, the military’s ability to defend the nation is 
often put at risk by avaricious military businessmen. Corruption, mismanagement, 
lessened military professionalism and capabilities, and other symptoms are evident, 
as we shall see in the following vignettes. 17 
 Egypt 
 No one knows how much of Egypt’s economy the army controls. Guesstimates range 
from 10 percent ( The Economist 2011; Stier 2011) to more than 40 percent or even 
60 percent (Tadros 2012; Hauslohner 2014). The diversity of businesses controlled 
by the military is quite stunning: cement, olive oil, household appliances, pest con-
trol, catering, child care, tourism, job placement for military retirees, flatscreen 
televisions, gas stations, technology projects, land on which they have built resorts, 
ports, and housing complexes, tax breaks and other privileges, including the use of 

Roles of the Military in Developing Countries  ●  177
conscript labor. Hauslohner (2014) reports that former President Morsi government 
was about to negotiate with “Qatar over development of the [Suez] canal zone in 
a way that didn’t directly involve the military . . . Anti-brotherhood media quickly 
howled that Morsi was ‘selling’ the canal to a foreign country. Sisi portrayed it as a 
national security decision.” 
 The special circumstances created by the multibillion-dollar annual aid payment 
the United States sends to Egypt for military equipment confound the corporate pic-
ture—for Egypt and also for US military arms producers such as Lockheed Martin, 
Boeing, and General Dynamics for aircraft, tanks, missiles, guns, and a full range 
of weapons (Valente 2011). Justification of the military’s dominance in the econ-
omy was “because it helped ensure regime stability and security,” at least until Tahrir 
Square when it no longer did ( The Economist 201 1). 
 Pakistan 
 Ayesha Siddiqa (2007) claims that the army controlled at least $15 billion of Pakistan’s 
economy in 2007. Her book,  The Military, Inc.: Inside Pakistan’s Military Economy , 
was a sensational expos é whose implications reverberate to this day. Others have pur-
sued her lead. Najad Abdullahi (2008) suggests that the total may have been $20 
billion or more. Evidence and precise data are hard to come by, but nothing suggests 
that this dominance is any less in 2014. It is likely to be even higher ( The Economist 
2011). 
 The military is everywhere, including serving officers, retired ones, and those in 
charge of various foundations and pension funds that the military controls (Abdullahi 
2008; Khan 2012). Claims and rationalizations of the military’s superior managerial 
and administrative capabilities abound, based on its cultural and professional ties 
to the British military and colonial civil services. Hopeful arguments based on the 
indisputable economic successes of the PLA are also deployed. 
 Actual lackluster performance of the Pakistani military in a wide array of true 
business activities calls this myth into question. The early hope for military control of 
the economy was grounded on its good performance meeting IMF structural require-
ments in 1999–2000 and 2005–2006 periods. Satisfying the IMF and running a suc-
cessful business are not the same thing, as the subsequent penetration of the military 
into so many parts of Pakistan’s economy reveals (Khan 2007, 2012). 
 Many military businesses exist and depend heavily on hefty public subsidies—
often sourced out of legitimate development line items and public sector budgets. 
“[P]rivate sector activities are more complex and require more than military training 
which could be accounting for the high failure rate of the military’s venture into 
economic activities. There is no compelling case to support the military’s venture in 
private sector activity” (Khan 2012, 6). As the military took on more political power, 
especially after 1990, it controlled more and more of civil (especially economic) life 
in Pakistan. At some point, the common, public interest was overtaken by the nar-
rower and personal one of sustaining and enhancing the military for that institu-
tion’s own sake (Siddiqa 2007, Chapters 1, 4; Khan 2012). Civilian control of the 
military has fared poorly over the years—most recently in the case of current Prime 
Minister Sharif, despite his strong election victory in 2013 ( The Economist 2014a). 

178  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
The greatest, consistent problem according to two recent critiques “is an army (and 
its spies) with too much power and no accountability” ( The Economist 2014c, 78, 
reviewing Jalal 2014 and Fair 2014). 
 China 
 What is sometimes called the “Beijing Consensus” summarizes in a simple label what 
has been in fact a monumental, complex, and long-running process for economic 
development. The process is founded on a strong military basis and has used, even 
depended on, the military to operate the key economic elements and drivers (Cheung 
2001). Almost as remarkable as the story of economic success is the subsequent tale 
of political assertion and restoration of control over the military—primarily because 
of widespread corruption, fears about compromised force readiness, and concerns 
that an independent and self-funded PLA could lead to decreased loyalty to the 
Communist Party (Goodman 1996; Kwong 1997; Busch 2008). 
 The full story of how the PLA got into business is fairly complicated, but the basic 
impetus can be summarized. 
 Between 1978 and 1998, the Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA) underwent 
a dramatic transformation. Faced with the contradictory forces of a declining 
military budget and pressures to modernize at the end of the Mao era, the army 
reluctantly agreed to join the Chinese economic reform drive. It converted and 
expanded its existing military economy to market-oriented civilian production, 
in the hope that the resulting profits could replace lost expenditures and help 
to finance the long-needed modernization of weaponry and forces. (Mulvenon 
1999, 2)  
 The Chinese military’s efforts to generate cash to sustain and improve the military 
post Mao (1976–1980) resulted in numerous, small, out-of-the-way, and out-of-
sight businesses making military equipment for the PLA’s own use (Goodman 1994; 
Goodman, Segal, and Yang 1996). The military soon realized that basic military 
equipment was a marketable commodity around the world and so started exporting 
it and making money (Bickford 1994, 1999; Welker 1997, 3). 18 Profits from these 
exports financed many more and different businesses. No one planned this, and no 
one could have imagined how everything would eventually shake out in the next 
decade or two. Simply stated: PLA businesses generated a transformative industrial 
revolution and succeeded in lifting millions of Chinese out of poverty. 
 The mysterious nature and array of these businesses did not get noticed in the early 
years—certainly not by Western businesses, markets, or governments and probably 
not even by the central Chinese leadership. At some point the political leaders did 
notice and were not entirely pleased by what they saw (Solomone 1995). The central 
political leadership did support various small successes. It also ordered the creation 
of joint companies, conglomerates meant to consolidate and rationalize management 
and supply chains and so improve control and overall efficiency (Mulvenon 1999, 
9–11). 19 Many of the companies employed retired PLA officers in top corporate 

Roles of the Military in Developing Countries  ●  179
positions. The political leaders also regionalized and then globalized these growing 
enterprises with listings on exchanges—primarily in Hong Kong where transparency 
and disclosure rules are slack; joint ventures and partnerships; and the casting off of 
subsidiaries around the world. Securing financial access in the markets was supple-
mented by the acquisition of holding companies in strategic international tax havens 
(Welker 1997). 20 The businesses insinuate themselves into different markets in dif-
ferent ways, and keeping score here has taken on huge importance for intelligence 
agencies ev erywhere. 21 
 The penetration of Chinese firms that control ports is particularly impressive. 
Controlling ports worldwide is the business of Hutchison-Whampoa and Hutchison 
Port Holdings (HPH), which is itself controlled by Cheung Kong Holdings in Hong 
Kong. It seemed innocent enough in the 1980s when operations were mainly con-
fined to Hong Kong and several other ports in the region. But now HPH controls 
more than 136 important ports around the world, which makes it the world’s largest 
seaport operator. Significant among all its port operations is the Panama Canal, over 
which it has an exclusive contract (Busch 2008; Hutchison Port Holdings 2014). 
 The divestiture and reform of the PLA’s businesses was complicated and chal-
lenging. A slow-motion competition for dominance occurred between military and 
civilian/political factions. It also took nearly a decade. There is evidence of sustaining 
attention to this day, especially the vigilant rooting out of military/business corrup-
tion (Mulvenon 1998; Mayama 2000; Mulvenon 2001a, 2001b; Buckley 2014). It 
is an amazing accomplishment that may not be replicable—especially in countries 
where countervailing political power and authority does not exist to challenge kha-
ki-clad capitalists. This is a cautionary note for countries seeking development by 
embracing the Beijing Consensus. 
 The military’s role in China’s development could not have been forecast, much 
less imagined beforehand. It happened as the military struggled to keep itself on an 
even financial keel in an era of economic upheaval. Domestic economic successes and 
benefits of the military’s involvement in the economy were not planned, although the 
results are appreciated and have been leveraged for other purposes. China and the rest 
of the world must now learn to live with the consequences. 
 Indonesia 
 In a world accustomed to the economic promise of the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, 
China, South Africa), it is unlikely to highlight Indonesia as being at least as inter-
esting. For one reason or another, Brazil, India, and South Africa have faltered since 
2001 when Goldman Sachs coined the term BRICS. 22 The last four or five years have 
been especially problematic. Each of these countries promises to be “the development 
miracle of the future” for what now seems like a long time. Russia is a different case 
and depends on oil and gas and a declining and aging population, neither of which 
can possibly last—not for long and certainly not forever. The military’s role in all of 
the BRICS, save China, is negligible to modest—even in Russia despite Vladimir 
Putin’s favoring of it in recent years. Indonesia is a surprisingly different case and 
proposition, as summarized by Abdul-Latif Halimi (2014):

180  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
  Indonesia has achieved a 5.4 percent average annual growth since 2001 and sus-
tained only a slight impact after the 2008/09 global recession. Its economy ranked 
27th in the world in 2001; today it is 16th. The Asian Development Bank forecast 
for 2030 places Indonesia at 7th largest, which is larger than both Germany and the 
United Kingdom. Citibank estimates that Indonesia could rank 4th in the world 
as soon as 2040. Only the U.S., China, and India will be larger. Government debt 
has fallen from 95 percent of GDP in 2000 to just 26 percent in 2014. Fitch and 
Moody’s granted Indonesia investment grade status in 2013. Indonesia’s strategic 
importance in Southeast Asia is growing, especially with the ascendance of China 
and the U.S. “rebalance” to Asia and Southeast Asia in particular. 
 The role of the military has been central since the end of WWII, and not always 
beneficial for economic development. The long-standing involvement of the military 
in nearly all sectors of the economy began under the reign of Suharto with investiture 
in government and state-owned corporations. It persists there and continues to show 
up in various military-controlled foundations “which operate businesses in the finan-
cial sector, travel industry, manufacturing and resource extraction. These foundations 
fund, in part, the underfunded military” (Beeson 2008). Military involvement in 
Indonesia’s vast natural resource sector has been extensive and challenging for many 
years (Ascher 1998; Mishra 2014). Problems with corruption persist well beyond 
the natural resource sector. A growing trade deficit, unsustainable fuel subsidies, 
inadequate infrastructure, poverty, and widening inequity between haves and have-
nots all demand attention and solution (Cochrane 2014;  Christian Science Monitor 
2014). Despite all the rosy economic forecasts, resolving and coming to terms with 
a fundamental change in national leadership in the form of populist President Joko 
Widodo—at the same time as a lingering list of basic problems beg for attention 
and solution—will test mightily the balance between civil and military sectors in 
Indonesia ( Christian Science Monitor 2014) . 
 Theory of Economic Stimulus 
 The influence of the military may be a positive economic factor if government expen-
ditures increase demand for military goods and services and create a multiplier effect 
for consumer spending. Employing armed forces removes pressure on the civilian 
labor market—especially that from the young, poorly educated, and unskilled—
while providing education and basic skills for subsequent deployment in civilian 
life. 23 Military expenditures for research and development sometimes benefit the 
civilian economy, for example, the internet, GPS, radar, nuclear power. Government 
expenditures contribute to a nation’s economy, but how  military expenditures specifi-
cally contribute, particularly in different settings and circumstances, is often hard to 
figure out. 
 Government expenditures are frequently assumed equal in their effects. Actually 
they take many different forms, and few of these are meant to maximize simple 
financial returns on investment. There is the unresolved question of what multiplier 
to assign to different expenditures (de Rugy 2012). Most assume that weapons are 
less useful for development than many other public investments are. 

Roles of the Military in Developing Countries  ●  181
 The theory of economic stimulation was formulated on 1930s’ Depression-era 
experiences of developed countries, not of countries desperately seeking a way out 
of poverty (Benoit 1968, 1973). The perspective of five great powers from 1870 to 
1939 is not clear about what military expenditures contributed to economic growth. 
Germany, France, Russia, Japan, and the United States invested in their militaries, but 
the longer term economic effects for each were not the same. Often military spending 
is fear-motivated and forecloses other growth opportunities (Castillo et al. 2001). 
 Likewise, military spending in advanced countries features state-of-the-art tech-
nologies and manufacturing processes and so creates outcomes for an economy dif-
ferent than arms transfers to poor countries might (Looney 1989; Graham 1994). 
Even among somewhat similar developing countries (e.g., Egypt, Israel, Syria), evi-
dence relating military investment to economic growth is inconsistent (Abu-Bader 
and Abu-Qarn 2003). Military spending has opportunity costs, especially when basic 
health, education, and social needs are neglected to favor military priorities (UNICEF 
1996). Military expenditures expand opportunities for corruption. Reservoirs of cash 
pose temptations, whether these are directed to military projects or toward businesses 
that the military controls (Mauro 1995; Gupta, De Mello, and Sharan 2001). 
 External versus Internal Theories 
 The seven theories roughly fall into two distinctive categories and ways of think-
ing about and using the military in development. The division emphasizes different 
perspectives, either external or internal, and reliance on force, either coercive or non-
coercive.  External/Coercive perspectives include theories of weak civilian capacity and 
corporatism.  Internal/Noncoercive perspectives include theories of beneficent char-
ity/humanitarian necessity, universal conscription, and enterprise. Professionalism, 
for reasons earlier mentioned, seems to straddle the basic divide between External/
Internal and Coercive/Noncoercive. 
 Key Considerations and Conditioning Factors 
 Considerations and conditioning factors focus attention on activities and processes 
within the context of a problem that will likely influence subsequent outcomes and 
events. Which of these will matter and by how much is not predictable. Military 
involvement in the development of a society is dynamic and at times volatile. 
Historical trends in civil-military relations are seldom purely good or clearly harm-
ful to the larger objectives of a society’s development. There is no best military case 
or pathway to development success. Context matters, as any close examination of 
specific cases since WWII will attest. Nevertheless, several key considerations, con-
ditioning factors, and questions are identifiable and may provide guidance to future 
evolutionary p athways. 
 Down-Shifting and Right-Sizing 
 Getting the military back in the barracks and out of politics and business has, as 
illustrated previously in this chapter, long been essential for development to occur. 

182  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
Reducing a nation’s military after guerrilla, civil, or border wars, when full-scale 
mobilization is no longer necessary, is a related but different objective. Demobilized 
soldiers (and their former guerilla enemies) need opportunities rare in the developing 
world. Wealthy countries provide ideas for what might work however: grants for job 
retraining, low-cost loans to start businesses, aid for education, and subsidized home 
loans and medical insurance are indicative. 
 Down-shifting from active military status into the national guard, to the reserves, 
or into retirement is not simple or attractive (De la Rosa 2007). Assurances about 
continuing credit toward retirement, pay for refresher training and other days on 
duty, promotions while in guard or reserve status, and several other practices should 
be considered to ease these transitions and maintain political control while provid-
ing human capital and resources for development. Civilian jobs taking advantage of 
military skills such as logistics and civil engineering (for shipping, transport, airlines, 
and construction infrastructure) could provide preferential treatment to outgoing 
service personnel. 
 Conscripted forces differ from more professional and long-serving forces. 
Conscripts provide a labor force buffer in times of economic downturn. Keeping 
them in the military employs them. It also offers educational and training oppor-
tunities before they return to civilian life. Conditions therefore occur when holding 
military members in service may help basic economic conditions improve. 
 The officer corps in many developing countries also needs incentives to relinquish 
power to political and civilian authorities. Many countries exhibit long-standing 
cultural and class identifications with the military as a profession. Often middle-
class officers and their offspring are directed to military academies and subsequent 
military leadership positions. Legacies routinely persist over generations. Experiences 
and exposures are narrow and mostly limited to military and professional subjects 
and skills. Many developing countries should explore chances to broaden experi-
ences beyond conventional military experiences and so create careers in the national 
guard, reserves, and retirement or second careers in civilian life. The Internal and 
Noncoercive theories previously characterized contain constructive suggestions for 
means to succeed here. At a minimum, military leaders need to know they will con-
tinue to receive pay and benefits and that the military will not be emasculated in a 
country’s transition to a right size for its national forces. This point is demonstrated 
by the contrast between Chile post-Pinochet and the former Soviet Union post-1989. 
The Chilean armed forces transitioned gradually and continued to receive respect 
and resources. The Soviet collapse was humiliating to its military and helps one 
understand its current support for Putin’s efforts on its behalf. 
 Professionalization 
 Educational opportunities for servicemen and women matter for current levels of 
professionalization and to shore up future development capacities. Are there recruit-
ment and educational opportunities for a domestic officer corps? Does the officer 
corps benefit from advanced professional education at home? To what extent is mili-
tary education provided outside the country and in various professional subjects that 
contribute to development? American, Russian, Chinese, and different European 

Roles of the Military in Developing Countries  ●  183
countries have provided such opportunities since WWII, so the issue is whether a 
country takes advantage. But does it? 
 Prevalent military careers and expectations are important. Lacking regular promo-
tional pathways, with objective and fair criteria for evaluation, military organizations 
often become ends and means in themselves rather than ways and means to defend a 
nation or protect its sovereignty. 
 Mission Creep 
 Mission creep occurs when basic military objectives open up and give way to civilian, 
humanitarian, nation-building objectives (Siegel 1998). The melding and blurring of 
military with other different missions have long been with us, as Huntington (1957) 
pointed out more than a half century ago distinguishing between core security and 
peripheral management goals and objectives. Mission creep is traditionally regarded 
as an unwanted and harmful diversion from the military’s fundamental purpose of 
national defense (Janowitz 1964). However, it may now be time to reconsider what 
constitutes defending the nation for many developing countries and regions around 
the world. 
 If climate change continues on tracks the scientific community foresees, genu-
ine security threats to nations will become common. Defending the nation in the 
future is likely to mean protecting it and its citizens from environmental challenges 
of enormous potential and shocking consequences. Similarly, recent experiences deal-
ing with the Ebola virus in West Africa have so overpowered existing health institu-
tions that military forces from several nations have been employed and justified with 
threats to national and regional security (Gettleman 2014). 
 If population growth and wholesale displacements of populations increase, 
then the already large number of 50 million refugees worldwide will grow larger 
(Kimmelman 2014, A-8). 24 Some of these displacements will be voluntary, as for vast 
movements of rural populations for economic reasons to existing and newly made 
urban areas. 25 Other displacements will not be voluntary, but will result from wars 
and other conflicts. Syria provides awful evidence of this sort, and the US border 
with Mexico illustrates the former. 26 Whichever stimulant, protecting and supervis-
ing large numbers of displaced people will require traditional military skills and capa-
bilities. Also required are creative and innovative thoughts and actions well beyond 
guns and tanks to reduce human suffering on this grand scale. Mission creep under 
the circumstances becomes essential. 
 Political Institutions and Public Administration 
 The civil-military equation indicates who controls decision-making power, but also 
how this power is deployed. Civil service and administration, when professional-
ized and competent, serves as a countervailing force to the military—especially as 
the latter intrudes into economic or other management roles and functions. The 
existence of national police and border protection forces as parts of a comprehensive 
civil service could be decisive, as the experience of Costa Rica demonstrates (Barash 
2013). 27 

184  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 Classic public administration theories, doctrines, and practices emphasize the 
importance, even centrality of bureaucracy as a means to achieve development. 
 [E]conomic, social, educational, political changes emerge in large measure as the 
result of direct governmental intervention. Whereas much of the Western world 
developed with relatively little direct intervention by the “public sector,” this his-
tory clearly will not repeat itself. For reasons that range from economic necessity 
to ideological rigidity, the developing nations insist that  government—particularly 
the bureaucracy—should play a major, even exclusive, role in effecting the changes 
that are sought. (LaPalombara 1967, ix) 
 The development role of the military during the 1945–1990 period was commonly 
 conceived, based largely on its professionalism, as just another bureaucracy (LaPalombara 
1967, 502–503). 
 The competence, professionalism, and defender of democracy themes noted ear-
lier were generally presumed to guide and limit military excesses and self-dealing 
(Janowitz 1960; Johnson 1962). These presumptions routinely proved to be mis-
guided, as did those that treated the military as “just another kind of bureaucracy.” 
It is not. 
 Control and Ownership of Business 
 A great deal has happened soon after WWII. Myriad patterns and pathways have 
developed and evolved with respect to military activities in different national econo-
mies. Asking what these patterns are and how they evolved is essential. Dominance 
of the military illuminates the total development experience in Egypt, Burma, China, 
and Indonesia in fundamentally different ways than it does where the control and 
ownership of business have been more widely distributed and shared among private 
and public entities. Transitions from predominantly military control of business to 
a more balanced array, as in Chile, are special cases to probe and understand. What 
prompted relinquishment from military to civil control? Can parallel conditions be 
constructed in other countries to accomplish these ends? 
 Chile has since 1976 dedicated 10 percent of the gross revenue from the copper 
industry to its military as a means to ensure steady financial support to the armed 
forces while keeping them from having direct, hands-on control of the industry. This 
arrangement has been challenged, unsuccessfully, by Chilean presidents since the 
first Bachelet term in office. It was being challenged more forcefully in 2014. 28 The 
Chinese experience provides a different story, but one that also features a strong mili-
tary presence in business and the economy being challenged effectively by powerful 
political interests (Marquand 2014;  The Economist 2014b). The Egyptian experience 
of seeking a balance between military and civilian control of business is yet another 
story altogether with an unforeseeable ending. 
 These considerations and conditioning factors are selective of the numerous possi-
bilities. Nonetheless, each of them—alone and in different combinations—will likely 
help shape and direct events in the coming era. 

Roles of the Military in Developing Countries  ●  185
 Exploring the Next Era of the Military’s Involvement in Development 
 The military’s development roles in coming years will continue on many traditional 
pathways. Business as Usual is likely to dominate. Great variability in performance 
will also persist from country to country and between different regions around the 
world, as has been the case since WWII. However, several large and significant factors 
in the coming years set the stage for and necessitate major changes.  Natural events 
related to climate change and public health emergencies,  natural resource competitions , 
especially those having serious ecological consequences, and  burgeoning populations , 
especially in cities, will combine and challenge in coming decades. Militaries around 
the world are beginning to respond, but only tentatively and with less effectiveness 
than what will be demanded of them. 
 International Rapid Response/Humanitarian Disasters 
 Possibilities following abrupt climate change have captured scientific attention since 
at least 2002 (National Research Council 2002). More recent studies refine the 
underlying science and focus usefully on implications flowing from it (Gillis 2013; 
Kerr 2013; Parker 2015). At the moment, general catastrophic, doomsday predic-
tions are not supported by scientific consensus. Specific concern for Most Vulnerable 
Countries, usually specified as those with low-lying coasts, is a present and grow-
ing scientific concern (Barbier 2014; IPCC 2014). Military involvement in disaster 
recovery, such as Haiyan in the Philippines, Sandy in the greater New York/New 
Jersey area, and Katrina, Mitch, and Joan in the Gulf of Mexico, all provide impor-
tant lessons about humanitarian responses involving the military and many other 
organizations. Lessons being learned in a cascade of natural disasters in recent years 
will eventually refine a bill of particular responsibilities. 29 
 High on this list is something called “a global emergency task force” that can supply 
communications, control, and logistical support. It “must be the ‘commandos’ of any 
international relief operation” (Scheffran et al. 2012; Barbier 2014, 1250). The mili-
tary reference is telling and squares well with our own assessment in the NGO chapter 
for Rapid Response. In both, drawing the military more directly and constructively 
into humanitarian and disaster relief activities is urged. A useful turn to a regional 
focus for dedicated task forces, for example, Latin America, Asia, or Africa, helps align 
recovery efforts with specific geographic and social cultural realities. It also links recov-
ery efforts better with existing development banks and related funding sources. 
 Reimagining and then recasting military forces in developing countries for larger 
and more sophisticated roles potentially benefit them, especially when budget cuts 
and reduced strategic threats force downsizing. Assisting disaster relief can improve 
the armed services’ image if they are properly trained and behave appropriately. It 
also provides training opportunities with respect to infrastructure repairs, medical 
operations, logistical support, and command and control. Achieving these benefits 
depends on careful planning and respectful integration of the military with other 
civilian organizations (Hofmann and Hudson 2009; Svoboda 2014). 
 The number, scale, and devastation of natural disasters call for extraordinary mea-
sures in response. War-like images abound in the aftermath of typhoons, hurricanes, 

186  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
floods, Tsunamis, forest fires, droughts, earthquakes, volcanoes, and other disasters. 
Increasing concerns about human health threats on a large scale present similarly 
huge challenges to conventional organizations (Walt 2014). The war-like images are 
reinforced by the presence of regular military forces bringing their own talents and 
resources to bear for humanitarian objectives. Good and humane intentions aside, 
the blending of military and humanitarian cultures, people, and organizations is sel-
dom easily done. 
 Natural Resource Competitions 
 The resource-seeking and energy-providing activities identified earlier as coming to 
prominence at the end of Era 4 will continue and increase around the world. Add 
to these a third element of food security and production and a full array of natural 
resource possibilities emerges to engage and require military, paramilitary, and other 
security forces. 
 Inventories of national resource assets to establish baseline inventories will create 
demands for satellite monitoring, remote sensing, and other large-scale data-collect-
ing and handling activities within the scope of many existing militaries’ capabilities. 
Real-time monitoring of national resource assets provides important intelligence on 
resource use, both legal and illegal. Protecting and managing forests, wilderness areas, 
and offshore oil, gas, and minerals create opportunities for military involvement, 
preferably by designated and properly oriented units such as coast guards, engineer-
ing battalions, drug enforcement and border patrols. For countries providing energy 
for world markets, the protection of development and production facilities as well 
as pipelines, ports, and other transport means will likely increase in coming years 
as many of these resources become more valuable and in demand. The logistical 
strengths of services along with their C 3 I (communications, command, control, and 
intelligence) abilities all have potential uses in managing resource competitions. 
 Food production and security means protecting lands and crops as well as feed-
ing people. As world population increases, disproportionately so in the developing 
countries, feeding populations will probably increase in importance—translating 
into more demand for monitoring and protective services, including protections for 
intact ecosystems to sustain them. 
 Each natural resource competition offers many opportunities to link military 
training, skills, and experiences to appropriate nonmilitary needs and careers hav-
ing distinct security implications. Down-shifting and right-sizing the military to 
transition away from destructive and into constructive roles comes into play here. 
Considerable creativity is called for to identify, align, and link these opportunities—
starting with education and training within the armed forces themselves. 
 Population—A City Focus 
 Cities are increasing in number and size around the world (as discussed in  chapter 6 ). 
Vast deficiencies in providing urban infrastructure exist and are growing worse. Roads, 
bridges, transport, water, sewers, electricity, information (fiber optic, internet), pub-
lic health, education, and many other kinds of infrastructure are inadequate. 

Roles of the Military in Developing Countries  ●  187
 The sheer size of mega-cities creates specific needs for crowd management and 
control that outstrip conventional means, for example, traffic congestion of epic pro-
portions. Size combined with modern social media presents a different management 
and control imperative to political leaders, as demonstrated in Cairo, Hong Kong, 
and even New York (Occupy Wall Street). 
 Down-shifting and right-sizing come into play again in seeking links between spe-
cific needs of urban populations with existing and potential training, skills, and expe-
riences found in the military. Specific attention could be directed to veteran affairs 
organizations to develop adaptive retraining and education programs to enhance 
these links. The potential of large-scale, even super-networks to connect retraining 
and education to different civilian jobs is intriguing, as is the prospect of plugging 
into internet-based training and education opportunities anywhere in the world. 
 Mitigating any of these deficiencies goes well beyond the capacity of any one 
institution, even a robust military. Many institutions and many more resources will 
be needed to improve matters to open more prospects for development. Securing and 
sustaining a balance between political, economic, and military interests and capa-
bilities becomes more important as the complexity and stakes in development all 
increase. 

 CHAPTER 10 
 Complementarity of Security and 
Development Doctrines: Historical 
Cases and Aftermaths  
 A
s seen in  chapter 9 , the roles of the armed forces within developing countries 
are often heavily influenced by their interactions with governments and with 
the armed forces of other countries.  Chapters 7 and  8 demonstrate that these 
relationships are even more complicated when foreign assistance is entwined with 
security initiatives. This chapter examines these complications through US assistance 
in three of its most difficult development and security challenges: Korea, Vietnam, 
and Chile. We also explore the aftermath of these and the more nuanced security 
development balance applied to today’s Venezuela as the closest Latin American par-
allel to Chile in the 1960s and 1970s. Thus, combined with the governance progress 
made in Korea and Chile, in part attributable to development policy, this chapter 
demonstrates that the tensions between security and development imperatives can be 
mitigated in the current, less ideological context. 
 When USAID was created in 1961, in the throes of the Cold War that would 
continue for 30 years, the overriding doctrine guiding US bilateral aid was simply 
stability and security. 1 This objective turned out to be elusive. The prevailing mod-
ernization theory (see  chapters 3 and  5 ) appeared sound enough. Rostow’s 1960 
noncommunist manifesto was a refutation of revolutionary socialism and an account 
of development as a guided series of steps leading gradually to prosperity and there-
fore to democracy, as long as certain decisions and leadership capacity prevailed. 
In this view, the first and most important task for donor countries like the United 
States—before economic growth, literacy, or mass communications—was to stabilize 
government and make the state secure. If this could be accomplished, at the “end 
of the road” people would be “well fed, well educated, and well provided for with 
consumer goods, medical care, and social security” (Black 1967, 148). The intended 
outcomes were straightforward: economic aid would increase agricultural and indus-
trial productivity, build desperately needed physical infrastructure, improve health 

190  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
and educational services, and produce a new managerial and civil service elite ideally 
educated in the United States. Large capital investments across all sectors of society 
would create the necessary balance between economic development and cultural and 
political stability, an important precondition for peaceful, functioning democracies. 
Stable government was essential to economic growth, but so too was a stable economy 
to the development of good governance, itself a vital ingredient to successful aid pro-
grams. Economic growth and political stability would create the conditions for a new 
prosperity by removing the causes of radical social revolution—a discontented work-
ing class, systemic inequalities, and corrupt, unresponsive politicians—and clearing 
the path to greater foreign private investment, the traditional barometer of successful 
development (Rostow 1956, 1960). A flexible balance of good government, foreign 
aid, and either direct or indirect military assistance would need to prevail, however, 
in countries, such as Chile and Vietnam, where conditions fueling civil unrest and 
encouraging local insurgence seemed intractable. Economic aid linked to social and 
political reform and backed by the use or threat of military force, whether overt as 
in Vietnam or covert as in Chile, was, according to Cold War policymakers, the best 
antidote to violent revolution. 
 By the end of the 1960s, however, many writers on the right  and the left began 
to question that peace and development were so entwined. Economic development 
might be an “inherently self-destroying process for the large group of countries 
recently emerged from colonial status” (Muscat 2002, 106, 110). Another argument, 
that communist-backed “wars of national liberation” would envelop the developing 
world and destroy free institutions, 2 was also prominent, although free institutions 
were hardly prevalent. Their notable absence was the primary reason for stressing 
the political development of countries scheduled to receive US aid. 3 But political 
change did not necessarily equate to democratization. Where efficient and effective 
participatory democracy was absent, historically untenable, or too weak to make a 
difference, political change often aimed at establishing security and stability  at the 
expense of  democracy. In Latin America the nightmare scenario for US policymak-
ers was not military government, which had often been turned to US objectives, 
but “intervention from outside the hemisphere by the international communist con-
spiracy” (Patterson 1989, 115–116). However much to be desired, democracy and 
constitutionalism were pipedreams where democratic governments could not stand 
up against communist insurgents. 
 As Pye observed in an early memorandum to USAID, “If we go beyond the notion 
of democracy in searching for the basis of political development, we are likely to note 
that development is often associated with the concept of stability . . . stable political 
systems are assumed to be more developed than unstable ones” (1960, 6–7). The 
need for capacity building in countries having better law and order and the ability to 
manage a crisis was regarded as of greater practical importance than unrealistic efforts 
to install democratic regimes. Going back to Truman’s Point Four program, the goal 
of US foreign policy, for Pye and others, was the achievement of “orderly social pro-
cesses,” democratic or otherwise (Kaplan 1950, 55). The political realism behind the 
containment doctrine dictated prudence in the face of “the actual facts and their con-
sequences,” a preference for limited action that would minimize risk and maximize 
benefit and achieve “interest defined as power” (Morgenthau 1978, 4–5). 

Security and Development Doctrines  ●  191
 While Pye questioned whether it would be possible to know how to change social 
structures or value systems, USAID leaders and Kennedy’s foreign policy circle were 
not so dubious, especially when fearing that US national security was at stake. Nor 
did Pye’s appeal for “developmental diplomacy” (1960, 10–11, 13)—a rare sensitiv-
ity to the needs and desires of aid recipients—prevent the passage of the Foreign 
Assistance Act of 1966, urging “the building of democratic and public institutions 
 on all levels — local, state, and national .” In 1968 the clause—“In particular, emphasis 
should be given to research designed to increase understanding of the ways in which 
development assistance can support democratic social and political trends in recipient 
countries”—was added (Committee on International Relations and Committee on 
Foreign Relations 2003, 143). This was a tocsin call for research relevant to American 
national self-interest. 
 Implicit in the democratization rhetoric was the reality of American security 
needs—the need for the proper mix of military assistance and economic aid. The 
Eisenhower administration set the tone. The 1959 President’s Committee to Study 
the United States Military Assistance Program (MAP), chaired by former undersecre-
tary William Draper, deemed a purely defensive approach to Soviet-Chinese expan-
sionism as inadequate and that “our best counteraction” was “a strong and growing 
economy throughout the free world. Our aid program is an important element in 
the achievement of this end.” Economic development and the resulting political sta-
bility of countries exposed to “the threat of communism” were regarded as the best 
deterrence against aggression (USAID, 1959, 6, 8, 10). Kennedy himself, arguing 
for his comprehensive new foreign assistance program, cautioned that “This is not 
an effort . . . [to benefit] those who are less fortunate[;] this is a program that involves 
very importantly the security of the United States.” The American people needed 
to understand “the real nature of the struggle in which we’re engaged” (Kennedy 
1961a, 1). In January 1962, Kennedy instructed the Joint Chiefs of Staff to “plan 
in terms of which mix of military and other forms of aid will best serve our over-
all national security aims.” MAP and USAID programs were complementary, not 
competitive. Not only should they be “effectively coordinated” but efforts should 
also be made to “mesh” their planning cycles to achieve optimal complementarity 
(Gerakas et al. 1995, 32). USAID was to take the lead, not the State Department or 
the Defense Department, in ensuring that military assistance and economic aid did 
not work at cross-purposes by, for example, competing for appropriations or jug-
gling between accounts(Committee on International Relations and Committee on 
Foreign Relations 2003, 290). In response, in May 1962, outgoing USAID admin-
istrator Fowler Hamilton outlined recommendations for more effective coordination 
between economic and military aid programs or mix initiatives. He proposed incor-
porating mix studies into all aspects of the planning process in target countries on the 
Sino-Soviet periphery. These studies would identify variations in budgetary needs, 
depending upon each country’s unique circumstances (e.g., its ability to self-finance 
some defense expenditures), and highlight direct and indirect “side effects” of greater 
“complementarities” (Hamilton 1962, 1–4). 
 Two months later, Secretary of State Dean Rusk issued a secret memorandum to 
all foreign mission heads, the Military Assistance Advisory Group, Foreign Policy 
Advisors, and command headquarters. Rusk called for “explicit consideration” of 

192  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
MAP/AID joint operations—being “a regular part of the planning process” and 
announced the Department’s intention to formulate “a single long-term foreign 
 assistance strategy, military and economic” (1962, 1). 
 Yet a year earlier, Kennedy had outlined an approach that clearly separated mili-
tary assistance from social and economic development. The latter, he asserted, “must 
be seen on its own merits, and judged in the light of its vital and distinctive contribu-
tion to our basic security needs.” Was Kennedy being disingenuous, or had the les-
sons of Berlin, Cuba, and Korea, among others, taught him the futility of exclusively 
military or narrow economic solutions to address insurgencies? How could he loudly 
declaim “our economic obligations as the wealthiest people in a world of largely poor 
people” (Kennedy 1961b) while presiding over one of the largest military build-ups 
in recent US history? This was a “development race,” in Kennedy’s words, to dem-
onstrate “that the United States, not the communist nations, represented the wave of 
the future” (Rabe 2010, 143). The Cold War logic dictated repressive policies abroad 
(e.g., the use of counterinsurgency forces to suppress popular dissent) at the cost of 
freedom at home. The pursuit of national self-interest was the rationale for American 
altruism through development aid, especially in countries under communist chal-
lenge. Kennedy, like so many others of his generation, viewed the United States as a 
sanctuary of freedom and democracy that required neglecting democracy in certain 
developing countries. 
 With a view to improving our understanding of the doctrinal relations of secu-
rity and development, this chapter examines USAID policies in Chile, Korea, and 
Vietnam between 1961 and 1967 and the aftermath of each. An assessment of mili-
tary, political, and economic considerations illuminates how doctrines shape how 
foreign aid has been utilized and how the United States is perceived—donors and 
recipients share a symbiotic relationship that is impossible to disentangle. 
 Chile 
 The most progressive Latin American country in the 1960s—Chile—was also the 
most problematic for American policymakers. Political forces ranged from radical 
Marxist and socialist forces to an increasingly beleaguered Right wing willing to take 
drastic measures, all operating within a liberal Christian democratic framework of 
constitutional reformism. Chile—considered by administrative officials as “the show-
case” for Kennedy’s Alliance for Progress, the president’s response to Castroism—thus 
aroused their gravest fears: a communist regime emerging not through violent revolu-
tion but through legitimate democratic processes. Unlike its neighbors, Chile enjoyed 
an uninterrupted record of democratic government since the early 1930s. Despite 
many of the same economic problems of other Latin American countries, Chile’s con-
stitutional order was the envy of the region’s liberal democrats. Top US officials feared 
that the coalition of Socialist, Communist, and other Leftist parties, centering on 
a young Salvador Allende, threatened all that (US Senate Select Committee 1975, 4). 
 The economic problems were universally regarded as severe: the social problem of 
poverty and inequality, dependence on volatile revenues of mineral exports, and low 
productivity in both agriculture and industry. Chilean officials and US development 
experts viewed land reform, although an explosive issue dividing Right and Left, 

Security and Development Doctrines  ●  193
as nevertheless the key to transforming the social and economic structure inherited 
from colonialism. With 2.5 million peasants, largely living and working on large, 
poorly managed private estates, and such low productivity, despite having some of 
the most fertile lands in Latin America, Chile by 1960 was a net food importer 
(Winn and Kay 1974, 135–136). 
 While disenfranchised peasants flooded into the cities looking for work, urban 
jobs were scarce. CORFO-led 4 import substitution policies such as tariff protection 
and tax credits failed to stimulate sustainable industrial growth and worsened the 
urban-rural divide, as employed urban residents earned nearly triple the wages of rural 
workers (Collier and Sater 1999, 272). Reform (though meaning different things to 
different people) suddenly became an extremely prominent issue. 5 Conservatives saw 
land reform as a hedge against social revolution; Marxists as a means to break the 
backs of the capitalist, landowning classes as well as achieve redistributive justice for 
the peasant masses; Christian democrats as creating a “Revolution of Liberty,” a com-
munitarian society of equals (Loveman 1976, 293, 187, 199, 225). Kennedy admin-
istration officials were unsure about land reform, even if carried out within the legal 
framework of Law 15.020, which in 1962 declared that “The exercise of the right of 
property in rural land is subject to the limitations required for the maintenance and 
progress of the social order.” State Department officials were more interested in “the 
existence of favorable investment conditions [that] included low levels of inflation, 
balanced government budgets, and open markets” than in structural reforms (land 
reform being chief among them) and feared that they would only turn Chile into 
another Cuba (Michaels 1976; Taffet 2007, 73, 86). 
 Therefore, USAID was instructed to hold up much needed grants and loans to 
Chile, pending a demonstration of the government’s willingness to pursue stabiliza-
tion policies. Approving program and project loans to Chile on the basis of curbing 
inflation was, in the words of US Ambassador Edward Korry, “primordial.” However, 
one interpretation of the ultimate consequences is that requiring inflation control 
policies and reducing balance-of-payments problems harmed American interests in 
the region and reduced the prospects for peace (Taffet 2007, 91). By tying aid to 
government cutbacks, US policies antagonized the center-left social democrats like 
Chile’s President Eduardo Frei, pushing them further to the left. By discouraging 
public spending, they eroded popular support for the moderate reform agenda of 
the Alliance for Progress. Aid conditionality expanded the base of support for the 
Marxist Left. The State Department and USAID were pushing antistatist, neolib-
eral doctrines—free market competition, privatization, free trade and export expan-
sion—20 years before the neoclassical counterrevolution of the 1980s. 
 Bound to, yet wary of, the reformist agenda of the Alliance for Progress, USAID 
walked a tightrope between demands for land reform, which raised the specter of 
expropriation and nationalization, and more conservative agricultural adjustments 
like livestock improvement and credits to small farmers. However, Christian demo-
crats and Marxists were not immediately at loggerheads over solutions to the land 
problem. Leftists organized into the Popular Action Front and worked with ruling 
Christian democrats to push through a land reform bill that eschewed the wholesale 
confiscation and redistribution of large estates, preferring a “mixed form of indi-
vidual holdings, cooperatives, and state farms” that would preserve and extend “gains 

194  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
already won within the framework of the established system,” gains like the con-
stitutional right to unionize and the right to strike (Kaufman 1972, 197). Yet the 
constitutional amendment that permitted land appropriation without immediate full 
compensation was a red flag to the Right, and upon the end of Frei’s administration, 
the Left launched illegal land takeovers. There was much in the Christian Democratic 
Party program of noncapitalist development to which the Left could subscribe. But 
US officials resisted this interpretation, insisting instead that political stabilization 
dictated a policy of counterinsurgency. 
 The objective was to provide technical assistance, training, and riot control equip-
ment to the national police force (Carabineros de Chile) to “more effectively prevent 
and control public disorders and to counter acts of subversion, terrorism, and other 
threats against the internal security of the country” (USAID Office of Public Safety 
1964a, 1). Despite little evidence of real terror in Chile, for the Cold Warriors in 
USAID’s new Office of Public Safety there was always the imminent threat of it, 
especially following a contentious presidential race pitting Marxist-Socialists against 
liberal democratic moderates. With an overriding US aid policy of stability and secu-
rity, the lack of police preparation became the real enemy. 6 
 In collaboration with MAP/Chile and a special US Military Assistance Team from 
a police training school in Panama, USAID and the Embassy in Santiago developed 
a Special Emergency Equipment and Training Program that involved the provision 
of basic riot control equipment to the Carabineros and in-service training for new 
recruits in seven regional training centers and cities where the potential for civil dis-
turbance was believed to be highest. Undersecretary of State George Ball himself 
weighed in on the looming problem of Chile’s internal security and its maintenance 
both by military and police forces. “In apportioning aid to military forces in riot 
control,” he directed in a secret memo, “the role of the Carabineros should be con-
sidered paramount, and US aid to military forces for this purpose should not become 
disproportionate to that being furnished Carabineros under the AID program” (Ball 
1964). The government in cooperation with USAID stationed over 600 noncom-
missioned police officers in Santiago alone. These new centers of police protection 
were now at good capacity, bristling with “the supplies and weapons for handling 
public disorder” (USAID Office of Public Safety 1964b, 2). The Carabineros, after 
the 1973 coup against Allende, were among the most brutal repressors of suspected 
Leftists. US assistance continued after Allende took office, but only for assistance to 
the Chilean military, which received $45.5 million in military assistance in 1970–
1974 (Farnsworth 1974, 139). 
 Did the $1.7 million in police assistance between 1963 and 1970 and MAP loans 
and grants of $100 million compromise hard-won gains in the country’s socioeco-
nomic development, many of those gains paid for by US loans and grants totaling 
$279.7 million between 1963 and 1968? 7 An angry Eduardo Frei, Chile’s new presi-
dent, wrote in  Foreign Affairs in 1967 that the militarization not only of Chile but of 
Latin America generally had divided the region, exacerbating the threat of internal 
subversion and violent revolution. Militarization, argued Frei, was precipitating an 
arms race that fueled nationalization and dashing hopes for the regional integra-
tion annunciated by the Alliance for Progress. The focus on security, combined with 
a string of structural adjustments, distracted attention from the very reforms that 

Security and Development Doctrines  ●  195
Kennedy had originally called for as required for peaceful revolution (Frei Montalva 
1967, 437–438). 
 Between 1962 and 1969, Chile received over a billion dollars in direct loans and 
grants from US government and international agencies, making it the largest per 
capita aid recipient in Latin America. In 1975 a Senate committee estimated that 
between 1963 and 1973 Chile received an additional $13.4 million in covert aid, 
nearly $4 million of that between 1962 and 1964 alone (USSC 1975, 7; Patterson 
1989, 116). These monies were approved by high-level sub-Cabinet committees like 
the Special Group set up by presidential order to monitor and fund counterinsur-
gency activities throughout the developing world. In Chile, in the run-up to the 
1964 presidential election, the Special Group authorized funding for some 15 covert 
action projects in four categories: propaganda, including black propaganda designed 
to create internal divisions within communist ranks and between communists and 
their labor movement allies; bribery and manipulation of the media; trading of influ-
ence within and between public and private sector institutions; and direct subsidies 
as well as intelligence sharing with the military to support a potential coup (USSC 
1975, 14, 7–11). 
 Set up by Kennedy in 1962, the Special Group included the Attorney General, the 
Deputy Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Director 
of the Central Intelligence Agency, the Administrator of USAID, and the Director 
of the US Information Agency. It was to ensure that the importance of counterinsur-
gency was reflected in the “political, economic, intelligence, military aid and infor-
mational programs conducted by State, Defense, AID, USIA and CIA.” It was to 
create and coordinate interdepartmental programs, ensuring free and unobstructed 
flow of resources and information within and across those programs (Gravel 1971, 
660–661). The Special Group reinforced the growing linkage at the highest levels 
between military assistance and economic aid. 
 Where nation building and modernization programs fell short in removing the 
teeth from rural and urban discontent and where organized insurgents threatened 
to seize the upper hand from unresponsive government, American planners turned 
increasingly to a counterinsurgency doctrine emphasizing military and police train-
ing and development, through special warfare training, direct provision of equipment 
and supplies, intelligence gathering, demolition, and communications. The counter-
insurgency doctrine not only entailed efforts to seek out and destroy insurgent units 
but also to win the support of civilian populations by investing in education and 
health care, decent housing and labor conditions, and so forth. 
 The US government was indeed divided on the magnitude of threat posed by the 
Chilean Left and the 1970 election of Allende. Only a month after the election an 
Interdepartmental Group for Inter-American Affairs, with representatives of the CIA, 
the State Department, the Defense Department, and the White House, concluded 
that Chile was no longer a US security threat. At around the same time the Church 
Committee suddenly announced that “the United States had no vital interests within 
Chile” (USSC 1975, 48). This was startling, in light of the Allende government’s 
expropriation of major holdings of US copper companies, yet reinforced by National 
Intelligence Estimates downplaying Allende’s revolutionary intentions both in Chile 
and in Latin America generally. But whatever Allende’s preference for consolidating the 

196  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
Left’s gains through more gradual changes, the more radical wing of the Left provoked 
land and factory takeovers, while the Allende administration’s policies exacerbated the 
economic crumbling caused by capital flight and US-backed efforts to undermine the 
economy. Between 1970 and Allende’s overthrow in 1973, an additional $8.8 million 
was authorized for covert actions in Chile (USSC 1975, 46–48). 
 Chile’s Aftermath—and Is Venezuela the New Chile? 
 Although the US government encouraged the 1973 coup against Allende, by the 
mid-1980s the US government supported the transition back to democracy in several 
ways. Initially, the United States provided development assistance to the Pinochet 
government, in part because the Chilean economy was in shambles following capital 
flight, worker takeovers of factories, and Allende’s reckless economic policies, and the 
fears that the Left would come back if economic collapse persisted. 8 Yet when CIA 
destabilization efforts against the Allende administration were revealed, and in 1976 
the ex-Chilean ambassador to the United States under Allende was assassinated in 
Washington, DC, US assistance to the Pinochet regime was abruptly cut. 
 By the mid-1980s, with clear signs of political moderation from both the Chilean 
Right and Left in the protracted negotiations with the government and armed forces 
to restore civilian rule, the US government supported civil society groups financially, 
but also by signaling future political support. Thus, when Pinochet lost the 1988 
plebiscite to extend his rule indefinitely, the US government strongly signaled its 
opposition to annulling the results. Constable and Valenzuela (1989, 184) note that 
“Chile’s transition to democracy can be viewed as a success for U.S. policy, which 
has given strong support to democratic forces since 1985 and played an important 
role at several key moments in discouraging reversals in the political liberalization.” 
They add that US officials “set the proper, low-profile tone in encouraging the 
transition,” and they surmised that “by 1985 U.S. policymakers [concluded] that 
prolonged military rule was only strengthening communist groups . . . U.S. officials 
helped ensure a fair vote in the plebiscite by financing the parallel vote count and 
voter education projects, and by warning the regime against trying to doctor or abort 
the results” (184–185). Official US support was reinforced by the efforts of such 
US-based entities as the National Endowment for Democracy, Freedom House, and 
the Washington Office on Latin America (Sankey 2014). It is noteworthy that while 
all three are legally NGOs, the National Endowment for Democracy was founded by 
the US Congress in 1983 as part of an initiative “to promote the development and 
strengthening of democratic forces overseas” (2). 
 The US government has supported the consolidation of Chilean democracy 
through foreign assistance and a trade pact. The possibility of this pact rested on 
economic policy reforms pursued during the Pinochet years  and the maintenance of 
these reforms under civilian governments despite strong pressures to stimulate the 
economy at the risk of rekindling inflation and trade imbalances. The democratic 
governments, the most mature among Latin American nations in economic policy as 
well as governance, undertook the market-oriented reforms required of trade pacts to 
harmonize economic policies of trade pact members. Chile’s reforms were thorough 
enough to secure membership in the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 

Security and Development Doctrines  ●  197
Development in 2010—only one of three developing countries to be admitted to this 
“rich country” group. 
 What Has Changed in US Approaches to Radical Regimes in Latin America? 
 The closest contemporary Latin American parallel to Chile of the 1960s and early 
1970s is Venezuela, which since 1998 has been ruled by Presidents Hugo Ch á vez 
(until his death from cancer in 2013) and Nicol á s Maduro, under an increasingly 
populist radical Bolivarian Revolution—reflecting the aspiration to spread Venezuela’s 
socialist approach throughout Latin America in the name of the pan-Latin American 
independence hero. Although the parallel is far from perfect, the US reactions to 
the increasingly Leftist and authoritarian Venezuelan administration illuminate both 
changes and continuities in foreign assistance and security strategy. 
 The significant differences include the fact that Venezuela did not face a truly far-
Left threat in the 1990s; Venezuela’s Communist and socialist parties and factions 
were weak, and Chavez himself, when he was first elected, was less rhetorically radical 
than he was later to become. The broader ideological landscape had changed dramati-
cally as well. The Leftist guerrilla groups lost their inspiration following the collapse of 
the Soviet Union and suffered setbacks in societal rejection (e.g., community defense 
groups against Peru’s Sendero Luminoso) and military defeats by armies and Right-
wing paramilitaries. US foreign assistance supported some of these antiguerrilla efforts, 
but (as in Colombia) was typically framed as “the war on drugs,” with the effect of 
justifying assistance in terms of addressing domestic US problems. The worry about 
the Red Tide in the 1960s through the 1970s has given way to tolerance of the Pink 
Tide. The political landscape of Latin America in the 1990s became divided between 
governments with fairly cordial relations with the United States, like that of Chile, and 
governments with populist, sometimes anti-American, rhetoric, but with no aspirations 
to launch a Communist tide across Latin America. Even as Leftist parties maintained 
their symbolism (Chile’s Michelle Bachelet was inaugurated in 2006 with hammer-
and-sickle flags fluttering behind her), most Left governments adopted surprisingly 
centrist economic policies (e.g., the preelection fears that rhetorically extreme “Lula” de 
Silva would radicalize Brazil politically and economically were unfounded). 
 Furthermore, the opportunities to win support for moderates like Chile’s Eduardo 
Frei through foreign assistance were simply absent in oil-rich Venezuela.  In fact, prof-
ligate spending of oil revenues prior to Ch á vez’s first election was widely seen as cor-
rupt favoritism bypassing the poor, a major factor triggering the 1989 Caracazo riots 
that undermined the support of the traditional parties. 
 Unlike the well-organized Chilean Left that brought Allende to power in 1970, 
Chavez’s Fifth Republic Movement was ad hoc. His failed 1992 coup and two years 
of imprisonment did not give rise to stiff resistance; when he was elected in 1998, 
he appeared to be a garden-variety populist. Yet he orchestrated a constitutional ref-
erendum in 1999 that established a new constitutional assembly with the power to 
change the institutional structure, with subsequent changes that included a commis-
sion with the authority to dismiss the supreme court, the dissolution of the existing 
supreme court, and the appointment of new judges. Chavez was reelected in 2000 
under the provisions of the new constitution, and again in 2006 and 2012. 

198  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 In December 2006 Chavez consolidated the Leftist parties into the United Socialist 
Party of Venezuela. A constitutional referendum proposing increasing presidential 
powers, extending the presidential term to seven years, and eliminating presidential 
term limits was narrowly defeated in December 2007, but in 2009 another referen-
dum abolished all term limits. Perhaps the most important contrast with the Allende 
administration was that Chavez purged the armed forces of officers likely to oppose 
the consolidation of his powers. 
 The US government’s response fell far short of conspiring with the military, or 
trying to sabotage the Venezuelan economy. Despite the opportunity to invoke the 
erosion of political competition as a rationale for economic sanctions, it was not 
until 2014 that sanctions—of a quite selective nature—were imposed, following 
government crackdowns on protestors. According to a 2006 secret communication 
from the US Embassy in Caracas reporting on progress of the 2004 USAID/OTI 
Programmatic Support for Country Team 5 Point Strategy, the focus of US action, 
conducted through USAID’s Office of Transition Initiatives (OTI), was directed at 
“1) Strengthening Democratic Institutions, 2) Penetrating Chavez’ Political Base, 
3) Dividing Chavismo, 4) Protecting Vital US business, and 5) Isolating Chavez 
internationally,” justified on the grounds that Chavez had “systematically dismantled 
the institutions of democracy and governance.” 9 The major thrust was to fund both 
US-based and Venezuelan NGOs. The cable noted that “OTI has supported over 300 
Venezuelan civil society organizations with technical assistance, capacity building, 
connecting them with each other and international movements, and with financial 
support upwards of $15 million. Of these, 39 organizations focused on advocacy have 
been formed since the arrival of OTI; many of these organizations as a direct result of 
OTI programs and funding.” The deployment of OTI funds to Venezuela is arguably 
beyond OTI’s mandate, which is, according to OTI’s self-description, focused on 
“countries transitioning from authoritarianism to democracy, from violence to peace, 
or following a fragile peace.” 10 While OTI still functions around the world, its opera-
tions in Venezuela ended in 2010. US-based NGOs continued to support domestic 
NGOs; 11 many are increasingly critical of the growing infringements on political 
competition, and the Venezuelan government has been forcing foreign-based NGOs 
from operating in Venezuela or funding domestic NGOs. International NGOs are 
now largely criticizing the Venezuelan government and security forces from afar. 12 
 Yet aside from the mild economic sanctions, the US government has apparently 
been waiting for the Bolivarian Revolution to collapse under the weight of its eco-
nomic failure, thereby minimizing the risk of providing the Latin American Radical 
Left with additional rationales to mobilize anti-American sentiment and action. 
 Korea 
 For much of the 1960s, US foreign aid to South Korea was dictated by military neces-
sity, the need to shore up the Republic of Korea (ROK) against the inroads of a commu-
nist regime in the North that seven years after the Armistice still remained aggressive, 
insistent, and antagonistic to the notion of a unified Korea under international aus-
pices rather than the establishment of an all-communist state in the region. And it 
was not above exploiting sympathizers in South Korea, where unification remained 

Security and Development Doctrines  ●  199
a popular ideal. By the early 1960s officials within the Kennedy administration like 
Carl Kaysen, the president’s Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, 
were convinced that “the principal external threat is not one of renewed aggression but 
of Communist exploitation of South Korea’s weaknesses via the unification theme” 
(Kaysen n.d., 11) The defense of the ROK was no longer simply a matter of develop-
ing and maintaining the country’s 600,000 man army (no match in any case, reasoned 
US officials, for an all-out invasion of North Korean and Chinese forces). In a return 
to the familiar doctrine of winning hearts and minds, what was most needed was a 
greater concerted effort to support South Korean economic and social development. 
Economic growth, Cold War logic dictated, would trickle down to the poorest ele-
ments of Korean society, lift them up, and in so doing shield them from the powerful 
allure of Communist ideology. Only by outperforming the communists could liberal 
developmentalists hope to prove the efficacy of their plans to the masses. As a case in 
point, US officials, who met the new military junta’s Five-Year Economic Plan with 
enthusiasm, worried about its undercapitalization of areas crucial to the expansion of 
the private industrial sector—urban water systems, power transmission, coal mining, 
and cement manufacturing, for example—and so spoke of leveraging development 
funds to generate new sources of “power” (Kaysen n.d., 13–17). 
 This is not to suggest that American officials resisted the view popular among 
South Korea’s military leaders that privatization would have to await the consolidat-
ing gains of economic development. In the minds of development officials, demo-
cratic reform, even the goal of reunification itself, was secondary to securing both 
economic growth and military security (USAID 1962, 1). In 1964, working with the 
South Korean government, USAID moved expeditiously to help South Korea com-
bat what experts deemed was its greatest obstacle to growth: an unfavorable balance 
of trade exacerbated by a reputation on the international market for the poor quality 
of its consumer products. It helped set up an Export Promotion Sub-Committee of 
the Korean-American Economic Cooperation Council, securing a seat on the com-
mittee along with representatives from private industry and government. Over the 
next decade, USAID provided the moral and material support for a campaign to 
increase the amount of and improve the quality of Korean exports. It sent in experts 
to help institute new quality controls at the factory level, improve productivity, and 
establish new legal standards and guarantees, while using its own considerable influ-
ence with American businesses to bolster confidence in Korean-made goods. In just 
over a year, Korean products started appearing in large department chains such as 
Sears, JCPenney, Macy’s, and Woolworth’s (Butterfield 2004, 206–207). 
 Considered a “showcase of American effort and intention” like Chile, South Korea 
was nevertheless still under the thrall of a strong nationalist government that was 
often repressive and authoritarian in its methods (USAID 1962, 2). To compound 
this problem, its social and economic institutions were still largely rooted in tradi-
tional village life and in dynastic norms that, in effect, discouraged entrepreneurship 
and technological innovation. Rejecting the concept of private property dominant 
in liberal democratic societies and reinforcing instead ancient Confucian norms of 
status and prestige, traditional Korean society, according to development officials, 
placed the country at odds with the free-market doctrine and consumption patterns 
of the economically advanced countries. In the Confucian world of South Korea, 

200  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
“barely over the slave, came the businessman and trader . . . Business was despised and 
considered the legitimate expropriative prey of the officials who could not themselves 
engage in it; it reacted often in the resentful, clandestine role Korean society carved 
for it” (USAID 1962, 4). And yet if South Korea, as “one of the key outposts” of 
“free world forces,” was to resist the advances of an aggressive Communist North, the 
growth, modernization, and sustainability of not only its armed forces but also its 
economy and society was essential (10). Although USAID officials recognized that 
the “breakdown of traditional society” would create “social and political instability,” 
this was a temporary expedient to a deeper and more lasting stability based upon the 
values of “individualism, cosmopolitanism, liberalism, and individual initiative,” all 
prerequisites for Korean prosperity (3, 4). 
 Just how much relative peace and conflict Korea’s model of guided capitalism pro-
duced on balance is a difficult question, compounded, on the one hand, by a prior 
history of cultural and political authoritarianism and, on the other, by ambiguities 
among American leaders over the tradeoffs among security, democracy, and develop-
ment (USAID 1962, 13). One answer, as in Chile, was in the peculiar mix of MAP 
and USAID funding and its militarizing, culminating in 1972 in President Park’s 
declaration of martial law. At the outset of the Park regime in 1961, US officials were 
persuaded that they could have it both ways—a strong Korean government capable 
of making “the difficult decisions required for economic reform without excessive 
interference from the civilian population” and progress toward democratization that 
would open the country up to greater participation (Brazinsky 2007, 161). As it 
turned out, events and their own zeal to contain Communism proved them wrong. 
While looking to the Park government to combat internal corruption and faction-
alism, the United States also pushed, despite strong opposition in Korea, to enlist 
Korean armed forces in the Vietnam military build-up and to promote normalization 
with Japan, a distressing possibility for most Koreans (120). For its cooperation in 
these tasks, the ROK made fresh progress toward attaining a positive balance of trade, 
a perennial American economic statecraft instrument. South Korea earned $402 mil-
lion between 1965 and 1968 in export sales to Vietnam and the US military, and 
made rapidly growing Japan its number one importer (140–141). 
 The Korean War was America’s first proxy war and as such held a special place 
in the development thinking of counterinsurgency experts. While aid workers and 
government officials alike worried about the state of the Korean economy, espe-
cially under conditions of political repression, they were also sensitive to the need to 
strengthen local Korean police forces against the new and very real threat of commu-
nist infiltration and insurgency. In 1963, Bryan Engle, the director of Public Safety 
at USAID, outlined a MAP plan for the Korean National Police (KNP), the first line 
of defense against civil disturbances. Citing an absence of “standardization of weap-
ons,” “inadequate” mobility and communications capabilities, and “deficiencies” 
in police training and preparedness, Engle worried that at its current force level of 
30,000 men, the KNP was ill-equipped to combat “continuous Communist efforts 
to infiltrate and then to undermine the internal security” of the country (1963, 1–2). 
With talk in the air of reducing the Korean army by more than half and sending the 
bulk of the men into the Korean countryside where, in the words of Secretary of 
State Dean Rusk, they might be “helpful to economic development,” the problem 

Security and Development Doctrines  ●  201
of police preparedness was more urgent than ever. The military may be “essential to 
inhibiting insurgency,” yet in countries like Korea, with little or no real democracy, 
the best way of achieving this mission was to cultivate friendly relations between the 
military and the populace. In practice this meant employing the former in civil works 
projects in public transportation and communication, health and sanitation, and 
only tangentially in counterinfiltration activities. But it was a double-edged sword. A 
large military presence in rural areas, no matter how helpful, might, US officials wor-
ried, only further alienate the local populace (Rusk 1962, 1–2). This only made the 
problem of creating an efficient and effective local police force all the more pressing. 
As in almost every case, the solution was a pragmatic doctrine of selective adaptation 
and adjustment (to changing circumstances on the ground) in the service of larger 
military objectives. 
 By 1968 the threat of communist infiltration seemed more credible than ever. At 
the beginning of the year a team of highly trained North Korean agents entered Seoul 
in a failed attempt to assassinate the South Korean president. 13 According to intel-
ligence sources, an estimated 15,000 to 20,000 North Korean guerillas stood poised 
for action in the ROK (Engle 1968, 1). Engle was now requesting $5 million in FY 
1968 (out of a proposed $100 million in military assistance for Korea) to build up the 
counterinsurgency capabilities of the KNP. These funds would go to USAID but be 
administered by the US Operations Mission (USOM) (Secret Seoul 4499 1968, 1). 
In a secret memo to the Department of State, the Department of Defense and the 
American Ambassador in Seoul spelled out the case for additional police assistance in 
language by now familiar:
 We have pursued this policy considering that an effective police force for this pur-
pose would enhance the public image of a democratic civilian government, avoid 
degrading the ROK/US military posture to meet overt NK military aggression, 
and minimize the political and social strain within the country that could develop 
as a result of the use of military forces for counter-infiltration activities in their 
contacts with the civilian population. (1–2) 
 With $5 million in funding, USAID/USOM would be able to train and equip a 
4,000 man Combat Police Force, provide for an elite Reserve Task Force of 9,281 
police, and train and equip a Tactical Mobile Force of 407 men in Seoul itself (Engle 
1968, 2). President Johnson gave his personal imprimatur to efforts to combat the 
growing threat of North Korean infiltration (Lee 2006, 55). 
 The eight-volume joint study of the Harvard Institute for International 
Development and the Korean Development Institute published in 1980 concluded 
“that, during a period of rapid economic growth, the existence of an authoritar-
ian government accepting economic development as its first priority, able to main-
tain economic stability, and capable of making difficult economic policy decisions, 
and implementing these decisions, has been a positive factor in promoting growth” 
(Steinberg 1982, 45). 14 Yet in Korea, positive growth notwithstanding, the choice was 
not simply between political liberty and social and economic stability. In the context 
of Vietnam, increasing North Korean belligerence and growing democratic opposi-
tion to authoritarian government, US aid to South Korea was tied less to evidence of 

202  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
democratic reform (still a generation off) as to cooperation with US Cold War goals 
in the region. Success was mixed for both. Cold War containment policies made a 
virtue of militarized necessity, stalling the democratization process, yet the conten-
tious nature of US-Korean relations was a great school of democracy and a site of 
democratic education. 
 Aftermath o f K orea 
 Following the highly corrupt and ineffective decade of Korea’s authoritarian President 
Syngman Rhee and a short-lived chaotic democratic administration, General Park 
Chung-Hee led a military coup that put him into power from 1961 until his assassina-
tion in 1979 by an old colleague, then the director of the Korean Central Intelligence 
Agency. Over the next eight years, the agitation for democratic governance culmi-
nated in the competitive elections of 1987 and democratic governance thereafter. 
In the meantime, the Korean economy grew at a remarkably high, sustained rate, 
converting one of the poorest countries to a wealthy member of the OECD and a 
significant provider of foreign assistance. Yet the North Korean threat has kept the 
South Korean military as a formidable force, with roughly 650,000 active troops and 
a US$30 billion military budget taking up more than 14 percent of the government 
budget and roughly 2.5 percent of GDP (Global Security 2015). 
 US development assistance and military assistance approaches have varied dra-
matically in the face of both the dramatic changes and the constant military threat 
from the North. 
 Following the cessation of the Korean War (i.e., the 1953 uneasy truce that still 
prevails without a formal treaty ending the war), the US government poured huge 
volumes of economic and military assistance into South Korea: US$5.2 billion from 
1953 through 1976 in economic assistance; US$6.9 billion in military assistance, 
with the proportions of military assistance steadily increasing (38% in 1953–1961, 
60% in 1962–1969, 75% in 1970–1976) (Korean  Ministry of Finance and Strategy 
2012, 38). Thereafter, as the Korean economy grew, US official development assis-
tance amounted to only US$166 million through 1981; by 1982 loan repayments 
exceeded the flow of loans and grants (OECD ODA database). 
 The military assistance declined for a different reason. In 1977 Secretary of State 
Henry Kissinger was successful in reducing US military assistance to the South Korean 
government, due to the driving concern that Park might grow confident enough to 
attack North Korea (Kim 2011, 36). Presumably US policymakers, following the 
shock and huge US troop losses when China entered the Korean War, had been rec-
onciled to the stalemate in the Korean Peninsula. The challenge for the United States 
was to draw down US troops in Korea without making South Korea seem vulner-
able or provoking the South Korean military into transforming the country into a 
garrison state at the expense of democratic governance. At the time of the truce, US 
armed forces had nearly over 325,000 troops in Korea. It is true that the US support 
for General Park paid dividends—Park committed 320,000 Korean troops to join 
US forces in Vietnam—but pressures within the United States to withdraw troops 
have been strong from the beginning. In 1954 US troops were reduced to just over 
225,000, and to just over 75,000 in 1955, with gradual reductions thereafter to the 

Security and Development Doctrines  ●  203
current level of less than 30,000 troops. The development of democratic governance 
in South Korea reflects interlocking dynamics that harken back to many of the theo-
ries of economic development and governance, but with more nuance than the origi-
nal theories. The premise of modernization theory that prosperity would create the 
conditions for democratic governance seems to be consistent with post-1987 South 
Korea, but the theory did not anticipate the tutelage of the United States. On the 
other hand, South Korea’s democratization defies the presumption that acute security 
threats dramatically increase the likelihood of military dominance. The continuing 
close collaboration between the South Korean and US armed forces reinforced the 
ethos of accepting civilian authority. Moreover, the South Korean military has not 
had to grovel for funding or to seek additional political power to gain respect—the 
military defends the country against an obvious enemy and provides technical and 
leadership training magnified by universal male conscription. 
 South Korea’s remarkable economic growth is consistent with the Big Push 
implication that massive development assistance could trigger a take-off. For rea-
sons clearly other than the standard sociopolitical underdevelopment that the Big 
Push theory attributed to developing countries, South Korea fulfilled the conditions 
Rostow (1956, 25) specified as necessary—“a society prepared to respond actively to 
new possibilities for productive enterprise; [requiring] political, social and institu-
tional changes.” The social conditions were strengthened by the fact that a mobilized 
civil society was in evidence immediately after the Japanese occupation, in the efforts 
to end the immediate postwar American occupation (Lee 1997), as well as during the 
authoritarian period under General Park (Richardson 2010, 166). The government’s 
capacity to make tough economic decisions is supported by the North Korean threat, 
which, for example, has impelled (and permitted) governments to be less tolerant of 
business leaders taking advantage of protected industries to capture rents rather than 
take appropriate constructive risks. 
 South Korea also avoided the major institutional pitfall (see  chapter 9 ) of the mili-
tary’s entrenchment in business. The 1973 government initiative to replace US-origin 
materiel, beginning with arms and ammunition and progressing to aircraft, ships, 
and missiles, awarded the production contracts to the private  chaebol (business con-
glomerates) such as Daewoo and Hyundai (Klare 1997, 59), leaving little space for 
the armed forces to penetrate the business sector. 
 Vietnam 
 US foreign aid spending reached a peak in real terms in the 1960s, when fears were at 
their height that without US military and economic assistance, developing countries 
around the world would fall like dominoes to either Soviet- or Chinese-style commu-
nism. The US Congress authorized $1 billion in foreign aid in 1960, $3.6 billion in 
1963, down to $2 billion in 1967 and $1.4 billion in 1968. In 1965 Vietnam received 
a larger portion of US foreign aid than any other country. Nearly 90 percent of this 
aid went to military appropriations, including support for the training of indigenous 
armed forces and intelligence services. Only a minute fraction of this money went to 
traditional development programs supporting industry and agriculture (Picard and 
Buss 2009, 96, 110–111). Out of this gross imbalance emerged perhaps the most 

204  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
creative, albeit most politically explosive, program in Vietnam, designed to combine 
security with social reform and change: the Strategic Hamlet program of civilian 
pacification led by John Paul Vann, a USAID official in the office of Civil Operations 
and Revolutionary Development Support (Herring 1979; Sheehan 1989). 
 Although the enormous military assistance and economic aid to Vietnam failed to 
prevent or win the war, the legacy of US foreign aid to Vietnam has to be measured, 
as with Chile and Korea, against the ability of the local system to absorb the demands 
of modernization, to cleanse itself of historic elements of power and greed, and to 
achieve some modicum of economic and political independence under conditions 
of abject dependency (Picard and Buss 2009, 112–117). Aid to Vietnam and the 
extreme conditions that motivated it pose an important test for the doctrine that 
development assistance, organized around the twin goals of security and stability, 
could be an effective deterrent to civil unrest. 
 South Vietnam was in a poor position to accomplish either of these ends with 
or without foreign assistance. It suffered from a debilitating history of dependency 
under French rule; a much older history of Mandarin elitism and Confucianism that 
relegated material progress to the demands of moral and spiritual uplift; and tradi-
tional anti-Western, antiindustrial attitudes. All these made it difficult for the country 
to absorb the much touted lessons of modernization: the desire for socioeconomic 
mobility, a technological orientation to change, and individual efficacy in the face of 
impersonal social forces (Dacy 1986, 94–96). These orientations made it unlikely that 
most South Vietnamese would respond effectively to the economic opportunities and 
democratic initiatives that some US policymakers hoped could be sustained. 
 Faced in 1974 with the imminent collapse of South Vietnam, the Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee found the blame not in the vagaries of US foreign aid, the 
growing strength of the North, or any other external forces, but in Vietnam itself: 
“Vietnam is rich in agricultural resources but cannot feed herself, has absorbed west-
ern technology but cannot afford the imports to operate it, has a well-trained labor 
force but cannot employ it, and provides a wide range of government services but 
does not have the means to pay for them” (Dacy 1986, 19). 
 The assumption of Vietnamese intractability in the face of US foreign economic 
aid and assistance is only partially true. Certainly the prospects for democracy were 
slim under the oligarchic, paramilitary governments of both Ngo Dinh Diem and 
Nguyen Van Thieu. It is practically a commonplace that “The unpopularity and inef-
fectuality of the Vietnamese government conditioned the effectiveness of assistance 
and ultimately neutralized any impact it might have had” (Picard and Buss 2009, 
113). However, competing conceptions held by American economic and military 
advisors of the role of US foreign aid played no less a determining part. 
 These objectives—one pursued through economic programs designed to win legit-
imacy of the government, the other through military assistance programs designed 
to increase security—ran along more or less parallel lines at the beginning of US 
involvement in Vietnam, converging increasingly in the strategic hamlets and in 
other pacification programs. The legitimacy school argued for a Point Four approach 
to social and economic development, including technical assistance and capital input 
into public health and education, land reform, agricultural productivity, and small-
scale industry. The security school sought very different kinds of results, “body counts 

Security and Development Doctrines  ●  205
and village stability ratings,” that would lend credibility to the overriding American 
mission to prevent an infiltration of communist forces, which came to be called the 
Viet Cong Infrastructure (Montgomery 1986, 68). As the security threat grew (both 
cause and effect of the failure to achieve genuine legitimacy), the role of aid began to 
shift almost exclusively to counterinsurgency in what one USAID official described 
as “‘Militarization’ of Program” (USAID 1969, 408). Of course, to assume otherwise 
under the circumstances would have been na ï ve. 
 There is some evidence that USAID resisted this view. A full four years before the 
first major spike in military aid and US troop size in September 1962, a confidential 
USAID addendum to its 1963 Operating Year Budget claimed that the Vietnam pro-
gram, due to “changing forces of the war,” had been “drastically reoriented from the 
traditional economic development and technical assistance theme . . . to one primarily 
concerned with counter-insurgency” (USAID 1963, 1–2). This meant the allocation 
of $12.4 million in nonproject commodities (i.e., military and police equipment) for 
use in the villages and hamlets and $11.6 million in direct support of counterinsur-
gency activities to repair roads and improve provincial hospitals. 
 Much of this aid was coordinated by the USAID Public Safety Division until 
in May 1967 it was incorporated into CORDS under the Military Assistance 
Command, Vietnam. Headed by General William C. Westmoreland yet directed by 
a civilian, Robert W. Komer, then Ambassador to Vietnam, CORDS was charged 
with coordinating all civil and military pacification programs in Vietnam (USAID 
1969, 481–482). Montgomery (1986, 76) concluded that this boiled down to “coun-
ter-insurgency through civic action, the theoretical hope that an army can contribute 
to nation-building by providing both security and an infrastructure of small public 
works constructed by troops and village volunteers.” 
 As the war in Vietnam escalated, its original Cold War objectives dissolved into 
increasing numbers of friendly and enemy body counts: the struggle for legitimacy 
was overruled and finally corrupted by a perverse evaluation of progress based on spu-
rious quantitative measures (Montgomery 1986, 71). The casualties for a soft power 
approach to peace and development were felt up and down the line within USAID. 
The whole relationship between theory and practice, between program planning, 
implementation, and review, was upended. “There was never time in the heat of 
war,” lamented a USAID official, “to fully dissect theories and prove them in pilot 
operations before launching into large-scale operation.” In the transition from peace 
time to war time, traditional programming areas within the Agency—public health, 
education, agriculture, refugee relief, and supply management—were no longer rec-
ognizable. Where public health had been labeled “advisory services on preventative 
medicine” it now meant “an unprecedented program of direct medical care for sick 
and wounded Vietnamese.” Where education programs once entailed “long-range 
development of an integrated educational system,” they now called for “a crash pro-
gram of providing new elementary schools in the rural areas in order to gain political 
impact.” Agricultural programs, elsewhere organized on an experiment station exten-
sion plan, in Vietnam supported “large operations with immediate impact” (USAID 
1969, 379–380). Fitzgerald (1972, 346) has lampooned the waste with historical 
accuracy: “thousands of tons of bulgar wheat, thousands of gallons of cooking oil, 
tons of pharmaceuticals, enough seed to plant New Jersey with miracle rice, enough 

206  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
fertilizer for the same.” Supply management, once a function of local intermediar-
ies, grew to Total War proportions: “a modern logistics operation,” reads an internal 
administrative history of USAID, “with hundreds of Americans in port management, 
coastal sealift, airlift, warehouse construction and operation, repair and maintenance” 
(USAID 1969, 380). 
 The USAID program in Vietnam was unique in one other important respect. In 
conventional settings, AID advisors worked collaboratively with their local coun-
terparts. In Vietnam “major operations were sometimes planned, supervised and 
partially performed by American personnel,” a dramatic reversal of the rhetoric of 
self-help and of the advising function that had driven development theory since the 
beginning. The prosecution of aid in Vietnam, the vast majority of it dedicated to 
counterinsurgency, had become a big business with aid workers serving no longer as 
advisors but as operators. In 1967 USAID established a separate Vietnam Bureau 
with a staff of over 400 to expedite the provision of aid and enable “quicker procure-
ment of goods and services” than would be normal under traditional procedures 
requiring prior host country agreement before loans or shipments could be made 
(USAID 1969, 390, 395–396). The Vietnam experience elevated the doctrine that 
more uncertain conditions require more heavy-handed intervention by foreign assis-
tance providers. 
 Economic and Political Renewal after the Second Indochina War 
 The evolution of Vietnam’s economic policies reveals the pull of the private market. 
Like China, Vietnam today demonstrates what would probably have been unthink-
able to many in both the West and the Communist states: a Communist party, still 
monopolizing governance, but shorn of what were thought to be the essential ele-
ments of a Communist economic system. When the Soviet Union collapsed, its sup-
port for Vietnam disappeared, and several crucial weaknesses thus revealed compelled 
the Vietnamese government to permit private entrepreneurship. Another unantici-
pated outcome has been how the conflict between Vietnam and China that flared 
into open war in 1978–1979 gave lie to the fear of a World Communist Movement. 
Policymakers easily confuse deeply ingrained nationalism for ideology. Chinese mili-
tary and economic assistance in the amount of roughly $300 million per year came 
to an end in 1978, which forced the Vietnamese government to seek increased assis-
tance from the Soviet Union that resulted in effective Soviet control over many of the 
industrial sectors of the economy (Steinfeld and Thai 2013, 19; Vo 1990, 90–98). 
 The first decade after the end of the Second Indochina War (1954–1976) pro-
duced slight economy recovery or growth. 15 No wonder. The country had been at 
war virtually nonstop since WWII and had suffered more than three million deaths 
and the exodus of something like two million refugees. The industrialized north had 
been essentially destroyed by relentless air attacks, while the agricultural south was 
crippled by battle-scarred terrain and monumental environmental devastation from 
defoliants. Flush with victory, the Communist Party set very ambitious goals for its 
Second Five-Year Plan (1976–1980) of double-digit rates of economic growth, major 
reconstruction of its industrial base, modernization of traditional agriculture, and 
integration of North and South Vietnam into a single nation (Beresford and Phong 

Security and Development Doctrines  ●  207
2000). Success of the Plan was predicated on continuing and large foreign invest-
ments and assistance, which in the end were not forthcoming in amounts equal to the 
ambitions (Boothroyd and Pham 2000, 14). The Third Five-Year Plan (1981–1985) 
acknowledged these shortcomings with fewer, less ambitious goals that were doled 
out every year, rather than at once, during the full run of the plan. Tacit accep-
tance of an entrepreneurial private sector, particularly in the South for wholesale and 
retail trade, marked another realistic accommodation. Decentralization of industrial 
and agricultural activities paired with the sloughing off of inefficient state enter-
prises. State subsidies for a full range of goods and services were also sharply curtailed 
(Luong 2003). 
 All of these changes finally came together in 1986 with the  Doi Moi economic 
renovation plan that eventually extended until 2006. During this remarkable period 
Vietnam’s economy grew at an average 7–8 percent per year, foreign direct investment 
(including from the United States as part of the 1992 US-Vietnam Trade Bilateral 
Agreement) soared to over $60 billion per year, and numerous international, political, 
and economic partnerships, events, and agreements marked this era (Vuong 2014). 
 The country has hit rougher waters since the global economic downturn of 2008–
2009 and is currently dealing with problems in the finance, banking, real estate, and 
many of the remaining state-owned or operated enterprises. Substantial corruption has 
also surfaced. On top of this lengthy list of domestic and economic challenges, the long-
standing competition between Vietnam and China is once more coming to the fore—in 
economics (Malesky and London 2014) and in geopolitical matters in disputed territory 
and resources in the South China Sea (Steinfeld and Thai 2013, 70–72). 
 Conclusion 
 In the administration of aid in our three case studies, the goal of political and economic 
stabilization almost always took precedence over the social reforms associated with 
democratization—free elections, constitutional governance, broad economic oppor-
tunity, and equitable distribution. Not that these goals had any greater prospect of 
success in lieu of US assistance. The point is not that Chile, South Korea, or Vietnam 
would have been better off without US aid, but that opportunities were lost based on 
the kind and degree of that support. US containment doctrine in Latin American and 
Southeast Asia restricted the field of action for reform-minded USAID officials; it 
made the Agency a reluctant partner with the Defense Department. Joining USAID 
and MAP funding uncomfortably at the hip in effect subordinated the peace time 
uses of aid to the martial necessity of combatting Communism. In Chile this meant a 
rejection of Christian democratic liberalism on the one hand and an exaggerated and 
ultimately baseless fear of Allende’s Marxist radicalism on the other, leaving US aid 
officials in an unconstructive limbo between policies that supported industrialization 
(at the expense of land reform and greater agricultural productivity) and new levels of 
potentially destabilizing anticommunist police preparation that discouraged foreign 
investment in the country’s growth. 
 In Vietnam, almost wholly dependent on US military support as the prospects 
for both democracy and development grew dimmer, military solutions to problems 
of development sabotaged the good work of aid officials even in strategic hamlet and 

208  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
pacification programs, where the value of their contributions was often underap-
preciated. Instead the strategic hamlet became a kind of government decoy for local 
insurgents in search of asylum in the Vietnamese countryside. Visiting one such ham-
let in March of 1962, the head of USAID’s Public Safety Division reported back to 
Washington the remarks of their guide, Presidential Advisor Ngo Dinh Nhu: “Under 
my plan,” said Nhu, “we force the Communists to attack the Strategic Hamlet; thus 
it is no longer guerrilla warfare” (Walton 1972, 2). Achieving the right mix of eco-
nomic aid and MAP funding, so much a part of development assistance in countries 
like Chile and Korea, simply did not apply in Vietnam. Military and civilian opera-
tions were indistinguishable, with USAID workers forming counterinsurgency teams 
and US soldiers directing relief work under one unified command structure. Not 
even the best economic planning by the best minds under the most promising condi-
tions could compensate for the hypermilitarized social and political landscape. This 
was the one overriding lesson of the US development experience in Vietnam. 
 

 CHAPTER 11 
 Conclusion: Linkages and Challenges 
 Taking Stock 
 We have seen that some aspects of the evolution of development thinking and 
practice have been quite positive. First, the development agenda has been greatly 
expanded, bringing development efforts more broadly in line with the full pursuit of 
human dignity by going beyond economic growth to include equitable distribution, 
responsive governance, environmental protection, gender equality, and minimiza-
tion of violence. Second, the expertise in the field of development has deepened and 
broadened. Development economics, development administration, human ecology, 
institutional analysis, gender studies, anthropology, and a host of other fields have 
been deployed to address development challenges. A host of institutions has accu-
mulated and organized vast amounts of information, leading to broader and more 
nuanced understanding of the dynamics and challenges of development. Third, with 
experience has come greater pragmatism; in many circles the extreme ideological 
positions have given way to asking what works in particular contexts. And, as the 
monitoring of the MDGs has indicated, significant progress has been made in reduc-
ing poverty, illiteracy, discrimination against women, and some diseases in many 
countries, though these problems remain severe in numerous nations as well. 
 However, other trends have been highly problematic. Some promising devel-
opment strategies have been rejected prematurely or are applied only superficially. 
Some counterproductive strategies have persisted. Superficially definitive methods 
hide issues in need of deliberation. Often inappropriate objectives reign, despite the 
broadened agenda. As a consequence, the progress in addressing growth, poverty, 
conflict, the environment, health, and other aspects of human dignity has certainly 
not advanced as much as one would hope. 
 This chapter focuses on the remaining challenges of theory, doctrine, and practice 
by exploring the factors that still hold back progress in economic growth, poverty 
alleviation, reduction of violence, and environmental stewardship. These factors are 
found not just within each of the foci of this book (economic strategies, governance 
reform, and the roles of civil society, the military, and foreign assistance) but also at 
the intersections of these aspects of development. At the heart of the challenges is the 

210  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
pervasive weakness of development efforts to integrate the multiple facets of develop-
ment. Here we are referring not just to the frequently criticized lack of coordination 
among government agencies, the clashes among international development agencies, 
the turf battles among NGOs, or the conflicts across these sectors. There is a deeper 
lack of integration of institutional development and economic policies, of foreign 
assistance doctrines and strategic considerations of international assistance agencies, 
and of development strategies and the role of the armed forces. 
 Economic Growth and Distribution 
 What Technical Analysis Can and Cannot Do 
 As  chapters 2 and  3 recount, the apparent rigor of economic analytical tools can mask 
the considerable technical uncertainty that remains in evaluating projects, programs, 
and policies, both before and after they are implemented. Some analytic techniques 
developed through hard labor by first-rate economists—explicit rate-of-return analy-
sis being the most obvious example—are applied more rarely or less seriously. This 
reflects the implicit recognition that consequences are simply more difficult to pre-
dict than the methods require. The space for ideology and political calculations is, 
therefore, expanded beyond what would prevail if the outcomes of particular actions 
were more fully known. However, technical certainty would not eliminate political 
concerns—who gets what, when, how, 1 and, in fact, should not—because distri-
butional questions, and the question of what society ought to produce in terms of 
material and nonmaterial benefits, are beyond purely technical analysis. On the other 
hand, technical analysis can clarify the range of the plausible and help to make policy 
analysis more comprehensive and systematic. 
 Continuity an d A daptability 
 When the hopes for predictive certainty are dashed, policymakers must consider 
adopting policies that are robust in terms of the implications of uncertainty and 
often require the capacity to adapt. As important as adaptive management is to cor-
rect for false steps, consistency is also important. To address the potential tradeoffs, it 
is useful to note that uncertainty has two distinct aspects. One aspect is uncertainty as 
to whether objectives of an economic policy would be accomplished, such as reduc-
ing inflation or stimulating investment. In such cases, assuming that enough time 
has been given to adequately determine that the policy has truly failed compared to 
expected outcomes of policy alternatives, terminating the policy is a sensible option. 
Yet sometimes core policies include fixed parameters, such as exchange rates or tax 
rates, to provide certainty, to gain the acquiescence of stakeholders who would see 
risk in easily adjusted parameters, or both. Government officials may try to enhance 
the certainty, and their political support, by conveying that the commitment is irre-
vocable. However, it may reach the point that the fixed parameter creates such distor-
tions that the economy seriously falters. In Argentina, for example, the peso-dollar 
parity, which for a while was stunningly successful in reducing inflation, was main-
tained far too long, resulting in the collapse of the Argentine economy. Argentine 

Conclusion  ●  211
political institutions have been too fragile to permit governments to easily adapt 
policies introduced as important commitments. 
 The other aspect of unpredictability is that basically sound policies can have unex-
pectedly adverse impacts on particular groups or unexpectedly disruptive reactions of 
groups that regard the policy as contrary to their interests. Compensatory measures 
must be enacted—and publicized—both to cushion the possible adverse effects on 
groups made vulnerable by the new policies and to preempt disruptive opposition. In 
other words, if a policy is relatively sound for the nation as a whole, the adverse effects 
on particular groups ought to be addressed through social safety nets, tax structures 
that mitigate big losses, or other measures that leave a sound economic structure 
operating while compensating unexpected losses to a greater or lesser degree. The 
fundamental principle is to address efficiency and equity through different policies 
so as to avoid distorting the efficient operation of the economy. 
 The question, then, is how stabilization can be accomplished. One possibility is 
to rely on foreign assistance agencies, whether bilateral or multilateral. Agreements 
of developing country governments with such entities are often credibly binding, 
because of the potential costs that governments would incur if they reneged on an 
agreement. Yet here, too, the risk of being locked in too long arises, if the agree-
ment ties the hands of the government beyond the period in which the commitment 
makes sense. One approach to mitigate this risk is for the agreement to have mutually 
agreed-upon thresholds for relevant parameters, such that exceeding these thresholds 
would void the agreement without penalizing the government and country. Another 
approach is for the foreign assistance agency to have the flexibility and monitoring 
capacity to recognize when the agreement is no longer optimal and to be able to ter-
minate or adapt the agreement without harming the country. For example, although 
the IMF was roundly criticized for the stringency of the agreements reached with 
Indonesia, South Korea, and Thailand in the wake of the 1997 East Asian financial 
crisis, what the critics fail to appreciate is that the IMF backed off on the fiscal restric-
tions when it became clear in 1998 that they were too stringent. 2 
 Matching Economic Policies and Institutions 
 As  chapter 2  describes, one insight of development economics in the 1980s was that 
“institutions matter.” This was greeted with some amusement by political scientists, 
in that political scientists (e.g., Plato) have recognized this for millennia. A common 
instinct of economic theorists, with the exception of transactions cost theorists, is 
simply to urge stronger institutions and rely on questionable aggregate indicators 
of institutional strength, often without exploring what specifically would constitute 
stronger institutions and how to accomplish this. There is little consideration of how 
policies need to be altered to take account of institutional weaknesses; perhaps that 
would seem to be caving in to a system’s weakness to acknowledge that “second best” 
policy options must be adopted. However, even if the sound advice of governance 
experts and economists is followed, institutional development is often a slow and 
inconsistent process, and it often comes at a high political cost that calls for prioritiz-
ing the institutional changes in terms of their contributions to sound economic and 
political development. This gives rise to two challenges under the rubric of matching 

212  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
economic development policies and institutions: how should policies be adapted to 
match institutional weaknesses, and what priorities should guide institutional reform, 
in light of the fact that such reform often comes at a high political cost. 
 Adapting Economic Policies to Match Institutions 
 Given the frailties of the institutions through which economic development policies are 
formulated and conducted, how should the policies accommodate these limitations? 
The need to adapt economic strategies to the reality of weak institutions remains, but 
has been a largely unattended challenge. To adapt the economic strategies and policies 
that are developed under the assumption of sound institutions raises the question of 
what economic policies are more resilient under low institutional strength. 
 To address this requires clarifying what institutional weakness entails. One aspect 
is the inability or unwillingness to enforce regulations in a consistent manner. 
Government leaders may also lack the incentive or capability to allocate government 
resources in a sensible way to maximize societal benefits. A third weakness in many 
contexts is a high level of corruption. It is also a common problem that governments 
under strong political pressures and thin support have trouble maintaining policy 
continuity. However, some commitments are locked in to the point that policies can-
not be adapted soundly to meet new conditions and challenges. 
 The challenge of adapting to weak institutions has been addressed constructively 
in taxation theory and practice, but has been considerably weaker in many other 
aspects of economic policy. Tax reforms undertaken in both developed and develop-
ing countries have embraced the virtues of simplicity and uniformity through an 
emphasis on value-added tax. Value-added tax regimes typically reduce the other-
wise multiple sales tax rates applied to different products and reduce the importance 
of income taxes, which are typically highly complex because of multiple rates and 
exemptions for both different economic activities and different situations of taxpay-
ers. Whereas income tax regimes that have undergone thorough reforms to reduce 
exemptions are often highly vulnerable to the reintroduction of exemptions, value-
added taxation is much less prone to this erosion. 
 Because liberalization in general entails simplifying economic policy by reducing 
nonmarket elements (regulations, subsidies, monopolies, and state enterprises), the 
continuity of liberalization gains requires preserving these simplifications in the face 
of efforts by special interests to erode them. Liberalization is highly contested because 
of the redistributive implications, generating pressures to restore the privileges that 
liberalization has eliminated. Whereas tax reform can simplify in ways that do not 
have significant short-term redistributive impacts, the elimination of price controls 
and other subsidies and changes in budgetary allocations typically have highly vis-
ible, immediate redistributive impacts. The weakness of institutions with respect to 
maintaining the simplification comes in the inability or unwillingness of leaders to 
resist the pressures to restore subsidies and price controls. 
 Adapting Institutions to Match Economic Policies 
 In the long run, of course, the optimal situation would be that sounder institutions 
would permit technically optimal policies to be faithfully enacted. This is one of the 

Conclusion  ●  213
most important topics covered in  chapters 4 and  5 . As mentioned above, in addi-
tion to complex challenges of policy inconsistency and policy rigidity, institutional 
weaknesses include weak regulatory enforcement, weak capacity to allocate budgetary 
resources, and corruption. 
 With respect to weak regulatory enforcement, although it is easy to lament the 
inability or weak capacity to enforce regulations, the scope of regulation and the 
magnitude of resources devoted to enforcing them are policy choices. One approach 
to make regulation more effective with a given level of resources is to reduce the scope 
of regulation to what is truly constructive rather than what is creating restrictions to 
competition in order to favor privileged firms or individuals. In other words, it is 
essential to distinguish between regulations that reduce damaging behavior and those 
that primarily restrict competition. The institutional weakness for reducing predomi-
nantly competition-restricting regulations is often the inability or unwillingness of 
leaders to fend off rent-seeking efforts. For constructive regulations, here again we 
see the interplay between governance and economic policy, in that one tack is to 
strengthen governance by devoting both budgetary and political resources to enforce-
ment, but an alternative tack is to maintain the regulatory scope but streamline the 
regulations such that they are more easily monitored and enforced. 
 Bureaucratic Li mitations 
 How can governance reforms minimize the damage potentially caused by intragov-
ernmental rivalries, inadequate intra- and interorganizational communication, and 
lack of coordination? Economic growth requires coordinated calibration and timing 
of investment, goods, and services, but the conventional ministerial structure of gov-
ernments requires more coordination and goodwill than many developing country 
governments can muster.  Chapters 4 and  5 address the possible solution of shifting 
the source of demand from the multiple centralized agencies to subnational agencies. 
These agencies can order inputs according to the level of resources they generate or 
are allocated and the preferences that the local people express. However, although 
many governments have claimed to embrace decentralization and have lauded it as 
a democracy-enhancing governance doctrine, the financial wherewithal for effective 
decentralized governance is often lacking. Fiscal decentralization is required to avoid 
unfunded m andates. 
 Corruption 
 The major, though often highly controversial, economic policy instrument to address 
corruption is to increase the administrative budget to provide adequate pay for civil 
servants. This requires overcoming the public distaste for granting higher salaries to 
government and state officials, ranging from bureaucrats to police officers, when they 
are widely believed to be prospering from bribes or self-dealing practices. 
 Reforming economic policy measures, such as existing regulations that induce 
rent-seeking, is another imperative at the intersection of economic policy and gov-
ernance. The intertwining of well-connected businesspeople and the state is a risk 
to competitive politics as well as a drag on the economy. However, economic policy 
reforms are clearly not enough. Credible deterrence, requiring adequate monitoring 

214  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
and the political will to punish high-profile violators, is necessary. Yet anticorruption 
campaigns must be insulated as much as possible from the reality and perception 
of political vendetta. Anticorruption measures that come down on the rivals of the 
top government leaders often contribute to the cynicism regarding the motives and 
thoroughness of the anticorruption initiative. 
 Armed Forces and the Economy 
 Economic efficiency is also challenged by the role of the military in many developing 
countries. The military often claims the prerogative to control those aspects of the 
economy and society that it deems to be relevant to national security. Yet national 
security, as argued in  chapter 9 , is a concept with no obvious boundary; few economic 
policies, programs, or projects cannot be justified as relevant to strengthening national 
defense, maintaining internal order, or simply strengthening the nation so that it can 
stand up to foreign or domestic threats. When the military is in control of the govern-
ment, the option of leaving economic policy in the hands of technical experts often 
gives way to security strategies, such as launching expensive or inefficient programs to 
extend the reach of the state or of the military itself, or to populate a potentially con-
tested area (e.g., the Brazilian Amazonian expansion). Sometimes the military insists 
on maintaining inefficient industries deemed as “commanding heights,” or requires 
that these industries be held domestically even if international firms would be more 
efficient. In other cases, the military establishes and jealously maintains a large indus-
trial complex, invoking national security, even if these industries are inefficient. 
 The military may also be implicated in economic problems through the patterns 
of conflict between the military and others. To be sure, in some circumstances the 
strength of the armed forces deters violence. Yet in other circumstances the military 
reacts with coercion to perceived threats to domestic order or to its own perquisites, 
provoking armed resistance. The cycle of violence, which is often exacerbated if the 
military has taken over governance, often delays the establishment of restoration of 
sustainable democracy. In addition, this cycle of coup d’ é tat, resistance, greater coer-
cion, and human rights violations is often a major deterrent to investment and dis-
rupts economic activity in general. 
 Poverty Alleviation 
 Poverty alleviation, though certainly not the sum total of the efforts to further human 
dignity, is clearly essential. The obstacles to poverty alleviation begin with the inertia 
of discriminatory policies, exacerbated by misguided opposition to the reforms to 
eliminate these policies. Beyond these disadvantages, the government investments 
that could help the poor are often neglected because the benefits and costs of projects 
and programs are underexamined. 
 Persistence of Discriminatory Policies 
 As noted in  chapter 3 , many of the privileges of the wealthy come through the  illib-
eral aspects of economic policy: restricted import licenses, import duties that protect 

Conclusion  ●  215
manufacturers and the modern sector “labor elite,” tax exemptions that reduce the 
government’s capacity to spend on social programs, energy pricing subsidies that 
favor higher income people who consume more energy, and so on. Note that our 
argument is not that all regulations of market forces are bad but rather that many of 
them are, in terms of both equity and economic growth. 3 
 It is therefore highly problematic that even these policies, unwarranted on both 
growth and equity grounds, have resisted reform. In part, as we argue in  chapters 2 
and  3 , the ideological opposition to the dismantling of policies that favor the wealthy 
and the powerful rests on a serious misinterpretation of why income inequality often 
increases as development proceeds. The premise of an unavoidable tradeoff between 
efficiency and equity has defined much of the ideological confrontation. The most 
negative interpretation of growing inequality is that ongoing policy reforms, particu-
larly liberalization initiatives, are prejudicial to the poor. Indeed, there are instances 
in which the enrichment of the already privileged comes at the expense of the poor. 
And it is true that economic growth typically enriches some people, particularly those 
with greater assets in the first place, much more than others, increasing inequality 
of wealth, education, access to health care, and environmental amenities. Growing 
inequality provokes skepticism about the trajectory of development as well as inter-
group conflict. What is too often ignored is that growing inequality often results 
from the expansion and increasing productivity of the modern sector, elevating the 
profits and salaries of owners and workers within this sector, but without depriving 
the relatively lower income owners and workers outside of the modern sector. The 
radical critique against liberalization, that growing inequality is proof of unfairness to 
the poor, has often served as a convenient pretext for resisting liberalization reforms. 
Because growing inequality sometimes can have innocuous causes, a paradigm shift 
is required: from a preoccupation with distribution—always a politically fraught 
topic—to a concern over poverty alleviation. 
 Yet in practice the liberalization efforts themselves often fall short of protecting 
the poor while eliminating the special advantages of the rent-seekers. Although many 
governments have claimed that they were adhering to the suite of the Washington 
Consensus mentioned in several chapters (and thereby seeming to accept the develop-
ment policy leadership of the United States), in fact crucial aspects of the doctrine 
frequently have been omitted in practice. Most importantly, of the ten elements of the 
Washington Consensus reforms (see  chapter 2 ), the two most important for safeguard-
ing the incomes and well-being of low-income families have often been neglected. 
One is to redirect public spending to sectors with both high economic returns  and 
“the potential to improve income distribution.” The other is to secure property rights. 
Without these elements, invoking and applying the Washington Consensus can be 
highly regressive in terms of income distribution and can undermine income opportu-
nities of local people living off natural resources such as forests. John Williamson (1999) 
has expressed regret about how the term has been hijacked by advocates of narrow neo-
liberal, market fundamentalist policies to portray a false image of what Washington-
based development institutions such as the World Bank were really espousing. He 
argues that the truncated conception (“restriction by partial incorporation,” one of the 
dynamics that we describe in  chapter 1 ) is not an effective framework for combating 
poverty but rather a regressive rationalization for “laissez faire Reagonomics.” 

216  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
 In short, because core economic policies often do not directly address poverty 
alleviation, the risks of both neglecting the poor and provoking disruption need to 
be addressed by policies specifically targeting the poor. However, economic theory 
calls for policies that minimally distort the market signals required for economic effi-
ciency. The orthodox approach is to rely on government revenues to provide direct 
payments to the poor; a less preferable alternative—to provide goods and services to 
the poor—limits the capacity of the poor to purchase what they need and opens up 
the possibility of benefit leakage insofar as the nonpoor can manipulate eligibility 
criteria or the poor feel compelled to resell the goods. One of the most promising 
approaches, then, is the direct cash transfer, which can have additional long-term 
benefits, as well as a more compelling appeal to tax payers, if they are conditioned on 
families keeping the children in school and providing for their health care. As men-
tioned in  chapter 2 , conditional cash transfers have strong potential for improving 
human capital, as families become healthier and better educated; they can also ease 
the process of economic reform by reducing the pain of structural adjustment for the 
most vulnerable, and often most potentially disruptive, populations. 
 However, whether the compensatory benefits for the poor are regarded as worth-
while government expenditures depends on whether their advantages can be ade-
quately appreciated. Sound economic policymaking requires budget decisions that 
take into account, as accurately as possible, the full range of benefits and costs of 
government spending, including the less tangible gains in education, health care, and 
environmental protection, and such costs as environmental degradation, population 
displacements, and so on. Incorporating the long-term, often intangible benefits of 
meeting the poor’s needs and wants requires intensive analysis that many planning 
agencies neglect. The failure to do so is as much a governance issue as an economic 
methodology issue. The declining use of benefit-cost analysis to guide government 
investment decisions (see  chapters 2 and  3 ) means that the investment decisions can 
be made without going through the difficult, imprecise, but necessary step of trying 
to inventory and value the consequences. Moreover, because the poor generally face 
greater environmental vulnerability, the neglect of environmental costs poses risks to 
the poor’s income from degraded forestry, farming, and fishing, as well as threats to 
health because of pollution that the poor are less able to avoid. 
 The stability of social safety net programs is frequently essential for poverty alle-
viation and the general well-being of the most vulnerable populations. However, this 
need for continuity clashes with the conventional approaches to public finance preva-
lent in developed nations. Conventional public finance theory dictates that revenues 
from taxation and natural resource royalties ought to go directly into the central 
treasury, to be allocated across the whole range of possible programs and projects 
in order to maximize the overall societal benefit. However, this flexibility, despite 
its virtue of permitting planners to adapt to changing problems and opportunities, 
presumes enough societal consensus that the poverty alleviation and social safety nets 
would not be jettisoned. In a developed country with a stable set of practices and 
expectations regarding the broad outlines of income distribution and social safety net 
support for the poor, the resources devoted to social safety nets are likely, in many 
instances, to be fairly stable. Yet there is evidence that propoor social safety net pro-
grams are vulnerable to severe cuts when the economy falters and taxpayers become 

Conclusion  ●  217
more self-protective. 4 Therefore, stabilizing the financing of these programs ought to 
be a high priority. 
 The logic for stabilizing social safety net programs conforms to the general logic 
outlined earlier regarding the advantages of simple, broad, and uniform measures. 
The political considerations come to the fore as well: they begin with the need to con-
vince the nonpoor that social programs should benefit those who contribute mini-
mally to taxes. A broad social safety net program is likely to be more resilient insofar 
as efforts to terminate or emasculate such a program would arouse more opposition. 
This does not mean that all eligible beneficiaries would receive the same magnitude of 
benefits, but they must be sufficiently motivated to organize against severe cutbacks. 
Another important requirement is simplicity of the compensatory program, in terms 
of eligibility criteria, lean administration, and insulation from egregious corruption. 
However, a social safety net program that depends on recipients’ contributions (e.g., a 
conventional pension plan) may seem broad and uniform but would exclude workers 
outside of the formal sector and families too poor to contribute. 5 
 Chapters 4 and  5 on governance reveal some of the obstacles to addressing the 
problems of the poor. Understanding the obstacles to fair and effective governance 
has advanced across the social sciences. And the doctrines of greater and fairer par-
ticipation in governance have been considerably refined, evolving from traditional, 
centralized, top-down public administration to democratic governance, but in many 
countries have not been fully embraced. The typically far greater access to revenues 
enjoyed by central governments (whether through taxation or raw material export 
revenues) has reinforced the power of central governments to control subnational 
authorities, and in some instances, deconcentration as a variant of decentralization 
has imposed even greater central government control over local affairs. 
 Conflict-Sensitive Development 
 The fragmented nature of most government policymaking rarely brings sufficient 
knowledge of the potential for intergroup conflict into the selection of development 
policies. Strategies that entail population movements (e.g., resettlement programs, 
physical infrastructure projects that displace people, regional development policies that 
induce spontaneous migrations to favored areas) often create flashpoints involving the 
preexisting populations and the “intruders.” Greater state presence may be required 
to keep the peace, but the state’s expansion into hitherto lightly governed frontiers 
frequently provokes resistance from the indigenous population. Strategies that involve 
direct or indirect redistribution of income, job opportunities, educational access, and so 
on, often create hostility between favored and disfavored groups. They can also reinforce 
rigid group identities and stereotypes, as in the case of affirmative action programs that 
add economic and political salience of such identities as Afro-Brazilian or “backward 
castes” in India. Liberalization initiatives that hold the long-term promise of increasing 
economic efficiency and eliminating the special privileges of the wealthy and politically 
powerful have had a frightful history of riots, other forms of disruption, and military 
coups, especially when introduced alongside painful austerity measures. 
 Conflict-sensitive development policies include those that encourage broader 
sharing of economic roles to reduce the perception that ostensibly exploitive roles 

218  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
are held predominantly by one ethnicity (e.g., Chinese merchants in Southeast Asia; 
Lebanese shopkeepers in Senegal). They can also involve policies that create mutually 
beneficial economic interdependence among groups, deterring aggressive confronta-
tions that might threaten the gains. They may entail compensatory programs that 
soften the impacts on the groups otherwise disadvantaged by the main thrust of 
the strategy. They may reduce the salience of group differences through integrated 
schools or military service. 
 However, given the lack of awareness of conflict potentials by analysts in economic 
policymaking institutions, the conflict-sensitive policies may seem suboptimal, even 
if taking the risk of violence and consequent economic disruption into account would 
reveal that conflict-inducing policies may be worse from an economic perspective as 
well. Just as the selection of development policies must heed the institutional con-
straints, it must also note the fragility of peace in many developing countries. 
 If order is to be maintained by the armed forces, the evolution of its own insti-
tutional roles becomes crucial. A positive trend has been that in many countries the 
armed forces seem to have accepted—in principle—the doctrine of military subser-
vience and political neutrality. Yet the practice often falls short. In one variant, the 
military leaders claim the role of “safeguarding” democracy by dictating processes or 
policies, or even by ousting a civilian government they deem as bent on undermining 
the very democracy that brought that government to power.  6   In another variant, the 
government cannot control disruption, and military leaders conclude that maintain-
ing order justifies intervention. In this context, antigovernment opposition leaders 
have an incentive to provoke confrontation. Yet another variant is an alliance between 
military leaders and particular segments of civilian political forces, as in Turkey and 
Thailand, that may or may not result in military intervention but provides the armed 
forces with more control than full subservience. Sometimes all of these circumstances 
converge, as in the case of Egypt currently. As  chapter 9 clarifies, for many countries 
the crucial unfinished business is making civilian government robust enough to shep-
herd the military to a constructive and politically set of roles. If the armed forces are 
to be shifted to a less militarized, less fully mobilized form, whether a national guard 
or a proportionally greater reserve force, the civilian government institutions, and the 
robustness of the economy, must be stable enough. 
 Environment 
 All of the foci of this book bear on the weaknesses of environmental protection and 
conservation in developing countries, accounting for the largely dismal record in 
many countries. 
 Governance structures in many developing countries put the agencies oversee-
ing environmental protection into a weak intragovernmental position vis- à -vis the 
ministries mandated to expand industry, agriculture, resettlement, and other initia-
tives that pose environmental and conservation threats. Even decentralization, often 
posed as a corrective for national governments’ low environmental priorities, can 
undermine environmental protection. For example, in China the decentralization 
of environmental regulation enforcement to the provincial level permits the national 
government to claim environmental responsibility by having what appear to be 

Conclusion  ●  219
stringent environmental regulations, but the provincial authorities have little incen-
tive to enforce them at the cost of economic growth (Lo, Fryxell, and Wong 2006). 
The devolution of responsibility for forest exploitation has often left underfunded 
local governments or community groups to grapple with already degraded forest-
lands, and sometimes provides perverse incentives for local authorities to overexploit 
the forests (Andersson, Gibson, and Lehoucq 2004). 
 Conflicts over the distribution of revenues from resource extraction, exacerbated 
by lack of transparency in both contracting the extraction effort and channeling reve-
nues, have led to the waste and misallocation of resource wealth and are root causes of 
some of the violence in resource-dependent countries. Vigorous international efforts 
by coalitions of international NGOs and bilateral and intergovernmental develop-
ment agencies have been launched to promote improved resource governance for 
greater transparency and sound policies. 7 The challenge is to induce governments to 
comply with the guidelines despite the possibilities of huge gains through corrupt 
practices. 
 The relationship between the military and the environment is often driven by the 
dominance of national security as integral to the military’s doctrine. The Brazilian 
expansion into the Amazon, initiated under a military government, has caused con-
siderable forest degradation. 
 Environmental NGOs have played a highly constructive role in many countries, 
yet two types of conflicts frequently arise. One is that NGO leaders in some countries 
view their relationship with government as intrinsically adversarial, with the result 
that government leaders disregard NGO input. The other conflict is between envi-
ronmental NGOs, particularly international ones, and local grassroots organizations 
when the NGOs call for conservation that threatens livelihoods. 
 Regarding economic methodology and doctrines, in the use of standard economic 
approaches to select programs and projects, the long-term, less easily identified or 
monetized environmental impacts are often given short shrift. While some interna-
tional organizations, such as the World Bank, have adopted the approach of holding 
up projects that have open-ended, difficult-to-assess environmental risks. 8 
 Final Thoughts 
 The problems facing developing countries in economic policy, governance, and inter-
national interactions, as played out among so many types of institutions, can easily 
be seen by pessimists as too entangled to hold much hope for sustained progress of 
inclusive development. Weak institutions preclude the optimal policies for growth 
and poverty alleviation; corruption has corrosive impacts on both growth and equity; 
political instability and limits to honest incomes make corruption all the more attrac-
tive; conflicting objectives among civilian government leaders, civil society, and the 
military reduce the stability and soundness of policies even beyond the uncertainties 
intrinsic to economically fragile nations. 
 Yet, as our chapters have conveyed, progress can have its own momentum. In 
many respects, economic policies have shed some of the more regressive and growth-
restricting elements formerly propped up by now-discredited doctrines. The paths 
to stronger institutions have been blazed by enough nations to point to the social, 

220  
●  The Evolution of Development Thinking
political, and economic advantages of sounder, more inclusive governance. As nations 
gain political stability, especially if based on broader political participation through 
regular democratic channels that preempt the disruption to gain voice, the military’s 
role is likely to be constrained as well. The institutions through which developed 
nations impinge upon developing nations, whether bilateral, multilateral, or nongov-
ernmental, have also been learning how to play more constructive roles. 

 Notes 
 1 Introduction 
 1 .  We embrace the policy sciences framework (Lasswell 1971) to anchor our examination in 
the task of exploring how real-world problems—poverty, infringements on human rights, 
authoritarian and unresponsive governance, physical insecurity, and sluggish economic 
growth—in many developing countries can be understood and overcome. 
 2 Evolution of Economic Development Theories and 
Doctrines since World War II 
 1 .  The First Development Decade (1961–1970) specified a 5 percent sustained annual 
growth rate by 1970; actual was 4 percent. The Second Development Decade (1971–
1980) specified a 6 percent annual growth rate by 1980; actual was 4.8 percent. The Third 
Development Decade specified a 7 percent growth rate during that decade; the actual was 
2.8 percent. Similar shortfalls pertain to agricultural and industrial growth rates and sav-
ings rates (Roberts 2005, 114). 
 2 .  For example, see Chenery (1975), Hirschman (1981), Hoadley (1981), Killick (1976), 
Krugman (1994), Meier (1968, 1987), Meier and Seers (1984), Rostow (1956), Schultz 
(1986), Stern and Ferreira (1997), and Tignor (2006). Kapur, Lewis, and Webb (1997), 
with an exhaustive history and set of commentaries on the World Bank, also have highly 
relevant material on the evolution of development thinking. 
  3 .  Like for many broad labels, considerable confusion reigns as to whether a particular theo-
rist ought to be classified as being a neoclassical economist. However, Remenyi (1979, 
56–59) offers a helpful characterization of the hardcore propositions of the essential com-
mitments of neoclassical economics: (1) Consumers and producers can be assumed to be 
rational decision makers who know their wants. (2) Economic activity is motivated by 
individual self-interest. (3) More is better than less. (4) Given perfect knowledge and good 
government, economic welfare is maximized by free competition. (5) Although welfare 
and economic welfare are not synonymous, the latter is a good approximation for the 
former. (6) Stable Pareto-efficient equilibrium solutions can be defined for any and all 
markets relevant to economic research and analysis. (7) Everything has its opportunity 
cost. (8) Abstract, reduced-form models and simplifying assumptions are valid tools of 
economic a nalysis. 
 4 .  The GDP growth rate is estimated on the basis of the incremental capital-output ratio—
the change in capital required to generate a unit change in GDP. The domestic savings rate 
and the effectiveness of capital to generate economic growth determine the growth rate.  

222  
●  Notes
 5 .  Kuznets (1955, 24–25) warned that “if and when industrialization begins, the dislocating 
effects on these societies, in which there is often an old hardened crust of economic and 
social institutions, are likely to be quite sharp—so sharp as to destroy the positions of 
some of the lower groups more rapidly than opportunities elsewhere in the economy may 
be created for them.” 
 6 .  Columbia U niversity econom ist R agnar N urkse ( 1953, 21)  a rgued, 
  Why do [poor] countries not push their exports of primary products according to the 
rules of international specialization, and import the goods they need for a “balanced 
diet”? . . . For fairly obvious reasons, expansion of primary production for export is 
apt to encounter adverse price conditions on the world market, unless the indus-
trial countries’ demand is steadily expanding . . . In the present century . . . [t]here has 
been some sluggishness in the industrial countries’ demand for primary products, 
and despite the recent raw material boom there is no certainty that this sluggishness 
is gone for good.  
 7 .  Tax reform, as endorsed by international financial institutions, entails marginal rate 
reduction, tax base broadening, and special tax treatment elimination. See Gillis (1988). 
 8 .  Pioneered by Wassily Leontief, who won the 1973 Nobel Prize in economics. 
 9 .  As Wing ( 2004, 2)  not es, 
 Computable general equilibrium (CGE) models are simulations that combine the 
abstract general equilibrium structure . . . with realistic economic data to solve numeri-
cally for the levels of supply, demand and price that support equilibrium across a 
specified set  of markets. 
 10 .  Chenery (1961, 21) defines balanced growth as “simultaneous expansion of a number of 
sectors of production,” crediting Nurkse (1953) and Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) for estab-
lishing that market signals regarding comparative advantage are unreliable and that the 
synergies among sectors should not be neglected. 
 11 .  Anderson (1994, 16) concludes that “[b]roadly, developing countries tend to underprice 
farm products whereas industrial countries tend to overprice them.” 
  12  .   The prominent 1981 World Bank Berg Report documented the policy biases and 
concluded, 
 There is a fairly widespread consensus as to the main factors behind the present rural 
crisis . . . disruptions caused by wars and civil strife, drought and poor rainfall patterns 
during the 1970s, and rapid population growth, which pushed cultivation into less 
productive areas. Agriculture was also neglected for a long time by government and 
donors, as it was by development theorists. (48–49) 
 Bates (1981) also enumerates the bases of the bias in Sub-Saharan Africa and provides 
multiple political explanations for it. 
 13 .  So-called “ tied a id.” 
 14 .  Technically, it is the discount rate that would render the net present value of the project 
equal to zero. 
 15 .  Sometimes labeled the two-sector model, but this can be confused with the two-sector 
model of household and firm; this confusion can be avoided by using the term dual-
sector. 
 16 .  See Zeller and Meyer (2002) and Flynn (2007) for useful histories and assessments. 
 17 .  Streeten and Burki (1978, 413) argue that “BN gives high priority (attaches considerable 
weight) to meeting specified needs of the poorest people, not primarily in order to raise 
productivity (though additional production is necessary), but as an end in itself.” 
  18  .   Streeten and Burki (1978, 413) assert that “societies can define their own basket of basic 
goods and services. The list of goods included and the quantities in which they are to be 
consumed would differ according to the society’s objective.” 

Notes  ●  223
 19 .  Streeten and Burki (1978, 415) had to rely on the following rough estimates:
 Well over 50% of the population has inadequate caloric intake; over 60% receive less 
than the minimum daily requirement of proteins and the entire population has vitamin 
deficiencies . . . this translates into about 2.5 million tons of foodgrains. At least 20–25% 
of the population does not have minimum clothing. This is equivalent to about 100 mil-
lion square meters of cloth . . . The share of the absolutely poor in total income is esti-
mated at only 30% or $2.6 billion, giving them an income per head of only $56 . . . to 
satisfy the three core needs of these people, they must receive on average at least $43 in 
additional income. However, since perhaps only two-thirds of the extra income is spent 
on core basic needs, the absolute increase in incomes may amount to $65  per capita .  
 20 .  The World Bank lends for projects submitted by developing country governments along 
with their own assessments of the projects’ costs and benefits; the World Bank staff then 
conducts its own appraisal. In practice, the Bank staff has significant prior input in the 
selection and design of submitted proposals. 
 21 .  See Ascher (1983) and Leff (1985b) for accounts of the experience of trying to introduce 
this method; see Cleaver (1980) for a prominent example of its use. 
 22 .  The broadest definition of the term institution is a regular pattern of interaction and 
expectations, whether formal or informal. 
 23 .  See Wolf (1979) for a prominent articulation of the policy (i.e., nonmarket) failure expla-
nation for poor performance. 
 24 .  Ronald Coase, James Buchanan, Jr., Herbert Simon, Douglass North, Oliver Williamson, 
and Elinor Ostrom are generally regarded as fitting one or both criteria. 
 25 .  Neoclassical economics and institutional economics do not conceive of transaction costs 
in the same way. Allen (1999, 898, 901) notes that the neoclassical definition of transac-
tion costs is “costs resulting from the transfer of property rights,” whereas the broader 
conception from the property rights approach of the new institutional economics is “costs 
establishing and maintaining property rights.” This latter conception entails a more cen-
tral role of the state as protector of the institutions that secure property rights. 
 26 .  For ex ample, see B uchanan, Tollison, a nd Tullock ( 1980). 
 3 Economic Policy and Program Practice 
 1 .  Lora (2001) developed indicators of structural reforms in trade, finance, taxation, privati-
zation, and labor market regulation for 19 Latin American countries from 1985 to 1999.  
 2 .  Except for Chile, they are small nations: Bahamas, Belize, Costa Rica, and Panama. 
  3 .  On deregulation, 140th, 135th, 147th, and 151st, respectively; on trade openness, 150th, 
67th, 81st, and 151st, respectively. 
  4 .  This includes both North Africa and Sub-Saharan Africa; the Economic Freedom assess-
ment includes 40 African nations. 
 5 .  On deregulation, Tunisia, Morocco, Algeria, and Egypt were ranked 107th, 137th, and 
146th, 148th, respectively; on trade openness, 79th, 75th, 141st, and 126th, respectively.  
 6 .  Similarly, the World Bank Group’s ease of “trading across borders” rankings place nearly 
80 percent of the African countries below the median; half are in the bottom quartile. 
 7 .  Calculated from the World Bank Databank site,  http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/
exploretopics/trading-across-borders 
 8 .  World Bank Group (2014). Djibouti, Morocco, and Tunisia are above the median. 
 9 .  Calculated from the IMF database (2014), using IMF country designations. 
 10 .  Ortiz and Cummins (2011). Apparently, given their reliance on World Bank data, 
the 36 low-income countries are 27 Sub-Saharan African countries, plus Afghanistan, 
Bangladesh, Cambodia, Haiti, Kyrgyzstan, Nepal, North Korea, and Tajikistan. 

224  
●  Notes
  11  .   The neoclassical perspective is that protective tariffs protect the profits and wages of inef-
ficient industry to the detriment of the rest of society (Little 1982; Lal 2000); the neoclas-
sical position on credit is that market-sensitive credit mechanisms are superior because 
administered credit allocation favors the well-connected (World Bank 1975). Regarding 
minimum wages, the neoclassical argument is that the cost of labor in the privileged 
modern sector of the labor elite discourages hiring. Regarding tax exemptions designed to 
induce investment, the neoclassical position is that they reduce revenues that the govern-
ment could invest in social services, divert investment into activities unjustified by before-
tax rates of return, and favor the wealthy who typically have more capability to avoid or 
evade taxation (Harberger 1984, 432–434; Gillis 1988). 
 12 .  Cited i n N ellis ( 2012, 2) . 
 13 .  A better measure of tax effort than the ratio of tax revenues to GDP is the volume of tax 
revenues to the tax capacity, which takes into account factors such as per capita income, 
the size of the agricultural sector, and/or income distribution to determine how much 
revenue could feasibly be collected. 
  14  .   Pessino and Fenochietto (2010, 74) present different metrics of tax effort and choose the 
truncated normal heterogeneous model as their criterion for ranking, which takes into 
account the impact of corruption and inflation on the inefficiency of tax collection. 
 15 .  Useful summaries are found in Grosh et al. (2008) and Fiszbein and Schady (2009). 
 16 .  For Asia, real per capita GDP would increase by 0.53 percent; 0.44 percent for Eastern 
European and Central Asian nations; 0.56 for Latin America and the Caribbean; 0.47 per-
cent for the Middle East and North Africa; 0.55 percent for Sub-Saharan Africa. 
 17 .  Reported in World Bank (2012c). Twenty-six African nations have reported data on public 
education expenditure by level. Unfortunately, only one North African country, Tunisia, 
reports this information; the latest figure of the Tunisian proportion of expenditure tar-
geted to higher education is 23 percent. Educational data have been quite slow to update. 
 18 .  The three that achieved that level were Botswana, Rwanda, and Zambia. 
 19 .  This ranking excludes the city-states of Hong Kong and Singapore. World Bank 
(2011b). 
 20 .  In an updated publication, Alston (2010) still finds high rates of return. 
 21 .  For detailed information on the Chinese infrastructure strategy, see Kim and Nangia (2010). 
 22 .  Some impacts, such as the health and education improvements due to the greater ease of 
people to reach health clinics and schools, cannot be systematically assessed. 
 23 .  Calculated from Tables 6 and 7 in Canning and Bennathan (2007). For the roads sample, 
eleven of the countries are Latin American, eight are Sub-Saharan, two are South Asian, 
two are Southeast Asian, and two are Middle Eastern. For electricity sample, sixteen are 
Latin American, eleven are Sub-Saharan, six are Southeast Asian, five are Middle Eastern, 
five are South Asian, four are Middle Eastern, and the remaining two are Fiji and China. 
 24 .  Government policies unavoidably promote or discourage investment and overall spending 
in different sectors through the budget allocations to sectoral ministries (e.g., ministries of 
agriculture or education), tax policies, subsidies of input such as energy, the stringency or 
leniency of regulations, and so on. 
 25 .  Confusion over education returns arises because social returns are not returns to society as 
a whole, but rather only the private economic returns  minus societal costs of providing the 
education. Patrinos and Psacharopoulos (2011, 10) note that “[e]stimates of social returns 
to education, as commonly found in the literature, ignore non-income benefits of educa-
tion (e.g., improved health) and the possibility of positive externalities from education, 
such as productivity spillovers, lower crime, reduced use of social services, increased civic 
participation, and so on.” Yet even when social includes impacts on the rest of society, the 
findings have been highly inconsistent (Venniker 2001). 

Notes  ●  225
 26 .  See Bloom and Canning (2003) and Jack and Lewis (2009). 
 27 .   The World Bank (2013) provides a useful definition of the computable general equilib-
rium model: “Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) models offer a comprehensive 
way of modeling the overall impact of policy changes on the economy. They are com-
pletely-specified models of an economy or a region, including all production activities, 
factors and institutions . . . These models incorporate many economic linkages and can be 
used to try to explain medium- to long-term trends and structural responses to changes in 
development p olicy.” 
 28 .  Van de Laar (1980, 221) argued that “[m]any Bank staff . . . feel that the calculation of 
project rates of return is principally intended to put the ‘icing on the cake’ after all the 
interesting decisions have been made. Insofar as Executive Directors need to be able to 
show that they have approved ‘sound’ . . . projects, it is necessary to have a yardstick.” 
 29 .  The same problems hold for the regional development banks: the Asian Development 
Bank (2013, 1) reported, “Through a series of annual retrospectives from 2003 to 2008, 
ERD [the Asian Development Bank’s Economic Research Department] reviewed the 
quality of economic analysis in the ADB and noted significant scope for improvement, 
particularly in the articulation of the projects, economic rationale, demand analysis, and 
alternatives a nalysis.” 
 30 .  See Mok (2008) for a summary of the efforts and obstacles to extend education in Vietnam.  
 4 Evolution of Governance and Development 
Administration Theory 
 1 .  Cawson (1985: 38) defines corporatism as the “process in which organizations represent-
ing monopolistic functional interests engage in political exchange with state agencies over 
public policy outputs which involves those organizations in a role which combines inter-
est representation and policy implementation through delegated self-enforcement.” 
  2 .  As a Princeton professor, Woodrow Wilson (1887) wrote the landmark article “The Study 
of A dministration.” 
  3 .  For example, the University of Southern California’s School of Citizenship and Public 
Administration became the School of Policy, Planning and Development, and is now the 
Sol Price School of Public Policy. See also Lynn (1996) and Allison (2008). 
 4 .  See especially Foucault et al. (1991) for a particularly philosophical treatment. 
  5  .   For example, the so-called Istanbul Consensus emerging from the 2011 Fourth UN 
Conference on the Least Developed Countries. 
  6  .   Of course, other institutions, from religious institutions to multinational banks dating 
back to the Renaissance, have always played a role. 
 5 Evolution of Governance and Development 
Administration Practice 
 1 .  Tosun and Yilmaz (2008, 8, 28–29) report that in the Middle East and North African 
region the deconcentrated units of the central government provide most public ser-
vices, including health and education, while the role of decentralized units (municipali-
ties) is limited to construction of local roads, street maintenance, and other mundane 
functions. 
  2 .  In political science, the most useful definition of legitimacy is behavioral: the belief on the 
part of citizens that the form of government is appropriate and the top government offi-
cials have been selected through appropriate processes. This is in contrast to conceptions 

226  
●  Notes
of legitimacy as an attribute apart from people’s attitudes. The latter type of definitions is 
used in political discourse as a form of demand; for example, “This government is legiti-
mate because the King/God/ the Party has blessed it.” Using the behavioral definition, it 
is clear that undemocratic governments may be considered legitimate. 
 6 Evolving Roles of NGOs in Developing Countries 
 1 .  Article 71 of the UN Charter formalized NGOs and included them as an integral part of 
UN a ctivities. 
  2 .  Davis (2013) notes the existence of religious orders, missionary groups, merchant com-
bines, and scientific societies beginning at least in the seventeenth century as performing 
functions one could readily associate with NGOs in more recent times. Pressing back even 
farther in time, there is clear evidence of humanitarian societies providing nongovernmen-
tal public services along China’s fabled river systems as early as the thirteenth century. 
 3 .  http://www.ushistory.org/documents/ask-not.htm 
 4 .  http://www.un.org/geninfo/bp/enviro.htm 
 5 .  For the reader’s convenience, these are fiscal discipline, redirection of public expendi-
ture priorities toward sectors with both high economic returns and potential to improve 
income distribution, tax reform, interest rate liberalization, competitive exchange rates, 
trade liberalization, liberalization of inflows of foreign direct investment, privatization 
of state-owned enterprises, deregulation to abolish barriers to entry and exit, and secure 
property r ights. 
 6 .  Interview: www.democracynow.org/2004/8/23 
  7 .  Aggressive attempts to define and assess measures of effectiveness may actually impede 
performance because of burdensome record keeping and reporting. Small NGOs are espe-
cially vulnerable to this because of limited personnel. 
 8 .  Pelaez (2012) recites a list of confrontations in the human rights and civil liberties realms 
between NGOs and Venezuela, Nicaragua, Bolivia, Ecuador, Cuba, and Belarus. Russia 
continues to crackdown on a wide range of NGOs (Weir 2013). The various issues and 
tensions were hardly confined to socialist and former Communist states (Mayr 2010; 
Hubbard 2013; Murphy 2013). 
  9 .  It shows up in contemporary times in theories and practical activities related to social 
enterprises, a topic we return to later in this chapter. 
 10 .  The commercial possibilities of the poorest of the poor underlie and motivate theories to 
exploit “The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid” (Prahalad and Hart 2002). 
  11 .  Dees and Anderson (2006, 39) conclude, “The construct of social entrepreneur-
ship . . . reflects a breakdown in the boundaries between business and the nonprofit sector 
in the search for new approaches to social problems and needs. It is a development that is 
potentially promising, but also risky.” 
 The seminal Dees and Anderson survey has been augmented by Dacin, Dacin, and 
Matear (2010), where disdain for theorizing is signaled in the survey’s subtitle: “Why We 
Don’t Need a New Theory and How We Move Forward from Here.” 
 12 .  Several organizations on this list are not well known outside of the social enterprise realm. 
Kiva Microfunds, Acumen, SELCO, and Seventh Generation are all interesting in their 
own r ight. 
 13 .  The late John Sawhill, former president of the Nature Conservancy. 
 14 .  Citizens United is a tax-exempt 501(c) 3 organization. The Supreme Court decision, 
 Citizens United vs. Federal Election Commission (No. 08–205, decided January 21, 2010), 
opened up the full range of nonprofit, public benefit, nongovernmental institutional 

Notes  ●  227
options to heretofore prohibited political and commercial activities ( http://www.law.cor-
nell.edu/supct/html/08 ; http://www.followthemoney.org/Press ). 
 15 .  It was overtaken in value by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. 
 16 .  http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/henry-ford-ii-leaves-post-at-ford-foundation 
 17 .  The  combined State Department and USAID budget requested in FY 2014 was $47.8 
billion (  http://www.usaid.gov/results-and-data ). 
 18 .  Four to five billion dollars of the proposed USAID budget is earmarked for Afghanistan 
and P akistan. 
 19 .  Tetlock a nd G ardner ( 2013: 81)  r eport, 
 In the late 1980s one of us (Philip Tetlock) launched a [forecasting] tournament. It 
involved 284 economists, political scientists, intelligence analysts and journalists and 
collected almost 28,000 predictions. The results were startling. The average expert did 
only slightly better than random guessing. Even more disconcerting, experts with the 
most inflated views of their own batting averages tended to attract the most media 
attention. Their more self-effacing colleagues, the ones we should be heeding, often 
don’t get on to our radar screens. 
 20 .  It is unusual to find thoughtful efforts to combine ecological and human systems directly 
and in terms of stability and resilience. The giant reinsurance organization, Munich Re, 
has done excellent work in the last ten years or so by sponsoring an annual Summer 
Academy on Social Vulnerability (Hamza et al. 2012). 
 21 .  Hurricane Mitch struck Central America in 1998 with such terrific force as to call into 
question the very legitimacy of Honduras and Nicaragua. The lessons learned in this 
disaster are still being assembled, although they indict national, international, and non-
governmental organizations with nearly equal opprobrium (Bradshaw, Linneker, and 
Z ú niga 2001; Allianz 2012: 112–128). The 2010 Haitian earthquake is likewise filled 
with i mportant lesson s. 
 7 Evolution of Foreign Assistance Theories and Doctrines 
 1 .  For incisive background works, see Montgomery (1962), Montgomery (1967), Shin (1969), 
Tendler (1975), Montgomery (1986), Riddell (1987), and Tarnoff and Lawson (2012). 
 2 .  US official development assistance exceeded US$30 billion in 2012, two-and-a-half times 
greater than that of the United Kingdom, the second largest donor by absolute volume 
(OECD 2013b) . 
 3 .  Roughly ten percent of foreign assistance during the Cold War came from the Soviet 
Union (Dreier, Fuchs, and Nunnenkamp 2012, 2). 
  4 .  These included prominent political scientists and economists such as Gabriel Almond, 
Daniel Lerner, Max Millikan, Lucian Pye, Paul Rosenstein-Rodan, and Walt Rostow. 
  5 .  An excellent survey of early post-WWII thinking about modernization theory and the role 
of the United States can be found in Latham (2011, especially Chapter 2). 
  6 .  That is, its successor, the Mutual Security Agency (MSA) (1951–1953), and the Foreign 
Operations Agency (1953–1955), which superseded the MSA. 
  7 .  See Arase (1995, 2005) and Ascher (2007) for more details about the contrasting foreign 
assistance a pproaches. 
  8 .  A US Congressional Research Service notes that “For FY2000 and thereafter, Plan 
Colombia funds are assigned to the State Department’s International Narcotics and 
Law Enforcement Bureau (INL) or the Andean Counterdrug Initiative (ACI). The State 
Department transfers funds to other agencies carrying out programs in Colombia, of 
which USAID has received the largest portion” (Beittel 2012, 38). 

228  
●  Notes
 9 .  Comecon consisted of Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, 
Mongolia, Poland, Romania, the Soviet Union, and Vietnam. 
 10 .  As noted in  chapter 2 , the World Bank Independent Evaluation Group (2010) reported 
that even the World Bank, long a champion of systematic analysis, has used benefit-cost 
analysis less and less in its project evaluations, with the lowest utilization for education 
and health projects. 
 11 .  McCleary and Barro (2008, 512) report that “[i]n recent years, an estimated 41% of U.S. over-
seas development funds are channeled through PVOs, whereas in Japan, only 2%, and in the 
United Kingdom, 12% of development funds are estimated to flow through nonprofits.”  
 12 .  Its functions were absorbed by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization and the World 
Food Programme, both predating the World Food Council’s formation in 1974. 
 13 .  The definitional distinction is that the members of NGOs ostensibly act in the public 
interest, for people other than themselves, or both; whereas members of grassroots orga-
nizations explicitly act in their own interest. 
 14 .  Sachs (2003, 38) notes, “Rather than focus on improving institutions in sub-Saharan 
Africa, it would be wise to devote more effort to fighting AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria; 
addressing the depletion of soil nutrients; and building more roads to connect remote 
populations to regional markets and coastal ports.” 
 15 .  Kapur a nd Webb ( 2000, 2)  a rgue, 
 Governance was thrust into prominence with the end of the cold war and the resulting 
need to recreate civil societies in former communist states. Even more broadly, inter-
national political culture has changed, making state sovereignty far less sacrosanct in 
international discourse. One aspect of globalization has been to change international 
rules and norms in ways that weaken the “sovereignty” defence against intervention. 
The setting up of the International Criminal Court and international conventions that 
allow crimes against humanity to be tried in countries where they were not committed 
are ex amples of t his shi ft. 
 8 International Development in the American Grain: 
From Point Four to the Present 
 1 .  Quoted in  USA Today , February 2, 2009,  http://www.usatoday.com/news/washington/2009-
02-01-aid-inside_N.htm 
 2 .  For an account of the internal machinations behind Kennedy’s historic declaration, see 
Heffron ( 2009). 
 3  .   The relative percentages of US bilateral and multilateral ODA were calculated from figures 
at the US ODA Database,  http://usoda.eads.usaidallnet.gov/data/summary_reports.html  
  4  .  In a 2010 survey conducted by the polling firm Polimetrix/YouGov, participants were asked 
“Would you prefer that the US give economic aid directly to a country or give aid to an 
international organization (such as the World Bank or International Monetary Fund) which 
then would give it to the country?” Only 22 percent of the respondents chose multilateral 
delivery, 78 percent preferring the bilateral option (Milner and Tingley 2013, 322–324). 
  5 .  Dean Achison, Secretary of State under Truman, stated, “We are willing to help peo-
ple who believe the way we do, to continue to live the way they want to live” (cited in 
Williams 1973, 474). 
 6 .  As McVety (2012, 105) has recently written, “While many policymakers recognized the 
intrinsic humanitarianism of promoting economic development for its own sake, the realities 
of international affairs and domestic politics dictated that self-interest . . . had to be the foun-
dation of U.S. foreign policy.” See also Ruttan (1996, 1–4), where he paints the contradiction 
underlying American exceptionalism as one between our idealism and our realism.  

Notes  ●  229
 7 .  Under current law, 100 percent of Food for Peace Act (FPA) disbursements must be 
produced in the United States and 50 percent shipped overseas on US-flagged ships, 
including a requirement for monetization of at least 15 percent ( http://borgenproject.org/
food-aid-reform-act-1/ ). This although “food aid currently compris[es] just 0.86 percent 
of total U.S. agricultural exports and 0.56 percent of net farm income” ( http://www.
washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2013/05/17/obamas-plan-to-overhaul-food-
aid-is-running-into-trouble-in-congress/ ). 
 8 .   This last point is so essential to the orientations and limitations of US foreign assistance 
as well as the evolution of militaries in developing countries that  chapter 10 is devoted to 
the security-economic assistance nexus in the crucial cases of US intervention in Korea, 
Vietnam, and Chile. 
 9 .  One candidate for notable exception to this generalization is Ekbladh (2010). 
  10  .   “No economic or technical assistance shall be supplied to any other nation unless,” the 
Act stated, “the President finds that the supplying of such assistance will strengthen the 
security of the United States and promote world peace, and unless the recipient country 
has agreed to join in promoting international understanding and good will, and in main-
taining world peace, and to take such action as may be mutually agreed upon to eliminate 
causes of international tension” (Mutual Security Act of 1951, sec. 511b). 
 11 .  The loss of China did not precipitate communist takeovers in Indonesia, Thailand, or 
other large Southeast Asian countries; the wars in Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam were 
wars of national liberation from colonial and neocolonial governments, exploited perhaps 
by Moscow but never under its direct control. The Sino-Soviet split would make sure 
of that (Herring 1979, 149–150, 242; Hobsbawm 1994, 346–347). Eisenhower (1954) 
introduced his domino theory at a press conference. 
 12 .  Judging from the relative scope and magnitude of the US and Soviet aid programs, there 
was little real competition in the first place. In 1964, US foreign aid outstripped the 
Soviet Union by ten times. In FY 1968, US aid commitments equaled the total Soviet 
expenditures between 1954 and 1968. 
 13 .  See a lso U SAID ( 1982). 
 14 .  See Prosterman (2007); Raup (1968, especially 574); and Gaud (1968). For a useful over-
view, see Prosterman and Riedinger (1987). 
  15 .  Rennack, Mages, and Chesser (2011, 1) note, “Over time, as enactment of foreign aid 
authorizations waned, the general provisions of foreign operations appropriations measures 
increasingly have become a legislative option for Congress to assert its views on the role 
and use of U.S. foreign policy, put limits or conditions on assistance, or even authorize new 
programs. As a result, some contend, general provisions have become more important.” 
 16 .  For supplemental emergency funding estimates, see Lawson, Epstein, and Nakamura 
(2010). 
 17 .  For a treatment of McNamara’s global liberalism and its critics, those who viewed the 
Bank “as a self-indulgent institution that forced unsuccessful, neo-socialist programs on 
nations that would otherwise have successfully embraced private enterprise,” see Milobsky 
and Galambos (1995, 173, 169). 
 18 .  One of the earliest expositions of this concept is Watkins (1998). 
 19 .  See the US Foreignassistance.gov site,  http://www.foreignassistance.gov/web/AgencyLanding.
aspx  
 9 Evolving Roles of the Military in Developing Countries 
  1  .   Simple classifications of nations in this era as Modern, Traditional, or Modernizing, as Pye 
and others did in the late 1950s and early 1960s, facilitated the joining of military with 

230  
●  Notes
development objectives—typically to no good end in general and especially for develop-
ment end s. 
 2 .  One overlooked and consistent outcome of trying to force military and development 
objectives during this period was failure, often to accomplish either goal. For instance, 
few African officers had even basic military training; courses in economics or business 
management skills were likewise unknown in military academies around the world—
including those in developed countries. 
 3 .  Coast guards and border patrols actually qualify as  internal agencies more than heavy-duty 
 external agencies having tanks, fighters, bombers, and large naval vessels. At least they do 
for this discussion. 
 4 .  Egypt, Pakistan, Myanmar, Thailand, and many other countries are illustrative. 
 5 .  Huntington and others following his lead assumed the existence of a stable constitutional 
order, with competent civilian policy elites. Such a condition may exist in the United 
States and other developed or modern countries; it seldom does in developing countries. 
  6  .   Fitch (1998, Chapter 3) points out that for Latin America, at least, military professionalism 
in a democratic system implies that armed forces training should not go beyond the conven-
tional military roles and the policymaking roles should be confined narrowly to the few top-
ranking officers who must interact with national security councils and their equivalents.  
 7 .  The title of Jones’s article, “The Nationbuilder, Soldier of the Sixties,” says it all. 
  8  .   Transition to civilian control and away from the military took notable strides in 2005 with 
the creation of the Council of Civil Aviation and in 2011 with the creation of Secretariat 
of Civil Aviation. Airports and related infrastructure were privatized (Infraero) during the 
run-up to the 2014 World Cup, largely because of charges of ineffectiveness. The con-
trol of all airspace remains the responsibility of the Air Force’s Department of Air Space 
Control. http://www.abag.org.br . 
  9 .  So-called military tourism, where actual military sites and equipment are featured attrac-
tions, is one form. Russia and Ukraine are notable for this type. Another form occurs 
when military interests actually own regular tourist sites and infrastructure. Thailand, 
Indonesia, Ecuador, Egypt, and Pakistan, among others, are cases in point. 
 10 .  Realistic, as opposed to perceived, security threats are subject to interpretation—and 
manipulation. 
 11 .  Sudan, Ethiopia, Bangladesh, Thailand, Indonesia, India, Nicaragua, Guatemala, Liberia, 
Sierra Leone, and so on. 
 12 .  Conscription historically has severe coercive connotations, for example, cannon fodder, 
press gangs. Our use of the label goes well beyond this to include national service in which 
the military is only one of several options. It also includes voluntary service through con-
tractual enlistment for different periods of time. 
  13  .   Mercenaries date back to antiquity. The modern-day equivalent for outsourcing and 
privatizing the use of deadly force is private military contractors, a notorious example of 
which is Blackwater. 
 14 .  The literature is extensive—especially that generated in the 1960s to the 1980s, with 
the 1970s being most productive. Contributions by Schmitter (1972, 1974), O’Donnell 
(1973, 1986), Przeworski et al. (1986) and Stepan (1971) are illustrative. 
 15 .  Peru (1975), Honduras (1975), Argentina (1976), El Salvador (1979), Bolivia (1980), 
Haiti (1988), Panama (1989), Paraguay (1989), Haiti (1991), Venezuela (1992), Peru 
(1992), Guatemala (1993), Ecuador (2000), Venezuela (2002), Haiti (2004), Honduras 
(2009), and Ecuador (2010). 
 16 .  We are indebted to our colleague Sam Fitch for this sharp insight and for many other 
improvements in this chapter. 
 17 .  Military entrepreneurs challenge civil control over means of production and political 
institutions and processes. Khaki capitalism is a recent label bestowed by a wag at  The 

Notes  ●  231
Economist (2011), in a revealing summary of military enterprises in Egypt, Pakistan, China, 
Iran, Indonesia, and Thailand. Lengthier, more scholarly sources include Br ö mmelh ö rster 
and Paes (2004) and Mani (2007). Mani (2011) is an excellent review of Latin American 
experiences. 
 18 .  The Iran-Iraq War (1980–1988) provided a long-lived and profitable market. It also 
flooded the Middle East with weapons of war in use to the present. Saudi Arabia and 
Pakistan were also good customers for the Chinese PLA firms. 
 19 .  For instance: The China Poly Group, linked to the PLA’s General Staff Department; 
China Xinxing, controlled by the PLA General Logistics Department; China Carrie 
and the PLA General Political Department; NORINCO, an arm of the Northern Army 
Group; and China Songhai, operated by the PLA Navy. 
 20 .  PLA companies listed in Hong Kong are referred to as red chips. The British Virgin 
Islands, Liechtenstein, and Panama each has PLA-affiliated financial offices. 
 21 .  Unclassified sources are not as numerous as one would hope. Business sources are seldom 
forthcoming for proprietary and competitive reasons. Chinese language sources, includ-
ing translations, are also challenging—primarily because those sources are located in and 
controlled by China. 
 22 .  Goldman Sachs published the book  BRICS and Beyond in 2007 , when things were going 
well. A careful reading of the book is reminder of the cloudiness of economic crystal 
balls much beyond a year or two.  http://www.goldmansachs.com/our-thinking/archive/
BRICs-and-Beyond.html 
 23 .  The relationship here to the Theory of Universal Conscription is evident. 
 24 .  At 50 million human beings, this is the largest number of refugees since WWII according 
to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. 
 25 .  The mega-cities scenario and forecast presented in the NGO chapter describe this. 
  26  .   Economic improvement explains most of the history of migration north out of Mexican 
poverty. Other conflicts in Central America, as well as in Mexico, now contribute to the exo-
dus of women and children and the humanitarian crisis this presents to the United States. 
 27 .  Costa Rica abolished its military in 1948. In addition some 20 nations around the world 
do not have formally constituted militaries. Unsurprisingly, these nations are small, even 
tiny. Surprisingly, 11 of them are island nations at high risk of increasing sea levels.  http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_without_armed-forces 
 28 .  Codelco, the state-owned copper company, is the result of nationalization of the privately 
held copper industry in 1971 by Salvador Allende and then its reorganization during 
the military reign of Augusto Pinochet in 1976.  http://upi,com/Business_News/Security-
Industry/2014/01/22Chilean-defense-spending 
 29 .  Hurricane Mitch, in 1998, struck Central America with terrific force and also called into 
question the very legitimacy of Honduras and Nicaragua. The lessons learned in this disas-
ter are still being assembled, although they basically implicate, even indict, national, inter-
national, and nongovernmental organizations with nearly equal opprobrium (Bradshaw, 
Linneker, and Z ú niga, 2003; Allianz 2012, 112–128). The 2010 Haitian earthquake is 
likewise filled with important lessons, some of which informed recovery efforts in the 
Philippines in the wake of Typhoon Haiyan (Holtz 2014). 
 10 Complementarity of Security and Development 
Doctrines: Historical Cases and Aftermaths 
 1 .  “The security and stability of nations half a globe away,” Secretary of Defense Robert 
S. McNamara made imperative in 1966, is directly linked to the security of the United 
States, “whether communists are involved or not” (Nelson 1968, 19, 20). 

232  
●  Notes
 2 .  Described on R abe ( 2010, 38) . 
 3 .  For the meaning and usage at the time of the term political development, see Pye (1960). 
See also Butler (1968). 
  4  .   CORFO refers to the Production Development Corporation (in Spanish: Corporaci ó n 
de Fomento de la Producci ó n de Chile), an organization founded in 1939, by President 
Pedro Aguirre Cerda, to promote domestic economic development. 
  5 .  See, for example, Loveman (1976, 197, 189–220, 293); Lower (1968, 283–287); and 
Kaufman (1972, 39–44). 
 6 .  For example, USAID workers expressed alarm that in Santiago, a city of three million 
people, less than half of the 78 patrol cars in its inventory were operational. 
 7 .  USAID/Chile ( 1980, 28) ; U SSC (1975, 34) . 
 8 .  See Lo wden ( 1996) a nd M eyer ( 2013). 
 9 .  Public Library of US Diplomacy n.d.,  https://wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/06CARACAS3356_a.
html 
 10  .  http://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/organization/bureaus/bureau-democracy-conflict-
and-humanitarian-assistance/office-1 . 
 11 .  The Open Society Foundations’ website mentions, “We give priority to civil society groups 
and individuals that work to: monitor and report on human rights abuses and advocate 
for rights-respecting policies and practices in select countries (Mexico and Venezuela).” 
 http://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/about/programs/latin-america-program . The 
Open Society Institute & Soros Foundations Network also supports Human Rights 
Watch, which issued scathing reports on the Maduro government in the  World Reports 
2014 and  2015 . 
 12 .  For example, Human Rights Watch 2015.  http://www.hrw.org/world-report/2015/country-
chapters/venezuela?page=1   
 13 .  For the details of this assassination attempt and the US response, see Lee (2006, 56–57). 
 14 .  For the full study, analyzed here in critical detail, see Mason et al. (1980). 
 15 .  The First Indochina War was against the French (1945–1954), the second against the 
United States and its Allies (1954–1976), and the third refers to the short conflict with 
China over Vietits incursions into Cambodia in 1978–1979 on behalf of the Khmer 
Rouge, which had instigated an ethnic cleansing campaign against Vietnamese living 
there. 
 11 Conclusion: Linkages and Challenges 
 1 .  Lasswell ( 1936/1958). 
 2 .  See IMF (2000). The budget restrictions were loosened as early as 1998. 
 3 .  The debates over liberalization still rage among prominent economists, such as Edwards 
(2010), Lal (2012), Rodrik (2008), Stiglitz (2000, 2002, 2011). 
 4 .  For example,  chapter 3 cites Ravallion (2002) on the greater declines in Argentine propoor 
safety net spending than overall spending. 
 5 .  Evidence of this bias is provided in depth in Grosh et al. (2008, 357–359). 
  6 .  Guillermo O’Donnell (1973, 166–199) called this the “Impossible Game” in reference 
to military intervention in Argentina beginning in the 1950s when Peronists, regarded by 
the military as likely to impose authoritarian governance, won elections that were then 
annulled by the military. 
 7 .  The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative is the most prominent effort to pro-
mote improvements; the most prominent effort to establish governance guidelines is the 
Resource Charter. See Bebbington (2013). 

Notes  ●  233
 8 .  Nielson and Tierney (2003, 264) note regarding the World Bank’s project appraisal:
 Disbursement for any project categorized as environmentally sensitive A or B types 
now requires two distinct environmental assessments . . . [A]n environmental impact 
assessment (EIA) must be submitted and a pilot program must be designed to test for 
environmental degradation . . . After data is collected during the pilot phase, a second 
EIA must be submitted for the project as a whole Loan disbursements cannot com-
mence until these administrative procedures are completed and the documents sub-
mitted to the board by authorized environmental staff. 

 References 
 ABAG. 2013. ABAG yearbook 2012 . Brasilia: Brazilian Association for General Aviation. 
 Abdullahi, Najad. 2008 February 17. Pakistani army’s “$20bn” business,  Al Jazeera .  http://
www.aljazeera.com/focus/pakistanpowerandpolitics/2007/10/200852518451598412 
 Abu-Bader, Suleiman, and Aamer Abu-Qarn. 2003. Government expenditures, military 
spending and economic growth: Causality evidence from Egypt, Israel, and Syria.  Journal of 
Policy Modeling 25(6): 567–83. 
 Acheson, Christopher. 2005. Review of Taylor’s reconstructing macroeconomics: Structuralist 
proposals and critiques of the mainstream,  Journal of Economic Literature 43(1): 141–43. 
 Adams, Dale. 1971. What can under-developed countries expect from foreign aid to agricul-
ture? Case study: Brazil 1950–70,  Inter-American Economic Affairs 25(1): 47–64. 
 Agarwal, Bina. 1997. “Bargaining” and gender relations: Within and beyond the household, 
 Feminist Economics 3(1): 1–51. 
 Agrawal, Arun, and Jesse Ribot. 1999. Accountability in decentralization: A framework with 
South Asian and West African cases,  Journal of Developing Areas 33: 473–502. 
 Agrawal, Arun, and Jesse Ribot. 2006. Recentralizing while decentralizing. In David Cameron, 
Gustav Ranis, and Annalisa Zinn, eds.,  Globalization and self-determination: Is the nation-
state under siege? London: Routledge, pp. 301–32. 
 Ahluwalia, Montek, and Hollis Chenery. 1974. The economic framework. In Hollis Chenery, 
Monteek Ahluwalia, C. L. G. Bell, John Duloy, and Richard Jolly, eds.,  Redistribution with 
growth . Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 38–51. 
 Alagappa, Muthiah. 2004.  Civil society and political change in Asia: Expanding and contracting 
democratic space . Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press. 
 Allen, Douglas. 1999. Transaction costs. In Boudewijn Bouckaert and Gerrit De Geest, eds., 
 Encyclopedia of law and economics , Vol. 1. Surrey, UK: Edward Elgar. 
 Allianz, Ryan. 2012. Unsupervised recovery: Adaptation strategies by two NGOs in post-
Mitch Honduras,  SOURCE 16: 112–28. 
 Allison, Graham. 2008. Emergence of schools of public policy: Reflections by a founding 
dean. In Michael Moran and Martin Rien, eds.,  The Oxford handbook of public policy . New 
York: Oxford University Press, pp. 58–79. 
 Alston, Julian. 2010. The benefits from agricultural research and development, innovation, 
and productivity growth. OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Paper No. 31. Paris: 
OECD Publishing. 
 Alston, Julian, Connie Chan-Kang, Michele C. Marra, Philip G. Pardey, and Tim J. Wyatt. 
2000.  A meta-analysis of rates of return to agricultural R&D: Ex pede herculem? Washington, 
DC: International Food Policy Research Institute. 

236  
●  References
 Alvarado, Facundo, and Leonardo Gasparini. 2013 November. Recent trends in inequal-
ity and poverty in developing countries. Rio de la Plata, Argentina: Centro de Estudios 
Distributivos, Laborales y Sociales, Universidad Nacional de la Plata Documento de Trabajo 
Nr0. 151. 
 Anderson, Kym. 1994. Food price policy in East Asia,  Asian-Pacific Economic Literature  8 (2): 
15–30. 
 Anderson, Kim, John Cockburn, and Will Martin, eds. 2010. Introduction and summary. 
In Kym Anderson, John Cockburn, and Will Martin, eds.,  Agricultural price distortions, 
inequality, and poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank, pp. 3–46. 
 Anderson, Mary. 1999.  Do no harm: How aid can support peace—or war.  Boulder, CO: Lynne 
Rienner Publishers. 
 Andersson, Krister, Clark Gibson, and Fabrice Lehoucq. 2004. The politics of decentralized 
natural resource governance,  Political Science and Politics 37(3): 421–26. 
 Andrews, Stanley. 1970 October 31. Oral history interview. Sec. 14, 12. Oral Histories. Kansas 
City, MO: Harry S. Truman Public Library. 
 Appiah, Elizabeth, and Walter McMahon. 2002. The social outcomes of education and feed-
backs on growth in Africa,  Journal of Development Studies 38(4): 27–68. 
 Arase, David. 1995.  Buying power: The political economy of Japan’s foreign aid. Boulder, CO: 
Lynne Rienner. 
 Arase, David. 2005.  Japan’s foreign development, not foreign aid: Old continuities and new direc-
tions. London, UK: Routledge. 
 Ascher, William. 1983. New development approaches and the adaptability of international 
agencies: The case of the World Bank,  International Organization 37(3): 415–39. 
 Ascher, William. 1998. From oil to timber: The political economy of off-budget development 
financing in Indonesia,”  Indonesia 65: 37–61. 
 Ascher, William. 2007. Foreign aid and alternative approaches to leadership: Japanese and 
U.S. contrasts. In Dennis Rondinelli and Jay Heffron, eds.,  Leadership for development in a 
globalizing society. Sterling, VA: Kumarian Press. 
 Asian-African Conference. 1955 April 24. Final communique of the Asian-African conference 
of Bandung. 
 Asian Development Bank. 1997. Governance bank policies.  Operations manual. Section 54. 
Manila: Asian Development Bank. 
 Asian Development Bank. 2010.  Strategy 2020 . Manila: Asian Development Bank. 
 Asian Development Bank. 2013.  Cost-benefit analysis: A practical guide . Mandaluyong City, 
The Philippines: Asian Development Bank. 
 Asociaci ó n Latinoamericana de Organizaciones de Promoci ó n al Desarrollo. 2010. Open 
forum for CSO effectiveness and development, Mexico City. 
 Auer, Matthew R. 2007. More aid, better institutions, or both?  Sustainability Science 2(2): 
179–87. 
 Austin, James E., and John C. Ickis. 1986. Management, managers, and revolution,  World 
Development 14(7): 775–90. 
 Baldacci, Emanuele, Benedict Clements, Sanjeev Gupta, and Qiang Cui. 2008. Social spending, 
human capital, and growth in developing countries,  World Development 36(8): 1317–41. 
 Ball, George. 1964 November 10. Briefing paper on USAID Public Safety Program with 
Carabineros de Chile. Office of Public Safety. USAID Record Group 286. Entry 26– Chile. 
Box 23. Folder IPS-1 File material/Chile 1 of 2. NACP. 
 Bang, Henrik, and Anders Esmark. 2009. Good governance in network society: Reconfiguring 
the political from politics to policy,  Administrative Theory & Praxis 31(1): 7–37. 
 Barash, David. 2013 December15. Costa Rica’s peace dividend: How abolishing the military 
paid off,  Los Angeles Times .  http://www.articles.latimes.com/print/2013/dec/15/opinion/
la-oe-barash-costa-rica-demilitarization 

References  ●  237
 Barbier, E. B. 2014. Disaster management. A global strategy for protecting vulnerable coastal 
populations,  Science 345(6202): 1250–51. 
 Bates, Robert. 1981.  Markets and states in Tropical Africa . Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press. 
 Bates, Robert, and Da-Hsiang D. Lien. 1985. A note on taxation, development and represen-
tative government,  Politics and Society 14(1): 53–70. 
 Bauer, Peter. 1957/1965.  Economic analysis and policy in underdeveloped countries . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Bauer, Peter, and Basil Yamey. 1957.  The economics of underdeveloped countries . Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 Bebbington, Anthony. 2013 June. Natural resource extraction and the possibilities of inclusive 
development: Politics across space and time. ESID Working Paper No. 21. Manchester: 
University of Manchester. 
 Beeson, Mark. 2008. Civil-military relations in Indonesia and the Philippines: Will the Thai 
coup prove contagious?  Armed Forces & Society 34(3): 474–90. 
 Beittel, June S. 2012.  Colombia: Background, US relations, and congressional interest . Washington, 
DC: Congressional Research Service. 
 Benmaamar, Mustapha. 2006. Financing of road maintenance in Sub-Saharan Africa. Sub-
Saharan Africa Transport Policy Program, Discussion Paper 6. Washington, DC: World 
Bank. 
 Benoit, Emile. 1968. The monetary and real costs of national defense,  American Economic 
Review 58(2): 398–416. 
 Benoit, Emile. 1973.  Defense and economic growth in developing countries . Lexington, MA: 
Lexington/D.C. Heath. 
 Beresford, M., and D. Phong. 2000.  Economic transition in Vietnam: Trade and aid in the 
demise of the centrally planned economy . Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 
 Bernstein, Thomas, and Xiaobo L ü . 2008. Taxation and coercion in rural China,  Taxation and 
State-building in Developing Countries : 89–108. 
 Bevir, Mark, Rod Rhodes, and Patrick Weller. 2003. Traditions of governance: Interpreting the 
changing role of the public sector,  Public Administration 81(1): 1–17. 
 Bezemer, Dirk, and Derek Headey. 2008. Agriculture, development, and urban bias,  World 
Development 36(8): 1342–364. 
 Bickel, Lennard. 1974.  Facing starvation: Norman Borlaug and the fight against hunger . New 
York: Reader’s Digest Press. 
 Bickford, Thomas. 1994. The Chinese military and its business operations: The PLA as entre-
preneur,  Asian Survey 34(5): 460–74. 
 Bickford, Thomas. 1999. Sunrise or sunset for the Chinese military? The business operations 
of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army,  Problems of Post-Communism 46 (4): 35–46. 
 Bird, Richard, Jorge Martinez-Vazquez, and Benno Torgler. 2008. Tax effort in developing 
countries and high income countries: The impact of corruption, voice and accountability, 
 Economic Analysis and Policy 38(1): 55–71. 
 Black, C. E. 1967.  The dynamics of modernization: A study in comparative history . New York: 
Harper & Row. 
 Blind, Peride. 2009.  Democratic institutions of undemocratic individuals . New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
 Bloom, David, and David Canning. 2003. The health and poverty of nations: From theory to 
practice,  Journal of Human Development 4(1): 47–71. 
 Bloom, David, David Canning, and Jaypee Sevilla. 2004. The effect of health on economic 
growth: A production function approach,  World Development 32(1): 1–13. 
 Blunt, Peter, and Merrick Jones. 1992.  Managing organizations in Africa . Berlin and New York: 
Walter de Gruyter. 

238  
●  References
 Bockh, Laszlo, and Mary Blakeslee. n.d. Budget analysis—Federal agency money matters. 
 http://www.budgetanalyst.com/The%20CR.htm 
 Boothroyd, P., and Pham Xuan Nam, eds. 2000.  Socioeconomic renovation in Vietnam: The 
origin, evolution, and impact of DoiMoi . Ottawa: International Development Research 
Centre. 
 Bornhorst, Fabian, Sanjeev Gupta, and John Thornton. 2009. Natural resource endowments 
and the domestic revenue effort,  European Journal of Political Economy 25(4): 439–46. 
 Bossert, T. J., and J. C. Beauvais. 2002 March. Decentralization of health systems in Ghana, 
Zambia, Uganda and the Philippines: A comparative analysis of decision space,  Health 
Policy and Planning 17(1): 14–31. 
 Boughton, James. 2003.  Who’s in charge? Ownership and conditionality in IMF-supported pro-
grams. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. 
 Bradshaw, Sarah, Brian Linneker, and Rebecca Z ú niga. 2001. Social roles and spatial rela-
tions of NGOs and civil society: Participation and effectiveness in Central America post 
Hurricane “Mitch,”  The Nicaraguan Academic Journal 2(1): 73–113. 
 Brazinsky, Gregg. 2007.  Nation building in South Korea: Koreans, Americans, and the making of 
a democracy . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. 
 Brewer, Garry D. 2007. Inventing the future: Scenarios, imagination, mastery and control, 
 Sustainability Science 2(2): 159–77. 
 Brice ñ o-Garmendia, Cecilia, Antonio Estache, and Nemat Shafik. 2004.  Infrastructure ser-
vices in developing countries: Access, quality, costs, and policy reform . Washington, DC: World 
Bank. 
 Brodzinsky, Sibylla. 2013 July 22. Foreign funding dries up for Latin American NGOs, 
 Christian Science Monitor . http://www.csmonitor.com/World/Americas/2013/0722 
 Br ö mmelh ö rster, J ö rn, and Wolf-Christian Paes. 2004.  The military as an economic actor: 
Soldiers in business. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Brooks, Arthur. 2008.  Social entrepreneurship: A modern approach to social value creation . Upper 
Saddle River, NJ : Pearson Prentice Hall. 
 Buchanan, James, Jr., Robert Tollison, and Gordon Tullock, eds. 1980.  Toward a theory of the 
rent-seeking society . College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press. 
 Buckley, Chris. 2014 July 1.China’s antigraft push snares and ex-general,  New York Times , A6. 
 Buffett, Peter. 2013 July 27. The charitable-industrial complex,  New York Times , A -19. 
 Burnside, Craig, and David Dollar. 2000. Aid, policies, and growth,  American Economic 
Review 90(4): 847–68. 
 Busch, Gary. 2008. The Chinese military-commercial complex.  http://www.ocnus.net/
artman2/publish/Editorial_10/ 
 Butler, Brian E. 1968. Title IX of the foreign assistance act: Foreign aid and political develop-
ment,  Law & Society Review 3(1): 115–51. 
 Butterfield, Samuel. 2004.  Hale U.S. development aid—An historic first: Achievements and fail-
ures in the twentieth century. Westport, CT: Praeger. 
 Caffrey. Craig. 2014 October 2. South Korea announces 5.3% boost in defence spending.  http://
www.janes.com/article/44030/south-korea-announces-5-3-boost-in-defence-spending 
 Campbell, Joel, Leena Thacker Kumar, and Steve Slagle. 2010. Bargaining sovereignty: State 
power and networked governance in a globalizing world,  International Social Science Review 
85(3–4): 107–23. 
 Canning, David, and Esra Bennathan. 2007. The rate of return to transportation infra-
structure. Report of the Round Table on Transport Economics, European Conference of 
Ministers of Transport. 
 Carothers, Thomas. 1999.  Civil society . Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace. 
 Carson, Rachel. 1962.  Silent spring . Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. 

References  ●  239
 Castells, Manuel. 2006. The network society: From knowledge to policy. In Manuel Castells 
and Gustavo Cardoso, eds.,  Societies in transition to the network society . Baltimore, MD: The 
Johns Hopkins University Press, pp. 1–21. 
 Castillo, Jasen, Julia Lowell, Ashley Tellis, Jorge Munoz, and Benjamin Zycher. 2001.  Military 
expenditures and economic growth . Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation. 
 Cawson, A. 1985  The political economy of corporatism . London: Sage. 
 Chalmers, Douglas. 1977. The politicized state in Latin America. In James Malloy, ed., 
 Authoritarianism and corporatism in Latin America . Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh 
Press, pp. 23–45. 
 Cheema, G. Shabbir. 2005.  Building democratic institutions: Governance reform in developing 
countries. West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press. 
 Cheema, G. Shabbir. 2010. Civil society engagement and democratic governance. In 
G. Shabbir Cheema and Vesselin Popovski, eds.,  Engaging civil society: Emerging trends in 
democratic governance. Tokyo: United Nations University, pp. 1–20. 
 Cheema, G. Shabbir, and Dennis Rondinelli. 2007.  Decentralizing governance: Emerging con-
cepts and practices. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. 
 Cheema, G. Shabbir, and Vesselin Popovski. 2010.  Engaging civil society: Emerging trends in 
democratic governance. Tokyo: United Nations University. 
 Chenery, Hollis. 1961. Comparative advantage and development policy,  The American 
Economic Review 51(1): 18–51. 
 Chenery, Hollis. 1974. Introduction. In H. Chenery, M. S. Ahluwalia, C. L. G. Bell, J. H. 
Duloy, and R. Jolly, eds.,  Redistribution with growth . London: Oxford University Press. 
 Chenery, Hollis. 1975. The structuralist approach to development policy,  American Economic 
Review 65(2): 310–16. 
 Cheung, Tai Ming. 2001.  China’s entrepreneurial army . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Christian Science Monitor . 2010 August 5. Warren Buffett, Bill Gates, and the billionaire chal-
lenge. http://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/the-monitors-view/2010/0805/ 
 Christian Science Monitor . 2014 December 8. When loss is gain: A global move to end fuel 
subsidies,  Christian Science Monitor 107(3): 34. 
 Clark, John. 1991.  Democratizing development: The role of voluntary organizations. West 
Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press. 
 Clark, John. 2010. The role of transnational civil society in promoting transparency and 
accountability in global governance. In G. Shabbir Cheema and Vessilin Popovski, eds., 
Engaging civil society: Emerging trends in democratic governance. Tokyo: United Nations 
University Press, pp. 44–57. 
 Cleveland, Harlan. 1972.  The future executive: A guide for tomorrow’s manager . New York: 
Harper & Row. 
 Cleaver, Kevin M. 1980. Economic and social analysis of projects and of price policy: The 
Morocco fourth agricultural credit project. World Bank Staff Working Paper, International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 
 Clinton-Gore Administration History Project. 2000.  USAID’s role, 1993–2001. Washington, 
DC: US Agency for International Development. 
 Cochrane, Joe. 2014 July 23. A child of the slums rises as President of Indonesia,  New York 
Times , A -4. 
 Cohen, Jean, and Andrew Arato. 1994.  Civil society and political theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 
 Colclough, Christopher. 1980. Primary schooling and economic development: A review of the 
evidence. World Bank Staff Working Paper. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 Collier, David, and Ruth Collier. 1977. Who does what, to whom, and how: Toward a com-
parative analysis of Latin American corporatism. In James Malloy, ed.,  Authoritarianism and 
corporatism in Latin America . Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, pp. 489–512. 

240  
●  References
 Collier, Simon, and William Sater. 1999.  A history of Chile, 1808–1994. New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Commission on Global Governance. 1995.  Our global neighbourhood . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Committee on International Relations and Committee on Foreign Relations. 2003.  Legislation 
on foreign relations through 2002. Volume 1-A, Sec. 296 Foreign Assistance Act of 1961. 
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. 
 Congressional Quarterly Research. 1951 May 3. Future of foreign aid. Washington, DC: 
Congressional Quarterly.  http://library.cqpress.com/cqresearcher/document.php?id=cqresrre
1951050300 
 Constable, Pamela, and Arturo Valenzuela. 1989. Chile’s return to democracy,  Foreign Affairs 
68(5): 169–86. 
 Cooley, Alexander, and James Ron. 2002. The NGO scramble: Organizational insecurity and 
the political economy of transnational action,  International Security 27(1): 5–39. 
 Cornia, Giovanni Andrea, Richard Jolly, and Frances Stewart. 1987.  Adjustment with a human 
face: Protecting the vulnerable and promoting growth. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cowen, Tyler 2015. Does China hitting the wall reflect a deeper reality about emerging economy 
growth? Marginal Revolution http://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2015/09/
does-china-hitting-the-wall-reflect-a-deeper-reality-about-emerging-economy-growth.html 
 Cullather, Nick. 2010.  The hungry world. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Cuny, Frederick C. 1989.  Use of the military in humanitarian relief. Dallas, TX: Intertect Relief 
and Reconstruction Corporation.  http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/cuny/
laptop//humanrelief 
 Cutshall, Charles R., Dustin C. Emery, Daniel J. Fitzpatrick, Sarah J. Hammer, Leslie J. Kelley, 
and Kirill Meleshevich. 2009. Integrating USAID and DOS: The future of development and 
diplomacy, Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs.  http://www.developmentgap.
org/americas/US/the_effectiveness_development_assistance_programs_under_new_.pdf 
 Daalder, Hans. 1962/6969.  The role of the military in the emerging countries. The Hague, The 
Netherlands: Institute of Social Studies. 
 Dacin, Pete, Tina Dacin, and Margaret Matear. 2010. Social entrepreneurship: Why we don’t 
need a new theory and how we move forward from here,  The Academy of Management 
Perspectives 24(3): 37–57. 
 Dacy, Douglas. 1986.  Foreign aid, war, and economic development: South Vietnam, 1955–1975. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Dani ñ o, Roberto. 2006. The legal aspects of the World Bank’s work on human rights in devel-
opment outreach,  The International Lawyer 41(1): 21–25. 
 Davis, Kevin, and Anna Gelpern. 2010.  Peer-to-peer financing for development: Regulating the 
intermediaries . New York: NYU Law and Economics Working Papers. 
 Davis, Thomas. 2013 January 24. NGOs: A long and turbulent history,  The Global Journal . 
 http://theglobaljournal.net/article/view/981 
 De Janvry, Alain, and Jean-Jacques Dethier. 2012. The World Bank and governance: The 
Bank’s efforts to help developing countries build state capacity. World Bank Policy Research 
Working Papers. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 De la Rosa, Braulio. 2007.  Transforming armed forces to National Guard units in Latin America. 
Carlisle Barracks, PA: US Army War College. 
 de Rugy, Veronique. 2012. Military Keynesians.  http://reason.com/archives/2012/11/20/
military-keynesians/print 
 de Waal, Alex. 1997.  Famine crimes: Politics and the disaster relief industry in Africa . Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press. 
 Dees, J. Gregory. 2011. Social ventures as learning laboratories,  Tennessee’s Business 20(1): 3–5. 

References  ●  241
 Dees, J. Gregory, and Beth Anderson. 2004. Scaling social impact,  Stanford Social Innovation 
Review ( Spring). http://www/ssireview.org/articles/entry/scaling_social_impact 
 Dees, J. Gregory, and Beth Anderson. 2006. Framing a theory of social entrepreneurship: 
Building on two schools of practice and thought,  Research on Social Entrepreneurship: 
Understanding and Contributing to an Emerging Field 1(3): 39–66. 
 Devarajan, Shantayanan, Tuan Minh Le, and Ga ë l Raballand. 2010 April. Increasing pub-
lic expenditure efficiency in oil-rich economies: A proposal. World Bank Policy Research 
Working Paper 5287. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 Diamond, Larry. 1994. Toward democratic consolidation,  Journal of Democracy 5(3): 4–17. 
 Dodge, Joseph M. 1954 November 22. Considerations relating to the problem and its solu-
tion. Report on the Development and Coordination of Foreign Economic Policy. White 
House Central Files Confidential. Box 18. Council on Foreign Economic Policy. Dwight 
D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas. 
 Dollar, David, and Aart Kraay. 2001 April. Growth is good for the poor. World Bank Policy 
Research Working Paper 2587. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 Dorfman, Robert. 1991. Review article: Economic development from the beginning to 
Rostow,  Journal of Economic Literature 29(2): 573–91. 
 Doornbos, Martin. 2004. “Good Governance”: The pliability of a policy concept,  Trames 4: 372–87. 
 Dreier, Axel, Andreas Fuchs, and Peter Nunnenkamp. 2012. New donors. Kiel: Kiel Institute 
for the World Economy Working Paper. 
 Dr è ze, Jean, and Amartya Sen. 2013.  An uncertain glory: India and its contradictions. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 Dryzek, John, and Patrick Dunleavy. 2009.  Theories of the democratic state . New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
 Duit, Andreas, and Victor Galaz. 2008. Governance and complexity: Emerging issues for gov-
ernance theory,  Governance 21(3): 311–35. 
 Dunleavy, Patrick, and Hood, Christopher. 1994. From old public administration to new 
public management,  Public Money and Management 14(3): 9–16. 
 Duranton, Gilles. 2009. Are cities engines of growth and prosperity for developing countries? In 
Michael Spence, Patricia Annez, and Robert Buckley, eds.,  Urbanization and growth . Washington, 
DC: World Bank for the Commission on Growth and Development, pp. 67–113. 
 Ebrahim, Alnoor S., and V. Kasturi Rangan. 2010. The limits of nonprofit impact: A con-
tingency framework for measuring social performance. Harvard Business School General 
Management Unit Working Paper 10–099. 
 Economist . 2011 December 3. Khaki capitalism.  http://www.economist.com.node/21540985/print 
 Economist. 2013a July 27. The great deceleration, 10. 
 Economist . 2013b November 23. Let quite a few flowers bloom, 16. 
 Economist . 2013c June 1. Towards the end of poverty, 11. 
 Economist . 2013d July 27. When giants slow down, 20. 
 Economist . 2014a June 14. Sharif versus Sharif, 35–36. 
 Economist . 2014b July 5. Chairman of everything, 38. 
 Economist. 2014c September 20. Nosebags: The army in Pakistan, 78–79. 
 Edelman Trust Barometer. 2013. NGOs most trusted institution globally.  http://www.trust.
edelman.com/trusts/trust-in-institutions-2/ngos-remain-most-trusted 
 Edwards, Michael, and David Hulme, eds. 1996.  Beyond the magic bullet: NGO performance 
and accountability in the post-Cold War world . West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press. 
 Edwards, Sebastian. 2010.  Left behind: Latin America and the false promise of populism . Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
 Eggertsson, Thr á inn. 1990.  Economic behavior and institutions: Principles of neoinstitutional 
economics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

242  
●  References
 Eisenhower, Dwight D. 1954. The President’s News Conference. Online by Gerhard Peters 
and John T. Woolley, The American Presidency Project.  http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/
ws/?pid=10202 
 Ekbladh, David. 2010.  The Great American Mission: Modernization and the construction of an 
American world order. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 El Beblawi, Hazem. 2008. Economic growth in Egypt: Impediments and constraints (1974–
2004). Washington, DC: World Bank Working Paper 14. 
 Elkington, John. 1994. Towards the sustainable corporation: Win-win-win business strategies 
for sustainable development,  California Management Review 36: 90–100. 
 Elkington, John. 1997. Cannibals with forks. In  The triple bottom line of 21st century . Oxford, 
UK: Capstone. 
 Encyclopedia Britannica. 2014. Corporatism.  http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/
138442/corporatism 
 Engle, Bryon. 1963 September 27. Military assistance plan—Korea. USAID Record Group 
286. Entry 25. Box 69. Folder: IPS#1 General Policy Guidelines and Background, 1961–
1967 Korea. NACP. 
 Engle, Bryon. 1968. Action memorandum for the administrator. USAID Record Group 
286. Box 70. Folder: IPS#1 General Policy Guidelines, General Information Korea ’68. 
NACP. 
 Esman, Milton J., and Norman T. Uphoff. 1984.  Local organizations: Intermediaries in rural 
development. Ithaca, CA: Cornell University Press. 
 Eswaran, Mukesh, and Ashok Kotwal. 2006. The role of agriculture in development. In A. V. 
Banerjee, ed.,  Understanding poverty . Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 111–23. 
 European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 2010.  http://www.ebrd.com/down-
loads/research/economics/macrodata/sci.xls 
 Fair, C. Christine. 2014.  Fighting to the end: The Pakistan army’s way of war. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Falconer, Peter. 1997. Public administration and the new public management: Lessons from 
the UK experience,  L í nea . http://www.Vus.Uni-Lj.si/Anglescina/FALPOR97.Doc 
 Farnsworth, Elizabeth. 1974 Autumn. More than admitted,  Foreign Policy 16: 127–41. 
 Fay, Marianne, and Mary Morrison. 2007.  Infrastructure in Latin America and the Caribbean: 
Recent developments and key challenges. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 Feasel, Edward M. 2013. Official development assistance (ODA) and conflict: A case study on 
Japanese ODA to Vietnam. In William Ascher and Natalia Mirovitskaya, eds.,  Development 
strategies, identities, and conflict in Asia. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 209–40. 
 Feder, Ernest. 1965. Land reform under the alliance for progress,  Journal of Farm Economics 
47(3): 652–68. 
 Felix, David. 1961. An alternative view of the “monetarist”-“structuralist” controversy. In Albert 
Hirschman, ed.,  Latin American issues. New York: Twentieth Century Fund, pp. 81–93. 
 Fernholz, Rosemary Morales. 2010. Infrastructure and inclusive development through “free, 
prior, and informed consent” of indigenous peoples. In William Ascher and Corinne Krupp, 
eds.,  Physical infrastructure development: Balancing the growth, equity, and environmental 
imperatives. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 225–58. 
 Fesselmeyer, Eric, and Kien T. Le. 2010. Urban-biased policies and the increasing rural–urban 
expenditure gap in Vietnam in the 1990s,  Asian Economic Journal 24(2): 161–78. 
 Field, C., V. Barros, T. Stocker, Q. Dahe, D. Dokken, K. Ebi, M. Mastrandrea, K. Mach, G. 
Plattner, and S. Allen. 2012. IPCC. Managing the risks of extreme events and disasters 
to advance climate change adaptation. Special Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Finkelstein, Lawrence S. 1995. What is global governance?  Global Governance : 367–72. 

References  ●  243
 Fiszbein, Ariel, and Norbert Schady. 2009.  Conditional cash transfers: Reducing present and 
future poverty . Washington, DC: World B ank .
 Fitch, J. Samuel. 1998.  The armed forces and democracy in Latin America . Baltimore: The Johns 
Hopkins University Press. 
 Fitzgerald, Frances. 1972.  Fire in the lake: The Vietnamese and the Americans in Vietnam . New 
York: Vintage. 
 Fjeldstad, Odd-Helge, and Mick Moore. 2008. Tax reform and state building in a globalized 
world. In D. Brautigam, O.-H. Fjeldstad, and M. Moore, eds.,  Taxation and state-build-
ing in developing countries: Capacity and consent. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
pp. 235–60. 
 Flynn, Patrice. 2007. Microfinance: The newest financial technology of the Washington con-
sensus,  Challenge 50(2): 110–21. 
 Flyvbjerg, Bent, Massimo Garbuio, and Dan Lovallo. 2009. Delusion and deception in 
large infrastructure projects: Two models for explaining and preventing executive disaster, 
 California Management Review 51(2): 170–93. 
 Flyvbjerg, Bent, Nils Bruzelius, and Werner Rothengatter. 2003.  Megaprojects and risk: An 
anatomy of ambition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Foucault, Michel, Graham Burchell, Colin Gordon, and Peter Miller. 1991.  The Foucault 
effect: Studies in governmentality . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Frederickson, H. George. 2004. Whatever happened to public administration? Governance, 
governance, everywhere. Queens University Institute of Governance, Public Policy and 
Social Research Working Paper QU/GOV/3/2004. Belfast: Queens University. 
 Frei Montalva, Eduardo. 1967. The alliance that lost its way,  Foreign Affairs 45: 437–48. 
 Fritz, Verena, Kai Kaiser, and Brian Levy. 2009.  Problem-driven governance and political econ-
omy analysis: Good practice framework . Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 Fukuda-Parr, Sakiko. 2013 April. Global development goal setting as a policy tool for global 
governance: Intended and unintended consequences. International Policy Centre for 
Inclusive Growth Working Paper No. 108, Brasilia. 
 Gaud, William. 1968 March 8. The Green Revolution: Accomplishments and apprehensions. 
Administrator, Agency for International Development. Washington, DC: The Society for 
International Development.  http://www.agbioworld.org/biotech-info/topics/borlaug/bor-
laug-green.html 
 Gerakas, E., D. S. Patterson, W. F. Sanford, and C. B. Yee, eds. 1995. National Security 
Council Record of Action No. 2447. Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, 
Vol. IX. Foreign Economic Policy, Section 7. 
 Gerschenkron, Alexander. 1957. Reflections on the concept of “prerequisites” of modern 
industrialization,  L’Industria 2: 31–51. 
 Gerth, Hans, and C. Wright Mills, eds. and trans. 1946.  Politics as a vocation in Max Weber . 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Gettleman, Jeffrey. 2014 December 7. As Ebola rages, poor planning thwarts efforts,  New York 
Times , A-1, A-4. 
 Gibson, Bill, and Dirk Ernst Van Seventer. 2000. A tale of two models: Comparing structural-
ist and neoclassical computable general equilibrium models for South Africa,  International 
Review of Applied Economics 14(2): 149–71. 
 Gillis, Justin. 2013 December 3. Panel says global warming carries risk of deep changes,  New 
York Times , A -24. 
 Gillis, Malcolm, ed. 1988.  Lessons from fundamental tax reform in developing countries . Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press. 
 Gimlin, Hoyt. 1988. Foreign aid: A declining commitment,  Editorial Research Reports , Vol. II. 
Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly Press.

244  
●  References
Global Security. 2015. U.S.-Korean relations. http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/
rok/forrel-us.htm 
 Goodman, David. 1994.  Corruption in the People’s Liberation Army. Murdoch, Australia: Asia 
Research Centre, Murdoch University. 
 Goodman, David, Gerald Segal, and Richard H. Yang. 1996. Corruption in the PLA,  Chinese 
Economic Reform: The Impact on Security : 35–52. 
 Goodman, Louis. 1996. Military roles past and present,  Civil-Military Relations and Democracy : 
30–43. 
 Goodrich, Malinda. 1989. The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance—Soviet Union, 
Appendix B. In Raymond E. Zickel, ed.,  Soviet Union: A country study . Washington, DC: 
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service.  http://rs6.loc.gov/frd/cs/soviet_union/
su_appnb.html 
 Gordon, Lincoln. 1975 July 17. Oral History Interview. Sec. 162 and 158. Oral Histories. 
Harry S. Truman Public Library. 
 Gourevitch, Peter, David Lake, and Janice Gross Stein. 2012.  The credibility of transnational 
NGOs: When virtue is not enough. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Graham, Carol. 2002.  Crafting sustainable social contracts in Latin America: Political economy, pub-
lic attitudes, and social policy. Washington, DC: Center on Social and Economic Dynamics. 
 Graham, Norman, ed. 1994.  Seeking security and development: The impact of military spending 
and arms transfers. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner. 
 Gravel, Mike, ed. 1971. Establishment of the Special Group (Counterinsurgency). The 
Pentagon Papers, Gravel Edition, Vol. 2. Boston, MA: Beacon Press. 
 Grosh, Margaret E., Carlo Del Ninno, Emil Tesliuc, and Azedine Ouerghi. 2008.  For protection and 
promotion: The design and implementation of effective safety nets . Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 Guest, L. Hayden. 1925 October. British labor and the empire,  Nation 121: 392–94. 
 Gupta, Sanjeev, Alvar Kangur, Chris Papageorgiou, and Abdoul Wane. 2011. Efficiency-
adjusted public capital and growth,  World Development 57: 164–78. 
 Gupta, Sanjeev, Luiz De Mello, and Raju Sharan. 2001. Corruption and military spending, 
 European Journal of Political Economy 17(4): 749–77. 
 Gwartney, James, Joshua Hall, and Robert Lawson. 2014.  2014 economic freedom dataset . 
Vancouver: Fraser Institute.  http://www.freetheworld.com/datasets_efw.html . 
 Hacking, Theo, and Peter Guthrie. 2008. A framework for clarifying the meaning of triple 
bottom-line, integrated, and sustainability assessment,  Environmental Impact Assessment 
Review 28(2): 73–89. 
 Hagen, James, and Vernon Ruttan. 1987. Development policy under Eisenhower and 
Kennedy. Economic Development Center, University of Minnesota, Bulletin No. 87–10. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota. 
 Halim, Nafisa. 2008. Testing alternative theories of bureaucratic corruption in less developed 
countries,  Social Science Quarterly 89(1): 236–57. 
 Halimi, Abdul-Latif. 2014 April 10. The regional implications of Indonesia’s rise,  The Diplomat . 
 http://thediplomat.com/2014/04/the-regional-implications-of-indonesias-rise 
 Hamilton, Fowler. 1962 May 25. Memorandum for the President. Methods for Improving the 
Coordination of Economic and Military Aid Programs. USAID Record Group 286. Box 6. 
Folder: Program FY63. Entry P39: Classified Vietnam. NACP. 
 Hamza, Mohamed, Cosmin Corendea, Andrea Wendeler, and Katharina Brach. 2012.  Climate 
change and fragile states: Rethinking adaptation. Tokyo: United Nations University. 
 Harberger, Arnold. 1984. Economic policy and economic growth. In Arnold Harberger, ed., 
 World economic growth . San Francisco, CA: ICS Press, pp. 427–66. 
 Harmonization for Health in Africa. 2011.  Investing in health for Africa: The case for strengthen-
ing systems for better health outcomes . Geneva: World Health Organization. 

References  ●  245
 Hauslohner, Abigail. 2014. Egypt’s military expands its control of the country’s economy. 
 Washington Post .  http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/middle_east/egyptian-Military-
Expands-its-Economic-control/2014/03/16/39508b52-a554-11e3-b865-38b254d92063_
story.Html 
 Hechinger, John, and David Golden. 2006 July 8. The great giveaway,  Wall Street Journal , 
A-1, 8–9. 
 Heffron, John M. 2009. Leadership for a “Decade of Development”: John F. Kennedy and the 
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961. In Dennis Rondinelli and John M. Heffron, eds.  Leadership 
for development: What globalization demands of leaders fighting for change . Sterling, VA: 
Kumarian Press. 
 Hellinger, Steven, Fred O’Regan, and Douglas Hellinger. 2009. The effectiveness of develop-
ment assistance programs under New Directions legislation: Criteria for assessment. The 
Development Group for Alternative Policies.  http://www.developmentgap.org/foriegn_aid/
proposal_to_reform_us_development_assistance.pdf 
 Henry, Clement, and Robert Springborg. 2001.  Globalization and the politics of development in 
the Middle East . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Herring, George C. 1979.  America’s longest war: The United States and Vietnam, 1950–1975. 
New York: Willey. 
 Hirschman, Albert. 1958.  The strategy of development . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
 Hirschman, Albert. 1981. The rise and decline of development economics. In Albert Hirschman, 
ed.,  Essays in trespassing: Economics to politics and beyond . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, pp. 1–24. 
 Hoadley, J. Stephen. 1981. The rise and fall of the basic needs approach,  Cooperation and 
Conflict 16(3): 149–64. 
 Hobsbawm, Eric. 1994.  The age of extremes: A history of the world, 1914–1991.  New York: Vintage. 
 Hoebink, Paul. 2006. European donors and “good governance”: Condition or goal?  The 
European Journal of Development Research 18(1): 131–61. 
 Hofmann, Charles-Antoine, and Laura Hudson. 2009 September. Military responses to natu-
ral disasters: Last resort or inevitable trend?  Humanitarian Exchange Magazine .  http://www.
odilhpn.org/humanitarian-exchange-magazine/issue-44 
 Holling, Crawford S. 1973. Resilience and stability of ecological systems,  Annual Review of 
Ecology and Systematics 4: 1–23. 
 Holtz, Michael. 2014 December 1. In the Philippines, a year of recovery,  The Christian Science 
Monitor 103(2): 18, 20. 
 Hout, Wil. 2010.  Governance and the rhetoric of international development . Rotterdam: Erasmus 
University, International Institute of Social Studies. 
 Hubbard, Ben. 2013 June 5. Egypt convicts workers at foreign nonprofit groups, including 16 
Americans,  New York Times , A -4. 
 Hubert, Leo, ed. 2004.  The integrity of governance . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Hulme, David, and Michael Edwards. 1996.  Making a difference: NGOs and development in a 
changing world. London: Routledge. 
 Human Rights Watch. 2014a. Russia: Constitutional court upholds “Foreign Agents” law: Blow 
to freedom of association.  http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/04/08/russia-constitutional-
court-upholds-foreign-agents-law 
 Human Rights Watch. 2014b. World report 2014: Zimbabwe.  http://www.hrw.org/world-
report/2014/country-chapters/zimbabwe?page=2 
 Human Rights Watch 2015. Human Rights Watch world report: Venezuela.  http://www.hrw.
org/world-report/2015/country-chapters/venezuela?page=1 
 Huntington, Samuel. 1957.  The soldier and the state: The theory and politics of civil-military 
relations . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

246  
●  References
 Hutchison Port Holdings. 2014.  http://www.hhp.com 
 Hyd é n, Goran. 2007. The challenges of making governance assessments nationally owned. 
Paper presented at the 2007 Bergen Seminar on Governance Assessments and the Paris 
Declaration, September 24–25. Bergen: Mickelsen Institute. 
 Hyd é n, Goran. 2011. Rethinking governance theory and practice. In G ö ran Hyd é n and John 
Samuel, eds.,  Making the state responsive: Experience with democratic governance assessments . 
New York: UN Development Programme. 
 Hyd é n, Goran. 2012.  African politics in comparative perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Hyd é n, Goran, and John Samuel, eds. 2011.  Making the state responsive: Experience with demo-
cratic governance assessments . New York: UN Development Programme. 
 Hyman, Gerald. 2010.  Foreign policy and development: Structure, process, and the drip-by-drip 
erosion of USAID. Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International Studies. 
 Ickis, John, Ed C. de Jesus, and M. Maru Rushikesh. 1986.  Beyond bureaucracy: Strategic man-
agement of social development. West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press. 
 IISD. 2013. The rise and role of NGOs in sustainable development. In  Business and sustainable 
development: A global guide . ht tps://www.iisd.org/business/ngo/roles.aspx. 
 International Monetary Fund. 2000 June. Recovery from the Asian crisis and the role of the 
IMF. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.  http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/
ib/2000/062300.htm#V 
 International Monetary Fund. 2002 August 31. The IMF and good governance, a factsheet. 
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. 
 International Monetary Fund. 2014. World economic outlook, October 2014. Washington, 
DC: International Monetary Fund.  http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2014/02/
weodata/weorept.aspx?pr.x=53&pr.y=7&sy=2000&ey=2015&scsm=1&ssd=1&sort=count
ry&ds=.&br=1&c=001%2C110%2C200%2C901%2C505%2C511%2C205%2C440%
2C406%2C603&s=PPPPC&grp=1&a=1 
 IPCC Working Group II. 2014.  Climate change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. 
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders.  http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/ 
 Isham, Jonathan, and Daniel Kaufmann. 1999. The forgotten rationale for policy reform: The 
productivity of investment projects,  Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1): 149–84. 
 Ishikawa, Shigeru. 1967.  Economic development in Asian perspective. Tokyo: Kinofuniya 
Bookstore Co. 
 Jack, William, and Maureen Lewis. 2009. Health investments and economic growth: 
Macroeconomic evidence and microeconomic foundations. World Bank Policy Research 
Working Paper Series No. 4877. 
 Jain, H. K. 2010.  Green revolution: History, impact and future. New Delhi: Studium Press LLC. 
 Jalal, Ayesha. 2014.  The struggle for Pakistan . Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press. 
 Janowitz, Morris. 1960.  The professional soldier: A social and political portrait . New York: Free Press. 
 Janowitz, Morris. 1964.  The military in the political development of new nations: An essay in 
comparative analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Jaskoski, Maiah. 2013.  Military politics and democracy in the Andes. Baltimore: The Johns 
Hopkins University Press. 
 Jayasooria, Denison. 2010. Civil society engagement in Malaysia. In G. Shabbir Cheema 
and Vesselin Popovski, eds.,  Engaging civil society: Emerging trends in democratic governance. 
Tokyo: United Nations University, pp. 214–31. 
 Jepma, Catrinus. 1991.  The tying of aid. Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development. 
 Jimenez, Emmanuel, and Harry Anthony Patrinos. 2008 March. Can cost-benefit analysis 
guide education policy in developing countries? World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 
4568. Washington, DC: World Bank. 

References  ●  247
 JLT Specialty Limited. 2014.  JLT expropriation database . London: JLT Specialty Limited. 
 http://expropriation.jltgroup.com/home/listview?Country=&IndustryDataObject[]=3&Ev
entTypeDataObject[]=&FromDate=2004–01&ToDate=2013–12&sortby= 
 Johnson, John J. ed. 1962.  The role of the military in underdeveloped countries. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 
 Jones, Richard. 1965 January. The nationbuilder, soldier of the sixties,  Military Review 45: 63–67. 
 Kahn, Herman. 1962.  Thinking the unthinkable . New York: Horizon. 
 Kalman, Matthew. 2013 July 11. Israel’s military entrepreneurial complex owns big data, 
 MIT Technology Review .  http://www.technologyreview.com/news/516511/israels-military-
entrepreneurial-complex 
 Kaplan, Jacob. 1950. United States foreign aid programs: Past perspectives and future needs, 
 World Politics 3(1): 55–71. 
 Kapur, Devesh, John Lewis, and Richard Webb. 1997.  The World Bank: Its first half century . 
Washington: The Brookings Institution Press. 
 Kapur, Devesh, and Richard Webb. 2000 August. Governance-related conditionalities of the inter-
national financial institutions. G-24 Discussion Paper Series No. 6. New York: United Nations. 
 Katz, Jonathan. 2013.  The big truck that went by: How the world came to save Haiti and left 
behind a disaster. New York: Macmillan. 
 Kaufman, Robert. 1972.  The politics of land reform in Chile, 1950–1970: Public policy, political 
institutions, and social change. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
 Kaufmann, Daniel. 1992.  How macroeconomic policies affect project performance in the social 
sectors . Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 Kaufmann, Daniel. 2009. Aid effectiveness and governance: The good, the bad and the ugly, 
 Development Outreach 11(1): 26–29.
Kaufmann, Daniel and Yan Wang. 1995. Macroeconomic policies and project performance in 
the social sectors: A model of human capital production and evidence from LDCs, World 
Development 23(5): 751–765. 
 Kaysen, Carl. n.d. Secret–Korea–Field Plan, National Security Files. Foreign Aid Subjects. 
Military Assistance Programs. Box 373. John F. Kennedy Library. 
 Kennan, George. 1947. The sources of Soviet conduct , Foreign Affairs 25(4): 566–82. 
 Kennedy, John F. 1960.  The strategy of peace. New York: Harper. 
 Kennedy, John F. 1961a. Remarks at the Eighth National Conference on International 
Economic and Social Development.  http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu 
 Kennedy, John F. 1961b. Special message to the congress on foreign aid.  http://www.presi-
dency.ucsb.edu 
 Kennedy, John F. 1963 September 17. Address before the White House Conference on Exports. 
 http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=9411 
 Kerr, Richard. 2013 December 3. Abrupt climate change: Still looming.  Science . 
 Kettle, D. F. 2000.  The global public management revolution: A report on the transformation of 
governance . Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. 
 Khan, Shahrukh. 2007. Pakistan’s economy since 1999 has there been real progress?  South Asia 
Economic Journal 8(2): 317–34. 
 Khan, Shahrukh. 2012 October. The military and economic development in Pakistan. 
Amherst, Political Economy Research Institute, Working Paper Series, No. 291. 
 Khator, Renu. 1998. The new paradigm: From development administration to sustainable develop-
ment administration,  International Journal of Public Administration 21(12): 1777–801. 
 Killick, Tony. 1976. The possibilities of development planning,  Oxford Economic Papers 28(2): 
161–84. 
 Kim, Hyung-A. 2011. Heavy and chemical industrialization, 1973–1979: South Korea’s 
homeland security measures. In Hyung-A Kim and Clark Sorenson, eds.,  Reassessing the 
Park Chung Hee era 1961–1979 . Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, pp. 19–42 . 

248  
●  References
 Kim, M. Julie, and Rita Nangia. 2010. Infrastructure development in India and China—A 
comparative analysis. In William Ascher and Corinne Krupp, eds.,  Physical infrastructure 
development: Balancing the growth, equity, and environmental imperatives. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, pp. 97–140. 
 Kimmelman, Michael. 2014 July 5. Refugee camp evolves as a do-it-yourself city,  New York 
Times , A-1, A-8. 
 Klare, Michael. 1997. East Asia’s militaries muscle up,  The Bulletin of Atomic Scientists 53(1): 
136–152. 
 Knio, Karim. 2010. Investigating the two faces of governance: The case of the Euro-
Mediterranean Development Bank,  Third World Quarterly 31(1): 105–21. 
 Kohli, Harpaul, and Phillip Basil. 2010. Requirements for infrastructure investment in Latin 
America under alternate growth scenarios: 2011–2040,  Global Journal of Emerging Market 
Economies 3(1): 59–110. 
 Kooiman, Jan. 1993.  Modern governance: New government-society interactions. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. 
 Korean Ministry of Strategy and Finance. 2012.  Impact of foreign aid on Korea’s development. 
Seoul: Ministry of Strategy and Finance . Seattle, WA: University of Washington Center for 
Korean Studies, pp. 19–42. 
 Korten, David. 1987. Third generation NGO strategies: A key to people-centered develop-
ment,  World Development 15: 145–59. 
 Korten, David. 1990.  Getting to the twenty-first century: Voluntary action and the global agenda . 
West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press. 
 Krueger, Anne, Maurice Schiff, and Alberto Vald é s. 1991.  The political economy of agricultural 
pricing policy , Volume 2. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 Krugman, Paul. 1994. The fall and rise of development economics. In Lloyd Rodwin and 
Donald Schon, eds.,  Rethinking the development experience: Essays provoked by the work of 
Albert O. Hirschman . Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, pp. 39–58. 
 Kuczynski, Pedro-Pablo, and John Williamson, eds. 2003.  After the Washington Consensus: 
Restarting growth and reform in Latin America. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute. 
 Kuznets, Simon. 1955. Economic growth and income inequality,  American Economic Review : 1–28. 
 Kwong, Julia. 1997.  The political economy of corruption in China. Armonk, NY: ME Sharpe. 
 Labini, Paolo. 2000. Growth models and the explanation of forces behind development pro-
cesses. In Roger Blackhouse and Andrea Salanti, eds.,  Macroeconomics and the real world . 
New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 263–74. 
 Lal, Deepak. 2000.  The poverty of development economics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Lal, Deepak. 2012. Is the Washington Consensus dead?  Cato Journal 32(3): 493–512. 
 Lanjouw, Peter, and Gershon Feder. 2001. Rural non-farm activities and rural development: 
From experience towards strategy. World Bank Rural Development Strategy Background 
Paper No. 4. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 Lansdale, Edward. 1962. Civic action helps counter the guerrilla threat,  Army Information 
Digest 17: 50–53. 
 LaPalombara, Joseph. 1967a. Bureaucracy and political development: Notes, queries, and 
dilemmas. In Joseph LaPalombara, ed.,  Bureaucracy and political development. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, pp. 34–61. 
 LaPalombara, Joseph. 1967b. Preface and acknowledgements. In Joseph LaPalombara, ed., 
 Bureaucracy and political development. Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp. ix–xi. 
 Laquian, A. A. 1981. Review and evaluation of urban accommodationist policies in popula-
tion redistribution. In United Nations Department of International Economic and Social 
Affairs, eds.,  Population distribution policies in development planning . New York: United 
Nations, pp. 101–12. 

References  ●  249
 Lasswell, Harold D. 1936/1958.  Politics: Who gets what, when, how . New York: Meridian. 
 Lasswell, Harold D. 1965. The policy sciences of development,  World Politics 17(2): 286–309. 
 Lasswell, Harold D. 1971.  A pre-view of policy sciences . New York: Elsevier. 
 Lasswell, Harold D., and Abraham Kaplan. 1950.  Power and society . New Haven: Yale 
University Press. 
 Lasswell, Harold D., and Myres McDougal. 1992.  Jurisprudence for a free society . Dordecht: 
Kluwer. 
 Lastarria-Cornhiel, Susana. 2006. Feminization of agriculture: Trends and driving forces. 
Background paper for the World Development Report 2008.  http://siteresources.world-
bank.org/INTWDR2008/Resources/2795087-1191427986785/LastarriaCornhiel_
FeminizationOfAgri.pdf 
 Latham, Michael E. 2011.  The right kind of revolution: Modernization, development, and US 
foreign policy from the Cold War to the present. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
 Lawson, Marian, Susan Epstein, and Kennon Nakamura. 2010.  State, foreign operations, 
and related programs: FY2011 budget and appropriations . Washington, DC: Congressional 
Research Service. 
 Lawson, Marian, Susan Epstein, and Tamara Resler. 2011 . State, foreign operations, and related 
programs: FY2012 budget and appropriations . Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service. 
 Lee, Chae-Jin. 2006.  A troubled peace: U.S. policy and the two Koreas . Baltimore: John Hopkins 
University Press. 
 Lee, Hyesook. 1997. State formation and civil society under American occupation: The case of 
South Korea,  Korea Journal of Population and Development 26(2): 15–32. 
 Leff, Nathaniel. 1985a. Optimal investment choice for developing countries: Rational theory 
and rational decision-making,  Journal of Development Economics 18(2): 335–60. 
 Leff, Nathaniel. 1985b. The use of policy-science tools in public-sector decision making: Social 
benefit-cost analysis in the World Bank,  Kyklos 38(1): 60–76. 
 Lehmann, Tim. 2013 March 6. Embodying the new era: Models for NGOs in the 21st cen-
tury,  Huffington Post . www.huffingtonpost.com/tim-lehmann/wef-ngos 
 Levy, Brian. 2010.  Development trajectories: An evolutionary approach to integrating gover-
nance and growth . Washington, DC: World Bank.  https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
handle/10986/1018 
 Lewis, David, and Nazneen Kanji. 2009.  Non-governmental organizations and development. 
New York: Routledge. 
 Lewis, W. Arthur. 1954. Economic development with unlimited supplies of labour,  The 
Manchester School 22(2): 139–91. 
 Lindert, Kathy, Emmanuel Skoufias, and Joseph Shapiro. 2006. Redistributing income to the 
poor and the rich: Public transfers in Latin America and the Caribbean. Social Safety Nets 
Primer Series Discussion Paper 605. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 Lipton, Michael. 2009.  Land reform in developing countries: Property rights and property wrongs. 
New York: Routledge. 
 Little, Ian. 1982.  Economic development: Theory, policy, and international relations. New York: 
Basic Books. 
 Little, Ian, and James Mirrlees. 1969.  Manual of industrial project analysis in developing coun-
tries. Paris: Development Centre of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development. 
 Little, Ian, and James Mirrlees. 1990. Project appraisal and planning twenty years on. Paper 
presented at the World Bank Annual Conference of Development Economics. 
 Lo, Carlos Wing-Hung, Gerald E. Fryxell, and Wilson Wai-Ho Wong. 2006. Effective regu-
lations with little effect? The antecedents of the perceptions of environmental officials on 
enforcement effectiveness in china,  Environmental Management 38(3): 388–410. 

250  
●  References
 Looney, Robert. 1989. Military Keynesianism in the third world,  Journal of Political and 
Military Sociology 17(Spring): 43–64. 
 Lora, Eduardo. 2001 December.  Structural reforms in  Latin America:  What has been reformed 
and how to measure it. Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank. 
 Lora, Eduardo. 2007.  The state of state reform in Latin America. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford 
University Press. 
 Loveman, Brian. 1976.  Struggle in the countryside: Politics and rural labor in Chile, 1919–1973 . 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
 Lowden, Pamela. 1996.  Moral opposition to authoritarian rule in Chile, 1973–90 . New York: 
St. Martins Press. 
 Lower, Milton D. 1968. Institutional bases of economic stagnation in Chile,  Journal of 
Economic Issues 2(3): 283–97. 
 Lucero, Jos é . 2008.  Struggles of voice: The politics of indigenous representation in the Andes. 
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. 
 Luong, H. V. 2003. Wealth, power, and inequality: Global market, the state, and local socio-
cultural dynamics. In H.V. Luong, ed.  Postwar Vietnam: Dynamics of a changing society . 
Boulder: Rowman and Littlefield, pp. 81–106. 
 Lynn, Lawrence. 1996.  Public management as art, science, and profession. Chatham, NJ: 
Chatham House Publishers. 
 MacAuslan, John, and Mark Addison. 2010. Governance in central government: Reconciling 
accountability and capability,  The Political Quarterly 81(2): 243–52. 
 Maldonado, Nicole. 2010. The World Bank’s evolving concept of good governance and its 
impact on human rights. Paper presented at doctoral workshop on development and inter-
national organizations, Stockholm. 
 Malesky, Edmund, and Jonathan London. 2014. The political economy of development in 
China and Vietnam,  Annual Review of Political Science 17: 395–419. 
 Mani, Kristina. 2007. Militaries in business state-making and entrepreneurship in the develop-
ing world,  Armed Forces & Society 33(4): 591–611. 
 Mani, Kristina. 2011. Militares empresarios: Approaches to studying the military as an eco-
nomic actor,  Bulletin of Latin American Research 30(2): 183–97. 
 Manyin, Mark E., Emma Chanlett-Avery, Mary Beth D. Nikitin, Ian E. Rinehart, and Brock 
R. Williams. 2015 June 11.  U.S.-South Korea relations Washington, DC: Congressional 
Research Service. 
 Manzano, Osmel, Francisco Monaldi, and Federico Sturznegger. 2008. The political economy 
of oil production in Latin America,  Econom í a 9(1): 59–98. 
 Maren, Michael. 1997.  The road to hell: The ravaging effects of foreign aid and international 
charity. New York: Simon and Schuster. 
 Marino, Andrea. 2011. Economic factors and political turmoil in North Africa. In Franco 
Praussello, ed.,  Euro-Mediterranean partnership in the aftermath of the Arab Spring . Milan: 
Franco Angeli, pp. 21–36. 
 Marquand, Robert. 2014 November 17. China unveils its own hard-line Putin,  Christian 
Science Monitor 106(52): 21–23. 
 Martin, Roger, and Sally Osberg. 2007. Social entrepreneurship: The case for definition, 
 Stanford Social Innovation Review 5(2): 28–39. 
 Mason, Edward, Mahn Je Kim, Dwight H. Perkins, and Kwang Suk Kim. 1980.  The economic 
and social modernization of the Republic of Korea. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Mauro, Paolo. 1995. Corruption and growth,  The Quarterly Journal of Economics : 681–712. 
 Mavroudeas, Stavros, and Fanis Papadatos. 2007. Reform, reform the reforms or simply 
regression? The “Washington consensus” and its critics,  Bulletin of Political Economy 1(1): 
43–66. 

References  ●  251
 Mayama, Katsuhiko. 2000 March. Chinese People’s Liberation Army: Reduction in force by 
500,000 and trend of modernization,  NIDS Security Reports 1: 116–34. 
 Mayr, Walter. 2010 November 15. Exotic birds in a cage—Criticism grows of Afghanistan’s 
bloated NGO industry,  Speigel Online.  http://www.spiegel.de/international/world/exotic-
birds-in-a-cage-criticism-grows-of-afghanistan-s-bloated-ngo-industry-a-718656.html 
 McCleary, Rachel, and Robert Barro. 2008. Private voluntary organizations engaged in inter-
national assistance 1939–2004,  Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly 37: 512–36. 
 McVety, Amanda. 2012.  Enlightened aid: US development as foreign policy in Ethiopia. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
 Meier, Gerald. 1968.  The international economics of development. New York: Harper & Row. 
 Meier, Gerald. 1987.  Pioneers in development , Vol. 2. New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Meier, Gerald. 2004.  Biography of a subject: An evolution of development economics. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
 Meier, Gerald, and Dudley Seers. 1984.  Pioneers in development , Vol. 1. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Meltzer, Alan. 2000.  Report of the International Financial Institutions Advisory Commission . 
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.  http://www.house.gov/jec/imf/meltzer.pdf
Meyer, Peter. 2013. Chile: Political and economic conditions and U.S. relations. Washington, DC: 
Congressional Research Service. 
 Michaels, Albert. 1976. The Alliance for Progress and Chile’s “Revolution in Liberty,” 1964–
1970,  Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 18(1): 74–99. 
 Mickelwait, Donald, Charles Sweet, and Elliott Morss. 1979.  New directions in development: A 
study of US AID. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 
 Mikesell, Raymond. 1983. Appraising IMF conditionality: Too loose, too tight, or just right? 
In John Williamson, ed.,  IMF conditionality . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 47–62. 
 Millikan, Max. 1955 November. Economic policy as an instrument of political and psycho-
logical policy. Psychological Aspects of United States Strategy. Panel Report. White House 
Central Files. Confidential. Box 61. Rockefeller. Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, 
Kansas. 
 Milner, Helen V., and Dustin Tingley. 2013. The choice for multilateralism: Foreign aid and 
American foreign policy,  Review of International Organizations 8(3): 313–41. 
 Milobsky, David, and Louis Galambos. 1995. The McNamara Bank and its legacy, 1968–
1987,  Business and Economic History 24(2): 173, 169. 
 Minford, Paul. 2011. Review of Lance Taylor, Maynard’s revenge: the collapse of free market 
macroeconomics,  Journal of Economics 103: 289–91. 
 Mishra, Pankaj. 2014 August 4. The places in between,  The New Yorker : 64–69. 
 Mitra-Kahn, Benjamin. 2008. Debunking the myths of computable general equilibrium mod-
els. Schwartz Center for Economic Policy Analysis Working Paper 2008–1. New York: New 
School. 
 Modernizing Foreign Assistance Network. 2008 June 1. New day, new way: U.S. foreign assis-
tance for the 21st century.  http://www.cgdev.org/content/publications/detail/16210/ 
 Mok, Ka Ho. 2008. When socialism meets market capitalism: Challenges for privatizing and 
marketizing education in China and Vietnam,  Policy Futures in Education 6(5): 601–15. 
 Montgomery, John. 1962.  The politics of foreign aid: American experience in Southeast Asia. New 
York: Council on Foreign Relations. 
 Montgomery, John. 1967.  Foreign aid in international politics . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
 Montgomery, John. 1986.  Aftermath: Tarnished outcomes of American foreign policy . Dover: 
Auburn House Publishing Company. 
 Moore, Mick. 2004. Revenues, state formation, and the quality of governance in developing 
countries,  International Political Science Review 25(3): 297–319. 

252  
●  References
 Moore, Mick. 2007.  How does taxation affect the quality of governance? Brighton, UK: Essex 
University Institute of Development Studies. 
 Morgenthau, Hans. 1978.  Politics among nations: The struggle for power and peace . New York: 
Knopf. 
 Mosher, A. 1976.  Thinking about development . New York: Agricultural Development Council. 
 Moss, R. H., G. A. Meehl, M. C. Lemos, J. B. Smith, J. R. Arnold, D. Behar, G. P. Brasseur, 
S. B. Broomell, A. J. Busalacchi, and S. Dessai. 2013. Climate change-hell and high water: 
Practice-relevant adaptation science,  Science 342: 696–98. 
 Mulvenon, James. 1998. Military corruption in china: A conceptual examination,  Problems of 
Post-Communism 45(2): 12–21. 
 Mulvenon, James. 1999. Soldiers of fortune: The rise and fall of PLA, Inc. Paper presented at 
American Political Science Association Meeting, Toronto. 
 Mulvenon, James. 2001a December. PLA divestiture and civil-military relations: Implications 
for the sixteenth Party Congress leadership,  China Leadership Monitor 1( 2). 
 Mulvenon, James. 2001b.  Soldiers of fortune: The rise and fall of the Chinese military-business 
complex, 1978–1998. Armonk, NY: ME Sharpe. 
 Murphy, Dan. 2013 May 29. Why do they hate our NGO funding? Well, because it’s threaten-
ing to foreign governments,  Christian Science Monitor .  http://www.csmonitor.com/World/
Security-Watch/Backchannels/2013/0529 
 Murty, K. N., and A. Soumya. 2006. Macroeconomic effects of public investment in infra-
structure in India. Working Paper series No. WP-2006–003. Mumbai: Indira Gandhi 
Institute of Development Research. 
 Muscat, Robert J. 2002.  Investing in peace: How development aid can prevent or promote conflict . 
Armonk, NY: ME Sharpe. 
 Mutual Security Act of 1951. Title 5, sec. 511b. Washington, DC: US Government Printing 
Office. 
 National Research Council. 2002.  Abrupt climate change: Inevitable surprises . Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press. 
 National Research Council. 2009.  Informing decisions in a changing climate . Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press. 
 National Research Council. 2010a.  America’s climate choices: Adapting to the impacts of climate 
change . Washington, DC: National Academies Press. 
 National Research Council. 2010b.  America’s climate choices: Advancing the science of climate 
change . Washington, DC: National Academies Press. 
 Nellis, John. 2012 January. The international experience with privatization: Its rapid rise, 
partial fall and uncertain future. Calgary: University of Calgary School of Public Policy 
Research Paper No. 12–3. 
 Nelson, Joan. 1968.  Aid, influence, and foreign policy . New York: Macmillan. 
 Nielson, Daniel, and Michael Tierney. 2003. Delegation to international organizations: Agency 
theory and World Bank environmental reform,  International Organization 57(2): 241–76. 
 Nurkse, Ragnar. 1953.  Problems of capital formation in developing countries. New York: 
Columbia University Press. 
 O’Donnell, Guillermo. 1973.  Modernization and bureaucratic-authoritarianism: Studies in 
South American politics . Berkeley, CA: Institute of International Studies, University of 
California. 
 O’Donnell, Guillermo, Philippe Schmitter, and Laurence Whitehead. 1986a.  Transitions from 
authoritarian rule: Southern Europe , Vol. 1. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University 
Press. 
 O’Donnell, Guillermo, Philippe Schmitter, and Laurence Whitehead, eds. 1986b.  Transitions 
from authoritarian rule , Vol. 2. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. 

References  ●  253
 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. 1995.  Participatory Development 
and Good Governance. Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. 
 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Development Assistance 
Committee. 2011. Peer review on the United States.  http://www.oecd.org/development/
peer-reviews/48434536.pdf 
 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. 2013a.  Aid untying: 2012 report 
review of the implementation of the 2001 recommendation and the Accra and Busan untying 
commitments . Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. 
 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. 2013b.  Official Development 
Assistance 2013 update. Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. 
 http://search.oecd.org/officialdocuments/publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?cote=DCD/
DAC(2012)39/FINAL&docLanguage= 
 Orme, John. The original megapolicy: America’s Marshall Plan. In John D. Montgomery and 
Dennis Rondinelli, eds.  Great policies: Strategic innovations in the Pacific Basin . Westport, 
CT: Praeger. 
 Ortiz, Isabel, and Matthew Cummins. 2011 April. Global inequality: Beyond the bottom bil-
lion. UNICEF Social and Economic Policy Working Paper. New York: UNICEF. 
 Osborne, David, and Ted Gaebler. 1993 . Reinventing government: How the entrepreneurial spirit 
is transforming the public sector . New York: Plume. 
 Osborne, Stephen, ed. 2010.  The new public governance? Emerging perspectives on the theory and 
practice of public governance . London: Routledge. 
 Owusu, Francis. 2003. Pragmatism and the gradual shift from dependency to neoliberalism: 
The World Bank, African leaders and development policy in Africa,  World Development 
31(10): 1655–72. 
 Pansuwan, Apisek, and Jayant K. Routray. 2011. Policies and pattern of industrial develop-
ment in Thailand,  Geojournal 76(1): 25–46. 
 Parker, Laura. 2015. Treading water,  National Geographic 227(2): 106–27. 
 Partners in Progress. 1951. A report to the President by the International Advisory Board, 
ca. March 1951. Official File, Truman Papers in the Harry S. Truman Presidential Library, 
Independence, Missouri. 
 Patrinos, Harry, and George Psacharopoulos. 2011 March. Education: Past, present and future 
global challenges. Washington, DC: World Bank Human Development Network Education 
Team Policy Research Working Paper 5616. 
 Patterson, Thomas G., ed. 1989.  Kennedy’s quest for victory: American foreign policy, 1961–
1963 . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Pelaez, Vicky. 2012 July 13. The insidious role of NGOs in the 21st century,  The Moscow 
News . www.moscownews.ru/international/20120713/189957078 
 Perkins, Dwight H. 2001. Industrial and financial policy in China and Vietnam: A new model 
or a replay of the East Asian experience? In Joseph Stiglitz and Shahid Yusuf, eds.,  Rethinking 
the East Asian economic miracle . New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 247–94. 
 Pessino, Carola, and Ricardo Fenochietto. 2010. Determining countries’ tax effort,  Revista de 
Econom í a P  ú blica 195: 65–87. 
 Petermann, Jan-Henrik. 2013.  Between export promotion and poverty reduction: The foreign eco-
nomic policy of untying official development assistance. Dordrecht: Springer. 
 Peters, B. Guy. 2001.  The future of governing , 2nd ed. Lawrence, KS: University Press of 
Kansas. 
 Pfiffner, James. 2004. Traditional public administration versus the new public management: 
Accountability versus efficiency. In A. Benz, H. Siedentopf, and K. P. Sommermann, eds., 
 Institutionenbildung in Regierung und Verwaltung: Festschrift fur Klaus Konig . Berlin: Duncker 
& Humbolt, pp. 443–54. 

254  
●  References
 Picard, Louis, and Terry Buss. 2009.  A fragile peace: Re-examining the history of foreign aid, 
security, and diplomacy . Sterling: Kumarian Press. 
 Popovski, Vesselin. 2010. The role of civil society in global governance. In G. Shabbir Cheema 
and Vesselin Popovski, eds.,  Engaging civil society: Emerging trends in democratic governance. 
Tokyo: United Nations University, pp. 23–43. 
 Powell, Walter, and Paul DiMaggio. 1991.  The new institutionalism in organizational analysis. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Prahalad, Coimbatore, and Stuart Hart. 2002. The fortune at the bottom of the pyramid, 
 Strategy + Business 26( Spring). 
 Prebisch, Raul. 1949.  The economic development of Latin America and its principal problems. 
New York: United Nations. 
 President’s Advisory Committee on Government Organization. 1954 July 12. Memorandum 
for President Eisenhower. Organization for the Development and Coordination of Foreign 
Economic Policy. Executive Office of the President. White House Central Files Confidential. 
Box 18. Council on Foreign Economic Policy. Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas. 
 President’s Committee to Study the United States Military Assistance Program. 1959 August 
17. USAID DEC (PC-AAA-444). 
 Prince, Erik. 2013.  Civilian warriors: The inside story of blackwater and the unsung heroes of the 
war on terror. New York: Penguin. 
 Prosterman, Roy. 2007. Land reform. In  International encyclopedia of the social sciences , 2nd 
edn. New York: Macmillan, pp. 341–45. 
 Prosterman, Roy, and Jeffrey Riedinger. 1987.  Land reform and democratic development. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 Przeworski, Adam, Guillermo O’Donnell, Philippe C. Schmitter, and Laurence Whitehead. 
 Transitions from authoritarian rule: Comparative perspectives . Baltimore, MD: The Johns 
Hopkins University Press. 
 Psacharopoulos, George, and Harry Patrinos. 2004. Education: Past, present and future global 
challenges. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5616. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 Pye, Lucian. 1960. Political development and foreign aid, USAID Development Experience 
Clearinghouse. http://dec.usaid.gov/ 
 Pye, Lucian. 1961. Armies in the process of political modernization,  European Journal of 
Sociology 2: 82–92. 
 Pye, Lucian. 1964. Military training and political and economic development. In Don Piper 
and Taylor Cole, eds.,  Post-primary education and economic development . Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, pp. 75–94. 
 Rabe, Stephen. 2010.  John F. Kennedy, world leader . Dulles, VA: Potomac Books. 
 Radelet, Steven. 2006. A primer on foreign aid. Working Paper 92. Washington, DC: Center 
for Global Development. 
 Rai, Kul. 1980. Foreign aid and voting in the UN general assembly, 1967–1976,  Journal of 
Peace Research 17(3): 269–77. 
 Rampersad, Hubert, and Saleh Hussain. 2014.  Authentic governance: Aligning personal gover-
nance with corporate governance . Dordrecht: Springer. 
 Rana, Raj. 2004. Contemporary challenges in the civil-military relationship: Complementarity 
or incompatibility?  International Review of the Red Cross 86(855): 565–92. 
 Raup, Philip. 1968. Land reform. In  International encyclopedia of the social sciences. New York: 
Macmillan, pp. 562–75, esp. 574. 
 Ravallion, Martin. 2002. Are the poor protected from budget cuts? Evidence for Argentina, 
 Journal of Applied Economics 5(1): 95–121. 
 Reimann, Kim. 2005. Up to no good? Recent critics and critiques of NGOs. In Oliver 
Richmond and Henry Carey, eds ., Subcontracting peace: The challenges of NGO peacebuild-
ing , Aldershot, UK: Ashgate Publishing, pp. 37–54. 

References  ●  255
 Remenyi, Joseph. 1979. Core demi-core interaction: Toward a general theory of disciplinary 
and subdisciplinary growth,  History of Political Economy 11(1): 30–63. 
 Rennack, Dianne, Lisa Mages, and Susan Chesser. 2011 August. Foreign operations appro-
priations: General provisions. CRS Report for Congress. Washington, DC: Congressional 
Research Service. 
 Revkin, Andrew. 2013 December 3. An update on risks of abrupt jolts from global warm-
ing,  DOT Earth/The New York Times .  http://dotearth.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/12/03/
an-update-on-risks-of-abrupt-jolts-from-global-warming/
Richardson, Michael. 2010. Civil society and the state in South Korea, SAIS U.S.-Korea year-
book. Washington, DC: Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, pp. 
165–176.
Riddell, Roger. 1987. Foreign aid reconsidered. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 Rigg, Jonathan. 2003.  South East Asia: The human landscape of modernization and development. 
London: Routledge. 
 Rioja, Felix, 2003. The penalties of inefficient infrastructure,  Review of Development Economics 
7(1): 127–37. 
 Ritzer, George. 2000.  The MacDonaldization of society . Newbury Park, CA: Pine Forge Press. 
 Roberts, John. 2005. Millennium development goals: Are international targets now more cred-
ible?  Journal of International Development 17: 113–29. 
 Robichau, Robbie. 2011. The mosaic of governance: creating a picture with definitions, theo-
ries, and debates,  Policy Studies Journal 39: 113–31. 
 Rodrik, Dani. 2008.  One economics, many recipes: Globalization, institutions, and economic 
growth. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 Rondinelli, Dennis. 1987.  Development administration and US foreign aid policy . Boulder, CO: 
Lynne Rienner. 
 Rondinelli, Dennis. 1990. Financing the decentralization of urban services in developing 
countries: Administrative requirements for fiscal improvements,  Studies in Comparative 
International Development 25(2): 43–59. 
 Rondinelli, Dennis. 2007. Parallel and partnership approaches in decentralized governance: 
Experience in weak states. In G. Shabbir Cheema and Dennis Rondinelli, eds.,  Decentralizing 
governance: Emerging concepts and practices. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 
pp. 21–42. 
 Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul. 1943. Problems of industrialization of eastern and south-eastern 
Europe,  Economic Journal 53: 202–11. 
 Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul. 1944. The international development of economically backward 
areas,  International Affairs 20(2): 157–65. 
 Rostow, Walt. 1952.  The process of economic growth . New York: W.W. Norton. 
 Rostow, Walt. 1956. The take-off into self-sustained growth,  The Economic Journal 66(261): 
25–48. 
 Rostow, Walt. 1960.  The stages of economic growth: A non-communist manifesto . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Roy, Arundhati. 2002.  Power politics , 2nd edn. Cambridge, MA: South End Press. 
 Roy, Denny. 2009. China’s dilemma over civil society organizations. Paper presented to the 
Regional Workshop on Engaging Civil Society, Honolulu, East-West Center. 
 Rusk, Dean. 1962 July 19. Methods for improving the coordination of economic and military 
aid programs. AID/Washington. USAID Record Group 286. Box 6. Folder: Program FY 
63. Entry P39: Classified Vietnam. NACP. 
 Ruttan, Vernon. 1984. Integrated rural development programmes: A historical perspective, 
 World Development 12(4): 393–401. 
 Ruttan, Vernon. 1996.  United States development assistance policy: The domestic politics of foreign 
economic aid. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. 

256  
●  References
 Sachs, Jeffery. 2003. Institutions matter, but not for everything,  Finance and Development 40: 
38–41. 
 Salamon, Lester, and Helmut Anheier. 1992a. In search of the non-profit sector I: The prob-
lem of classification.  Voluntas: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations 
3(2): 125–51. 
 Salamon, Lester, and Helmut Anheier. 1992b. In search of the non-profit sector II: The prob-
lem of classification.  Voluntas: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations 
3(3): 267–309. 
 Salamon, Lester, S. Wojciech Sokolowski, and Associates. 2004.  Global civil society: Dimensions 
of the nonprofit sector , Vol. II. Bloomfield, CT: Kumarian Press. 
 Sally, Razeen, and Rahul Sen. 2011. Trade policies in Southeast Asia in the wider Asian per-
spective,  The World Economy 34(4): 568–601. 
 Sankey, Mara. 2014. The role of transnational non-state actors in Chilean democracy: The 
NED, WOLA, and Freedom House and the 1988 Plebiscite.  http://www.academia.
edu/6663614/ 
 Sarfaty, Galit. 2012.  Values in translation: Human rights and the culture of the World Bank . 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
 Savitz, Andrew. 2013.  The triple bottom line: How today’s best-run companies are achieving eco-
nomic, social and environmental success—and how you can too. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
 Scahill, Jeremy. 2007.  Blackwater: The rise of the world’s most powerful mercenary army. New 
York: Nation Books. 
 Schaub Jr., Gary, and Volker Franke. 2009. Contractors as military professionals?  Parameters 
39(4): 88–104. 
 Scheffran, J ü rgen, Michael Brzoska, Jasmin Kominek, Michael Link, and Janpeter Schilling. 
2012. Climate change and violent conflict,  Science 336(6083): 869–71. 
 Schmidhuber, J., J. Bruinsma, and G. Boedeker. 2009. Capital requirements for agriculture in 
developing countries to 2050. Paper presented at the FAO Expert Meeting on How to Feed 
the World in 2050, 24–26 June, Rome. 
 Schmitter, Philippe. 1972. Paths to political development in Latin America,  Proceedings of the 
Academy of Political Science : 83–105. 
 Schmitter, Phillipe. 1974. Still the century of corporatism?  Review of Politics 36(1): 85–131. 
 Schmitter, Philippe 1996. The influence of international context upon the choice of national 
institutions and policies in neo-democracies. In Laurence Whitehead, ed.,  The international 
dimensions of democratization: Europe and the Americas . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
pp. 26–54. 
 Schou, Arild, and Marit Haug. 2005. Decentralisation in conflict and post-conflict situations. 
Working Paper No. 139. Oslo: Norwegian Institute for Urban and Regional Research. 
 Schultz, T. Paul. 1986. Economic demography and development: New directions in an old 
field. In Gustav Ranis and T. Paul Schultz, eds.,  The state of development economics . London: 
Basil Blackwell. 
 Scott, James C. 1998.  Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condition 
have failed . New Haven: Yale University Press. 
 Secret Seoul 4499. 1968. Assistance to Korean National Police (KNP). Office of Public Safety: 
USAID Record Group 286. Entry 25. Box 5. Folder: General Correspondence Relating to 
Geographical Areas, 1965–1971 February 26. Jamaica to Korea. NACP. Box 70. Folder: 
IPS#1 General Policy Guidelines, General Information Korea ’68. NACP. 
 Sen, Amartya. 1985.  Commodities and capabilities . New York: North-Holland. 
 Sen, Amartya. 2000.  Development as freedom . New York: Random House. 
 Sheehan, Neil. 1989.  A bright shining lie: John Paul Vann and America in Vietnam. New York: 
Vintage Books. 

References  ●  257
 Shihata, I. F. J. 1997. Corruption—General review and the role of the World Bank. In B. Rider, 
ed.,  Corruption, the enemy within . The Hague: Kluwer Law International. 
 Shin, Roy. 1969.  The politics of foreign aid: A study of the impact of United States aid in Korea 
from 1945 to 1966 . Doctoral dissertation, Department of Political Science, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis. 
 Shlaim, Avi. 1983.  The United States and the Berlin blockade, 1948–1949: A study of crisis deci-
sion making . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
 Siddiqa, Ayesha. 2007.  Military Inc: Inside Pakistan’s military economy. London: Pluto. 
 Siegel, Adam. 1998.  Mission creep: An examination of an overused and misunderstood term . 
Alexandria, VA: Center for Naval Analysis. 
 Silicon Valley Business Journal Staff. 2012. Strategies for success—nonprofits: Nonprofit execs 
talk donor fatigue, recruiting, mission creep.  http://www.bizjournals.com/sanjose/print-
edition/2012/06/29/ 
 Singer, Hans. 1950. The distribution of gains between investing and borrowing countries, 
 American Economic Review 40(20): 473–85.
Singer, Hans. 1968. Targets, commitments and realities, Intereconomics 3(2): 53–55. 
 Singh, Kavaljit. 2003. Aid and good governance. A discussion paper for the reality of aid. 
Delhi: Public Interest Research Group (India). 
 SIPRI. 2008.  The effectiveness of foreign military assets in natural disaster response . Stockholm: SIPRI. 
 Skocpol, Theda. 1996. Unsolved mysteries: The Tocqueville files: Unravelling from above,  The 
American Prospect 25(March–April): 20–25. 
 Slaper, Timothy, and Tanya Hall. 2011. The triple bottom line: What is it and how does it 
work?  Indiana Business Review 86(1): 4–8. 
 Slocum-Bradley, Nikki, and Andrew Bradley. 2010. Is the EU’s governance “good”? An assess-
ment of EU governance in its partnership with ACP states,  Third World Quarterly 31(1): 
31–49. 
 Solomone, Stacey. 1995. The PLAs commercial activities in the economy-effects and conse-
quences,  Issues & Studies 31(3): 20–43. 
 Solt, Frederick. 2010.  Standardized world income inequality database, Version 3.0 . Carbondale, 
IL: Southern Illinois University. 
 Squire, Lyn, and Herman van der Tak. 1975.  Economic analysis of projects . Baltimore, MD: 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 Steinberg, David. 1982. The economic development of Korea: Sui Generis or Generic? A.I.D. 
Evaluation Special Study 6. USAID DEC. PN-AAJ-177. 
 Steinfeld, Joshua, and Khi V. Thai. 2013. Political economy of Vietnam: Market reform, 
growth, and the state,  Maryland Series on Contemporary Asian Studies 3: 1–72. 
 Stepan, Alfred. 1971.  The military in politics: Changing patterns in Brazil. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 
 Stepan, Alfred. 1988.  Rethinking military politics: Brazil and the southern cone. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 
 Stern, Nicholas, and Francisco Ferreira. 1997.  The World Bank as “Intellectual Actor.” 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. 
 Stier, Ken. 2011. Egypt’s military-industrial complex.  The Times 9( 11). 
 Stiglitz, Joseph. 2000 April 17. What I learned at the world economic crisis,  The New Republic 
222(16/17): 56–60. 
 Stiglitz, Joseph. 2002.  Globalization and its discontents. New York: W.W. Norton & Company. 
 Stiglitz, Joseph. 2011. Rethinking development economics,  The World Bank Research Observer 
26(2): 230–36. 
 Stoker, Gerry. 2006. Public value management: A new narrative for networked governance? 
 American Review of Public Administration 36(1): 41–57. 

258  
●  References
 Stokke, Olav. 2009.  The UN and development: From aid to cooperation. Bloomington, IN: 
Indiana University Press. 
 Stolper, Wolfgang F. 1966.  Planning without facts: Lessons in resource allocation from Nigeria’s 
development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Streeten, Paul. 1959. Unbalanced growth,  Oxford Economic Papers 11(2): 167–91. 
 Streeten, Paul, and Shahid Burki. 1978. Basic needs: Some issues,  World Development 
63(March): 411–21. 
 Streeten, Paul, Shahid Burki, Mahbub ul Haq, Norman Hicks, and Frances Stewart. 1981. 
 First things first: Meeting basic human needs in the developing countries . New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Studwell, Joe. 2013.  How Asia works: Success and failure in the world’s most dynamic region. New 
York: Grove Press. 
 Svoboda, Eva. 2014 April. The interaction between humanitarian and military actors: Where 
do we go from here? Policy Brief 58. London: HPG/Overseas Development Institute. 
 Swyngedouw, Erik. 2005. Governance innovation and the citizen: The Janus face of gover-
nance-beyond-the-state,  Urban Studies 42(11): 1991–2006. 
 Tadros, Sherine. 2012 February 15. Egypt military’s economic empire,  Aljazeera .  http://www.
aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2012/02/2012215195912519142.html 
 Taffet, Jeffrey. 2007.  Foreign aid as foreign policy: The Alliance for Progress in Latin America. 
New York: Routledge. 
 Tandon, Rajesh. 1992.  NGOs and civil society . Boston, MA: Institute for Development 
Research. 
 Tarnoff, Curt, and Marian Lawson. 2011.  Foreign aid: An introduction to U.S. programs and 
policy . Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service. 
 Tarnoff, Curt, and Marian Lawson. 2012.  Foreign aid: An introductory overview of US programs 
and policies . Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service. 
 Tarnoff, Curt, and Larry Nowels. 2004.  Foreign aid: An introductory overview of US programs 
and policies . Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service. 
 Tarrow, Sidney. 1994.  Power in movements: Social movements, collective action, and politics . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy. 1960 December 31. Report to the Honorable John F. 
Kennedy. National Security Files. Foreign Economic Policy. Box 297, 10–11. Boston, MA: 
John F. Kennedy Library. 
 Task Force on International Development. 1970. U.S. foreign assistance in the 1970s: A new 
approach. Report to the President. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. 
 Taylor, Lance. 2011.  Maynard’s revenge: The collapse of free market macroeconomics . Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Tendler, Judith. 1975.  Inside foreign aid . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 Tetlock, Philip, and Dan Gardner. 2013. Who’s good at forecasts?  The Economist , 81. 
 Thirkell-White, Ben. 2003. The IMF, good governance and middle-income countries,  The 
European Journal of Development Research 15 (1): 99–125. 
 Tignor, Robert. 2006.  W. Arthur Lewis and the birth of development economics. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 
 Tosun, Mehmet, and Serdar Yilmaz. 2008. Centralization, decentralization and conflict in the 
Middle East and North Africa. Paper delivered at the Economic Research Forum Fifteenth 
Annual Conference, November 23–25, Cairo. 
 Trinkunas, Harold. 2005.  Crafting civilian control of the military in Venezuela . Chapel Hill, 
NC: University of North Carolina Press. 
 Trofimenko, Henry. 1981. The third world and the US-soviet competition: A soviet view, 
 Foreign Affairs (Summer): 1021–40. 

References  ●  259
 Truman, Harry S. 1949 January 20. Inaugural address.  http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/
ws/?pid=13282 
 Ul Haq, Mahbub. 1999.  Human development in South Asia 1999: The crisis of governance. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
 UN Conference on Trade and Development. 2007 July. Economic development in Africa: 
Reclaiming policy space: Domestic resource mobilization and developmental states. 
Overview by the UNCTAD Secretariat, Geneva. 
 UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs 2009.  The contribution of the United Nations 
to the improvement of public administration: A 60-year history . New York: United Nations. 
 UNICEF. 1996. Military expenditure—The opportunity cost.  http://www.unicef.org/
sowc96/8mlitary.htm 
 United Nations. 1962.  The United Nations development decade: Proposals fora . New York: 
United Nations. 
 United Nations. 1987.  Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development: Our 
common future . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 United Nations. 1997.  Agenda for development. New York: UN Department of Public 
Information. 
 United Nations. 2011.  Global issues: Governance . New York: United Nations.  http://www.
un.org/en/globalissues/governance/ 
 United Nations Capital Development Fund. 2005.  Delivering the goods—Building local gover-
nance capacity to achieve Millennium Development Goals . New York: United Nations. 
 United Nations Development Programme. 1990.  Human development report 1990 . New York: 
United Nations Development Programme. 
 United Nations Development Programme. 1995. Public sector management, governance, and 
sustainable human development: A discussion paper. New York: Management Development 
and Governance Division, Bureau for Policy and Programme Support, United Nations 
Development Programme. 
 United Nations Development Programme. 1997.  Governance for sustainable human develop-
ment . New York: United Nations Development Programme. 
 United Nations Development Programme. 2002.  Human development report 2002 . New York: 
United Nations Development Programme. 
 United Nations Development Programme. 2011.  Human development report 2011 .  Sustainability 
and equity: A better future for all . New York: United Nations Development Programme. 
 United Nations High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. 
2013.  Report of the UN high-level panel of eminent persons on the post-2015 development 
agenda. New York: United Nations. 
 UNRRA. 1950.  The history of the United Nations relief and rehabilitation administration . New 
York: Cornell University Press, Vols. 1, 3, 4. 
 USA Today . 2009 February 2.  http://www.usatoday.com/news/washington/2009-02-01-aid-
inside_N.htm 
 USAID. 1959 September 1. Committee to Strengthen the Frontiers of Freedom. “The time 
has come to face the facts.” USAID DEC. PC-AAA-217. 
 USAID. 1962 December 13. Country Assistance Program–Korea. USAID DEC. PD-ACC-396. 
 USAID. 1963. Introduction. Classified Vietnam Subject Files. USAID Record Group 286. 
Entry #P 39. Box 1. Folder: AGR Agriculture FY 1962, 1963. 1–2. NACP. 
 USAID. 1964a November 23. Office of Public Safety. Airgram–Public Safety. USAID Record 
Group 286. Box 23. Folder IPS-1. File Material Chile 2 of 2. National Archive at College Park. 
 USAID. 1964b March 13. Office of Public Safety. Joint State/AID to Santiago AIDTO. 
USAID Record Group 286. Box 24, 1964–73. Folder IPS1 General Policy–Chile 1964. 
NACP. 

260  
●  References
 USAID. 1969.  Administrative history—Agency for International Development . Vol. 1. 
Chapter 13. Washington, DC: USAID. 
 USAID/Chile. 1980 September. A history: United States of America assistance to Chile, A.I.D. 
and predecessor agencies, 1943–1980. USAID DEC. PN-AAJ-651. 
 USAID. 1982. Population assistance. AID Policy Paper. Washington: US Government Printing 
Office. 
 USAID. 2005. U.S. overseas loans and grants: Obligations and loan authorizations. July 1, 
1945-September 30. Cong-R-0105.  http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADH500.pdf 
 USAID. 2013.  USAID strategy on democracy, human rights and governance . Washington, DC: 
USAID. 
 USAID 2014.  Greenbook 2014 . Washington, DC: US Agency for International Development. 
 https://eads.usaid.gov/gbk/data/program_report.cfm 
 USAID Alumni Association. 2008 December. Foreign assistance reform and strengthen-
ing USAID: Talking points for the President-elect’s transition team for foreign assistance. 
Washington, DC: USAID Alumni Association.  http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PCAAB936.pdf 
 US Department of State. 1950 November 29. Report on American opinion. Public discussion 
of the Gordon Gray Report. Washington, DC: US Department of State. 
 US Department of State. 2014 May. Congressional budget justification: Department of State, 
foreign operations, and related programs. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. 
 US Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, Section 610. 2002. Legislation on foreign relations through 
2002. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. 
 US ODA 2014.  U.S. ODA database, summary reports . Washington, DC: US ODA. 
 USSC (US Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to 
Intelligence Activities). 1975.  Covert action in Chile, 1963–1973 . Washington, DC: US 
Government Printing Office. 
 Vald é s, Alberto. 1983. The role of agricultural exports in development,  Agriculture and the 
State: Growth, Employment, and Poverty in Developing Countries : 84–115. 
 Valente, Michael. 2011 February 10. Egyptian democracy meets the military-industrial complex, 
 Sustainable Business Forum .  http://www.sustainablebusinessforum.com/mikevalente/49733/
democracy-hands-corporations 
 Van de Laar, Aart. 1980.  The World Bank and the poor . Dordrecht: Springer. 
 Venniker, Richard. 2001. Social returns to education: A survey of recent literature on human 
capital externalities. The Hague: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis 
Report 00/1. 
 Vo, 1990.  Vietnam’s economic policy since 1975 . Singapore: ASEAN Economic Research Unit. 
 Vuong, Quan Hoang. 2014. Vietnam’s political economy: A discussion on the 1986–2016 
period. Working Papers CEB 14–010, Universite Libre de Bruxelles. 
 Walt, Vivienne. 2014 November 10. Missing in action: Why the World Health Organization 
failed to stop Ebola,  Time 184(18): 32–37. 
 Walterhouse, Harry. 1962. Civic action, a counter and cure for insurgency,  Military Review 
42(8): 47–54. 
 Walters, Robert S. 1970.  American and Soviet aid: A comparative perspective.  Pittsburg, PA: 
University of Pittsburgh Press. 
 Walton, Richard J. 1972.  Cold War and counterrevolution: The foreign policy of John F. Kennedy . 
New York: Viking Press. 
 Watkins, Kevin. 1998.  Economic growth with equity: Lessons for East Asia. Oxford, UK: Oxfam GB. 
 Weil, David. 2007. Accounting for the effect of health on economic growth,  The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 122(3): 1265–1306. 
 Weir, Fred. 2013 June 24. Russia widens its crackdown,  Christian Science Monitor 105(31): 
11–12. 

References  ●  261
 Weiss, Thomas. 2000. Governance, good governance and global governance: Conceptual and 
actual challenges,  Third World Quarterly 21(5): 795–815. 
 Wekwete, Kadmiel. 2007. Decentralization to promote effective and efficient pro-poor infra-
structure and service delivery in the least developed countries. In G. Shabbir Cheema 
and Dennis Rondinelli, eds.,  Decentralizing governance: Emerging concepts and practices. 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, pp. 242–66. 
 Welker, D. 1997. The Chinese military industrial complex goes global,  The Multinational 
Monitor 18( 6). http://multinational m onitor.org/hyper/mm0697.05.html 
 Westad, Odd Arne. 2003.  Decisive encounters: The Chinese civil war, 1946–1950. Palo Alto, 
CA: Stanford University Press. 
 White, Gordon. 1994. Civil society, democratization and development (I): Clearing the ana-
lytical ground,  Democratization 1(2): 375–90. 
 White House. 2002.  The national security strategy 2002 . Washington, DC: US Government 
Printing Office. 
 White House Office of the Press Secretary. 2010a. Fact sheet: US global development policy.  http://
www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2010/09/22/fact-sheet-us-global-development-
policy 
 White House Office of the Press Secretary. 2010b September 22. Remarks by the president 
at the Millennium Development Goals Summit in New York.  http://www.whitehouse.gov/
the-press-office/2010/09/22/remarks-president-millennium-development-goals-summit-
new-york-new-york 
 Widianto, Bambang. 2007. Are budget support and cash transfer effective means of social 
protection. Paper presented at Forum on Inclusive growth and poverty reduction in the new 
Asia and the Pacific. 
 Williams, William. 1973.  The contours of American history. New York: Verso Books. 
 Williamson, John. 1990.  Latin American adjustment: How much has happened? Washington, 
DC: Institute for International Economics. 
 Williamson, John. 1999. What should the World Bank think about the Washington con-
sensus? Paper prepared as a background to the World Bank’s World Development Report 
2000. Institute for International Economics Papers.  http://scienzepolitiche.unipg.it/tutor/
uploads/williamson_on_washington_consensus_002.pdf 
 Williamson, John. 2004. A short history of the Washington consensus, Conference on 
From the Washington Consensus towards a New Global Governance, September 24–25. 
Barcelona: F undaci ó n CIDOB. 
 Williamson, John. 2009. Short history of the Washington consensus,  Law and Business Review 
of the Americas 15: 7–26. 
 Williamson, Oliver. 2002. The theory of the firm as governance structure: From choice to 
contract,  Journal of Economic Perspectives : 171–95. 
 Wills, Garry. 1987.  Reagan’s America. New York: Penguin. 
 Wilson, Margaret. 2011.  Does your nonprofit suffer from “mission creep”? Frederick, MD: 
McLean, Koehler, Sparks & Hammond. 
 Wilson, Woodrow. 1887. The study of administration,  Political Science Quarterly 2(2), 197–222. 
 Wing, Ian. 2004 September. Computable general equilibrium models and their use in econ-
omy-wide policy analysis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy 
of Global Change Technical Note No. 6. 
 Winn, Peter, and Cristobal Kay. 1974. Agrarian reform and rural revolution in Allende’s Chile, 
 Journal of Latin American Studies 6(1): 135–59. 
 Wintrop, Norman. 1983.  Liberal democratic theory and its critics . London: Croom Helm. 
 Wolf, Jr., Charles. 1979. A theory of nonmarket failure: Framework for implementation analy-
sis,  Journal of Law and Economics 22(1): 107–39. 

262  
●  References
 Wolf, Jr., Charles, Xiao Wang, and Eric Warner. 2013.  China’s foreign aid and government-
sponsored investment activities: Scale, content, destinations, and implications . Santa Monica, 
CA: RAND Corporation. 
 World Bank. 1975.  Agricultural credit: Sector policy paper.  Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 World Bank. 1981.  Accelerated development in Sub-Saharan Africa: An agenda for action. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 World Bank. 1989.  Sub-Saharan Africa: From crisis to sustainable growth: A long-term perspective 
study. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 World Bank. 1992.  Governance and development . Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 World Bank. 1994.  Governance: The World Bank’s experience . Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 World Bank. 1997.  World development report 1997: The state in a changing world . New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
 World Bank. 2011a August. Breaking even or breaking through: Reaching financial sustain-
ability while providing high quality standards in higher education in the Middle East and 
North Africa, Washington, DC.  http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMENA/Resources/
FinancingHigherEducation_MENA.pdf 
 World Bank. 2011b.  The changing wealth of nations: Measuring sustainable development in the 
new millennium . Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 World Bank. 2012a. An update to the World Bank’s estimates of consumption poverty in 
the developing world. Washington, DC: World Bank.  http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
INTPOVCALNET/Resources/Global_Poverty_Update_2012_02-29-12.pdf 
 World Bank. 2012b. World Bank data bank. Percentage distribution of public current expen-
diture by level.  http://databank.worldbank.org/ddp/home.do?Step=3&id=4 
 World Bank. 2012c. World Bank databank. Secondary school enrollments.  http://databank.
worldbank.org/ddp/home.do?Step=3&id=4 
 World Bank. 2013.  Computable general equilibrium models, poverty and social impact analysis 
site . Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 World Bank. 2014a.  The state of social safety nets 2014 . Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 World Bank. 2014b.  World development indicators 2013 . Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 World Bank Independent Evaluation Group. 2010.  Cost-benefit analysis in World Bank projects . 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
 World Bank Group. 2014.  Doing business 2015: Going beyond efficiency . Washington, DC: 
World Bank. 
 World Health Organization. 2014.  World health statistics 2014. Geneva, Switzerland: World 
Health Organization. 
 Yunus, Mohammed. 2010.  Building social business: The new kind of capitalism that serves 
humanity’s most pressing needs . New York: Public Affairs. 
 Zeller, Manfred, and Richard Meyer, eds. 2002.  The triangle of microfinance: Financial sustain-
ability, outreach, and impact . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 

ABAG (Associação Brasileira de Aviação 
Geral), 172, 230
Abdullahi, Najad, 177
abortions, ban on U.S. aid for, 163
Abra (Philippines), governance, 90
absorptive capacity, of developing countries, 
96, 134, 145
Abu-Bader, Suleiman, 181
Abuja (Nigeria), 54
Abu-Qarn, Aamer, 181
academics, 4, 67, 77, 82–3, 91, 101, 105, 111
accountability, as a governance criterion, 11, 
23, 37, 50–1, 63, 71, 73–80, 82–3, 85, 
89–100, 103, 105–6, 108, 111–12, 
116, 124, 139, 144, 178
Acheson, Christopher, 24
Achison, Dean, 228
ACI (Andean Counterdrug Initiative), 227
Adams, Dale, 25
ADB. See Asian Development Bank
Addison, Mark, 79
Adivasi, 128
affirmative action, 8, 93, 217
in Brazil, 128, 217
in India, 8, 93, 128, 217
Afghanistan
aid-seeking strategies, 160
anti-drug efforts, 137
identification, 4
Soviet assistance, 169
terrorism, 158
U.S. assistance, 163–4, 227
Africa. See also under specific subregions and 
countries
administrative capacity, 86–7
agricultural decline, 26, 222
centralized planning, 86
civil service, 73
civil society, 91, 104–5
colonial legacy, 68
education, 53
governance, 97
healthcare, 54
low development, 17
low liberalization levels, 42–4
military disaster relief force, 185
NGOs, 125
and the nonaligned movement, 160
poverty, 44–5, 124
statist model, 20–1, 46
African Development Bank, 97, 130
African Peer Review Mechanism, 91, 104
Afro-Brazilians, 128, 217
Agarwal, Bina, 35
Aguirre Cerda, Pedro (Chile), 232
Ahluwalia, Montek, 29, 31
Air Force Academy (United States), 169
Alagappa, Muthiah, 90
Al-Assad, Bashar (Syria), 43
Algeria, limited deregulation in, 223
Allen, Douglas, 223
Allende, Salvador (Chile), 192, 194–8, 207, 
231
Alliance for Progress (United States), 19, 
109, 135, 139, 167, 192–4, 218
Allianz, Ryan, 227, 231
Allison, Graham, 225
Almond, Gabriel, 227
Alston, Julian, 57, 224
altruism, 165, 192
Alvarado, Facundo, 44–5
Amazon expansion (Brazil), 214, 219
Index

264  
●  Index
Andean Counterdrug Initiative/Counterdrug 
Program (United States), 136, 227
Anderson, Beth, 115, 226
Anderson, Kim, 26, 57, 222
Anderson, Mary, 112
Andersson, Krister, 219
Andrews, Stanley, 156
Angola, Soviet assistance, 137
Anheier, Helmut, 108
Anthropocene Age, 9
anthropology, perspectives on governance, 
77, 138, 209
anti-agricultural bias, 25–6, 57
anticorruption programs, 95–6, 99–100, 
105, 108, 214
apolitical civil service model, 73, 78
Appiah, Elizabeth, 61
Arab nations, 43, 51, 53, 90, 94. See also 
under specific countries
Arab Spring, 90, 94
Arase, David, 227
Arato, Andrew, 90
arbitrariness risk in allocating cash transfers, 
8, 121
Argentina
agricultural taxation, 25
conditional cash transfers, 32
deregulation, 42
electoral oversight, 89
liberalization, 42
military, 9, 175, 232
policy inflexibility, 210
regressive social protection programs, 51
social movements, 82
Unemployed Workers’ Movement, 82
armed forces, 1, 12–13, 48, 167, 170, 172, 
174, 180, 182, 184–6, 189, 196, 198, 
200–3, 210, 214, 218, 230–1. See also 
militaries and under specific countries
Armenia, liberalization, 43
Ascher, William, 180, 223, 227
Asian Development Bank (ADB), 97, 102, 
136, 138, 152, 180, 225
Asian Tigers, 133
Asociación Latinoamericana de 
Organizaciones de Promoción al 
Desarrollo, 92
audits
for CSO accountability, 93
for government accountability, 99, 105, 145
Auer, Matthew, 145
Austin, James, 110
Australia, foreign assistance, 147
Austria, Corporatism, 175
authoritarianism, 68, 81, 92, 125–7, 160, 
176, 197–203, 221, 232
autonomy, critique of NGOs, 111
Axis countries, WWII, 134
Azerbaijan, liberalization, 43
Bachelet, Michelle (Chile), 184, 197
Bahrain, liberalization, 43
balanced growth approach, 222
Baldacci, Emanuele, 53
Baltic republics, Soviet foreign assistance, 136
Bandung nonaligned nations meeting, 160
bandwagon dynamics, 7
Bang, Henrik, 80
Bangalore Public Affairs Center, 90
Bangkok region, industrialization, 55
Bangladesh
CSOs, 91, 93
legislative capacity, 89
NGOs, 89, 91
poverty alleviation resource needs, 34
Barash, David, 183
Barbier, E. B., 185
Barro, Robert, 108, 228
basic needs doctrine, 5, 32–5, 58, 138, 156, 
163, 222–3
Bates, Robert, 50, 222
Bauer, Peter, 20
Beauvais, J. C., 64
Bebbington, Anthony, 232
Beeson, Mark, 180
behavioralism, 53, 78, 225–6
Beijing Consensus economic approach, 127, 
178–9
Beittel, June, 227
Belarus, repression of NGOs, 226
beneficent charity function, 113, 173
benefit leakage, as a problem of poverty 
alleviation, 216
Benmaamar, Mustapha, 60
Bennathan, Esra, 59, 224
Bennett, G., 156
Benoit, Emile, 181
Beresford, M., 206
Berg Report, of the World Bank, 222
Berkeley Boys (Indoensia), 3

Index  ●  265
Berlin
Airlift, 113
blockade, 119
lessons of, 192
Wall, 109, 159
Berlin Blockade, 119
Bernstein, Thomas, 64
Bevir, Mark, 2
Bezemer, Dirk, 26
Bickel, Lennard, 109
Bickford, Thomas, 178
bilateralism, 2, 6, 12, 16, 27, 33, 88, 90, 
95, 101, 104, 134, 137, 139–42, 146, 
151–3, 157, 163–5, 189, 207, 211, 
219–20, 228
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 115, 
227
Billionaire Challenge, 115
biotechnology, 112
bipolarity assumption of foreign policy, 159, 
161
Blackwater, international security 
firm, 230
Blakeslee, Mary, 163
Blind, Peride, 81
Bloom, David, 54, 61, 225
Blunt, Peter, 73
Bockh, Laszlo, 163
Boedeker, G., 58
Boeing Corporation, 177
Bolivarian Missions (Venezuela), 197–8
Bolivia
CSOs, 94
government-NGO conflicts, 226
military takeovers, 175
populist regime, 42
Bolsa Familia social safety net program 
(Brazil), 51
Boothroyd, P., 207
Bornhorst, Fabian, 50
borrowing as an economic strategy, 18, 
21–3, 33, 56, 97, 119, 142–3
Bossert, T. J., 64
Botswana
education, 53, 224
independent electoral body, 89
Boughton, James, 23, 47, 143
BRAC University (Bangladesh), 91
Bradley, Andrew, 100
Bradshaw, Sarah, 227, 231
Brazil
affirmative action programs, 217
Afro-Brazilians, 217
Amazonian expansion, 214, 219
armed forces’ roles, 172, 214, 219
centrist policies, 197
civil society organizations, 90–4
decentralization, 8, 89
economic stagnation, 179
food prices, 25
foreign assistance, 153
income distribution, 30
liberalization, 32, 42
mining, 49
mixed private-public ownership, 49
NGOs, 124, 128
regional development, 87–8
Rural Landless Workers Movement, 82
social movements, 82, 90–1
social safety nets, 51
Superintendency of the Northeast, 88
trade restrictions, 42
Brazinsky, Gregg, 200
Brewer, Garry D., 127
bribery, 95, 195, 213
Briceño-Garmendia, Cecilia, 59
BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, China), 128, 
179, 231
bridges, 172, 186. See also physical 
infrastructure
British Virgin Islands, 231
Brodzinsky, Sibylla, 126
Brömmelhörster, Jörn, 231
Brooks, Arthur, 115
Bruinsma, J., 58
Brundtland Commission, 70
Brunei, deregulation, 42
Bruzelius, Nils, 59
Buchanan, James, 223
Buckley, Chris, 179
Buffett, Peter, 112
Bulgaria, Comecon member, 228
bureaucracies, 9, 12, 43, 63, 72, 74–5, 78, 
82, 85–7, 89, 96, 98, 105, 115, 141, 
150, 163, 184, 213
Burki, Shaheed, 34, 222–3
Burma, military dominance, 184
Burnside, Craig, 142
Burt’s Bees (United States), 117
Busch, Gary, 178–9

266  
●  Index
Bush, George W. (United States), 164
Buss, Terry, 203–4
Butler, Brian, 232
Butterfield, Samuel, 199
California Public Employees Retirement 
System (CALPERS), 73, 123, 225
caloric intake, as a basic needs criterion, 223
Cambodia, wars, 229, 232
Campbell, Joel, 80
Canada, foreign assistance, 147
Canning, David, 54, 59, 61, 224–5
capital abundance, 21
capitalism, 116, 125, 127, 158, 193, 200, 230
carabineros (Chile), 170, 194
carabiniere (Italy), 170
Caracazo riots (Venezuela), 197
Cardoso, Fernando Henrique, 118
Caribbean
economic growth, 224
education, 54
poverty, 44
US foreign assistance, 44, 163, 44, 54, 
163, 224
Carothers, Thomas, 90
Carson, Rachel, 109
cash transfers for the poor, 8, 32, 34–5, 
49, 51–2, 58, 71, 128, 216. See also 
conditional cash transfers
Castells, Manuel, 79–80
castes, 128, 217
Castillo, Jasen, 181
Castroism (Cuba), 192
Cawson, A., 225
Central America
conflicts, 162–3
hurricane destruction, 162–3, 227, 231
See also under specific countries
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) (United 
States), 195–6
centralization, of US foreign assistance 
efforts, 154, 157
chaebols (Korea), 203
Chalmers, Douglas, 175
charitable organizations, 90, 113, 120, 122, 
173, 181. See also NGOs
Chavez, Hugo (Venezuela), 197–8
Chavismo (Venezuela), 198
Cheema, G. Shabbir, 75–6, 79, 90–1, 93–5, 
99, 102–3
Chenery, Hollis, 2, 20, 29, 31, 221–2
Chesser, Susan, 163, 229
Cheung, Tai Ming, 178–9
Chicago boys (Chile), 3
Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 
(United States), 152
Child Survival and Health Programs (United 
States), 164
children, 32, 35, 52, 60, 71, 95, 120, 131, 
216, 231
Chile
corporatism, 175
economic reform, 126
electoral oversight, 89
governance, 89
income distribution, 30
land reform, 8
Mapuches, 4
military, 182, 184
privatization, 49
US educational influence, 3
US foreign assistance, 13, 158, 189–200, 
204, 207–8, 229
US security concerns, 158, 189–200, 
207–8, 229
China
Beijing Consensus, 178–9
conflict with Vietnam, 206–7
CSOs, 92
decentralization, 8, 64, 218
disruption, 127–8
economic growth, 4, 31, 44, 47, 127–8
education, 182–3
environmental regulation, 218
foreign assistance from, 134, 147
governance, 5
infrastructure, 59, 224
international assertiveness, 170
Korean War, 202
legitimacy, 103
liberalization, 206
military, 171, 175, 178–9, 184
military assistance, 170, 206
NGOs, 120–5
poverty alleviation, 103, 124–6, 178
resource-seeking, 170
Revolution, 158
rural industrialization, 55, 125
socialism, 19
South China Sea confrontation, 137, 207

Index  ●  267
Soviet rivalry, 136
statism, 46
taxation, 64
US foreign assistance, 158
US security concerns, 191, 199, 202–3
Uighurs, 125
China Carrie, firm, 231
China Poly Group, 231
China Songhai, firm of the PLA Navy, 231
China Xinxing firm, 231
Chinese Revolution, 158
Christian Democratic Party (Chile), 192–4, 
207
Christian Science Monitor, 155, 180
Citibank, 181
cities
infrastructure bias, 26
mega, 108, 128, 168, 186–7, 231
military roles, 185
overcrowding, 54, 138
satellite settlements, 33
See also urbanization
citizen participation in governance, 1, 4, 
10–11, 50–1, 68, 72–4, 76–7, 79–81, 
83, 85–6, 89–91, 93–4, 96, 99–100, 
102–3, 105–6, 109, 121, 128, 154, 
171, 183, 225–6
civic education, 81, 100
civic engagement, 74–5, 81–2, 91, 205, 
224
civil liberties, 76, 226
civil society organizations (CSOs), 11, 75, 
81–5, 99, 111, 121, 126, 152–4, 198. 
See also under specific countries
Clark, John, 91, 111
Cleaver, Kevin, 36, 223
Cleveland, Harlan, 78
climate change, 91–2, 108, 117, 122, 128–9, 
173, 183, 185
Clinton, Hilary (United States), 150
Clinton-Gore History Project, 152, 164
coal mining (South Korea), 199
Coalition for Environmentally Responsible 
Economics (CERES), 123
Coase, Ronald, 223
coast guards, 186, 230
coastal vulnerability, 185
Cochrane, Joe, 180
Cockburn, John, 57
cocoa, Ghana, 25
Codelco (Chilean Copper Corporation), 
49, 231
coercion
applied to conscription, 230
by external actors, 3
military capacity for, 170, 181–2
military use of, 214
Cohen, Jean, 90
Colclough, Christopher, 53
Collier, David, 175
Collier, Ruth, 175
Collier, Simon, 193
Colombia
anti-drug programs, 163–4, 197, 227
border war risk, 172
electoral oversight, 89
ELN guerrilla group, 172
FARC guerrilla group, 172
guerrillas, 136
military, 136, 163, 172
regressive social assistance programs, 51
US military assistance, 136, 163
colonialism, 102, 160, 193
Colorado Springs, Colorado (United States), 
169
Combat Police Force (South Korea), 201
combatant reintegration, 7
Comecon (Council for Mutual Economic 
Assistance), 136, 228
Command and General Staff College 
(United States), 169
Commerce Department (United States), 
155–6
commercialization, NGO criterion, 111–12
Commission on Global Governance, 77, 
101–2
Communism, 108–9, 111, 145, 155, 158–61, 
171, 178, 190–2, 195–201, 203, 205–8, 
226, 228–9, 231
communitarian philosophy, 193
computable general equilibrium models, 24, 
62–3, 222, 225
Concerned Citizens of Abra for Good 
Governance (Philippines), 90
concessional lending, 140, 147, 164
conditional cash transfers (CCTs), 32, 34–5, 
51–2, 71, 128, 216
conditionalities imposed by lenders, 22–3, 
46–7, 76, 83, 85, 95, 100, 106, 142–7, 
193

268  
●  Index
Confucianism, 199, 204
Congressional Research Service (United 
States), 151
conscription, 174, 181–2, 203, 230–1
Consolidated Appropriations Act (United 
States), 163
Constable, Pamela, 196
consumer sovereignty theory, 35
Cooley, Alexander, 112
CORFO (Corporación de Fomento de la 
Producción de Chile), 193, 232
Cornia, Giovanni, 32
corporate social responsibility, 116–17
corporatism, 68, 175–6, 181, 225
corruption, 11, 39, 49, 51, 74–5, 83, 86, 
93, 95, 97, 99, 105–6, 114, 145–6, 
160, 172, 176, 178–81, 190, 197, 200, 
202, 205, 207, 212–13, 217, 219, 224. 
See also under specific countries
Corruption Perceptions Index, 105
cosmopolitanism, 200
Costa Rica
abolition of the armed forces, 231
national police, 183
Cotonou Agreement between the EU and 
developing countries, 100
cottage industry, 26
counterinsurgency, 131, 168–9, 192, 194–5, 
200–1, 205–6, 208
Cowen, Tyler, 126
Cradle to Cradle, 130
credible deterrence, 213–14
CSOs (Civil Society Organizations), 85, 
90–5, 98–9, 112. See also under specific 
countries
Cuba
Comecon member, 228
human rights, 226
lessons of for the United States, 192
military action in Africa and Latin 
America, 136, 169
NGO-government confrontations, 226
redistribution, 31
socialism, 19
Soviet foreign assistance, 136, 169
Cullather, Nick, 109
cultural control theory, 74
cultural preservation, 123
Cummins, Matthew, 44, 223
Cuny, Frederick, 171, 173
Cutshall, Charles, 161, 163
Czechoslovakia
Comecon member, 228
NGOs, 109
Daalder, Hans, 172
DAC. See Development Assistance 
Committee
Dacin, Pete, 226
Dacy, Douglas, 204
Daewoo (South Korea), 203
Dalits, 128
dams, 55, 160
Davis, Kevin, 140
Davis, Thomas, 107, 226
De Janvry, Alain, 145
De la Rosa, Braulio, 182
De Mello, Luiz, 181
De Rugy, Veronique, 180
deconcentration of public administration, 8, 
54, 89, 217, 225
Dees, J. Gregory, 115–16, 226
Defense Department (United States), 163, 
191, 195, 207
deficit spending, 18
deforestation, 6
deliberative democracy, 83
demining, 164
demobilized soldiers, 7, 182
democracies, 6, 8–12, 19, 68, 71–2, 76, 
80–3, 90, 92, 98, 100–6, 112, 125, 
127–8, 133–4, 154, 158–9, 163–4, 
184, 189–90, 192, 196, 198, 200–2, 
204, 207, 213–14, 218, 232
democratic governance, 5–6, 67–9, 72, 
75–82, 85–6, 89–95, 98–101, 103–5, 
114, 134, 145, 160–1, 190–4, 196, 
199–204, 207, 217, 220, 230
Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), 
resource dependence, 56
demographic transition to lower birth rates, 
159
Denmark, advocacy of democratic 
governance, 101
deregulation, 22, 42–3, 223, 226. See 
also liberalization and under specific 
countries
Derg (Ethiopia), 137
Dethier, Jacques, 145
Devarajan, Shantayanan, 50

Index  ●  269
Development Alternatives, Inc. (United 
States), 17, 162
Development Assistance Committee of the 
OECD, 147, 151
devolution, form of decentralization, 7–8, 
64, 89, 99, 103, 158, 219
Diamond, Larry, 90, 149
Diem, Ngo Dinh, 204
DiMaggio, Paul, 112
disaster relief, 129, 168, 185
disasters, 8, 46, 112–14, 125, 128–31, 
168–9, 173–4, 185–6, 227, 231
disciplines, impact on development theory, 
4, 77, 83, 130
disease eradication challenges, 36, 98, 158, 
164, 209
diversity, respect for as a governance 
criterion, 69, 85, 176
Doctors without Borders, 131
Dodge, Joseph, 156–7
Doi Moi economic strategy (Vietnam), 207
Dollar, David, 15, 142
Dominican Republic, regressive social 
protection spending, 51
domino theory of vulnerability to 
Communist takeover, 159, 203, 229
donors. See foreign assistance and under 
specific countries
Doornbos, Martin, 96
Dorfman, Robert, 2
Draper, William (United States), 191
DRC. See Democratic Republic of the Congo
Dreier, Axel, 227
drought, 129–30, 186, 222
drug trafficking, 136–9, 169, 172–3, 186, 
197, 227
Dryzek, John, 76
Duit, Andreas, 77
Dunleavy, Patrick, 74, 76
Duranton, Gilles, 26
Dutch, former colonies, 171
Earth Summit. See UN Conference on 
Environment and Development
earthquakes, 113, 125, 130, 173, 186, 227, 
231
East Asian Economic Miracle, 4
Eastern and Southern Africa Management 
Institute, 87
Eastern Bloc, 136–7, 164, 168
Eastern Europe, 19, 81, 87, 136–7, 163–4, 
224. See also under specific countries
Ebola epidemic, West Africa, 173, 183
Ebrahim, Alinoor, 123
ecological economics, 129–30, 185, 209, 227
Economic Cooperation Agency (ECA) 
(United States), 153–4, 158
Economic Freedom of the World, 42–5, 
105, 223
Economic Support Fund (ESF) (United 
States), 158, 162–3
Economist (Magazine), 124–8, 176–8, 184, 
231
economists, 3, 5, 16–18, 20, 22–4, 29–30, 
36, 41, 61–2, 67, 127, 138, 210–11, 
221–2, 227, 232
ecosystems, 55–7, 70, 108, 129–30, 168, 186
degradation, 55, 57, 88, 216, 219, 233
ecotourism, 172
Ecuador
border war risks, 172
CSOs, 94
government-NGO conflicts, 226
human rights, 94
military takeovers, 175
military tourism, 230
Edelman Trust Barometer, 123
education, 6, 9, 16, 27–8, 31, 33–6, 50–4, 
60–4, 69–72, 76, 91, 93, 96–101, 104, 
108, 110–11, 114, 119–22, 125, 130, 
138–9, 150, 154, 156, 160–1, 169, 
174, 180–4, 186–90, 195–6, 202–5, 
215–17, 224–5, 228. See also under 
specific countries
Edwards, Sebastian, 111–12, 232
effectiveness criterion for decentralization 
choices, 7
efficiency, criterion for decentralization 
choices, 118–19
Eggertsson, Thráinn., 39
Egypt
army, 176–7, 181, 184, 218, 231
deregulation, 223
low tax effort, 50
NGOs, 120
poverty alleviation, 51
Soviet foreign assistance, 136–7, 160
US foreign assistance, 158, 160
EIAs. See Environmental Impact 
Assessments

270  
●  Index
Eisenhower, Dwight D. (United States), 
156, 159, 191, 229
Ekbladh, David, 229
El Beblawi, Hazem, 137
El Salvador, police, 172–3
elections, fair and competitive, as a criterion 
of governance, 74–6, 89–90, 98–101, 
103, 105, 202, 207
Elkington, John, 118, 123
ELN (National Liberation Army) 
(Colombia), 172
El-Sisi, Abul Fattah (Egypt), 177
employment, 17, 21, 26, 30, 43, 69, 71, 
87, 146, 171. See also under specific 
countries
empowerment, 8, 69–70, 81, 102, 105, 112, 
162
enclave industries, 5
Encyclopedia Britannica, 175
energy security, 170, 186
energy subsidies, 51–2
Engle, Byron, 200–1
environmental agencies, 10
environmental degradation, 54–5, 88, 216, 
233
Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs), 
233
environmental NGOs, 141, 219
epidemics, 173
Epstein, Susan, 163, 229
equality
as a governance criterion, 78
as a sustainability criterion, 70
equilibrium premise of neoclassical 
economics, 24, 62–3, 129, 135, 221–2, 
225
equity, criterion of governance, 10, 28–31, 
36, 41, 50, 58, 68–9, 75, 77, 79, 110, 
128, 130, 145, 164–5, 211, 215, 219
Esman, Milton, 110
Esmark, Anders, 80
Estache, Antonio, 59
Eswaran, Mukesh, 57
Ethiopia
access to telephones, 27
CSO limitations, 121
Derg leftist regime, 137
Soviet foreign assistance, 137
ethnicity, 11, 27, 29, 75, 87, 93, 146, 218, 
232
European Recovery Program (ERP) (United 
States), 153, 157
European Union (EU), 80, 100–1, 134, 158
exceptionalism, American, 228
export pessimism, 20, 219
Export-Import Bank (United States), 155–6
expropriation of assets, 56, 126, 193, 195, 200
externalities
of education, 61, 224
negative, 75
extraparliamentary monitoring institutions, 
105
Falconer, Peter, 74
famine, 138, 173
FAO. See UN Food and Agriculture 
Organization
farmers, 26, 58, 117, 151, 161, 193, 216
Farnsworth, Elizabeth, 194
fascism, 175
Fay, Marianne, 59
Feasel, Edward, 146
Feder, Gershon, 27, 139
Federal Election Commission (United 
States), 226
Federal Financial Management 
Improvement Act of 1996 (United 
States), 152
Fenochietto, Ricardo, 50, 224
Fernholz, Rosemary, 55
Ferreira, Francisco, 24, 221
fertility, 53, 61
Fesselmeyer, Eric, 57
Finkelstein, Lawrence, 80
Finland, support for democratic governance, 
101
Fiszbein, Ariel, 224
Fitch, J. Samuel, 230
Fitzgerald, Frances, 205
Fjeldstad, Odd-Helge, 50
Flynn, Patrice, 222
Flyvbjerg, Bent, 59
FOA. See Foreign Operations Agency
Food for Peace Act (FPA) (United States), 229
Food Motor Company Fund (FMCF), 122
Ford, Henry (United States), 110, 122, 149
Ford family, philanthropy (United States), 122
Ford Foundation (United States), 110, 122
Ford Motor Company (United States), 122
Foreign Affairs (magazine), 194

Index  ●  271
foreign aid. See foreign assistance
foreign assistance, 1–2, 5, 9, 12, 18–19, 27, 
33, 41, 76, 82–3, 94, 104–6, 111, 127, 
133–7, 139–41, 146–7, 149–65, 169, 
177, 182, 189–95, 198, 200–1, 203–8, 
222, 228–9. See also under specific 
countries
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (United 
States), 153, 158–9, 162–3, 165, 191
Foreign Operations Agency (United States), 
153, 156, 163
Fort Benning (United States), 169
Foster, William, 155
Foucault, Michel, 82
fragmentation of policymaking, 80, 88, 90, 
98, 141, 152, 217
France
colonialism, 171
colonialism in Vietnam, 204, 232
Franke, Volker, 174
Frederickson, H. George, 79
Freedom for Russia and Emerging Eurasian 
Democracies and Open Markets Support 
Act of 1992 (United States), 163
Freedom House (United States), 105, 196
Freedom Support Act (United States), 164
Frei Montalva, Eduardo (Chile), 193–5, 197
FRELIMO regime (Mozambique), 137
Fritz, Verena, 96
frontiers, governance, 217
Fryxell, Gerald, 219
Fuchs, Andreas, 227
fuel subsidies, 36, 52, 180
Indonesia, 32
Fukuda-Parr, Sakiko, 15
Fukuyama, Francis, 149
fundamentalism, 22, 215
Furezas Armadas Revolucionarias de 
Colombia (FARC), 172
Gaebler, Ted, 82, 87
Galambos, Louis, 229
Galaz, Victor, 77
Gandhi, Mohandas (India), 26
Garbuio, Massimo, 59
Gardner, Dan, 227
garrison state, 202
Gasparini, Leonardo, 44–5
Gates, Bill (United States), 115, 227
Gaud, William, 229
Gelpern, Anna, 140
gender equality, 36, 70, 108, 120, 209
genocide, 145
geopolitics, 1, 55, 136–7, 155, 164–5, 207
Georgia, liberalization, 43
Gerakas, E., 191
Gerschenkron, Alexander, 19–20
Gerth, Hans, 78
Gettleman, Jeffrey, 183
Ghana
cocoa exports, 25
legislative enhancement, 89
Gibson, Bill, 62
Gillis, Justin, 185
Gillis, Malcolm, 222, 224
Gimlin, Holt, 159, 162
Gini index, 44
globalization, 71, 76, 82, 85, 89, 92, 98, 111, 
118, 120, 124, 161, 167–8, 179, 228
Gobson, Clark, 219
Golden, David, 118
Goldman Sachs (United States), 179, 231
Goodman, David, 178
Goodman, Louis, 171
Goodrich, Melinda, 136–7
Gordon, Lincoln, 154–5
Gore, Albert (United States), 152, 164
Gourevitch, Peter, 111
governance, 1–6, 8, 10–11, 28, 37–8, 50, 
56, 62, 64–9, 71–83, 85–107, 111–12, 
117, 125, 144–6, 160–5, 175, 189–90, 
196, 198, 202–3, 206–9, 211, 213–21, 
225, 228, 232
Government Management Reform Act of 
1994 (United States), 152
grassroots organizations, 77, 107, 111, 
141–2, 219, 228
Gravel, Mike, 195
Great Britain. See United Kingdom
Great Depresson, impact on economic 
theory, 17, 181
Greece, 23
emergency aid to, 159
Green Revolution, 6, 110, 161
Grosh, Margaret, 32, 51, 224, 232
Guardia Civil (Costa Rica), 170
Guatemala
anti-drug policing, 172–3
regressive pension plans, 51
US military assistance, 158

272  
●  Index
guerrilla warfare, 195, 208
guerrillas, 136, 169, 172, 182, 195–7, 201, 
208. See also under specific countries
Gulf of Mexico, hurricane responses, 185
Gulf States, extent of deregulation, 42. 
See also under specific countries
Gupta, Sanjeev, 50, 59, 181
Guthrie, Peter, 118, 123
Gwartney, James, 42
Hagen, James, 153
Haiti, earthquake, 227, 230–1
Haiyan typhoon (Philippines), 185, 231
Halim, Nafisa, 74–5
Halimi, Abdul-Latif, 179
Hamilton, Fowler (United States), 191
Hamza, Mohamed, 227
Han, incursion into Uighur regions (China), 
125
Harberger, Arnold, 224
Harmonization for Health in Africa, 54, 196
Harriman, Averill (United States), 155
Harrod-Domar model, 18
Hart, Stuart, 226
Harvard Institute for International 
Development, 20, 201
Haug, Marit, 89
Hauslohner, Abigail, 176–7
Headey, Derek, 26
health clinics, 125, 137, 224
Pakistan, 125
Vietnam, 6
healthcare, 52, 60, 62, 113, 173, 182, 185, 
189, 203, 216. See also under specific 
countries
Hechinger, John, 118
Heffron, John M., 228
hegemony, US, 83, 169
Hellinger, Steven, 161
Henry, Clement, 50
Heritage Foundation, 5
Herring, George, 204, 229
heterodox economic analysis, 5
hierarchical bureaucracy, 38, 72, 75, 78, 172
High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on 
the Post-2015 Development Agenda, 
37, 91
Hirschman, Albert, 25, 221
HIV/AIDS, 36
Hoadley, J. Stephen, 33–4, 221
Hobsbawm, Eric, 159–61, 229
Hoebink, Paul, 100
Hoffman, Paul (United States), 155
Hofmann, Charles-Antoine, 185
holistic approach to development and 
governance, 70–1, 82, 97–8
Holling, Crawford, 129
Holtz, Michael, 231
Honduras
hurricane destruction, 227, 231
policing, 172
Hong Kong
Chinese military firms sited in, 179, 
231
as a mega-city, 187
Hood, Christopher, 74
hospitals, US support for in Vietnam, 205
housing, 34, 91, 156–7, 171, 176, 195
Hout, Wil, 77
Hubbard, Ben, 226
Hudson, Laura, 185
Hulme, David, 111–12
Human Development Index (HDI), 35, 70, 
97, 111
Human Development Report (HDR), 70, 
111
human trafficking, 91, 98
humanitarian relief, 108, 112–13, 129, 145, 
152, 164, 169, 173
Hungary
Comecon member, 228
NGOs, 109
Huntington, Samuel, 171, 183, 230
hurricane disasters, 113, 129–30, 173, 185, 
227, 231
Hurricane Katrina, 185
Hurricane Mitch, 185, 227, 231
Hussein, Saleh, 102
Hutchison Port Holdings (HPH) (Hong 
Kong), 179
Hyundai (South Korea), 203
Ibrahim Index of African Covernance, 105
Ickis, John, 110
IDA (International Development 
Association of the World Bank Group), 
140
identifications
with the military, 182
national, 4

Index  ●  273
identities
group, 217
indigenous, 94
national, 174
nonethnic, 94
political, 94, 174, 217
ideology, 4–5, 7, 11, 39, 111–12, 120, 184, 
189, 197, 199, 206, 209–10, 215
IDF (Israeli Defense Force), 174
IISD (International Institute for Sustainable 
Development), 122, 130
illegal settlements, 33
illiteracy, 53, 209
imperialism, 112, 125, 140, 171
import substitution industrialization 
economic model (ISI), 20, 26, 137, 193
income distribution, 3, 16, 21, 29–32, 
43–5, 53, 133, 215–16, 224, 226
Nigeria, 3
indebtedness, of developing countries, 21, 
85, 91, 230
India
affirmative action, 217
agriculture, 57
CSOs, 90–4
Dalits, 128
decentralization, 89
economic growth, 47, 128, 179–80
electoral oversight, 89
gold as savings, 18
government capacity, 89
heavy-industry model, 26
liberalization, 47
low international borrowing, 21
Narmada Valley Authority, 88
NGOs, 89, 111, 121, 123, 128
rural industrialization, 55
Soviet assistance, 136
statism, 46, 86
US assistance, 136, 160–1
indigenous peoples, 4, 70, 90, 94, 169, 171, 
173, 203, 217. See also under specific 
countries
Indochina Wars, 206, 232
Indonesia
Berkeley Mafia, 3
borrowing, 56
Communist threat, 229
conditional cash transfers, 52
CSOs, 93–4
decentralization, 4, 8, 89
deforestation, 6
democratization, 92
electoral oversight, 89
fuel prices, 32, 51–2
human rights, 93
and the IMF, 211
liberalization, 32
low tax effort, 50
military, 179–80, 184, 230–1
natural resources, 180
policy shortsightedness, 10
rural industrialization, 53
social services, 51
US foreign assistance, 158
infant industry economic model, 20, 26, 46
infant mortality, 34, 69
infectious diseases, 98, 164
inflation, 16, 18, 21–2, 32, 210, 224
Chile, 193, 196
Latin America, 45, 126
information limitations, 3–4
infrastructure, 12, 17, 26–7, 41, 48, 50, 
54–5, 58–60, 72, 97–8, 109, 114, 116, 
135, 137–8, 141, 146, 154, 161, 169, 
171–2, 180, 182, 185–6, 189, 205, 
217, 224, 230
innovation
agricultural, 110
among competing government 
agencies, 74
dependence on education, 60
governance, 82–3, 87, 144
NGOs, 112, 116–17, 130
requirement for development, 19, 71
technological, 25, 199
Institute of Inter-American Affairs (United 
States), 154
institutionalist theory, 80
insurgencies, 109, 169, 190, 192, 195, 
200–1, 205, 208. See also under specific 
countries
intellectuals, African, 47
interagency conflicts, US federal 
government, 12, 73, 150
Inter-American Defense College, 3, 6
Inter-American Development Bank, 97, 136
Interdepartmental Group for Inter-American 
Affairs (United States), 195
interdisciplinary analysis, 4

274  
●  Index
intergovernmental organizations, 32, 87, 
141, 152, 219
Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC), 173, 185
intergovernmental processes, 91–2, 95, 97, 
118
intergroup conflict, 28, 55, 215, 217
Interior Department (United States), 155
International Criminal Court, 228
International Development Association, 
of the World Bank Group, 
140, 164
International Institute for Democracy and 
Electoral Assistance (Nordic country 
funded), 101
International Labour Office, 33
International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
2, 5–6, 16, 21–3, 47, 53, 88, 102, 
142–4, 152, 156, 167, 223, 
228, 232
and the 1997 East Asian financial crisis, 
211
and Pakistan, 177
International Narcotics and Law 
Enforcement Bureau (INL), 227
Internet
military origin, 180
training for demobilized military, 187
unmet needs for, 186
interorganizational coordination, 73, 77, 
87, 213
intragovernmental rivalries, 213, 218
investigative journalism, 91
involuntary sterilization, US restrictions on 
foreign assistance, 163
Iran
arms purchases from China, 231
military, 231
revolution, 161
US sanctions against, 163
Iraq
anti-drug efforts, 137
identifications, 4
market for Chinese weapons, 231
terrorism, 158
US foreign assistance, 163–4
Isham, Jonathan, 37
Ishikawa, Shigeru, 69
Islam, 168
isolationism, in the United States, 154
Israel
anti-Israeli NGOs with Ford Foundation 
funding, 122
military conscription, 174
military funding’s economic impact, 181
NATO support, 137
US foreign assistance, 158, 163
ultra-orthodox Jews, 74
Istanbul Consensus, 225
Italy, corporatism, 175
Jack, William, 61, 225
Jain, H. K., 110
Jalal, Ayesha, 178
Janowitz, Morris, 183–4
Japan
foreign assistance, 133–5, 137–9, 146–7, 
228
military investment, 181
normalization with South Korea, 200
occupation of Korea, 203
statist model, 4
Jaskoski, Maia, 172
Jayasooria, Denison, 93
JCPenney (United States), 199
Jepma, Catrinus, 146
Jimenez, Emmanuel, 61, 139
JLT Specialty Limited (China), 56
Johnson, John J., 172, 184, 201
Joint Chiefs of Staff (United States), 191, 
195
Jolly, Richard, 32
Jones, Merrick, 73
Jones, Richard, 172, 230
Jordan, US foreign assistance, 163
journalism, 91, 227
judiciary, 74–6, 83, 89, 94, 96, 99–100, 
103, 106, 197
Kahn, Herman, 9
Kaiser, Kai, 96
Kalman, Matthew, 174
Kanji, Nazneen, 108
Kaplan, Jacob, 116, 190
Kapur, Devesh, 140, 142, 146, 221, 228
Katz, Jonathan, 112
Kaufman, Robert, 194, 232
Kaufmann, Daniel, 37, 145
Kay, Cistobal, 193
Kaysen, Carl, 199

Index  ●  275
Kennan, George, 159, 161
Kennedy, John F. (United States), 109, 135, 
150–1, 157, 160, 191–3, 195, 199, 
228
Kenya
citizen tribunals, 90
electricity coverage, 27
Kerr, Richard, 185
Kettle, D. F., 74
Keynesianism economic approach, 18
Khan, Shahrukh, 177
Khator, Renu, 70
Khmer Rouge (Cambodia), 232
Killick, Tony, 19, 221
Kim, Hyung-A, 202
Kim, Julie, 224
Kimmelman, Michael, 183
Kissinger, Henry (United States), 202
Kiva NGO (United States), 117, 226
Klare, Michael, 203
Knio, Karim, 77
Kohli, Harpaul, 59
Komer, Robert (United States), 205
Kooiman, Jan, 77
Korea. See North Korea; South Korea
Korean National Police (KNP) (South 
Korea), 200–1
Korean reunification, 198–9
Korean War, 155, 158, 200–2
Korry, Edward (United States), 193
Korten, David, 108, 110
Kotwal, Ashok, 57
Kraay, Aart, 15
Krueger, Anne, 26
Krugman, Paul, 221
Kuczynski, Pedro-Pablo, 110
Kumar, Leena Thacker, 80
Kuomintang (China), 171
Kuwait
oil dependence, 55–6
trade restrictiveness, 43
Kuznets, Simon, 30, 222
Kwong, Julia, 178
Kyrgyzstan, illiberal economy, 43, 223
Labini, Paolo, 70
laissez faire economic approaches, 79, 215
Lake, David, 111
Lal, Deepak, 224, 232
land abundance, 54
landless workers, 82, 139
Lanjouw, Peter, 27
Lansdale, Edward, 169
Laos
national liberation war, 229
US foreign assistance, 158
LaPalombara, Joseph, 184
Laquian, A. A., 33
Lasswell, Harold D., 3, 77, 109, 116, 221, 
232
Lastarria-Cornhiel, Susana, 58
Latham, Michael, 227
Latin America
Alliance for Progress, 109
anti-agricultural bias, 26, 58
anti-drug effort, 137
authoritarianism, 81
central planning, 8
civil society, 81, 92
commitment to economic planning, 
19, 135
constitutions, 4
corporatism, 175–6
Cuban military activities in, 136
decentralization, 104
economic growth, 17, 21, 224
education, 53–4
foreign assistance, 135
income distribution, 30, 44–5, 51
land reform, 139
liberalization, 42–4, 196, 223
military, 3, 6, 185, 194, 230–1
nationalization of hydrocarbons, 18
NGOs, 92–4, 110, 122, 125–6, 196
pensions, 51
physical infrastructure, 58–9
poverty alleviation, 44
US security concerns, 190, 195–8, 207
See also under specific countries
Latino-barometers, 104
Lawson, Marian, 158, 163, 227, 229
Lawson, Robert, 42
Le, Kien T., 57
Le, Minh, 50
League of Nations, 168
Lebanese, in Senegal, 218
Lee, Chae-Jin, 201, 232
Lee, Hyesiik, 203
Leff, Nathaniel, 37, 63, 223
Leftists, 6, 47, 49, 137, 192–4, 197–8

276  
●  Index
legitimacy, 20, 79–80, 83, 88, 94–5, 103, 
105, 112, 114, 117, 119, 177, 192, 
200, 204–5, 225–7, 231
Lehmann, Tim, 123
Lehoucq, Patrice, 219
Leontief, Wassily, 222
Lerner, Daniel, 227
Levy, Brian, 90, 96
Lewis, David, 108
Lewis, John, 140, 221
Lewis, Maureen, 61
Lewis, W. Arthur, 30
liberalism, 200, 207, 229
liberalization, 8, 21–2, 32, 41–8, 58, 60, 71, 
83, 105–6, 110, 127, 196, 212, 215, 
217, 226, 232
Liberia, electricity coverage, 27, 230
Liechtenstein, site of a PLA office, 231
Lien, D., 50
Lindert, Kathy, 51, 53
Linneker, Brian, 227, 231
Lipton, Michael, 139
literacy, 34, 53, 189, 209
Lo, Carlos Wing-Hung, 219
loan defaults, 21, 163, 168
Lockheed Corporation (United States), 177
Looney, Robert, 181
Lora, Eduardo, 42, 223
Lovallo, Dan, 59
Loveman, Brian, 193, 232
Lowden, Pamela, 232
Lower, Milton, 232
Lucero, José, 94
Luong, H. V., 207
MacAuslan, John, 79
macroeconomic approaches, 10, 16–18, 22, 
24–5, 29, 31–2, 37, 41, 45, 52, 62, 
146
Macy’s (United States), 199
Maddison Project, 21
Maduro, Nicolás (Venezuela), 197, 232
Mages, Lisa, 163, 229
Mahalanobis heavy-industry strategy 
(India), 26
majoritarian democracy, 80
malaria, 36, 228
Malaysia
CSO limitations, 92–9
economic growth, 93
human resource development, 27
low tax effort, 60
Malay political dominance, 27
reform programs, 89
regional development, 88
Malaysian Institute for Public 
Administration, 87
Maldonado, Nicole, 96
Malesky, Edmund, 207
malnutrition, 113
Mamram computer training facility 
(Israel), 174
Mandarin elitism (Vietnam), 204
Mani, Kristina, 231
Maoist enclaves (China), 5
Mapuches (Chile), 4
Maren, Michael, 112
marginalized groups, 89–91, 94, 100, 108–9
Marino, Adrea, 53
Marquand, Robert, 184
Marshall Plan (United States), 18–19, 108, 
133–5, 153, 156, 158, 168
martial law
in post-WWII Europe, 171
in South Korea, 200
Martin, Roger, 57, 115, 177
Martin, Will, 57
Martínez Vázquez, Jorge, 50
Marxist groups, Chile, 192–4, 207
Mason, Edward, 232
Matear, Margaret, 226
Matzov, Israeli Army cybersecurity division, 
174
Mauro, Paolo, 181
Mavroudeas, Stavros, 22
Mayama, Katsuhiko, 179
Mayr, Walter, 226
McCleary, Rachel, 108, 228
McDougal, Myres, 3, 77
McMahon, Walter, 61
McNamara, Robert (United States), 32, 71, 
138, 164, 229, 231
McVety, Amanda, 228
Meier, Gerald, 2, 221
Meltzer, Alan, 144
mercenaries, 174, 230
merchants, discrimination against, 
218, 226
meritocracy, as a criterion of governance, 
74–5

Index  ●  277
Mexico
CSOs, 232
drug trafficking, 172–3
legislative strengthening, 89
low tax effort, 50
population movements, 183, 231
regressive social protection programs, 51
state enterprise borrowing, 56
Meyer, Richard, 222, 232
Michaels, Albert, 193
Mickelwait, Donald, 162
microeconomic approaches, 16, 25, 32
microenterprise, 33, 111, 116
microfinance, 109, 116, 226
Middle East, 44–5, 50, 53, 122, 137, 
158–63, 224–5, 231. See also under 
specific countries
Middle East Peace Accord, 163
migrants, maltreatment of, 33
Mikesell, Raymond, 32, 143
militaries, 3, 168, 170–2, 176, 181, 
185–6, 229, 231. See also under specific 
countries
militarization, 86, 194, 200, 202, 205, 218
Military Assistance Command, Vietnam 
(United States), 205
Military Assistance Program (MAP) (United 
States), 191–2, 194, 200, 207–8
militias, demobilization, 7
Millennium Challenge Corporation, 105, 
164
Millennium Challenge Goals, 2, 36–7, 71, 
95, 105, 143, 164
Millikan, Max, 160, 227
Mills, C. Wright, 78
Milner, Helen, 228
Milobsky, David, 229
minerals
export dependence, 56, 192
military control, 176, 186
Minford, Paul, 24
mining
Brazilian, 49
Chilean, 49
expropriation, 56
Korean, 199
privatization, 49
project appraisal of, 28, 28, 49, 56, 199
Mirrlees, James, 28, 36
Mishra, Pankaj, 180
mission creep
military, 173–4
NGOs, 119–20, 173
missionary functions, 226
Mitra-Kahn, Benjamin, 24, 62
modernization theory, 6, 155–6, 189, 195, 
203–4, 227
Modernizing Foreign Assistance Network 
(MFAN) (United States), 149–50
Mok, Ka Ho, 225
Monaldi, Francisco, 56
monetarist economic theory, 18
Mongolia
Comecon member, 136, 228
governance, 91
liberalization, 43
Soviet foreign assistance, 136
Soviet military support, 169
monitoring, as a governance function, 3, 39, 
72–3, 78, 80, 82, 88–9, 91–3, 95, 99, 
102, 105, 123, 129–30, 147, 186, 195, 
209, 211, 213, 232
Montgomery, John, 205, 227
Moody’s, investment rating of Indonesia, 
180
Moore, Mick, 50, 118
Morgenthau, Hans, 190
Morocco, deregulation, 223
Morrison, Mary, 59
Morsi, Mohamed (Egypt), 177
Morss, Elliott, 162
Mosher, A., 33
Moss, R. H., 117
Mothers movements, 82
Movimento Popular de Libertação de 
Angola (MPLA), 137
Mozambique, Soviet foreign assistance, 137
Mugabe, Robert (Zimbabwe), 121
multidonor collaboration in foreign 
assistance, 139
multilateral foreign assistance, 12, 33, 90, 
95, 101, 104, 109, 133–4, 138–47, 
149, 151–3, 162–4, 211, 220, 228
multinational corporations, 49, 111, 122, 
225
Mulvenon, James, 178–9
Munich Re firm (Germany), 227
municipalities, limited functions in the 
Middle East, 225
Murphy, Dan, 120, 226

278  
●  Index
Murty, K. N., 57
Muscat, Robert, 190
museums, as income-generating nonprofits, 
117
Muslim Brotherhood (Egypt), 176–7
Mussolini, Benito (Italy), 175
Mutual Security Act of 1951 (United 
States), 155–6, 158, 229
Myanmar
identifications, 4
military, 230, 4, 10, 230
policy shortsightedness, 10
Nairobi Speech, 1973, World Bank 
President Robert McNamara, 33
Nakamura, Kennon, 229
Nam, Pham Xuan, 207
Nangia, Rita, 224
narcotics, Colombian-US action against 
trafficking, 136, 163, 227
Narmada Valley Authority (India), 88
National Endowment for Democracy, 196
National Human Development 
Reports, 71
national liberation wars, 167–9, 190, 229
national patrimony rationale for foreign 
exporpriation, 49
national security, 5, 13, 20, 68, 150, 158–9, 
164, 176–7, 191, 214, 219, 230
nationalism, 6, 19, 49, 199, 206
nationalization of private assets, 6, 56, 
193–4, 231
natural disasters, 46, 125, 128–30, 169, 
173, 185
natural monopolies, 48
natural resource dependence, 55, 219
natural resource revenues, 50, 55–7, 192, 
197, 216–17, 219
natural resource royalties, 49–50, 56, 216
Nature Conservancy, 122, 226
Naval Academy (United States), 169
Naval War College (United States), 169, 230
Nellis, John, 48, 224
Nelson, Joan, 154, 231
neoclassical economics, 5, 16–17, 20, 22, 
24–5, 30, 32, 38–9, 110, 130, 193, 
221, 223–4
neoimperialism, accusations of, 140
neoliberal economic doctrines, 22, 82, 111, 
164, 193, 215
NEPAD (New Partnership for Africa’s 
Development), 42, 47
nepotism, of NGOs in Bangladesh, 93
neutrality, as a governance criterion, 
6, 68, 73
New Directions Legislation (NDL), 161–2
New Orleans Times-Picayune, 155
New Public Management (NPM), 67–8, 
72–4, 78, 85
New York City, 185, 187
New Zealand, foreign assistance, 147
NGOs. See nongovernmental organizations
Nguyen Dinh Diem (Vietnam), 204
Nguyen Van Thieu (Vietnam), 204
Nhu, Din, 208
Nicaragua
drug trafficking, 172–3
human rights NGOs, 226
hurricane disaster, 227, 231
Nielson, Daniel, 233
Nigeria
poor economic information, 3
reform programs, 89
state oil enterprise, 56
Nixon, Richard (United States), 157, 162
nonaligned nations, 136, 160
nongovernmental organizations, 1, 3, 4, 
6, 10–11, 33–4, 75, 77, 79, 81, 93, 
107–31, 141, 147, 173, 185, 210, 220, 
226–7, 231
international, 16, 169, 198, 219, 226
Latin America, 92, 94
and militaries, 167
See also under specific countries
nonmarket failures, 212, 223
nonproliferation program funds (United 
States), 164
nonrenewable resources, 55
Nordic countries, 101. See also under specific 
countries
NORINCO firm (China), 231
norms
cultural, 104
governance, 79–80
international, 104, 120, 145, 165, 228
professional, 68
traditional, 199
North Africa
economic growth, 44–5
education, 5

Index  ●  279
inequality, 45
investment levels, 53
low liberalization levels, 42
poverty, 44
See also under specific countries
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO), 137
North Korea, conflict with South Korea, 
199–203
Northern Army Group (China), 231
Norway
advocacy of democratic governance, 101
corporatism, 175
economic growth, 2
Nowels, Larry, 152, 163
nuclear power, 112, 180
nuclear strategy, 9
nuclear war, 9
Nunnenkamp, Peter, 227
Nurkse, Ragnar, 222
nutrition, 27–8, 34–6, 53, 60
Obama, Barack (United States), 149–52, 
157
Occupy Wall Street (United States), 33, 187
O’Donnell, Guillermo, 9, 230, 232
official development assistance (ODA), 
151–2, 202, 228
offshore extractive resources, 186
Oman, liberalization, 43
ombudsman role, to safeguard human 
rights, 99
O’Regan, Fred, 161
Organisation for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (OECD), 147, 
150–1, 202, 227
Orme, John, 158
orthodox economic analysis, 42, 71
Ortiz, Isabel, 44, 223
Osberg, Sally, 115
Osborne, David, 78, 82, 87
Oslo Center on Governance, 101
Ostrom, Elinor, 223
Owusu, Francis, 21
Oxfam (United Kingdom), 131
Paes, Christian, 231
Pakistan
CSOs, 94
military, 177–8, 230–1
NGOs, 120, 125
political transition, 10
US foreign assistance, 163, 227
Palestinians, US foreign assistance, 163
Panama
Canal, 179
corporatism, 179
People’s Liberation Army office in, 231
US military assistance, 194
US police training, 194
Pansuwan, Apisek, 55
Papadatos, Fanis, 22
paralegal services, 90, 94, 99
paramilitaries, 169, 171, 186, 197, 204
Paris Declaration, 104
Park Chung-Hee, 202
Parker, Laura, 185
parliamentary government, 74, 85, 90, 
94–5, 98–9, 101, 103, 105
participatory budgeting, 90–1, 105
Partners in Progress (United States), 154
Patrinos, Harry, 53, 61, 139, 224
Patterson, Thomas, 190, 195
Peace, Prosperity, and Democracy Act 
(United States), 164
peacekeeper military role, 13
peasants, 64, 94, 161, 193. See also landless 
workers
Pelaez, Vicky, 226
pensions
bailouts, as regressive measures, 52
distributive implications, 51–2
People’s Liberation Army (PLA) (China), 
175–9, 231
performance appraisal, 87
performance management, 74, 99, 152, 164
Perkins, Dwight, 48
Peronists (Argentina), 232
Peru
CSOs, 94
human rights, 94
military takeovers, 175
NGOs, 94
regressive social protection programs, 51
Sendero Luminoso guerrilla movement, 
197, 51
tax effort, 50
Pessino, Carola, 50, 224
Petermann, Jan-Henrik, 146
Peters, B. Guy, 78

280  
●  Index
Peterson Task Force on International 
Development (United States), 157
Petrobras (Brazilian oil company), 49
Pfiffner, James, 78
PGPE analysis, 96
philanthropy, 111, 118. See also NGOs
Philippine Centre for Investigative 
Journalism (PCIJ), 91
Philippine Rural Reconstruction 
Movement, 91
Philippines
CSOs, 91, 93
healthcare, 64
policy reforms, 89
typhoon disaster, 185
Phong, D., 206
physical infrastructure, 20, 26, 35, 41, 48, 
54–5, 58–61, 109–10, 135, 137, 146, 
159, 189, 217
Picard, Louis, 203–4
Pinochet, Augusto (Chile), 182, 196, 231
PLA. See People’s Liberation Army
Plato, 211
pluralism, 69, 94–5, 103
Poland
Comecon member, 228
CSOs, 81, 109
NGOs, 109
Polimetrix/YouGov, 228
politicization, of NGOs, 120–1, 123, 162
pollution
abatement as a motive for rural 
industrialization, 53
exacerbated by decentralization, 75
exacerbated by growth, 128
impact on the poor, 216
NGO actions against, 122, 55, 75, 122, 
128, 216
Popovski, Vesselin, 90, 92–3
Popular Action Front (Chile), 193
population planning, 28, 161, 163
population proportionality, as an allocation 
principle, 8
populism, 49
Argentina, 42
Bolivia, 42
Brazil, 42
Indonesia, 180
Venezuela, 42, 197
Porto Alegre (Brazil), 91
POSCO (South Korea), 48
Post-2015 Development Agenda, 95
potable water, 36, 48, 60, 91, 114
PovcalNet, World Bank poverty analysis 
site, 44
poverty alleviation, 6, 10, 15–16, 28, 31–2, 
35–6, 39, 41–5, 51–5, 65, 71–2, 
75–6, 100, 110, 112, 123–6, 138, 209, 
214–16, 219
Poverty Index, 36
Powell, Walter, 112
Prahalad, Coimbatore, 226
Prebisch, Raul, 20
prequalification, to receive IMF loans, 144
privatization, 22, 41, 47–9, 64, 81, 193, 
199, 223, 226, 230. See also under 
specific countries
professionalism, 68, 93, 96, 112, 122, 
172–4, 176, 181–4, 230
Program Management Units (PMUs), 88
proindustrial economic policy, 5, 25–6, 58, 
138
project appraisal, 28, 233
Prosterman, Roy, 20, 25, 27, 54, 138, 203, 
229
protectionism, 20, 26, 42–3
Przeworski, Adam, 230
Psacharopoulos, George, 53, 61, 224
Public Benefit Corporations, 121
Putin, Vladimir, 179, 182
PVOs (Private Voluntary Organizations), 
228. See also CSOs; NGOs
Pye, Lucian, 169, 190–1, 227, 229, 232
Qatar
liberalization, 43
negotiations with Egypt, 177, 43, 177
qualitative analysis, 28, 70, 72, 105
quantitative, 70, 72, 105, 205
Raballand, Gaël, 50
Rabe, Stephen, 192, 232
Radelet, Steven, 165
radicalism, 197, 207
Rai, Kul, 135
Rampersad, Hubert, 102
Rana, Raj, 173
Rangan, Kasturi, 123
rapid response capacity, 127, 130–1, 185
Raup, Philip, 229

Index  ●  281
Ravallion, Martin, 51, 232
raw material exports, 20–1, 25, 43, 46, 
50–1, 56
Reagan, Ronald, 164
Reaganomics economic model, 215
rectitude, as a need, 116
redistribution, 31, 36, 51, 54, 81, 116, 127, 
139, 161, 193, 212, 217
redistributive justice, 193
refugees, 92, 108, 113, 129, 171, 173, 183, 
205–6, 231
religious institutions, roles, 126, 146, 225–6
Remenyi, Joseph, 221
renewable resources, 55
Rennack, Dianne, 163, 229
reparations, Japanese to other Asian nations, 
135
representation
corporatist, 175, 225
as a governance aspect, 11, 75–6, 80, 89, 
105
repression, 11, 146, 176, 192, 194, 199–200
republican tradition, 81
resettlement programs, 54, 217–18
resilience, ecological, 127, 129, 212, 217, 
227
Resler, Tamara, 163
resource abundance, 55
Resource Charter, 232
resource nationalism, 49, 56
Revkin, Andrew, 117
Rhee, Syngman (South Korea), 202
Rhodes, Rod, 2
Ribot, Jesse, 7
Richardson, Michael, 203
Riddell, Roger, 227
Riedinger, Jeffrey, 229
Rigg, Jonathan, 55
Rio Conference. See UN Conference on 
Environment and Development
Rioja, Felix, 59
riot control equipment (Chile), 194
Ritzer, George, 112
roads, as crucial infrastructure, 6, 59, 138, 
145, 160, 172–3, 186, 205, 224–5, 
228
Roberts, John, 15, 221
Robichau, Robbie, 78–9
Rockefeller, Nelson (United States), 154–5, 
157
Rockefeller Foundation (United States), 110
Rodrik, Dani, 232
Romania, Comecon member, 228
Rondinelli, Dennis, 74–5, 103, 154, 160
Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul, 18, 222, 227
Rostow, Walt W. (United States), 18–19, 
144, 189–90, 203, 221, 227
Rothengatter, Werner, 59
Routray, K., 55
Roy, Arundhati, 111, 128
Roy, Denny, 92
rural labor abundance, 27
rural poverty, 25, 54, 138
Rushikesh, Maru, 110
Rusk, Dean (United States), 191, 200–1
Russia
energy provider, 170, 179
foreign assistance, 161
military spending economic stimulus, 181
military tourism, 230
military training for developing country 
militaries, 182–3
new challenge to the West, 137
NGOs, 120–1, 124, 128, 226
trade within the Soviet Union, 136
Ruttan, Vernon, 34, 58, 153, 156–7, 159–
62, 164, 228
Rwanda, education, 224
Sachs, Jeffrey, 145, 228
Salamon, Lester, 107–8
Sally, Razeen, 43
Samuel, John, 81, 90–1, 94, 104–5
Sankey, Mara, 196
Santiago (Chile), 194, 232
Sarfaty, Galit, 97
satellite monitorong of natural resources, 
186
Sater, William, 193
Saudi Arabia
Chinese weapons purchases, 231
liberalization, 43
resource dependence, 55–6
US foreign assistance, 163
Savitz, Andrew, 118, 123
Sawhill, John (United States), 226
Scahill, Jeremy, 174
Schady, Norbert, 224
Schaub, Gary, Jr., 174
Scheffran, Jürgen,, 129, 173, 185

282  
●  Index
Schiff, Maurice, 26
Schmidhuber, J., 58
Schmitter, Philippe, 94, 230
Schou, Arild, 89
Schultz, T. Paul, 221
Scott, James C., 88
Sears, Korean products in, 199
secessionist movements, 55. See also under 
specific countries
Secretariat of Civil Aviation (Brazil), 5, 46, 
230
Secretary General’s Panel on Civil Society, 
118
sectoral analysis, 24
sectoral strategy, 26–7, 32, 37, 60–3, 97–8, 
138, 147
security concerns. See under specific 
countries
Seers, Dudley, 221
Segal, Gerald, 178
SELCO (India), 117, 226
semiautonomous government entities, 8, 
87, 89
Sen, Amartya, 35, 43, 70–1, 111, 128
Sendero Luminoso (Peru), 197
Senegal, Lebanese in, 218
Sevilla, Jaypee, 54, 61
Shafik, Nemat, 59
Shapiro, Joseph, 51, 53
Sharan, Raju, 181
shareholder accountability, 116, 130
Sharif, Nawaz (Pakistan), 177
Sheehan, Neil, 204
Sheldon, Tony, 116–17
Shihata, I. F. J., 96
Shin, Roy, 227
Shlaim, Avi, 113, 119
Siddiqa, Ayesha, 177
Siegel, Adam, 119, 173, 183
Silicon Valley, 120
Silicon Valley Business Journal Staff, 120
Simon, Herbert, 30
simulation models, 53, 222
Singapore
deregulation, 42–3
efficient state enterprises, 48
tax effort, 50, 42–3, 48, 50
Singer, Hans, 20, 146
Singh, Kavaljit, 102
Sino-Soviet preriphery, 191, 229
SIPRI. See Stockholm International Peace 
Research Institute
Skocpol, Theda, 81
Skoufias, Emmanuel, 51, 53
Slagle, Steve, 80
Slaper, Timothy, 130
Slocum-Bradley, Nikki, 100
social audits, 90–1
social justice, 71, 79
social services, 21–2, 32, 41, 47–52, 64, 69, 
72–5, 90–1, 108–9, 117, 120–1, 128
socialism, 19, 69, 125, 164, 189, 192, 194, 
197–8, 226, 229. See also under specific 
countries
socialization, 12, 68, 174
sociology, perspectives on governance, 77, 
80–1, 138
Sokolowski, Wojciech, 107
Solidarity Movement (Poland), 81
Solt, Frederick, 30
Soros, George (United States), 115, 232
Soros Foundations Network, 232
Soumya, A., 57
South Korea
authoritarian government, 126
economic growth, 2, 126
education, 138
efficient state enterprises, 48
electoral oversight, 89
foreign assistance donor, 133, 147
healthcare, 138
heavy industry strategy, 26
human resource development, 27
IMF lending, 211
income distribution, 30
land redistribution, 139
poverty alleviation, 126
South China Sea confrontation with 
China, 137
statist policies, 121
success of ISI, 27
US foreign assistance, 198–202
US military assistance, 152, 198–203, 
207
Southern Africa Management Institute, 87
Soviet bloc. See Eastern bloc
Soviet Union
break-up, 158–9, 197, 206
and Comecon, 228
conflict over Berlin, 113

Index  ●  283
economic model, 86, 135, 161
foreign assistance, 133–7, 159–61, 206, 
227, 229
split with China, 229
training for developing country armed 
forces, 169
and US conflict, 134–7, 155, 160–8, 
171–2, 176, 189–92, 199, 201–2, 228
and Vietnam, 206
Springborg, Robert, 50
Squire, Lynn, 28, 36
Sri Lanka, 88, 101, 163
stabilization programs, 193–4, 207, 211
stakeholder accountability, 116
Stassen, Harold, 156
statism economic model, 46, 121
Stein, Janice Gross, 111
Steinberg, David, 201
Steinfeld, Joshua, 206–7
Stepan, Alfred, 171, 230
stereotyping, 6, 217
Stern, Nicholas, 24, 221
Stewart, Frances, 32
Stier, Ken, 176
Stiglitz, Joseph, 22, 110, 232
Stockholm Conference on the Human 
Environment, 109
Stockholm International Peace Research 
Institute (SIPRI), 173
Stoker, Jerry, 79
Stokke, Olav, 107
Stolper, Wolfgang, 3
Stonyfield Farms (United States), 117
Strategic Hamlet Program (United States 
vis-a-vis Vietnam), 204, 207–8
strategic planning, 100, 152
Streeten, Paul, 25, 34–5, 69, 222–3
structuralist economic-analysis approach, 
17–18, 20, 22, 24–5, 30–1, 33, 38, 63, 
69, 81
Studwell, Joe, 125
Sturznegger, Federico, 56
subjectivity, 34, 77, 124
subnational governance, 7–8, 33, 64, 75, 80, 
83, 88–9, 100, 103–4, 115, 213, 217
Sub-Saharan Africa
agriculture, 26, 58, 222
Cuban military presence, 136, 169
economic growth, 4
education, 53, 61
foreign assistance, 151
governance reform, 96
inequality, 45
infrastructure weakness, 59–60
institutional weakness, 145
liberalization, 47
non-aligned movement, 54
regulatory reforms, 42
statism, 46
See also under specific countries
subsistence living in forest areas, 8
subsoil assets, 56–7
Sudan, US foreign assistance, 158
Suez Canal, 177
Suharto (Indonesia), 180
Summer Academy on Social Vulnerability, 
174, 227
Superintendency of the Northeast (Brazil), 
88
Support of Eastern European Democracy 
Act of 1989, 163
Supreme Court (United States), 121, 226
supreme courts, 11
sustainability, 7, 13, 36–7, 52, 55, 68, 70, 
76, 82, 90, 95–8, 103, 110, 112–13, 
119, 122, 127, 130, 150, 160–1, 165, 
193, 200, 214
Svoboda, Eva, 185
Swat Valley (Pakistan), 125
Sweden
corporatism, 175
democratic governance advocacy, 101
foreign assistance, 104, 127, 175
Swedish International Development Agency, 
104
Swyngedouw, Erik, 81–2
symbolism, 26, 100, 197
Syracuse University, 73
Tadros, Sherine, 176
Taffet, Jeffrey, 193
Tahrir Square (Egypt), 177
Taiwan
education, 138
healthcare, 138
human resource development, 27, 138
income distribution, 30
land redistribution, 139
state enterprises, 48
US foreign assistance, 158

284  
●  Index
Taliban, 120, 125
Tandon, Rajesh, 111
Tang, Isadora, 116–17
Tanzania, socialism, 19
tariffs, 20, 22, 26, 48, 58, 193, 224
Tarnoff, Curt, 152, 158, 163, 227
Tarrow, Sidney, 82
tax havens, 179
taxation, 25, 30, 48, 63–4, 75, 158
effort, 50–1, 121–2, 224
evasion, 50, 223–4
exemptions, 22, 46, 140, 215, 223–4
payers’ attitudes, 216–17
revenues, 18, 32, 50–1, 126, 224
Taylor, Lance, 24
TBL. See Triple Bottom Line
TCA. See Technical Cooperation 
Administration
Technical Cooperation Administration 
(United States), 153–6
technology, 15, 17, 20, 25, 29, 46, 
70–1, 82, 85, 108, 110, 112, 117, 
129, 154, 159, 172, 174–6, 181, 
199, 204
diffusion, 70
telecommunications, weakness in Sub-
Saharan Africa, 59
Tendler, Judith, 227
termination function, 9–10, 153
terrorism, 137, 145, 151, 158, 164–5, 
167–9, 194
tertiary education, 53
Tetlock, Philip, 227
Thailand
civilian-military alliance, 218
IMF conditionalities, 211
lack of communist takeover, 229
weakness of regional development, 54–5, 
206–7, 211, 218, 229–31
Thinking about the Unthinkable (Herman 
Kahn), 9
Thirkell-White, Ben, 77
Thornton, John, 50
Tierney, Michael, 233
Tignor, Robert, 221
Tingley, Dustin, 228
Tollison, Robert, 223
Torgler, Benno, 50
Tosun, Mehmet, 225
toxic waste, 130
training, as a crucial need for governance, 5, 
12, 16, 27, 35, 68, 72–3, 87, 91, 99, 
117, 138, 151, 169, 171, 174, 177, 
182, 185–7, 194–5, 200, 203, 230
transparency, as a governance criterion, 8, 
11, 71–2, 76–7, 79–80, 82, 89, 91, 
93–100, 102, 105, 112, 114, 121, 179, 
219, 232
Transparency International, 105
transportation, infrastructure, 26, 137, 
169–70, 201
military protection of, 170
tribals. See Adivasi
trickle-down economic model, 30, 68, 199
Trinkunas, Harold, 171
Triple Bottom Lines (TBLs), 118, 123, 130, 
193
Trofimenko, Henry, 169
Truman, Harry S. (United States), 153–5, 
190, 228
Tsunamis, 129–30, 186
tuberculosis, 228
Tullock, Gordon, 223
Tunisia
education, 53
low deregulation, 223
unemployment, 53
Turkey, 153
focus of US foreign assistance, 
159, 160
liberalization, 43
military-civilian alliance, 218
rural industrialization, 66
typhoons, 129–30, 185, 231
US Information Agency, 195
Uganda
dentralization, 64
healthcare, 64
Uighurs (China), 125
Ukraine
focus of Soviety foreign assistance, 136
military tourism, 230, 136, 230
Ul Haq, Mahbub, 82, 103
ultra-orthodox Jews (Israel), 174
UN Charter, 141, 226
UN Conference on Environment and 
Development 1992, 110
UN Conference on Trade and Development, 
5, 46

Index  ●  285
UN ECOSOC (United Nations Economic 
and Social Council), 118
UN Food and Agriculture Organization, 97
UN General Assembly, 68–9, 71, 118, 150
UN High Commission on Refugees, 92, 231
UN High Commissioner for Refugees, 231
UN Industrial Development Organization, 20
UN Millennium Summit 2000, 95
UN Relief and Rehabilitation 
Administration (UNRRA), 157–8
UN Secretary Generals’ Agenda for Peace, 94
UN specialized agencies, 97
UN World Summit for Social Development 
1995, 82
unbalanced growth theory, 25
undercapitalization, 56–7, 199
underinvestment, Sub-Saharan Africa, 59
Unemployed Workers’ Movement of 
Argentina, 82
unemployment, 25, 30
Argentina, 82
China, 92
North Africa, 53
urban, 30
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization), 97
UN-HABITAT, 97, 105
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund), 
44, 92, 97, 181
UNIDO (United Nations Industrial 
Development Organization), 97
unionization, 16, 68, 82, 86, 90, 92, 107, 
194
United Arab Emirates, liberalization, 43
United Kingdom
colonial legacy, 171
foreign assistance, 73, 104, 227–8
imperial governance, 78
military ties with Pakistan, 177
skeleton laws, 73
United States
and Afghanistan, 163–4, 169
arms producers, 177
and Chile, 152, 189–90, 192–6
and China, 158
civil society, 81
and Colombia, 163–4, 172
constitution, 4
economic growth, 181
education, 190
and Egypt, 177
foreign assistance, 5–6, 12–13, 18–19, 
100–1, 109, 127, 133–7, 140–2, 147, 
149–65, 189, 192
humanitarian assistance, 119, 152
and Israel, 163
and Jordan, 163
and Korea, 152, 154, 158, 189, 198–203
land reform advocacy, 161
and Mexico, 183
and Mongolia, 169
NGOs, 108, 112, 120–2, 126, 140–1
and Palestinians, 163
public administration programs, 73
and Saudi Arabia, 163
security concerns, 13, 18, 119, 135–7, 
145, 189–208
and Southeast Asia, 158
and the Soviet Union, 159, 163–4, 168–9
and Sri Lanka, 163
training of other militaries, 169
and Venezuela, 196–8
and Vietnam, 152, 189–90, 203–7
universal conscription, 174, 181, 231
South Korean, 203
universities
economic approaches taught in, 5
excessive spending on, 53
as international actors, 16
University of Southern California, 87
untouchables. See Dalits
Uphoff, Norman, 110
urban accommodationist policies, 33
Urban Governance Index, 105
urban poor, 26, 104
urbanization, 25, 33, 54, 106
Uruguay, 81, 175
US Agency for International Development 
(USAID), 100–1, 109, 114, 126, 136, 
139, 149–50, 152–4, 156–8, 160–4, 
189–95, 198–201, 204–8, 227, 229, 232
US Information Agency (USIA), 195
US Operations Mission (USOM), 201
USAID Alumni Association, 150
USS Gerald Ford, 149
USSC (US Senate Select Committee to 
Study Governmental Operatins with 
Respect to Intelligence Activities), 
195–6, 232
USSR. See Soviet Union

286  
●  Index
vaccinations, 145
polio, in Pakistan, 120, 125
Valdés, Alberto, 25–6
Vale, Brazilian mining firm, 49
Valente, Michael, 177
Valenzuela, Arturo, 196
valuation, for benefit-coast analysis, 9
value-added tax (VAT), 212
Van de Laar, Aart, 225
Van der Tak, Herman, 28, 36
Van Seventer, Ernst, 62
Vann, Paul (United States), 204
Venezuela
border war risk, 172
CSOs, 232
government-NGO conflicts, 226
human rights, 232
oil revenues, 50
Open Society Foundations controversy, 
232
reversal of liberalization, 42
state enterprise borrowing, 56
US security concerns, 189, 196–9
Venniker, Richard, 224
Vernon, Raymond, 153
Viet Cong, 205
Vietnam
centralization, 6
Comecon member, 136, 228
education, 6, 64, 225
governance performance assessment, 91
healthcare, 6
industry bias, 57
Japanese foreign assistance, 146
Korean military involvement, 200
legitimacy through benefit provision, 
103
North-South war, 192, 200–8, 229
Soviet foreign assistance, 136
US foreign assistance, 158, 190–2, 
200–8
US military assistance, 158, 190–2, 
200–8
Vo, Nhan Tri, 206
volcanic eruptions, 130, 186
voluntary associations, 82. See also CSOs; 
NGOs
voter education and registration programs, 
93, 99, 196
Vuong, Quan Hoang, 207
Walt, Vivienne, 18, 173, 186, 227
Walterhouse, Harry, 169
Walters, Robert, 159–61
Walton, richard, 208
Wang, Xiao, 37, 147
Warner, Eric, 147
wars, 12, 19, 109, 127, 135, 137, 139, 
167–9, 171–3, 182–3, 190, 222, 229. 
See also under specific countries
Warsaw Pact, 136
Washington Consensus, 21–4, 32, 79, 110, 
127, 215
watersheds, 130
Watkins, Kevin, 229
Webb, Richard, 140, 142, 146, 221, 228
Weberian public administration 
model, 78
Weil, David, 62
Weir, Fred, 226
Weiss, Thomas, 80, 102
Wekwete, Kadmiel, 75
Welker, D., 178–9
Weller, Patrick, 2
Westad, Odd Arne, 171
Western Europe
foreign assistance from, 133, 145–7
US foreign assistance, 18–19, 158
See also under specific countries
Westmoreland, William, 205
White Revolution (Iran), 161
Widianto, Bambang, 32
Widodo, Joko (Indonesia), 180
Williams, William, 228
Williamson, John, 21–2, 110, 215, 223
Williamson, Oliver, 38
Wills, Garry, 164
Wilson, Margaret, 120, 173
Wilson, Woodrow (United States), 68, 
72–3, 225
Wilsonian model of public administration, 
68, 73
Winn, Peter, 193
Wintrop, Norman, 76
Wolf, Charles, Jr., 147, 223
Wolfensohn, James, 141
Wong, Ho, 219
workfare programs, 35

Index  ●  287
World Bank Independent Evaluation Group, 
28, 228
World Health Organization, 33, 54, 97, 138
world population, 109–10, 186
World War I (WWI), 134
World War II (WWII), 1, 3, 5–6, 15, 17–20, 
25, 27, 29, 39, 42, 64, 67–8, 71–2, 
107–8, 113, 119, 124, 127, 131, 133–4, 
138, 147, 150, 152, 158, 168, 170–1, 
173, 175, 180–1, 183–5, 206, 227, 231
Yale School of Management, 116
Yamey, Basil, 20
Yang, H., 178
Yilmaz, Serdar, 225
Yunus, Muhammad, 116
Zapatista uprising (Mexico), 82
Zeller, Manfred, 222
Zimbabwe, human rights 
violations, 121

