TEAMFLY

THE WIRELESS WEB
How to Develop and Execute 
a Winning Wireless Strategy
Bryan Bergeron
McGraw-Hill
New York
Chicago
San Francisco
Lisbon
London
Madrid
Mexico City
Milan
New Delhi
San Juan
Seoul
Singapore
Sydney
Toronto

Copyright © 2001 by Bryan Bergeron. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of
America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication
may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval
system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after
every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit
of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations
appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales pro-
motions, or for use in corporate training programs. For more information, please contact George
Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069. 
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted
under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not
decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon,
transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without
McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use;
any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you
fail to comply with these terms. 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS”. McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUAR-
ANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF
OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMA-
TION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE,
AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the func-
tions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or
error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccu-
racy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom.
McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work.
Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental,
special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the
work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of lia-
bility shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort
or otherwise.
 
abc
McGraw-Hill 
 
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-137359-4. 
0-07-138670-X
DOI: 10.1036/007138670X

To Fred

This page intentionally left blank.

Introduction
vii
Acknowledgments
xiii
PART 1.  Ether-Business
1. 
The Ether World
3
2.
Evolution or Revolution?
25
3. 
Money Matters
47
PART 2.  Wireless Wonders
4.
Network and Wireless Technologies
73
5. 
Cellular Communications and Protocols
99
6. 
Enabling Technologies
131
PART 3.  Convergence
7. 
Realizing the Potential
173
8. 
What’s the Holdup?
195
9. 
Timing Is Everything
235
Glossary
253
Index
265
v
Contents
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

Success, whether in wireless eCommerce or any other endeavor, requires a
sophisticated combination of the appropriate technology, a cogent business
strategy, a modicum of creativity, and, above all, an ample supply of good luck.
In this context, good luck is the direct result of preparing to take advantage of
opportunities before they arise. As the Web has taught countless business
executives, the conservative wait-and-see approach doesn’t necessarily trans-
late into profits when the next “new thing” is on the verge of exploding into
the marketplace. The run on domain names, patents granted for what
seemed to be obvious Web-based business practices, and the benefits of being
first to market have left indelible marks on both the winners and losers in the
eCommerce game. 
In retrospect, it’s easy to see that the infrastructure suppliers of eCom-
merce were optimally positioned for the wired Web boom. However, few
CEOs have the luxury of running a core technology company such as
CISCO, Lucent Technologies, or ORACLE. The challenge for the thousands
of other eCommerce executives is to somehow introduce a creative, must-
have product, position it correctly in the marketplace, and make enough
profit to sustain growth and development and provide a reasonable return for
investors. In surveying the potential areas for rapid growth and profitability in
eCommerce, the wireless Web seems uniquely positioned as the area of
future growth. In fact, it’s difficult to see how a click-and-mortar company
without a wireless touch point will be able to survive.
Wireless computing is being embraced in all areas of business and personal
life and takes a variety of forms. Salespeople exchange information via Palm
Pilots through infrared links. Accountants use wireless mice and keyboards on
their desktop PCs. Students create wireless networks in their dormitories.
Executives use cordless and cellular phones and alarm systems at home and in
the office. Early adopters use wireless PDAs and smart phones to send and
vii
Introduction
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

receive short text messages to and from the Internet, including stock quotes,
weather forecasts, and flight information. While wireless computing and com-
munications offers a variety of opportunities to small and large businesses, the
most explosive growth and intense interest are currently centered on mobile
wireless voice and data communications, that is, the convergence of wireless
voice and data communications, using the Internet as a low-cost conduit. 
By now, everyone has heard of the popularity and apparent success of
smart cellular phones in Europe and Japan. For example, in Finland, a country
of only 5 million, over 60 percent of the population own a mobile phone, and
most use it as their only phone. A Finn’s identity is closely attached to her
phone, in part because she uses it like a virtual smart card. If a woman wants to
purchase a soft drink from a vending machine, she simply dials the number
listed on the machine and a soft drink appears. The charge is automatically
added to her phone bill. The same is true for banking, trading stock, or simply
surfing the Web. All she needs is her cell phone. 
But such uses only hint of the possibilities in store for the wireless Web.
Given the current trajectory of wireless technology, wireless will eventually
redefine the Web itself and the very nature of eCommerce. Today, Ether-
Commerce is beginning to infiltrate the essence of the Web. Soon, it will out-
strip the wired Web as a touch point. Just as cutting the umbilical cord is a
natural and necessary part of the birth process, freeing the Web from the
tether of the wired Internet opens up new possibilities that the original Web
designers probably never anticipated. 
Imagine, for example, that a man walks into a food store with his PDA and
has the various vendors bid for his business. Based on his purchasing profile,
the five or six companies that supply frozen peas compete for his attention,
each offering instant, virtual coupons for their products through the store’s
wireless intranet. At the checkout, his PDA, which also serves as a cellular
phone, transmits the discount data to the checkout computer, along with his
billing information. As he walks the aisles, his wireless headphones soothe
him with his favorite songs, transmitted to his PDA from the store’s local area
network. His music preferences, like his food preferences, are communicated
to the store’s intranet. Once home, he prepares the peas using a recipe that he
discovered on the wired Web. This scenario illustrates that whereas the wired
Web is information-based, the wireless Web is more transaction-oriented.
The man’s miniature smart phone, the new charge card of the masses, takes
the place of his wallet full of charge cards.
It may be difficult to comprehend, but the wired Web, as new and fluid as
it seems, is really a legacy system that has been superannuated by the intro-
duction of wireless technology. Even though it provides needed functionality,
the current Web actually hinders moving on to more efficient and useful plat-
forms for information delivery and exchange. Moving to the next stage will
require not only overcoming the typical legacy system challenge of having to
support the old system while introducing a new system, but overcoming the
viii
INTRODUCTION

mental inertia of current Web users as well. This inertia has technical and eco-
nomic consequences. 
Whereas legacy-wired Web users have been accustomed to having free
information at their fingertips, the transaction-oriented wireless Web will
likely follow the same transaction-based fee-for-service model used by cellu-
lar phone service providers. The premise is that customers are willing to pay
for information if they can have it immediately. Forums, chat rooms, videos,
animations, and extensive databases on the wired Web will take a backseat to
just-in-time, just-in-place transactions, navigation, and pure transaction opera-
tions that the wireless Web makes possible. Instead of sponsored content,
banner adds, and click-through revenue, wireless Web sites will work with
value-added transaction fees, akin to the charge and debit card models.
From a technologic perspective, success in wireless eCommerce, while
not trivial, seems imminently achievable. Applications of a ubiquitous, wire-
less communications network backed by millions of pages of information
have obvious potential including navigation and communications aids in per-
sonal and corporate vehicles; instructions and automatic calls for help in
emergencies; replacement for wired networks; interactive, just-in-time and
place edutainment for students of all ages; and a variety of mobile and wireless
business amenities. 
There is considerable technology-related work ahead. Some of the many
technical hurdles for wireless computing include a lack of standards; confi-
dentiality concerns; the lack of robust, high-bandwidth network infrastruc-
tures; the potential for interference; the question of scalability; fierce
competition for the wireless spectrum; and the usual losses associated with
small, expensive electronics devices. There is also the technical challenge of
managing the convergence of voice and data with traditional hardware that
caters to both worlds until the number of smart digital phones and appliances
reaches critical mass. Similarly, full utilization of the wireless Web will, in the
short term, require businesses to rework their content to contend with
diminutive, monochrome, text-only screens. In the long term, user interface
tools, such as voice recognition and even heads-up displays, may be the tech-
nologic solution to universal use of the wireless Web.
From a business perspective, it’s easy to see how a businesswoman would
pay a premium for the added convenience of working with a portable, wireless
office, using remote voice, email, fax, remote login, and Web surfing any time
and from anywhere. There are obvious win-win solutions, such as providing
wireless networks for businesses and customers in old, unwired buildings, and
providing remote contact for a company’s sales, taxi, trucking, or repair per-
sonnel. Of course, the real draw of the Internet is grounded in solid econom-
ics—it’s cheaper than the alternatives. For most operations where the
knowledge base of the Web isn’t important, any Internet could be used for the
majority of wireless computing. However, sending and receiving information
through theInternet is virtually free to most customers. 
INTRODUCTION
ix

The eCommerce CEO should be aware that there are a variety of socioe-
conomic implications concerning the increased connectivity that a wireless
Web portends.. With emphasis on user interface designs that work with small
screens, there will likely be an increased demand for voice recognition and
translation software systems. The latter will become increasingly important
as business becomes more globalized. In addition, what of the fate of universi-
ties, libraries, and other conventional sources of information where every stu-
dent has access to the world’s store of information at his or her fingertips?
How can these potential threats to traditional culture (and to any wireless
eCommerce start-up hopefuls) be converted into opportunities?
The successful players in the wireless eCommerce game will be those
eCommerce executives who have contemplated these and related issues and
are preparing now, carefully carving out niches for their businesses, forming
collaborative and strategic alliances, and gaining direct experience with wire-
less Web technologies. This isn’t to say that every dotCom CEO should
immediately jump into the wireless market for fear of missing out on the next
gold rush. Rather, it means gathering information now, formulating a strategy,
and following that strategy in deciding how and where to act. Readers of this
book have taken that first step.
The Wireless Web is a primer on the business and technology of the wire-
less Web, from a uniquely eCommerce perspective. It’s just as relevant to
executives who control companies that either have or are in the process of
contemplating a Web presence.  To increase the applicability of this book to a
variety of audiences, it is divided into three parts. Part 1, Chapters 1 through 3,
provides an overview of the current wireless eCommerce environment. This
section is intended to bring IT managers up to speed on wireless eCommerce
issues, and to provide a review for the wireless eCommerce executive. Part 2,
Chapters 4 through 6, describes the technologies involved in networking and
wireless computing. This section is intended as a review for IT managers
familiar with these technologies, and introduces the concepts necessary for
eCommerce executives to communicate intelligently with their IT peers and
wireless vendors. Readers well versed in wireless eCommerce principles can
save time by reviewing the condensed information at the end of each chapter
in Part 1. Similarly, readers fluent in the latest telecommunications principles
may elect to read the Executive Summary at the end of each chapter in Part 2.
Part 3 presents the synergy of wireless Web technology and eCommerce.
Chapters 7 through 9 provide busy eCommerce executives or IT directors
with a road map of how to navigate their business forward in the wireless
computing world, from business, technical, and consumer perspectives. This
section details what executives can do now within their business to prepare
the information infrastructure needed to support a wireless initiative.
With the increasing pressure on eCommerce businesses to produce and
demonstrate profitability, the winners will be the executives with strategic
advantages, such as a wireless touch point for their customers. They’ll decide
x
INTRODUCTION
TEAMFLY

how to deal with and take advantage of eBooks, cell phone technology, Palm 7
and similar Web-enabled PDAs, and other hardware and software. It’s up to the
visionaries to formulate and enact a winning plan that will take advantage of
wireless Web technology and make their eCommerce initiatives a success. At
a minimum, this will require that executives understand and appreciate the
possibilities of networks: the telephone network, the Web, and related,
enabling technologies. For example, how should a company deal with eBooks?
Should it invest in making a component of their Web content compatible with
wireless Palm devices? Should the executive look at including Bluetooth tech-
nology in her company’s next generation of home appliance or audio gear?
What about planning for wireless point-of-sale systems for restaurants, the-
aters, and other retail outlets? Obviously, to make an informed decision, the
eCommerce executive must have a working knowledge of both wireless and
telephone networks, and an appreciation of the business and technologic pos-
sibilities of the wireless Web. To this end, the goal of this book is to provide the
reader with exposure to these concepts and more.
INTRODUCTION
xi

This page intentionally left blank.

To my literary assistant and long-time editor, Terry Littlefield, for her techni-
cal expertise, encouragement, and mastery as a wordsmith.  I would also like
to thank my research assistant, Ana Maria de Aljuri, for hard work in provid-
ing assistance on this project. To the staff at McGraw-Hill, especially Michelle
Williams, my developmental editor.  To Rosalind Bergeron, whose experi-
ences with the wireless Web in Europe and Asia, together with her work as a
high-technology attorney in Silicon Valley, form the basis for this book.
To my readers and reviewers:  Steven Peck, Alliance Manager, Hewlett-
Packard; Jim Basillie, CEO of Research In Motion; Richard Bravman, Senior
Vice President and General Manager, Wireless Systems Division, Symbol
Technologies; Rosalind Bergeron, Vice President of Archetype Technologies;
Lucas Cudrigh; Ron Rouse, Director of Educational Computing at Harvard
Medical School; and, of course, Gilles, for their time, inspiration, insight, and
constructive criticism.
Special thanks to Tony Salomone of Research In Motion Limited; Grant
Frederiksen of Everypath; Michael Nobels and Dana Gonzalez of Netmorf,
Inc.; Jack Gold of META Group, Inc.; Denise Lahey and Brad Hogan of 
OracleMobile; Michael Levy of NewMotion Software; Rick Wilhite of
FusionOne; Brandon Barber of RadiantLogic, Inc.; Gary Gumbert of AvantGo;
Gordon Clyne of Palm, Inc.; Ron Kupkee, Mark Ferrone, and Timothy 
Brinegar of Symbol Technologies, Inc.; and Ron Sperano of IBM.
Thanks are also due to those who contributed directly and indirectly to
the substance of this book.  To the pioneers in telecommunications and elec-
tronics with whom I have worked over the years, especially Fred Marshall and
the staff at Data Comm, Inc.
xiii
Acknowledgments
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

Part One
ETHER-BUSINESS
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

The great pleasure in life is doing what other people say you
cannot do.
Walter Bagehot, founding editor
The Economist
INTRODUCTION
Given sufficient economic incentive, a favorable political climate, and ambi-
tious leaders with the proper entrepreneurial spirit, technologic, business,
and political changes usually follow familiar, if not predictable patterns. . . Ini-
tially, there is the original technical innovation, which may be of questionable
practical value. The technology is usually advanced by a creative entrepre-
neur—a change agent—with the vision and genius to combine knowledge
gained by others in a new way. This entrepreneur, usually with the help of
associates, must also have the time, energy, and money to protect the intellec-
tual property involved, through legal, political, and business channels. Then,
there is the actual business venture, championed by an entrepreneur who
finds new uses for the innovations, and, in so doing, creates a new infrastruc-
ture for distribution. 
Early on, amidst enormous speculation and hype, investment monies
along with heightened interest and inflated expectations from investors and
the public may boost the company’s valuation to many times what would
otherwise be considered sensible. After key critics and the buying public have
experienced and commented on the product or service, there’s a consolida-
tion period during which professional managers make the technology work
consistently and profitably. At this point, the product or service either takes
off or fails in the business arena. Eventually, the cycle repeats itself, as the pro-
3
1
The Ether World
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

fessional managers lose ground to a start-up headed by another creative entre-
preneur. In some situations, the same entrepreneur has the ambition, vision,
genius, and fortitude to move a technology from an idea to a successful com-
pany; but this combination of talents is rare in a single person.
Variables ranging from the nature of the technology, the competition, the
selling price, the business plan, the expertise of the management team, the
creativity and penetration of the marketing and advertising team, the quality
and drive of the sales force, and the demographics of the target market all
come into play in defining what will survive in the market. Furthermore, the
time between the original technologic innovation and a successful business
that exploits that technology may be a few months to a decade or more. The
interval depends on the nature of the product or service, the lead time
involved in production and testing, the time needed for certification or gov-
ernment testing, cross licensing, securing patents, trademarks, and other
intellectual property rights, and the ability to find willing buyers. Time to
market also depends on the personal energy, motivation, and ambition of the
management team. This team may involve a single entrepreneur or, more
commonly, a succession of managers with different skill sets and aptitudes.
This process of moving from technologic innovation to a successful busi-
ness venture is illustrated in simplified form in Figure 1-1. A new technology is
commercialized (C) into a business venture. Profits ($) are reinvested, result-
ing in new products (P) that can be marketed. A portion of the profits ($) is
4
ETHER BUSINESS
Technology
Politics
Business
C
$
$
P
+/–
+/–
Figure 1-1.
Business developments follow a predictable pattern. A new technology is commercial-
ized (C) into a business venture. Profits ($) are reinvested, resulting in new products (P) that can be
marketed. A portion of the profits ($) are invested in political areas, preferably resulting in positive
feedback (+/–) in the form of environments conducive to both business and research into the core
technologies involved in the company. Not shown are the inevitable delays in each pathway.

invested in political areas, preferably resulting in positive feedback (+/–) in
the form of environments conducive to both business and research in the
core technologies involved in the company. Not shown are the inevitable,
variable delays in each pathway, or the other variables that affect business suc-
cess. For example, it’s possible for the feedback on business and technology
research to be negative because of changes in the political environment.
The rate of technologic innovation is accelerating, in part because devel-
opments are rapidly disseminated through traditional print magazines and
newspapers, as well as through TV, radio, the Web, and other electronic
media. Communications tend to speed the evolutionary changes in the
improvement of a technology or process, because they provide competitors
in the same market with information on how much they need to change to
compete. Evolutionary changes are rewarded immediately—positively or
negatively—by the marketplace. 
Revolutionary changes, such as the Web, have the potential to change
everything, including the market infrastructure. The rewards may not be
immediate, but the effects on an entire industry can be cataclysmic. Even
before events were measured in Internet time, major revolutionary changes
occurred when a new technology was introduced. This may happen inten-
tionally, by accident, or as the result of an entrepreneur working on a problem
in a peripheral area. The hybrid vigor that results from combining relatively
disparate technologies—akin to a biological mutation—often creates a prod-
uct or technology that overshadows each of the original technologies
involved. In other words, the whole is greater than the sum of the parts. The
real issue is whether or not the product or service can withstand the ultimate
test—in biological terms, survival of the fittest—in the marketplace. If it does,
the challenge, at some point, becomes surviving success. For example, the
same political and legal structure that protects a nascent business idea in the
marketplace through patents, trademarks, and copyright protection, also
limits overly successful businesses from monopolizing a market at the
expense of competition. Success also tends to decrease the reward for creativ-
ity and to attract a risk-averse management team.
Consider the revolutionary developments that occurred in the United
States and abroad in the past century and a half, and how the patterns seem to
be repeated with each innovation. It’s often the case that a technologic
advance that results from a focused effort to solve a particular problem
becomes the seed for an unforeseen leap in technology that focuses on
another challenge. The Web, originally designed as a method of storing, sort-
ing, and accessing documents in a collaborative but closed research environ-
ment, has evolved into much more. It now represents a huge store of
knowledge and an affordable, globally accessible communications conduit
capable of connecting household appliances, automobiles, and people
through wired and wireless connections. Not only have thousands of pro-
grammers, entrepreneurs, and media consultants made their fortunes on
THE ETHER WORLD
5

Web-related businesses, but the social and political landscape of the devel-
oped nations has changed to reflect the status of the technologically savvy. 
Despite frequent technologic advances championed by visionary entre-
preneurs, it takes decades for society to change enough to turn research into
commercially viable products, as measured by increased customer demand.
Consider some of the more significant events involved in changing the elec-
tronic infrastructure of this country, from telegraph to telephone to cable to
satellite to the Internet, that led to the wireless Web. 
Just 60 years after the United States declared its independence from Eng-
land, Samuel Morse demonstrated the first telegraph system in New York.
The system of wires, batteries, solenoids, and keyers quickly evolved over the
next 100 years to include new technologies that allowed increasingly greater
coverage of both the United States and connections to Europe. Although
voice was never carried over the telegraph, other multimedia—including the
text-based Telex and the image-based Wirephoto service—evolved out of the
simple clickity-clack of the original electromechanical Morse sounder.
Wirephoto was especially popular with the newspaper industry in the
1930s, because it allowed images to be transferred instantly around the coun-
try to newspaper owners eager for a photo to include with national and
regional headline stories.
In 1876 (the year Lars Magnus Ericsson opened a repair shop for tele-
graph equipment) another entrepreneur, Alexander Graham Bell, received a
patent for the telephone. At the time, it was a technologic oddity with no
apparent practical use for the general public. Like the initial customers for
Digital Subscriber Line (DSL), cable modem, satellite, and other high-speed
Internet connections today, Bell’s clients were wealthy business people. Sys-
tems were composed of two phones and a private cable, run from one busi-
ness to another or from a home to a business office. The result was streets
choked with private cables strung directly between pairs of phones, because
the concept of the telephone network had not yet been invented. However,
only three years later, a major milestone occurred with the development of
the switchboard—a manual switching system that eliminated the eyesore
and expense of point-to-point wiring. This primitive network facilitated B2B
communications, since any business phone could be connected to any other
phone through the switchboard. The telephone received another boost in
popularity among business people when, in 1891, automatic switching for
the telephone was patented. This innovation eliminated the expense and
slow response of the manual switchboard, and provided ostensibly more pri-
vate B2B communications. 
The quality of life began to improve for consumers when Bell’s telephone
patents ran out in 1894. While the patents were in place, the average U.S. cit-
izen was only indirectly affected by the new era of communications. The pub-
lic initially viewed the telephone as a tool for business people and a toy for
aristocrats. However, new, competing phone services included the working
6
ETHER BUSINESS
TEAMFLY

middle class in their ranks, making the telephone a household appliance in
just a few years.
While consumers in the United States were experiencing the advantages
of the new telephone technology, Guglielmo Marconi was demonstrating
wireless communications using Morse code in 1895. After securing a patent
for his system in England, Marconi established the Marconi Wireless Tele-
graph Company, Ltd., in London two years later. By 1901, a year after Ameri-
can Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T) acquired Bell Telephone, Marconi was
transmitting telegraphy successfully across the Atlantic. There was brisk
competition between the old wired and new wireless telegraphy services,
domestically and internationally, for nonvoice communications. Many young
radio entrepreneurs became rich and famous overnight, much like the
founders of dotCom start-ups in the 1990s. 
The wired telephone was unchallenged as a voice communications
device until Lee de Forest invented the first electronic amplifier in the form of
a modified version of the newly invented vacuum tube in 1906. In 1907, with
the amplifier, de Forest demonstrated that voice signals could be transmitted
via wireless. Eight years later, vacuum tube amplifier technology had reached
the point that the first successful transatlantic wireless voice communication
was held between the U.S. Naval Radio Station in Arlington, Virginia, and a lis-
tening post at the Eiffel Tower in Paris. In 1919, the Radio Corporation of
America (RCA), founded only a few years before, acquired the Marconi Wire-
less Telegraph Company. Telegraphy remained popular for decades, even
after voice communications became the accepted standard for communica-
tions for technical reasons. Telegraphy doesn’t require much radio frequency
real estate and is audible through static and noise that would make voice com-
munications unintelligible.
Unlike wired and wireless telegraphy, wired and wireless voice technol-
ogy spun off a one-way or broadcast model. However, the role Bell had envi-
sioned for the telephone—a one-way conveyer of music and other
entertainment from concert halls to homes and businesses—was short lived.
Theatrophones, which not only carried live opera and other entertainment in
stereo, as well as stock reports, live sporting events, up-to-the-minute news
reports, and even programming for children, were crushed by cheaper wire-
less radio. Although several phone-based systems were in place in the United
States and Europe by the 1890s, and successful businesses were in place by
around 1910 that marketed stereo music on demand, wired services were
history within a decade. By the time stereo radio was available to the general
public, theatrophones were long forgotten.
By 1923, there was fierce competition for radio listeners, akin to the cur-
rent competition among Web sites for repeat visitors. There were over 500
radio stations broadcasting a variety of programs in the United States on a
crowded range of frequencies encompassing a fraction of the modern AM
broadcast band. Because most of these AM broadcast stations were located
THE ETHER WORLD
7

near the same heavily populated areas, interference from competing stations
operating on the same frequency was problematic. The station with the best
antenna, most powerful transmitter, or nearest proximity to a potential audi-
ence could literally drown out the competition. 
Disregarding, for the moment, the potential health risks associated with
bathing a population in high-power radio frequency energy from hundreds of
sources, static and noise were problematic for a listening public that expected
interference-free music, news, and entertainment from their expensive radio
receivers. Because many listeners simply turned off their receivers, interfer-
ence was disastrous for broadcast stations attempting to secure advertising
revenues. In response to the ensuing political pressure to do something about
the free-for-all occurring in broadcast radio, the U.S. Congress passed the
1927 Radio Act, which created the Federal Radio Commission (FRC) to
police the radio spectrum. This regulatory body became the more powerful
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) a decade later. These agencies
assigned to broadcast stations operating frequencies, antenna specifications,
and power limits in order to minimize interference. For example, the FCC
was empowered to assign “clear” channels on a regional basis, which barred
any other radio stations from broadcasting on the same frequency. This, in
turn, eliminated the threat of interference from competing stations. In addi-
tion, the broadcast station assigned to the clear channel was licensed by the
FCC to broadcast at many times the power of standard stations.
Attention from radio hobbyists and economic stimulus from the mili-
tary fueled nearly continuous technologic advances in the field of wireless
voice and coded communications, especially after World War I. As a com-
mercial venture, broadcast radio became a household item only after AT&T
became involved in the radio industry. AT&T used a scheme for networking
radio stations in distant cities via telephone lines to create a high-profile net-
work of simultaneous radio broadcasts. This combination of a telephone net-
work with broadcast radio finally made broadcast radio a profitable
commercial endeavor. Instead of every radio station investing in resources to
create quality content, the big studios in New York and Chicago secured the
best talent and made a handsome profit by distributing programming to affil-
iated radio stations around the United States. Profit was realized by either
spreading the production cost to affiliate stations or, more significantly, by giv-
ing the advertising-sponsored programming away. Advertisers were eager to
use the new business opportunity, which provided a simplified means of dis-
seminating their message to widespread markets. The single point of contact
also allowed them to monitor the quality and timing of their advertisements
in a way that was otherwise impractical at the time. Advertisers could be
assured that a specific advertisement, read by an announcer they preferred,
was associated with a particular program aired at a particular time of day. 
The AT&T network was eventually so successful that nonnetworked
broadcast stations simply couldn’t compete for listeners or national advertis-
8
ETHER BUSINESS

ers. With a demonstrable method of making money on the broadcast side of
the radio industry, RCA invested the profits it had made selling radios to con-
sumers in its own broadcast network, the National Broadcasting Company
(NBC), in 1926. The AT&T and NBC networks, and the networks that fol-
lowed—including the American Broadcasting Company (ABC), a spin-off of
NBC—were only possible because of technologies developed by Bell Tele-
phone Laboratories. A competing network, the Columbia Broadcasting Sys-
tem (CBS) was founded in 1927. During this time of explosive growth and
competition in network radio, the wired telephone remained the standard
technology for public and business communications.
With the network model in place, image broadcasts soon followed voice
and music broadcasts—just as voice had followed telegraphy. Regularly
scheduled TV broadcasts began in the United States in 1939, nearly a decade
before the ENIAC I (the first practical all-digital computer) was developed.
The ENIAC, like the radio broadcast equipment of that era, required an
entire room just to hold the power supplies, vacuum tubes, and cables. 
As a means of mollifying foreign competition, companies in the United
States and Europe developed different TV broadcast standards. Although
each claimed technical superiority in its own markets, the European standard
was clearly superior. The relative differences of these incompatible standards
remain today, virtually unchanged from their original specifications. Most TV
viewers in the United States aren’t even aware of the higher-quality images
available to consumers overseas, but assume that domestic TV is as good as it
gets. Even viewers of satellite TV in the United States can’t take advantage of
the superior image standards used in other countries; the TV signal from
other countries is “degraded” to the National Television Standards Commit-
tee (NTSC) standard so that the images can be viewed on U.S. receivers.
Relying on proprietary standards in order to keep foreign competition at
bay worked for only a few years. Asian manufacturers are very successful at
producing and selling TV receivers designed for the United States and Euro-
pean markets, which use the NTSC and PAL (Phase Alternate Line) stan-
dards, respectively. For these Asian manufacturers, it’s akin to manufacturing
cars with the steering wheel on either the left or the right side of the car. The
original motivation for deciding which side of the car the steering wheel
should be on doesn’t matter. For these electronics manufacturers, the politics
of the situation doesn’t concern them—it’s simply a matter of meeting the
standards for a given market. Today, U.S. domestic production of TV receivers
is virtually nonexistent.
As TV began to attract the public’s attention, telephone and radio tech-
nology continued to evolve. In 1946, AT&T created the Improved Mobile
Telephone Service (IMTS), the first mobile radio system to connect with the
regular public phone network. This system was mobile, but by no means
portable or even luggable. The equipment weighed over 100 pounds—not
including the separate car battery needed to power the system. The fixed
THE ETHER WORLD
9

component of the IMTS, a single, high-power transmitter and a tall antenna,
provided a line-of-sight operating radius of about 50 miles. Meanwhile, engi-
neers at Bell Laboratories created the first transistor in 1949. The integrated
circuit (IC) was invented in 1958, the same year the first active communica-
tions satellite was launched. The IC or “chip,” which can contain tens of thou-
sands of transistors, made the microelectronics revolution of the late
twentieth century possible. ARPANET, the precursor to the Internet, was
developed in the 1960s as part of the national defense grid. This communica-
tions network was intended to provide a fault-tolerant communications
backbone for the military and the government in the event of a nuclear attack.
As part of the Cold War effort, the AM shortwave radio broadcast ser-
vices begun in the 1930s took on a new significance. A huge infusion of gov-
ernment monies created international radio broadcast systems capable of
being heard around the globe. The most notable systems, the Voice of Amer-
ica, the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), and Radio Moscow acquired
huge, high-powered transmitter facilities and antenna systems that covered
acres of land. Hundreds of other international stations were created as well,
and programs were beamed to target countries with the aid of elaborate
antenna farms. Shortwave listening became an avocation for hundreds of
thousands of Americans and for listeners throughout Europe, especially
those behind the “iron curtain.” Like computer users who surf the Web today,
listeners scanned the shortwave bands until they happened on stations that
provided the news and entertainment they needed. These noncommercial
stations relied on government funding, not commercial advertising, to pro-
vide news and entertainment from a particular political perspective.
With advances in computer-based switching and electronic component
miniaturization, as well as major innovations in battery technology, work on
the cellular radio model began taking shape. A cellular model evolved that
relied on a grid of single, low-powered mobile transceivers (combined trans-
mitter and receiver units) that serviced a fixed, limited geographic area and
switched from one cell to the next in order to follow the mobile customer. By
1973, Motorola demonstrated a mobile phone, about the size of a modern
desktop PC, that worked with a network developed by AT&T. Five years later,
the FCC authorized two experimental cellular licenses, one to AT&T and
one to Motorola. In a parallel development, the FCC authorized the Special-
ized Mobile Radio (SMR) service in 1979—a two-way radio dispatch service
for use in public safety, construction, and transportation industries. In 1981,
the FCC authorized dual wireless/wired cellular licenses, one for wireless
and one for wired services in each of several geographic areas. Because com-
petition for licenses was so fierce, the FCC announced a lottery for cellular
licenses in all markets below the top-thirty system in 1983, a year after the
breakup of AT&T.
Advances in technology, politics, and business became even more interde-
pendent during the 1980s and 1990s. Technologically, transistors, ICs, and
10
ETHER BUSINESS

other solid-state components essentially obliterated any trace of vacuum tubes
and fueled the move toward miniaturization and handheld devices. As engi-
neers became more experienced with new solid-state devices, especially com-
putational systems, there was a shift from analog devices to more capable digital
devices. The computer world discovered the value of real time, online transac-
tion processing in the banking, airline, and process-control industries. The
resulting systems provide the framework for current Web-based transactions.
In the business arena, this period was characterized by mergers and acquisi-
tions. AT&T, which had previously only leased its equipment to homeowners
and businesses, bowed to pressure to allow independently manufactured tele-
phones on its network in 1986. Nextel, a major competitor to the established
cellular services, came online in 1991, three years after the birth of the World
Wide Web. The FCC authorized the auction of Personal Communications Ser-
vices (PCS) licenses in 1993 in order to increase competition in areas served by
cellular services. In 1995, AT&T made its move to become a major player in the
wireless telecommunications arena by acquiring McCaw Cellular. 
With the rapid proliferation of electronic products made possible by the
new digital technology, the establishment of electronic standards became a
political issue. Domestic manufacturers realized that cost cutting and global-
ization required the establishment of and adherence to standards for the
interoperability of components, devices, and systems. With an ever-increas-
ing number of wireless devices competing for the crowded radio frequency
spectrum, the FCC began granting licenses in the relatively vacant higher
operating frequencies, spurring technologic advances in the microwave fre-
quencies and above. A major political milestone was the passage of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996. One goal of this legislation was to increase
competition by reducing previous regulations, making it easier for new busi-
nesses to enter the telecommunications market. During that same year, the
TV industry adopted a volunteer rating system due to public concern over
the exposure of children to sex and violence. This is also one of the concerns
currently surrounding unrestricted access to content on the Web.
BACK TO THE FUTURE
Fast-forward to twenty-first-century America. Technology stocks account for
roughly a third of U.S. stock-market value. Even though the United States lags
behind several European and Asian countries in a number of key digital tech-
nologies, virtually everyone in the United States is wired for sound—either
via FM radio, portable CD, minidisk, or solid-state MP3 players. Personal com-
munications devices are not only part of every businessperson’s wardrobe
they hold the same status for teenagers that expensive sneakers once did. Par-
ents keep track of their children in the shopping malls via electronic tethers,
either in the form of cellular phones or miniature two-way radios. Televisions
are as pervasive as clocks in most homes, and the wireless remote controls for
THE ETHER WORLD
11

TVs and stereos are so common and inexpensive that they’re considered
accessories. Free, but limited, broadcast TV competes with for-fee cable and
satellite TV services for viewers.
Cellular and PCS mobile phones are so heavily used by commuters that
the federal government has investigated their use as a potential driving haz-
ard. Some restaurants restrict or prohibit mobile phone use around other din-
ers. Cellular phones have more in common with the original communicators
and tricorders featured on the Star Trek TV series than with the luggable
mobile phone systems of two decades ago. Mobile phones not only double as
pagers and two-way radios, but allow users to surf the Internet, listen to FM
radio or MP3 music, and even take pictures. Cordless phones for the home
and office are outselling corded models in many markets. Inexpensive hand-
held and mobile Global Positioning System (GPS) devices have replaced the
compass as the navigation tool of choice for hikers and motorists. Television
satellite systems now provide hundreds of channels of programming from
around the world. 
Pocket pagers, smaller and lighter than the batteries that powered the
first portable transistor radios, can send and receive messages. Wireless per-
sonal digital assistants(PDAs), such as the Palm VII, the RIM 957, and the HP
Jornada, extend the knowledge base of the Internet to the palm of the user’s
hand, at any time and from any place. Other handheld wireless devices, such
as the colorful Cybiko, are designed to allow teenagers to secretly send text
messages up to 150 feet indoors. Motorola’s Talkabout two-way pager is more
sophisticated, even though it’s available in colors from Totally Teal to Rasp-
berry Ice. The palm-size pager with a keyboard is more like a pocket terminal
than a pager for the high school and college crowd. Although most digital cell
phones can double as pagers, the lack of national telecommunications stan-
dards for cell phones and email has kept the pager industry alive. Because car-
riers cannot agree on standards that will provide interoperability, there are
vast areas of the United States without wireless phone service of any kind.
This has made the pocket pager one of the few options for staying in touch. 
Looking beyond the United States to the global market, mobile phone
users in Finland can access Web sites and select pop songs to play as a signal of
incoming calls. Finns and Swedes can purchase gasoline by dialing the toll-free
number on a gas pump, or a Coke by calling the number on the Coke
machine. The charge is simply added to their phone bill. Merita Nordbanken,
the large Finnish/Swedish bank, allows its customers to buy and sell securities
over their mobile phones. Teenagers use still-image–capable phones from
Nokia to exchange photos. In England, Excite UK Ltd. offers local movie list-
ings, stock prices, news, weather, and sports scores. Belgium’s Europeanin-
vestor.com offers customized stock quotes and business headlines. In France,
drivers can access real-time traffic information and navigation services
through a mobile-phone service unit of Cegetel SA, one of the country’s main
long-distance phone carriers. 
12
ETHER BUSINESS

Business people in Japan can read the morning news and then check
their bank balance on their cell phone. Waiters in some European cafes use
wireless tablets to take orders and process credit and debit cards at the table.
In Japan, teenagers and business people subscribe to a service that downloads
a cartoon character onto their cell phones daily. Some cell phones are so
advanced that people can send and receive email in either Japanese or English,
record conversations, exchange information through infrared links, program
ringers to play a choice of tunes, navigate the Internet, play games, and even
learn English through a daily subscription service. Third-party add-ons, such
as stick-on fingernails that flash to indicate an incoming cell phone call, are
popular among phone-toting Japanese youth. This activity in the wireless
market suggests that it is poised to become the fastest-growing phenomenon
in the United States, Europe, and Asia since the Web. However, consumers in
Europe and Asia are working with the wireless Web while Web-enabled
products are just being released in the United States. 
Global and domestic telecom acquisitions and mergers are as active and
as hotly debated as the dotComs once were. For example, in the domestic
market, Worldcom acquired MCI. Bell Atlantic and GTE merged to form
Verizon. Sprint, barred from acquiring Worldcom by a U.S. Justice Depart-
ment ruling, became an acquisition target of European telecom giants like
Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom, and Madrid-based Telefonica. AT&T,
forced to consider dumping its consumer long-distance services to get out of
debt, played catch-up in the wireless world with Verizon. It’s clear that regard-
less of what happens on Wall Street, activity in the wireless telecommunica-
tions market is a global phenomenon, and much of the leading-edge
activity—especially in Web-enabled wireless communications—is occurring
in Europe and Asia. 
The events outlined above are relevant today because they illustrate that
the developmental history of telecommunications, like that of the Web, has
been circuitous and fraught with technical, political, and business challenges.
For example, the Iridium satellite system, backed by telecommunications
giants such as Motorola, was a failure. Although the system was successful in
providing mobile phone service from any point on the planet, it had to be
decommissioned in 2000, just two years after it was put into service. Iridium
handheld units were bulky and expensive, the per-minute costs were astro-
nomical, and the system simply couldn’t compete with inexpensive, highly
mobile land-based technologies. AT&T Wireless, on the other hand, rents
specially programmed Nokia cell phones to international travelers that can
be used with the same number and features in over 100 countries—at less
than 10 percent of the monthly rate charged to Iridium system users. 
The telecommunications environment that has evolved since the first
telegraph services suggests that there are similar surprises in store for compa-
nies moving to the unwired Web. Unlike the virtually unpoliced wired Web,
the telecommunications industry is highly regulated. This clash of cultures
THE ETHER WORLD
13

represents a potential barrier to dotCom executives who are unaware of—
and unprepared to provide—the resources required to get things done in the
telecommunications business environment created by national and interna-
tional lawmakers. 
The initial success of mobile phones and GPS has been colored by federal
investigations into their safety. Not only have these systems been implicated
in driving accidents but the radiation from mobile phones may pose a direct
health risk. In addition to a $1 million industry-sponsored study overseen by
the FDA, mobile phone makers are now required to disclose the radiation lev-
els produced by their devices under a policy adopted by the Cellular
Telecommunications Industry Association (CTIA), the wireless industry’s
top trade group. This policy requires manufacturers to enclose information
on handset emissions and an explanation of the testing process inside each cell
phone box.
Despite the regulatory, technical, and business hurdles, the wireless Web
represents a tremendous opportunity for businesses to leverage their existing
or future investment on the Web.
ETHER-COMMERCE
Ether-Commerce, sometimes referred to as mCommerceor Mobile Commerce,
is the use of wireless technologies to access content on the Web or to use the
Internet as the network for voice and data communications. According to the
hype, the business opportunities are virtually limitless. Nearly 100 million
subscribers are projected to be connected to one or more cellular networks
by 2003. 
The future looks especially bright because much of the potential con-
sumer base is already primed for a wireless Web experience. An increasingly
large pool of professionals in the United States regularly rely on cell phones
for instant communications along with PDAs to plan their day, keep track of
contacts, and access the Web. Not only are many potential customers familiar
with the technologies underlying the wireless Web but many have come to
entrust their data to hardware devices. In contrast, the Web took several years
to be accepted by the general population. In many cases, this was simply
because the Web was so different from the norm for consumers. This isn’t the
case in Ether-Commerce, where, thanks to hype from Wall Street and adver-
tisers, consumers’ expectations of what is possible today are far greater than
the current technology can support. 
In simplest terms, when properly executed, wireless Web connectivity
provides location-independent access to a virtually unlimited library of
knowledge and applications—including decision support tools. A secondary
benefit is mobility, or freedom from wires and cables, which enables activities
such as remote data acquisition. Of course, the elimination of wires doesn’t
negate the need to integrate wireless hardware with other systems, provide
14
ETHER BUSINESS

secure transactions, or guarantee reasonable response times. Despite these
and other challenges, the lure of the wireless Web is impossible to ignore.
Consider a few of the specific, potentially life-changing and pervasive poten-
tial applications in Ether-Commerce:
• Time management.A PDA with wireless, networked peripherals can
maintain information about how long a woman is on the phone and with
whom, how much time she spends watching TV and the type of content
she views, and how much time she spends exercising. Web-based personal
calendars and to-do lists can be accessed and updated at any time.
• Just-in-time, just-in-place information. Instant access to the
anytime, anywhere Web can be used to identify and make reservations
at the nearest restaurant or hotel, or an appointment at the nearest den-
tist’s office. The user can request that titles of articles from key newspa-
pers be sent to him, alerting him to check the online or printed version
of the full article, akin to an electronic version of the front page of the
Wall Street Journal.
• eMenus. A customer can order food or services from a location-spe-
cific menu downloaded onto his smart phone (if it has Web access) or
wireless PDA when he walks into a restaurant. With a Web-enabled
phone or PDA, he can also reserve a table and place his order while he’s
driving to the restaurant.
• eTickets. With a wireless, Web-enabled PDA or phone, potential cus-
tomers can search for a particular show in their area and then purchase
tickets online. The same model could work with similar businesses,
such as airline reservations.
• eCoupons. Similar to just-in-time time information, stores can pro-
vide a woman with custom coupons that appear on her PDA when she
enters a retail store.
• Personal simulations.A businessman’s smart phone can store and
document the calories he expends throughout the day and the nutri-
ents ingested at each meal and snack. The system can communicate the
information to his physiologic simulation, allowing his health care pro-
fessional to track and predict his health status in real time.
• Preview events. A moviegoer equipped with video-enabled smart
phones can preview movie trailers before she buys an eTicket online.
• Instant ordering. A listener who hears a song on his radio while dri-
ving can instantly order and download the music through a wireless
connection to the Internet.
• eLearning. Access to just-in-time learning, on-site references, and
review materials for knowledge workers in the medical, legal, and engi-
neering professions can reduce errors and increase efficiency.
• Online auctioning. A person participating in online auctions can
respond to the time-sensitive data at any time and from any place. 
THE ETHER WORLD
15

Auctioning, one of the hottest activities on the wireless Web, is ideally
suited to Web-enabled cellular phones and wireless personal digital
assistants. 
• Personal productivity. Access to email, phone book, calendar,
instant messaging, chat, personal trading, mobile banking, and mobile
shopping can save time and increase productivity by transforming time
spent sitting in traffic and waiting in line into productive time.
• Remote services. Continually available alerts and notification,
remote monitoring, remote automobile diagnostics, telemedicine,
telemetry, service reporting, on-demand video conferencing, virtual
collaboration, as well as audio and video on demand can change how
people communicate.
• Financial customer support. Portfolio and account information,
indication of interest, research and alerts, quotes, trading/allocation
and confirmation, and analyst reports can be made available via a wire-
less device, providing investors with the information they need to man-
age their investments at any time and in any place. Stock trades can be
initiated whenever the market is open.
• Entertainment. Wireless connectivity between game players will
create a new pastime for millions of gamesters. Daily jokes, horoscopes,
and other information can be emailed to a mobile phone by subscrip-
tion.
These applications have yet to make it to mainstream users in the domes-
tic market, but most are enjoyed by those in other countries, early adopters in
the United States, and engineers in several research and development (R&D)
shops. However, as the Web has demonstrated, if someone can imagine an
application, it can be created. The question is when—not if—Ether-Com-
merce will take off from niche applications for use by the U.S. public.
Quantifying the potential of Ether-Commerce from an eCommerce per-
spective entails more than determining how much customers are willing pay
for the privilege of checking their email from the road. As more companies
move to integrate wireless technology into their information technology
infrastructure, their executives realize that there are many questions to be
answered when formulating a plan to meet the expected demand for wireless
applications. These questions include: 
Which wireless technology should be used, and will it be compatible
with existing management systems? Should the wireless systems be used for
content delivery or strictly to support transactions? Which strategic partners
should be considered when moving to a wireless Web presence? From an
eCommerce perspective, which of the services and information described
above will customers expect and be willing to purchase? Will the disparity
between the hype and what companies can actually deliver in the near future
quash the rush to the wireless Web? Will activities such as online auctions
16
ETHER BUSINESS
TEAMFLY

and eTicketing help push the wireless Web past early adopters and into the
mainstream? How will developments in Ether-Commerce in Europe and
Asia affect the market in the United States? Will technology be able to keep
up with customer expectations? What are the global and domestic market
projections for the wireless Web? The next section begins the exploration of
these and related issues from global and domestic eCommerce perspectives.
GLOBAL ECOMMERCE ON THE WIRELESS WEB
If the current stock market activity is any barometer of the viability of an
industry, all indicators point to wireless eCommerce as the next “new thing.”
Unlike the PC-based wired Web, which has been a predominantly U.S.
endeavor, the wireless Web is a global phenomenon—primarily because
Europe and Asia have been the test beds for wireless Web development. In
Japan, where about 40 percent of the population owns a mobile phone, the
wired Web has been leapfrogged; many wireless Web customers have never
logged on to the wired Web. 
Although the United States is the dominant figure in the world of the
desktop PC, domestic wireless voice and data networks are slower and much
less extensive than those in Europe and Asia. Unlike most Americans, Euro-
peans and Asians don’t limit most of their developments in digital technology
to desktop or laptop PCs. Non-PC-based digital appliances, from cell phones
to wristwatches with built-in electronic ski passes, vastly outnumber expen-
sive desktop systems.
In Italy, Europe’s largest market for mobile phones, almost 30 million
mobile phone subscribers outnumber PC-based Internet users 5 to 1. This is
only slightly higher than the European average of about 4 to 1. The mobile
phone markets with the greatest market penetration in Europe [Finland
(about 60 percent), Norway (about 50 percent), Sweden (about 45 percent),
and Italy (about 35 percent)] benefit from a wireless standard called the
Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM). Subscribers with GSM-
compatible phones can access the cellular network in over 130 countries. 
Current market indicators suggest that the wireless industries, princi-
pally the global telecommunications companies, are growing faster than the
Internet ever did, and for good reason. The traditional wired Web, with graph-
ics, animations, video, and sound, may be nice to surf during phone calls or
between meetings. However, if a businesswoman is running late for an
appointment because she can’t locate an office building, a mobile phone can
be invaluable. A smart phone can be even more valuable if she can use it to
access a map—even one displayed on a postage-stamp-size mobile phone dis-
play—indicating exactly where the meeting is being held. 
By 2003, over 500 million mobile phones will be in use globally, and only
about half as many people will be surfing the Web from their desktop com-
puters. Clearly, mobile computing and information access has the potential to
THE ETHER WORLD
17

outpace the wired Internet. Perhaps, stated more correctly, the Internet is one
of the enabling technologies making it possible for mobile computing and
telecommunications to grow so rapidly.
To appreciate the potential of the wireless voice and data communica-
tions industry, consider the events of early 2000 in the global telecommuni-
cations arena, particularly in Europe and Asia. Britain’s Vodafone AirTouch
PLC spent almost $200 billion in a hostile takeover of Germany’s Mannes-
mann. France Telecom acquired Britain’s Orange, a mobile-phone operator,
for nearly $40 billion. KPN Royal Dutch Telecom, the leading telecommuni-
cations company in the Netherlands, with over 3.6 million mobile customers,
invested heavily in Germany’s E-Plus, the third largest mobile operator in
Germany. The new entity, KPN Mobile, has a pan-European customer base of
nearly 8 million mobile subscribers.
Mobile phone licenses throughout Europe were scooped up at multiples
of their original offerings. Stocks of Deutsche Telekom, France Telecom, Tele-
com Italia Mobile, Ericsson, Nokia, Vodafone AirTouch PLC, and other
mobile phone and infrastructure equipment manufacturers remained
strong, despite the high-technology sell-off of late 1999 and early 2000. 
In Japan, NTT DoCoMo’s I-Mode, an optional mobile Internet connec-
tion service established in early 1999, is used by a quarter of DoCoMo’s 30
million subscribers. This figure represents nearly 8 million subscribers, or
over 6 percent of the Japanese population, who use I-Mode to read and send
email, check stock quotes, look up train schedules, obtain maps, buy movie
tickets, and download and play new ring tones. The revenues of DoCoMo
(which means “anywhere”), the publicly traded wireless spin-off of the pow-
erful Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corporation, are expected to climb
sharply as smart cell phones capable of supporting video, and the underlying
high-speed communications infrastructure, become available throughout
Japan. As it is, DoCoMo is already the world’s largest mobile Internet service.
Activity in the wireless sector in both Europe and Japan supports predictions
that Web-enabled mobile phones and other mobile devices will become the
primary means by which customers interact with the Internet in Europe and
parts of Asia.
THE MAJOR PLAYERS
As of 2000, the major players in the global wireless Web game fit into one of
six categories. There are those that: 
• Create the underlying infrastructure, including fiber backbones, satel-
lites, routers, and cellular stations 
• Design, develop, market, and support end-user hardware, including
wireless PDAs, wireless modems, two-way pagers, and digital mobile
phones 
18
ETHER BUSINESS

• Produce end-user hardware
• Develop operating system software for connecting smart phones and
PDAs to the wireless Web 
• Develop micro-browsers, the Web interfaces for smart phones and
wireless PDAs 
• Operate mobile phone and pager networks
In addition to the major players, there are hundreds of ancillary contribu-
tors to the wireless Web movement. One class of ancillary contributors that
may assume prominence is that of Wireless Enablers. These companies, such
as Solutions, Aether Systems, and Datalink.net, sell software and services that
take care of the information conversion to and from a variety of wireless
devices and networks. There are also thousands of Web developers, quality
control groups, Web translation services, data warehouse developers, chip
manufacturers, package designers, testing services, and marketing and adver-
tising groups that have a stake in the success of the wireless Web. For example,
Texas Instruments, the global producer of digital signal processing (DSP)
chips for mobile phones, shipped over 200 million chip sets worldwide in
1999. The one thing all these players have in common is volatility. 
The companies that design, develop, market, and support end-user hard-
ware aren’t necessarily the ones that actually produce the hardware. For
example, Motorola doesn’t make cell phones and Cisco Systems doesn’t
make routers. These companies market and support the products, but the
products are outsourced to third-party Electronic Manufacturing Services
(EMS), an $88 billion business in 2000. The motivation for EMS outsourcing
is clear: They can create products faster and cheaper than the contracting
company. Companies like Ericsson outsource so they can concentrate on
R&D, product design, sales, marketing, and bringing new products to market
faster. 
As the wired Web has painfully demonstrated, standards are everything.
Physical connectivity is worthless with incompatible browsers or operating
systems. The Symbian Alliance is one example of a high-visibility standards
organization with the mission of creating an environment promoting the
proliferation and use of mobile phones. The role of the Symbian Alliance—
composed of Ericsson, Motorola, Nokia, Matsushita Communication Indus-
tries, and Psion—is to set standard licensing terms and conditions for what
they call the Symbian Platform.
Another point to consider is that many domestic companies have foreign
investors, and vice versa. Finland’s Sonera Ltd. and Hong Kong’s Hutchinson
Whamopa Ltd. are large shareholders in VoiceStream Wireless Corp., a Belle-
vue, Washington, company. Japan’s NTT DoCoMo is a major investor in the
mobile phone unit of Royal KPN NV of the Netherlands.
Five of the largest Electronic Manufacturing Services contractors in the
United States are Solectron, Flextronics, Jabil Circuit, Celestica, and SCI 
THE ETHER WORLD
19

Systems. Solectron, the world’s largest EMS contractor, has Cisco, Hewlett
Packard (HP), NCR, Nortel, and IBM among its customers. Flextronics is the
world’s fourth largest EMS manufacturer, and the EMS leader in cell phones,
games, pagers, mice, and PDAs. It outsources for Motorola, Palm, Rocket e-
Book, Gateway, Philips, Ericsson, Cisco, Compaq, and Siemens. Jabil Circuits
focuses on communications equipment and outsources for HP, Cisco, Gate-
way, Motorola, and Network Appliances. Celestica, which outsources for HP,
IBM, and Sun Microsystems, is the dominant EMS contractor for LAN and
Internet services. SCI Systems, the oldest EMS contractor, with nearly 40
plants worldwide, outsources for Nokia, HP, and Compaq. EMS contracts can
involve significant revenues. For example, Solectron-Nortel and Flextronics-
Motorola are $10 billion and $30 billion relationships, respectively.
THE DOMESTIC WIRELESS MARKET
In the world of the wireless Web, the United States has been slow to catch on.
Only about a quarter of U.S. citizens own a cellular phone—less than the Euro-
pean Union’s 15-member penetration figure that approaches 50 percent. This
lack of cellular phone penetration in the domestic market is partly due to the
lack of a standardized, nationwide telecommunications carrier. Unlike
Europe, where a single phone can be used in Germany, France, or Sweden, a
traveler in the United States may have to carry a dual analog-digital phone, deal
with roaming charges, or simply do without services in some regions. 
Some wireless carriers, such as VoiceStream Wireless, which acquired
Aerial Communications, Inc., and Omnipoint Corp., use the GSM standard
popular throughout Europe. Most other major U.S. wireless carriers use an
incompatible system, usually Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) and,
rarely, Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA). Like U.S. NTSC and Euro-
pean PAL TV,  the United States and Europe each have a stake in the success
of their incompatible standards. However, except for a few companies like
Qualcomm of San Diego, California, that hold patents on the U.S. technolo-
gies, there aren’t many clear winners for the CDMA standard. Another factor
is the shortage of smart phones and other wireless hardware. The Palm VII
wireless PDA is one of the most popular wireless devices for accessing the
wireless Web in the United States, and even it has limited penetration.
Most mobile phones in the United States can’t access the wireless Web,
and the new Internet-ready phones are in short supply. In addition to cus-
tomer resistance created by relatively expensive mobile phone Internet con-
nect charges, there is also a lack of content on the Web capable of being
accessed and displayed by wireless mobile devices. Although there are over
15,000 sites available to I-Mode users in Japan, only a small fraction of that
number are available for domestic users. Another issue is the volatility of the
domestic telecom market. Even though the $155 billion U.S. communica-
tions market is significant, the stability of the U.S. market is questionable. For
20
ETHER BUSINESS

example, AT&T’s long-term viability in the long-distance market is question-
able as it diversifies into wireless digital communications. 
With the feeding frenzy of serial acquisitions and mergers, it’s difficult to
predict the future in the extremely volatile domestic wireless Web market.
However, global players, like Deutsche Telekom, DoCoMo, and France Tele-
com, may eventually dominate at least a segment of the domestic market by
acquiring smaller domestic companies like Sprint or WorldCom, including
domestic companies with large overseas shareholders, such as VoiceStream
Wireless. There are several potential impediments to such a scenario. A pre-
requisite for Deutsche Telekom to capture a significant U.S. presence is for
the German government–owned company to circumvent U.S. political
opposition to a company owned by a foreign government buying a U.S. com-
pany. Many foreign telecommunications firms want access to the U.S. market,
and buying a domestic wireless company is the fastest way to get it. Unlike
wired telecommunications services, which are heavily regulated by state gov-
ernments, wireless services are a quick and painless way to capture local mar-
kets. Collaborative arrangements are another way to gain access to the U.S.
domestic market. For example, Sybase Inc.’s mobile computing subsidiary,
iAnywhere Solutions, Inc., teamed with Ericsson to develop mobile banking
and trading applications that will run on Sybase servers and be accessible via
Ericsson mobile phones.
In the domestic market, Verizon is positioned to take the lead in wireless
communications. Cisco Systems, Inc. and Intel Corporation continue to grow
by supplying the building blocks of the wired and wireless eCommerce infra-
structure. Amidst the domestic activity, corporate America is following events
very closely in Europe and Japan, as it prepares to compete globally to supply
Web-enabled mobile phones, wireless PDAs, and two-way pagers. Even seem-
ingly small political steps, such as the ruling in early 2000 that digital signatures
are legally binding, aid the case for wireless eCommerce. Similarly, the lack of
browser standards on wireless phones from different manufacturers presents a
challenge for software developers, reminiscent of the Microsoft–Netscape
browser incompatibility issues. To address this issue, Phone.com, the U.S. com-
pany that pioneered the concept of providing a browser on wireless phones, has
established a testing center in Belfast, Ireland, to test for browser compatibility.
A standard browser environment will simplify and speed the task of developing
content for distribution on mobile phones. 
Revisiting the theme of repeating patterns in business, technology, and
politics, consider some of the domestic players in the wireless Web game and
their resemblance to pioneers in radio, network broadcasting, and comput-
ing. Microsoft, like the original AT&T, was found guilty of antitrust activity.
Palm Computing, like RCA, made its initial mark and its money by selling
hardware. In 2000, it reinvented itself as an Internet company. It still sells
wireless products, like the original Palm VII wireless PDA, but has poured its
energy into developing a wireless infrastructure. Like RCA, Palm Computing
THE ETHER WORLD
21

diversified into a related and potentially more lucrative market based on a net-
work model it helped develop. 
Sometimes technologic innovations fail in the marketplace because they
don’t meet expectations, even when they perform a useful function. Consider
the artificial intelligence (AI) market of the past two decades in the United
States. In the early 1970s, research in AI techniques at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) and other academic research institutions was
the next “new thing.” All the ingredients seemed to be in place. There was
ample funding from the U.S. military and government agencies that were anx-
ious to use AI techniques to guide missile systems, predict nuclear attack sce-
narios, and translate Russian to English in real time. 
However, because of the hype and overblown expectations leveled at AI,
it failed in the marketplace. Neural networks, rule-based expert systems, and
other technologies that had graced the covers of magazines and propelled
unknown researchers to become the heads of companies, disappeared as
soon as federal funding dried up. However, work continued with much
diminished funding in specific niches, and practical AI applications have been
developed for camera systems, copiers, and even in the form of intelligent
agents that make shopping through Web-enabled smart phones easier and
quicker. This experience with AI suggests that a key challenge with the wire-
less Web is to avoid the overblown hype (that could quash the movement for
decades or longer) through appropriate expectation management. In other
words, the challenges of limited screen size, lack of graphics, slow response
times, security, lack of content formatted for mobile phone users, browser
incompatibilities, and cost must be addressed from a marketing as well as a
technical perspective.
The next chapter continues to explore ether-commerce as a natural, evo-
lutionary development of the Internet. It also examines the new wireless
Internet in terms of the market drivers and implications of pervasive comput-
ing, and reviews the mobile and fixed wireless markets. 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Technologic, business, and political changes usually follow familiar patterns.
Communication tends to speed evolutionary changes in the improvement of
a technology or process, and facilitates revolutionary changes that can redefine
and create entire markets. Despite frequent technologic advances champi-
oned by visionary entrepreneurs, it may take years or even decades for society
to change enough to turn research into commercially viable products. 
At the cusp of the twenty-first century, the wireless market is poised to be
the fastest growing phenomenon in the United States, Europe, and Asia since
the Web. The market is extremely volatile, with companies coming and going,
collaborating, and consolidating. Global and domestic telecom acquisitions
and mergers are as hotly debated as the dotComs once were at their peak. 
22
ETHER BUSINESS

Ether-Commerce, the use of wireless technologies to access content on
the Web or the use of the Internet as the network for voice and data commu-
nications, looks especially bright because much of the potential consumer
base is already primed for a wireless Web experience. Applications of wireless
eCommerce range from time management, just-in-time/just-in-place infor-
mation, eMenus, eTickets, eCoupons, and personal simulations, to event pre-
views, instant ordering, eLearning, online auctioning, personal productivity,
remote services, financial customer support, and entertainment. Some of
these applications are already in use in Europe and Asia, while others are
under development.
The wireless Web is a global phenomenon, primarily because Europe
and Asia have been the test beds for wireless Web development. The Internet
is one of the enabling technologies making it possible for mobile computing
and telecommunications to grow so rapidly. The major players in the global
wireless Web game are creators of the underlying infrastructure, end-user
hardware, operating system software, micro-browsers, and mobile phone net-
work operators. 
The United States has been slow to catch on due to the lack of a stan-
dardized, nationwide telecommunications carrier, the lack of smart phones
and other wireless hardware, and the lack of content on the Web capable of
being accessed and displayed by wireless mobile devices. Europeans, in con-
trast, have a single wireless standard and much more wireless-compatible
content to choose from. Despite the apparently sanguine future, the U.S.
experience with AI suggests that a major challenge with the wireless Web
will be to avoid the overblown hype that could undermine the move to wire-
less in the United States.
THE ETHER WORLD
23

This page intentionally left blank.

Life is pretty simple: You do some stuff. Most fails. Some works. 
You do more of what works. If it works big, others quickly copy it. 
Then you do something else. 
The trick is the doing something else. 
Tom Peters, business speaker 
INTRODUCTION
At a time when Internet start-ups face global cooling, and enthusiastic dot-
Com investors are an endangered species, it may seem paradoxical that monies
are pouring into telecommunications ventures in the United States and
abroad. Even though venture capitalists are raising their standards, start-up
firms are withdrawing their initial public offerings (IPOs), and tumbling dot-
Com stock prices have crushed the prospects of traditional wired Web start-
ups, there is a flurry of excitement around anything remotely related to the
wireless Web. This is especially true of the underlying network infrastructure.
Although some of the excitement may reflect an overreaction to marketing
hype, there are reasonable grounds for a positive outlook on the wireless Web
and related technologies. Developments in ether-commerce are a logical
extension of the technologic and societal changes related to the Web.
NATURAL EVOLUTION
From one perspective, ether-commerce is a natural—even expected—evolu-
tionary development of the wired Web. Consider the pieces of the wireless
Web puzzle that are now in place, or were developed in one form or another
during the mid to late 1990s: 
25
2
Evolution or Revolution?
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

Figure 2-1. Touch points for a typical click-and-mortar business, from the customer’s perspective.
Maturation of the Wired Web
The wired Web is a repository of knowledge and information in the form of
text, graphics, video, and sound. This information network, originally
designed as a document-sharing and archiving system, is the beneficiary of
content from physicians and physicists to grade-school students and prison
inmates. The Internet, and the Web interface to the Internet in particular, is
one of the primary drivers of the wireless Web. Without access to the Web,
wireless customers would be limited to private networks controlled by wire-
less hardware vendors and micro-browser developers. Furthermore, without
access to the Web, wireless customers couldn’t easily access or modify per-
sonal Web content, such as the links listed on their home directory or their
Internet-enabled device. 
The wired Web is also important because it has served as a test bed for
developers and advanced users who experimented with what the Web could
offer. Today, most consumers are aware of browsers, hypertext, and the hard-
ware and software tools required to cruise the information superhighway.
Just as important, seasoned Web developers recognize the importance of
26
ETHER BUSINESS
Physical
Fax
Personal
email
Phone
Mail
Web
Media
Business
TEAMFLY

standards, of using the appropriate tools to make the task of programming
easier. They have also learned to appreciate and work in Internet time, espe-
cially in regard to bringing products to market in a timely manner. A caveat is
that Web phones designed to work with proprietary, non-HTML–coded
content effectively limit the user’s access to the Web. A further restriction,
from a global perspective, is that most of the content is in English, and despite
the global extent of the Internet, most content is created and used in the
United States.
Natural Touch-Point Extension
The movement from traditional click-and-mortar touch points (Figure 2-1) to
a business that includes wireless touch points (Figure 2-2) is a natural and
obvious one. As illustrated in Figure 2-1, touch points for a typical click-and-
mortar business, from the consumer’s perspective, include the physical build-
ing, personal contact, mail, phone, fax, email, the Web, and traditional media
advertising. Depending on the nature of the business, some of these touch
points will be more prominent than others, and some may be nonexistent.
The natural extension of wired touch points, illustrated in Figure 2-2,
includes wireless support for two-way pagers and a variety of phone and hand-
held devices. In the near future, click-and-mortar companies will consider
wireless connectivity as an ordinary, everyday touch point, just as wired tele-
phone and fax services are today.
The Telecom Industry Is Growing, Standardizing, and Coalescing
The next piece of the wireless Web puzzle to fall into place is the proliferation
and standardization of domestic and global telecommunications systems.
These private networks may resemble the Internet, but typically rely on pro-
prietary hardware and software standards. For Europeans, one positive result
of the formation of the European Union (EU) was the standardization of
telecommunications in the 15 EU countries. Although there were seven or
eight wireless telecommunications standards floating around Europe at the
end of the century, today most of Europe has only one wireless standard,
GSM. 
Even with the deregulation of telecommunications in Europe in 1998,
European mobile phone customers don’t have to concern themselves with
the differences between PCS and cellular services, deal with roaming
charges, or determine the extent of coverage areas. In contrast, customers in
the United States are confronted with a potentially confusing array of prod-
ucts and wireless telecommunications standards. Despite these and other
limitations, business professionals and an increasingly larger percentage of
the general population rely on the telecom system for their everyday com-
munications needs. 
EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?
27

Figure 2-2. Touch points for a click-and-mortar business that includes wireless connectivity is a
natural, evolutionary extension of traditional touch points. The wireless touch points illustrated
here are special devices, such as wearable computers, smart phones, wireless PDAs, and interactive
pagers.
Proliferation of All-Digital Cellular Systems
The replacement of the legacy analog cellular systems popular in the mid-
1990s with digital technology makes possible added functionality in the
handsets, with options such as caller ID. An all-digital system usually results
in power savings as well, allowing for a smaller form factor, or more room for
batteries without increasing the size of the unit. Wireless Internet service is
only available on digital networks.
28
ETHER BUSINESS
Business
Smart
Phone
Interactive
Pager
Wireless
PDA
Special
Device

Proliferation of Wireless and Cordless Phones
Although the sight may have been cause for alarm a few years ago, it’s difficult to
walk down a busy city street or across a university campus today without pass-
ing someone who appears to be talking to him- or herself. The proliferation of
wireless phones suggests that people from all walks of life have come to rely on
them for everyday communications—not just emergencies or urgent calls. 
Cell phones have not only become a habit; they’re a status symbol as well.
Everyone from high school and college students to investment bankers sport
pagers and wireless phones to keep in touch with friends or business associ-
ates. By wearing a cell phone, users imply that they are important enough to
be paged and that they have a circle of friends to call. Just as many immigrants
in the United States during the early 1900s carried an ink pen in their front
pocket to suggest that they possessed the ability to write—although many
could not—a cell phone suggests literacy in the modern technology culture.
For many in the business world, wireless pagers and phones are simply tools
of the trade, and a natural and expected part of everyone’s wardrobe.
Widespread Acceptance of PDAs
The success of the affordable RIM, Palm, and CE-based PDAs suggests that
people recognize the value of having relatively recent—at least since the last
sync operation—calendar, phone, and to-do-list information on hand at all
times, even when they’re away from their desktop computer. What’s more,
the popularity of PDAs—whether inexpensive, translucent hot-pink models
designed for teenagers to keep track of schoolmates’ names and phone num-
bers, or a business executive’s RIM 957—indicates a level of trust in the tech-
nology. Most users don’t fear that their PDA will suddenly crash, leaving them
without their meticulously compiled records. Reliability breeds trust, and
trust results in users relying on the technology even more. The success of
PDAs has primed users to experience the wireless Web.
Unlike desktop computers, PDAs provide data at any time and at any
place, and most importantly, without delay. PDA users have been primed to
expect that they can activate their unit, search and retrieve the data they need,
deactivate the unit, and return the PDA to its carrying case or a desk drawer,
long before a desktop PC has finished booting. PDA users are also accus-
tomed to a much more compact, non-PC interface. For example, although
the Palm Pilot’s screen real estate is limited, support for handwriting recogni-
tion and the simplified user interface make it easy to use. PDA users are pre-
pared to trade limited screen size for a small form factor.
Wireless Is a Déjà Vu Experience
Corporate America and hundreds of thousands of programmers, designers,
HTML coders, and database professionals are familiar with the costs, 
EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?
29

technologies, and nuances of archiving, updating content, and determining
the resources needed to maintain a Web presence. The merits and constraints
of push services, where personalized content is forwarded to users based on
their preferences, provides a starting point for delivering content via smart
phones and other mobile Internet-enabled devices. Experience with develop-
ing and updating content for the wired Web, and of addressing intellectual
property and privacy concerns, will help developers circumvent many of the
potential roadblocks on the path to developing wireless Web applications.
Often, the techniques and technologies developed for the wired Web
translate directly to wireless Web applications. For example, after years of play-
ing a distant third to Netscape and Explorer, established browser companies
such as Spyglass, ICE, and Opera have a new lease on life in the form of micro-
browsers. For mobile phone suppliers, a company with years of real-world
experience developing and testing browsers counts for more than a hot IPO.
Advances in Electronic Design
Thanks to progress in electronic component design, especially in the area of
application specific integrated circuits (ASICs), miniaturization of cellular
handsets is now limited by the minimum size of the keypad that users need to
enter phone numbers. Whereas early cellular phones were built with hun-
dreds of discrete components and a few integrated circuits, modern units are
built around one or two integrated circuits. The simplified design results in
cost savings during assembly, as well as a more compact design. 
With the latest electronic power management circuitry, power can be
supplied to a smart phone or other wireless device for extended periods of
time. Thanks to smart power packs, which contain their own microprocessor
chips, a cell phone can be powered by a battery pack for 48 hours or more in
standby or receive-only mode, and for several hours of talk or Web access.
Proliferation of Miscellaneous Wireless Devices
Another component of the technologic and social foundation for the wire-
less Web is the proliferation and public acceptance of miscellaneous wire-
less devices, from garage door openers to TV remote controls. Wireless is
no longer mysterious. Increasingly, the tangle of wires stuffed behind every
home and office PC is being replaced by a wireless network. Fixed wireless
network products like CyberGenie, Airport, and AirConnect are increas-
ingly popular alternatives to wired printer and computer resource sharing.
Similarly, Palm Pilot owners commonly beam information from one PDA
to another by using the Palm’s built-in wireless Infrared (IR) port. Many lap-
tops also sync with Palm Pilot and Windows CE PDAs through IR connec-
tions. Kensington and other manufacturers offer wireless, IR-linked
keyboards and mice.
30
ETHER BUSINESS

Ready Money for Telecom Mergers and Acquisitions
Thanks in part to a healthy European economy, Europe’s Internet power-
houses—former telephone company monopolies like Deutsche Telekom
and France Telecom—are in buying mode. As they are expanding their con-
tent and geographic domain by acquiring smaller companies, they are stan-
dardizing the telecommunications system. Domestic mergers and
acquisitions are frequently fueled in part by foreign investment, since wire-
less is usually the fastest and least complicated means for a European com-
pany to establish a foothold in the U.S. market. Of course, there are also
domestic mergers and acquisitions.
Increased Customer Expectations
Consider the fundamental components of a successful wireless Web strategy
and how they relate to each other. The prerequisite technical and business
achievements, together with customers’ experience with wireless technologies
and the price points set by similar technologies, not only prepare the founda-
tion for what is technically feasible but also help mold customer expectations.
Taken as a whole, most of these individual contributions portend a positive
future for the wireless Web. Consider how mobile computing has been
primed by the use of PDAs. With wireless Web connectivity, the process of
syncing a PDA with a host PC to exchange data could be a thing of the past,
and up-to-date information could be downloaded or accessed in seconds.
Wireless devices, from PDA/interactive pagers, TV remote controls, and
model airplane controllers, to the handheld product tracking devices used in
grocery stores and large warehouses, have been around for years. What’s dif-
ferent today is the networking standards that allow the linking of tens of mil-
lions of users to each other and the Web. It’s one thing to have a wireless
remote control that communicates with a TV and another to have a remote
control that can access anything on the World Wide Web!
REVOLUTIONARY DEVELOPMENTS
An old cliché for the wired Web is that the Web changes everything. That may be
true, but what’s also true is that the wireless Web changes everything we know
about the Web. The revolutionary aspects of the wireless Web are a result of:
Location Specificity. The design of a cellular system allows the cus-
tomer’s location to be determined within a few hundred meters. This loca-
tion specificity can be used to assist the customer in locating the nearest
theater, hospital, restaurant, or ATM. 
Ease of Personalization. With a known phone number or cell loca-
tion, it’s easy for the service provider and, by extension, the wireless Web-site
EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?
31

operator, to determine the customer’s demographics. If detailed demo-
graphic information isn’t available, then general information, such as the cus-
tomer’s town of residence, can be used to personalize his wireless experience.
Often, this level of customer detail isn’t possible on the wired Web without
significant user interaction with the site. 
New Monetary Models. In some wireless smart phone systems,
the hardware vendor is the portal provider. This puts the provider in a posi-
tion to extract fees from Web sites wishing to be listed on the PDA or cell
phone’s home page. Some smart phone systems allow the customer to
modify her home page by logging onto a Web site. In this system, banner
ads and other forms of advertisement are placed on the higher-bandwidth
wired Web, leaving the handset free of advertising. The wireless Web chal-
lenges the concept of the worth of a Web portal and the value of click-
throughs.
New Interface Models. In an almost shocking change, graphics and
color have limited importance in wireless Web applications. Free-form hyper-
text linking also takes on less importance with postage-stamp-size screens.
Typical Web-enabled phones can display only three to five lines of 15 to 17
characters of text, plus two or three lines for status and menu information. 
Given the nature of the mobile work environment, immediacy of
response is of utmost importance. Some delivery vehicles perform better
than others. For example, smart phones have a delay or latency on the order
of two seconds. Two-way pagers have a 30- to 90-second latency. The current
Palm VII has a delay of between 5 and 15 seconds. 
Transaction Focus. Because of the nature of the mobile work envi-
ronment, most wireless encounters are transaction-based (as opposed to
information-based). That is, most customers expect specific, concise informa-
tion with a minimum of delay.
LIMITATIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES
The new wireless Web has its share of both limitations and opportunities.
The most significant are listed below.
Bandwidth Limitations
The bandwidth of most smart phones and wireless PDAs used in the United
States is limited to less than 14.4 KBps, or about a quarter of the speed of the
standard 56-KBps connection to the wired Web. This bandwidth restriction
places a practical limit on the amount of information (especially nontext
information) that can be sent to and from a wireless Web device in a reason-
able amount of time. There are faster services available in parts of Europe and
Japan, and all wireless markets have plans for increased bandwidth capacity in
the near future. Just as DSL and cable modem companies are finding markets
32
ETHER BUSINESS

for users desiring greater bandwidth connections to the wired Web, there are
opportunities for companies that offer premium wireless bandwidth services
as well.
Incomplete Service Coverage. Despite the global nature of the
Web and of the telecommunications industries, coverage for the wireless
Web is far from global. With the exception of Japan, most countries, including
the United States, have spotty wireless Web coverage. This is especially true
when the mode of communications is considered. There is no single, nation-
wide wireless operator that blankets the United States with coverage.
Because of the nature of terrestrial radio, even a covered area is usually depen-
dent, to some degree, on the effects of structures, foliage, and weather-absorb-
ing radio-frequency (RF) energy. 
For example, coverage for Palm devices through Palm.Net, also known as
BellSouth Mobile, is limited to about 230 U.S. cities. In addition, some areas
require the user to be outside to transmit, while some areas have enough cov-
erage to allow indoor transmit and receive wireless connectivity. BellSouth
Mobile’s major competitor, Motient (www.Motient.com), uses a different
network, but provides similar coverage patterns. In some instances, laws and
regulations obstruct coverage. For example, cell phone use is barred in certain
hospital wards and on most airplanes because they have the potential of inter-
fering with medical or aircraft navigation equipment.
Scarcity of Content. Content may be “king” on the wired Web, but
on the wireless Web, content is the undisputed supreme ruler. Content writ-
ten specifically for the smaller Palm Pilot or cell phone display is sparse. Even
content designed for NTT DoCoMo’s wildly popular I-Mode is limited to
thousands, not millions of sites. While there are software tools that automati-
cally convert wired Web content into content suitable for smaller, low-band-
width displays, the results are often aesthetically deficient, and the content
isn’t easy for the user to access. Content designed specifically for a particular
device—that is, content formatted not only for the bandwidth and screen size
but the application as well—is of far greater value to users than generic con-
tent originally designed for the wireless Web.
Lack of an Installed User Base.In Japan, where mobile phones and
wireless Internet access are the rage, only a little more than a third of mobile
phone users made the move to Internet-mode (I-Mode) phones by the end of
2000. The number of Internet-capable mobile phones in the United States is
even lower. As in Japan, U.S. customers upgrading to wireless Web access  will
need to discard or trade up their current mobile phones, which may be in per-
fect working condition, and sign up for a more expensive monthly service
plan. In Europe, the relative expense and scarcity of the latest generation of
Wireless Application Protocol (WAP)-enabled phones have increased inter-
est in and use of alternative net-access protocols, especially Short Message Ser-
vices (SMS), a means by which short messages can be sent wirelessly to
handheld wireless devices. This turn of events has not only been a boon to
EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?
33

SMS providers but also to the customers who can access the Web without
making a new investment in hardware.
High Customer Cost. The increased cost of Web-enabled hardware
and Internet access service is an impediment to global wireless Web use. In
the United States, the tiered-access service-charge model, where subscribers
receive a given number of minutes for a flat monthly rate, is common. Cellu-
lar providers frequently offer business customers “free” nights and weekends,
as a means of attracting customers while shifting the cost burden to business. 
More progressive Internet access companies offer volume-based services.
Palm.Net offers several access options, ranging from a minimal monthly charge
that includes a small amount of data transfer, to a significant monthly charge
for unlimited access. In the United States, monthly charges for unlimited wire-
less Web access are about double the cost of comparable wired Web access.
Changing Communications Standards. Communications stan-
dards are changing worldwide. These changes are driven by technologic as well
as business and political pressures. For example, wireless telecommunications
in Europe and China use one standard or protocol, Japan has another, and the
United States has several. As global mergers and acquisitions continue, either
the European or Japanese standard will likely emerge as the global standard.
It’s difficult to predict which communications standard will eventually
win in the global market. As the VHS versus Beta, Mac versus PC, or the ac
versus dc power wars illustrated, simple technologic superiority isn’t neces-
sarily a good predictor of a technology’s success. However, even if global tele-
com standardization were to occur immediately, there are plans for increased
bandwidth and media capacities in virtually all wireless markets. For sub-
scribers to take advantage of this increased capacity, they’ll eventually have to
upgrade their handsets, and the infrastructure will need to be upgraded as
well. In other words, periodic change in wireless access is inevitable.
Although there will likely be some cost resistance among consumers, if
the added functionality offered by a successive generation of devices is entic-
ing enough, customers will opt for the new services. Consider the incremen-
tal sale of wired modems. Virtually everyone with Internet access in the
United States upgraded from 14.4- to 28.8- to 56.6-K modems as soon as they
became affordable. This opportunity for continuing sales assumes that the
wireless telecommunications industry can mirror the tactics used by the per-
sonal computer industry, where customers are enticed to upgrade to faster,
slimmer, and more powerful laptop computers, even when their existing lap-
tops are perfectly serviceable. Many customers are willing to pay handsomely
for an incremental increase in functionality, especially if time saving or
increased ease of use is involved.
Security. Wireless communications are inherently less secure than
wired communications. Not only are wireless devices susceptible to viruses
and the other data-threatening plagues of wired devices but the communica-
tions can be intercepted and, with the appropriate software tools, decoded.
34
ETHER BUSINESS

As it is, the FBI has taps on all Internet Service Providers (ISPs) and can inter-
cept any communication, whether it originates from a wireless device or a
wired desktop system. Third-party workarounds, such as sites that encrypt
and reroute email and other data, are popular on the wired Web. Encryption
and other security measures are likely to be even more popular on the wire-
less Web than they are on the wired Web. 
The next section dissects the new wireless Internet, and the remaining
part of this chapter examines how wireless connectivity redefines the Inter-
net for developers and users. It identifies the wireless market drivers, explores
the phenomenon of pervasive computing, and assesses the mobile and fixed
wireless market.
THE NEW INTERNET
Wireless and mobile Internet connectivity is an enabling technology for
transforming the current workforce—especially the segment that deals with
sales and knowledge management—into a mobile information society. The
focus on personal, any time and any place communications made possible by
wireless technology is driving the redefinition of the Internet. The new focus
is more on personalized services and transaction support, and less on surfing
the Web for multimedia games and references.
The individual and personal nature of the cell phone is a key to the trans-
formation of the Internet into the back end of a personal information appli-
ance. A cell phone, unlike the PC in a home or office, tends to be carried by
its owner. As a rule, people don’t share cell phones, but carry them on their
person for their own communications. This personal relationship with a
device that provides a telecommunications link is in part responsible for
transforming the Internet—simply because the user’s demographic infor-
mation, including telephone number, is available to the service provider.
This knowledge, properly leveraged, can be used to provide the subscriber
with personalized, location-specific information, such as directions to the
nearest service station.
The proliferation of smart phones—mobile or cell phones with the abil-
ity to browse the Internet, receive and send faxes and email—is also redefining
the Internet. Users expect personalized, relevant, concise information,
whether for personal navigation, eCommerce, or personal time manage-
ment, and they expect it instantly. From the service provider’s perspective,
these expectations represent a demand for services that can be delivered
when and where subscribers want them.
Enabling Technologies 
The enabling technologies of the new Internet include new, high-speed wire-
less networks, new protocols for sending data to and from wireless devices,
EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?
35

new operating systems, and technologies for providing short-range wireless
connectivity between peripherals and wireless devices. Although these and
other technologies are discussed at length in Part II, Wireless Wonders, they
are introduced below:
Wireless Networks. The wireless networks developed and supported
by the telecommunications industry define the potential of the wireless devices
connected to specific networks. Just as analog cellular was eventually superan-
nuated by all digital systems, the basic, slow-speed wireless networks are slowly
evolving into next-generation high-speed communications channels capable of
supporting multimedia services, like video. The alphabet soup of evolving net-
work standards that will be described in Part II, such as GSM (Global System for
Mobile Communications), GPRS (General Packet Radio Service), HSCSD
(High Speed Circuit Switched Data), EDGE (Enhanced Data for GSM Evolu-
tion), and WCDMA (Wideband Code Division Multiple Access), represent
the telecommunication industry’s attempt to provide service in the most effi-
cient, interference-resistant, bandwidth-sparing means possible. 
Wireless Protocols. The Wireless Application Protocol (WAP)
makes information and services on the Internet accessible to new, WAP-
enabled wireless devices. That is, WAP provides connectivity to the Internet.
In the United States, Amazon.com and Yahoo are two of the first large com-
panies to provide wireless connectivity to their Web sites through WAP. 
In Europe, wireless phone users without new WAP-enabled phones are
using the older, but readily available and inexpensive, Short Messaging Service
(SMS) to access the Internet. Potential WAP competitors, such as Sun
Microsystem’s Java 2 Micro Edition (J2ME), will appear on wireless phones
from NTT DoCoMo and Lucky Goldstar. Until a clear winner appears, it’s
likely that these and other protocols will coexist on wireless devices. If proto-
cols such as J2ME become accepted standards, they have the potential to
redefine the post-PC era of computing.
Symbian Alliance. Readers will remember from Chapter 1 that this
alliance of major wireless equipment manufacturers—Ericsson, Motorola,
Nokia, Matsushita Communication Industries, and Psion—develops and pro-
motes an operating system for wireless information devices. The core of the Sym-
bian Platform is a nonproprietary, scalable operating system called EPOC, which
defines issues such as Internet connectivity and the nature of the customizable
user interface. The EPOC operating system links software applications and pro-
vides a consistent development environment for wireless developers.
Bluetooth. A standard and a protocol, named after a fierce Viking king
of the tenth century renowned for uniting the kingdoms of Denmark and
Norway, defines and enables short-range wireless communications among
electronic devices. That is, Bluetooth links devices. For example, Bluetooth is
designed to support wireless connectivity among laptops, smart phones,
printers, PDAs, and peripherals. A Bluetooth-compatible smart phone could
access a phone number from a Bluetooth-enabled PDA without the user hav-
36
ETHER BUSINESS
TEAMFLY

ing to manually access and transfer the information to the cell phone from the
PDA. Similarly, a woman with a wireless headset containing a microphone
and ear mike could operate the smart phone in her car, either from the dri-
ver’s seat or from the comfort of her Jacuzzi with the car parked in her garage.
At the end of 2000, there were over 1,200 companies who had joined the
Bluetooth consortium, including most of the major telecommunications and
hardware vendors. 
Increased Infrastructure Demands
In seeming defiance of Wall Street’s opinion of dotCom start-ups, Internet traf-
fic continues to grow at exponential rates, even without a significant contribu-
tion from wireless Web traffic. In this environment, customers are demanding
higher-quality, higher-bandwidth connections to the Internet. This current
reality, together with the projected demands associated with exponentially
increasing wireless Web traffic, is fueling infrastructure growth and boosting
the valuation of infrastructure technologies, such as fiber-optic communica-
tions, to levels unheard of at the height of the dotCom era. Optical fiber infra-
structure companies, such as Nortel Network Corporation, are enjoying
multipliers of 40 and higher. This represents an opportunity for companies
like Microsoft that will offer software solutions to linking databases and servers
with wireless applications. Infrastructure capacity will become critical as wire-
less connections make demands of applied service providers (ASPs) connec-
tions, serving transaction-oriented applications to millions of wireless devices.
New Services
The New Internet is partially defined by the broad range of new services
made possible by personalized, just-in-time data access. As described broadly
in Chapter 1, these services focus on immediate, location-specific, personal-
ized communications. Content ranges from personal navigation, personal
health and security, personal time and knowledge management, entertain-
ment, edutainment, and eLearning, to eCommerce and social networks. Not
everyone will be interested in purchasing a Coke from a cellular-enabled
vending machine, but this is only one example of the potential of the wireless
Internet. For example, the concept of a wireless wallet—something that cus-
tomers keep with them at all times so that important information and money
are at their fingertips—seems intuitively attractive.
The introduction of new services is limited more by developer imagina-
tion and customer expectations than technology. For example, the all-woman
Finnish band Nylon Beat released the first hit single for mobile phones, “Not
Guilty,” as a cell phone ring. This unlikely use of a cell phone generated signif-
icant money for the band, and signaled the onrush of new mobile entertain-
ment options ranging from video games to games for video communities.
EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?
37

New Players
To avoid losing the lead they established on the wired Web, Amazon.com,
Yahoo, and the other wired Web powerhouses are making their presence
known on the wireless Web. One of the earliest eCommerce transactions
supported on the wireless Web was the ability to order books from Ama-
zon.com. In addition to the established dotCom players, the wired Web is
becoming home to telecommunications giants like AT&T and Deutsche
Telecom, and to wireless equipment manufacturers like Motorola. These
new players bring a different transaction and time-oriented focus to the Web.
One player obviously missing from the major players on the wired Web
is Microsoft. While Microsoft has had a great deal of leverage working with
PC manufacturers because of its operating system software, it hasn’t fared as
well in the mobile wireless market. Microsoft is a minor player in the micro-
browser business, having been snubbed by the major cell phone provider
companies like Nokia. In contrast, once prominent wired Web-browser com-
panies, including Spyglass, ICE, and Opera are developing micro-browsers for
Web-enabled appliances. Opera, for example, developed the micro-browser
for Ericsson’s Screen Phone.
Microsoft is working with Ericsson with the aim of bundling its micro-
browser on Ericsson’s phones. The company is also working with smaller cell
phone players, such as Samsung, toward developing a micro-browser based in
part on its CE operating system. Unfortunately for Microsoft, CE has yet to
be embraced by the cell phone manufacturers. However, Microsoft does have
a chance to become a major player in the wireless market, primarily as a back-
end system for companies such as British Telecom and NTT DoCoMo, Inc.
New Interface Paradigms
The postage-stamp-size display panels on smart phones require a rethinking
of Web access interface design. The tiny form factor of current smart phone
displays is a challenge that may eventually be addressed by some combination
of pen computing (as is used by the Palm PDA) and voice recognition. 
Affordable voice recognition systems, which allow a businessperson to
open a word processing document and dictate a letter with reasonable accu-
racy, are now available from several vendors, including IBM, Lernout & Haus-
pie, and Philips. These PC-based systems can interface directly with Web
browsers, allowing anyone to perform searches and other routine tasks with
speech control. Recent advances in speech recognition technology have
moved the price/performance ratio of speech recognition systems to the
point where powerful, affordable systems are becoming attractive alterna-
tives to the conventional mouse and keyboard. The greatest challenge to
overcome is that wired Web browsers are optimized for point-and-click oper-
ations, not speech recognition. Using speech recognition with a wired Web
38
ETHER BUSINESS

browser is akin to directing someone who’s blindfolded to “go right three
steps, stop, go forward six steps, stop, go back one step, stop.” 
The issue with large vocabulary, continuous speech, PC-based voice
recognition systems is that they’re extremely resource intensive and require
far too much computing power to run on a device like the current Palm Pilot.
A typical system requires a hundred megabytes or more of disk space, at least
that much RAM, and a fast processor to operate properly. The only portable
option these vendors offer is a handheld, digital voice recorder about the size
of a digital cellular phone. Voice recognition vendors are reportedly working
on an ASP-type voice recognition system that would offload most of the pro-
cessing to a remote server. The advantage of using a non-PC device, such as a
smart phone, is that the interface limitations of the current wired Web
browsers don’t have to be addressed. Smart phones represent a blank slate as
far as interface design goes. User expectations haven’t been solidified yet, leav-
ing the options open for alternative, innovative interface designs that needn’t
resemble anything on the wired Web.
A major concern with smart phone interface designs surrounds the
graphical user interface (GUI), or what the user sees and interacts with during
the normal operation of the wireless device. Good graphical interface design
for a browser such as Internet Explorer on the wired Web, or any PC-based
application for that matter, is considered an art. It is an art that is difficult to
master, which is one reason great Web designers are in demand. Even subtle
differences, such as the color, size, and style of the font used on a Web site, can
have a profound impact on how visitors perceive the site and the company it
represents. 
In developing a graphical interface for a site intended to be viewed on a
large color monitor, accomplished Web designers take into account dozens of
subjective and objective factors. They need to know what sort of image the
business wants to project to its customers: carefree, serious, or responsible?
Similar information is necessary for a Web designer to determine the modes of
interaction (mouse versus pointing device) that a Web site should support.
Considerations include the role of mental models (the metaphors that give the
GUI meaning) in the interface, the appropriate level of graphic complexity (a
balance among the need to focus customers’ attention on some aspect of the
site, hardware limitations, and the resources necessary to create the interface),
the optimal mix of power versus the ease of learning that should be provided,
and how to provide situational awareness (informing users where they are,
where they can go, and where they’ve been). Then there’s the issue of localiza-
tion—making a Web site equally appealing to customers in other countries
who may speak other languages. Not only is accurate textual translation an
issue, but subtleties such as the colors used in graphics and buttons can have a
profound effect on the perception of the site. 
As important as all of these factors are in the design of a wired Web site,
current hardware and bandwidth limitations require that these issues be put
EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?
39

aside for now. Until higher bandwidth connections are generally available, ani-
mated, colorful graphics on smart phones, wireless PDAs, and similar wireless
devices aren’t practical. For the immediate future, wireless devices have to
support a “retro” look, primarily using text lists. Perhaps the best way to han-
dle the limited bandwidth dilemma is to use wired devices in conjunction
with desktop-access Web content. For example, suppose there is late-break-
ing news in an area of interest to a subscriber. This might appear on her smart
phone display in the form of a text alert. (It might say something like “Stock
Alert.”) The subscriber acknowledges and stores the alert with a simple key-
stroke. When she returns to her office or home computer, a Bluetooth con-
nection between the subscriber’s PC and cell phone is automatically
established, and the URL associated with the full text and graphics stock alert
appears on the computer screen.
New Business Models 
Business on the wireless Web is centered on speed, location, and personaliza-
tion. For the foreseeable future, the wireless Web is being optimized for transac-
tions. In terms of these transactions, consider the value of pushing personalized,
preferred information, as well as a variety of applications, to customers.
The transaction paradigm doesn’t necessarily decrease the significance of
the PC as a component of the wireless Web. Subscribers can be enticed to use
wired Web connections through personalized portals, which can contain
banner ads and other forms of advertisement. Whether or not advertise-
ments can be successful on the wireless Web proper is debatable, especially if
users pay for per-minute connections. The wireless Web challenges the con-
cept of pay for connect time, versus a charge for the amount of data down-
loaded. Some wireless suppliers, such as Palm.Net, do offer connection plans
based on volume, not connect time. The per-KB connect charge will drop as
more competitors enter the wireless market.
WIRELESS MARKET DRIVERS
According to the Gartner Group, over 1.2 billion Internet-enabled cellular
phones were in use worldwide by the end of 2000. In contrast, the growth in
domestic PC sales declined. Even Microsoft is looking to the wireless Web and
other Web-enabled applications for its future growth. As the number of mobile
Internet users outnumbers PC users worldwide, there will be a concomitant
shift in eCommerce from wired PCs to Internet-enabled mobile devices.
As the wireless promise satisfies the demand for just-in-time information,
new opportunities in the consumer market will materialize. When a person
with a wireless tablet or smart phone can buy books, download music, moni-
tor news, buy and sell stocks, read and send email, check sports scores, book a
flight, check her bank account balance, or call her financial analyst, why
40
ETHER BUSINESS

would she spend money or time reading a newspaper in the morning with
her coffee? Following the “if we build it, they will come” mentality, consumer
expectations will redirect the flow of capital away from more traditional busi-
nesses such as the newspaper industry to wired devices, such as eBooks, and
wireless software and service providers.
For the modern commuter, a significant amount of time is spent in transit
to and from work, shopping, and in business travel, so everything takes on a
time-critical aspect. To capture the demand for instant gratification for prod-
ucts and services, cell phone retail outlets are almost as plentiful as Starbucks
in many areas of the United States. Just as fast food has taken off in the United
States, consumers will gladly pay to be connected to their friends, coworkers,
or suppliers at any time and from anywhere. The perceived value of instant
access to information is a function of the type of information and the role of
the customer in managing that information. For example, up-to-the-moment
stock quotes are invaluable to a day trader. For a businessman lost in traffic in
downtown New York City, the relative location of a meeting site is critical.
The value of just-in-time data is application and situation specific.
The worldwide adoption of wireless technology and demonstrated
worth of the Internet is a significant market driver. It’s obvious to subscribers
and investors alike that the Web is a virtual information megastore that pro-
vides a tangible value to anything that can tap into the knowledge base. In
addition, the wireless Web is increasingly perceived as a necessary touch
point by most click-and-mortar businesses.
PERVASIVE COMPUTING
As the United States evolves into an “information everywhere society,” the
wireless Web will look very different from the prewireless one. More impor-
tantly, the effect that pervasive computing will have on society is likely to be
profound. From the U.S. perspective, careful monitoring of how wireless tech-
nology is affecting the lives of workers overseas will provide information on
what might be in store for the United States, including the way pervasive
wireless technology will alter customer attitudes and expectations.
At the outset, pervasive computing seems like nirvana. A business-
woman can maintain constant contact with her home office, through voice,
email, or fax, to and from anywhere and at any time. Her ability to change
flight reservations without standing in line at the airport terminal and receive
a last-minute quote from an office associate before a critical meeting can
increase efficiency and accuracy. With the proper data acquisition equipment
at home, she can use her smart phone to control the lights in her house, adjust
the aquarium’s water temperature, and measure the temperature, relative
humidity, and wind speed at her summer home.
However, paradise can have its demons. As anyone who has worn a pager
knows, the advertised weight of only six or eight ounces for these devices is a
EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?
41

gross understatement. Even the lightest, thinnest electronic pager can feel
like a 50-pound weight when it’s perceived of or used as an electronic leash.
Pervasive computing and communications are desirable and sometimes life-
saving, as long as the user has the option of turning the equipment on and off,
or at least of being able to call or not call, when necessary. From an employer’s
perspective, having an employee who works at home or who travels a lot avail-
able at a moment’s notice can be critical. Providing that last-minute informa-
tion for a proposal or bid can make the difference between celebrating the
signing of a business contract over a good meal or spending a quiet evening in
a cheap hotel.
Another minefield on the wireless Web is the issue of privacy. Many pri-
vacy advocates object to the FBI’s ability to track a subscriber’s location by tap-
ping into the cellular phone system. However, the same capabilities used by
the FBI allow companies to determine a cellular caller’s location, and provide
him with location-specific information that may be of great interest. The issue,
from a societal and marketing perspective, is how much wireless subscribers
are willing to put up with in order to enjoy the benefits of wireless connectiv-
ity at home and work. One risk is that wireless customers may eventually
reject the personal privacy costs of living and working in the wireless world
without some sort of financial reward. This doesn’t seem to be the case in
Japan, where the I-Mode has captured the younger generation by providing
games and communications on demand. As will be discussed in Part III, Con-
vergence, a prerequisite to achieving a state of pervasive computing is creating
a homogeneous, standardized wireless infrastructure in the United States.
MOBILE AND/OR FIXED WIRELESS
The concept of wireless communications, including access to the wireless
Web, isn’t limited to accessing the Web through a smart phone, wireless
PDA, or two-way pager. Wireless communications extend into small geo-
graphical areas, such as a home or office, much the same way cordless phones
extend the reach of the telecommunications network. The concept of local
roaming—moving freely with a laptop, for example, from one office to
another without having to reconfigure local network settings—is catching on
in many businesses and at home. Wireless docking stations and keyboards
remove the clutter from a work desk, and ultimately increase workspace effi-
ciency. Even cordless phones, which aren’t necessarily connected to the Web,
are becoming necessities in the workplace. In some parts of Europe, the con-
cept of fixed and mobile phones doesn’t apply, because most people own one
phone—a wireless model—that they use for all calls. Along a similar line, a few
hotels in Silicon Valley offer wireless network connections. Guests don’t deal
with modem connections and incomprehensible switchboard glitches. They
simply check out a PCMCIA wireless modem card, stick it in their PC, and
start checking their email.
42
ETHER BUSINESS

Several vendors offer fixed wireless networks that allow multiple PCs to
access a single DSL or cable modem port from wireless connections. In addi-
tion to saving money on connect charges, users in an office or home setting
can access their laptop from one location to the next. In addition, new hires
can usually be added quickly and inexpensively to the fixed wireless network,
without the time and resources needed to run additional cables. 
Although the wired Web is evolving rapidly, and the most profound
hardware and software solutions are still under development, there are
dozens of hardware solutions available today, each focused on a particular
niche of the wireless market. There are wireless modems that allow any lap-
top or handheld computer to access the wired Web. These PCMCIA cards
are equipped with antennas and can be used like a wired PC when connect-
ing to the Web. No special software is required—just an access account with
an Internet service provider—and the patience to surf the Web using wired
Web browsers at very slow speeds. There is the pace-setting Palm VII, which
provides the functionality of the popular Palm organizer in a somewhat hefty
form factor. In addition, there are also third-party modem manufacturers,
such as Novatel Wireless, that market the Minstrel Wireless IP Modem for
pre-Palm VII devices. A variety of vendors market snap-on modem adapters
that connect personal data assistants (PDAs) to the user’s cell phone to pro-
vide wireless Web connectivity.
Smart phones with a variety of features, from built-in PDAs to MP3 play-
ers, address the teen market. Two-way paging devices, like the RIM Interactive
Pager, allow businesspeople to send and receive email when a phone call
would be inappropriate. Smart phones with built-in pager functionality obvi-
ate the need for someone to carry both a pager and a cell phone. As a dedi-
cated text input/output device, however, two-way pagers provide a keypad
that is much easier to use for composing email messages.
In the long term, many wireless add-ons, such as wireless modem cards and
snap-on modems for the current generation of PDAs, will be unnecessary
thanks to technologic advances and the consolidation of individual wireless
devices. Consider the proliferation of IR remote controls in the typical U.S.
household, each specific to a particular piece of equipment. Most homeowners
replace three or four remotes with a single, easy to use universal remote. Simi-
larly, there will be a demand for a single device that can replace wireless phones,
interactive pagers, wireless PDAs, and other specialized wireless devices—each
with its own battery, password, mobile Internet provider, and billing account. 
Some forward-looking manufacturers are providing the infrastructure
for wireless options within their current products, obviating the need for cus-
tomers to purchase third-party products later on. For example, Apple Com-
puter includes a built-in wireless antenna system in its laptop series, in the
event that the computer owner decides to upgrade to a wireless network.
If the concept of smart phones displayed by Nokia and other smart
phone marketing companies has any bearing on reality, the future wireless
EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?
43

communications device will be a thin, portable unit that provides functional-
ity through a user-definable pen-based interface. This device, or something
like it, may eventually sound the death knell for interactive pagers and PDAs.
It will provide virtually infinite functionality because of its user-fconfigurable
user interface and its ability to run programs running on Web-based servers,
through an ASP interface.
The next chapter examines the economic aspects of the wireless Web,
including a look at the current and future stakeholders in the wireless econ-
omy, the frenzied feeding pattern of mergers and acquisitions, the Eurasian
advantage, and the business opportunities for companies supplying hardware
and content.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Even though Internet traffic continues to grow at an exponential rate, the
explosive growth in domestic PC sales and Web-related start-ups has cooled
to the point that investors are increasingly hesitant to assume the risk of a dot-
Com failure. However, in ventures related to the wireless Web, dotCom fever
is as hot as ever—monies and other resources are pouring into any application
that has a wireless Web component. This is especially true of infrastructure
providers, such as companies involved in fiber-optics communications com-
ponents. The Web infrastructure is critical, since all traffic, whether wireless
or wired, eventually travels through the wired infrastructure.
The wireless Web represents a natural and expected development in
that the technologic, political, and business foundation for success in the wire-
less Web is in place. This foundation includes maturation of the wired Web;
the standardization and coalescing of the telecom industry; the proliferation
of all-digital cellular systems; the increased acceptance and use of PDAs and
other portable, personal data devices; experience with the wired Web;
advances in electronic design; the proliferation of miscellaneous wireless
devices; and the ready availability of money for mergers and acquisitions.
There are also revolutionary developments, including the ability to specify
user location, the ease of personalizing services, new monetary models, new
interface models, and a focus on transactions.
Some of the more significant limitations and opportunities associated
with the wireless Web include limited communications bandwidth, scarcity
of content crafted for the wireless Web, lack of a significant installed user base
compared to the user base afforded by the wired Web, high customer costs,
and the challenge of moving standards.
The “new” wireless Internet is defined by enabling technologies, includ-
ing wireless networks, the wireless application protocol (WAP), self-govern-
ing bodies like the Symbian alliance, and the Bluetooth standard. The new
Internet is also defined in part by new services, such as personal navigation
and new players from the global telecom community.  The wireless Web also
44
ETHER BUSINESS

brings with it increased infrastructure demands, as well as demands for new
services, new players, new interface paradigms, and new business models. 
Wireless market drivers include the number of cell phones in use, the
projected cell phone use in the near future, the just-in-time delivery of con-
tent, and the time-critical nature of information. The work-anywhere attrac-
tion of pervasive computing carries with it a threat to personal privacy.
Despite the current technologic limitations, mobile and fixed wireless ser-
vices provide real benefit to users today, and promise even more in the future. 
EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?
45

This page intentionally left blank.
TEAMFLY

The most successful businessman
is the man who holds onto the old just as long as it is good
and grabs the new just as soon as it is better.
Robert P. Vanderpoel 
INTRODUCTION
Assuming that the wireless Web is, in fact, the next “new thing,” just who is
going to make a profit, and by doing what? As the dotCom experience has
taught many start-up executives, timing and execution are almost everything.
The rush on catchy URLs made some early prospectors millions of dollars
overnight, simply because they had the foresight to claim potentially valuable
URL real estate before someone else. In the wireless Web world, the real
estate involved is the RF spectrum that extends across national boundaries.
The money involved in securing licenses for the next generation of cellular
phone service makes the cost of even the most expensive dotCom URL pale
by comparison.
From a business perspective, things look promising for companies even
peripherally involved with the wireless telecommunications industry. Con-
sider that cell phone use by U.S. business travelers has been growing at about
30 percent per year for the last two years. Following this trend, the global mar-
ket for mobile devices will be well over 1 billion by 2003, with a majority of
those devices connected to the Web. Not only will this level of Web access
overshadow wired Web access significantly but it also promises a substantial
revenue stream for companies involved in the wireless Web. For example, in
Japan, I-Mode customers pay a 25 percent premium to be connected to the
Web, as compared to regular cellular phone users. Not surprisingly, at the
47
3
Money Matters
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

start of the new millennium, Nokia and NTT DoCoMo were the most valu-
able companies in Europe and Japan, respectively. And look at what hap-
pened with the two largest cell phone operators in Europe: Vodafone
AirTouch’s $163 billion takeover of Mannesmann was the largest ever! Voda-
fone’s commitment to Britain’s network infrastructure alone was $8 billion.
Even though the business prospects for the wireless Web seem almost as
limitless as the Web itself, picking the wrong technology, or using the best tech-
nology for the job with the wrong business strategy, or simply bringing a prod-
uct or service to market too soon can spell disaster, even for the big players. 
The Iridium fiasco is one such example. Iridium LLC, the world’s first global
satellite and paging company designed for handheld mobile phone users, filed for
bankruptcy in early 2000 and was at one point prepared to destroy its network
of 66 low earth-orbiting satellites. When the system went live in November
1998, it seemed less of a technical marvel than when it was conceived. A sub-
scriber with a portable, but by no means slim, handset could make a call from
anywhere on the globe. As with most businesses, there was competition from
the start. GlobalStar and ICO offered similar services using different and less
expensive systems. To make matters worse, the voice service available through
Iridium didn’t seem so leading edge compared to the Internet and email services
available through more popular GSM-compatible mobile phone systems.
A postmortem analysis suggests that Iridium failed on several points.
First, despite its early mover advantage, the Iridium service was too expensive.
Second, Iridium was initially marketed only to wealthy business travelers—
ignoring the more lucrative and receptive professionals in the maritime, oil,
and gas industries. Even though deep-pocketed Motorola, a company fluent
in the workings of the telecom industry, was one of the major backers of Irid-
ium, it failed. Despite this temporary setback, Motorola continues to invest
heavily in satellite communications, underlining the confidence the major
players have in wireless as the future of telecommunications.
Motorola may yet see some profit from the Iridium project, in the form of
the new company, Iridium Satellite, which purchased the $5 billion assets of
Iridium LLC for $25 million. Motorola will make or license the production of
handsets and satellites for the new company, which has a $72 million contract
for two years of satellite service.
This chapter focuses on the economic aspects of the wireless Web from
the perspective of the stakeholder businesses that stand to profit from the
inrush of capital, energy, and ideas. It also examines the pattern of mergers,
acquisitions, and alliances that forms in the volatile wireless market as compa-
nies jockey for position, leverage, and radio spectrum licensing.
STAKEHOLDERS
The types of companies that stand to benefit most from the wireless Web
gold rush are the companies that create the underlying infrastructure, manu-
48
ETHER BUSINESS

facture or supply end-user hardware, develop operating system and applica-
tion software, and operate the communications networks. The roles of these
first-tier stakeholders, and the more significant second-tier stakeholders in
the wireless Web arena—including government, content providers, and ser-
vice providers—are described in more detail below.
Telecom Giants
The cash-rich giants of the telecommunications industry, including Vodafone
AirTouch (the largest cellular operator in the world), Telecom Italia Mobile
(the largest domestic operator in Europe, with over 20 million subscribers in
Italy), Tercel (Portugal’s second largest ISP), Libertel (the second largest oper-
ator in the Dutch market), and Finland’s Sonera (the world leader in wireless
encryption), are investing feverishly. These and other companies are paying
whatever it takes to upgrade their systems so they can not only participate in
but also control the next generation of wireless telecommunications. There is
a similar, but less frenzied, feeding taking place in North America. Players
include AT&T Wireless, BellSouth Corp., Motient, Nextel, Sierra Wireless,
SBC Communications, Sprint PCS, Verizon, and several start-ups.
For telecommunications carriers that own and operate the cellular net-
works that transport voice and data to and from wireless devices, upgrading
for the future wireless Web entails the acquisition of next-generation cellular
licenses throughout the United States, Asia, and Europe. The lofty expendi-
tures for licenses are rationalized by even loftier goals—to become the Cisco
of the wireless world. The eventual winners in Europe and Asia will certainly
influence the industry in the United States, whether through acquisitions,
mergers, and partnerships with U.S. companies, or by setting the global wire-
less standards for the wireless Web. The economic risk that the telecom
giants face, aside from competing with each other, is dealing with the debt
accrued from acquiring subscribers at a cost of between $350 to $1000 each,
including next-generation spectrum licenses.
Government
In order for the telecom giants to secure their positions in the next genera-
tion, they continue to spend billions at government auctions for high-capac-
ity cellular licenses. Consider the positive effect of huge cash flows on regional
and national governments as Vodafone and others competed for the 64 third-
generation licenses throughout Europe. Every telecommunications carrier,
regardless of its past profitability, depends on next-generation licenses for its
future viability. 
To the delight of local governments, the telecom powerhouses are
uniquely positioned—and have deep enough pockets—to continue a bidding
war for a pan-European presence. Not only has building a pan-European 
MONEY MATTERS
49

network entailed paying governments handsomely for the coveted licenses but
the government’s windfall is compounded by secondary gains of increased tax
revenues and the creation of local jobs. When the United Kingdom auctioned
off five third-generation (3G) wireless licenses in 1999, it raised over $33 billion,
about ten times what was expected. Similarly, the German auction for 3G
licenses in 2000 raised $46.25 billion. Furthermore, the windfalls haven’t been
limited to Europe. The domestic PCS spectrum, auctioned off in 1994
and1995, raised $7.7 billion for the U.S. government. Most analysts expect the
FCC’s 2000 auction for 422 licenses to be even more lucrative.
While the situation isn’t as dire in the United States, for most European
mobile operators, obtaining a license isn’t an option—it’s a matter of life or
death. Failure to obtain a next-generation technology license effectively locks
such mobile operators into a relatively low-speed wireless network. A mobile
operator limited by current technology faces extinction. In addition to secur-
ing the appropriate licenses, the winners in the wireless Web struggle will be
those companies with the largest subscriber base, the right mix of customers,
quality management, and an ability to react to changes in the marketplace in
Internet time.
Although the government auctions for wireless licenses have left some
bidders in debt, governments have been winners, at least in the short term.
The risk is that, although the various European, Asian, and U.S. governments
may be cash rich in the short term, the long-term effects on local economies
are less certain. Unless the debt-ridden companies are managed expertly, they
may not be able to grow themselves fast enough to survive in the long run—
even with licenses for next-generation wireless connectivity.
Infrastructure Builders
The companies ultimately responsible for the wireless Web’s infrastructure,
such as Cisco, Powerwave, WorldCom, Ericsson, and Nortel, are well posi-
tioned to benefit economically from the wireless Web explosion. Given their
expertise and continued involvement with the wired Web, the telecommu-
nications infrastructure builders are the key to the success of the wireless
Web. These companies are essential because the infrastructure is the primary
rate-limiting factor in determining how rapidly the global markets can evolve.
This evolution involves moving from the relatively slow-speed first- and sec-
ond-generation telecommunications network connections to the third- and
fourth-generation network systems and beyond. The next generation of net-
works will be capable of supporting voice recognition, video, and other band-
width-intensive interfaces that will eventually supplement or obviate the
miniature, text-oriented displays found on first-generation devices. 
Barring the collapse of the Web and the dotCom industry, the future suc-
cess of infrastructure builders is relatively secure given the constantly increas-
ing traffic load of the dotCom and wireless voice industries. In addition, the
50
ETHER BUSINESS

wireless Web is a new driving force injecting money and energy into this
industry. The main economic risk to information builders is primarily from
domestic and foreign competitors vying for market share.
Application Developers
The wireless Web represents an open frontier, ready for the taking by capa-
ble, creative application developers, especially for those with expertise in
developing programs for wireless devices that follow the ASP model. These
applications reside on remote servers and execute locally within a generic
browser environment connected to the wired or wireless Web. There are
ample valued markets for wireless Web–enabled applications, such as mes-
saging systems that communicate physicians’ orders to pharmacists, so pre-
scriptions can be filled and waiting for patients when they arrive at the
pharmacy. In addition, there are markets for many of the same applications
that run on standalone and Internet-enabled PCs. Among the most popular
applications are antivirus utilities, personal databases, calendars, to-do lists,
and other time management applications. As the wired Web has demon-
strated, the ASP model can be successful for products ranging from Web-
based games to office utilities. The ASP model is not only cost-effective, but
the rapid time to market this model means that developing and deploying
software across the Web on a variety of hardware platforms can truly happen
in Internet time. 
The greatest initial opportunity for application developers appears to be
in porting wired Web applications to wireless devices, including applications
that target specific wireless devices. The financial risk for application develop-
ers is related to the fast-changing market, and, correspondingly, short product
life cycles. The wireless device standards, including display sizes and capacities,
will be in flux for years. As a result, developers will have to write for a rapidly
moving target, anticipating future hardware and firmware characteristics. 
Working under the constraints of a moving-target platform is a normal
and expected part of software development, given the periodic upgrades in
operating system software and browsers every year or so. The challenge with
developing applications for the wireless Web is the volatile product cycle and
the rapid pace at which the changes in standards are likely to occur during the
early phases of evolution.
Content Authors
On the Web—wired or not—content is king. However, with the introduc-
tion of any new computer-based system, applications and content typically
lag behind hardware innovations by months, or even years. As IBM and Apple
Computer learned from their first personal computer offerings, hardware
doesn’t sell well without software, and software developers and content
MONEY MATTERS
51

authors don’t write for specific hardware platforms that don’t have a large
user base. Because of this chicken-and-egg phenomenon, hardware vendors
are doing all they can to encourage development on their platforms. They are
providing content authors with everything from heavily discounted hard-
ware, developer seminars, documentation, and joint marketing opportuni-
ties, to t-shirts and coffee mugs. One company, Nokia, established R&D
centers in Belgrade, Helsinki, and Sydney to help develop entertainment con-
tent for its cell phones.
The enticements for content authors to publish their work on the Web
are more obvious. Consumers either pay for content directly or, more com-
monly, indirectly through advertisers who pay for banner ads at a rate that is a
function of the amount of traffic a site handles. In this regard, the wireless Web
resembles the wired Web at an early stage of development. While the wired
Web has more content than one person could possibly read through or expe-
rience in a lifetime, the wireless Web has very sparse content. The first com-
panies to develop and publish interesting content for the wireless Web will
have an opportunity to capture customers before the amount of available
content explodes, as it did on the wired Web.
There are two direct routes open to content authors. The first is to create
content de novo, using tools designed specifically for wireless access, such as
those that follow the WAP standard. However, in part because WAP doesn’t
live up to expectations, and because authoring in these environments is too
challenging for those who simply want to provide content, the other option is
to reformat or translate wired Web content. Although the wireless Web, at its
full potential, is much more than a repackaging of the wired Web, the fastest
time to market involves reformatting HyperText Markup Language
(HTML) documents from the wired Web to fit, for example, the layout of a
RIM wireless PDA.
Many wired portals are paying to have their sites reworked to make the
content they host more suitable for displaying and searching on handheld
devices. Software tools for converting existing Web content are available from
vendors such as Everypath (www.everypath.com) and NetMorph (www.net-
morph.com). As described in detail in Chapter 5, these transcoders translate
content originally developed for the wired Web for different screen phones,
PDAs, and interactive pagers. 
With the wireless Web industry trying desperately to attract customers,
there is a wide-open market for content authors and translators. The risk for
these developers, who may spend many months mastering a particular
authoring language or environment, is that tools will eventually be available
that make content development as easy as using a word processor. This sce-
nario is typical of tool development in the PC industry. For example, many
authors learned HTML early on in the Web’s history. However, a few years
later, tools such as Microsoft FrontPage and Adobe’s GoLive put the power of
Web publishing into everyone’s hands. Until that happens with the wireless
52
ETHER BUSINESS

Web, content authors and translators will be able to charge a premium for
their services.
Content Providers
As the wired Web has demonstrated, excellent content is necessary, but not
sufficient, to attract traffic to a site. Spending millions on a Super Bowl com-
mercial is one approach, but an option open to more companies is to collabo-
rate with a service provider to reach target audiences. For example,
Barnes&Noble.com negotiated contracts with the service providers Verizon
and AT&T so a link to Barnes&Noble.com would be listed prominently under
shopping headlines on the cell phones that Verizon and AT&T support.
Because of the display and keypad limitations of the current generation of
smart phones, the wired Web approach of making a URL known around the
globe isn’t enough. Users not only have to know the URL, but they have to
take the time to type it in. Even if a businesswoman’s favorite online book-
seller is Barnes&Noble, she’s probably not going to spend a minute or more
keying in a name when a link to Amazon.com is only a keystroke away. The
challenge for content providers is to secure links on as many wireless devices
as possible—within economic reality—and this means working with a ser-
vice provider. On the wireless Web, the service providers make the rules.
Service Providers and Portals
On the wired Web, user dependence on the top portals or information gate-
ways, such as America Online (AOL) and Yahoo, has been very lucrative.
Many wireless portals, sometimes called content aggregatorsor formatters, fol-
low an obvious strategy, instituted by Sprint and other wireless service
providers, of creating an ISP and portal wrapped into one. Service providers
set up browser environments that include links to other sites, email, informa-
tion personalization, and a list of online retailers. Service providers act as gate-
ways to Web content, since they work with device browsers to present
preselected content menus. In other words, they both define and control the
links to Web content. Examples of wireless service providers that run portals
include AT&T Digital PocketNet Service by AT&T, Mobile Web from Veri-
zon, Yahoo Mobile from Yahoo, MSN Mobile from Microsoft, and Wireless
Web from Sprint. 
Consider what happens when a businessman signs on to Sprint’s Wire-
less Web service. He is first greeted by Sprint’s home page, where there are
links to Web portals, such as Yahoo and AOL. In exchange for their promi-
nent position on the wireless screen, these Web portals share revenue with
Sprint when it sends customers their way. For companies like Amazon.com,
Sprint acts as a value-added reseller. For subscribers, these services are either
free or available for a minimal monthly cost. The content providers pay fees
MONEY MATTERS
53

for being listed. Amazon.com, BarPoint.com, JDJ Direct, ESPN, E-Trade,
Fidelity Investments, and TicketMaster are examples of companies that have
contracted with Verizon to display links to their Web sites. This approach has
been attempted before on the wired Web, but the first generation of wired
ISPs moved too slowly to compete with the more nimble, yet entrenched
companies like the then youthful Yahoo.
Portal owners, by virtue of their control over the information gateways to
the Web, can effectively censor Web content. Wireless portal companies
charge more for space on the front screen, just as wired portals do. Start-up
screens for PDAs and Web phones may be owned by huge players, such as
AOL and Microsoft, effectively blocking competition from services with less
political or financial clout. Subscribers may find it easy to look for books under
Barnes&Noble.com, but almost impossible to navigate to Amazon.com,
depending on how the portal owner has the browser home page configured.
Service providers that follow this model will eventually face the same type of
antitrust claims made against Microsoft for bundling its Internet explorer
browser with every PC sold. Perhaps in realization of this, some portal owners
do not ascribe to the combined ISP-portal service model. For example, U.S.
West’s Web portal, BrowseNow, allows subscribers to configure their wireless
start-up screen from their PC.
Search Engine Developers
One of the earliest success stories on the wired Web was that of search engines
that somehow managed to make the millions of pages of Web content accessi-
ble in a standardized way. As a result of the work of companies like Yahoo, users
could quickly search for and access Web content without having to know a
specific URL beforehand. Although the Web content available using a smart
phone isn’t anywhere near the amount of information available on the wired
Web, there is an increasing demand for fast, efficient search capabilities. 
In the new wireless market, the established wired Web search engine
developers, including Yahoo, are being challenged by start-ups like Oracle’s
OracleMobile and Phone.com Inc.’s Myphone.com, which are completely
focused on the wireless Web. These heavyweight contenders for the wireless
Web search engine arena provide added value by basing search results on user
preferences. As a result, the number of keystrokes needed to access a site is
minimized. Saving keystrokes on a smart phone saves time, and that’s worth
money to most users.
The smaller search engine start-ups, such as MobilID, which provide ser-
vices that list local restaurants and events based on user preferences, face stiff
competition from the heavyweights. In addition to facing competition from
other companies specializing in search engines, the carriers are also creating
their own wireless Web portals. The competitive landscape is further clouded
by the way search engine companies make money. In addition to collecting a
54
ETHER BUSINESS

fee from phone carriers, the search engine companies extract a fee from com-
panies they list in search results. The challenge for independent search engine
developers is to sign up enough carriers who either don’t have the resources to
create their own wireless portals, or who will pay a fee in order to be able to
compete with the carriers intent on creating and controlling their own portals.
The DotComs
Virtually every dotCom in existence has a financial stake in providing a wire-
less touch point for its customers, regardless of whether the dotCom sup-
ports a B2C, B2B, or some other business model. This includes traditional and
customer relations businesses that have only recently become click-and-mor-
tar establishments by adding a Web touch point.  Even a nontransaction-ori-
ented Web site that’s little more than a comprehensive information listing,
such as an online magazine, can profit from the wireless Web by adding wire-
less transaction capabilities. Without a means of specifying the exact informa-
tion required, a reference Web site, for example, is essentially off-limits to a
wireless device. It’s unreasonable to expect that someone commuting to
work on a bus would scroll through hundreds of postage-stamp-size screens
of text.
Consider the value of adding a wireless touch point to a dotCom’s wired
medical portal that specializes in providing references for its clinician mem-
bers, including drug and disease management information. The static textual
information on the Web site could be reformatted for transaction-based Web
phones and wireless PDA access. Because scrolling through hundreds of
miniature pages of drug-to-drug interactions would be too time-consuming
for clinicians, a transaction-based application optimized for wireless access
could be developed. The application could allow clinicians to enter the names
of the drugs and would return a list of potential reactions and precautions, for-
matted for their wireless PDA or cell phone. For more in-depth information,
clinicians would be directed to the references on the comprehensive wired
Web site. In this scenario, investment money for development and operations
could come from managed care organizations interested in minimizing costs
and from pharmaceutical firms. Both would benefit indirectly by helping clin-
icians promote the safe use of drugs, including detecting drug-to-drug inter-
actions among their subscribers. 
The overall financial incentive for dotComs (including click-and-mortar
companies) to include a wireless Web touch point is to increase traffic to the
wired Web site, thereby increasing potential advertising revenue. A second
incentive is to build on the services provided by the wired Web site with
value-added functionality: a billable service. Consider the wired touch point
of a firm offering a wired push service that provides subscription-based alerts
and short bulletins that are customized for the subscriber’s needs. For exam-
ple, a short text message like “NOK up 11/4,” accompanied by a special ring,
MONEY MATTERS
55

could alert the subscriber to an increase in the stock price of Nokia. She could
then either opt to buy or sell stock or read more information from her cell
phone. Alternatively, she could go to the dotCom’s main Web site on her PC
for the details behind the stock price change.
Transaction Businesses
All businesses, by definition, are transaction-based, and transaction-based
dotComs, as well as countless click-and-mortar businesses, have the potential
to profit from just-in-time, location-specific business from wireless customers.
Transactional online sites, unlike show-and-tell marketing and advertising-ori-
ented wired Web sites, survive not by simply attracting visitors to their sites,
but by achieving a high conversion rate—the number of business transac-
tions, such as book purchases, relative to the number of visits. Amazon.com
and Barnes&Noble.com don’t benefit from customers checking the price of a
book and then going to their neighborhood Borders bookstore to purchase it.
Virtually all transaction-based businesses, on- or offline, have the poten-
tial to profit from a properly implemented wireless Web presence. For exam-
ple, QXL.com, Europe’s largest online auction company and eBay, the U.S.
equivalent, offer wireless access to online auctions. The challenge is to provide
customers with fast, efficient service while maintaining a reasonable return
on investment (ROI). Establishing a reasonable projected ROI for developing
and maintaining a wireless touch point is especially relevant, given the high
cost associated with being an early adopter of technology. Examples of trans-
action-oriented businesses positioned to benefit from a touch point with a
likelihood of a positive ROI include the following.
Restaurants. The better (higher margin) eating establishments stand
to gain the most, initially, from location-specific advertising to potential
patrons. Connectivity can be used to provide menu selections and, with the
advent of 3G bandwidth and larger graphic displays, images of the dishes avail-
able. Wireless devices can be applied to everything from locating a restaurant
to selecting items from a menu. The customer’s selection can be communi-
cated directly to the kitchen and suppliers, following the choice board model.
A choice board is a Web-based, multiuser ordering system in which a cus-
tomer’s order is sent to suppliers along the entire supply chain. For example,
not only would the chef be notified of an order, but the companies that sup-
ply ingredients to the kitchen as well. 
Wireless choice board style systems have been in place for years in some
resorts, such as Disney World in Orlando. At some of Disney’s outdoor restau-
rants, waiters take orders with the aid of wireless tablets, moving from one
table to the next, but never wasting time walking back and forth between cus-
tomers and the kitchen. The order, communicated via wireless to the kitchen
and the serving staff, is delivered by a second waiter to the appropriate table
when it is ready. The order is also communicated to a procurement program
56
ETHER BUSINESS
TEAMFLY

that subtracts the ingredients necessary to prepare the order, then initiates a
reorder of ingredients and supplies when the level drops below a predeter-
mined value. In the restaurant business, there are opportunities for system
integrators, especially those with experience in the restaurant industry. The
economic risk is that low-volume, low-margin restaurants won’t be able to
compete.
The choice board system at restaurants at some Disney resorts, as well as
similar systems used in Europe, illustrate several points that most transaction
businesses have in common. Consider the old-fashioned speaker and micro-
phone system of ordering food popular in the 1950s. With the wired version,
a woman who wants a burger simply buzzes the order taker and orders her
meal by speaking into the tableside microphone. A few minutes later, a waiter
delivers the order and collects the cash or credit card. If the woman uses a
credit card or doesn’t have the correct change, then the waiter makes yet
another trip to the table. 
Even if the original order taker keyed the order into a computerized
restaurant management system, there are several important advantages to a
wireless scenario. First, if the wireless restaurant system is properly config-
ured, there’s no error-prone, dual entry of data. That is, once the waiter checks
off the customer’s selection on the wireless tablet with his stylus, the order is
entered into the restaurant system computer and displayed on the chef’s
screen. Second, the wireless restaurant management system acts like a choice
board on the wired Web.  When the waiter orders a meal, messages are sent to
the kitchen staff and the suppliers, which may be across the street from the
restaurant or in another state. In other words, when a customer orders a
burger, then the beef patty supplier is notified of a sale, as is the bakery. Every-
one in the supply chain is aware of the raw materials need to construct a
burger, and the suppliers know to replenish the restaurant’s supplies when
certain raw materials drop below a preset quantity. Third, record-keeping
overhead is reduced, since the wireless system tracks every transaction. In
addition, because only one or two wireless pads are used, there is a potential
cost savings over having to build and install dozens of wired tableside stations. 
Most importantly, and perhaps most paradoxically, the use of wireless
technology allows for more personal service with the same number of
employees. The one order taker is no longer hiding behind a speaker micro-
phone, but is out in front of the customers, smiling, and creating an air of trust
and, hopefully, loyalty. One final point is that, compared to the alternatives,
using a wireless pad to take orders looks cool—and customers will pay for
cool. At Disney, cool is almost expected. Similarly, witness the popularity of
the Apple iMac and G4 cube computers. People didn’t buy these systems
because they run Microsoft Word any better than a PC clone that sells for
$500 less; they bought the Apple products because of cool product design.
The same goes for the IBM NetVista. IBM’s ads for the NetVista, like Apple’s,
don’t tout computer speed or hard drive capacity, but focus on the “look.”
MONEY MATTERS
57

Another example of the value of “cool” is NEC’s 20-inch flat screen LCD
monitor. When the panel was first introduced, it was available in putty or
black, the only difference being color—and price. The black model listed for
about 15 percent more than the putty model—the price of cool.
Hotels. Mobile travelers with access can poll a specific area or hotel
chain for room rates and locations. Customers select a hotel, based on per-
sonal criteria, and the hotel then provides a detailed map or driving instruc-
tions. The transaction is recorded and automatically forwarded to the
customer’s company, along with billing information. The customer then
receives an electronic verification of his stay, including room number, before
he enters the hotel parking lot. Hotels not listed on the wireless Web will be
increasingly passed by, as more mobile travelers begin to rely on the wireless
Web for locating rooms. The opportunities for software developers, hardware
developers, and vertical integrators to provide these and other services is bal-
anced by the economic risk that the overhead and complexity of the initial
wireless system may be too great for all but the largest hotel chains.
Emergency Services. The wireless Web isn’t only for business and
leisure. It can provide necessary and, at times, lifesaving assistance. A “911”
equivalent can be established for cellular phones that not only pinpoints,
within a radius of about 500 feet, where the call originates but also the iden-
tity of the caller. Directions and prenotification to the nearest emergency
room can also be provided. The subscriber’s demographic information,
including electronic medical records, can be forwarded to the emergency
room for review before she arrives. In the area of emergency services, there are
opportunities for using wireless to create networks that connect hospital
units, ambulance services, and cellular phones, much like the mobile emer-
gency services. The economic risk is that the emergency service staff will be
turned off by having to rely on and carry yet another piece of equipment.
Media and Entertainment. The media and entertainment indus-
tries represent a large, untapped market for location and user-specific con-
nectivity. A variety of user-specified goods and services can be sold, including
interactive games, news and information services, music, gambling, electronic
ticketing services, and adult entertainment.
Strong sales of Nintendo’s Gameboy and Sony’s PSone mobile game
machines demonstrate that the wireless game market is significant. MP3
music downloads, video games, and other entertainment will be among the
largest revenue generators of wireless providers. Nokia ships games with
some of its wireless phone models. Some Ericsson phones sport a scaled-
down version of the Tetris game. In Finland, even extensive text-only interac-
tions with adventure games are the rage, as are jokes and dating services. 
Fortunately for game developers, most can leverage their expertise on
the PC and the wired Web into creating games for the wireless platforms. The
market for portable, pocketable entertainment devices includes school-age
children. There is the risk that unknown, unwired competitors will cannibal-
58
ETHER BUSINESS

ize sales of game consoles. Some analysts postulate that the telephone giants
could overtake the Segas and Nintendos of the world.
Retail.The huge brick-and-mortar retail industry, once thought to be at
risk from the dotComs, is uniquely positioned to benefit from technology.
There are virtually unlimited possibilities for integrating wireless commerce
with every retail operation. Because of the location and user specificity possi-
ble with wireless technology, companies like GeePS are offering to deliver tar-
geted sales messages to shoppers within the vicinity of a particular store. This
service can even be provided on a store-by-store or market-by-market basis.
Location-based marketing can be used to deliver messages to customers who
access them by wireless phonepagers and PDAs. In other words, they can
become part of an orchestrated promotion to reinforce advertising and pro-
mote customer loyalty.
Another wireless application is to employ the smart phones as digital wal-
lets. In other words, use the wireless phone’s memory to store and forward
information about purchases and demographics. An issue regarding the use
of cell phones in retail operations is that everyone’s user profile is still consid-
ered private. This is a negative for businesses and a positive for consumers.
Travel and Transport. The mobile professional will become virtually
inseparable from the wireless Web. For the mobile traveler, the ability to
check flight availability, make last-minute travel arrangements, and obtain the
local forecast, all translates to secondary gain for the airline industry. Happier
travelers travel more on a particular carrier. In the war for customers, airlines
that provide the best, easiest access to travel information win customer loy-
alty. Similarly, ancillary travel services that provide online guides for locating
restaurants, entertainment, and fuel represent additional financial opportuni-
ties. These specialized travel portals, paid for by the vendors they represent
on a per-transaction basis, vie with larger, horizontal portals for business.
Just as the wired Web has changed the airline reservation industry, with
discount tickets and last-minute ticketing available online, the Web is poised
to transform the online ticketing industry again. Consider that Southwest air-
lines alone sold over $725 million worth of tickets online in 1999, and in the
same period, United Airlines sold $268 million. These online Web sales fig-
ures represent more than a potential market for travelers with access to the
wireless Web.
In addition to supporting the business traveler, wireless communications
holds great potential for the commercial transportation industry as well. For
example, the Omnitracs system, developed by Qualcomm in the 1980s, was
the first satellite-based mobile communications and tracking system for the
transportation industry. It’s still used today to track and communicate with
over 300,000 commercial vehicles worldwide. With the system, trucking
companies can track each truck’s progress from pickup to drop-off, as well as
maintain real-time contact with drivers. The result is not only time and cost
savings. The degree of control and certainty that it enabled has opened up
MONEY MATTERS
59

new markets for the trucking industry, including accounts with manufactur-
ers that demand just-in-time delivery.
Banking and Finance. Online banking, one of the first transaction-
supporting services of the wired Web, is also one of the first services offered to
wireless Web users. Initiated by Japanese and European wireless service
providers, mobile banking promises to be a lucrative business for both finan-
cial institutions and the service providers that charge transaction pass-
through fees. Consider that Paine Webber had $140 billion or 33 percent of
total customer assets in online accounts in 1999. Similarly, Bank of America
had 14 percent of its customers, or 2.1 million clients, enrolled in online bank-
ing in 2000. 
Security Solutions Providers
One of the greatest challenges for the wireless industry to overcome is that of
security. Not only must the transactions be secure from eavesdropping, but
someone with a stolen wireless device must be prevented, through the use of
some type of personal identification verification system, from directing the
financial transactions of others. 
Wireless devices provide particular security challenges due to their
portability. They present an opportunity for someone with the appropriate
equipment to intercept or at least monitor communications between the
mobile unit and the base station. Companies that provide encryption tech-
nologies, such as Finland’s Sonera, stand to gain enormously, since every
secure mobile device requires security. Encryption makes even sensitive
transactions like stock trading and bank account management relatively safe
on wireless devices. Companies that develop other security measures, such as
personal identification verification through biometrics—the use of a
thumbprint to validate a credit transfer, for example—have opportunities as
well, as long as they can work within the confines of a cellular phone or PDA
form factor. The challenge for these companies is to provide secure transac-
tions on enough devices. Not only would successful attacks result in sensa-
tional news coverage but they would also undermine the integrity of cellular
phones in any financial transaction.
End-User Hardware Suppliers and Developers
As the number of features provided by a generation of cell phones is
superceded by the next, available at the same price or less, the EU will probably
enjoy a high device turnover rate. This pattern follows the PC model, where
faster, more powerful machines are always six months away, and devices are
obsolete the moment they’re turned on. Whether this is a form of planned
obsolescence on the manufacturers’ part, or a reflection of user expectations,
the result is a brisk market for hardware suppliers and developers.
60
ETHER BUSINESS

It is clear that the lure of continually increasing functionality will sell
more phones, following the PC model of producing faster and more powerful
machines. For example, early adopters of phones were quick to pick up analog
systems for safety reasons, especially for use while traveling. After customers
became familiar with cellular technology and began to rely on it for some day-
to-day communications, subtle differences in cell phone models began to
matter. Portability became a major factor, creating a demand for thin, light-
weight phones, such as the Motorola StarTac series. Clarity of communica-
tions became an issue, as well as convenience features such as caller ID and
other services normally found on wired phones. With clarity, caller ID, and
other services available on digital phones, old analog units were soon replaced
by digital models. 
Now the push is to provide Web access on the wireless Web. This move
requires that customers upgrade their existing cell phones again. For many
customers, the history of cell phone use in the United States represents a new
phone purchase every 12 to 18 months. This is a greater turnover than is
experienced in the PC industry, where CPU upgrades average every 18 to 36
months. 
Bigger, brighter screens are on the horizon. In addition, U.S. companies
like Texas Instruments and Intel are gearing up to produce chip sets for
mobile phones. Nokia and others are loosely following the PC model of creat-
ing continuous demand by introducing models that provide enough incre-
mental value that users will upgrade their existing equipment on a regular
basis. The risk that chip suppliers face is not being able to meet demand,
much the same way that periodic RAM shortages strangled PC sales.
Interface Developers
The various and varied displays on smart phones, PDAs, and two-way pagers
present a very different and difficult problem for interface designers. Interface
developers for the new wireless formats who can work around these difficulties
will be in demand in any company that wants to move onto the wireless Web.
In addition to graphic interface developers, there are classes of companies
that stand to benefit directly from the wireless Web. For example, as voice
recognition and synthesis become major components of the next-generation
cellular interface, the voice recognition software companies such as Lernout &
Hauspie, IBM, and Philips stand to gain considerably. In the United States,
Sprint PCS supports a service called voice commands, where a cellular phone
responds to a customer’s voice. Not only does the system handle commands
for up to almost 3000 numbers, but subscribers can edit their entries by voice
as well. This capability bypasses the limitations of the typical cell phone graph-
ical interface. The opportunities for these and other companies that offer user
interface components will increase as they move to a system that uses a thin
client architecture in which most of the processing is done on a server. 
MONEY MATTERS
61

Despite a long maturation curve, voice recognition is starting to take hold
in general computing and for users with specialized problems. One indication
of the new status this potential tool holds for the wireless Web is the quick
growth of Lernout & Hauspie, a major force in voice recognition software.
Despite subsequent managerial and financial turmoil, this Belgian firm went
from a tiny company headquartered in a trailer in the middle of a cow pasture
to a multibillion-dollar company with offices located worldwide in only a few
short years due to the increasing popularity of voice recognition technology.
Vertical Integrators
Vertical integrators in areas such as medicine, law, education, and trans-
portation have opportunities to leverage the standards established on the
wired Web and extend the legacy systems used in these areas. In medicine,
wireless technologies have been tried for years, with a very poor return on
investment. Fragile, expensive, nonstandard hardware was one limitation.
Another was the high cost, in part because each system was based on a pro-
prietary networking infrastructure and operating system. With the advent
of standardized hardware and Web connectivity, vertical integrators pro-
vide most of the tools needed to implement a wireless component for most
businesses. Unfortunately, vertical integrators could become entangled in
standards wars, resulting in extended implementation time and potential
failure.
Consider the economic benefit associated with integrating wireless Web
capabilities in law enforcement. When the next generation of cell phones
becomes commonplace, the FBI and other government agencies will be able
to monitor the location of the cell phone (and therefore the owner) at all
times. G3 phones are intended to be left on continuously, not just when the
subscriber wants to place a call, so a cell phone can be polled for its position at
any time. Such devices will provide cost savings to law enforcement agencies
in manpower and time when trying to locate a suspect. The economic risk to
law enforcement is minimal.
In the area of education, wireless devices can provide a means for students
and faculty to collaborate in real time, inside or outside the classroom. Stu-
dents can provide real-time feedback to a lecturer regarding level of interest,
relevance of content, and other suggestions that would allow the teacher to
modify her presentation accordingly. Similarly, real-time testing, requiring fre-
quent participation from students or listeners can gauge whether or not the
listeners are grasping the concepts. The result is a more attentive student
body and more data for analysis.
The advantage of wireless over a wired Web connection, given the cur-
rent pace of hardware development, is lower cost. Initial wireless educa-
tional systems are being targeted at schools, such as the project initiated by
MindSurf, a company started by Sylvan Learning Systems, Inc., and Aether
62
ETHER BUSINESS

Systems, Inc., to enable eLearning services over wireless devices. In addition
to charging for the programs themselves, these companies can charge
clients to train their personnel, initially through the cost-savings of provid-
ing on-site training. 
Wireless Enablers
Companies involved, directly or indirectly, with the two-way conversion of
information to and from wireless devices and networks will be in tremendous
demand as long as there is content on the wired Web that must be available on
the wireless Web. Wireless enablers allow a content provider such as a click-
and-mortar business or dotCom to maintain a single version of their informa-
tion and make it available on a variety of wireless platforms. Similarly, this
makes the process of transaction translation seamless for the restaurateur,
widget developer, or online bookseller. Given that millions of dotComs could
be potential customers for this service, this market seems like a low risk. The
more technical aspects of this technology are described in Chapter 5.
The downside for wireless enablers is that, as a stop-gap measure, they
have a limited life span. There are two developments that will eventually
negate the need for enablers. The first is the eventual appearance of auto-
mated software tools that provide enabling translation, especially Web sites
that provide real-time or ASP-style programming. The second, and most dev-
astating, is that once wireless networks and devices conform to one or two
standards, enablers will be competing directly against every ISP and ASP on
equal ground.
The major advantage of using a wireless enabler is that content providers
only have to maintain a single version of a document. For example, a medical
site that lists current drugs and prices for consumers doesn’t have to concern
itself with updating the price on multiple databases or Web pages each time
there is a change. A single entry takes care of every touch point, whether wire-
less or wired.
Pager Companies
For pager companies, the wireless Web breathes new life into a technology
that faces obliteration by the cellular phone industry. Thanks to interactive
email, two-way pagers have experienced a resurgence of interest in the United
States. Pagers have an edge over cellular phones in nonvoice applications, such
as email, and they typically have a superior keypad for entering short mes-
sages. Pagers, unlike cell phones, also enjoy virtually total coverage in the
United States The downside for pager companies is that, as more digital
phones have the ability to double as pagers, the overhead and inconvenience
of carrying and maintaining an additional electronic device will discourage
pager use. 
MONEY MATTERS
63

Advertising Industry
Advertising and eCommerce certainly have a place on the wired Web. As dot-
Coms quickly demonstrated on the wired Web, the shotgun banner ad
approach simply didn’t warrant the cost per thousand (CPM) requested by
the online advertising agencies. Personalized ads, made possible by Web sites
that either track user preferences with cookies or ask consumers outright for
their preferences, are more effective. 
Consider the value of knowing where a smart phone subscriber spends
her weekends. If, based on weekend calling or monitoring patterns, she is
known by the wireless portal operator to visit a particular mall a few miles
from her house, this information probably has considerable value to the shop
owners in the mall. Together with other subscriber demographics, such as
email address or cell phone number, marketing firms representing specific
stores in the mall could send directed advertising to the woman, in the form of
paper flyers, email messages, or a message on her cell phone. However, such
practices, while potentially lucrative, face potential opposition. There contin-
ues to be a hot debate on the rights of companies to create dossiers on con-
sumers without their knowledge and then sell the information to third
parties. 
While companies like DoubleClick received a lot of media attention for
the intentional use of consumers’ data gathered without their knowledge,
other companies, such as America Online, have maintained a low profile.
America Online, for example, maintains information on over 21 million sub-
scribers, including demographics, credit card numbers, and where they
spend their time within its service. Although AOL is not currently in the
business of selling consumer data, it sells names and addresses to bulk mailers,
and buys information about subscribers for targeted advertising. Some ser-
vice providers intentionally track subscriber movements, with their knowl-
edge, and sell the information to third parties. In return for the extensive
personal profiles that result, subscribers are given free Internet access. The
same model will extend to the wireless Web.
The diminutive smart phone screen does leave room for imaginative
advertising. Banner ads, where the name of a retail outlet is pasted across a
screen isn’t likely to be appreciated when the cell phone is clipped to a busi-
nessperson’s waistband or carried around in a briefcase. A better option is to
use proximity-based multimodal advertisements. For example, when a busi-
nessman is within two blocks of a McDonalds, an audible advertisement not-
ing a special is announced over his cell phone. This system assumes a
user-definable filter that accepts only certain messages; otherwise driving
down the highway with a cell phone turned on would be akin to listening to a
radio station that featured nothing but advertisements. For advertisers, it’s a
boon, simply because customers are most receptive when they’re looking for
something specific—like lunch. That’s the time for a restaurant such as
64
ETHER BUSINESS

McDonalds to pay for an advertisement. The success of just-in-time, location-
specific advertisements will depend on changes in the billing structure for cell
phones. In the United States, most cellular users are charged for airtime,
whether or not they initiated the call. Like faxes and collect calls from vendors,
subscriber-funded advertisements from a cell phone are not appreciated. 
Stockholders
As in the wired Web, all of the current and projected activity surrounding the
wireless Web is certain to provide investors with an opportunity to profit from
the stock market. As the dotCom experience has also illustrated, however,
there is ample opportunity to lose money as well. The stocks to watch include
the telecom giants and infrastructure builders, which should experience mod-
est growth for the foreseeable future. As is frequently the case with a brick-and-
mortar firm adding a wired touch point, the traditional business profitability
may be temporarily depressed due to the start-up cost of a dotCom operation.
For example, Staples, the office supply chain, initially saw its profitability fall
because of the investment required in its Staples.com touch point.
Customers
Customers—everyone from schoolchildren toting candy-colored PDAs to
executives sporting the lightest, thinnest cell phones—are the ultimate bene-
ficiaries of the developments in wireless technology. For example, school-age
children who have not been exposed to the Internet will have affordable, easy
access to the Web. Executives will have affordable, multimedia communica-
tions on the Web. In addition, there are hundreds of thousands of field service
engineers who need access to mission-critical information on demand from
any location. And many stockholders and employees will benefit indirectly
from some phase of the wireless boom.
The wireless Web value chain, arranged in order of increasing customer
value, includes network, device, and infrastructure developers, as well as cus-
tomer services and solution integrators. At each point in the value chain, tech-
nology, people, and resources come together to provide solutions that
ultimately benefit customers—and virtually everyone is a customer.
MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS, AND ALLIANCES
The use of cell phones in the United States is less than half that of Europe and
Japan combined. For the cash-rich European and Japanese telecom giants and
service providers, the U.S. market represents a huge, untapped opportunity for
expansion and globalization. The possibility of adding U.S. companies, such as
VoiceStream Wireless Corp., to their future subscriber base is extremely attrac-
tive; but that base will only be available within a finite window of opportunity.
MONEY MATTERS
65

Dates for the anticipated next-generation wireless network launch vary
from country to country, with the United States trailing Japan, Australia,
Western Europe, and Hong Kong. The issues aren’t simply technological, but
political as well. For example, the anticipated date of between 2002 and 2003
for next-generation wireless technology to appear in the United States
assumes that licenses can be obtained, and that the spectrum can actually be
used. However, in the United States, many broadcasters hold licenses for
spectrum designated for the next-generation system until 2006.
The standards adopted by the United States and other countries that lag
behind Western Europe and Japan will be defined by the technologies used
in those countries. As such, European telecom companies, such as Deutsche
Telekom, are bidding over $20,000 per subscriber for U.S. territories. While
this overvaluation seems ludicrous at first, if the potential subscriber base is
considered, the investment drops down to a more reasonable $250 to $650
per subscriber. More importantly, the potential to significantly alter the stan-
dards mix in the United States also positions the right investors to secure
global dominance. That is, owning major U.S. markets would allow a Euro-
pean company to promote GSM, the European wireless standard used by
only 10 percent of U.S. subscribers—primarily VoiceStream subscribers. 
Similarly, if NTT DoCoMo were to win major telecom positions in the
United States, it could use the leverage of the U.S. market to extend its stan-
dard worldwide. NTT DoCoMo is forming alliances with U.S. companies
such as AT&T Wireless Group, Microsoft, Sun Microsystems, and investing
heavily in telecom companies in Hong Kong and Europe. Its aim is to spread
its new standard, a direct competitor to GSM called W-CDMA, worldwide. In
this regard, the United States represents the swing vote, with enough poten-
tial customers to make the European or Japanese standard the global one.
Although international competition may not bode well for U.S. compa-
nies such as Sprint, Verizon, WorldCom, and SBC Communications, for sub-
scribers, the real or perceived threat of competition will have a positive
impact. Domestic companies will have to provide services enjoyed by Euro-
pean and Japanese subscribers in order to compete. And, if a European tele-
com gained control of the U.S. market, then U.S. subscribers would have
access to technology that’s faster than what’s available in the domestic mar-
ket. For any of this to come to pass, however, European and Japanese telecom
companies will have to merge with, acquire, or form alliances with U.S. com-
panies that have access to spectrum licenses.
Mergers and acquisitions are by no means limited to international com-
panies preying on the disorganized U.S. market. For example, chip manufac-
turer Intel has been diversifying by acquiring wireless companies. Similarly,
WorldCom has become a powerhouse primarily through buying other com-
panies and making more of their assets than their previous owners. However,
regulators in the United States and Europe have a habit of attenuating the
megamerger mentality.
66
ETHER BUSINESS
TEAMFLY

Given the turmoil in the wireless market, a number of companies have
decided to minimize their risk by forming alliances, similar to the ones used in
the PC arena, where standardized components and bus architectures paved
the way for inexpensive cards and peripherals. 
THE EURASIAN ADVANTAGE
In evaluating the economics of the wireless Web, it’s impossible to ignore the
lead Japan and Europe have over the United States. Europe and Asia are the
leaders in wireless technology, and both are well positioned in emerging wire-
less markets. As the European economy pulls ahead of the cooling U.S. econ-
omy, the United States is left in the uncomfortable position of playing
catch-up in the world of the wireless Web. Although the United States does-
n’t compete directly with companies like Deutsch Telecom for subscribers in
Germany, the wireless Web is a global business, and what affects Deutsch
Telecom affects U.S. businesses, too. Foreign investment in the United States
can dramatically alter the makeup of the U.S. network infrastructure, from
determining which companies will own and run the infrastructure to the
communications standards used with cellular handsets. 
In the evolution of the wired Internet, the domestic infrastructure was in
place before there was a critical mass of content and applications to make the
Web a commercially viable entity. However, on the wireless Web, the oppo-
site condition holds true; the domestic wireless infrastructure is in a relative
shambles. But even though device-specific content lags behind what cus-
tomers in Japan and Europe have access to, there is a storehouse of content in
digital form residing on the wired Web. Unfortunately, this information is out
of reach of most wireless devices in the United States. In addition, the infra-
structure lags behind where it needs to be in terms of bandwidth and con-
nectivity to support the interactivity and content that wired Web users are
accustomed to.
The access to capital, engineering excellence, and the technological lead
of Japan, Germany (and other European countries), and Finland is difficult to
ignore, despite the historical lead of the United States in exploiting technolo-
gies in the marketplace. On the bright side, telecom companies in the United
States can learn a lot from observing the international markets. 
Consider Japan, the second largest mobile phone market. NTT
DoCoMo of Japan has the advantage of experience with millions of sub-
scribers on its I-Mode phones. One reason I-Mode is so popular is that there
are over 20,000 Web sites that have been specially modified so they can be
viewed on a small phone screen. From an economic perspective, not only is I-
Mode attracting additional revenue, but I-Mode phones, used by about a
quarter of DoCoMo’s customers, bring in substantially higher revenue per
customer compared to phones sold without the I-Mode’s interactive features.
In addition, DoCoMo makes money by charging a transaction fee of about 10
MONEY MATTERS
67

percent for every eCommerce transaction. This approach, which has been
highly successful for DoCoMo, is in sharp contrast to some of the U.S. tele-
com carriers who are positioning themselves to be gatekeepers to the Inter-
net. DoCoMo’s approach, an apparently successful one, is to make it easy for
outside Web developers to make their sites I-Mode friendly. The more Web
sites that support I-Mode, the more valuable I-Mode phones are to con-
sumers, and the more I-Mode customers sign up for the DoCoMo service.
International activity isn’t limited to the EU and Japan. Koreans enjoy cell
phones with services that surpass what most Americans have experienced.
Cell phone activities in countries such as Korea and Taiwan will become
increasingly significant as companies from these and other countries enter
the international market. From the consumers’ perspective, this should be a
welcome change, and wireless device prices should plunge overnight. Unfor-
tunately, many domestic producers will be unable to compete on price or
quality. Similarly, for U.S. telecommunications companies hoping to invest in
foreign companies or governments, China, Eastern Europe, Australia, and
developing countries represent opportunities as well. As a result, the market
for some of these players is largely uncertain and fraught with political prob-
lems that will likely take many years to resolve. For this reason, the leaders in
the wireless world (Europe, Japan, and, in third place, the United States) have
the potential to define standards and develop the technology to the point that
deploying a wireless system in another country will simply be a purchase
decision on the consumers’ part.
ETHER-COMMERCE WRAP-UP
This chapter ends Part I on ether-business for the wireless Web. The discus-
sion underlined the relative position of the United States in the global econ-
omy of the wireless Web, and looked at how important it is for the United
States to follow economic developments of the wireless Web in Europe and
Asia. It also emphasized the relative importance of government regulations
and licensing to the survival of wireless Web companies—a sharp contrast to
the relative free-for-all on the wired Web.
Part II, Wireless Wonders, introduces the myriad technologies related to
the wireless Web, with a focus on the practical aspects of these technologies
from an executive decision-maker’s perspective. Chapters 4 through 6 will
provide an overview of the technologies involved, with just enough technical
detail to give any CEO or CIO the knowledge they need to speak intelligently
and confidently with vendors and executives in the telecommunications
industries, and to make informed decisions about which technologies and
approaches make sense for their business goals. 
68
ETHER BUSINESS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The wireless Web may well be the next “new thing,” but cashing in on the
euphoria is going to take more than securing a highly desirable URL. Unlike
the wired Web, the telecommunications networks that will support ether-
commerce are highly policed and subject to local, state, regional, and federal
legislation. Claiming territory on the wireless Web will be much less like the
western gunfight of the dotCom era and more like a dentist appointment.
Companies willing to pay the price for RF spectrum licenses, technology
licenses, and the hearts of customers stand to win big. 
In addition to the obvious winners in a wireless utopia—the telecom
giants, infrastructure builders, and wireless handset manufacturers—others
also stand to gain. Those that should benefit directly and indirectly include
two-way pager companies, which have been given a new lease on life with the
advent of Web connectivity; the millions of existing dotComs; portal owners,
such as Sprint Wireless; a variety of transaction-based businesses, from travel
and banking to ticketing; and the entire advertising industry, from dotComs
to newspapers to radio. Of course, the ultimate beneficiaries, subscribers, will
determine if the services provided by the new wireless technology fill their
needs for instant gratification and time and cost savings.
Significant funds will change hands in the many mergers, acquisitions,
and alliances. Enormous sums of money are being spent on next-generation
wireless licenses in Europe and, to a lesser extent, in the United States The
United States is playing catch-up to both Europe and Asia, where money,
engineering excellence, a technologic lead, and a hot European economy are
pushing the wireless Web forward. The immature domestic infrastructure in
the United States also limits its global influence. Globally, a short-term lack of
content and a wireless handset hardware shortage temporarily limits demand
for and access to the wireless Web, but it also presents a huge opportunity for
content developers and translators and hardware manufacturers. 
In addition to those who secure the appropriate licenses, the economic
winners in ether-commerce will be the companies with the largest sub-
scriber base, right mix of customers, quality management, and the ability to
react to changes in the marketplace in Internet time.
MONEY MATTERS
69

This page intentionally left blank.

Part Two
WIRELESS WONDERS
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

For the things we have to learn before we can do them, 
we learn by doing them.
Aristotle
INTRODUCTION
When the telephone was first introduced to the general public, long distance
meant calling the next town.  Because electronic amplifiers weren’t yet avail-
able, the feat of sending a feeble audio signal over a distance of 10 to 20 miles
was accomplished by using specially constructed telephones and, most
importantly, high-quality, low-loss cables to connect one special phone to the
next. Instead of signals running over barbed wire, from farmhouse to farm-
house with local phone traffic, long-distance calls traveled over cables that
were carefully constructed of low-resistance copper wire. Furthermore, the
cables were insulated from—and supported by—tall poles designed to keep
them off of the moist earth, away from branches and anything else that might
interfere with or attenuate the audio signals they carried. 
Even with this level of attention paid to minimizing the amount of audio
signal lost in the phone system, calling someone in another state, much less
across the country, was out of the question with unamplified point-to-point
cabling. To get a message from one end of a state or region to another, human-
operated relays were established. An operator—often the town postman or
other official—took a written message from a customer, called the next town,
and dictated the message to an operator, who in turn called the operator in the
next town down the line, and so on. This process was continued until the oper-
ator in the town of the person intended to receive the message was reached.
This arduous process changed with the advent of electronic amplifiers used to
73
4
Network and 
Wireless Technologies
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

boost the audio signal every 20 miles, or more. These “repeaters” made it pos-
sible for an audio signal to travel from one end of the continent to the other
without human intervention.
The development of long-distance wireless communications in the
United States has a similar history. Even as late as the 1970s, it was common
practice for military personnel stationed overseas to contact their family and
friends in the United States via human-operated relays. For example, a private
in the U.S. Army stationed in West Germany wishing to contact relatives in
San Francisco—but without the funds to pay for a long-distance call—would
place a local call to a radio operator in West Germany. The operator would
contact an operator in, say, New Jersey, who would in turn contact a radio
operator in San Francisco. The radio operator in New Jersey could hear the
other two operators, but the operators in San Francisco and West Germany
could not hear each other directly. By using specially designed equipment to
connect his radio to the public telephone network, the operator in San Fran-
cisco would call the private’s relatives and connect the two parties. Of course,
not only could the three operators hear everything that was said between the
private and his relatives, so could anyone else with a shortwave receiver.
Unfortunately, this system of manually relaying or repeating messages
from one station to the next, while providing a humanitarian and inexpensive
service to military personnel and others stationed overseas, was unreliable.
The reliability of long-distance, terrestrial-based wireless communications,
like the weather, is difficult to predict. In the high frequency (HF) bands, which
are frequencies between 3 and 30 million cycles of a radio wave or megahertz
(MHz), and for distances greater than line of sight (about 100 mi or 166 km),
communications depends on the state of the ionosphere. The efficiency with
which the ionized atmosphere or ionosphere acts as a mirror for HF radio sig-
nals is affected by the sun’s ultraviolet light, the time of day, the exact frequency
of the RF signal, the season of the year, and even the sunspot cycle. 
The reliance on point-to-point HF (3 to 30 MHz) wireless technology for
global communications diminished rapidly with the advent of automatic
satellite relay stations, the proliferation of wired transcontinental communi-
cations cables and networks, and the demand for rapid, reliable, personal com-
munications. Today, privates stationed overseas use their calling cards and
wireless phones that operate at 800 MHz or above to make long-distance
calls home, and generals use secure direct satellite links to the Pentagon.
Except for the security precautions used with the generals’ communica-
tions link, the technologies in the two communications examples are virtu-
ally identical. Wireless communications over any appreciable distance is
rarely totally wireless. Even a cell phone call across town to another cell
phone typically involves a wired communications link between the two cell
stations handling the calls for each subscriber. 
The cell is the fixed transmitter and receiver that sends and receives mes-
sages from wireless mobile phones, and connects these phones with the pub-
74
WIRELESS WONDERS

lic telephone network and, more recently, with the Internet. Few “wired”
communications of appreciable distance are fully wire based. For example, a
transcontinental phone call from the United States to Europe might entail a
hybrid system of a microwave link from one bank of a river to the next or
across a mountain range with a satellite link and perhaps a laser link between
skyscrapers. (Microwave communications are generally considered to use the
frequency band between about 1 and 20 gigahertz (GHz). Whether a call
contains voice, data, or both, there’s likely to be a mixture of wired and wire-
less technologies involved.
This chapter begins Part 2, “Wireless Wonders.” Chapters 4, 5, and 6 pre-
sent a synopsis of the major technologies involved in the wireless Web,
including topics from networking and RF communications principles to
wireless Web communications protocols and software development tools.
The focus is on the practical aspects of the technologies involved, and on pro-
viding a ready reference for the alphabet soup jargon the reader is likely to
encounter in contracts and advertisements. The glossary at the end of this
book provides an added resource for deciphering the technological informa-
tion involved. 
Readers who are fluent in wireless communications and networking
technologies may wish to simply review the Executive Summary sections at
the end of this and the following two chapters. They can then skip ahead to
Part 3, “Convergence,” which describes the convergence of the technologic,
business, and political forces in the development of the wireless Web.
THE PHYSICS OF COMMUNICATIONS
A scene from Funny Lady starts with a ruthless businessman interviewing
prospective painting companies for the job of refinishing several hundred
chairs in his nightclub. As part of the interview process, he has the fastest,
most skilled painter from each company come to his nightclub and paint one
chair—at their cost. The impeccably dressed owner glares at his stopwatch as
each painter carefully brushes on glossy black enamel, taking care not to drip
any on the white dropcloth. The businessman has done his homework—at
least on the financial end of things—and he knows the going rate for painters.
He takes the salesman of the winning company aside and offers him the going
rate for painting his chairs, based on the painter’s winning time. The salesman
begrudgingly accepts, remarking that the owner really knows his business.
Confident that he has negotiated a winning contract, the penny-pinching
nightclub owner walks away, off to attend to some other detail of his business. 
The salesman walks away as well, even more confident. He pats the
painter on the back and compliments him on a job well done. The salesman
then asks the painter to get some help to take the chairs out back where he
can spray paint them. The nightclub owner is unaware of the technology
available to the paint company. His negotiations are based on the cost of two
NETWORK AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
75

man-weeks of labor, for a job that requires only a few man-hours of work—
with the right technology.
Any technology, whether a paint sprayer or cellular communications sys-
tem, is simply a consistent way of producing meaningful results. It happens
that most technologies, no matter how complex, are built on a foundation of
basic principles. For example, the technologies involved in communications,
whether between two neighbors talking on a phone to each other or
between a NASA astronaut and Mission Control, are based on a handful of
physical principles. These principles, outlined below, include signals and
information content, operating frequency, modulation, bandwidth, and
noise. With wireless communications, there are additional principles to con-
sider, including field strength, antennas, receiver sensitivity and selectivity, sig-
nal absorption, signal propagation, and interference. In order to avoid the
nightclub owner’s mistake, it’s important for a corporate decision maker to at
least be familiar with these underlying principles so she can intelligently
select the approach most appropriate for her company’s needs.
Signals and Information Content
At the simplest level, communications is about moving energy from one
place to another. This energy—a beam of light, a burst of RF energy, or the
sound of a drum beating—when sent in a controlled way, can serve as a signal
capable of imparting information to the receiver. Of course, the energy sent
from a sender or transmitter to a human or electronic receiver takes on mean-
ing only if the signals follow a mutually agreed-upon language—a standard
syntax and character set—and a protocol or set of rules regarding how the lan-
guage is used. The amount of information that can be conveyed by an RF sig-
nal is a function of the operating frequency, the bandwidth of the
communications channel, the manner in which the signal is generated, the
error correction and compression schemes used (if any), and the amount of
noise in the communications system. 
Operating Frequency
The operating frequency is the quantitative description of the RF wave used
to carry information, often referred to as the carrier frequency. The operating
frequency ranges from 10 to 20 Hz used for submarine communications to
microwave signals used to communicate with satellites. For example, many
first- and second-generation cell phones in the United States operate at a fre-
quency of about 800 MHz. Because frequency allocations by the FCC
started at the lower end of the spectrum to contend with the crowding in the
AM broadcast bands, increasingly higher frequencies tend to be allocated to
new services. As such, many new services operate in the ultra-high frequen-
cies (UHF) of 300 MHz to 3 GHz and super-high frequencies (SHF) of 3 to
76
WIRELESS WONDERS
TEAMFLY

30 GHz) bands, where 1 GHz is equal to 1000 MHz. However, even these
bands are crowded. For example, the personal wireless system called Blue-
tooth operates at 2.4 GHz, which is in the same band allocated for industrial,
scientific, and medical (ISM) applications. 
Since the UHF and SHF frequencies used for wireless phone communi-
cations are not normally reflected back to earth by the ionosphere but travel
off into space, terrestrial communications is limited to line-of-sight distances
under ideal conditions. As such, the potential for a wireless phone service in
the United States to interfere with a wireless service of any type in Europe or
Japan is minimal. It follows that the international governing bodies who nego-
tiate international agreements on frequency allocation are more concerned
with the lower frequencies that can traverse the globe than they are with
those used for line-of-sight communications. This stance is reflected in the dif-
ferent frequency assignments for cellular services in Japan, Europe, and the
United States. For example, the European GSM system operates in the 1.8-
GHz band, whereas U.S. cellular and PCS services occupy the 800-MHz, 1.7-
GHz, and 2.3-GHz bands. This lack of a global frequency standard means that
for a European communications company to be successful in capturing the
U.S. market it would still have to deal with dual-band phones because the fre-
quencies licensed for use by the United States and Europe are different—
even for the same type of service. 
Modulation
In order to impart information to a receiver, an RF wave must be varied
through a process called modulation. Modulation commonly involves chang-
ing the amplitude (intensity), frequency (cycles per second), or phase
(rhythm) of a beam of light or radio signal in accordance with the information
intended to be communicated to a receiver. Amplitude modulation (AM)
and frequency modulation (FM) are used in broadcast radio throughout
most of the world.
One of the key distinctions in defining modulation is whether it’s accom-
plished through analog or digital means. The majority of wireless phones in
use in the United States use analog modulation techniques because of the
huge analog legacy systems that span the country. To use the new digital ser-
vices, many cell phones in the United States are dual-mode devices, capable of
working with either digital or analog networks. These phones default to ana-
log services if there are no digital services available. Most modern cell phones
and all PCS phones are completely digital. 
Bandwidth
One of the basic physical principles of communications, and the focus of 
virtually every wireless company that is looking to the next generation of
NETWORK AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
77

wireless systems, is bandwidth. In the context of the wireless Web, band-
width is a measure of the information-carrying capacity of a communications
system. Note that bandwidth applies to an entire communications system,
since the bandwidth of a system is limited by the software or hardware com-
ponent in the communications chain with the narrowest bandwidth. The
more information that has to be transferred from one location to another, the
greater the bandwidth requirement of the communications system.
Bandwidth is commonly expressed in bits per second (bps), where a bit is
equal to a binary unit of information—a “0” or a “1.” Dividing the number of
bits/second by 10 provides an approximation of the equivalent number of
characters per second. For example, 10 bps is equivalent to about one charac-
ter per second. Images require much more bandwidth than text. 
Where bandwidth and the wireless Web are concerned, a picture really
is worth a thousand words—or more. As in the wired Web, it seems inevitable
that everyone wishing to work with graphically rich content on the Web will
require more bandwidth than they have access to (or can afford). The pic-
tures, video sequences, and music that appear on a typical Web site require
much greater bandwidth than even lengthy text-only email messages. The
desire to download and share music and images across the Internet is the dri-
ving force behind DSL and Cable Modem use on the wired Internet and next-
generation (G3 and above) wireless technologies.
Bandwidth and speed are often used synonymously. A high-speed con-
nection is by necessity a high-bandwidth one. However, a high-bandwidth
system, though capable of handling high-speed communications, may not be
used to capacity because of some nontechnical constraint, such as licensing.
The bandwidth of wireless systems is usually measured in Kilobits per sec-
ond (KBps) or even Megabits per second (MBps), corresponding to sending or
receiving a thousand or a million 0’s and 1’s per second, respectively.
Primarily because of the work of C. E. Shannon, a scientist working at Bell
Laboratories in the 1940s, it’s now understood exactly how bandwidth and
the maximum amount of information that can be communicated are interre-
lated. Shannon discovered that a signal—whether a human voice, MP3-
encoded music, or streaming video on the Web—requires a medium that
provides a bandwidth equal to about double the highest frequency of the
information to be communicated. Often, this information is processed or
manipulated in a way that minimizes the bandwidth requirement without
losing too much of the original information. For example, telephones are
designed to carry voice frequencies only up to about 1500 Hz, even though
the speech of most adults contains frequencies up to 5000 or 6000 Hz. 
Because bandwidth is so precious, engineers and physicists have toiled for
countless hours to determine how to squeeze as much data as possible
through a connection with a given bandwidth. Fortunately, human speech is
full of redundancies, including pauses, ums and ahs, and repetitions, all of
which can be removed or compressed to increase information throughput.
78
WIRELESS WONDERS

There are also redundant variations in the loudness or amplitude of speech
that can be used to reduce bandwidth requirements. A variety of data com-
pression algorithms are available to minimize the bandwidth requirements
and allow content to be sent and received across the wireless Web that would
otherwise be impractical.
Voice frequencies used for public telephone communications are lim-
ited to a band of between 300 and 1500 Hz, corresponding to a bandwidth
requirement of only 1500 Hz x 2 or 3000 Hz. In contrast, if the full range of
human speech were used, the bandwidth requirement would be 6000 Hz x
2 or 12,000 Hz. In other words, limiting the bandwidth of the speech signal
to 3000 Hz allows four channels to exist in the space that would have been
occupied by the higher-fidelity signal. 
This limited bandwidth of the phone system is one reason that “on-hold”
music sounds so miserable over the phone; all of the higher frequencies above
about 1500 Hz are cut off. In addition, the 3000-Hz limit also accounts for the
slow progression of online modem connection speeds, from 300 to 1200 to
9600 to 14,400 to 28,800 and finally 56,000 (56K) bits per second. The current
maximum modem speed over regular telephone lines, 56K bps is only possible
because of elaborate, high-speed compression and error-correcting communica-
tions techniques that were perfected and standardized over several years.
Signal Loss
No matter how carefully constructed the communications system, signals
are eventually degraded and attenuated. Every cable and connection is associ-
ated with signal loss. Infrared signals are absorbed or reflected by a piece of
cloth or paper, and RF signals are attenuated by walls. Eventually, unless an
amplifier is used appropriately and in the correct part of the signal path, a sig-
nal will be lost; that is, become indiscernible from noise. Recall that the old
phone systems were limited to 10 or 20 miles primarily because of signal loss,
even with high-quality phone cables. 
Digital systems are somewhat better than analog systems at maintaining
signal integrity, in part because distortions aren’t added to the signal with each
stage of amplification, as is the case with analog signals. With an analog ampli-
fier, the background noise is amplified along with the desired signal. In addi-
tion, distortion and noise are added to the desired signal because of the
limitations of the technology.
Noise
Unwanted, meaningless data, due to random electrical fluctuations or other fac-
tors, are an inescapable component of communications. Electrical noise can be
due to natural disturbances, such as lightning or manmade sources, such as the
operation of a car engine. Even the vibration of molecules at room temperature
NETWORK AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
79

in everyday objects contributes to electrical noise. Most wireless devices, from
cell phone receivers to home audio receivers are designed to work with noise—
as long as it’s considerably lower in strength than the communications signal.
The relationship between the strength of the desired signal and that of the back-
ground noise is commonly referred to as the signal-to-noise (s/n) ratio. The
higher the s/n ratio, the better. Digital communications systems, such as the
second-generation cellular phone system in the United States, are less affected
by noise than analog systems. This is due in part to a variety of error correction
and regeneration processes that can be applied to digital signals.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS BASICS
Building on the physics of communications, the next step is to understand the
characteristics specific to wireless. It’s important to note that, from a communi-
cations perspective, it doesn’t matter if information flows through a cable run
from Boston to San Francisco, in a beam of IR light between a TV remote con-
trol and a TV receiver, or in an RF signal beamed from a satellite to a satellite TV
dish. The principles of information content, modulation, noise, and bandwidth
apply equally. However, wireless communications involves a few additional
technologies and principles not normally associated with wired communica-
tions, including antennas, the concept of field strength, receiver sensitivity and
selectivity, absorption and propagation of RF signals, and interference.
Field Strength
The intensity of a radio signal emitted by an antenna or other radiator, com-
monly called the field strength, falls off with the square of distance from the
source. That is, assuming there are no obstructions between a transmitter
and a receiver, doubling the distance between a transmitter and a wireless
PDA results in a drop in the field strength of the signal to (1/2)2 or 1/4 of the
original value. The more powerful the signal fed to the antenna, the greater
the field strength created by the antenna and, all else being equal, the greater
the operating range of the communications system. For those users con-
cerned with the potential health effects of cellular and PCS phone use, the
relationship between field strength and distance means that doubling the dis-
tance between the antenna and their head—through the use of a headset or
by using a car window or rooftop-mounted antenna—reduces the field
strength to 1/4 of the original value.
Antennas
The wire or other apparatus used to radiate and receive radio waves from
space has several important properties: radiation pattern, efficiency, selectiv-
ity, and gain. The radiation pattern for the short vertical antenna found on
80
WIRELESS WONDERS

most cell phones is normally omnidirectional in the horizontal plane. The
radiation pattern for the fixed, tower, or rooftop-mounted cell antenna is usu-
ally omnidirectional in the horizontal plane as well, but may be directional
depending on the proximity of adjacent cells. If one cell is likely to cause inter-
ference with a neighboring cell, the radiation pattern can be directed away
from the neighboring cell with special antenna designs. Similarly, a satellite
transmitter antenna may be focused broadly on a particular region of the con-
tinent, but the receiving dish antenna is usually tightly focused on the satel-
lite’s signal. Terrestrial microwave links typically employ two highly focused
dish antennas for security and for the increased signal strength—referred to in
relative terms as gain or in absolute terms as effective radiated power (ERP)—
provided by the dish antenna design.
The efficiency of an antenna as a radiator of energy, and as a receiver of RF
energy from space, is related to the physical size of the antenna relative to the
operating frequency. For optimum transmitting and receiving efficiency, the
length of the antenna on a handheld phone should be some multiple of 1/4 of
the wavelength of the operating frequency. Actually, the minimum effective
wavelength of an antenna is 1/2wavelength. In the case of a cell phone or wireless
PDA, the metal chassis of a handheld phone and, to some extent, the hand of the
user, form the other 1/4wavelength of the antenna. That is, together, the 1/4-wave
antenna and the chassis-human holder create a 1/2-wavelength antenna.
Wavelength and frequency are related by the formula:
wavelengthmeters  frequencyMHz  300
where wavelength is measured in meters and frequency is expressed in mega-
hertz. The 300 represents the speed of light or any other electromagnetic
wave, such as a cellular radio signal, in space. That is, regardless of the fre-
quency, a radio wave will travel approximately 300,000,000 m/s through
space. Since the frequency is expressed in MHz in this equation, the speed of
radio waves traveling through space is represented by the figure 300.
For example, if the operating frequency of a wireless PDA is 300 MHz,
then, by the formula above, the wavelength equals 1 m, since 1 (meter) 300
(MHz)  300. That is, in 1 s, the wireless PDA would generate 300 million
electromagnetic waves, each 1 m in length. If the PDA’s frequency were 600
MHz, then in 1 s it would generate 600 million electromagnetic waves, each
1/2 m in length. 
Based on the above formula, at 300 MHz the theoretical or electrical
wavelength is 1 m. At 900 MHz, one wavelength is 1/3m, and a 1/4-wavelength
antenna would be 1/4 of 1/3 m or 8 cm (3 in). Although the physical length of
an antenna is 2 to 3 percent shorter than the theoretical or electrical length, at
800 MHz, the frequency used by most domestic cell phones, the difference
between electrical and physical length is negligible. The optimum physical
length for a 1/4-wavelength antenna for 800-MHz cell phones is about 9 cm
NETWORK AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
81

(31/2 in). Adding multiples of 1/4 wavelength to the antenna length has the
effect of focusing the radiated energy in the horizontal plane, parallel to the
ground, where it can do the most good. Radiating energy above or below the
horizontal plane, that is, where the cells are located, is simply sending energy
into space or into the ground. 
The commercial relevance of optimum physical antenna length is that,
because of differences in the cellular operating frequencies used in Europe,
Japan, and the United States, there is an added cost to manufacturing anten-
nas for specific markets. In other words, not only must wireless phone manu-
facturers contend with differences in the electronics contained in cell phones
destined for different markets, but the physical packaging (antenna length,
for example) must change as well. Even in the domestic market, antennas
designed for 800-MHz cell phones aren’t suitable for 900-MHz PCS use. This
difference applies to the fixed wireless base antennas, as well as to those used
with handheld phones. For consumers, this means that moving from a cell to
a PCS service provider entails changing their car phone antenna to a shorter
900-MHz model, as well as replacing their phone unit.
In addition to the simple vertical antenna found on cell phones, there are
a variety of complex configurations, such as dish antennas, which have their
own constraints on efficiency and radiation patterns. Many of these larger
configurations are associated with directivity, gain, and a greater degree of
selectivity, compared to the simple 1/4-wavelength antennas used on hand-
held cell phones. Directivity is the ability to create greater field strength in
one direction compared to another on transmit, and to receive signals with
greater efficiency in one direction compared to another. Using a vertical
antenna longer than 1/4 wave—a 5/8-wavelength antenna, for example—pro-
vides gain over a 1/4-wave antenna because the signal strength is focused in a
narrower beam. Multielement antennas, such as the aesthetically vacant TV
antennas that graced many urban rooftops prior to the introduction of cable
TV, also provide gain. Dish antennas can have enormous gain and directivity,
allowing secure terrestrial communications as well as terrestrial-satellite com-
munications using minimal power and receiver sensitivity. For example, Qual-
comm’s Omnitracs satellite-based mobile communications and tracking
system relies on truck rooftop-mounted dish antennas to maintain real-time
contact with drivers. 
The selectivity of an antenna is a function of how well it responds to the
frequency of the desired signals and how well it rejects others. More selective
antenna designs are an obvious advantage in a metropolitan area where there
is an abundance of potentially interfering RF signals from other services. Man-
ufacturers typically offer a selection of omnidirectional and directional anten-
nas to provide coverage patterns that meet the specific requirements of a
particular installation.
Since wavelength is inversely related to operating frequency, the use of
higher operating frequencies allows for shorter, lighter, less obtrusive anten-
82
WIRELESS WONDERS

nas, without compromising on the efficiency or operating range of a wireless
PDA or phone. Not only are small antennas necessary for practical mobile
communications but small, unobtrusive, fixed cellular antennas can be
placed throughout a city—on rooftops, atop telephone poles, and along high-
ways—without spoiling the view. 
At the VHF (30 to 300 MHz) frequencies used for broadcast TV and
other services, antennas may need to be several feet in length for optimum
efficiency. An efficient antenna system, especially for transmitting, is critical
for a handheld cellular phone or wireless PDA in order to provide adequate
range with the minimum power (and therefore the minimum battery drain)
that’s consistent with reliable communications.
Receiver Sensitivity and Selectivity
Two interrelated qualities that describe the receiver component of wireless
devices are sensitivity and selectivity. The sensitivity value indicates the ability
of a receiver to pick up weak signals. All else being equal, a more sensitive
receiver will be able to pick up a signal a longer distance from the source. Both
sensitivity and selectivity are desirable characteristics of a receiver. However, a
more sensitive receiver may also be more susceptible to noise and interfer-
ence. Selectivity is the ability of a receiver to distinguish desired signals from
adjacent signals, as well as from noise and other interference. Selectivity can be
a major factor in the performance of a receiver, especially when the poten-
tially interfering signals are much stronger than the desired signal. For exam-
ple, the frequency allocated for Bluetooth, the very low-power, personal
network communications system, is adjacent to the “dirty” RF band allocated
to microwave ovens. Since microwave ovens can create 1000 watts or more,
and the Bluetooth system operates on mere milliwatts (1/1000th of a watt),
the Bluetooth system receiver must be selective enough to operate effectively
even when bombarded with several milliwatts of nominal leakage from a
microwave oven.
More sensitive, more selective receivers are generally larger, heavier,
require more power, and are more expensive to build and design. Mobile cel-
lular systems (car phones) have more latitude in their design, given that power
and size limitations are relatively lax compared to micro-thin handheld cellu-
lar or PCS phones.
Signal Absorption
The UHF radio waves used for cellular communications are subject to
absorption by objects and structures between the cell and the handheld
device. Trees, water vapor, rain, cars, metal beams, metal plumbing, and elec-
trical wiring all absorb radio frequencies to varying degrees. The result is that
a cell phone used in an open field has a greater range, and therefore doesn’t
NETWORK AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
83

require as many closely spaced cells (fixed transmitters and receivers), com-
pared to a wireless phone used in, say, downtown Manhattan.
Absorption is a function of the RF used, as well as the nature of the poten-
tially absorbing obstacles in the radio signal’s path. For example, many experts
consider the radio spectrum near 700 MHz, which is currently licensed to
UHF TV broadcasters in the United States, to be optimal for third-genera-
tion (3G) wireless services because of the relatively low absorption of 700-
MHz signals by buildings. At 800 MHz, the frequency for 2G cellular
services in the United States, radio signals are absorbed by vegetation and
bounce off the ground and buildings.
Signal Propagation
Radio waves tend to propagate or travel through space in predictable ways. As
noted earlier, at the frequencies used for cellular communications, propaga-
tion is mainly line of sight, free of the effects of the ionosphere.
At the UHF frequencies allocated to the wireless Web, radio waves often
behave with less predictability. For example, the signal from a cellular phone
might follow an elevator shaft, only to be directed to another building where
it causes interference with a computer monitor. Conversely, the same com-
puter, operating at or near the cellular phone’s operating frequency, might
generate an RF signal that blocks the cell phone. Similarly, the RF signal from
a mobile phone used in an office building might be reflected by partially sil-
vered glass.
Interference
The RF spectrum isn’t the open frontier it was a century ago. Today, virtually
every frequency band is allocated or licensed to services ranging from com-
mercial broadcast to fire, police, and cellular phone use. With all of this “radio
pollution,” interference from neighboring services is not uncommon, espe-
cially since radio signals from various sources can interact to create new sig-
nals that interfere with cellular phone service. Harmonics or multiples of the
operating frequency of a device can create unexpected interference. A laptop
computer operating at 1 GHz can emit harmonics at 2 GHz (2  GHz) and
3 G MHz can wreak havoc on wireless communications using the same or
nearly the same frequencies. As noted above, receiver selectivity and sensitiv-
ity as well as antenna selectivity can be manipulated to lessen the likelihood of
interference from neighboring signals.
A COMMUNICATIONS MODEL
To illustrate the communications principles described above—which will be
applied directly to wireless Web communications in the following chap-
84
WIRELESS WONDERS

ters—consider this communications model. The model consists of a long,
semiflexible tube, black (corresponding to a binary digit of value 0) and white
(corresponding to a binary digit of value 1) marbles, a means of inserting mar-
bles in the upper end of the tube (the sender or transmitter), and a means of
observing the marbles as they exit the bottom of the tube (the receiver). Sig-
nals can be sent down the tube by one of several approaches. Groups of, say,
three marbles can be inserted in rapid succession at the top of the tube, fol-
lowed by a brief pause, and then three more marbles, and so on. With three
marbles, messages or words composed of six different characters can be sent
(for example, 000, 001, 011, 111, 110, or 100), corresponding to the possible
color combinations of three marbles. 
Assume that gravity is constant, so the rate of marbles falling down the
tube doesn’t vary from one moment to the next, and that initially the diame-
ter of each marble is just slightly smaller than the diameter of the tube,
thereby preserving the pattern of marbles inserted at the top. Given these
assumptions, the maximum number of marbles that can drop freely from the
tube per second, corresponding to the maximum frequency, is primarily a
function of marble size. The smaller the marbles, the more that can fall
through the tube in a given period of time—in other words, the higher the fre-
quency. That is, the frequency used in this system is the reciprocal of marble
size. Big marbles correspond to low frequency, small marbles to high fre-
quency. The rate at which a marble moves through the tube is fixed by grav-
ity, just as signals travel through space and copper wire at a speed of about
300,000,000 m/s.
The maximum communications throughput of the model, correspond-
ing to the maximum number of marbles that can be handled by the system,
occurs when there is virtually no space between adjacent marbles. However, as
the space between characters (sets of three marbles, for example) is decreased,
there is an increased likelihood of error. A marble intended to be associated
with one character could be knocked adjacent to the set of three marbles cor-
responding to another character. Without some sort of memory device to
keep track of the total marble count and therefore which marbles belong to a
character, utter confusion may result. The operator will have to shut down the
model and restart it at the point of the last known good character.
The transmitter in this simple, single-tube system consists of two cylin-
ders, one containing new black marbles and one containing white ones.
There’s a slider bar with a hole in it below the mouth of the containers. The
slider bar is moved in unison with a time-varying analog signal, such as a
human voice or other sound, releasing black marbles as it moves left, and
white ones as it moves right. That is, the slider apparatus, analogous to an RF
modulator, converts an analog signal into a digital one, just as a digital tele-
phone takes analog voice signals and converts them into digital signals. In a
cell phone, this process is accomplished with a chip called an analog-to-digital
(A-to-D) converter.
NETWORK AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
85

In the model, noise is represented by the variability in the rate of release
of marbles at the bottom of the tube. This variability can be due to a variety of
internal factors, ranging from changes in the length, diameter, or elasticity of
the tube due to changes in ambient temperature, humidity, or simply aging—
the same factors that affect electronic components. The tube could shrink
and become brittle with age, slowing the marbles down as they traverse its
length. External factors include earthquakes and other sources of low-fre-
quency vibrations, such as nearby traffic, which may affect the motion of mar-
bles relative to the tube.
In addition to noise, the model illustrates other imperfections typical of
communications systems. For example, the model is lossy, in that marbles
wear a little and pick up debris from the tube wall as they travel down the
tube. Bright white marbles become dull, and dull black marbles take on a
dusty gray color. In this model, marble color saturation corresponds to field
strength, with bright white and darkest black corresponding to the highest
field strength. At some point, the marble color (corresponding to signal field
strength) may become an ambiguous gray. The receiver may not be able to
accurately distinguish an originally white marble from an originally black
marble, introducing errors in the message. Fortunately, digital technology
supports the concept of lossless regeneration. 
A marble regenerator, which corresponds to a repeater in a communi-
cations system, takes dirty marbles in one end and produces clean marbles
on the other. Even though digital systems are superior to analog systems in
many respects, they aren’t perfect. Errors are possible with the regeneration
process when the input is ambiguous. The parallel would be a repeater
placed too far from the signal source in a wireless communications system.
There are ways of resolving this sort of ambiguity, including error correction
techniques, as described below. Of course, an analog repeater or amplifier
would simply replicate the input pattern in the output, including the gray
tone. The very process of analog amplification will introduce a bit of gray
into each marble in the output pattern, as well. Eventually, after many stages
of analog amplification and lossy travel through the communications sys-
tem, the original signal will be lost, corresponding to all gray marbles, with
varying shades of gray.
With a few modifications, the original communications model can illus-
trate the concept of interference. The addition of a few adjacent tubes that
carry marbles is equivalent to crowding in the RF spectrum. Assuming that
the tubes are somewhat elastic, and that adjacent tubes are touching, the
motion of marbles down one tube can upset the progression of tubes down
the other. Two neighboring tubes, one to either side of the main communica-
tions tube can cause even more interference with the movement of marbles
down the main tube. The obvious solution to the interference problem is to
keep the other tubes away from the main tube—a feat normally accom-
plished in the real world by FCC licensing and frequency assignments for dif-
86
WIRELESS WONDERS
TEAMFLY

ferent services. Using a more selective receiver is another approach to mini-
mizing interference.
To illustrate the concept of the bandwidth limits of a communications
system, assume that there are small fenestrations or perforations along the
length of the communications tube, appreciably smaller than the diameter of
the tube. Recall that in order to increase the throughput of the communica-
tions system—that is, increase the KBps figure—one approach is to decrease
the size of the marbles. However, the holes limit the minimum marble size
that can be used in the model, corresponding to the maximum frequency of
an RF signal that can be used in a real-world communications system. 
Assuming that the model is limited to a single, fixed-bandwidth tube, one
way to increase the information throughput is to use some form of informa-
tion compression. Recall that signal compression is what allows a 56-KBps
modem to operate on a telephone line that can only handle a noncompressed
signal at about 1200 Bps. In the model, compression is represented by a
process that shrinks and encapsulates each character or group of three mar-
bles into a clear sphere the size of the original marbles. That is, a single trans-
parent marble containing three miniature marbles corresponds to a
character. Each marble may contain three white, three black, two black and
one white, or two white and one black marbles. In the real word, the parallels
to the compression process would be accomplished by high-speed com-
puter-enabled digital signal processing.
Even further increases in information throughput of the model could be
achieved by shrinking the marbles so that more could fit in the tube at the
same time to the point that the marbles approach the size of the tube perfo-
rations. That is, the bandwidth of the tube still limits the maximum fre-
quency of marbles traversing the tube, just as the bandwidth of a
communications channel does for RF signals. The length of the original mes-
sage, relative to the tube length, diminishes significantly, becoming shortest
when a higher frequency is combined with encapsulation and shrinking of
the marbles. Recall that tube length is equivalent to time, since propagation
time through the tube, like the propagation of electrical signals through a
cable, is fixed.
Further increases in information throughput can be achieved with addi-
tional tubes, which effectively increases the bandwidth of the model. In mov-
ing from a  serial to a parallel model, the tubes can be used in a variety of ways
to increase signal throughput. One use is timing. Instead of spaces between
characters (or, if the compressed marbles are used, between groups of charac-
ters or words), a marble can be dropped down the timing tube to indicate the
start of a new word. Furthermore, the color of the marble signifying the start
of a new word can be used for error correction. For example, a black marble
can signify that the word being sent is composed of an odd number of individ-
ual black marbles. A white marble sent down the timing tube can signify an
even number of black marbles is contained in the following word. If the error
NETWORK AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
87

correction marble doesn’t agree with the marble count of a particular word
(the checksum), then the sender can be asked to resend the word.
With the increased information-handling capacity of the model provided
by using multiple tubes, there may be idle periods during which there are no
marbles flowing down the tubes. This excess bandwidth capacity can be used
as added communications channels for additional users. The tubes can be
multiplexed, or shared by multiple users, with the addition of an address tube.
In the multiplexed communications model, a transparent marble with some
combination of compressed black and white marbles, corresponding to the
identity of each owner, is released at the start of every three-character word. In
this way, words belonging to separate messages, each intended for a different
recipient, can be sent and received. The cost is the additional overhead of
selecting and sending the appropriate marble down the address tube and of
interpreting it at the receiving end. In addition, there is the bandwidth occu-
pied by the timing and user ID marbles, which could otherwise be used for
data. However, this overhead is acceptable, given the power and flexibility
that addressing and error correction provide.
Note that in a real-world communications system, the equivalent of par-
allel tubes can be created with a variety of encoding schemes that don’t actu-
ally involve multiple, parallel wires. Of course, providing the virtual
equivalent of parallel connectivity, along with features such as error checking
and multiplexing does make for a more complex system. Not discussed, for
example, is the complexity of the receiver, which has to handle address recog-
nition as well as performing the checksum calculation for error correction.
Continuing with the marble communications system analogy, the wire-
less equivalent of the communications system. Marbles from the centrally
located base transmitter (equivalent to the fixed cell) are launched into the air
before traveling down a communications tube to all receivers within range.
The range of the cell, a function of the power fed to the antenna from the trans-
mitter, is represented by the velocity and trajectory of the stream of marbles. 
Objects in the path of the marbles can drastically reduce the operating
range (absorption), and marbles from other communications systems can
knock the marbles off course (interference). In this wireless model, funnels
correspond to antennas, with the funnel shape determining selectivity. A fun-
nel with a wider mouth corresponds to a system with less selectivity; a nar-
rower mouth corresponds to greater selectivity. 
Note that while every receiver receives the same stream of marbles, the
receiver only recognizes messages that contain the appropriate user ID. In
the model, the filter rings at the base of each funnel (antenna) represent this
mechanism. In this and most other respects, the basic operating principles of
the airborne (wireless) model is the same as the initial tube (wired) model.
For example, there are bandwidth limitations on both the sender’s side and
the receiver’s side, represented by perforations in the transmitter and
receiver tubes. The primary exception is that receivers are mobile. As dis-
88
WIRELESS WONDERS

cussed below, this seemingly small variation makes all the difference in the
world to consumers.
THE VALUE OF MOBILITY
From a business perspective, the difference between wired and wireless com-
munications is that wireless gives the user freedom of mobility, and therefore
value over and above that of wired communications. Sometimes the value of
mobility is primarily a matter of convenience and timesavings, such as the
ability to make an important call from a cell phone instead of taking the time
to go out in the rain to make a call from a phone booth. The same holds for a
wireless garage door opener versus one with a wall-mounted switch that
must be pressed for access, or a TV or stereo remote control. In addition to
the convenience factor, wireless also makes some things possible that are oth-
erwise impossible. For example, the remote control of model airplanes, cars,
and even control of interplanetary satellites would not be everyday occur-
rences without wireless communications technology.
Bandwidth, a measure of the maximum information-carrying capacity of
a communications system, is only one of several factors that defines the usabil-
ity of a wireless system. For example, a trader on the stock exchange trading
floor needs a wirelesscommunications system that provides virtually instan-
taneous response. However, even with more than adequate bandwidth,
response time can be lengthened simply by virtue of the distances involved
between the sender and the receiver. Communicating via satellite, for exam-
ple, might take several seconds for each exchange of information. The point is
that, while bandwidth limits the maximum throughput of a communica-
tions system and makes rapid response possible, the system must be designed
to take advantage of the bandwidth available, within the limits of what the
customers want and can afford.
The issues of bandwidth, range, power, and cost can be illustrated by
examining the typical wireless phone or PDA. First of all, the handheld unit
has to be light, the battery must be able to supply the energy requirements
for several days, the range has to be sufficient to allow the phone to be used
indoors and outside of the city, and the phone needs to be relatively immune
from interference from other remote control systems or unrelated devices.
Finally, for the system to be successful in the marketplace, not only does it
need to be easy to use and provide the proper mix of features, it also has to be
affordable. 
The features and affordability of any wireless system depend to a great
degree on the nature of the underlying infrastructure—the communications
network—that provides the support and connectivity to resources on the
public telephone network and the Internet. A review of several aspects of net-
works and networking that are relevant to the wired and, increasingly, the
wireless Web follows.
NETWORK AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
89

NETWORKS
A network is simply a means of connecting devices in such a way that they can
share information. Connecting to the most celebrated network, the Internet,
with fast, secure, mobile communications technology is viewed by many as
the means to providing added value over strictly voice communications.
Without a connection to the public telephone network or the Internet, a cell
phone is just an expensive walkie-talkie. As described below, there is a
plethora of competing technologies focused on providing subscribers with
the most impressive, high-speed connectivity to the Internet and public tele-
phone network possible. Before exploring the bells and whistles, a grounding
in network principles is in order.
As introduced in Chapter 1, one of the first networks was born out of the
need for point-to-point wiring for the telephone. Not only was point-to-point
wiring an eyesore—streets were littered with huge bundles of cables hung
from telephone poles—but the cost of this approach was far too prohibitive for
all but the most affluent businesspeople. A telephone network with a manual
switchboard at its hub or center made it possible for anyone with a telephone
connected to the switchboard to talk with anyone else on the network.
Since the early networks with manually operated switchboards, net-
works have evolved to service a variety of other appliances, from the PC to
wireless PDAs and cell phones. Networks are most commonly described on
the basis of the following: their architecture; the types of signals they handle;
the speed that these signals flow through the network; the topology or phys-
ical layout of the network; their geographical extent; the protocols or com-
munications standards used; the application, such as supporting the Web or
telephone communications; and the details of physical connectivity, such as
satellite or wireless PDA communications. These categories are described in
more detail below.
Network Architecture
Network architecture describes the framework for interoperating on net-
works—the rules that allow sharing of information among different types of
computers and other devices, regardless of their design or operating system.
That is, architectures describe the cables, transmission services, the services
provided to the network applications, and how they can be put together. Net-
work architectures are often confused with the protocols that run on them.
Protocols are specific implementations of services that follow the rules of the
underlying architecture. 
Examples of network architectures are Open System Interconnection
(OSI), IBM’s System Network Architecture (SNA), and Transmission Con-
trol Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP). TCP/IP, originally developed by
the U.S. Department of Defense, the dominant architecture today, provides
90
WIRELESS WONDERS

the logical connectivity for the Internet. Like OSI and SNA, TCP/IP uses a
layered approach to networking, starting with the top level that deals with
applications, and ending with the bottom layer that deals with hardware
issues. An example of a network application for TCP/IP is the ability to pub-
lish Web pages. The lower layers handle connections between devices and the
routing of information. 
Signal Type
From the perspective of the wireless Web, the major distinction regarding sig-
nal type is analog versus digital signals. Most computer networks are fully dig-
ital. However, the domestic public telephone network, one of the largest and
oldest networks in the United States, is predominantly analog. Even the
majority of wireless telephone networks are analog, albeit with an interface to
digital networks to provide caller ID and other functions made possible by
digital technology. 
Although only about a third of cellular telephone traffic in the United
States is digital, there is stiff competition from the all-digital PCS service (the
intent of creating the PCS service in the first place was to provide cellular
operators with competition to move things along), as well as all-digital carriers
such as Sprint. Digital communications services, on average, require less bat-
tery power, offer improved sound quality, and offer a level of privacy and secu-
rity that’s difficult to match with analog networks.
Data Transfer Rate
The distinction between high-speed versus normal-speed networks is a rela-
tive one, and one that, like PC clock speeds, changes every few months. What
was considered high-speed six months ago is considered slow today. Even so,
most would agree that a dial-up 56K-modem speed represents a benchmark
for normal speed connectivity on the public telephone network, whereas
ISDN, Satellite, DSL, and Cable Modem represent the higher end of speeds
possible. The speeds possible with these wired network technologies range
from a rather modest 128 KBps for ISDN to over 7 MBps for DSL. Network
data transfer rate or speed is normally tied to specific network services, either
by technologic limitations or, more often, by licensing restrictions. Increased
speed requires an increase in bandwidth, potentially resulting in interference
with other services that share the spectrum.
In the wireless world, what constitutes normal speed in the United
States is painfully slow—anywhere from 9 to 19.2 KBps. Even the third-gen-
eration (G3) wireless network services, considered high-speed at 384 KBps
to 2 MBps, are slow compared to high-speed wired services. Given the mar-
ket that G3 services is projected to open up, it’s a concern in the industry
that even high-speed wired network services have yet to tame streaming
NETWORK AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
91

video and other services that slower G3 wireless connectivity is supposed to
provide. 
It’s important to recognize the features and limitations of the most com-
mon high-speed or broadband network service, in part because they are com-
peting with fixed wireless service for the “last mile” connection in the United
States and Europe. High-speed network services have yet to become com-
monplace in Europe or the United States. Less than 1 percent of Western
Europe has high-speed Internet access, and the figures aren’t much better in
the United States. Reasons range from expense, long delays for installation,
and unavailability. In Europe, lack of high-speed wired network access is seen
as an opportunity for Wireless Local Loop (WLL) access. This fixed wireless
solution may extend the wired Web to the home and small business in a way
that was impossible before because of the monopolies that controlled the last
mile of cable from the telephone office to the home. Paradoxically, wireless
technology may finally bring the wired Web into the homes of Western Euro-
peans at the same time the United States struggles to achieve the level of wire-
less service enjoyed by many Europeans.
The most significant high-speed network alternatives in the United
States are ISDN, Cable Modem, DSL, T1, and Satellite. At 128 KBps, ISDN
(Integrated Services Digital Network) services provide about double the
bandwidth of a standard 56-KBps modem. Even though the high initial and
monthly costs, difficulty associated with setup, lack of general availability, and
only modest bandwidth improvements over a 56-KBps analog modem have
limited the appeal of ISDN, it does allow both voice and data flow over a stan-
dard phone line. A key characteristic of ISDN is that it is symmetrical, in that
upload and download speeds are the same.
Cable modems use the same cable and much of the communications
electronics used for cable TV. Cost is typically a little less than DSL. Down-
load bandwidth, the connection bandwidth for images and other content
coming from the Internet to a desktop PC, is typically between 3 MBps and
10 MBps. When uploading data to the Internet, bandwidth is between 1 and
2 MBps. A smaller upload bandwidth isn’t normally a problem if the user is
sending text emails and mouse clicks. A cable modem is a natural for the
home if the subscriber has cable TV, but it may be inappropriate for a business
unless it’s already wired for cable TV. The downside of cable is security, in that
everyone in an area shares access to the same information.
A Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) lets users send data at about 1/2 MBps
and receive data at over 7 MBps, depending on the type of DSL service avail-
able. Like ISDN, DSL can simultaneously handle voice and data over standard
phone lines. Since DSL is only available within a four-mile radius of a tele-
phone switching office, it’s typically not an option in rural areas.
For years, the standard for reliable, secure, high-speed connectivity has
been the T1 line. A T1 line is a dedicated, high-speed cable, typically com-
posed at least in part of fiber optics, that delivers at about 1.5 MBps. The only
92
WIRELESS WONDERS

real problem with a T1 line is cost, which can be several times that of other
high-speed network services. For rural connectivity, a satellite network con-
nection may be the only available option. Satellite downlinks provide moder-
ate speeds of only about 400-KBps connectivity. This technology provides
point-to-point, narrow-beam (secure) communications between the satellite
and the user’s dish antenna. Satellite networks are more expensive than alter-
native systems, in part because of the added cost of the antenna and receiver
system, but may be the only option available in some communities.
Topologies
Regardless of whether the media that is used to connect devices on a network
is copper wire, fiber-optic cables, or wireless, there are a variety of established
physical configurations or designs that have become standards for networks.
The archetypal configurations are point-to-point, star, ring, and bus. Other
physical configurations are common as well, including ARCnet, Switched,
Daisy Chain, and Mesh. It’s important to note that the physical topology may
be very different from the logical topology. For example, it’s possible to estab-
lish a logical star network even though the cabling is arranged in a bus config-
uration. In addition to these “pure” topologies, there are hybrid and irregular
topologies as well.
In theory, an enterprise selects one physical topology and extends it
throughout the organization. In practice, few networks are original; there’s
always some legacy system to deal with, which is often composed of several
network configurations glued together to solve some long-forgotten prob-
lem that a company’s IS department faced in the past. A patchwork of net-
work topologies—referred to as a hybrid or irregular topology—can also
develop in new networks as well. Perhaps the graphics department wants to
install a group of Macintosh computers with their own star network topol-
ogy, including several wireless devices, in an otherwise all-PC shop. Similarly,
the R&D group may need to install its own network of Silicon Graphics
workstations.A small cluster of devices connected together, with or without
connection to a larger network, is often called an ad hoc network. Two lap-
tops connected to a printer through a wired or wireless network would nor-
mally be considered an ad hoc network. Each topology is associated with
benefits and tradeoffs regarding centralization, cost, maintenance and trou-
bleshooting, scalability, security, speed, and stability. For example, point-to-
point networks work best for a handful of devices, whether local or spread
out over thousands of miles. As Alexander Graham Bell discovered before
the advent of the switchboard, a point-to-point network topology doesn’t
scale very well. 
In the star topology, all data are routed through a central machine or hub.
That is, the star topology is structured for centralization; failure in one con-
nection or leg of the star should not affect the others. Networks set up in a star
NETWORK AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
93

configuration are therefore easier to manage, but tend to be slower than the
other topologies, because every message must pass through the hub.
In the ring topology, information is passed from device to device in turn,
when permission is given. The ring topology, often referred to as token ring,
usually involves passing a token around the network to identify which device
on the network has a matching address. The bus network simply links
devices to a common signal channel. Note that the physical and electrical
topologies can be totally different from each other, even on the same system.
For example, a logical star network can run on a physical bus topology. 
Geographic Extent
In addition to physical topologies, networks tend to be categorized in terms
of their particular geographic configurations, which in turn lend themselves
to particular types of physical connections. For example, connectivity config-
urations include wireless, wired, fixed, mobile, terrestrial, and satellite. Exam-
ples of actual implementations are handset-to-satellite, mobile-satellite,
terrestrial, and maritime.
The most common geographic network descriptors are PANs, LANS,
WLANs, WANs, and MANs. Personal Area Networks (PANs) have a very
limited range, on the order of a few meters, and tend to be somehow attached
to the user. Wearable computers typically rely on PAN technologies to pro-
vide communications between the various components of the computer and
peripherals. A form of PAN defined by the Bluetooth standard is called a
piconet, and multiple independent piconets combine to form a scatternet.
As the name suggests, a Local Area Network (LAN) connects computers
in a single  location, such as an office or a car. Car-based LANs, which may con-
tain a mix of wired and wireless connectivity, are expected to increase dra-
matically in popularity, assuming legislation against a Web-enabled office on
wheels isn’t forthcoming. Wireless LANs (WLANs) are commonly used in
fixed wireless services, based on either IR or RF signaling. Wired LANs tend
to be high-speed networks used to connect, for example, printers, scanners,
and other peripherals with computers on a network. RF WLANs have a
range of up to a few hundred meters—much less if based on IR technology—
and typically handle speeds of up to 10 MBps. LANs are often implemented
with symmetric topologies such as the star or ring. 
The archetypal Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) is a high-speed
intra-city network that links multiple locations with a metropolitan area.
MANs operate from 1 MBps to 200 MBps. MANs can be wired and increas-
ingly include a wireless component. At the next level of geographic coverage
is the Wide Area Network (WAN). WANs are used to connect disparate net-
works, often located in different states or across the globe. For example, the
major telecommunications carriers have WANs connecting the West and
East coasts of the United States. WANs consist of multiple local networks tied
94
WIRELESS WONDERS

together, typically using telephone company services. WANs may connect
users in different buildings or countries. They tend to have irregular topolo-
gies, often built around point-to-point wiring, satellite, and cellular telephone
networks. Although high-speed WANs are commonplace, wireless WANs
tend to be limited to about 20 KBps.
Network Protocols
Protocols are specific implementations of services that follow the rules of the
underlying architecture, providing the logical connectivity among devices on
the network. The role of a protocol is to make certain that messages sent over
a network reach their destination. Modern devices are capable of handling a
variety of protocols so they can be used in different parts of the United States
and with different service providers. For example, the OmniSky Minstrel
wireless modem designed for the Palm V supports TCP/IP, UDP, PPP, and
SLIP protocols. (See the Glossary for details.)
One of the most important network protocols for wireless Web work is
IEE 802.11b, the industry standard for LANs. This protocol provides 10
MBps throughput with a maximum range of about 300 m (1000 ft). This
standard forms the basis of many home and office-based wireless networking
products that can extend connectivity to the Web through a variety of hand-
held devices and laptops.
Application
The two major application areas for network technology relevant to the wire-
less Web are internetworks, including the Internet, and the public telephone
systems. To the dismay of appliance manufacturers and trademark lawyers,
sometimes the word for a technology or device comes to stand for the generic
device. For example, many people go Rollerblading instead of inline skating,
spinning instead of indoor cycling, and at one time owned a Frigidaire instead
of a refrigerator. 
It’s the same with the Internet. A collection of interconnected networks
is called an Internetworks or internet. There are many internets, but only one
Internet. An internet is simply a collection of LANs connected to WANs.
Because of the potential for confusion, the term internet (lowercase i) is often
avoided.
Wired Web users, except for those connecting to an Internet service
provider or ISP via a modem, have largely ignored the telephone network.
The network uses computer-controlled exchange switches, which are
roughly equivalent to operator switchboards, but operate much more
quickly and without human intervention. A central technology in the tele-
phone network is the Private Branch Exchange (PBX). A PBX is the elec-
tronic equivalent of a local switchboard operator, interconnecting telephones
NETWORK AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
95

and other devices in a local area with a telephone switching system. Most
larger companies have their own PBX, allowing outside customers to call a
single number, and then connect to a particular line in the company by using
an extension number. In this way, one telephone line can be leased from the
telephone company, replacing potentially thousands of direct lines. 
Essential Network Jargon 
Every executive working in the area of wireless technology has to have a grasp
of the networking jargon that describes much of the enabling infrastructure.
A reasonable vocabulary for an executive engaged in negotiations with a net-
work vendor might include terms like 100BaseT, Application Server, ATM,
Backbone, Bridge, Client-Server Architecture, DNS, Fast Ethernet, Firewall,
Gateway, Linux, NIC, Repeater, Router, Server, Switch, and Thin Client.
These and other networking-related terms are defined in the Glossary.
DISCUSSION
Technologic issues aside, most users don’t care or even know which standards
their wireless phones, PDAs, or two-way pagers use until they have to switch
providers or use their wireless devices while traveling outside of their home
territory. Their concerns, and the concerns that will continue to drive busi-
ness in the wireless Web, are full, consistent coverage, data transfer rates that
meet their needs, and reasonable prices. Regardless of advances in bandwidth
and other technical issues, availability and connection costs will be the main
factors affecting wireless usage for the foreseeable future.
The next chapter builds upon the basic communications and network-
ing technologies discussed here and examines the technologic trajectory of
wireless communications as it relates to the wireless Web.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The technologies involved in communications are based on signals and infor-
mation content, operating frequency, modulation, bandwidth, and noise.
Other factors in wireless communications are field strength, antennas,
receiver sensitivity and selectivity, signal absorption, signal propagation, and
interference. Most of the technologic advances that pertain to the wireless
Web have to do with supporting multiple users in a challenging, bandwidth-
restricted environment adjacent to potentially interfering signals.
Wireless communications relies heavily on both wired networking tech-
nologies and vice versa. The standard wired networking issues apply equally
to wireless communications, including the importance of selecting a compat-
ible topology, adherence to network architecture and protocol limitations,
and of employing technologies that provide sufficient data transfer rates.
96
WIRELESS WONDERS
TEAMFLY

Of the networking technologies related to the wireless Web, personal
area networks (PANs) and wireless local area networks (WLANs) are the
most critical to understand. Both of these technologies provide the last leg of
connectivity between the Internet or other networks and the personal
devices that users rely on to access and create data.
From a business perspective, communications and networking technolo-
gies define the cost of circuit and component design, within the constraints of
fulfilling customer needs. In the end, the added value that mobile communi-
cations technology has over wired communications is related to the afford-
ability of and easy access to the features provided by these technologies.
NETWORK AND WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
97

This page intentionally left blank.

When one door closes another door opens;
But we often look so long and so regretfully upon the closed door 
that we do not see the ones which open for us.
Alexander Graham Bell
INTRODUCTION
As illustrated in Part 1, the ultimate success of any business venture concern-
ing the wireless Web depends on having a solid technology, leadership with
the vision and business acumen to bring the potential of the technology to
fruition, and a supportive or at least accepting sociopolitical environment. In
at least one or two of these areas, the United States may have a second-mover
advantage over the European and Asian companies and their prospective
wireless Web customers.
At a minimum, U.S. executives now have a good idea of which questions
to ask. After all, who’s to say whether or not domestic customers will jump at
the chance to buy a Coke from a vending machine, or buy wine, or pay rent
using their cell phones? And even if they do, what type of information infra-
structure and combinations of technologies will present customers with an
irresistible mix of utility, security, responsiveness, and cost-effectiveness?
After corporations pour huge amounts of capital into creating a high-speed,
reliable, ubiquitous wireless communications infrastructure, where will the
profits come from, and how will they be sustained? Are the descriptions of
new wireless Web technologies that flood the technical papers and journals
merely a reflection of a fad, or a lasting trend? Will the infatuation that
teenagers in parts of Europe and Asia have with personal, hip, and inexpensive
wireless devices carry on to adulthood? Will the loops and pockets for cell
99
5
Cellular Communications 
and Protocols
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

phones that are standard issue on virtually every backpack made for teens in
Korea and Japan seem like some vestigial appendage to teens in the United
States, or will they too embrace wireless communications? Will domestic
wireless content providers, such as Disney, that supplies cartoons for Japan’s I-
Mode phone system, find the domestic market equally receptive to its prod-
ucts? Furthermore, will the U.S. consumers’ passion for the PC short-circuit
Web-enabled, smart phone services and instead drive the extension of high-
speed Web access to underserved communities via fixed wireless technolo-
gies? Similarly, will consumer expectations, having been shaped by their
experience on the multimedia-rich Web, be impossible to meet, given the rel-
atively slow, predominantly text interfaces provided by Web-enabled
phones?
In attempting to answer these and other questions about the wireless
Web, the West European picture seems clearer than the domestic one. First,
the huge political and technologic infrastructure advantage that Europe has
over the United States is the GSM continentwide standard. The European
Union scored a major political victory when it convinced Nokia, Ericsson,
and the other major cellular players to collaborate on GSM as a second-gener-
ation digital standard. As a result, European businesspeople can buy a GSM
phone in Italy, France, or Germany and bring it home to Finland. There, they
can choose from several service and pricing plans offered by competing carri-
ers. In contrast to the United States, European cellular carriers are barred
from subsidizing phones by passing costs on to subscribers. As a result, rates
are a true reflection of the level and nature of the service provided. For most
European customers and the European wireless industry, this is a win-win sit-
uation. European customers can compare oranges with oranges, and cellular
operators and cell phone manufacturers can focus on developing new fea-
tures and improving the technology for all GSM phones.
Japan’s NTT DoCoMo presents another perspective on the technologic
trajectory of wireless Web communications. DoCoMo’s I-Mode, which has
virtually saturated the Japanese market, offers subscribers a constant online
connection without the hassle and delay of dialing in. In addition to providing
services that are apparently precisely in line with what Japanese consumers
want and need, DoCoMo is in a league of its own technologically. Not only has
NTT DoCoMo created the world’s smallest, most sophisticated, feature-
laden cellular handsets, it is also the first operator to introduce third-genera-
tion (3G) cellular using the same communications standard that will
eventually be deployed throughout Europe.
In sharp contrast to the typical European or Japanese experience, a cellu-
lar subscriber in the Northeast region of the United States will probably have
to buy a new mobile phone as well as sign up for a new wireless plan if he
moves to the Pacific Northwest. It can be an expensive move, especially if he
hasn’t fulfilled his original plan’s one- or two-year service obligation. He may
end up paying a termination fee to the original carrier, as well as having to buy
100
WIRELESS WONDERS

a new cellular or PCS  phone. Even in the same region of the United States,
customer choices may be limited. For example, a businesswoman in the
Northeast considering Nextel PCS service is locked into a Motorola wireless
phone. Her only option for a more feature-rich phone is to buy a more expen-
sive Motorola model. Furthermore, if she decides to switch to another service,
she’ll probably have to buy a new PCS phone from another manufacturer.
Even so, the FCC cites dictating cellular rates as evidence that consumers are
benefiting from multiple competing standards for service.
Despite the technological prowess of NTT DoCoMo and the political
savvy of Europe’s wireless access providers, the United States and Canada
have an opportunity to take the lead in the use of some niche technologies,
such as wireless PDAs, and in the development of middleware or software
that pulls everything together. In the context of the wireless Web, middle-
ware is the software running on a network that provides connectivity
between wireless devices and the wired network. Middleware encompasses
applications that compress and decompress data, provide security, perform
data and application synchronization, manage wireless devices from a dis-
tance, manage software and hardware inventories, store and forward mes-
sages, provide Web clipping, and provide database connectivity, for example,
between a CE handheld and an Oracle database.
Even in the world of hardware providers, there are only so many Ciscos.
In addition, many companies once regarded as domestic, such as Motorola,
are really international players that use local talent and materials whenever
politically or economically advantageous. It may be that U.S. companies are
best equipped to profit from adding value to core technologies developed
elsewhere and providing them to rapidly developing markets like China. 
Whatever the ultimate role of the United States in the development of
the wireless Web, it’s clear that establishing a presence in this market is first
about creating or otherwise acquiring and manipulating reliable technolo-
gies. Taking this perspective, this chapter builds upon and reinforces the basic
communications and networking technologies discussed in the previous
chapter regarding the context of cellular communications, so the underlying
principles become practical and real. In addition, it explores key enabling
technologies, including voice recognition and the Bluetooth personal net-
work system, with a view toward the trajectory of wireless technologies as
they relate to the wireless Web.
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS
Up to this point, the discussion of communications technology and networking
has been applicable to most wired and wireless communications systems.  To
illustrate the practical relevance of the basic communications principles intro-
duced in Chapter 4, such as multiplexing schemes, bandwidth requirements,
and receiver sensitivity and selectivity to the more practical, commercial aspects
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
101

of the wireless Web, this section focuses on the principal delivery vehicle for
wireless Web content—the cellular telephone system. 
The terms cellular phone and cellular radio are often used more or less
synonymously with mobile wireless communications. However, cellular
radio or telephone is just one aspect of wireless communications technology,
and a distinction that has as much to do with marketing as it does with real
technological differences. Wireless communications encompasses technolo-
gies like cordless phones, analog and digital cellular phones, PCS phones,
Web-enabled phones, smart phones (which are Web-enabled, and provide a
number of other features not found in ordinary cell phones), one-way, 11/2
way (acknowledgment of messages only), and two-way pagers, and wireless
PDAs. Unless a distinction is warranted, all of these technologies will be
referred to simply as cellular phone systems. As described below, the key
issues in cellular systems, and where incompatibilities arise, lie in operating
frequency allocation, the features and restrictions imposed by the different
modulation types (which are in turn a function of licensing), the availability
(or lack thereof) of a supporting network infrastructure, and how interfer-
ence is dealt with.
Frequency Allocation
The greatest source of confusion for potential wireless subscribers in the
United States is in establishing the difference between cellular and PCS ser-
vices. This confusion apparently arises partially by accident, and in part
through planning and a concerted marketing campaign by PCS providers.
This contention between cellular and PCS services is reasonable, given that
the spectrum for PCS services was ostensibly established by the FCC for the
primary purpose of creating competition for cellular operators. 
On the surface, the only significant technical difference between PCS and
digital cellular services is in the assigned operating frequencies. Domestic cel-
lular phone systems operate at about 800 MHz, whereas PCS systems typi-
cally operate from about 1.5 to 1.8 GHz. From an operational perspective, the
PCS services offered by Sprint, Nextel, and other domestic PCS carriers fol-
low the cellular model of fixed, networked base stations with connectivity to
the public switched telephone network. Similarly, mobile units can move
freely from cell to cell within the regions covered by the service provider.
From a practical business perspective, the differences between PCS and
digital cellular have several ramifications. Given the frequency differences, the
antenna structures for PCS use can be 1/2 to 1/3 the size of comparable anten-
nas designed for cellular use. The upshot is that PCS antennas are usually
more compact, which affects mobility as well as consumer demand. The
increasingly popular two-way pagers, which also operate at the higher PCS
frequencies, are able to use an internal antenna without losing effectiveness.
The wireless Palm VII, in comparison, has a larger fold-up antenna, since its
102
WIRELESS WONDERS

antenna length is comparable to that of an 800-MHz cellular phone. In addi-
tion, absorption and propagation at the higher PCS frequencies are very dif-
ferent, with some atmospheric and geographic conditions favoring a
lower-frequency cellular signal, and others favoring a higher-frequency PCS
signal. Interference issues are more challenging with PCS as well, especially
since there are many services running on or near the PCS band. Finally, the
higher PCS frequencies may be associated with greater health risks, com-
pared to the lower cellular frequencies. Figure 5-1 shows the primary digital
cellular and PCS operating bands in the United States, Japan, and Europe.
Modulation
Modulation, the process of varying the main or carrier frequency in accor-
dance with the information to be transferred to a receiver, can be accom-
plished through a variety of methods. One approach is to create virtual
channels—like the multiple, parallel tubes in the communications model
from Chapter 4—so that hundreds of subscribers can share the same band of
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
103
U.S.
Frequency (MHz)
1700
1800
1900
2000
1700
1800
1900
2000
Japan
DIGITAL CELLULAR OPERATING BANDS
Europe
Figure 5-1. Primary digital cellular and PCS operating bands in the United States, Japan, and
Europe. Because there is little overlapping in systems operating in the same or adjacent bands,
cell phone manufacturers have to develop units capable of operating on muliple frequencies in
order to provide global coverage for international business travelers. The option is for travelers to
purchase separate phones for each area.

frequencies. Modulation methods are normally linked to operating frequen-
cies and types of wireless services through FCC licensure. That is, there may
be no technical reason why a particular type of modulation must be used for
one service, and another service only a few MHz away must use another.
These and other license constraints may have a historical, technologic, or
political basis.
The modulation technique used in many second-generation (2G) cell
phones in the United States falls under a general category called spread spec-
trum. As the name implies, the modulation technique spreads transmissions
across a spectrum or range of frequencies (multiple, parallel tubes in the com-
munications model) instead of transmitting over a single radio frequency (a
single tube in the communications model). Although spread spectrum tech-
niques are generally known today because of their use in cell phones and
other modern wireless communications systems, they were actually devel-
oped in the late 1940s in the  United States.
The two most common types of spread spectrum modulation tech-
niques used in wireless communications are Direct Sequencing Spread Spec-
trum (DSSS) and Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum (FHSS). DSSS is a
wireless spread spectrum method that breaks each transmission into pieces,
scatters them across a range of frequencies, and reconstructs the pieces at the
receiving end. As in the multitube (spread spectrum) communications
model described in Chapter 4, each piece of the message is marked with a
code specifying a receiver, allowing pieces of messages intended for multiple
recipients to travel in the same frequency band without directly interfering
with each other. 
FHSS is a spread spectrum method that “hops” its transmission across
multiple channels instead of remaining on one signal frequency. By FCC rules,
FHSS transmissions must hop or change frequencies after a specified maxi-
mum time. For example, wireless communications using the 2.4-GHz ISM
(Industrial, Scientific, and Medical) band, which is shared by several services,
including Bluetooth, must change frequency several times per second. Since
a random number generator controls the frequency hopping sequence,
FHSS messages are difficult to intercept. Not only must the intended recipi-
ents know the random number generator’s sequence, they must also have the
appropriate user ID.
An advantage of using spread spectrum modulation for cellular commu-
nications is that it deters eavesdroppers because the signals are encoded and
difficult to intercept. Communications systems based on spread spectrum
technology are uniquely suited for applications requiring privacy, signal
covertness, interference rejection, selective addressing, and multiple access—
all of which apply to wireless Web communications. Unlike the conventional
techniques used to ensure message security, such as cryptography, spread
spectrum communications can not only conceal the message but the
sender’s identity as well.
104
WIRELESS WONDERS

Spread spectrum modulation is used in wireless applications ranging
from cell phones, satellite and ground-based communications to navigation
and RADAR. For example, the GPS uses spread spectrum technology to
allow users with GPS receivers to determine their location anywhere on the
globe to within about 1 m. GPS satellites blanket the earth with spread spec-
trum radio signals, allowing handheld devices to determine position through
triangulation of the signals. Software in a handheld GPS receiver can compute
speed and direction, and a mapping program can use the position data to plot
a businessman’s position on the road to an important meeting, and even esti-
mate how long it will take for him to arrive at the meeting. If it appears as
though he’s going to be late for the meeting, he can use his cellular phone to
call ahead and notify the other participants.
Spread spectrum technology makes it possible for multiple signals to
occupy the same channel or band of frequencies simultaneously with mini-
mal mutual interference. Adding spread spectrum signals to a communica-
tions band already supporting signals has the effect of raising overall
background noise. Returning to the communications model in Chapter 4,
adding another user requires that an additional user ID marble be dropped
down the Address Tube. In other words, the same communications channel
now has to deal with one more subscriber, so every message is delayed by a
small, virtually imperceptible amount. The result is a gradual decrease in
communications efficiency for all subscribers using the channel. 
An important feature of spread spectrum receivers is that they are rela-
tively immune to both intentional and accidental interference. Practically
speaking, this means that wireless networks in offices and factories can use
spread spectrum modulation because the technique supports error-free net-
work access even under electrically noisy conditions created by PCs, copy
machines, industrial lighting, and the operation of heavy machinery. With
increased noise and competing signals, a spread spectrum receiver may not
respond as fast as normal, but at least there is usually a response. An added
benefit of using spread spectrum with a wireless PDA or cell phone is relative
insensitivity to fading, which is a reduction in received signal strength as a
result of signal reflection, refraction, or absorption.
Cellular Networks
The first commercial cellular system, the Improved Mobile Telephone Ser-
vice (IMTS), was created by AT&T in 1946. IMTS, perhaps better described
as a repeater system instead of a cellular network, was the first mobile radio
system to connect with the regular public phone network. It was based on a
single high-power transmitter and a tall transmit and receive antenna (usually
located on a hilltop) that provided a line-of-sight operating radius of over 80
km (50 mi). Since the VHF and UHF spectrum was virtually open at that
time, IMTS used a communications channel with a huge frequency spread
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
105

from 150 to 450 MHz. In order to provide two-way communications, the
mobile units, which were based on heavy, power-consuming vacuum tube
technology, had to provide several watts of power for their signals to reach the
centrally located receiver antenna with sufficient field strength. 
Because of the high power levels and the coverage provided by the cen-
tral antennas, IMTS systems had to be located hundreds of miles apart to
avoid interference. As a result, islands of mobile telephone access, usually
located around population centers, were separated by long expanses without
service. In addition, since each IMTS cell supported up to only 23 channels or
simultaneous users, subscribers frequently had to wait extended periods of
time in order to access the telephone network.
The modern cellular network, invented by Bell Laboratories and installed
in the United States in 1982, improved upon the IMTS system in a number of
important ways. As in the IMTS system, the service area is divided into local
regions called cells, with each cell containing a more or less centrally located
transmitting and receiving antenna. In addition, the same antenna structure
can be used for both transmit and receive antenna, or a separate antenna struc-
ture can be used, separated by a short distance. However, instead of a single,
high-powered transmitter, the modern cellular design is based on a network of
low-powered transmitters and centrally located omnidirectional antennas,
each providing a range of perhaps 10 km (6 mi). Cells are typically 10 to 20 km
(6 to12 mi) apart, separated from cells using the same frequency by a buffer of
at least two cells to avoid same-frequency interference. Since the number of
voice channels available per cell at any time is about 45, and there may be 100
or more cells in a metropolitan area, several thousand simultaneous calls (45 
100  4500) can be handled by a typical cellular network. Caller capacity is
vastly improved over the original IMTS design. 
Smaller cells means lower cell and handheld unit power requirements for
reliable communications, and decreased battery drain and relaxed antenna
requirements for handheld units. Of course, the power output of a cell phone
doesn’t automatically change dynamically with need, but the decreased
power output requirement is reflected in the cell phone designs made possi-
ble by the smaller cell size. The downside of using low-power levels is the
added expense associated with erecting and maintaining additional cells,
especially since a typical cell installation can cost over $100,000, including
hardware installation and securing rights to erect a cellular antenna.
A key feature of the modern cellular system, absent in the original IMTS
design, is coverage overlap. City and metropolitan areawide coverage is
accomplished despite the finite number of frequencies or channels available
by assigning different frequencies to adjacent cells, and by activating cell trans-
mitters in a way that tracks subscriber movements through the cellular net-
work. As a handheld cellular unit moves from one cell to the next, the relative
field strength of the signal from the handheld unit decreases in the first cell
and increases in the other. A computer-based switching network monitors
106
WIRELESS WONDERS
TEAMFLY

this relative change in signal strength, which varies with the square of the dis-
tance from each cell, and switches the message intended for the handheld
unit to the transmitter in the second cell from the transmitter in the first cell.
Because of the relatively small cell size and the time required for one cell to
hand off a subscriber to another cell, most cellular systems have difficulty
tracking a fast-moving mobile cell phone. Many cellular systems, especially
those located in metropolitan areas where cells tend to be much smaller and
more densely packed than those located in rural areas, are unable to track a
subscriber moving through the network above about 115 kph (70 mph).
Of particular note is that each cell in a cellular network, which is com-
posed of a transmitter and a receiver, is connected to every other cell as well as
to the public telephone network. A Mobile Telephone Switching Office
(MTSO) provides the connectivity to the public telephone network. The
MTSO is what allows a businessman to call his office on his cell phone while
he’s stuck in traffic. It’s also what allows his secretary to use her office phone to
call him when there’s a major problem that he has to deal with. Without a
MTSO, cellular communication would be limited to other subscribers using
cell phones and the same cell phone service. Connectivity through the
MTSO provides the basis for a variety of other services as well, including
accessing the Internet and roaming outside of the local calling area into other
cellular networks. For example, a business traveler from Boston who is work-
ing in San Francisco can use her cell phone because her local MTSO commu-
nicates with her home network for authentication of her status as a registered
user of the system—assuming, of course, that the cellular or PCS services are
compatible.
Balanced Communications Systems
In the world of svelte cellular phones, pencil-thin PDAs, and shrinking two-
way pagers, there is a practical need for mobile devices that use the minimum
power necessary to establish reliable communications. It doesn’t make sense,
from an economic or engineering perspective, to build a handheld cell phone
with a receiver that is more sensitive—and therefore more susceptible to
noise—than is needed to cover the range supported by the handheld’s trans-
mitter output power. As illustrated in Figure 5-2, the transmitter output
power and receiver sensitivity of a cellular communications system are opti-
mum when coverage for sending and receiving messages is about the same.
This is especially true at the fringes of cell range, as shown in the figure. At the
fringe of the cell, both the cell and handheld subscriber units can receive each
other’s transmitted signals. 
In contrast, a scenario in which a handheld unit’s transmit power is not
matched to its receiver sensitivity. Although the handheld unit’s signal is
strong enough for the cell to detect, the cell’s transmitter is out of receive
range for the handheld. In other words, a handheld unit is wasting energy on
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
107

transmitter power that could otherwise be used, for example, to extend
standby time. In addition, by transmitting more power than necessary, the
handheld unit contributes to the overall noise of the system, and may inter-
fere with other mobile and fixed cell users. For subscribers concerned about
the health risks of handheld “microwave ovens,” the extra power simply pre-
sents a greater potential risk. Most handheld cellular and PCS units provide a
little over 1/2 W of output power. Mobile units, which rely on the car battery
for power, typically produce 3 W, the legal limit allowed by the FCC. This
added power is also usually complemented by a more sensitive receiver and a
superior antenna system, thereby maintaining a balanced system.
Geographic Coverage
The Achilles heel of the U.S. cellular network, at least from the perspective of
the traveling public, is the lack of nationwide cellular coverage. Unlike the situa-
tion in Western Europe, there is no single domestic cellular or PCS system that
provides uninterrupted coverage from coast to coast. The intentional or
designed-in gaps in coverage are no accident. From an economic perspective,
these gaps may be justifiable, in that covering an uninhabited stretch of desert in
Arizona may not have a reasonable return on investment, compared to cover-
ing Tucson. In this regard, the lack of nationwide coverage in the United States is
in part due to wide variations in population densities. Europe, being more
densely and uniformly populated than the United States, can expect a reason-
able return on investment for virtually every cell on the continent. Since there
are very few sparsely populated areas in Western Europe, mobile operators can
reach more subscribers with a smaller investment in the cellular network.
In addition to intentional lapses in coverage, there are unintentional gaps as
well. This is commonly a result of signal absorption from vegetation and reflec-
108
WIRELESS WONDERS
Cell
Subscriber
Transmit Range
Receive Range
Figure 5-2. Balanced Communications. The optimum condition is when coverage for sending and
receiving message is about the same, especially at the fringe of cell range.

tion from cars and buildings, or because height or other restrictions necessitate
the use of separate antennas for the base cell’s transmit and receive signals. Sepa-
rate antennas can result in uneven coverage on transmit and receive. The result
of intentional and unintentional gaps is that, outside of areas with dense cellular
coverage, for example, the major metropolitan areas and away from major high-
ways, there are frequently dropped and poor quality calls.
In contrast to spotty and regional cellular and PCS coverage, pagers,
including the more recently introduced two-way variety, provide more or less
blanket coverage of the United States—at least for receiving messages. The
increased coverage available for pagers is due primarily to the configuration of
the pager cells. Each cell is composed of a powerful, centrally located trans-
mitter that can cover a wide geographic area. Within each cell are several
highly sensitive receivers that can respond to the 1-W two-way pager signal. In
addition, each cell is linked to a network of other cells by both satellite and
cable connections in order to provide national coverage.
Dealing with Interference
Cellular phones, like all other communications devices, are not only susceptible
to signals from other devices but also generate signals that can interfere with
other devices. For example, as every business traveler who flies knows, FAA reg-
ulations prohibit the use of cell phones and certain other electronic devices dur-
ing takeoff and landing because of the potential of interference from these
devices with the equipment on board the plane. Similarly, many hospitals ban
the use of cell phones, especially near recovery areas, because of the potential for
interference with sensitive life support and monitoring equipment. Cell phones
are susceptible to interference from other phones, from microwave ovens, cord-
less phones, laptops and PCs, external disk drives and printers, and automobile
ignition systems. Some of these sources can simply be avoided.
Although susceptibility to interface is less of a problem with digital
receiver designs, a large percentage of cellular users in the United States are
using older analog technology, which is more likely to be affected by high
strength signals on adjacent frequencies. Digital cellular systems are less sus-
ceptible to interfering signals than are older analog receivers.
One of the major concerns over interference is regarding the 2.4-GHz
spectrum, which is becoming saturated with signals from PCS phones, wire-
less LANs, Bluetooth, and even microwave ovens. Because of concerns about
interference, as well as the simple need for more bandwidth, research into
fourth-generation (4G) cellular communications is taking place at even
higher frequencies where greater bandwidths are available. At higher fre-
quencies, greater bandwidth is generally available for communications for
technologic reasons and because no one has claimed or licensed the space
from the FCC. The HyperLAN project, a European venture into 4G systems,
uses the 5.3-GHz band once relegated to experimenters. 
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
109

The higher microwave frequencies, which approach optical frequencies,
are generally more challenging to work with compared to lower VHF and
UHF frequencies. For example, generating power at the higher frequencies is
more difficult, in part because electronic components are not as efficient at
higher frequencies, and in part because when designing ultra-compact com-
munications devices the higher frequencies represent uncharted territory for
many communications engineers. Generating 1/2 W of output power at 800
MHz is much less challenging than generating the same power at 2 or 4 GHz
from the same size handheld unit.  
WIRELESS WEB PROTOCOLS
Communications Protocols
A major component of the information-handling infrastructure of the wire-
less Web is the collection of communications protocols that establish an envi-
ronment that can support services such as Web access. Before discussing the
individual protocols, it’s important to distinguish between packet switching
and circuit switching. Circuit switching is the way the worldwide telephone
system works, which is why it is often referred to as the Public Switched Tele-
phone Network (PSTN). In circuit switching, a connection is made between
sender and receiver for the duration of the conversation or data transfer. The
circuit is free to be used by another party only when the switch is opened,
regardless of when the communication was finished Packet switching, in con-
trast, sends packets of information from the sender to the receiver, leaving the
communications channel open to other subscribers who are free to send
packets through the system. The original message is parsed into small slices
and put into packets that are individually addressed and numbered to the
recipient, and each packet may take a different route to get to the recipient.
Packet switching is important because it is the model upon which the wired
Internet is based. Furthermore, packet switching on the wireless Web, first
implemented in a big way by NTT DoCoMo for their I-Mode, allows an
always-on condition since the communications channel isn’t held captive by a
single subscriber, and can receive a packet of information at any time.
Paradoxically, the evolution of wireless protocols in the United States is
the reverse of that found in Europe. While Europe has evolved from a first-
generation (G1) analog cellular system with five major, incompatible stan-
dards to a single, pan-European GSM standard, the United States has moved
from a single G1 analog standard into three noncompatible digital standards,
TDMA, CDMA, and GSM. There are literally dozens of other networks,
especially in the areas of paging networks and specialized services that are not
listed for the sake of clarity.
AMPS (Advanced Mobile Phone System) is the first-generation (1G)
analog cellular system used throughout the United States. Analog cellular is
110
WIRELESS WONDERS

almost ubiquitous across the United States. With a suitable modem and a lap-
top or PDA, analog cellular can be used for wireless data communications.
Data throughput using analog cellular is slow. Subscribers typically experi-
ence about 2 KBps data throughput on the system, which operates in the
800-MHz band.
MOBITEX (Mobitex International) is a data-only two-way pager net-
work developed by Ericsson and known in the United States as BellSouth
Wireless Data. In addition to supporting RIM’s two-way paging, this system is
used by Palm and GoAmerica service providers and some wireless LANs,
including those based on RIM’s type II card for laptops. Mobitex operates at
400 and 800 MHz, with a data rate of 8 KBps. Mobitex uses a cellular net-
work model, with each cell served by an intelligent base station. BellSouth
provides coverage for about 93 percent of the United States.
A related service offered by Motient Corporation competes for wireless
messaging in the United States. Motient, which supports wireless modems
for PCs as well as wireless PDAs including those from RIM, offers wireless ser-
vices in four general categories: terrestrial data, terrestrial voice and data, satel-
lite-only data, and satellite point-to-multipoint voice communications.
D-AMPS (Digital-AMPS or Digital Cellular) is one of the two main
types of second-generation (2G) digital wireless service in the United States.
The other domestic digital service, PCS, uses small antennas and more closely
spaced cells. D-AMPS, which is supported by two incompatible multiplexing
schemes, provides increased channel capacity, caller ID, built-in pagers, and
other features not available on analog cellular systems. Digital cellular radio
signals are more difficult to intercept and decode, compared to analog cellular,
providing a more secure communications channel. In the United States, D-
AMPS is licensed to operate in the 800-MHz Band.
CDMA (Code Division Multiple Access) is a spread spectrum, second-
generation (2G) communications service developed in the United States by
Qualcomm. Although CDMA is a popular standard in the United States and
South Korea, and is gaining market share in China (even though China post-
poned plans to build a mobile network based on CDMA), it was not
embraced by Europe, in part because the European GMS standard provides
superior sound. Voice is important; even in Japan and Finland, where digital
services abound, cell phones are used primarily for voice communications.
CDMA, which supports a data rate of 14.4 KBps, is technically superior to its
main competitor, TDMA, in terms of bandwidth efficiency. CDMA can sup-
port more calls in a given bandwidth, compared to TDMA. In the United
States, CDMA operates in the 800-MHz and 1.9-GHz bands. The CDMA
wireless communications protocol has many parallels with the communica-
tions model developed in Chapter 4.
NA-TDMA (North American—Time Division Multiple Access), the
first digital standard tested in the United States, is one of the three competing
second-generation cellular standards in North and South America. This stan-
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
111

dard supports data throughput of up to 19.2 KBps, but typical speeds are
around 8 KBps. TDMA, which is used by Nextel’s PCS service, operates on
the same bandwidth as CDMA cellular, but the two protocols are incompat-
ible with each other. Whereas CDMA uses spread spectrum technology to
assign each user a code within the spectrum, TDMA divides the frequency
into time slots and gives users access to a time slot at regular intervals.
Although Nextel is built around TDMA, it uses a proprietary network.
TDMA is the largest network in the United States, and second in the world,
behind GSM. In the United States, NA-TDMA operates in the 800-MHz and
1.9-GHz bands.
CDPD (Cellular Digital Packet Data) is a wireless communications pro-
tocol used primarily in second-generation (2G) wireless data communication
systems. Each device in a CDPD network has a unique network address and
remains connected as long as the cell phone or wireless PDA is on; broken
connections are automatically and transparently resumed. CDPD has a max-
imum speed of 19.2 KBps, as defined by the FCC, which is adequate for
graphics-free Web surfing and email. CDPD is a popular standard for a PCM-
CIA wireless modem cards that allow any laptop to connect to the wireless
Web through a patchwork system that provides about 50 percent coverage
in the United States.
GSM(Global System for Telecommunications), a variant of TDMA that
uses time-division technology, is extremely popular in Europe, where it has
essentially decimated the CDMA system. GSM is used in over 130 countries,
representing over 70 percent of the wireless subscribers worldwide. Even so,
the domestic representation of GSM is less than 10 percent . The typical
GSM data throughput is about 16 KBps. GSM is a PCS network that operates
at 1.9 GHz in the United States and 900 MHz or 1.9 GHz throughout most
of the rest of the world. Wireless phone manufacturers are more than happy
to offer a solution to the frequent flying executive who needs to maintain
phone communications throughout the United States or the world in the
form of multimode phones that are capable of switching between analog and
various modes of digital communications dynamically.
I-MODE (Internet Mode) is NTT DoCoMo’s second-generation (2G)
wireless communications protocol used throughout Japan. I-Mode, which
has a maximum speed of 28.8 KBps, is based on the Internet Protocol (IP and
a subset of HTML. The Internet Protocol, a component of TCP/IP, is the chief
method of transporting data across the Internet. I-Mode, which operates in
the 1.9-MHz band, is based on a packet-switched infrastructure that supports
the “always-on” wireless connectivity that I-Mode is famous for. Because I-
Mode is so far ahead of any other wireless Web implementation, it’s often
regarded as 2.5G.
GPRS (General Packet Radio Services) is the planned interim (2.5G)
high-speed digital cellular upgrade to Europe’s GSM network. One of the fea-
tures of GPRS is that the packet-switched infrastructure supports the ability
112
WIRELESS WONDERS

for cellular subscribers to maintain a fast, always-on connection to the wire-
less Internet. After GPRS, which represents the evolutionary endpoint of the
GSM technology, the countries in Western Europe are planning to deploy
wide-band CDMA for third-generation (3G) services. Although GPRS soft-
ware can be installed as a software upgrade to existing GSM networks, it does-
n’t improve the network’s capacity significantly. In addition, GPRS is unlikely
to be able to achieve download speeds of much above 100 KBps. GPRS is posi-
tioned as an interim strategy that is expected to last from 18 to 24 months,
during which time the infrastructure for G3 will be put into place.
EDGE (Enhanced Data rates for Global Evolution), like GPRS, is an
intermediate (2.5G) solution to increasing the throughput on the wireless
Web. EDGE can boost data speeds on both GSM and TDMA networks to
more than 300 KBps, up to 2 MBps in some cases. Like GPRS, however,
EDGE doesn’t increase network capacity significantly, meaning it is likely to
be an intermediate technology for many operators. EDGE, like GPRS, repre-
sents a nondisruptive way to upgrade existing GSM networks without dimin-
ishing the revenue stream.
CDMA 2000 (Code Division Multiple Access 2000) is a third-genera-
tion (G3) wireless technology derived from second-generation CDMA.
Developed by Qualcomm, CDMA 2000 can be laid on top of an existing
CDMA network. The first release of CDMA 2000 will supposedly boost
download rates to 100 KBps, while the next stage will support speeds of more
than 300 KBps. CDMA 2000 is projected to eventually support data streams
of up to 2 MBps.
W-CDMA (Wide-Band Code Division Multiple Access), a rival to
CDMA 2000, is a third-generation (3G) wireless communications protocol
derived from CDMA. W-CDMA is Japan’s cornerstone for their 3G initiative
starting in Tokyo and will become available nationally over a three-year roll-
out period. W-CDMA will initially deliver content at download speeds of up
to 300 KBps, with capabilities to 2 MBps. W-CDMA is backed by NTT
DoCoMo, Nokia, and Ericsson, among others. It is expected that China will
eventually move to W-CDMA for at least part of its cellular communications
solution. W-CDMA is often referred to in Europe as UMTS.
UMTS(Universal Mobile Telecommunications Systems), a third-genera-
tion (3G) network protocol built with W-CDMA technology, is expected to
become the first global mobile phone standard to have high-speed capabilities.
Europeans with UMTS cell phones will be able to surf  the Web and enjoy ser-
vices that take advantage of being online all the time just as users of Japan’s I-
Mode have done since 1999. Although initial data throughput will be around
300 KBps, access speeds near 2 MBps will eventually be supported.
TD-SCDMA (Time Division-Synchronous Code Division Multiple
Access) is China’s homegrown standard for third-generation (3G) cellular.
Often referred to as 2.9G cellular because it isn’t quite up to the technical spec-
ifications of other 3G proposed standards, TD-SCDMA is being developed in
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
113

conjunction with Siemens. The Chinese Academy of Telecommunications
Technology (CAT), Alcatel, and Ericsson are also involved in developing the
standard. Even though TD-SCDMA is not quite 3G technology, because it is
inexpensive, it is thought to be suitable for poorer, remote areas of China that
won’t have a need for 3G for several years. TD-SCDMA is prominent not
because of the technology proper, but because the standard enjoys the sup-
port of the Chinese government. The U.S. company Qualcomm claims that
TD-SCDMA uses components of its patented CDMA technology, and that
they are entitled to licensing fees. China is apparently motivated to create its
own standard in order to avoid paying royalties to Qualcomm and others.
China may eventually use W-CDMA for 3G service in the big cities, avoiding
at least some of the Qualcomm licensing issues.
IMT-2000 (International Mobile Telecommunications for 2000) is a
next-generation, global wireless service initiative proposed by the ITU-T
(International Telecommunications Union—Telecommunications Sector).
This third-generation (G3) standard, which is more of a concept for fourth-
generation (G4) wireless communications than a standard, defines a 128-
KBps data rate for mobile applications, 384 KBps for handheld devices, and 2
MBps for fixed wireless LANs. The standard includes frequency allocations
for mobile satellite services, generally referred to as the GMPCS (Global
Mobile Personal Communications by Satellite). Terrestrial cellular services
will operate in the 2-GHz band.
Generations
Some domestic companies are moving from 2G, which was designed primarily
to support voice, directly to 3G, which is designed to carry multimedia, bypass-
ing the 2.5G temporary patch. For example, for AT&T to move to 2.5G based
on TDMA would require the company to install new equipment in all of its
10,000 cell sites across the United States. With a projected life span of only two
or three years, a 2.5G initiative would simply be too expensive for the expected
ROI. The risk, of course, is that 3G may take several years to materialize, and
competing companies may use this window of opportunity to develop their
own 2.5G solutions, some of which may be superior to AT&T’s 2G system. 
Special Protocols 
Bluetooth. The highly publicized Bluetooth protocol, a common set of
specifications for short-range RF wireless communications network, is sup-
ported by approximately 2000 companies, from IBM, Microsoft, and
Hewlett Packard to Dell and Palm. Because of uncertainty in the eventual suc-
cess of Bluetooth, many of these companies support competing standards as
well. Bluetooth defines the hardware and software required to provide the
10-m (30-ft) operating radius in the 2.4-GHz band with a maximum
114
WIRELESS WONDERS

throughput of 720 KBps. The technology, which uses a low-power, two-way
radio link that is built into a microchip, is designed for transmitting and receiv-
ing small amounts of data. Initial applications include linking cell phones and
cordless headsets, linking PDAs with cell phones, linking smart cards still
tucked in a customer’s wallet with a cash register at checkout lines, and auto-
matically collecting tolls from cars passing through toll booths.
Bluetooth is viewed as a way to replace the cables to printers, scanners,
mice, keyboards, and other peripherals to desktop PCs. In this regard, Blue-
tooth is a replacement for IR connectivity. Whereas IR is directional or line of
sight, Bluetooth’s RF signal is omnidirectional. In addition, whereas IR is one-
to-one, Bluetooth provides a one-to-many connection for up to eight voice
and data communications devices.
Bluetooth supports two modes, Private and Promiscuous. While in the Pri-
vate mode, a Bluetooth device will respond to signals from only specified
devices. A PDA would normally be configured in Private mode, for example,
allowing only the owner to access his or her address book. In the Promiscuous
mode, a Bluetooth device, such as a printer, can receive input from any other
Bluetooth device. One application of Bluetooth technology is to support auto-
matic, private access to a PDA-based address book from a subscriber’s cell
phone without any effort on the subscriber’s part. The user enters the name of
the person to be contacted and the number is retrieved from the PDA, which
could be in the subscriber’s briefcase. The PDA may also log the file in the PDA’s
database, noting the time and length of the call and the person contacted.
Although the success of Bluetooth isn’t guaranteed, the supporting com-
panies, including Dell, IBM, Motorola, Qualcomm, Ford Motor Company,
and British Airways, are pouring resources into the standard. For example,
Microsoft is working with the chip manufacturer Intel to integrate Bluetooth
more closely with the Windows operating system. Similarly, Motorola offers
a Bluetooth car kit, with Bluetooth features available to domestic and foreign
car companies. IBM released one of the first widely available Bluetooth
devices in 2000, a PCMCIA card for laptops.
Another automotive Bluetooth initiative, spearheaded by Motorola, is to
equip vehicles with a Telematics Control Unit (TCU) that is kept in the trunk
of a car. Each TCU provides cellular phone service, GPS, Web-based map-
ping, as well as the usual mobile office amenities such as address book and cal-
endar. While the unit sits securely mounted in the trunk, a cordless
Bluetooth phone handset controls the unit. Obvious extensions to the sys-
tem under development by Motorola are to provide Bluetooth connectivity
to gas station pumps for ordering and paying for gas, as a garage door opener,
and to control home lighting and alarm status on entry and exit.
A major concern with Bluetooth is that its 128-bit encryption system
may not be sufficient to prevent attack by viruses or, more significantly, theft.
For example, with the right equipment, a thief could stand at the end of a
checkout line at a grocery store and capture everyone’s charge information as
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
115

Bluetooth-enabled charge cards or cell phones transmit their financial infor-
mation to the Bluetooth-enabled cash register.  Another limitation is the
reliance on a variety of batteries in multiple devices—any of which could fail
because of an expired battery.
Wi-Fi. Although not a direct competitor to Bluetooth, the Wireless
Fidelity (Wi-Fi) protocol, also known as the IEEE 802.11b High Rate Stan-
dard, is yet another component-to-component wireless communications
protocol that has major industrial backers. Wi-Fi is backed by the Wireless
Ethernet Compatibility Alliance, which includes Lucent, Cisco, and 3Com.
Wi-Fi is positioned to become the standard for high-speed wireless LANs,
with features like encryption for security. A new generation of chips is mak-
ing Wi-Fi more cost-effective than competing, nonstandardized wireless net-
work systems. 
Any Wi-Fi certified device, from a personal computer to a stereo system,
should work seamlessly with every other Wi-Fi certified device. Whereas
Bluetooth seems to be aimed more at personal devices, Wi-Fi is projected to
provide wireless connectivity for business travelers in airports and in major
hotels. However, like Bluetooth, Wi-Fi will also allow anyone with the proper
hardware to connect between laptop and desktop at speeds of 11 MBps—
over an order of magnitude greater than the speed supported by Bluetooth. 
SWAP. Like Wi-Fi, SWAP (Shared Wireless Access Protocol) is a low-
cost, high-speed wireless networking protocol that supports the HomeRF
networking system. With a maximum speed of 10 MBps, the protocol sup-
ports streaming multimedia on multiple devices and with multiple networks.
SWAP is backed by Intel, Motorola, Siemens, and Proxim, and is positioned as
a direct competitor to Wi-Fi.
UPNP and JINI. In the move to connect all appliances in the home
with wired and wireless communications to the Internet, allowing every-
thing to be controlled and monitored from anywhere, two additional com-
peting standards have evolved. UPNP (Universal Plug and Play) from
Microsoft and JINI from Sun Microsystems, Inc. JINI is the standard pro-
posed for wired and wireless connection of appliances to the Internet, backed
by Sun Microsystems, Inc., and based on their JAVA language. Given the
uncertainty of the eventual winner, a consortium of leading consumer elec-
tronics companies have formed the Home Audio Video Interoperability
Organization (HAVi) to develop a technology for entertainment systems that
works with either JINI or UPNP. Although Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, JINI, and UPNP
have overlapping aims, Wi-Fi and Bluetooth are not compatible with each
other, nor are they compatible with JINI or UPNP. 
High-Level Protocols and Languages
The following are a sampling of the top language technologies being applied
to developing and presenting content on the wireless Web, often through the
116
WIRELESS WONDERS
TEAMFLY

use of a microbrowser. A microbrowser is a software application designed to
run on handheld wireless devices and to interpret and display documents
written in languages such as WML and HDML. Equivalents to a micro-
browser on the wired Web are Netscape Navigator and Internet Explorer. 
These languages sit on top of the communications protocols previously
discussed that provide an infrastructure upon which voice and data commu-
nications can occur. These languages address the actual content that sub-
scribers see when they interact with the wireless Web. These Web
implementation languages can be considered applications or environments
that run on top of the protocol layer of the wireless Web, just as the HTML,
Java, and JavaScript languages work on the wired Web. See Figure 5-3 for the
lineage of these languages.
Figure 5-3. The lineage of languages for the wired and wireless Webs. WML is XML-based. The
globe represents the wired Web.
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
117

SGML (Structured General Markup Language) is not a wireless lan-
guage or protocol, but it is the parent from which most wired and wireless
languages are derived, as shown in Figure 5-3.
HTML (Hypertext Markup Language) is the language of the wired
Web and, with some small modifications, of NTT DoCoMo’s I-Mode. HTML
is used to create Web pages, often in combination with applets written in Java
or some other language to provide improved security, dynamic graphics, and
other content. In addition to generic HTML, there are a variety of flavors or
minor variations of HTML, such as Compact-HTML used by Windows CE
handhelds. 
The problem with HTML, from a wired and wireless Web perspective, is
that the data are buried within the HTML code. For example, if the goal is to
present the following formatted statement over the Web:
The quick brown fox bit the lazy dog.
Then the HTML equivalent would appear in the form:
<HTML>
The quick brown <BOLD>fox</BOLD> <I>bit</I> the
lazy <BOLD> dog</BOLD>.
</HTML>
As a result, it’s difficult to extract and repurpose the data for other uses,
such as support for transaction-based processes over Web-enabled cell
phones. As illustrated in Figure 5-4, for an enterprise with all data stored in an
HTML format, the content must be reformatted for each type of device sup-
ported, from cell phones with postage stamp-size displays to larger RIM
Blackberry, Palm, and PocketPC displays. That is, if there are five types of
devices supported from a central HTML-based archive, then every change in
the central content ripples through the system, requiring recoding of the
HTML for each of the five devices. The more different types of devices that
must be supported, the more fragile the system, and the more maintenance
overhead involved.
HDML(Handheld Device Markup Language) is a proprietary language
for coding Web sites so the content can be downloaded quickly onto wireless
systems. HDML, a modification of standard HTML for use on wireless
devices, is the basis for WML. Some older microbrowsers can only access
HDML-written Web sites. HDML allows cellular subscribers to access the
Internet and send and receive email.
WML(Wireless Markup Language) is a language for implementing user
interfaces on wireless devices. WML, which is analogous to and based on
HDML, is optimized to create Web sites that are compatible WAP. WML, a
core part of WAP, is designed for specifying user interface behavior and con-
tent on portable wireless devices. Unlike HDML, WML supports scripting.
118
WIRELESS WONDERS

Because WML is based on XML, there are a variety of commercially available
tools that can be used to generate and manipulate WML code, compressing
an application’s time to market.
A variety of translation tools are available for moving content from the
wired to the wireless Web. For example, IBM’s WebSphere Transcoding Pub-
lisher dynamically translates HTML and XML content originally developed
for the multimedia-rich wired Web into WML for display on wireless devices.
Web sites coded in WML can be accessed via WAP gateways, which are
servers that compress data into a form compatible with Web-enabled cell
phones.
WMLScript (Web markup language script) is a lightweight scripting
language for the wireless Web that looks and performs something like
JavaScript on the wired Web. WMLScript allows programmers to check the
validity of user-supplied data, access device-specific features, and generate a
message.
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
119
Data
and
Formatting
HTML
Document
Device-Specific
Reformatted
HTML Documents
Content Publisher
(WML/WAP)
Content Publisher
(HTML/HTTP)
Content Publisher
Content Publisher
Figure 5-4.
An HTML-based wired and wireless content distribution system. Since content and
data display are coupled, HTML content must be reformatted for each type of device to be sup-
ported. Changing the source content usually requires reformatting the HTML code for each device.
Similary, supporting a new device requires reformatting the content as well as redefining how the
content is displayed.

XML (Extensible Markup Language) is a markup language for the Web
that supports the definition, transmission, validation, and interpretation of
data on a variety of hardware and software environments without specifically
coding for each environment. In other words, XML allows a Web designer to
create a program once, without the need to create a separate version for every
model of wireless PDA and cellular phone on the market.
XML was introduced in part because HTML, the language of the wired
Web, doesn’t distinguish between data and the presentation of data, and only
deals with the appearance of information. That is, the wired Web is replete
with information that is trapped in HTML forms. Although there are search
engines that can locate some of this data, for the most part, it is unusable by
other applications. XML is popular in the wired as well as the wireless Web
development shops because it is self-describing. An XML message contains
the data being passed to another system—a wireless PDA, for example—as
well as a universal description of that data. This data about data or metadata
can be used for formatting on the particular device used to view the data.
Continuing with the example above:
The quick brown fox bit the lazy dog.
Would appear as XML in the form:
<PHRASE>
The <SPEED>quick</SPEED> <COLOR>brown</COLOR>
<ANIMAL>fox </ANIMAL> <ACTION>bit</ACTION> the
<SPEED>lazy</SPEED> <ANIMAL>dog</ANIMAL>.
</PHRASE>
Although unformatted, the XML document has structure and tags that
can be used to infer meaning. For example, the XML document could be
queried to determine that it contains a phrase that references two animals, a
“fox” and a “dog,” and two speeds, “quick” and “lazy.” The formatting for the
display devices is handled by XSL, described below. XML is also extensible,
meaning that developers can define new tags (codes used in formatting or
identifying data), as well as define how the tagged content should be used by
the application running on a smart phone or wireless PDA. For example, a tag
might specify that a text string contain numeric data. XML tags can be com-
bined with HTML, providing increased flexibility when working with data
on the wired and wireless Web. The formal combination of HTML and XML
is called XHTML, which is poised to become the standard implementation
language on the wired Web. XHTML allows documents to be created in
HTML and for mathematical equations to be in the form of XML.
XML excels at data aggregation and syndication tasks, where aggregation
is the process of collecting data from disparate sources, and syndication is the
process of distributing data to disparate channels, such as wireless PDAs and
120
WIRELESS WONDERS

cell phones. Even when every subscriber is using the same hardware and soft-
ware, XML can be useful by providing user-specific interfaces. For example, a
customer could be presented with a graphically rich Web storefront,
whereas a manager could receive a no-frills, information-rich ordering status
display. For these and other reasons, XML is quickly becoming a standard on
the Web, wired or not.
The main deterrent to using XML at this point of wireless Web infra-
structure development is that the performance of XML on some 2G wireless
networks can be less than adequate. The popularity and utility of XML
should improve rapidly as bandwidth improvements are made in the wireless
infrastructure. Paradoxically, although XML was developed by an engineer
with Sun Microsystems in 1996, Microsoft, Sun’s major competitor, is using a
version of XML known as Biztalk as the center of its Internet strategy.
XSL (Extensible Stylesheet Language) is an extension of XML that
allows transformation of XML-based data into HTML and other presenta-
tion formats. By using XSL, the presentation format can vary from the under-
lying data structure. XML, together with XSL Translation (XSLT), separates
the content from formatting, allowing one XML content document to sup-
port multiple style formats.  For example, the content in the XML statement
above can be formatted for several wireless devices through the use of XSL
code that defines the document structure for each device.
A device that supports bold and italic text output would have an XSL
document in the form:
FORMAT "ANIMAL" = BOLD
FORMAT "ACTION" = ITALICS
However, if a second device doesn’t support bold but does support color,
then emphasis on the two animals could be provided by using red text
instead of the default black text. Using the same XML document as a source,
the XSL would take the form:
FORMAT "ANIMAL" = COLOR: RED
FORMAT "ACTION" = ITALICS
As illustrated in Figure 5-5, support for multiple wired and wireless
devices is simplified by an XML/XSL environment, compared to the multi-
ple interface model required by a native HTML environment.
WAP (Wireless Application Protocol) is a collection of standards that
developers and hardware manufacturers follow to provide a standard environ-
ment for wireless applications. Phone.com of Redmond City, California, is the
impetus behind the development of WAP, as well as the design of the browser
that appears on WAP phones. WAP is the backbone protocol that lets users
connect to the Internet across any digital wireless network and through any
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
121

122
Data (Constant)
XML
Document
XSL
Translation
Formatting (Variable)
Device-Specific
XSL Pages
Content Publisher
(WML/WAP)
Content Publisher
(HTML/HTTP)
Content Publisher
Content Publisher
Figure 5-5. An XML/XSL-based wired and wireless content distribution system. Because the data (in XML) is decoupled from the display information, one XML
content documents and multiple XSL style sheets can support multiple devices without modifying the content. The content provider converts device-specific XSL
pages to serve the language and protocol for particular devices: HTML/HTTP for the wired Web and WML/WAP for Web-enabled phones, for example. Compared
to an HTML document, system maintenance is reduced and new devices are more easily added.

wireless device, application, or service provider. In order to get content from a
Web server on the Internet to a mobile device running a WAP browser, a WAP
gateway is necessary. A WAP gateway forms the protocol and format conver-
sion to transmit content to a mobile device such as a wireless PDA. 
The challenge for companies developing wireless Web content that is
WAP compliant is that WAP is an evolving standard. Microbrowser develop-
ers and hardware manufacturers have to make provisions for new features
while maintaining backward compatibility with existing cell phones. For
example, Push Access Protocol (PAP) was first introduced in WAP 1.2. This
feature, not available on WAP 1.1, provides a standard, programmable way of
pushing data, such as stock quotes, to a WAP-enabled cell phone. When
Nokia released the source code with their WAP browser, it became easier for
developers to create services customized for their needs.
Handling legacy cell phones is another challenge, because pre-
WAP–enabled microbrowsers only understand HDML, the language from
which WML was derived, and don’t recognize WMLScript. One solution is
to provide a gateway that automatically translates WML into HDML. How-
ever, in this approach, the advanced features of WML not found in HDML are
lost and unavailable to subscribers without current WAP microbrowsers.
While developers in the United States have to make provisions for users
with pre-WAP microbrowsers, European developers face the opposite prob-
lem. Since most European cell phones support some version of the WAP
standard, Web sites written in the older HDML language need to be trans-
lated to WML by a gateway before they can be interpreted on WAP-enabled
wireless devices.
The WAP protocol model, contains the transport layer, security layer, a
means of application delivery, and finally, at the top level, some means of devel-
oping content for users. Whereas the wired Web uses TCP/IP as the basic
transport protocol, WAP is based on the network protocol, such as GSM or
CDMA, as well something called the Wireless Datagram Protocol. This pro-
tocol presents a consistent data format to the higher layers of the WAP proto-
col, giving developers independence from the underlying wireless network
hardware and software.
At the next level up, Wireless Transport Layer (WTL) Security handles
security features of WAP. Up one more layer, WSP (Wireless Session Proto-
col) and WTP (Wireless Transaction Protocol) provide an environment for
transactions and for linking wireless applications to various services. At the
highest level of the WAP protocol is content development or wireless appli-
cation environment, which contains definitions of the user interfaces on
various handheld devices. Whereas the wired Web supports HTML and
JavaScript for content development at this level, WAP accepts WML and
the parallel to JavaScript, WMLScript, the programming and display lan-
guages in the WAP environment. That is, JavaScript is to WMLScript as
HTML is to WML.
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
123

In theory, WAP is an open, network independent, global specification
intended to allow cellular subscribers to access and interact with information
and services on the Web. WAP has a lot going for it. For example, WAP works
across all three cell phone technologies in the United States, allowing domes-
tic content providers the luxury of not having to create specific messages for
different displays.
In practice, WAP has some severe limitations. For example, WAP has had
a slow start because handsets with WAP-compatible microbrowsers were ini-
tially not available, services have been slow in coming, and there are different
interpretations of the WAP standard, causing incompatibility problems on
some cellular devices. Because of these incompatibility problems, WAP has
severe competition at the low end of the market from Short Message Ser-
vices, which works with most digital phones. SMS is a protocol used to send
short text messages to non-WAP cellular phones.  It’s popular in Nordic coun-
tries and in Western Europe because it can run on older-generation phones, it
is relatively inexpensive, and it supports secure payment for mobile electronic
commerce. In 2000, about a third of all online trades in Singapore were made
through SMS-based Internet connections. New versions of WAP are being
developed and released, but each release requires a new handset. Another
threat to the lifeline of WAP is that 3G networks may eventually have enough
throughput to handle the fully wired Internet – that is, native HTML with-
out the need for WAP or any other cellular-specific protocol or environment.
China, the largest potential wireless market worldwide, is ahead of the
other Asian markets in introducing WAP. However, like other WAP installa-
tions, the network is slow and features are limited. Motorola is pushing GPRS
in China as a way to provide high-speed WAP services. A practical example of
applied WAP technology is DHL in Stockholm’s package tracing service,
wherein a customer calls the DHL service via a cell phone and enters the
number of the package to be traced. The service returns a list of dates and
locations for the package, whether or not the package has been delivered, and,
if it has been delivered, the name of the person who signed for the package.
Other Approaches
In addition to the above languages, there are a variety of tools that have been
announced for developing wireless applications. For example, Sun Microsys-
tems introduced J2ME (Java 2 Micro Edition, also known as JavaLite) as a
development platform for Web-enabled cell phones that is a potential com-
petitor to WAP. J2ME, which has been embraced by RIM and other hardware
providers, represents a major departure from the PC approach to computing
because it is an abstraction of the hardware and operating system. In other
words, instead of the PC-era client-server architecture, J2ME is synonymous
with a sessionless, distributed online viewing and browsing architecture. In
this regard, J2ME supports a virtual machine that is more a programming
124
WIRELESS WONDERS

environment than an operating system such as Palm OS or Windows CE.
These and similar operating systems support session-based interactions,
meaning that the communications connection is active from the beginning to
the end of each interaction.
Even if a company doesn’t use a tool to rewrite its content for the wireless
Web, wired Web content can still be accessed by a technique called Web Clip-
ping, screen scraping, transcoding, or morphing. Web Clipping involves read-
ing the contents of a Web site, stripping the graphics, links, and multimedia,
and then displaying the text on a wireless device. Web Clippers tend to be site
specific, in that they make some allowances for the individual Web sites, so text
formatting is optimum for reading and interacting with the site. Web Clipping
was popularized by Palm Computing to support its wireless PDA, the Palm
VII. By offering Web-site–specific clipping applications for free downloading
from its Web site, Palm was able to provide users of its wireless PDA with access
to the most popular services supported by the wireless Web.
In many ways, clipping or screen scraping is a throwback to the 1980s
when vendors used a similar approach to move data from mainframe applica-
tions to the then-new desktop PC. The problem with the approach back
then, and today, is that when there are changes made to the screen display—
to the Web site in this case—the scraper must be modified to recognize the
change and the nature of the new data. In addition, because the scraping
process tends to be device specific, a different scraping algorithm has to be
developed for each wireless device. For example, the scraping or clipping
applications developed for the Palm VII don’t work for wireless phones that
sport postage stamp-size screens. In other words, simple screen scraping is
usually viewed as a short-term fix that doesn’t scale. 
Second-generation screen scraping provides the ability to dynamically
follow changes in the source HTML and reflect these changes in the appro-
priate manner in a variety of handheld environments. For example, one
approach is to take the original HTML code and convert it to an intermediate
form, such as XML and XSL that can more easily serve a variety of wireless
handheld devices. For example, Netmorph, Inc., provides a middleware solu-
tion to moving from the wired to the wireless Web that involves converting
the standard HTML feeding a Web site to XML and XSL, which maps to a
variety of handheld devices. Changes in the HTML code that feeds the wired
Web site are automatically reflected in the XML. One of the features of the
Netmorph model is that, once the conversion to XML is complete, the wired
and wireless are separate and independent. For example, the wired Web site
can go down and not affect service on the wireless handheld devices.
DISCUSSION
The development of every wireless communications system represents an
engineering effort. Unlike pure scientific exploration, the goal is to create a
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
125

means of providing consistent communications—a technology—that repre-
sents the tension between form, function, and affordability (see Figure 5-6).
For example, the affordability of a Web-enabled cellular phone includes the
direct or subsidized handset price; the service contract (which can include
prepaid service, one-rate service, with or without extra roaming charges); the
cost of accessories, such as a headset, belt clip, spare battery, charger for home
or office; as well as incidental operating costs, such as a replacement battery
every year. From the cellular operator’s perspective, affordability includes the
cost of cell installation, power, insurance, maintenance, management, as well
as day-to-day operations. There is also the cost of acquiring customers, such as
marketing and advertising, and keeping customers happy through customer
service. Infrastructure costs ranging from renting tower space to laying cables
also affect affordability.
In the realm of function, from the customer’s perspective, wireless com-
munications technology is evaluated in terms of services provided, such as e-
mail, voice mail, text messaging and paging, mobility (which is related to
battery life), privacy, roaming capabilities, coverage area, and the intuitiveness
126
WIRELESS WONDERS
FORM
FUNCTION
AFFORDABILITY
Handset
Service Contract
Roaming Charge
OPERATOR
Operating Cost
CUSTOMER
Screen Characteristics
User Interface
Size
Style
Screen Size
Audio Capabilities
Design
Security
Voice Quality
Battery Life
Operating Modes
Coverage Area
Roaming
Privacy
Mobility
Cell Radius
Efficiency
Antenna
Weight
Color
Accessories
Cell
Infrastructure
Operating Cost
Management
Marketing
Figure 5-6.
Developing successful wireless technologies requires adequately addressing the tension
between form, function, and affordability, from both the customer and operator perspectives.
TEAMFLY

and ease of learning the user interface (which includes the graphics interface,
voice-enabled interface, and keypad or stylus). From the cellular operator’s
perspective, function includes spectrum efficiency, network security, deploy-
ment time, and cell radius. 
The third element in the triad—form—is reflected in the physical para-
meters of a cell phone, such as the weight, size, shape, and color. Form also
includes subjective traits, such as “style” and “coolness,” which, although
often difficult to quantify, can be recognized immediately by subscribers. A
cell phone’s display screen size and placement, number and arrangement of
buttons, and size of the external antenna all contribute to the form of a cell
phone or other wireless device.
The technology involved with wireless communications is reflected in
the value subscribers and operators place on a particular mix of these three
traits. Consider the failure of the original Iridium satellite communications
system, with its brick-size handheld unit, and the lackluster appeal of the fea-
ture-packed and overly complicated PDAs that predated the Palm Pilot. Both
cases demonstrate how failure to adequately address form, function, and
affordability can make the difference between global success and catastrophic
failure.
It’s obvious that the functionality made possible by technology is the
basis for the initial activity on the wireless Web. However, as the technologies
that appear to have the most promise begin to standardize, the emphasis
within the area of functionality must shift from raw capabilities to manage-
ability issues. These include the provision for security, and the ability to inte-
grate or at least coexist with other technologies used in an enterprise or the
subscriber’s home. Similarly, within the realm of affordability, the cost of main-
tenance over the life of the product becomes a primary focus. During the stan-
dardization process, form has to support changes in function and support
increased affordability, by decreasing manufacturing costs, for example, and
to keep pace with the competition and customer expectations.
The current success of cell phones, two-way pagers, and wireless PDAs
illustrates the dynamic tension depicted in Figure 5-6. With the industry’s
plan to roll out generation after generation of standards, subscribers who
want or need the latest features will have to buy a new phone every 18 to 24
months, paralleling the constant upgrade market established for laptops and
desktop PCs. As long as developers can provide the technology with the opti-
mum mix of features in the right form at a reasonable price, there may not be
much resistance from consumers to the constant upgrade pressure. For
example, if the experience of NTT DoCoMo transfers to the United States,
then subscriber churn rate, or rate at which subscribers leave for other carri-
ers each year, should decrease significantly. Domestic wireless carriers experi-
ence a churn rate of about 30 percent, which is significant, considering that it
costs about $300 to attract and add a new subscriber. However, just providing
Web access isn’t enough to capture subscribers. There is the issue of rising
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
127

expectation, with companies leapfrogging each other in features and perfor-
mance in an effort to win over subscribers. For example, NTT DoCoMo,
which was operating at capacity within a year of its I-Mode offering, had no
choice but to move to a new generation of wireless technologies. 
Looking ahead, the limiting factor in propelling the wireless Web into
everyday reality is establishing a standard, secure, affordable, universally acces-
sible, high-speed infrastructure to support Web-enabled devices. Paradoxi-
cally, it may be that wireless Web infrastructure in the United States and
much of Europe ends up primarily being the last-mile communications
between subscribers and national high-speed networks.  The wireless Web is
melding with all forms of wired Web access.
The next innovations in wireless Web ecommerce will likely take advan-
tage of other wireless technologies, such as GPS, combining them in new and
useful ways. For example, although it’s possible to locate a caller within a few
hundred feet with cellular technology, GPS is more exact. Using an integrated
approach that involves GPS and local cellular, nearby stores can offer invita-
tions, in the form of sales notices, to customers strolling by. Similarly, smart
cards, which consist of memory and a CPU embedded in a plastic card, will
eventually become wireless, complementing cell phones as a form of digital 
currency.
Chapter 6 continues the discussion on technologies that will have a
direct impact on the development of the wireless Web. In particular, it
explores the emergent, enabling technologies that have the potential to trans-
form wireless devices into conduits for pervasive Web access.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The genesis of the modern cellular system involved dividing service areas into
small cells so that radio frequencies could be reused, resulting in increased call
capacity without significantly increasing the bandwidth requirements. The
key issues in cellular systems, and where the incompatibilities arise, are in
operating frequency allocation, the features supported by the different types
of modulation, the nature and availability of the underlying network infra-
structure, and how interference is dealt with.  
The communications concept of switching is also central to cellular
systems, especially the distinction between circuit and packet switching.
In circuit switching, a connection is made between sender and receiver for
the duration of the conversation or data transfer. The circuit is free to be
used by another party only when the switch is opened, regardless of when
the communication was finished. Packet switching, in contrast, sends
packets of information from the sender to the receiver, leaving the com-
munications channel open to other subscribers. Packet switching is what
allows the “always-on” connection between wireless devices and the cellu-
lar network.
128
WIRELESS WONDERS

The most important wireless protocols are AMPS, D-AMPS, CDMA,
MOBITEX, NA-TDMA, CDPD, GSM, I-MODE, GPRS, EDGE, CDMA
2000, W-CDMA, UMTS, TD-SCDMA, and IMT-2000. In addition to these
general wireless communications protocols, there are specialized wireless
protocols, including Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, UPNP, and JINI that specify short-
range wireless communications networks.
High-level protocols and languages specific to the wired and wireless
Web include HDML, WML, XML, and WAP. WAP is a stripped-down alter-
native to the standard protocol used on the wired Web that has a good chance
at becoming the standard for Web-enabled phones despite its limitations.
With XML and a related scripting language, XSL, a single Web site can be
constructed that is readable by a variety of devices, regardless of their screen
size, local memory, processing power, or data input/output features. JavaLite
or J2ME, which allows the creation of an appliance-oriented, sessionless, vir-
tual machine as opposed to an operating system, represents a radical depar-
ture from the standard client-server, session-based architecture used on the
wired Web.
In addition to authoring content specifically for wireless devices, another
approach is to leverage existing Web content by using Web Clipping tech-
nology, which removes multimedia and other high-bandwidth content from
wired Web pages and makes the content available to handheld users. Simple
clipping or screen scraping offers a quick fix to the move to wireless devices
from the Web, but the approach isn’t scalable and tends to have a high main-
tenance requirement. Second-generation technologies use a variety of tech-
niques allowing changes in the original Web content to be automatically
reflected on all wireless devices without manual intervention.
The development of successful wireless communications systems is an
engineering effort that recognizes the tension between the form, function,
and affordability of a wireless device.
CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS AND PROTOCOLS
129

This page intentionally left blank.

Learn from the mistakes of others—
you can never live long enough to make them all yourself.
John Luther
INTRODUCTION
There’s much more to communications than simply establishing an informa-
tion conduit between a sender and a receiver. After all, two empty cans prop-
erly connected by a taut string can provide reliable and inexpensive
communications. However, such a system isn’t very practical in most situa-
tions, such as busy public areas, and it doesn’t scale very well. What’s worse,
the point-to-point channel doesn’t connect to the wireless Web or the public
phone network. In other words, although a can-and-string system provides
affordable communications, the form and function of this simplistic technol-
ogy do not provide much added value to users over the predominant legacy
system—yelling.
Improving the way customers communicate, conduct commerce, and
transact business—using metrics such as speed, ease of use, efficiency, and
effectiveness—requires more than establishing a connection, even if it is
immediately affordable to everyone. A communications system has to pro-
vide situation- and user-appropriate form and function. That is, it has to either
support the current process for accomplishing some task that the users are
engaged in, or suggest a process that can help users achieve their goals more
effectively and efficiently.
This chapter continues the discussion of the technologies that will have a
direct impact on the development of the wireless Web. In particular, the fol-
lowing material explores the emergent, enabling, or synergistic technologies
131
6
Enabling Technologies
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

that have the greatest potential to transform wireless devices into conduits
for pervasive Web access. This chapter explores the technologies that can
take the current cell phone system in the United States, (equivalent to a can-
and-string system as far as communications with the wireless Web are con-
cerned), and transform it into an indispensable tool that propels businesses
and subscribers into the future.
EMERGENT ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
Thanks to a continuous stream of enabling technologies, followed by a
process that has evolved to put these technologies into attractive, affordable
packages, cellular technology is progressing at a dizzying pace. For example,
since the form factor—or packaging size—is critical for providing pervasive
communications, the rate of miniaturization of handheld and even wearable
wireless devices has superceded even that of laptop computers and digital
cameras. Cell phones—at least those in the laboratory and the limited-run
prototypes available to the well-heeled early adopters—are to the point of the
clip-on communicators depicted in Star Trek, in the form of digital wearable
jewelry, sometimes referred to as Digital Wearables. Some of the many chal-
lenges of providing even more compact access to the wireless Web includes
developing hands-free methods of requesting and interacting with data and
innovative methods of powering communications devices so that they can
maintain always-on connectivity.
These and other challenges are being met with the aid of emergent tech-
nologies in the areas of voice recognition and speech synthesis, as well as
advances in portable power technologies. Another emergent, enabling tech-
nology is the cellular communications infrastructure, especially in the area of
fixed wireless communications. Fixed wireless, using both terrestrial and
satellite technology, promises to provide Web connectivity to residential sub-
scribers denied access to the wired Web because of geographic, wired infra-
structure, or economic constraints. 
For example, thanks to fixed wireless, entire countries may be able to
leapfrog from the nineteenth century, bypassing the wired legacy systems of
the twentieth century, directly into twenty-first century wireless communi-
cations. In Tanzania and Ghana, where each country’s wired infrastructure is
less extensive than that of a small U.S. town, wireless local loop technology
makes wireless pay phones and pocket pagers possible in even the remotest
areas. Fixed wireless technology has a place in the most congested, densely
populated cities of the world as well. For many commercial subscribers in the
domestic urban sprawl, fixed wireless represents high-speed, high-bandwidth
connectivity to the Internet at a price-point that can’t be matched by tradi-
tional wired services. 
The most prominent enabling technologies on the horizon include ter-
restrial and satellite fixed wireless; a variety of user interface technologies,
132
WIRELESS WONDERS

including Emotionally Intelligent Interfaces, voice recognition, and speech
synthesis; voice portal technologies; portable power; and a variety of privacy
and security tools. These technologies are described in more detail in the fol-
lowing paragraphs.
Terrestrial Fixed Wireless
Terrestrial or land-based fixed wireless, especially in the “last-mile” circuit, is
becoming increasingly technologically and economically feasible because of
advances in low-power miniature cells and other wireless network technolo-
gies, and the significant business opportunities the related service offers. In
many parts of the United States and Europe, terrestrial fixed wireless com-
petes directly with DSL and cable modems for high-speed Web access, espe-
cially when these services, although heavily promoted, fail to materialize as
viable options. In many cases, it’s simply a question of who can get to cus-
tomers first, and wireless has the upper hand when it comes to set-up time.
In the United States, service providers such as AT&T, Sprint, and World-
Com have tremendous economic incentives to bypass the regional telecom
companies. By using fixed wireless installations, they can provide customers
with long-distance service without having to pay the regional telecoms’ high
access charges for last-mile access. In other words, they can charge customers
more for long-distance service and still provide the customer with a less expen-
sive alternative to local wired service. In addition to potential cost savings, fixed
wireless offers high-speed Web access to customers who either haven’t elected
to use DSL or cable modem because of cost, or because they live in rural areas
or in cities that don’t offer high-speed wired Web connectivity. In some rural
areas of the United States, for example, there simply isn’t enough of a potential
subscriber base for local telecoms to offer DSL service. Economics aside, often
the technology simply won’t support a critical mass of subscribers. For exam-
ple, because of signal loss over standard telephone lines, DSL cannot service
subscribers more than about 6 km (4 mi) from a telephone switching station.
When set-up time and cost are primary factors, fixed wireless—or, more
specifically, terrestrial fixed wireless—has an advantage over wired services.
Fixed wireless can be installed quickly for large numbers of subscribers with-
out major physical changes to the information infrastructure, such as digging
up streets to lay cable for DSL or cable modem subscribers. Installing the
infrastructure for a residential fixed wireless network can be as simple as
attaching a series of microcell radios, each only a little larger than this book, to
the public light fixtures in a community. The light fixtures provide a line-of-
sight platform for antennas, as well as ready access to power. One company
that uses microcell technology is Metricom, which offers 28.8-KBps wireless
service to both mobile and fixed subscribers. To use the service, subscribers
simply install inexpensive and unobtrusive fixed wireless units on the sides of
their homes, within sight of one of the microcells. 
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
133

There are other fixed wireless configurations as well. For example,
Teligent uses a single, omnidirectional antenna, providing 128 KBps- to 640-
KBps service to residential neighborhoods. Sprint’s SpeedChoice service is
based on a broadcast antenna mounted on the highest location available, pro-
viding a coverage area of about 55 km (35 mi) radius per antenna. Speed-
Choice is unique in that, while downloads occur over the fast wireless
connections, uplinks occur over ordinary 56-KBps analog modems. Most
other services use a single cellular unit at the residential site for both sending
and receiving data.
In the fixed wireless arena, seemingly minor technical factors, such as
operating frequency, can have a huge impact on the economics of network
configuration and potential subscriber base. For example, AT&T uses the
same radio spectrum it licenses for its PCS services for its fixed wireless ser-
vices. At this frequency, signals can travel through or around buildings, trees,
and other structures without excessive signal loss. Therefore, line-of-sight
connectivity between a cell installation and a subscriber isn’t a necessity.
However, Sprint and WorldCom offer fixed wireless services that operate at
much higher microwave frequencies, where signals don’t bounce around
trees and in between buildings, but propagate in straight lines. As such, they
require line-of-sight communications between subscriber installations and
large, expensive, omnidirectional antenna clusters mounted on huge towers.
Because of the line-of-sight requirements, these fixed wireless services are
most effective in urban areas without skyscrapers to obscure signal paths.
Similarly, TeraBeam offers a speed of 1 GBps over the last mile in line-of-sight
communications over the IR band, which is not regulated by the FCC. 
In terms of physical infrastructure, AT&T has the advantage of over 10,000
cellular towers—each capable of supporting about 5000 subscribers—scattered
across the United States. Through the use of directional antennas and without
the need to hand off subscribers as they move from one cell to the next, adding a
fixed wireless subscriber has a minor impact on overall network performance,
compared to adding mobile cellular phones. The AT&T fixed wireless system
can use the available frequencies more efficiently, providing support for both
fixed and mobile wireless subscribers. Given this infrastructure, and because
AT&T mobile and fixed services operate on the same band, it is in a unique posi-
tion to provide integrated fixed and mobile wireless services. This provides cus-
tomers with the option of owning only one phone. At home, the unit operates
like a cordless phone, with at-home calling rates applied. Away from home, it
operates as a mobile cellular phone, with a different billing structure.
Commercial fixed wireless systems often represent the most economi-
cally viable means of providing high-speed Internet access to corporations
operating in office buildings located in major metropolitan areas, especially
when the technology is coupled with wireless LAN technology inside the
building. In the United States, less than 5 percent of all urban office buildings
are wired for Internet access. 
134
WIRELESS WONDERS

The major players in the commercial fixed wireless arena, namely
Nextlink Communications, Winstar Communications, Teligent, and
Advanced Radio Telecom, were the most successful bidders in the U.S. com-
mercial fixed wireless spectrum auction. Although each of these companies
provides services that operate in the 30-GHz band, they use different tech-
nologies to achieve the same goals.
The two basic types of commercial fixed wireless service are point-to-
point and point-to-multipoint. Recall from Chapter 4 that two characteristics
of antennas are gain and directivity, and that antenna designs can be highly
directional or less so, as requirements dictate. Point-to-point fixed wireless
uses highly directional (and therefore high-gain) pairs of antennas to connect
the communications network in one building with that of another. Since the
system isn’t shared with any other sites, the full bandwidth of communica-
tions—over 150 MBps—is available to the subscribing company. 
Triton Network Systems uses a modified point-to-point configuration, in
the form of a wireless ring network that requires two antennas on each build-
ing, each providing connectivity to another building. If one antenna in the
network fails due to lightning or a power outage, the system can remain oper-
ational because of the built-in redundancies in the data path.
The point-to-multipoint design uses central, moderately directional
antenna clusters, which are connected to the Internet. Subscribing companies
use highly directional dish antennas to communicate with the central, Inter-
net-connected hub. Since several companies share the available bandwidth
through the central hub, data rates are considerably slower than point-to-point
can offer, but still greater than that of DSL or cable modem. Regardless of the
wireless networking configuration, one of the greatest limitations of fixed wire-
less systems in major metropolitan areas is acquiring the right to install anten-
nas and radio equipment on rooftops and the sides of buildings. Not only are
there structural, power, and height issues, but local ordinances regarding aes-
thetics, insurance, and safety can take months or even years to resolve.
Satellite-Based Fixed Wireless
Satellite technology is perhaps the clearest example of how significant science
fiction has been in defining the dreams of innovators and entrepreneurs, and,
eventually, the realities of everyone’s lives. 
Arthur C. Clarke conceived the notion of a satellite-based communica-
tions system based on three geosynchronous satellites acting as extraterres-
trial relays in an article he wrote for Wireless Magazine in 1945. Clarke’s
insight, which obviously became part of the collective vision for the scientists
and engineers who grew up reading his stories, came decades before the tech-
nology was invented that was capable of creating the system he described.
Although satellite communications systems are at least an order of com-
plexity above terrestrial systems, at the most basic level, they can be thought
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
135

of simply as cells in the sky. Instead of a centrally located transmitter and
receiver located on a tower, these orbiting cells are positioned thousands of
kilometers above the earth, in a variety of orbits, providing communications
to fixed and, in some cases, mobile and even handheld units. Like terrestrial
cells, orbiting cells require connectivity among each other and with the pub-
lic telephone network. The connectivity can occur with direct satellite-to-
satellite wireless communications or through communications with
ground-based networks, including wired networks. Of course, connectivity
to the public telephone network requires a link to ground-based stations. 
Like terrestrial fixed wireless, orbiting cells can provide a viable alterna-
tive to wired Web access. The specific advantages of orbiting cellular commu-
nications over terrestrial cells—increased bandwidth; wide coverage area;
self-contained, rapidly deployed communications; and low cost per site—are
detailed below.
Increased Bandwidth.The optimum operating window for ground-
to-satellite communications is generally considered to be between 1 and 4
GHz. At these higher operating frequencies, there is greater potential band-
width available for modulating signals compared to, say, an 800-MHz terres-
trial cellular system. For example, assume that, because of circuit and antenna
design constraints, communications channels are limited to the main or car-
rier frequency 1 percent. At 800 MHz, this corresponds to an available
bandwidth of 8 MHz or 16 MHz. At 4 GHz, 1 percent corresponds to
40 MHz or 80 MHz—or five times the bandwidth available at 800 MHz. 
Wide Coverage Area. Whereas coverage in a terrestrial cell might be
limited to 10 km (6.2 mi), an orbiting cell can provide a cell size—usually
referred to as a footprint—approximating the size of the planet, depending on
the orbit. Orbiting cells are typically in one of three orbits: Geostationary Earth
Orbit (GEO), Low Earth Orbit (LEO), or Medium Earth Orbit (MEO). The
orbit not only affects the footprint, but also the signal delay or latency, availabil-
ity of communications, and terrestrial antenna and power requirements. 
A satellite or orbiting cell in a Geostationary Earth Orbit has a footprint
of about one-third of the globe, allowing virtually full coverage of the planet
with only three satellites (some areas near the north and south poles may be
unserviceable, depending on the season). Satellites in geostationary orbits
appear stationary in the sky because their orbits lie in the plane of the equator,
at an altitude of about 36,000 km (22,000 mi), completing one orbit every 24
h. Since each satellite moves in the same direction as the Earth’s rotation, they
remain in a fixed position over the equator, providing a fixed target for terres-
trial dish antennas. The first geosynchronous communications satellite was
placed into service in 1963.
The challenge in working with GEO systems is that there is a delay, or
latency, involved in the communications loop. Even though the radio waves
to and from a ground station to a GEO satellite travel at the speed of light (300
million m/s), because of the distance involved, this trip takes about half a sec-
136
WIRELESS WONDERS
TEAMFLY

ond. With voice communications, this delay is perceived as an annoying echo.
Data transmissions are similarly affected, but the delay isn’t usually as detri-
mental to the quality of communications. Because of the latency problem,
geosynchronous communications satellites aren’t viewed as a replacement
for terrestrial cellular voice service. For comparative purposes, the first gener-
ation of two-way pagers provided communications with a latency of between
30 and 90 s, compared to 2 s for data transferred over G2 cell phones using
terrestrial networks. The initial wireless Palm network provided a barely tol-
erable 5- to -15s latency per transaction.
To achieve the quality of communications of terrestrial cells systems, satel-
lites following medium and low earth orbits are more suitable than satellites in
geosynchronous orbits. Lower orbits are associated with much shorter
latency times and smaller footprints (cell size). As in terrestrial systems, smaller
cell size requires more closely spaced cell sites. In theory, the closer the satellite
is to the terrestrial station or handheld unit, the stronger the signal from the
satellite, and the smaller the possible size of the handheld unit.
Because LEO-based communications satellites have the lowest orbits,
their footprints are also the smallest. LEO-based communications systems
require large numbers of satellites, including spares, and a correspondingly
greater cost. LEO- and MEO-based satellite communications work like tradi-
tional cellular systems, with a slight twist. As the subscriber’s signal decreases
in one cell and increases in an adjacent cell, the cells communicate and hand
the subscriber off from one cell to the next. However, instead of the sub-
scriber traveling from cell to cell, the subscriber is motionless. From the sub-
scriber’s perspective, the cells are moving. LEO communications satellites
hand off subscribers every 10 to 20 min versus every 2 to 4 h for MEO satel-
lite communications systems.
There are several commercial ventures into satellite-based communica-
tions systems. A notable MEO project is the ICO system from ICO Global
Communications (www.ico.com). The ICO system (so named because the
satellites follow an Intermediate Circular Orbit) is based on 10 satellites and
TDMA technology. It’s designed to integrate mobile satellite communica-
tions with the terrestrial mobile networks running GSM, D-AMPS, and other
protocols. ICO is designed to support voice, fax, and messaging, with a data
throughput of initially only 2.4 KBps, and an ultimate capacity in the hun-
dreds of KBps range.
Major LEO initiatives include the resurrected Iridium system, Global-
Star, and Teledesic (www.teledesic.com). The Iridium LEO-based system,
built over five years at a cost of $4 billion and with a monthly maintenance
cost of over $10 million, is based on 66 LEO satellites, with a goal of support-
ing primarily voice through heavy but luggable handset units. GlobalStar,
like ICO and Iridium, is designed to support voice, fax, and messaging ser-
vices. The system is based on 48 satellites, interlinked through a ground
communications network, complementing the terrestrial cellular phone
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
137

service with a 7.2-KBps data channel. Since one of GlobalStar’s backers is
Qualcomm, it’s not surprising that the satellite system supports Qual-
comm’s CDMA standard. 
The Teledesic network, originally backed by Bill Gates and Craig McCaw,
is designed as the “Internet in the sky,” with a data throughput of over 64
MBps on the downlink and 2 MBps on the uplink. With 288 primary LEO
satellites and 12 spares, the system is designed to extend the terrestrial fiber
network to anywhere on the planet. The Teledesic design supports a variety
of protocols, including TDMA. Eventually, the Teledesic system is supposed
to provide capacity in the hundreds of MBps range. 
As evidenced by the fate of Iridium LLC, there are challenges ahead for
satellite-based communications systems that aim to provide Internet access
to the world. The failure of the original Iridium project is blamed for ICO’s
failure to secure funding and its subsequent filing for bankruptcy, for example.
However, while GlobalStar’s fate is less certain, ICO and Teledesic were both
reinvigorated with a $1 billion investment through the mechanism of a hold-
ing company, ICO-Teledesic Global, that controls the satellite assets of Craig
McCaw, chairman of both ICO and Teledesic. In addition to these high-profile
satellite systems, there are a variety of other high-bandwidth cellular com-
munications projects at different levels of planning and development, includ-
ing Cyberstar, Astrolink, Spaceway, and Skybridge.
Self-Contained, Rapidly Deployed Communications. A
local terrestrial satellite station requires only power, a satellite dish, and
portable communications hardware, making satellite communications ideal
for emergencies in remote locations. These simple requirements make for
rapid installations as well. Often, the greatest impediment for providing
communications to an underserved area isn’t technical, but revolves around
fulfilling local regulatory requirements in a timely manner.
Even though satellites are global devices, when a ground station is estab-
lished, the local regulations and politics have to be recognized. For example,
there are issues of frequency allocation and coordination with local services
to consider, licensing, connections to the local telephone network and the
Internet, as well as respect for sovereign rights and interests. Obviously, satel-
lite communications systems have military and civilian applications.
Low Cost Per Site. The economics of satellite communications are
such that it’s often the least expensive method of providing a high-bandwidth
channel between points separated by more than a few hundred kilometers.
The distance covered by terrestrial microwave hops is limited by the curva-
ture of the earth. A hop of 1700 km (1000 mi) for example, might require a
network of 20 terrestrial microwave dishes with land-based repeater hard-
ware. The same distance might be covered by a single satellite hop. Because
the rental of satellite channels is readily affordable and there is no network
maintenance overhead to deal with, satellite communications can quickly
become a viable option to a traditional terrestrial network.
138
WIRELESS WONDERS

Returning to the discussion of communications fundamentals in Chap-
ter 4, the microwave frequencies used in satellite communications demon-
strate several important characteristics involving propagation and
absorption. For example, microwave communications to and from satellites
are subject to atmospheric absorption, the effects of rain, refraction, or bend-
ing of the waves as they pass through the atmosphere, scattering, diffraction,
and multipath propagation. Microwave signals are absorbed by vegetation
and even water vapor in the air. Water absorption of microwave radiation
peaks at 22 GHz, making this frequency band unusable for terrestrial wire-
less or terrestrial-to-satellite communications. However, this frequency band
can be used for intersatellite links, which don’t involve the signal passing
through the atmosphere. Multipath propagation occurs when the signal
from a satellite is split among several paths, either because of disturbances in
the atmosphere, reflections off of an airplane passing overhead, or the pres-
ence of a fixed structure, such as a nearby building. The result is that the signal
interferes with itself, potentially rendering the data useless by the time it
arrives at the ground station.
USER INTERFACE TECHNOLOGY
The user interface, where the cell phone subscriber or wireless PDA user
meets the wireless Web, is the point at which form and function either coa-
lesce to provide value or collide and create confusion. User interface tech-
nologies are important because a good user interface can make a mediocre
technology usable, and a great user interface can make the same technology a
pleasure to use. When teamed with an exceptional technology, a great user
interface can propel the combination to the status of the “next new thing.”
The user interface is the veneer that covers or reshapes the intricacies of
the communications device and the associated infrastructure from users
while allowing them to focus their attention on what’s being presented.
While all user interfaces share the trait of communicating with the user, they
vary significantly in form and function. When a typical wired Web user talks
about a user interface, she’s usually referring to the quality, quantity, and
arrangement of the graphics, buttons, and menus on her computer screen.
However, the wireless Palm Pilot series with stylus pointing devices and the
RIM Blackberry with its miniature keypad have user interfaces that rely
much less on what’s displayed on the screen and more on the size and shape
of the physical units.
Of course, the task is much more involved than a simple cosmetic
change, simply putting lipstick on a pig. The underlying functionality must
be robust enough to support the user interface. For example, latency pro-
foundly affects interface design. The Microsoft Windows hourglass would be
inappropriate for the customer sitting in traffic, waiting to determine where
she should make a turn.
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
139

User Interface Components
Except for the recent popularity of voice recognition and speech synthesis as
components of a user interface, most of the user interface work with PCs has
been graphical in nature, and, except for games, with much less emphasis on
the tactical, auditory aspects. Even the simplest user interface is a complex,
multitiered structure that supports a dialogue or communications channel
between the user and the device. The interdependent interface components
can be categorized as Physical, Graphical, Logical, Emotional, Intelligent, and
Emotionally Intelligent. The highlights of these components and the tech-
nologies relevant to the wireless Web are described below.
Physical Interface.The Physical Interface component communicates a
user’s physical actions to her cell phone or wireless PDA and provides feedback
fromher device. Data input mechanisms range from a hardware or software key-
pad, miniature trackball, stylus, microphone, joystick, touch screen, digitizer pad,
video or still camera, data glove, data suit, retinal imager, or fingerprint recogni-
tion device. Feedback can come from LCD panels, haptic (force feedback) con-
trols, or audio, including music and synthetic speech, and even odor. 
The Physical Interface largely defines the form, and therefore limits the
functionality of a wireless device. A cumbersome, overly complex physical
interface will ruin the user experience, regardless of the functionality it pro-
vides. As illustrated in Figure 6-1, as the foundation of the user interface hier-
archy, the Physical Interface is highly relevant in the design of wireless
Web-enabled devices. Consider the relevance of the Palm Pilot’s stylus in the
elegance of the overall interface design. The stylus provides an intuitive,
immediately understood point and click tool that most users adapt to within
minutes. Similarly, RIM’s Blackberry physical interface incorporates a
thumbwheel and miniature keypad that allows one-hand operation.
Graphical User Interface.The Graphical User Interface component
(GUI) is the collection of windows, icons, menus, buttons, and other controls
drawn on a screen that map the user’s actions to the physical layer below. On
the wired Web, the GUI is often viewed as synonymous with Microsoft Win-
dows, the Macintosh OS, and the Web browsers they support. For wireless
devices such as cell phones, WAP and the related microbrowser environments
serve the same purpose, although they do so in a much simpler way. 
All of these PC-based GUI systems are based on metaphors. With the
exception of games, the predominant desktop metaphor is that of a desktop,
which is usually traversed with the aid of a mouse and a large, ergonomically
correct keyboard. As far as the wired Web is concerned, interface designers
are continually making tradeoffs between interface bandwidth and interac-
tivity potential, given the practical constraints of infrastructure bandwidth.
Some bandwidth-demanding technologies, such as streaming video, simply
can’t be used for the general domestic public until a high-speed infrastructure
is established. 
140
WIRELESS WONDERS

A common metaphor for Web-enabled cell phone interface designers is
the card, and cards are arranged in one or more decks. In addition, a card can
be one of several types. Choice cards allow subscribers to select from a list of
choices, Display cards display data, and Entry cards present data entry fields to
the subscriber. Although the metaphor is reminiscent of Apple Computer’s
HyperCard environment, the visual component of the interface is more sim-
ilar to a text-only DOS or mainframe environment. 
Although these concerns of the wired Web world continue to challenge
designers, at least as far as interface design is concerned, the wireless Web has
changed everything. The desktop metaphor, with its trash can and seemingly
infinite layers of folders within folders simply won’t do for a Web-enabled cell
phone. One area of development is that of defining new interface metaphors
that allow and encourage speed and versatility, as opposed to an empty-calorie
diet of eye candy. The original Palm Pilot and the RIM Blackberry wireless
PDA are often-cited examples of how a simple, elegant design metaphor, in
this case that of a traditional paper-based organizer, can be extended to an
electronic format without losing functionality or adding unnecessary com-
plexity in the translation process. 
With the increased focus on voice as an interface component, the role of the
GUI in handheld devices is less prominent. Working with voice (a Physical Inter-
face component, as described above) as an interface is challenging, especially
when most of the work during the 1980s and 1990s in interface design focused
on the graphical aspects of the user interface, as described below. Whereas graph-
ical designers are concerned with the role of metaphors and color schemes and
the aesthetics of layout and icons, voice interface designers work in a space
defined by human limitations (as in short-term memory), linguistic clarity,
accommodation, fulfillment, user support, predictability, interpretation, suitable
tempo, precision, forgiveness, and responsiveness. Some of these concepts have
parallels in the GUI world, but many are foreign, and will require interface
designers to study the differences. Understanding the importance of the similar-
ities and differences in the two modalities is especially critical in multimodal inter-
face designs, where a GUI, voice recognition, and speech synthesis are combined.
Logical Interface. The Logical Interface component deals with the
rules, guidelines, and standards of interface behavior, such as how an interface
should display the results of a calculation. The Logical Interface helps define
user expectations. For example, in proper logical interface design, pressing the
“1” key consistently enters a “1” on the display panel. On a subtler level, if hit-
ting the “submit” soft button (the function of a soft button on a cell phone is
determined by the application) while logged onto a stock trading site initiates
a trade but pressing the same button, relabeled, five minutes later cancels the
trade order, this behavior would violate the logic of the interface design. The
technologies involved in Logical interface design have more to do with the
rules, guidelines, and standards of interface behavior than with hardware or
software design per se.
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
141

Because of the limited screen real estate available for a robust GUI on a
cell phone, the Logical Interface component is critical to minimizing possible
frustration when accessing the Web and other services. For example, in pur-
chasing an item through the Web, the text-only interface on a small cell
phone display must provide the means of entering charge card information in
a logical, efficient manner. That is, if an error is made in entering the charge
card number, the subscriber must be presented with a logical method of cor-
recting the error, and preferably one that doesn’t also require that she re-enter
other information, such as her name and mailing address. Even reasonable
customers will walk away from an eCommerce transaction when the interac-
tion isn’t logical and supportive of their needs. Entering the same data
through the GUI available on a standard computer monitor isn’t nearly at the
level of logical complexity as the smaller cell phone or PDA screen. Moving
from field to field is accomplished by pointing and clicking or using the TAB
key. Similarly, editing any of the information can be done, regardless of the
sequence in which the information is entered.
Emotional Interface. The Emotional Interface component is
intended to elicit emotions in the user. As game developers have demon-
strated, an Emotional Interface can be fun. Games highlight the basic compo-
nents of an Emotional Interface: there must be some element of risk, the
prospect of a physical or virtual reward, a degree of uncertainty, and the process
of interaction; and/or the end point of the game must elicit some form of emo-
tion in the player. This component of the user interface is important for wire-
less interface developers to master, given that NTT DoCoMo’s I-Mode is
popular with teens primarily because of its games and emotive content.
Intelligent Interface.The Intelligent Interface component is primar-
ily concerned with providing the overall interface with adaptability and a vari-
ety of pattern recognition techniques. Intelligence, after all, is simply the
ability to adapt—that is, to change with experience. Pattern recognition tech-
nologies relevant to the wireless Web include speech recognition(the ability to
convert the spoken word into machine-readable text), machine translation
(automated conversion of text from one language to another), natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) (interpreting the meaning of text within a given lan-
guage), and intelligent agents (a broad range of intelligent programs that
perform specified tasks on behalf of customers). 
Emotionally Intelligent Interface. The Emotionally Intelligent
Interface (EII) component is designed to modify user behavior by forming a
bond, such as trust, with the user. A fully emotionally intelligent interface
would not only express emotions but would know how to manage those
expressions and how to use its emotions to modify user behavior. For a posi-
tive bond between the user and his or her cell phone, the EII component
should approximate a helpful customer support professional. In other words,
it should be respectful, helpful, empathetic, socially adept, truthful, unam-
biguous, anticipatory, persuasive, responsive, and emotive. 
142
WIRELESS WONDERS

Obviously, the technologies available for Web-enabled cell phones have a
long way to go before they can approximate the ideal EII. Since EIIs are con-
cerned with influencing emotions in users, some form of pattern recognition
is needed to recognize what emotions are likely to be generated in a given sit-
uation. New developments in the area of Emotionally Intelligent Interface
designs, which rely on software agents and graphically rich, human appearing
Bots, are changing the wired Web. 
Bots can speak and emote appropriately to support the qualities found in
a person-to-person interaction, including trust, an emotional bond. A Bot or
software robot can carry on a humanlike conversation with a customer
through the instantaneous exchange of text messages and one-way (from Bot
to customer) transfer of images that correspond to the tone or content of the
text messages. The images are typically that of a real or synthetic person’s face,
but could be other characters as well, thanks to technologies such as
LifeF/X’s stand-ins, which take a single image of a person and animate it in a
lifelike way, using local computational ability. In this thin-client system, band-
width requirements are minimized since rendering occurs locally, unlike
streaming video of a real person. The downside, at least until G3 phones are
generally available, is that few cell phones have the local processing power nec-
essary for real-time video capture and compression. This is likely to change as
soon as video processing capabilities become commonplace on wireless
PDAs and cell phones.
While Bots and synthetic actors represent the near horizon of interface
design on the wired Web, especially using thin client technology, the current
incarnation of the wireless Web must emphasize speed and versatility as
opposed to graphics. Even so, while most of the world awaits the arrival of
G3-level speeds on the wireless Web, there is sufficient bandwidth for inter-
faces based on voice recognition. Initially, these will be faceless, nameless
voices; but as bandwidth capabilities increase, they will be supplemented
with the faces of synthetic actors, adding to the emotionally intelligent inter-
face component.
Applications
Every device embodies variations of the six user interface components in dif-
ferent ways, with some taking on more significance than others. For example,
for an ordinary (non-Web–enabled) toaster, the Physical and Logical inter-
face components are the most significant. Most users expect a toaster to oper-
ate by applying heat to a slice of bread after they’ve placed a slice on the rack
and lowered the rack by pressing the on-off switch. The Logical component
comes into play regarding the degree of doneness. Users expect a logical,
direct correlation between the light-to-dark setting on the toaster to the out-
put of the toaster. The other four interface components are insignificant in
most toaster designs.
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
143

Similarly, the six user interface components apply in varying degrees to
devices designed for wired and wireless Web access. Assuming a standard
desktop PC for wired Web access and a Web-enabled cellular phone for wire-
less access, the greatest discrepancies in user interface component mix is in
the Physical and Graphical User Interface components. At least in the cur-
rent incarnation of Web-enabled phones, the relevance of the GUI is limited
by screen real estate. There is only so much that can be done, from a GUI,
with a few lines of text. Even the graphical, color screens available to NTT
DoCoMo’s I-Mode customers are less important to the overall device user
interface, relative to Physical Interface components. The physical form fac-
tor—including device size, weight, color, keypad layout, screen size and place-
ment—defines the subscriber’s experience more than the graphics on the
screen. 
The other large discrepancy between handheld wireless and wired Web
access interface components is in the Emotional Component. Assuming the
I-Mode experience translates to other Web-enabled phone systems, one of
the major draws for Web access is the fun factor, especially in the teen market.
Cartoons, games, and jokes are the most popular uses of the I-Mode, high-
lighting the relevance of the Emotional Component of the user interface on
device design.
Within the realm of user interface technology, it’s important to note that
the particular mix of interface components helps define the personality of the
interface and, by extension, of the cell phone or wireless PDA. All interfaces,
whether as part of a cell phone or wireless vending machine, have personali-
ties. The major personality traits of dominance, submissiveness, conscien-
tiousness, emotional stability, and openness can be applied to the user
interface of a particular device, such as a wireless PDA. 
Wearable Computers and Communications.Thought by some
to be the ultimate in user interface design, wearable communications and
computing are supported by advances such as the development of flexible
integrated circuits that can be wrapped around bracelets, including image
sensors and displays. Although cellular phones, wireless PDAs, and two-way
pagers are now pocketable objects, there is a move in the industry to create
wireless, wearable computers and electronics that do everything from enter-
tain to assist at work. Prototype wearable communications systems have been
around for years, and a few commercial versions of wearable computing have
surfaced, all sporting wireless connectivity. 
For the consumer market, Philips and Levi Strauss developed the ICD+,
a jacket with a GSM, voice-controlled cell phone, MP3 player for playing
music downloaded from the Web, a headset, and a remote control. Making a
call involves simply flipping up the collar; the volume controls are in the
sleeves. The ICD+ jacket uses a personal area network or PAN, woven into
the fabric of the jacket to serve as the backbone of the network. The ICD+
jacket isn’t the only such wearable device. Nike has integrated MP3 players
144
WIRELESS WONDERS

into their sportswear line, and Motorola and Swatch Group have developed
telephone wristwatches. 
Other wireless personal communications systems have been developed
with government agencies in mind. However, what these systems lacked was
an established standard for communications. For example, prototype systems
have been developed for the military in which soldiers wearing biosensors
and personal LANs communicate their status to a central cell. Dead or alive
status is verified by each soldier’s wireless EKG. In this way, the commanding
officers know when to risk retrieval of a downed soldier in the field. Similarly,
prototype vests have been developed for the U.S. military that determine the
severity of wounded in the field, based on locations and size of entry and exit
holes in the vests. A soldier with an entry wound in the lower right chest
would probably warrant rescue and triage, whereas one with an entrance and
exit hole in his left chest (i.e., through the heart) would probably be assigned
to a low ROI for a rescue mission.
Prototypes of wearable computers and PANs and several consumer-
oriented systems are commercially viable today. For example the POLAR
(www.polar.com) heart monitoring watch gathers pulse information that can
be downloaded into a PC for analysis of the user’s training. A similar system
exists for bicycles in the form of a wireless device that tracks cadence, torque,
heart rate, and other variables for later analysis on a PC. 
In the commercial area, wearable computers have a more significant
impact, especially where ergonomics, efficiency, and throughput are driving
factors. For example, Symbol Technologies manufactures a wearable scanning
and computing system that is used by virtually all UPS warehouse workers to
tag packages for tracking. Their WSS 1000 unit, which resembles something
out of Star Wars, attaches to the user’s forearm and uses a laser scanner
attached to a finger or the back of the hand. The PDA-sized main unit has an
LCD display and alphanumeric keypad as well.
Bandwidth Compression. Supporting interactivity requires a mini-
mal level of bandwidth, loosely corresponding to the various generations of
the wireless communications infrastructure. In the evolution of wireless
communications, first-generation (G1) pagers represent the lowest level of
interactivity. Conversely, person-to-person, live videophone communications
on late G3 infrastructures provide the highest level of interactivity, with
visual and auditory cues available for all parties in the discussion. Between
these two extremes are a variety of computer- and human-mediated modali-
ties, each dependent on a certain level of technologic support, and each capa-
ble of providing a different level of interactivity. Note that the increases in
interactivity for email and paging are relatively small from one generation to
the next, since subscribers can only type or read email messages so fast,
regardless of how quickly the underlying infrastructure can handle the data.
For example, consider a computer-mediated Voice Portal, a form of voice-
only conversation between a human subscriber and a computer that serves as
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
145

a portal to the Web. A Voice Portal recognizes the patterns of the subscriber’s
voice and synthesizes speech, and requires at least G2.5-level bandwidth.
Even with all of the support technology involved in establishing communica-
tions between a subscriber and the Web, a Voice Portal only provides interac-
tivity approaching the level associated with a person-to-person conversation
over a cell phone. 
A wireless VideoPhone seems in many ways like something out of sci-
ence fiction, especially when the combination of voice and video over a wired
modem or DSL connection is still problematic at best. A Bot Portal is a syn-
thetic version of a VideoPhone conversation. It’s equivalent to a Voice Portal
with a computer-generated, animated face that can be displayed on the cell
phone’s LCD panel, providing a level of interactivity equivalent to that of a live
person-to-person phone conversation. With ever-increasing bandwidth pro-
vided by post-G3 infrastructures, Voice and Bot Portals will approach the
level of interactivity provided by live VideoPhone conversations.
Given the bandwidth requirements of live VideoPhone communica-
tions, the first commercially successful application of Bot Portal technology
will likely be as a compression utility for VideoPhones. That is, Bot technol-
ogy can be used to provide emotional, photo-realistic animated images of
the speakers without the need to send streaming video over a wireless
channel. 
Companies such as LifeF/X (www.lifefx.com) are developing technolo-
gies that take a single photo of a subscriber and, using that image as a basis, cre-
ate a virtual actor or stand-in that can be reproduced on the receiver’s end.
Instead of using the entire 2-MBps bandwidth of a communications channel
to send the image of a talking head to a recipient, a still image, with emotional
cues and the sender’s voice, is sent. The thin-client signal may require a band-
width of only 20 KBps for transmission, and no additional bandwidth when it
is reconstituted on the receiver’s cell phone. The reconstituted image is an
animated stand-in of the actual speaker, complete with lip syncing and gross
head movements. In addition, it will be possible to use a still image from an
archive—one showing the sender in a business suit, for example—to use at
inopportune moments, such as when a businessman is just rolling out of bed
or is having a bad hair day. While this compression technology and the Bot
Portals they support aren’t yet applicable for images of the view at the top of a
ski lift, they will be sufficient to create faces on a watch-sized screen. Stand-in
compression technology will be especially appealing, as there will certainly
be economic incentives to avoid the high-bandwidth requirements of stream-
ing video. 
The above are but a sampling of the enabling technologies that have the
greatest likelihood of influencing the trajectory of wireless Web computing
on a global scale. The most compelling of the enabling technologies on the
near horizon, voice recognition and speech synthesis, are described in more
detail below.
146
WIRELESS WONDERS
TEAMFLY

Voice Enabled Interfaces (VEIs)
Voice recognition, the ability of a device to translate the spoken word into
machine-readable text or commands, is almost to the point that it can be
applied to wireless devices with confidence. Similarly, speech synthesis, the
generation of understandable speech from machine-readable text, has been a
viable commodity for decades. Only recently, however, have advances in
speech synthesis made it applicable to accessing the wireless Web. While syn-
thesized speech technology in the 1970s produced mechanical-sounding
output, with choppy speech and improper intonation, modern synthesizers
can produce more human-sounding speech with user-configurable speaker
qualities, such as the age and sex of the virtual speaker. Even when the voice
inflection produced in these synthesis programs isn’t perfect, the speech is
virtually always understandable.
In many respects, voice recognition teamed with speech synthesis a
VEI is the most natural user interface for a cell phone, primarily because it
doesn’t require the subscriber to change his or her existing modes of inter-
action. Virtually every businessperson is accustomed to talking on a cell
phone, and, except for a few PDA aficionados, interfacing with a cell phone
through a miniature keypad or plastic stylus doesn’t come as second nature.
In addition, talking on a cell phone is generally socially acceptable, espe-
cially in a business setting. There isn’t the need to don a special headset with
a heads-up display or anything out of the ordinary in order to use the tech-
nology. Furthermore, there is no stylus or other device necessary to operate
a VEI.
In many instances, a VEI may be the only practical option in environ-
ments that demand hands-free and eyes-free information access. For example,
businesspeople driving through heavy traffic or walking down a crowded
street have to be aware of their surroundings. Accessing data in hands-busy
environments is an obvious fit for VEIs, as long as subscribers can walk and
talk at the same time.
The trajectory of VEI is overwhelmingly positive. Both Voice Recogni-
tion and Speech Synthesis software are commodity items on desktop and lap-
top PCs, despite the presence of keyboards and mice that may make VEIs
seem superfluous. However, given the information input and output con-
straints of a Web-enabled cell phone, voice recognition suddenly takes on a
new relevance. In fairness, many PC users have shunned voice recognition for
its inaccuracies and difficulty in correcting errors once they’ve been made.
After a half-hour or more of training, even the best PC-based voice recogni-
tion systems still make one error every 10 to 20 words.
Fortunately, voice recognition technology is improving constantly. The
global voice recognition developers, IBM, the financially troubled Lernout
& Hauspie, and Philips, have made great strides in the past decade, including
the ability to work with virtually unlimited vocabularies and some degree
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
147

of speaker independence. In addition, newcomers, such as Motorola, are
developing systems expressly for wireless communications, free of the
legacy constraints of PC-based voice recognition systems. These and other
voice recognition software developers are working with thin-client tech-
nologies such as the ASP model of application distribution that negate the
need for high-speed, computationally intensive local processing on a cell
phone. In the ASP model of VEI, the cell phone acts like a wireless micro-
phone, with the voice recognition software running on a remote server.
A concern with cell phone–based voice recognition systems—assuming
that recognition accuracy continues to improve with each generation of
speech recognition technology—is that of audio quality and bandwidth. The
voice recognition engines developed for PCs use more of the audio spectrum
than most cell phones support. That is, PC-based voice recognition systems
use the information content in speech above the frequencies normally car-
ried by phones to differentiate between similar sounding words. The chal-
lenge is that the voices of passersby, traffic, and other environmental noises
also tend to occur at higher frequencies, and these noises can render a voice
recognition system useless.
Another hurdle, and one that may take years to address, is that voice
recognition and synthesis have been mainly English language–based tech-
nologies. Although there are systems developed for the mainstream Euro-
pean languages, such as German, these systems tend not to be as robust as
their English language counterparts. This discrepancy is in part because the
current generation of voice recognition engines has been developed assum-
ing nuances and structures inherent in the English language. Not only is the
language model of sentence structure that can be applied to English signifi-
cantly different from, for example, the structure of Korean, but the sounds
used in the two spoken languages do not have a one-to-one correlation. For
example, in the Korean language (Hangul), numbers from 0 to 99 use Korean
phonemes. However, for numbers greater than 99, a mixture of Chinese and
Korean is generally used. Similarly, the question:
“Do you speak English?” 
is structured in German as:
“Speak you English?”
with the verb at the beginning of the question.
Every language, especially English, has similar nuances, and these must be
represented in the language model used by a VEI system. The result is that it’s
not a simple question of remapping sounds to create a new VEI in another
language. For voice recognition and synthesis to serve as a global interface to
cell phones, the voice recognition software developers will have to develop
148
WIRELESS WONDERS

recognition and synthesis technologies optimized for dozens of different lan-
guages and their regional variations as well.
The language models used in voice recognition engines are domain and
user specific. That is, a language model for recognizing questions about direc-
tions to specific places on a map is different from one that supports questions
about the stock market. Similarly, most subscribers have stereotypical ways of
asking questions, and use phrases that are peculiar to their peer group. An
engineer might reasonably be expected to use different words and phrases
when interacting with an inventory system compared to, for example, an
attorney. Similarly, a subscriber in the Midwest may have a vernacular that is
considerably different from that of a subscriber native to the South.
In speech synthesis systems, the challenge is in creating more naturally
sounding speech with context-appropriate emphasis on the proper words.
As in speech recognition, the appropriate sounds can be generated when
there is sufficient information on the working context as well as the nature of
the listener.
Voice Portals
The most promising application of VEI technology to cellular communica-
tions is in creating Voice Portals. As noted earlier, the motivation behind
Voice Portals is to use voice recognition and synthesis to obviate the limita-
tions of interacting with the Web through a visually limited interface of a
Web-enabled cell phone. Instead of entering a URL, subscribers dial a phone
number. Using voice commands, subscribers select from a list of features, just
as they would use a typical voice mail system. After selecting a topic or work-
ing context using voice commands, subscribers can request specific informa-
tion. The system then performs the appropriate search and reads the results
back to the subscriber using voice synthesis. In other words, a Voice Portal
represents the marriage of VEI technology with a search engine and connec-
tivity to the Web. It’s also important to note that VEI technology can be used
in multimodal interfaces in which voice recognition is used for input. Text
information, with or without synthesized speech, is provided as output, just
as most voice recognition systems are used on PCs.
To explore how a Voice Portal might operate in a typical business setting,
assume that the subscriber is a businesswoman en route to Boston’s Logan
airport, and that the time is 7:05 P.M., and the date is Oct 7. From the back seat
of the cab, she dials the airport’s automated reservation system with her cell
phone and, when the automated operator answers, she asks:
“When is the next flight to Dallas?”
At this point, she has established a communications link between her phone
and the cell, from the local cell to the MTSO, which provides connectivity to
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
149

the public phone network and to the airline reservation system’s VEI Service.
Continuing with the process within the VEI Service, her voice query is first
cleaned and filtered by the Signals Preprocessor to remove road noise picked
up from the cab and other potentially interfering signals. Next, the Speech
Recognition (SR) Engine handles her query, in audio form. 
The SR Engine first attempts to map each of her spoken words to sound
definitions in its library. For example, the top four matches for her spoken
“Dallas” might be “Dulles,” “Dallas,” “Denver,” and “Denmark,” in that order.
In other words, the Phonetic Matcher assigns certainty factor to each word it
processes, and, in the example, (incorrectly) assigns the greatest certainty to
“Dulles” because “Dulles” sounds closest to the businesswoman’s spoken
“Dallas” (see Figure 6-1). Early voice recognition systems stopped here, and
often confused similarly sounding words, such as “hat” for “cat” or “hot” for
“cot.” However, as this case illustrates, voice recognition systems based on
simple phonetic matching—especially those with vocabularies of more than
a few dozen words—provide recognition accuracies only in the range of 60 to
70 percent . This level of accuracy is not acceptable to most business travelers. 
Voice recognition systems with active vocabularies of only a dozen words
or so can provide nearly perfect recognition, even with noisy environments
and speakers with pronounced accents. If the only single-syllable word in the
vocabulary is “cat,” then the possibility of other, similar sounding words being
recognized as “hat” is very small. 
150
WIRELESS WONDERS
Figure 6-1. The Phonetic Matcher component of a speech recognition engine assigns a certainty
factor or probability to each of the words in its vocabulary that matches a spoken word. In this
example, “Dulles” has the closest match to the spoken word “Dallas,” based solely on the similar-
ity of their audio waveforms.

The next phase of processing within a modern SR Engine uses a Lan-
guage Model that examines probabilities of word pairs (in some systems,
word triads, or three-word sequences are examined). In this example, the Lan-
guage Model in Figure 6-2, which is specific to flight reservations but generic
to all subscribers, assigns a greater likelihood to the word pair “next flight”
than to a similarly sounding word pair, such as “best flight.” The Language
Model is critical in situations where the Phonetic Matcher assigns a greater
score to less likely word sequences, such as “next night” or “best night.” In
other words, the Language Model can override a match suggested by the Pho-
netic Matcher if the differences in the scores involved are great enough.
At the level of phonetic matching, recognition accuracies on the order of
80 to 90 percent are usually possible, which translates to roughly one or two
recognition errors per 10 words, which may be acceptable in some situations.
Even so, there are techniques, such as training, that can be used to increase the
recognition accuracy by a few percentage points especially if there is a large
working vocabulary of several hundred words. In this example, the process-
ing in the Phonetic Matcher and Language Model has been based on generic
subscriber data. That is, the pronunciations used by the Phonetic Matcher
represent the average of pronunciations from male, female, young, old, south-
ern, northern, and western speakers. Similarly, the Language Model is generic,
in that it doesn’t represent how a particular subscriber tends to speak. For
increased accuracy, the Speech Recognition needs to be trained to recognize
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
151
Figure 6-2. The Language Model component of a speech recognition engine assigns a probability
to word pairs in order to increase the accuracy of recognition. In this example, in the context of a
travel reservation system, the word pair “next night” has a greater probability than “best night.”

the exact pronunciations of the businesswoman, and to have the Language
Model represent probabilities of word pairs in her speech patterns. 
The last phase in this simplified view of the SR Engine, Semantic Process-
ing, attempts to determine the semantics or meanings of the words recog-
nized thus far, for the purpose of using the text as a basis for computer
operations. For example, “Dallas” is recognized as a place or destination, and
“next flight” is recognized as a time constraint. These and similar determina-
tions are sent to the Text Formatter, which presents a Query Generator with
information in a format that can be used to generate a search statement to the
Search Engine. 
Assuming that the Speech Recognition Engine is 100 percent accurate,
“When is the next flight to Dallas” eventually becomes transformed into a
machine-readable query that looks something like:
Select *.* from flight_table where 
departure = "Boston" and 
destination = "Dallas" and 
date >= "Oct 7" and 
time >= "7:05 pm"
where “flight_table” is a table of flight information that is maintained in the
reservation system’s database, and the departure, destination, date, and time
constraints are applied to the search. Assuming everything works perfectly,
the Search Engine produces a result something like:
Delta #756
Dallas
October 7
7:05 pm
The Results Formatter of the VEI Service rearranges the output into rough
linear text:
"October 7, Dallas, 7:05 pm, Delta #756"
and the Sentence Generator creates a less cryptic and more user friendly:
"The next flight to Dallas is at 8:00 pm tonight on
Delta #756"
which is presented to the Speech Synthesizer. The synthesizer creates the
human-like speech equivalent of the Sentence Generator’s output, and this
speech is sent back through the public telephone system to the cell and then
to the businesswoman’s cell phone. Alternatively, or in addition to the syn-
152
WIRELESS WONDERS

thetic speech, the textual information could be sent to the businesswoman’s
cell phone.
Note that this is a very simplified discussion of the complex information
handling and processing technologies that make Voice Portals possible. For
example, not considered is the communication of the businesswoman’s loca-
tion from the cell to the MTSO for processing by the automated reservation
system, or the automated answering system that greets her after she connects
to the system initially. In addition, the potential for providing text along with
synthesized speech output isn’t discussed. Assuming the cell phone is capa-
ble of displaying several lines of text, then it could capture the information,
creating a record that could be stored by the subscriber for later reference.
This type of multimodal interface is especially helpful when there isn’t a piece
of paper around to transcribe the information provided through synthetic
speech, for example.
The challenge in creating a workable Voice Portal, from an interface
design perspective, is that of providing enough choices while not overwhelm-
ing the subscriber, and of organizing the content so that sophisticated sub-
scribers can bypass lists and go directly to what they want. One of the main
limitations of Voice Portals is that the data is presented sequentially, and the
amount of information (such as the contents of a menu of choices) that can be
remembered is limited by the subscriber’s short-term memory. Most people
have trouble remembering lists offering over seven or eight choices, espe-
cially if they’re hearing the choices for the first time. It’s like going to a restau-
rant and listening to the list of specials. Most diners ask the waiter to repeat
the choices at least once. As noted above, the addition of a text output option,
as part of a voice-enabled multimodal user interface environment can cir-
cumvent the memory problem by presenting long lists as scrollable text. This
option can be offered either in parallel with synthesized speech or instead of
speech. In a parallel system, subscribers have the option of ignoring the text,
but have it as a backup if they forget or don’t hear an item from a list because
of external noise or because of their short-term memory limitations.
As in a voice mail system, once users know the extension of the party
they’re trying to reach, they should be able to bypass all of the introductory
information put there to orient a first-time or infrequent visitor to the service.
Another challenge in creating Voice Portals is providing the level of personal-
ization that subscribers are accustomed to on the wired Web. If the sub-
scriber isn’t interested in sports, for example, then he shouldn’t have to
endure listening to sports options in the future.
Although significant attention is being given to the theoretical accuracy
of voice recognition systems, the adequacy of recognition is really a practical
issue. For example, for someone desperately in search of information about an
order, a voice recognition system with 95 percent accuracy seems like per-
fection compared to the alternative—a message that says please call back in
the morning. 
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
153

The prognosis for the eventual success of Voice Portals as a means of
accessing the wireless Web is excellent, as exemplified by the early offerings in
this field. For example, first-generation Voice Portals provide stock quotes,
traffic updates, movie listings, news headlines, and weather using a combina-
tion of digitally prerecorded messages and synthesized speech.
The problem with the first-generation Voice Portals is that the recogni-
tion and synthesis processes are imperfect. Recognition accuracies hover
around 90 to 95 percent, and the synthetic speech doesn’t sound quite
human, even when the intonations are correct. Wireless communications
require a high degree of accuracy from the voice recognition component of
Voice Portals. All else being equal, a wired phone system will provide better
quality audio for voice recognition processing than will a wireless phone. Pre-
dominantly wired communications systems, in general, provide lower noise
levels than do systems that rely primarily on wireless communications.
A more complex issue for voice recognition developers is how to effi-
ciently and affordably create language models for the wide variety of contexts
for which Voice Portals are likely to be used. Creating a language model can
be a costly, time-intensive endeavor that depends foremost on acquiring sam-
ples of in-context speech that can be analyzed for patterns. In medicine, for
example, extensive language models for voice recognition systems must be
developed for each specialty—that is, separate models for Radiology, Cardiol-
ogy, and Internal Medicine, for example—in order to create systems that pro-
vide reasonable recognition accuracy. This degree of specialization isn’t
surprising, given that, just as with human operators, when the context is
known, it’s easier for the operator to understand the meaning of otherwise
ambiguous questions.
To appreciate the significance of the language model, consider, for exam-
ple, the potential ambiguities in the question:
“Who is on first?”
Assuming a sports context, specifically one pertaining to baseball, “first”
would probably be equated to “first base.” Thus, a sports language model
would translate the query into:
“Who is on first base?”
However, a language model for a medical scheduling system would catego-
rize “first” as synonymous with “first call,” or: 
“Who is taking first call?”
where “Who” refers to the physician to be called at night in the event of a
medical emergency.
154
WIRELESS WONDERS

PORTABLE POWER
More than any other factor, battery size and capacity limit handheld wireless
device form, function, and affordability. For example, even though the Palm
VII wireless handheld computer relies on a communications infrastructure
capable of always-on connectivity, the designers decided not to implement
that feature. In exchange for requiring subscribers to actively request infor-
mation updates, the Palm boasts a battery life measured in days. In exchange
for this battery life, customers have to log in each time they want an update on
the weather or stock prices, or to check if they have email.
In contrast, the OmniSky wireless modem, designed for the Palm V
series, provides excellent always-on connectivity, but the battery life is only
about six hours. Furthermore, the Palm VII is designed to use the bulkier
AAA batteries, compared to the thin, internal battery pack used in the
OmniSky. As a result, a Palm VII user can usually find replacement batteries
anywhere in the world. However, the OmniSky user has to remember to
carry the special charger with him, and he’s not going to find emergency
replacement batteries at his corner convenience store.
There is nothing innately inferior about using an encapsulated battery
for power, other than being unable to buy a replacement on short notice. For
example, RIM’s Blackberry 957 wireless PDA/pager, which uses a built-in
rechargeable lithium ion battery, boasts a typical battery life of several weeks.
Blackberry, which uses the same wireless network as the Palm VII, provides
always-on connectivity, notifying the user of new mail or alerts keyed to events
such as changes in stock price. RIM solved the problem of short battery life in
part by using creativity in their engineering. The Blackberry’s holster has a
magnet that switches the LCD off when the Blackberry unit is placed in it. 
The battery accounts for at least half of the weight and often up to a quar-
ter of the cost and volume of a typical handheld cellular phone. Despite all of
the advertisements with pink bunnies marching forever because of improved
battery designs, battery technology has lagged far behind advances in com-
puter technology. While computers are following Moore’s law, doubling the
transistor density on a chip every 18 months, the improvements in basic bat-
tery chemistries are advancing at single-digit rates.
As in the case of computer chips, because batteries are normally hidden
from view, advances in battery technology aren’t always readily apparent.
What is obvious are the results of the technology, in terms of cost, size, weight,
power output, and battery life. Of course, with added size and weight come
increased reliability and greater output capacity.
Because factors such as battery life can make or break a product, the chal-
lenge presented to a wireless device developer is selecting a battery design
that minimizes size, weight, and cost while maximizing output capacity. An
early draw for the Palm Pilot, for example, was its ability to work for a month
on two AAA alkaline batteries, especially for users accustomed to one hour
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
155

of battery life from their laptop. Similarly, one of the attractions of RIM’s
Blackberry wireless PDA—in addition to the stylish design that includes a
hidden antenna—is a three- to four-week battery life from a single two-hour
charge. One of the battery-saving design elements of the Bluetooth standard
is that Bluetooth devices go into a power-saving sleep mode when there’s
nothing to communicate.
The most popular chemistries used in rechargeable batteries (although a
battery is a collection of electrochemical storage cells, the terms battery and
cell are often incorrectly used interchangeably) for cell phones are nickel cad-
mium, lithium ion, and nickel metal hydride. Each chemistry is associated
with a certain energy density, maximum recharge rate, peak discharge cur-
rent (for transmit operations), charge retention, and cost.
The cost of a battery includes not only the initial purchase price but also
the operating cost amortized over the life of the battery, which may include
hundreds of discharge-recharge cycles. Nickel cadmium batteries can be
recharged more times than nickel metal hydride or lithium ion batteries
before failure, for example. Energy density is important in providing the
greatest amount of energy in the smallest volume possible, which directly
affects form and mobility. A high maximum recharge rate is important when
the subscriber has only a few minutes to recharge the phone between meet-
ings or before a flight. Most cell phone batteries can be recharged in less than
two hours. A high peak discharge current is crucial to support short, high-
intensity current requirements, such as when a cellular phone or wireless
PDA is in transmit mode. Charge retention is a measure of the self-discharge
rate of a battery. A battery with low charge retention has to be recharged fre-
quently even if it hasn’t been used. Lithium ion and nickel metal hydride bat-
teries have better charge retention than nickel cadmium batteries.
Because battery chemistries have such different characteristics, batteries
can be combined to provide characteristics that would be impossible or too
expensive with a single battery type. For example, RIM’s 950 two-way pocket
pager/PDA uses two batteries—an internal, rechargeable lithium ion battery
and a disposable AA battery. The AA battery, which has a low peak discharge
rate, supports the low-current receive mode. The lithium ion battery, which
has a high peak discharge rate, is used for powering the transmitter for send-
ing email messages. 
In general, lithium ion batteries are lighter than nickel cadmium or nickel
metal hydride batteries, and also provide greater energy density than either of
these two popular chemistries. Nickel cadmium batteries tend to be less
expensive than either lithium ion or nickel metal hydride batteries. Not only
do nickel cadmium batteries have a lower initial price but they can also be dis-
charged and recharged hundreds of time with minimal loss in capacity. A typ-
ical lithium ion battery used in a cell phone can be recharged perhaps 300
times, compared to about 500 for a comparable nickel metal hydride battery
or 600 times for a nickel cadmium battery. Batteries based on nickel cad-
156
WIRELESS WONDERS
TEAMFLY

mium chemistries can exhibit a memory effect in which they prematurely
fail to deliver current even though a partial charge remains. 
Lithium polymer batteries, which rely on a solid plastic electrolyte
instead of a liquid like that used in lithium ion units, can be very thin and light
and shaped or molded to fit virtually any handheld cellular device. Lithium
polymer batteries offer performance similar to lithium ion batteries, but at a
lighter weight and greater cost. In general, batteries based on lithium
chemistries provide the best shelf life, capacity, energy density, and discharge
characteristics of any battery type. However, lithium is relatively unstable.
Lithium is volatile in the presence of water, and because lithium is toxic to the
environment, federal regulations limit the amount that can be contained in a
battery. Like the battery chemistries popular in the 1980s that used mercury
to extend battery life, discarded lithium batteries poison the environment.
Although new materials, such as lithium polymer and enhanced tita-
nium are being used to extend battery life a few minutes, the most promising
technologies on the horizon make use of old materials in a new way. For exam-
ple, fuel cells that make electricity by mixing oxygen and hydrogen using a
process invented in the mid-1800s, are being repackaged in a way that may
make the technology economically viable. These zinc-air batteries are being
marketed as environmentally friendly, high-energy–density disposable bat-
teries that cost about one-sixth as much as a comparable rechargeable lithium
ion battery. Zinc-air batteries are relatively free of the heavy metals found in
lithium ion and nickel metal hydride batteries.
The demand for increased energy densities and lower profile cases has
been a motivation behind the popularity of encapsulated battery pack
designs found in virtually every cell phone and in many wireless PDAs. Encap-
sulated battery packs are extremely compact, available in a variety of inter-
changeable sizes and capacities, and are relatively impervious to shock,
vibration, moisture, and other environmental factors. In addition to provid-
ing for mechanical stability, encapsulation reduces the number of terminals
exposed to possible corrosion. The downside, as noted earlier with the
OmniSky modem, is that emergency power can be impossible to find if a bat-
tery pack fails or a businesswoman forgets to take the charger with her on a
long business trip. 
Another promising approach is to advance battery technology indirectly
by focusing on the battery’s controlling circuitry. These so-called smart bat-
teries use embedded microprocessor chips to control their charge and dis-
charge rates, thereby extending battery life. This technology has been
applied successfully in laptop computer battery designs.
SECURITY AND PRIVACY TECHNOLOGIES
Before grocery store clerks can be expected to habitually ask customers “cash,
check, or cellular?” the issues of wireless security and privacy must be
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
157

addressed. Analog cellular—the most common wireless phone technology in
the United States—is plagued with security holes. Since analog cellular sig-
nals occupy a fixed frequency, anyone with a modified UHF receiver or scan-
ner can hear and record entire conversations. Like the human-operated radio
links of the 1970s and 1980s, literally hundreds of people could be listening
to a subscriber’s conversations, including eCommerce transactions where
credit card and other personal information is exchanged. In addition, the ser-
ial number used by analog cellular phones for subscriber authentication can
be recorded as well, allowing someone to steal air time by using the purloined
number. Because cellular serial number theft isn’t normally noticed until the
subscriber’s bill arrives at the end of the month, a thief can use a number for
weeks with impunity, and then switch to the new serial number, thereby
avoiding detection. 
One of the advantages of digital cellular over the older analog technology
is improved security. Instead of using a single, nonvarying frequency, digital
cellular relies on encoded spread spectrum signals that are much more diffi-
cult to intercept and decode. Even so, with the right equipment, digital cellu-
lar signals can be intercepted and their contents examined. Digital cellular
does provide a higher level of deterrence, however. Instead of a $500 receiver
and a laptop that could be used to monitor analog cellular, a $5000 receiver
and a laptop are required to interrupt and decode digital cellular. While this
added expense excludes most casual busybodies from digital cellular conver-
sations, the added cost to private investigators and corporate spies may be
insignificant.
Security issues aren’t limited to mobile wireless technology. Fixed wire-
less networks represent a major security risk as well. On the wired Web,
Secure Socket Layer (SSL) is the dominant security protocol for monetary
transactions and communications. Information being transmitted is
encrypted, and only when the user’s Web browser and the computer server
on the other end that is running the Web site have the same key can they com-
municate. Both Netscape and Internet Explorer and most wired Web sites
that accept charge card information over the Internet support SSL. It’s impor-
tant to note that SSL is wedded to the client-server architecture of the current
wired Web.
Anyone with a laptop equipped with an inexpensive wireless modem
can potentially access a commercial or private wireless LAN without ever
setting foot on private property. Unless a wireless network has been prop-
erly configured with the appropriate security software, a hacker can drive
into a company’s parking lot, log on to the company’s wireless LAN, and,
within less than 20 minutes, download the contents of the entire server. If
the hacker has malicious intents, he could either erase the server’s hard drive
or modify critical information, and then install a virus on the server. Either
way, the company is effectively shut down, at least as far as fixed wireless com-
munication is concerned.
158
WIRELESS WONDERS

The solution to providing adequate security isn’t to abandon wireless
network technology, but to develop the technologies necessary to provide
reasonable security. To this end, the security technologies that have been
developed applicable to the wireless Web include a variety of password pro-
tection schemes, supplemented with biometric security technologies,
antivirus utilities for PDAs and Web-enabled cell phones, and encryption
technologies for handhelds. A promising approach entails keeping wireless
devices separate from personal identifying data stored on special smart cards. 
Antiviral Utilities
The world’s first cell phone virus, Timofonica, surfaced in June of 2000. The
worm virus, written to infect phones on Timofonica, Spain’s largest wireless
network, sends email to everyone in the subscriber’s Microsoft Outlook
address book. It also sends short text messages to random Telefonica phone
numbers, spamming the network. Fortunately for subscribers, the virus was
stopped before it had a chance to propagate through the telephone net-
work. The first virus to hit PDAs, a Palm-specific virus called Phage, made its
debut only three months later, in September of 2000. Although Phage is rel-
atively innocuous as viruses go, it is proof that viruses can in fact attack hand-
held devices.
In anticipation of the inevitable wave of virus attacks on wireless handheld
devices, a number of companies have developed antivirus utilities designed
specifically for wireless PDAs. Until wireless devices have sufficient memory
and bandwidth connectivity to the Web, the main threat from a virus is to use
a handheld wireless device as a carrier. In other words, a handheld wireless
device can become infected with email attachments and files that don’t dam-
age the device, but are passed along to a PC and the network to which it is con-
nected when the device is synced. Following this line of reasoning, McAfee
offers a product, VirusScan Wireless, that is designed to keep Palm OS, Pock-
etPC, Windows CE, and Symbian EPOC handheld devices from transmitting
viruses while they are being synchronized with a desktop system. That is, their
product executes on the desktop, assuming wireless devices won’t be down-
loading applications through slow-speed wireless connections.
Eventually, however, bandwidth limitations will be relaxed, and wire-
less PDA owners can be expected to operate free from the tethers of a sync-
ing station. Web-enabled cell phones, for example, aren’t designed to
periodically sync with a desktop PC. Recognizing that it’s possible (or at
least the possibility presents a challenge and a degree of notoriety) for a pro-
grammer to develop viruses that can propagate in the small amount of
RAM and local processing available on G2 cell phones, most antivirus util-
ity vendors are at least appealing to subscribers’ sense of uncertainty by
offering utilities that execute on their handhelds, not on the desktop. Exam-
ples of first-generation products introduced for wireless-Web–enabled
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
159

PDAs and cell phones are InoculateIT for Windows CE devices by Com-
puter Associates, F-SecureCorp’s Anti-Virus for EPOC for devices compat-
ible with the Symbian EPOC standard, and a Palm-only antivirus utility
from Symantec Corp. 
Biometrics
Simple password protection schemes have several major security holes. Since
passwords are frequently lost or forgotten, many wired Web users pick a pass-
word that they can easily remember: the phone number of a friend or the
name of one of their children, for example. Even when network operators
require passwords to take the form of a “nonsensical” mix of digits and letters,
passwords are usually easily guessed. Birthdays fit the alphanumeric mix
requirement, for example. For wireless Web users, the problem with pass-
word schemes is that it’s a hassle to remember and then enter, with a keypad
or stylus, yet another personal identification number. The advantage of a
wireless device’s instant gratification can be negated by a tortuous security
interface.
One approach that is being developed to speed and simplify user authen-
tication for wireless device subscribers is to rely on biometrics, or individual-
specific characteristics that can either be recognized by the wireless device or
the network to which it is connected. A variety of biometric technologies,
including fingerprint, face, voice, retinal, and even DNA pattern recognition
are in various stages of development. All of these technologies have been used
with some success on desktop PCs, especially fingerprint recognition, which
is inexpensive and, for most information, secure and reliable. Fingerprint
recognition works by comparing whirls and swirls of a user’s fingerprint to
the patterns stored in memory. The two technologies used in fingerprint
recognition are optical and capacitive. Optical recognition takes a photo-
graph of the fingerprint, whereas capacitive fingerprint recognition indirectly
measures the thin layer of saline fluid that resides between the living and dead
skin on a user’s fingertip. Optical recognition has a smaller form factor, mean-
ing that it can be more easily used with handheld devices. However, optical
fingerprint recognition doesn’t work well if the user has changes in his or her
skin condition, such as dirt or scarring. 
Regardless of which type of recognition technology is employed, a user
with the same or very similar fingerprint causes the equivalent of a password
to be generated by the wireless device, which authenticates the subscriber to
the network. Authentication—proving that people are who they say they
are—is virtually impossible with password-only schemes, since a password
can be stolen. In operation, fingerprint recognition is unobtrusive and quick.
The user simply places a finger on a transparent plate and the image capture
hardware on the other side of the plate takes a digital photograph of patterns
on the fingertip. Validating a cell-phone charge with a fingerprint seems nat-
160
WIRELESS WONDERS

ural, since the device is already in the subscriber’s hands. A number of manu-
facturers, such as SONY and Motorola, offer optical fingerprint identification
units that can be used with wireless laptop computer systems.
The challenge with wireless devices is to provide the components
required for biometric identification in a small form factor and without com-
promising functionality or battery life. Given these constraints, the biometric
technology most likely to be applied to Web-enabled cell phones will rely on
some form of image recognition. Since live video capture and transmission is
viewed as one of the “killer apps” of G3 cell phones, these phones with high-
bandwidth connections to the Web will have image capture capabilities built
in, and these sensors should be able to serve a dual function of fingerprint
recognition. 
Encryption
Encryption is the use of a key or code to generate a seemingly unintelligible
message that can only be deciphered by someone with knowledge of the
key and the algorithm used to scramble the original message. Thanks to
practical needs of governments and the military at times of war, encryption
is one of the oldest information technologies, dating back thousands of years.
The two basic types of encryption, symmetric and asymmetric, are described
below.
Symmetric Encryption.Most encryption technologies are symmet-
ric, in that either the encryption and decryption keys are identical, or one key
is derived from the other. For example, a simple rotational encryption scheme
adds or subtracts a value for every character in a message. To illustrate the
technologies involved in encryption, assume that a sender wants to send the
message:
THEWIRELESSWEB
Using a simple rotational scheme, each letter of the message is replaced with
a letter that is 7 places later in the alphabet. Since there are 26 letters in the
alphabet, the process starts over at 26. In other words, “Z,” the 26th letter,
becomes “G,” the 7th letter of the alphabet. Mathematically, this symmetrical
encoding scheme is represented as:
Encoded  [Original  7] mod 26
where mod stands for modulo, the remainder after division by 26.
Using this method, which lends itself to the decoder rings that are occa-
sionally offered in cereal boxes, the original message becomes:
AOLDPYLSLZZDLI
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
161

As long as the recipient knows the encoding algorithm and the key (in
this case 7), she can quickly and easily decrypt the message. In this example, a
decoder ring, like the mathematical relationship between encoding and
decoding, is bidirectional. This simple letter substitution scheme is quick and
relatively easy to set up. However, it also provides only a modicum of security
against a hacker. Because the mod operator in this example limits the encoded
letter to a value of between 1 and 26, there are only 25 possible keys. 
A more secure symmetrical encyption approach, and one used by most
governments and corporations to send secure communications over the
Internet or other networks, is to use a multidigit key, such as 7-14-2-12.
Mathematically, the encoding scheme is represented as:
Encoded1  [Original1  7] mod 26
Encoded2  [Original2  14] mod 26
Encoded3  [Original3  2] mod 26
Encoded4  [Original4  12] mod 26
In this example, the key is fixed-length, with the encoding pattern repeating
every fifth character. With the input of:
THEWIRELESSWEB
Using the multidigit key 7-14-2-12, the encrypted message would read:
AVGIPFGXLGUILP
Sequential rotational encryption can be visualized through the use of multi-
ple decoder/encoder rings. Note in these examples that encoding is per-
formed by adding values, but they can be subtracted as well. That is, the
encoding-decoding relationship can be reversed.
The greater the key length, measured in bits, the more complicated
and time consuming the cracking process will be. The possible number of
keys of a particular length is 2 to the power of the key length. For example, 
there are 28 or 256 possible eight-bit keys. The most common symmetric
encryption algorithm is the 56-bit Digital Encryption Standard (256 
72,057,594,037,927,936). Because of national security, the largest
exportable key length is 40 bits, which provides for over 1 trillion possible
40-bit keys.
Many current multidigit encryption schemes use a key size up to 128
bits, making decryption resource intensive for unauthorized recipients of
encrypted messages. The current standard for data encryption used by the
U.S. government, established in 2000 through the U.S. National Institute of
Standard’s Advanced Encryption Standard effort, is based on a variable-length
key size of up to 256 bits.
162
WIRELESS WONDERS

However, there are schemes that undermine the security of even longer,
variable length encoding sequences. For example, certain characters (such as
“E”) appear more often than others (such as “Q”) in text, and these relative fre-
quencies can be used to crack the encoding scheme. This type of attack works
best with longer text messages, but won’t help someone trying to crack
numerical data. In some instances, the easiest way to break a code is to simply
steal the key from the intended recipients by snooping around their hard
drive or intercepting their email.
Even when the encryption technologies work flawlessly, there are prac-
tical, process-oriented challenges associated with using symmetric encod-
ing schemes. The most significant challenges are the need to exchange keys,
poor scaling, and the difficulties of establishing secure communications
with heretofore unknown parties. Symmetric encoding requires that the
sender and intended receiver first communicate, through some secure
mechanism, the keys they intend to use for encryption and decryption. In
other words, the parties have to establish some secure communications
channel first so that they can have secure communications later. This need
to exchange keys can be a major problem, especially when the sender and
recipient are geographically distant and there is a need to change keys peri-
odically. The courier wearing a trench coat and carrying the key in an alu-
minum Zero briefcase is one approach, but this mechanism is inconvenient
and expensive.
The scaling issue becomes apparent when there is more than one pair of
individuals exchanging information. If a company has 2000 employees, each
accessing the corporate network from mobile phones and wireless PDAs,
then someone in the company has to maintain a database of 2000 keys, one
pair for each employee. Providing each employee with the same key wouldn’t
do—that would allow employees to decrypt messages intended for other
employees. In addition, if secure employee-to-employee communications are
supported through the company email system, then each pair of potential
contacts requires a separate pair of keys, and each of these keys has to be main-
tained and stored by the individual employees. 
This is a typical n-squared problem, in that a company with n users
requires up to n2/2 unique keys, including the key each employee holds for
himself so that he can encrypt confidential data for his own use. For 2000
employees (n  2000) this translates to:
Unique Keys  n2/2
 20002/2
 2,000,0000
In other words, in order to provide 2000 employees with secure interper-
sonal communications requires a key management system with up to
2,000,000 unique keys.
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
163

Systems with large numbers of users also present major challenges
because it’s difficult for someone to keep track of all of the people involved,
much less their keys. In a large organization, or one that does business with a
large number of outside parties (an online brokerage house with thousands of
wireless accounts, for example) there is frequently the need to establish
secure communications with heretofore-unknown parties. Again, some
secure method of information exchange has to initiate the process. Several
online trading services simply use the mail to send a key or password to sub-
scribers, while others use unencrypted email. One problem with these meth-
ods is employees or subscribers who pose as the intended recipient in order to
obtain confidential information. Obviously, the method used to initiate
secure communications depends on the nature of the communications, and
the value of the information at risk. 
Asymmetric Encryption. In addition to symmetric operations,
encryption can also be based on an asymmetric approach, in which the pass-
word is different for encryption and decryption. The most common form of
asymmetric encryption, developed by Whitfield Diffie and Martin Helman, is
Public Key Encryption. While this is the most widely used system for encryp-
tion on the Internet, there are technologies especially suited to the wireless
Web, such as Elliptic Curve Cryptography, as well as technologies that may
prove equally valuable in the future, such as Quantum Cryptography.
Public Key Encryption. A prominent technology that has been
applied to the challenge of distributing keys to wired and wireless Web users
is Public Key Encryption (PKE). This technology, which is best known as the
ubiquitous RSA security that provides the backbone of the security protec-
tion for most eCommerce, is based on a pair of keys generated by a single algo-
rithm. One key is public, known or at least knowable to everyone, and one key
is private, known only to the sender. The private key, which is never shared
with recipients or transmitted, is used to decrypt information that’s been
encrypted by someone using the public key. In other words, encoding is done
using a generally available public key and decoding is done using a private key
available only to the intended recipient. Using a physical padlock as a compar-
ison, PKE is equivalent to requiring one key to lock a padlock and another key
to open it. The actual encoding and decoding can use a variety of schemes,
such as the symmetrical rotational encryption described earlier.
In the PKE technique, each person has both a public key and a private key.
Someone sending a message to a recipient uses an algorithm that creates a “ses-
sion” key from the recipient’s public key. The session key is the key value spe-
cific to a given message from a particular sender to a particular recipient. The
session key for another message to a different recipient would likely be differ-
ent, because it is a function of the recipient’s public key. Only the recipient can
decode the message, using her private key. The public key, as well as the session
key, is generated from the private key. The recipient calculates the session key
using his private and public keys, which is equal to the sender’s session key.
164
WIRELESS WONDERS

That is, the session key is the same value for a particular pair of senders and
recipients, even though they are calculated using different formulas. 
With knowledge of the public key and the session key, it’s possible for
anyone to calculate the private key. However, the solution to the mathemati-
cal relationship between the public and session keys is an exponential func-
tion of large prime numbers (a prime number is a whole number, such as 7 or
37, that can only be divided without a remainder by itself and 1). 
For the mathematically curious, the relationship between the session,
public, and private keys takes the general form:
Session Key  Public Keyx mod n
where x is unknown and n is a very large prime number. As a result, it is
extremely time consuming to attempt to solve for the session key, even on the
fastest mainframe computers. 
The greatest significance of PKE in the wireless Web is its use in estab-
lishing a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), which is minimally a pervasive secu-
rity infrastructure implemented and delivered using public-key technologies.
One purpose of a PKI is to provide a mechanism to verify that specific public
and private keys belong to a particular subscriber. This certification is issued
by a Certification Authority (CA), such as a cellular provider or online trading
service, which verifies identities and associates these identities with private
and public keys. In other words, a certificate binds a public key to the name of
the entity that holds the corresponding private key. Of note is that the patent
on RSA encryption expired in September 2000, paving the way for lower-
cost, even more widespread use of this industry-standard security technology.
Certification Authority services are an essential component of any PKI
system because they are the entities that directly issue, renew, and revoke cer-
tificates. Without a CA infrastructure to manage certificates and provide
seamless authentication, the entire PKE process would be unwieldy and
impractical for most businesses. It’s important to note that, unlike SSL, which
is wedded to client-server architecture and sessions, PKI can be used with a
variety of alternative architectures.
Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC). ECC is a digital signature
system that provides the same functionality as RSA, but does so more effi-
ciently. With ECC, it is possible to create a stronger cryptography system
using a shorter key size. Since performing computational operations on the
smaller key is more efficient, ECC is more suited for a computationally con-
strained platform, such as a cell phone or wireless PDA. For example, whereas
the processing of a digitally signed transaction might take up to half a minute
on a Palm device using RSA, an application using ECC would likely take a lit-
tle more than a second.
Quantum Cryptography. One of the most promising asymmetric
encryption technologies is Quantum Cryptography, which is based on 
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
165

quantum mechanics. This branch of theoretical physics explains the behav-
ior of subatomic particles in terms of energy states and the wavelike proper-
ties of matter. Quantum Cryptography relies on a quantum entanglement
process employing pairs of “entangled” photons that can generate a com-
pletely random sequence of 0s and 1s distributed exclusively to two users at
remote locations. This random sequence of digits serves as the key that can be
used to scramble the message into an apparently random sequence of letters.
The power of Quantum Cryptography is that any attempt by an eavesdrop-
per to intercept the sequence alters the message in a detectable way, alerting
the recipient that the communications channel has been compromised. 
WIM Cards
In practice, it isn’t reasonable for subscribers to use their Captain Marvel
decoder rings to encrypt the email they send over wireless PDAs or cell
phones. A more practical, user-friendly approach is to issue a smart card to sub-
scribers with all of their authentication information stored in machine-read-
able form. Smart cards, in the form of credit card-size devices containing a
microprocessor chip, have been in use in Europe since the mid-1970s. In com-
parison, smart cards have had limited success in the United States, with several
failed attempts in the health care industry. A more recent attempt, the Ameri-
can Express Blue Card, first released in 1999, is a smart card designed to be
used with a personal card reader that connects to a PC. Merchants never get an
account number, but do receive an authorization code. The customer’s credit
card number never appears in the company’s database, and is therefore secure
from hackers. PC-based card readers proved too cumbersome for casual users
who want to infrequently purchase small-ticket items through the Web.
In Europe, smart cards, called WIMs (Wireless Identity Modules) use Pub-
lic Key Encryption technology to address the greatest security threat for wire-
less devices: theft and loss. Some GSM-compatible handsets have a slot to fit the
credit-card size WIM card, rendering the phone useless without the card. Sub-
scriber data stored on the card is used rather than the telephone internal serial
number. Each WIM card contains a microchip that stores an algorithm that
encrypts voice and data transmission and identifies the subscriber to the
mobile network as an authentic caller. The widespread knowledge that steal-
ing a cell phone without the corresponding WIM card leaves the phone num-
berless and without a serial number is a deterrent to theft. This protection
assumes that the WIM cards are stored separately from the wireless device.
WIM cards using PKI are compatible with cell phones using WAP 1.2, and are
also equipped with internal SIMs (Subscriber Identification Modules).
SIMs are fingernail-size cards that contain information the service provider
uses to identify the phone and register it on the network as a native device. By
changing SIMs on a GSM phone, it’s possible to use a single phone for both the
United States and Europe without paying roaming charges in either region.
166
WIRELESS WONDERS
TEAMFLY

The disadvantage of this approach is the hassle of having to open the back of a
phone and swap the SIM, which can be damaged or lost in the process. 
The Bottom Line
When it comes to security and privacy technology, there are no perfect solu-
tions. Antiviral programs have been around for decades, mainly because new
virus technologies are being developed every day. As soon as someone learns
how to detect and disable a virus, it seems that there is another virus intro-
duced over the Internet. Similarly, even the best biometric security system
can be defeated by someone with enough motivation. For example, it’s possi-
ble to follow someone to a restaurant and secure the wineglass she used and
obtain a copy of her fingerprints. Printed on a suitable film, the image of the
fingerprint can be used to fool a fingerprint detection device. Finally, even the
best encryption technologies can be cracked, given enough time. Fortunately,
time is usually the issue because a message that is two or three weeks old may
have no practical value to the eavesdropper. For most subscribers, the tech-
nologies available today and on the horizon provide enough of a deterrent to
discourage hackers and corporate spies.
WIRELESS WONDERS WRAP-UP
This chapter ends Part 2, “Wireless Wonders,” which discussed the more
technical aspect of the Wireless Web. The technologic high points are the
developments in the areas of wireless and wired infrastructures, and the use
of new device technologies, from voice recognition to new battery tech-
nologies that will support the increasingly large power requirements. The
trajectory of communications technologies suggests that there are certain
must-have technologies that will be crucial in developing next-generation
wireless Web interfaces, which may be device dependent. For example, cel-
lular phones will benefit from speech recognition and synthesis, at least as far
as accessing Web content is concerned. For person-to-person communica-
tions, it’s likely that live video or still image transfer will be the killer applica-
tion of the future. Technologic advances in the areas of image capture and
display technologies, such as Light Emitting Polymer (LEP) screens that con-
sume less power than LCD screens and don’t require backlighting, will cer-
tainly impact this capability. 
In the area of image display, larger color displays are forecasted for cellular
phones. Heads-up displays, which are head-mounted virtual screens, have yet
to prove practical, especially for mobile and otherwise moving users.
Advances in display chips, especially in the area of high density, low power,
color displays, will probably impact wireless PDAs more than cell phones.
In the area of image capture, the technologic challenges include support-
ing the required resolution and frames per second through new lens designs,
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
167

compression algorithms, image storage technologies, while keeping power
requirements within reasonable limits. In addition to supporting person-to-
person communications, imaging technology will make other technologies,
such as fingerprint, face, and gesture recognition reliable security measures. In
the long term, as videophones become standard issue, synthetic actors and
Bots will be applied as well, using thin-client applications that minimize band-
width requirements while providing personal service. For the immediate
future, within the G2-G3 infrastructure, the most promising user interface
developments are in the area of Voice Enabled Interfaces, including Voice Por-
tal technology.
Part 3, “Convergence,” explores the future of the wireless Web from eco-
nomic, technologic, and sociopolitical perspectives. The goal is to provide
guidelines for businesses in the process of—or at least contemplating—estab-
lishing a presence on, and fully utilizing, the wireless Web.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
With the exception of fixed wireless communications, wireless connectivity
is synonymous with a compact form-factor that allows portability. Achieving
a level of portability and miniaturization supportive of pervasive communica-
tions with the wireless Web depends on developing hands-free methods of
working with Web data, providing a secure and private communications
environment, and providing the energy—in the form of new battery technol-
ogy—to power it all. 
The most prominent emergent technologies to address these needs
include a variety of pattern recognition technologies, including voice and
image recognition, voice synthesis, new battery designs, new interface tech-
nologies—including emotionally intelligent interfaces—and systems that
these technologies tie together, such as Voice and Bot Portals.
Fixed wireless services, while dependent on the wireless Web for con-
nectivity, resemble those of the wired Web for most subscribers. Terrestrial
fixed wireless competes directly with DSL and cable modem companies for
subscribers, especially subscribers in outlying areas. Similarly, satellite fixed
wireless service provides affordable, high-bandwidth, wide area coverage and
services not possible through other means. Several satellite projects on the
horizon have the potential to redefine how the world accesses and communi-
cates through the wireless Web. 
Advances in user interface technology specific to wireless operations on
the Web will provide greater access to the wired Web. In the hierarchical
interface model, the six basic interface components are Physical, Graphical
User, Logical, Emotional, Intelligent, and Emotionally Intelligent. The appli-
cation of these components or technologies ranges from introducing more of
a fun-factor to wireless communications, following the NTT DoCoMo
model, to creating wearable communications. The most promising user inter-
168
WIRELESS WONDERS

face technologies include Voice Enabled Interfaces (VEIs) that make use of
voice recognition and speech synthesis techniques. 
In order for a complex communications network to work properly, not
only must the battery technology catch up with advances in communica-
tions but subscribers’ security and privacy must be assured. Technologies
include antiviral utilities for Web-enabled handhelds, biometric technologies
for authenticating subscriber identity, and a variety of encryption techniques
to ensure private messaging. 
In particular, lightweight Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) technol-
ogy, when combined with a well-designed Certification Authority (CA), is a
major enabling technology for wireless Web eCommerce. Unlike SSL, which
is used on the wired Web and is wedded to the session-based client-server
architecture of the wired Web, ECC and the CA technologies can be used
with the sessionless architectures proposed for the wirelesss Web.
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
169

This page intentionally left blank.

Part Three
CONVERGENCE
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

He that will not apply new remedies must expect new evils,
for time is the greatest innovator.
Francis Bacon
INTRODUCTION
It’s common practice for high school physics students in the United States to
be introduced to the concept of the interconnectedness and persistence of
matter by an insightful teacher who reminds them that they’re breathing
some of the same air molecules that Aristotle, Caesar, and Napoleon
breathed centuries ago. However, but for the written record and what is
passed down by an oral tradition, the teachings, conversations, and actions of
these and other great figures in history are lost to the ether, never to be
recounted fully again. Although some of the hydrogen and oxygen molecules
breathed by current high school students in the United States and abroad
will inevitably be inhaled by their counterparts a thousand years from now,
there is also a good chance that at least some of their personal email conversa-
tions and other electronic communications and transactions will be available
as well—even if the students don’t gain the significance of ancient Greek
philosophers or charismatic world leaders. There will certainly be a record of
public transactions—utility bills, tax records, birth and death dates, and the
like—but these data are unlikely to add profoundly to the culture or general
knowledge of future generations. It is the personal details of the life of Aristo-
tle that are intriguing—his beliefs and teachings—not that he managed to pay
his property tax on time.
Achieving a modicum of immortality through technology has been a
goal of humankind since before recorded history. Whether through the use
173
7
Realizing the Potential
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

of red ochre in a prehistoric burial ritual, embalming and embedding a
pharaoh in a pyramid or other monument, commissioning a portrait, writing
a book, or, more recently, via a tape recorder or some type of camera, a key
issue is the availability of a technology that provides a persistent memory.
How many executives have missed an opportunity to record one of their
experiences because they didn’t have a camera handy, or failed to capture a
profound thought on paper or in a digital recorder before it slipped into the
abyss of forgetfulness?
At a time when technologies from paper and pen to miniature cell
phones and pocket-size digital cameras are ubiquitous, the issue shifts from
the availability of technology to one of conscious effort. Even though the tech-
nology of recording conversations and transactions is affordable and common
in most developed countries, other than special occasions—birthdays, gradu-
ations, and weddings—few people take the time to record many significant
aspects of their lives. Granted, not everything that everyone does is worth
recording. However, for those who are actually doing something significant
with their lives, it’s rare for them to take the time to maintain a relatively
detailed diary, complete photo album of their activities, or otherwise create a
record of life from their perspective. Most productive professionals are
focused on achieving their goals, and what they record is usually associated
with some requirement established by the government to ensure adequate
payment of taxes.
In addition to government records, much of what is recorded for each cit-
izen is the result of their business transactions—which is also related to tax-
able purchases. For example, every month private cellular subscribers in the
United States receive a detailed phone bill, which, although often barely
understandable, usually contains a record of phone numbers, times, commu-
nications charges, and the associated state and federal taxes. Even though
these records typically lack any reference to the topics discussed or who was
involved in the conversation, the phone company generates the records auto-
matically, without any conscious effort on the part of the subscriber. On occa-
sion, these records are relied on for the “public good,” as evidence in criminal
investigations, for example. From the subscriber’s perspective, however, the
type and granularity of the data reported are often insufficient, especially
when a conversation deals with a critical business transaction. As noted in
Chapter 1, one of the first attractions for using the telephone for transacting
business was the lack of a record of the transaction. Without a written record
of the conversation, any agreement made over the phone could always be
contested later.
As the popularity of email increases, more knowledge workers are
unconsciously creating an archive of their personal and corporate lives. Cor-
porations, as well as consumer-oriented ISPs such as AOL, commonly archive
personal and company email for years. Some corporations are beginning to
realize the value in archiving employee emails, because they may contain
174
CONVERGENCE

important contact information that may otherwise disappear when the
employee leaves for another company. From the employees’ perspective,
however, the potentially thousands of memos, many containing records of
insights and strategies that may be of use to them in their future careers, are
lost to them. Although there are legal issues of intellectual property owner-
ship and work for hire, the fact remains that the information remains sealed
away from the creator, and, unless the information is mined by the employer,
from society as well. In addition, in a decade or two, when the company that
the employee worked for is sold or acquired, and the information system is
replaced with a different one, the fate of the legacy data, perhaps preserved on
media no longer compatible with anything on the market, is probably the
trash bin. 
Even consultants who fastidiously maintain records of their business and
personal emails and other electronically generated correspondence have
trouble keeping their records accessible and usable as computer technology
advances. Since the introduction of the desktop microcomputer, media, for-
mats, and operating systems have evolved through dozens of incompatible
generations. Paradoxically, the best archive for computer-generated data has
remained paper printouts, which are difficult to search, maintain, index, and
make good use of.
From the perspective of growing a matrix of private, corporate, and pub-
lic information, the Internet, especially with the Web interface, is beginning
to change everything. The Internet defines the communications standard
that digital communications systems are increasingly relying on to transfer
voice and data to and from a universe of devices. But in and of itself, the Inter-
net and the enabling IP standard are no different than the networks used for
decades by the phone companies. The difference is the memory function pro-
vided by the Web. Not only can emails and documents traverse the Internet
but the contents of these documents and the record of the gross transactions
can also be recorded on the Web for a variety of future uses—many of which
have yet to be conceived. 
Consider a world in which every toddler, regardless of income level, is
provided with a rugged Web-enabled tablet that can be scribbled on with a
tethered stylus that works like a piece of chalk on a chalkboard. With time,
the tablet, or its replacement, serves as the child’s working medium for
preschool. She not only accesses illustrated books to read and to be read to
through the tablet but she also performs her homework on the tablet. Later,
in high school, she completes her homework assignment on the wireless
tablet using voice recognition software. Her teacher, parents, and national
accrediting agencies access and comment on her work through their own
Web-enabled wireless tablets and desktop computers. In college, she uses an
even thinner and lighter flexible tablet to record her laboratory experiments
in a material sciences class. At her first job out of school, she uses a heads-up
display and a voice recognition system to design engine components for a
REALIZING THE POTENTIAL
175

major aeronautical company, using notes that she posted to the Web when
she was in the material sciences class—perhaps with a small royalty paid to
her alma mater for the service. When she has her first child, her physician uses
his wireless bedside tablet to record the child’s weight and vital signs, starting
its lifelong Web-based electronic medical record, and also simultaneously
adding the details of the event into the mother’s Web-based electronic med-
ical record. 
Though the data acquisition and creation hardware and the nature of the
human interface will change over time, the constant in this future scenario is
the interface to the Web, and its use as a standardized, lifelong repository for
information. A life record of every subscriber’s activities, medical history, edu-
cation, business and private dealings, all recorded with a variety of Web-
enabled devices and appropriately filtered, can provide data that will have
value to the authors, their healthcare professionals, their employers, and the
government. For example, with Web-enabled data acquisition hardware
sewn into clothes and embedded in utensils and sports accessories, diet, exer-
cise, interpersonal contact, and other “personal” information can be gathered
for analysis, without interrupting or even informing the person. 
The downside, for those concerned with privacy, is the ability of the gov-
ernment and businesses to profile citizens. Political affiliations and religious
beliefs can be inferred from records of reading material purchased from an
eBookstore or from a short story written by a student in Freshman English, or
other information ostensibly gathered for a student’s or society’s benefits.
Clearly, everyone must be given some degree of control over the windows to
their information, disclosing some areas only as they see fit, unless they are
compelled to do so by the government.
Although Finland and Japan may be different, U.S. society, technology,
and business aren’t yet prepared to execute this future scenario, but the
trends to this potential path are becoming increasingly evident. For example,
U.S. parents planning back-to-school purchases for their teenagers have to
contend with more than clothes and new binders. Electronic organizers and
communications devices are now required accessories. Expensive athletic
shoes don’t count for much anymore; students without a cell phone, PDA, or
interactive pager just aren’t with it.
From business and technologic perspectives, creating a worldwide wire-
less Web infrastructure is a project that dwarfs the building of the Pyramids in
Egypt, in terms of both significance and difficulty. At some point in the future,
when there are universal communications protocols and devices, those who
elect to will enjoy instantaneous, recallable conversations on a global basis. In
this future communications utopia, the free exchange and recording of ideas
expressed in digital form will occur regardless of language or culture—thanks
to translation technology—in an ever-expanding variety of ways.
This chapter begins Part 3, “Convergence.” As the title suggests, this and
the following two chapters discuss the convergence of the complex social,
176
CONVERGENCE
TEAMFLY

political, economic, and technologic forces relevant to the growth and devel-
opment of the wireless Web, within the context of creating a pervasive com-
puting environment. It explores the opportunities for advancing the
technology, the change agents involved, and the characteristics of the com-
plex change process. This chapter also identifies the applications of wireless
Web technology most likely to succeed, from the perspective of what can rea-
sonably be achieved in the near term, with an eye to future possibilities. 
PERVASIVE COMPUTING
For most customers, the attraction of a pervasive computing environment—
the anytime, anywhere, context-specific, personalized user experience
involving the capture, production, or transfer of information—is the poten-
tial for computer and communications technologies to simplify their lives
and to save them time. Pervasive computing includes both wired and wireless
connectivity, with goals of supporting the early adopters who simply must
have the latest, thinnest, fastest technologies, providing for the information
capture and retrieval needs of everyday business, and offering news, enter-
tainment, and communications capabilities to subscribers.
Communication and computing are becoming pervasive in part because
the two technologies are becoming increasingly interdependent, increas-
ingly reliable, and therefore invisible. After all, what constitutes a computer
and what constitutes a communications device today? Most wristwatches,
portable and cell phones, pagers, televisions, radios, and even bicycle odome-
ters contain computer chips, but most people don’t think of these devices as
computers. Similarly, many laptop computers are configured to send and
receive faxes, email, voice, and even video, but they aren’t generally thought of
as primarily communications devices. The majority of communications tech-
nologies simply fit into the process of everyday business and personal life, and,
unless they fail unexpectedly, they become part of the framework, and fade
out of conscious existence. 
In sharp contrast with the concept of pervasive computing is invasive
computing, where users make a conscious effort to boot a desktop PC, con-
tend with formatting disks, and loading utilities so they can finally pull out a
keyboard and a mouse and get down to work. According to current projec-
tions, on a worldwide scale, pervasive computing will soon overshadow inva-
sive computing. For example, the number of Web-enabled handheld devices
in use worldwide will equal the number of Web-enabled desktop PCs by the
year 2003. Although pervasive computing involves the use of both wired and
wireless connectivity, the shift to predominantly wireless handheld devices
will change the way companies conduct eCommerce and provide services to
their customers. 
Steve Jobs’ vision for the original Macintosh as an information appli-
ance—the embodiment of pervasive computing—that presents users with
REALIZING THE POTENTIAL
177

the complexity and intrusiveness of an ordinary toaster has never quite mate-
rialized. However, the possibility exists on the immediate horizon for the
dream to be realized, albeit in the form of an Internet appliance based on a vir-
tual machine architecture instead of a traditional PC architecture. The cur-
rent generation of Web-enabled cell phones and wireless PDAs suggests that
the one thing these Internet appliances will have in common is lack of unifor-
mity. In addition, unlike current session-based wired Web transactions, these
appliances will support transient sessions and then the sessions will go away.
In this dynamic relationship, applications are to JAVA virtual machines as
URLs are to wired Web browsers. Similarly, instead of portals such as Yahoo
that aggregate content, wireless portals will aggregate applications. Alterna-
tively, the static PC era client-server architecture could migrate to the wireless
Web, in the form of Windows CE and Palm OS, for example.
Regardless of the outcome of the OS versus the virtual machine battle,
assuming the current trend continues, not only is the traditional desktop PC
destined to be outnumbered by Web-enabled handsets and cell phones but it
will also be overshadowed by TV set-top boxes and Web-enabled games as
well. Although each of these devices typically includes more computing
power than the original Apple computer, they aren’t perceived as computers
per se. They’re devices that provide communications and entertainment and
happen to use computer technology.
In the move to a pervasive computing environment, with time, the dis-
tinction between the Internet and other networks will fade. In one sense, this
is purely a result of local conditioning, in that what customers in the United
States have come to see and experience as the Web doesn’t fully translate in a
wireless phone experience. However, in countries like Japan and Korea,
where the wireless voice services are nearly saturated, creation of a pervasive
computing environment through the addition of Web connectivity to the
existing wireless communications infrastructure is a natural extension of sub-
scriber services. Not only does Web connectivity provide more value to cel-
lular phone subscribers but it also represents a way for communications
companies to boost revenues.
Wireless penetration rates and the extent of pervasive computing are
higher in South Korea and Hong Kong than they are in Japan, even though
Japan has the most advanced wireless Internet service on the planet. China, in
comparison, has virtually the lowest penetration of wireless services of any
developed country. However, because of its population, China is the largest
wireless carrier in Asia. The Chinese government is backing wireless telecom-
munications companies because wireless may be the fastest, least expensive
way to get the greatest number of citizens online since much of the country
lacks traditional wired phone circuitry. 
Despite the reliance on desktop computer systems and a less than opti-
mum communications infrastructure, the United States is positioned to cre-
ate truly pervasive computing environments within the next few years. The
178
CONVERGENCE

reasoning behind this prediction lies in the convergence of several factors,
described below.
Convergence
In the United States, the move toward a pervasive computing environment is
poised to accelerate because of a convergence of enabling technologic, socio-
logic, business, and political factors. For example, consider the technologic
components of this convergence, starting with the evolution and differentia-
tion of the microcomputer. What started as a dream that materialized as an
Apple computer in a garage in Silicon Valley first evolved into the large, pow-
erful desktop microcomputer. Only then did the evolutionary path include
luggable, portable, and eventually handheld devices. In an evolutionary path
that included successes such as the Apple II, the IBM-PC, and later the Palm,
Simbian, RIM, and Windows CE handhelds, there are notable dead ends.
Although the Apple Newton, PC-Jr and first luggable Macintosh, and CE
handhelds missed their marks, laptop and handheld computing is now a
mature technology. Although it would have been inconceivable only a few
years ago, the RIM wireless PDA sports a 386 microprocessor operating at a
faster clock frequency than the original desktop 386-based PCs. 
Another component of the technologic convergence is the cell phone.
Like the desktop microcomputer, the evolutionary path of the cell phone
includes large, barely luggable devices with poor user interfaces and ques-
tionable reliability. Along with the metamorphosis of the cell phone hard-
ware, the nature of the information that the cell phone is designed to transfer
has changed as well. Increasingly, the distinction between voice and data is
blurring, especially given Web-enabled cell phones capable of supporting
voice-to-voice, voice-to-synthesized speech, text-to-text, and text-to-synthe-
sized speech communications. 
The convergence of voice and data also redefines what constitutes a com-
puter, and where the telephone, a communications device, becomes a com-
puting device. Today, the cell phone is a ubiquitous business tool and, for
many teenagers, a fashion statement. Cell phone sales offices are now as com-
mon as Starbucks outlets in many major cities, and many regional service
providers offer phone fronts in colors that match school or business colors.
Another component of the technologic convergence that has coevolved
with battery-powered laptop and handheld computers is the thin, light-
weight, LCD screen. A lightweight handheld unit would be virtually impos-
sible without this lightweight, battery-powered, portable display technology. 
Application architectures have also evolved, first from applications
designed for the mainframe-centric, IT–department–controlled monoliths
to applications designed to run on the more democratic client-server archi-
tectures, as well as peer-to-peer architectures, popularized by the Napster
(www.Napster.com) site. Most recently, architectures favor the thin-client
REALIZING THE POTENTIAL
179

wired and wireless application service provider model (ASP and WASP,
respectively). A WASP makes it possible for a subscriber with a Web-enabled
cell phone with minimum local processing power and memory to perform
complex search functions, interact with databases, and initiate transactions—
all because the processing and memory are provided by a server. As a result of
this convergence in trends in application architectures and hardware plat-
forms, pervasive computing is becoming more of a conclusion than a possibil-
ity. For companies that add a wireless Web touch point to their business,
there is considerable prospect of gain. 
The conditions, technologies, and business opportunities that make the
wireless Web attractive to content developers, service providers, and their
potential subscribers include the emergence of new content delivery devices.
For example, eBooks are projected to account for 10 percent of book sales by
2005 according to Barnes and Noble and other major book sellers. The pro-
liferation of the Internet IP standard for communications, a global decline in
computer and communications hardware costs, as well as faster, less expen-
sive network technologies are significant attractors as well. 
For domestic companies, there is the lure of the apparent success of wire-
less in Europe and Asia. There is also the prospect of significant domestic mar-
ket potential, given the projections for huge increases in domestic wireless
activity. Part of the reasoning behind this projected increase in activity is the
result of new payment models that include one-rate plans, free nonwork-
hour wireless communications, and wireless service plans that don’t require
the call recipient to pay for the airtime. Similarly, a shift in subscriber demo-
graphics to a more mobile workforce with a pent-up demand for just-in-time
information, the handheld device proliferation, and decreased relevance of
voice for telecom profits all point to the wireless Web as a solution for invigo-
rating business in the communications space.
In addition to the pressure of constant technologic improvement, such
as the constantly increasing wireless infrastructure speeds, there are several
nonquantifiable factors involved in the push to the wireless Web. For exam-
ple, there are corporate and national egos involved in taming the wireless
frontier. There is nothing new about companies and countries doing every-
thing possible to take the lead in a technology. For example, just as the United
States has taken pride in the technology that flows out of Silicon Valley, Japan
has taken as national policy a stance to become the leader in the Internet
world by 2005. 
The Long View
Given the convergence of factors that favor the success of the wireless Web,
what are the best-case scenarios for the players involved? For example,
assuming that companies in the United States manage to establish an afford-
able, ubiquitous, high-speed communications infrastructure, what are the
180
CONVERGENCE

rewards? Should the United States focus on middleware applications and let
the infrastructure evolve on its own, free from foreign or domestic govern-
mental intervention? 
The primary reason Europe is thought to be ahead of the United States in
telecommunications and accessing the wireless Web through cell phones
and other devices is because of the standardization of the GSM protocol. And
yet, the countries of the EU and the millions of NTT DoCoMo users in Japan
have a minimal presence on the wired Web. Could it be that the ubiquitous
nature of the wireless Web is oversold, at least in terms of the need for national
coverage? After all, who cares—other than a frequent flying business execu-
tive—if a single cell phone works in Boston, San Francisco, and Tokyo? For the
vast majority of customers, the extent of a network’s national coverage does-
n’t really matter, as long as it works in their metropolitan area. 
Is this a myopic business view of early adopters of technologies such as
thin laptops, wireless PDAs, and Web-enabled phones as to what the United
States has to do to compete successfully with European and Asian wireless
companies? On the other extreme, will there be a backlash from the general
consumer population if ubiquitous Web access, sold initially as a means of pro-
viding communalitywide communications, including education and student-
teacher communications opportunities, is eventually perceived as Orwellian? 
Given the international intent not to miss out on the next big thing—as
many domestic and international corporations did in not realizing the poten-
tial of the wired Web until the likes of Yahoo and Amazon were already
entrenched—many international corporations are moving ahead. In some
cases they are moving with the same sense of misguided abandon that charac-
terized the wired Web in its early growth spurts. However, as described later,
this needn’t be the case, since there are clear indications of what types of ser-
vices will benefit from wireless Web access, and which types won’t. 
Although it may not fit the image that U.S. technology corporations pro-
mote, the domestic standing in the wireless Web has more in common with
China than it does with the more technologically developed countries in the
EU, Japan, or Korea. Like China, the United States is perceived as an enor-
mous potential market for technologies developed offshore. Telecom giants
and device manufacturers in Europe and the Pacific Rim countries are des-
perately attempting to control or at least become major players in the poten-
tially lucrative U.S. market, despite their knowledge that the United States
has a political structure designed to protect domestic business interests. 
It remains to be seen if there is a way for U.S. corporations to leverage their
R&D costs by exporting their middleware technologies, even if only in the
form of licensing arrangements, to less technologically advanced markets in
Asia, Canada, and South America. It’s also possible that middleware tech-
nologies, such as voice recognition and synthesis, may dissolve the lead
enjoyed by the first mover international wireless developers that rely on
graphical devices and related infrastructures.
REALIZING THE POTENTIAL
181

OPPORTUNITIES FOR CHANGE
The primary opportunities for change from either primarily wired desktop
Web access or no Web access to Web-enabled wireless connectivity are sum-
marized in Figure 7-1. These opportunities evolve around immediately satis-
fying a demand for timely, accurate, location- and user-specific information.
For example, virtually every salesperson in a mobile sales force needs to access
critical information at her customer’s site, from her car, and from her office.
However, in today’s competitive market, she can’t take the time to drive to a
central office whenever she has to access corporate or public information on
the Web. Location and time independent access to information is especially
critical when there is a constant need to access time-sensitive information,
such as the price of a stock, the status of a patient, data needed to close a busi-
ness deal, or stock on hand to fulfill a customer’s order. 
The always-on capabilities provided by some Web-enabled wireless sys-
tems, and the push applications that they can support, provide enhanced
functions that have application in time-sensitive situations. For example, noti-
fications of changes in a patient’s status, an alert that a stock value has
increased or decreased by a predetermined amount, or a customer’s need for
immediate assistance are all examples of the value that an information push
service can provide to its customers. For occupations that favor user-directed
information as opposed to service-initiated information transfer, wireless pull
technologies can provide instant access to specific, just-in-time information
sources. 
182
CONVERGENCE
Opportunities for Change
Demand for any time, any place access to critical information
Demand for constant real-time communication
Demand for frequent access to time-sensitive information
Extension of wired eCommerce applications
Market for push/pull value added information
Need to exceed customer expectations
Potential value of serving location-based information
Support for transaction-oriented business processes
Figure 7-1. The primary opportunities for change from a primarily wired Web access toward Web-
enabled wireless connectivity.

Handheld wireless access to the Web is especially relevant to transaction-
based business processes, whether a businesswoman is purchasing a ticket to
an entertainment event, trading stocks, or transferring funds from one of her
bank accounts to another. In this regard, the extension of wired-Web eCom-
merce applications to the wireless arena can be supported, changing the
dynamics of online shopping. For example, with a Web-enabled PDA, it
would be possible for a customer in a retail outlet to search for the best price
on the Web, and order the product for next-day home delivery from the site
with the lowest price. 
Consider how the partnership of AirClic, Inc. (www.Airclic.com),
Motorola, Symbol Technologies, and Ericsson’s Connect Things has the
potential to fundamentally change the nature of retail shopping. If this or a
similar project succeeds, customers will be able to browse through a retail
outlet and scan an item they’re interested in purchasing, using a combination
of wireless and bar-code technology. Within seconds, a shopping bot will go
out over the wireless Web and locate the same item. The customer will then
have the option of experiencing immediate gratification or saving 30 or 40
percent off of the sticker price by waiting for the item to be delivered by
FedEx the next morning. For wireless-enabled customers, browsing will take
on a completely new meaning.
Perhaps the greatest opportunity for change supported by wireless Web
access is by providing a company with the means of not simply satisfying, but
exceeding, customer expectations. For example, consider the value of wire-
less communications to a businessman who is equipped with a wireless PDA.
He can unobtrusively signal a limousine service while he’s still in a meeting,
notifying the service that the meeting is running shorter or longer than
expected, and rescheduling the pickup time appropriately. Similarly, consider
the value of wireless connectivity to the customers of a copier repair service.
Customers in need of service can contact the repairman assigned to their
account through a Web site and, in real-time, receive a notice from the repair-
man with his estimated time of arrival, as well as any updates on earlier or later
arrival times. For the business traveler, wireless communications can make
the difference between a pleasant trip and a night in a cheap hotel. A busi-
nesswoman who receives a page or email notification from the airlines that
her flight has been changed, can use her wireless communications device to
view or hear options for earlier or later available flights she would prefer to
take—including seat assignments. For the business traveler, this service pro-
vides incredible value over the alternative of discovering that a flight has been
cancelled after rushing to the airport. 
IDENTIFYING WHAT NEEDS TO BE WIRELESS
Thanks to affordable technology, replacing a cable with a wireless connection
is usually trivial. However, the challenge for a company moving into the wire-
REALIZING THE POTENTIAL
183

less Web space is to identify which of their services actually need to be wire-
less, and of these, which will provide the greatest traction or ROI. One
approach to making this determination is to use the metric of transparency.
That is, adding a wireless touch point makes sense when the behavior change
required of the customer—whether at work or on the road—is as little as pos-
sible. For example, requiring employees to log in to a voice portal with their
cell phones may not be reasonable if they are working at their desks most of
the time and have wired Web connectivity through a desktop PC. 
An important factor in assessing the transparency of the introduction of
wireless Web connectivity is the effect on the current process, in terms of
additional steps or the modification of existing steps. That is, if the addition of
a wireless touch point simply adds another step to a process that involves par-
allel data sources, such as the wired Web, then it will likely be poorly received.
For example, equipping clinicians in a hospital with wireless tablets for them
to record patient findings, but then requiring them to use a desktop PC in
order to place medication orders probably won’t be acceptable. It would be
better to delay the introduction of wireless Web technology into the patient
care process until all of the computer interactions that are required in a typi-
cal patient encounter and follow-up are available from a single device. With-
out a critical mass of applications on the wireless platform, the addition of a
wireless device simply adds an additional layer of complexity to the existing
system. The “you can’t get there from here” problem shouldn’t appear on a
wireless Web touch point.
In some cases, the potential benefits of adding wireless Web access to an
environment, from a customer value perspective, are obvious. For example,
college campuses seem like a natural fit with wireless Web communications,
with everyone concerned with accessing, managing, messaging, and creating
intellectual property. College campuses in the United States were among the
first businesses to have wired Web access, often in computer centers and, in
many cases, in dorms as well. However, with frequent student movement
from class to class and around campus, and the affordability of laptops and
wireless hardware, untethered Web access is a practical adjunct to wired con-
nectivity. For example, the University of Oregon in Eugene established an
infrastructure that allows students with laptops and wireless modem cards to
access educational content on the Web at 11 MBps. 
In other cases, wireless Web connectivity makes sense when it can sup-
port an existing process or technology by providing added convenience or
simplifying access for customers who don’t want or don’t need to know about
desktop computers, modems, ISPs, and the like. For example, consider the
applicability of wireless monitoring devices in the home health monitoring
industry. Home monitoring is becoming increasingly popular, and a number
of studies have shown that home monitoring not only works from a clinical
perspective but it also can save money. For example, a home scale that mea-
sures changes in weight or a blood pressure cuff that dials in and deposits the
184
CONVERGENCE

information in a hospital database can save the patient the hassle and expense
of having to get to a clinic. It also saves the healthcare system the cost of send-
ing a nurse or physicians assistant to the home to perform a routine lab test.
However, the setup is a problem, with modem connections, cables, and diffi-
culties that most elderly—those most in need of home monitoring—don’t
handle very well.
One obvious application for wireless Web connectivity is personal health
monitors that are currently connected to the wired Web. For example, there
are asthma monitors that record air flow parameters for asthmatics, and then
use a wired modem to upload the data to the Web, where it can be accessed at
any time by patients and their clinicians. With the very young and older
patients without ready access to a modem line or busy executives without
time to download the data after each measurement, there is the likelihood
that acute asthma attacks will be missed. Similarly, there are wired blood-test-
ing systems for diabetics that measure levels of glucose, cholesterol, and
triglycerides. The results can be sent to a PC and, from there, uploaded to the
patient’s personal Web page, which can be monitored by a clinician. How-
ever, for most wired devices, getting the information to the Web is a multistep
process, and the time involved is prohibitive for patients who need to test
their blood glucose several times a day. Instantaneous uploading of data and
feedback that wireless would provide would ensure compliance.
Consider the potential benefits of a wireless home monitoring system for
an elderly man with a heart condition and diabetes who is living alone in an
assisted-living complex. The man, who finds it impractical to make frequent
clinic visits, is equipped with several Bluetooth devices and wireless Web con-
nectivity through his cell phone. Although only three devices are used in this
example (a Bluetooth-enabled Med Watch, Scale, and Pill Box) others could
be added as well, up to a total of eight devices. For example, a Bluetooth-
enabled pacemaker, a self-inflating blood pressure and pulse rate monitor, or
a bar-code scanner for diet tracking and analysis could be added to the
patient’s arsenal of devices.
Every morning and night, the patient can step on the scale, which stores
his weight in local memory and sends the data through his cell phone to his
Web-based medical record. A sudden increase of more than 1 kg (2.2 lb),
which is associated with heart failure in a patient with known coronary dis-
ease, alerts the patient’s clinician through the Web site and his PDA or cell
phone. Similarly, a Bluetooth-enabled Pill Box could remind the patient to
take his medications, including how many and what type of pills to take, and
require that he verify that the medications were taken. Lack of patient com-
pliance with medication prescriptions is one of the major costs associated
with modern health care in the United States. Patients who don’t follow
their prescriptions require more and more frequent clinician visits, in part
because inadequate and irregular dosing may compromise the effectiveness
of medications. 
REALIZING THE POTENTIAL
185

The Med Watch, a fictitious device that resembles several medical
devices under development, in this case a wrist-mounted glucose monitor,
provides the patient with a real-time readout of her blood glucose level and
transmits this data to her medical record. It’s possible to add multiple func-
tionality to devices, such as a bar-code reader to the Med Watch, allowing the
patient to scan in codes on food packages and medication labels to track, for
example, protein or calcium intake.
Once patient information is posted on the Web, it can be examined auto-
matically by a rule-based transaction monitor that looks for trends and abnor-
mally high or low values, similar to the alert systems designed to assist stock
traders. The patient’s clinician can also review the data, using a wireless hand-
held device that allows her to make notes in the patient’s Web-based medical
record. Similarly, since the data are on the Web, a variety of interested third
parties can review the data and the data acquisition process in action. For
example, researchers interested in the efficacy of the wireless intervention
can track compliance. Pharmaceutical firms can monitor individual patient
compliance, and they also may be involved in financing the Pill Box compo-
nent of the service. The government and third-party payers also have access to
various components of the data, as needed.
The wireless Web brings two things to the home monitoring space. The
first is the pervasive memory functionalityof the Web. Records that are stored
on the Web in an appropriate format, such as XML or an SQL database, can
be searched, manipulated, and analyzed by clinicians using expert systems
and other analytical tools that have access to the Web. The second factor is
personalization. A patient’s particular condition often dictates specific med-
ication frequency and dosage. 
Bluetooth-enabled home or clinic monitoring is only one example of a
potential use of wireless Web technology in medicine. It’s one example of
how wireless information and communications technologies can be used to
save patients time and money, allow more independence and involved health
care, and simplify a complex problem area.
CHANGE AGENTS
Every new beginning starts with the end of another beginning, and progress
in the wireless Web arena is no different. Given the great potential of wireless
Web communications as a component of a pervasive computing environ-
ment that will eventually touch every aspect of modern life, what are the
change agents that will help the evolution come about? Although new tech-
nologies and applications, legislation favorable to wireless industries, and
expectations fueled by the prospects of a second dotCom experience are core
change agents, the most important change agent is vision.
With the maturation of the wired dotCom world that was highlighted by
the market correction of 2000, it’s clear that a prerequisite for success in the
186
CONVERGENCE
TEAMFLY

wireless space is a collective vision of the future. For example, one future is a
world in which wireless computer technology is embedded in everything
from appliances to toys and tools. Everyone is connected to the Web, espe-
cially children, whether for communications with their parents or to play
video games, to download music from the Internet, or to watch Internet TV. 
Another possible change agent is a corporate vision that empowers
employees to contribute their expertise in problem solving regardless of time
or location. In order for wireless to take off as a commercial success, what the
wireless providers have to offer must fit what customers expect—which is in
turn influenced by vendor-specific marketing and advertising. 
The collective vision is ultimately reflected in legislation at some level.
For example, consider the impact of the German Tax Reform of 2000, which
reduced personal and business tax rates. This removed a large barrier to cor-
porate mergers, and boosted momentum for the further economic restruc-
turing of Europe. In short, it made the world’s third largest economy
friendlier to wireless activity. 
The expectations of a second coming of the dotCom experience is also
fueling more than casual interest in developing wireless touch points. Many
individuals and corporations want to repeat the glory days when the wired
Web was at its peak. For example, management at Marvel Comics, which
licensed their superheroes to be deployed as comics on cell phones for a small
monthly subscription fee, views the wireless Web as a potentially huge rev-
enue stream. Other domestic and foreign companies want to replicate the
success of NTT DoCoMo as soon as the technology becomes available.
Potential customers clamoring for the benefits of wireless Web connec-
tivity include not only early adopters but also customers from all walks of life.
Applications of wireless communications technologies, range from delivering
Webucation through packet video; smart cars; networked appliances; fixed
wireless services; commuting games, including collaborative games; universal
remotes; and wireless eBooks that allow readers to download books from a
virtually infinite library over the wireless Web.
Of course, the spark for the vision and the motivation behind the demand
for these applications and services stems from the technologies that are on
the horizon. The technologies discussed in Part 2, “Wireless Wonders,” range
from voice enabled interfaces, new tools for creating and manipulating con-
tent, and conversion utilities to convert current programs and content into
wireless Web compatible form, to satellite systems, new protocols, wireless
heads-up displays, and last-mile connectivity options. 
Consider the potential change that the introduction of the Web and
the Bluetooth standard, both major change agents, will bring about in how
a typical business executive will keep track of her schedule, maintain her
phone lists, and transact business over the phone. In the pre-Bluetooth 
scenario, the executive first looks up scheduling and to-call information on
her PDA, and then manually enters the number into her cell phone to place
REALIZING THE POTENTIAL
187

a call. While this method of interaction has the advantage of privacy of data,
the two-hand operation has an extended interaction time, even if she has
both devices with her. Typically, however, the phone and PDA are stored
separately, and the two devices are difficult to work with when there is no
desk space.
Now consider a second scenario in which a Web-enabled cell phone pro-
vides access to the same scheduling and to-call information, but the data are
now available on the Web. Not only can the executive review and manipulate
her contact and to-do information from any Web site but she can also make
calls and retrieve data with one hand free, and in much less time, since there is
only one device to contend with. A benefit of the Web repository is the mem-
ory function described earlier.
A third scenario involves the use of a Bluetooth-enabled cell phone and
PDA. Because local processing is involved, lookup is likely faster than through
the Web. There is improved security, in that the data don’t leave the execu-
tive’s immediate area.
The natural extension of Bluetooth-enabled digital appliances is local
storage of private data for rapid transactions and backup in the event that the
Internet connection is temporarily lost. A Web connection allows the record
of selected transactions to be stored on the Web for later analysis or manipu-
lation. Alternatively, the Web provides a backup of all activities entered into
the PDA. If the local storage device is configured such that it is unusable
unless it is in range of the original owner’s Bluetooth network, then the data
on the device would be of no use to someone else if the device were misplaced
or stolen. This provision for security is potentially a major change agent in the
move to Bluetooth technology, given that an executive’s stolen laptop com-
puter makes front-page news. 
For example, when the laptop of Qualcomm’s chief executive containing
several gigabytes of confidential corporate information was stolen in Septem-
ber 2000, the event made the front page of several national newspapers. The
event highlighted the potential lapses in security that can be associated with
the new high-capacity handheld and portable devices. Although Bluetooth
and a variety of security-specific technologies may improve data protection,
several companies have policies about what can be placed on a handheld or
laptop device. Intel, for example, prohibits employees from working on confi-
dential documents in public areas, such as airplanes, or from leaving laptops
containing confidential materials unguarded.
THE CHANGE PROCESS
Returning to the high school students mentioned at the beginning of this
chapter, another basic concept taught in physics class is the activation energy
of a reaction. A chemical reaction involving several types of atoms that com-
bine to form a new compound usually requires energy to move the process
188
CONVERGENCE

along to completion. That is, it isn’t sufficient to simply put the ingredients in
a container; they have to be stirred, heated, shaken, or pressurized, etc. 
Without the extra energy required to promote the reaction—the activa-
tion energy—a chemical reaction may simply not occur under normal condi-
tions. For example, the reaction might require an activation energy in the
form of a very high temperature or pressure that’s too difficult and expensive
to maintain, given the value of the end product. The activation energy
required to drive a reaction to completion depends on exactly how the reac-
tion occurs. For example, adding a bit of platinum or a special surface on
which the reaction can occur may drop the energy of an activation require-
ment enough so that a reaction can occur at a lower temperature than before.
It’s important to note that very small changes in the activation energy require-
ment can result in large changes in the rate at which the reaction occurs. In
this relationship, the substance or environment, which isn’t directly involved
in the reaction but promotes it, is called a catalyst. The majority of chemical
reactions and products would be economically unfeasible without catalysts.
The concept of activation energy and catalysts has parallels in the eco-
nomics of technologic development. For example, the tax rate can be con-
sider a catalyst, in that very small changes in the tax rate can profoundly
increase or decrease the rate at which certain industries expand into a market.
Providing a tax credit for certain business practices typically promotes that
activity to a degree that is out of proportion to the direct investment required,
often because there are competing demands for resources. A small advantage
in one environment can shift capital and other resources from other activities,
resulting in an abundance of activity in an area.
In many regards, the change agents discussed above—the vision, tech-
nologies, legislation, and economic projections—are catalysts for business to
move into the pervasive computing space. The basic technologic ingredients
and their catalysts appear to be in place; what remains to be found is a catalyst
for the social process, which tends to progress much more slowly than the
development of wireless hardware or software. 
Often, the rate-limiting step in a business process is aversion to change,
especially when there is a comfort level with the current process. For exam-
ple, the field of medicine is notorious for its slowness to change, even when
faced with new technologies that have proved their effectiveness in other
areas. Many clinical activities are not yet computerized, for example, despite
the virtually global acceptance of computer-based tools by knowledge work-
ers in business, engineering, and other professions.
An Example in Medicine
Paradoxically, many of the early adopters of computer and communications
technology were clinicians, in part because vendors see medicine as a lucra-
tive market, and in part because clinicians, in general, have the capital to invest
REALIZING THE POTENTIAL
189

in technologies that may improve their practice. For example, the first com-
mercially successful voice recognition systems in the United States were
developed for medicine in the 1980s. However, except for pockets of activity
in specialties such as emergency medicine, the technology has failed to spread
to other medical areas. Similarly, even though electronic medical record sys-
tems were introduced in the 1950s in Russia and in the 1960s in the United
States, most hospitals in the United States rely on a paper medical record. 
The reason for the slow rate of acceptance of computers in medicine is
a complex issue. It involves resistance to change, the initial impression that
computers, like typewriters, are tools for secretaries and other support
personnel, and a numbing to technologies with great promises. This latter
factor is a result of clinicians’ almost constant exposure to vendors pro-
moting drugs and devices that are associated with fantastic claims, but
which usually fail to deliver on the vendor’s promises. Most clinicians will
accept a procedure or technology only after a trusted colleague has proved
the vendor’s claims.
In medicine, the rate of computerization has increased at an exponential
rate with new reimbursement guidelines that require complex coding and
documentation procedures that are only practical with the aid of computer-
based tools. Clinicians who don’t embrace technologies such as wireless bed-
side computing simply don’t have time to see patients and fill out the
paperwork they need to be reimbursed by third-party payers and to cover
themselves legally. The economics of health care in the United States are
evolving almost as rapidly as wireless technologies, making home monitoring
alternatives to hospital visits more economically viable. Because of the expec-
tations of the government and third-party payers, it’s becoming increasingly
difficult for clinicians to maintain a pen and paper practice. There are similar
situations in the financial and travel industries that seem ideally suited for
wireless Web-enabled devices.
DISCUSSION
To many business executives, wireless is synonymous with a cell phone and,
for the early adopters, a wireless PDA. However, wireless isn’t a product, but
part of a strategy for achieving a pervasive computing environment in which
the ability to store and manage data is so ubiquitous that the technology
becomes invisible. In this context, the value of the Web is much more than a
mere collection of virtual storefronts that provide consumers with ready
access to books, CDs, and inexpensive airplane tickets. In a ubiquitous, wired
and wireless pervasive computing environment, the Web becomes a univer-
sal and timeless repository of personal and public data. The Web is trans-
formed into a collective knowledge base that will eventually contain archives
of every significant aspect of life, from medical records, educational and pro-
fessional work, to purchasing and voting patterns. 
190
CONVERGENCE

Wireless technology is not the only enabler in creating a collective con-
sciousness through pervasive computing. For example, consider the potential
for the Zaplet technology, a class of lightweight applications built upon the
convergence of email, the Web, and instant messaging. Zaplets, a kind of inter-
active, Web-based email, are automatically updated with either recipients’
responses or external data. For example, a group of executives selecting the
best time for their next board meeting might send out a calendar Zaplet to
each board member. As each recipient indicates his or her preferred times for
a meeting, their choices are automatically reflected in every other recipient’s
calendar. Similarly, a brokerage firm could email a single Zaplet showing a
client’s stock portfolio in the morning, and the graph would be automatically
updated to reflect the current stock value when the customer opened the
message in the evening. Zaplets and other crossover technologies can have a
major synergistic effect on wireless, pervasive computing.
One day, subscribers will be able to ask,”Where is that old high school
buddy of mine?”, “What ever happened to my old girlfriend?”, “What was that
equation I derived in college physics?”, “How much did I pay for that TV?”,
and “Is my TV still under warranty?” The ability to communicate directly
with someone, search a high-school database of alumni, or check the status of
a repair takes more than simply supplementing a communications cable with
a digital walkie-talkie. It requires a technical and social infrastructure, and a
collective vision that not only allows an incursion of technology into what
people normally consider their private lives but actively encourages it. 
To obtain this level of enthusiastic support for wireless technology, the
personal benefits must be obvious, immediate, and affordable. Just as the
vision promoted by the automobile industry (with added motivation sup-
plied by the U.S. military) triggered the public outcry for the development of
a national highway system, a collective vision of pervasive computing may
help develop not only the information highway but also the educational sys-
tems and legal structures that will allow it to flourish.
Despite the technologic limitations of current devices, such as small
screens and even smaller buttons that make casual Web browsing an exercise
in frustration, wireless devices seem like a natural fit for transaction-based
applications. Even with this humble beginning, it isn’t difficult to imagine a
future in which cell phones and other disparate wireless devices converge
into a single communicator. This device, perhaps designed to be used with a
docking station that provides a larger display and wired Web connectivity,
will hold an archive of every event and action that the owner has been
involved in since shortly after he or she was born.
For businesspeople in the United States who grew up with Star Trek, Star
Wars, and the concept of time travel, the technologic leaps involved in creat-
ing a living, mobile Web consciousness seem almost trivial—from a techno-
logic perspective. The issue, especially in the United States and Europe, is
privacy. Despite the syntactical difference, pervasive is often synonymous
REALIZING THE POTENTIAL
191

with invasive, and what is deemed invasive computing is often viewed as con-
trolled and elective computing. 
There is also the issue of commercial privacy, privacy from the govern-
ment, and the ability to turn off access to personal information. For example,
that old girlfriend may not want to be bothered, but only notified that her for-
mer boyfriend made an attempt to contact her. However, the government,
whether in the name of national security or a suspected murder, may have
access to detailed information to a degree never before possible. Consider that
in Austria, where there is no division between church and state, citizens who
denounce the Catholic faith aren’t compelled by the government to pay the
state-mandated church tax. However, if it’s known by records of cell phone
roaming charges that a woman visits a church every Sunday, should she be
held liable for the tax? 
On a more global level, since the Web isn’t a company or government,
and isn’t responsible for any citizenry, where are the personal data stored?
Who owns it? Who maintains it? Who can access it? Can it be erased? Is it per-
missible as evidence in court? How is it paid for? For example, if a university
allows students to record their academic lives on their servers, do they have a
right to charge students to access that data years later?
Obviously, the wireless Web is ultimately not about simply reformatting
what’s on the Web to fit on a mobile device. It’s also more than just about cre-
ating a different platform that can support different needs. From business and
sociopolitical perspectives, it’s about redefining the way people communi-
cate, conduct commerce, and transact business wherever they are in the
world and, if possible, improving upon current processes.
From a personal perspective, the wireless Web represents a gateway into
a new way of thinking about privacy, of contributing to society, and of leaving
a legacy. Given the multitude of political, moral, and ethical views possible on
these and other sociopolitical topics, it’s clear that wireless technology is an
enabler and not the rate-limiting step in the move toward pervasive comput-
ing. The next chapter explores the technologic, business, political, and social
issues that represent both challenges and opportunities for companies mov-
ing into the wireless Web space.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The potential of the wireless Web is much more than a new technology for
creating another touch point for customers to interact with a business.
Whereas the Internet provides the standard IP communications protocol,
the Web provides a crucial memory component that has the potential to
transform the Web-Internet combination into a pervasive communications
and computing network. Pervasive computing involves both wired and wire-
less Web connectivity. Predictions are for 1 billion wireless devices to be in use
worldwide by 2003. Almost half of these devices will be connected to the
192
CONVERGENCE

Internet, the same number of desktop devices projected to be connected to
the Web.
The convergence of several enabling technologic, sociologic, business,
and political factors strongly suggests that the time is now for wireless Web
development. With the ability to provide anytime, anywhere, context spe-
cific, accurate, timely communications and computing, the challenge for cre-
ating the wireless component of pervasive computing is in deciding what
needs to be wireless, and which markets have the greatest potential. There
should be a focus on identifying the need for anytime, anywhere communi-
cations, tempered by a vision for where the technology and the industry as a
whole is headed. In this regard, the key issue seems to be whether pervasive
computing will be based on a post-PC, disseminated, virtual machine archi-
tecture or an extension of the existing PC operating system model.
Although there are multiple opportunities for wireless Web develop-
ment in all industries, the most obvious areas appear to be medicine, travel,
and financial services. For example, bedside computing for clinicians and
Web-enabled home monitoring systems can simplify home monitoring to
the point that elderly patients can operate the system without outside inter-
vention. Often, the acceptance of these and other new Web-enabled tech-
nologies is impeded by a social momentum that resists change. 
REALIZING THE POTENTIAL
193

This page intentionally left blank.

A bend in the road isn’t the end of the road – 
as long as you remember to take the turn.
Joan Lunden
INTRODUCTION
In the face of profound marketing hype and what appears to be at least lim-
ited success for Europe and Asia in their wireless Web ventures, what’s the
holdup? After all, isn’t the wireless Web simply another touch point for an
organization? Why aren’t more companies in the United States, Europe, and
Asia following the lead of the international telecom giants in their efforts to
provide subscribers with personalized, private, immediate access to informa-
tion? Perhaps a better question is why the level of interest and activity isn’t at
the level demonstrated during the action-packed nascent period of the wired
Web, the nearest technology to the wireless Web. Actually, thousands of
companies of various sizes around the world are jumping in, but many of
their activities aren’t yet obvious because the CEOs of these companies are
wrestling with several challenges inherent in any new industry. The purpose
of this chapter is to highlight these challenges on the path to the wireless
Web, so knowledgeable executives can either address the challenges directly
or create a business around providing relief for other executives facing the
same issues.
The cautious approach that many CEOs are taking with the wireless
Web is related to factors common to the commercialization of a new tech-
nology. At the highest level, most of these factors are manifestations of a level
of fear and uncertainty. For example, there is a degree of uncertainty in the
investment community, in companies with a wired Web presence, and in the
195
8
What’s the Holdup?
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

general public regarding exactly what the wireless Web is and is not. Is it a
completely new and separate touch point, like a fax machine or a telephone,
or is it simply an extension of the wired Web experience onto new hardware?
If a wireless Web initiative is undertaken at a company, who should own it—
the IT division, the Web development group, telecommunications, or a new
department? In addition to the uncertainty surrounding wireless technology,
a lack of technical expertise, unproven business models, and the need to part-
ner with or at least rely on start-up companies that have experience measured
in months elicits fear in the minds of many executives.
In many instances, this fear and uncertainty are probably more appropri-
ately labeled issues of timing. Many business executives are certain that they
want to wait and see what happens in the wireless Web market. After all,
there were major marketing efforts and a degree of initial success in the Euro-
pean and Asian markets for Laserdisc, HDTV, and the Interactive CD tech-
nologies—all stagnant or dead technologies today. Similarly, Clarion
Corporation’s AutoPC and the original Iridium Satellite systems were both
launched with backing from major corporations, but neither of these tech-
nologies gained a critical mass of followers. 
The issues outlined below are not offered as a body of information to be
used by CEOs to rationalize waiting even longer before staking a claim on the
wireless Web frontier. Instead, these challenges are offered to provide deci-
sion makers with a fuller understanding of ramifications of wireless Web tech-
nologies, so they can make better strategic decisions. With an understanding
of the major issues related to the wireless Web, executives should be in a posi-
tion to limit risk exposure while positioning their organization for maximum
gain.
Many of the challenges listed below may be perceived as negatives by
some executives, and as market opportunities by others, depending on the
company’s position in the wireless or supporting industry. For example, the
prospect of having to support a new generation of wireless device hardware
every 12 to 18 months may be perceived as a major challenge to the CEO of a
company involved in developing and delivering content to wireless Web sub-
scribers. However, for the CEO of a company that is involved in developing
tools that can speed and simplify the process of supporting multiple hard-
ware platforms, the stream of new hardware may represent her company’s
future revenue stream.
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES 
IN THE EMERGING WIRELESS WEB SPACE
Continuing with the metaphor of the activation energy of a process that was
introduced in Chapter 7, the primary challenges or issues that must be
addressed in order for a company to move rapidly from a wired to a wireless
Web presence. These issues, which are inherent to some degree in every
196
CONVERGENCE
TEAMFLY

emerging market, can be categorized as managerial, political, medical, legal,
economic, technical, market-based, and social. For example, CEOs in virtu-
ally every industry have to deal with challenges surrounding the medical or
environmental impact of their companies’ goods or services, whether
related to pollution resulting from the production and distribution of wid-
gets, or from the potential hazard that the widgets pose to the health and
well-being of end users.
These issues not only account for the bulk of the activation energy
required to shift the progression from wired to wireless Web connectivity
but they also represent opportunities for leaders of companies with solu-
tions—catalysts—that can diminish the significance of these challenges for
others. For example, many of the technical challenges associated with the cur-
rent generation of wireless devices are being addressed in the R&D depart-
ments of companies throughout the world. In many cases, a solution to a
challenge in any of the areas could catapult the wireless Web industry for-
ward by years, for example, the introduction of a high-capacity, postage
stamp-size energy source.The challenges and opportunities within each of
the eight areas are described in more detail below.
MANAGEMENT ISSUES
The CEO’s task of guiding his organization through the process of entering
and exploiting the wireless Web space, regardless of the organization’s posi-
tion in the value chain, is characterized by uncertainty and volatility (see Fig-
ure 8-1). As such, a successful CEO in this arena requires a special mix of
confidence, ambition, vision, genius, and fortitude. The key management
issues are described in the following paragraphs.
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
197
Figure 8-1. Management issues in the emerging wireless Web industry.

Duality of Focus
The wireless Web can be divided into at least two major market segments,
enterprise-centric and eCommerce-centric, each with its own goals, chal-
lenges, responsibilities, opportunities, and metrics for success. For instance,
enterprise-centric initiatives, such as those providing a company’s sales force
with wireless EDA (Enterprise Digital Assistant) support are focused on pro-
viding employees with a competitive advantage over the competition
through increased employee effectiveness and improved customer satisfac-
tion. In contrast, eCommerce-centric initiatives (i.e., those providing an addi-
tional touch point to an online bookstore) are concerned with metrics such as
an increased conversion rate (a measure of the number of visitors who initiate
a business transaction within a particular period of time, relative to the total
number of visitors), greater customer satisfaction, and, ultimately, greater cus-
tomer loyalty.
From a management perspective, the eCommerce-centric segment is a
much more volatile, unknown environment. Since the segment is character-
ized by unknown users employing a variety of hardware platform and oper-
ating system configurations, providing personalized, location-specific, timely
content is much more of a challenge. Not only must a CEO whose company
is focused on this space stay abreast of technologic developments so new
devices and software systems can be supported as they hit the market, but she
must contend with the competition as well. Many companies will eventually
be involved in both market segments, requiring a support structure capable
of addressing the challenges in each area. 
Technologic Details
Because the wireless Web is a relatively new space, CEOs have to focus on
technologic details that are normally the sole purview of Chief Information
Officers (CIOs), Chief Technology Officers (CTOs), and technology special-
ists. Because wireless Web technology is evolving rapidly, standards are mov-
ing targets, and small changes in the technologic mix will provide some
companies with an advantage in the marketplace, and cause others to fail. In
other words, the successful management team in the nascent wireless Web
space will have an understanding of the underlying technologies to a breadth
and depth much greater than that of executives in, for example, the mature
desktop PC industry. As the wireless Web matures and technology standards
are established, executives will be able to focus more of their attention on the
more compelling global strategic issues.
Volatility in the Space
The wireless Web space, like the early wired Web arena, is characterized by
frequent acquisitions and mergers. Most of this volatility is found in the
198
CONVERGENCE

maturer, developed areas of the wireless value chain, such as the service
providers.
Geographical Pockets of Expertise
As in most other industries, the political, business, and technical infrastruc-
tures favor one region and country over another in the availability of afford-
able skilled workers. For example, middleware developers seem to be
crystallizing in Silicon Valley, hardware centers are in Japan and Sweden, and
centers of expertise in infrastructure development are appearing throughout
the EU. Companies that can’t move to centers of expertise have a formidable
challenge when attempting to recruit employees.
The Wired Web
The wired Web, the nearest technologic relative to the wireless Web, is also
one of the greatest impediments to managing its development. Like a sapling
growing in the shadow of a mature tree that prevents the sapling from absorb-
ing enough sustenance from the soil to grow, the wired Web commands the
limited resources that the wireless Web needs to grow and thrive. For exam-
ple, the CEO of a company with a wired Web presence may have committed
to wired Web maintenance and growth plans that have already strained hard
to find and manage resources. For this CEO, the wireless Web is a diversion, or,
at best, something to pursue after the next major overhaul of his company’s
wired Web system, which may be months or years away.
The wired Web is also a source of confusion for end-users. For example,
because of their experience with the Web from the vantage provided by desk-
top PCs, many domestic subscribers have an unrealistic, preconceived notion
of what the wireless Web should offer. Choosing which of these expectations
to meet, and which to ignore, is a major management decision that has to take
into account the resource requirements for implementing a specific feature
versus the level of customer satisfaction.
Diversion of Resources 
Information-based projects in other areas of a company may need to be put
on hold or reduced in scope in order for the company to enter the wireless
Web arena. Other touch points, including the wired Web, may have to be
curtailed because they are less acute—with significant negative resource
management repercussions. For example, if a CEO initiates a project to auto-
mate her company’s internal sales force with wireless email and Web access,
she may need to temporarily divert resources normally used to maintain core
legacy systems. If these systems provide the backbone for communications
for the sales force, and the wireless solution does not prove to be immediately
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
199

effective, then the sales force may be at a competitive disadvantage for many
months.
Value Chain Positioning
Because the wireless space is so volatile, many companies are constantly
jostling for a place along the value chain. Uncertainties in the direction of the
market reward executives of companies that can quickly adapt to change, and
reposition their company’s products and services along the value chain. For
example, in the shift from B2C to B2B on the wired Web, in an effort to realize
greater profits, many former suppliers became customers, and many former
customers disappeared from the value chain.
Vendor Evaluation
Wireless vendor evaluation is a challenge for most executives. Wireless Web
vendors with apparent technical competence, no track record, and headed
by a CEO recently recruited from a dotCom are common. As such, because
so many executives are new to the wireless arena, technically competent
companies without knowledgeable leadership often fail to differentiate
themselves in terms of providing credentials, identifying their unique fea-
tures, emphasizing the value they provide relative to the competition, and
communicating these differences in a professional manner. To complicate
matters, many wireless technology vendors play on price-quality product
confusion, setting an artificially high price to assert high quality to gain and
retain market share.
Identifying Low-Hanging Fruit 
CEOs of wireless Web companies are challenged to identify their most likely
successes in order to demonstrate the viability of their business to early
investors and to secure additional funding. For example, in the United States,
financial, travel, and medical transactions are the three areas that seem to hold
the greatest potential for early success in the wireless space.
The Huge Space
The wireless Web is a huge space that presents CEOs with seemingly infinite
unknowns and options. As a reference point, consider the wired Web, which
appears to many brick-and-mortar CEOs as a large, undifferentiated space
filled with both opportunities and pitfalls, especially in the realm of eCom-
merce. However, to CEOs in the wireless Web space, the wired Web appears
as a solid foundation where strategic decisions are most often based on an
understanding of the wired Web trajectory, of the resources required, the rel-
200
CONVERGENCE

evant rules and regulations, the support requirements, and of where to find
help. In contrast, for many executives new to the wireless Web space, there
are dozens of technologies to contend with, even more standards, unknown
and evolving federal, state, regional, and local telecommunications guidelines
and laws, and an unclear endpoint.
Management Strategies and Structures
The above management issues highlight the need for a CEO to explore
new management strategies and structures for her company to succeed in
the wireless Web space. This shift in management strategy and structure
occurred in the wired Web early on. As the wired Web evolved from its
status as a marketing vehicle to a touch point of magnitude equivalent to
that of the telephone, a new management structure evolved in most cor-
porations, or, if an existing IT structure was in place, folded into existing
structures.
Issues that may call for a CEO to explore new management strategies
and structures include how to convert PDAs and other personal devices
used by employees to EDAs. The challenge facing a CEO includes determin-
ing how best to provide benefits to her company without ostracizing or oth-
erwise overcontrolling employees who are accustomed to owning and
managing their own data. For example, as a company moves along the con-
tinuum from PDAs to EDAs for its employees, the CEO may be forced to
establish a management structure for the enterprise devices. The higher
level of technical support may require reeducation of employees as well as
support utilities and other software to make device management as painless
and as efficient as possible. 
POLITICAL ISSUES
Wherever large sums of money and international corporations are involved,
politics are soon to follow. The wireless Web space is no exception; it brings
with it a veritable maze of international, national, state, and local political chal-
lenges for executives to solve. (See Figure 8-2.)
Standards Organizations
The main international standards organizations that every CEO in the wire-
less Web space needs to be familiar with are the International Telecommuni-
cations Union (ITU) and the Consultative Committee on International
Telegraph and Telephone (CCITT). The ITU is a specialized agency of the
United Nations and the CCITT is an operational entity of the ITU. Both of
these organizations are intimately involved in issues such as spectrum assign-
ments for cell phone users and other services. 
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
201

Figure 8-2. Political issues in the emerging wireless Web industry.
Contention for Limited Spectrum
One of the major political battles in the wireless Web space in the United
States is over the fate of 3G services, since the FCC has yet to clearly designate
where in the RF spectrum 3G services will be licensed. The Cellular Telecom-
munications Industry Association (CTIA), which represents the interests of
the domestic telecommunications industry, suggests that the 1.7- to 1.8-GHz
band is the most appropriate, in part because it would be consistent with plans
for 3G services in Canada and Central America. However, a large segment of
that band is occupied by the U.S. Department of Defense, which has invested
more than $100 billion in its communications infrastructure to support
almost 900,000 military systems, from weapons to military satellites.
The CTIA and Satellite Industry Association (SIA) propose the 2.5- to 2.7-
GHz band as an alternative to the 1.7- to 1.8-GHz band for 3G services. How-
ever, their petition to the FCC is opposed by the Multi-channel Multipoint
Distribution Service (MMDS) and Instructional Television Fixed Services
(ITFS), which own licenses in that band. Educational institutions that own the
ITFS licenses are reluctant to give up their spectrum licenses, but are negotiat-
ing leasing arrangements with domestic carriers. In other words, there aren’t
any uncontested spectrum slots remaining. In order for the FCC to award a
new slot for 3G services, it would have to dislodge some other service.
Opposition to Foreign Investment
There is increasing political opposition to foreign-government–backed com-
panies purchasing controlling shares in U.S. telecommunications companies.
For example, a bill introduced by Senator Ernest Hollings in 2000 attempts
to block any company from buying a U.S. phone company as long as a foreign
government holds more than a quarter of the company. Politicians in Europe
202
CONVERGENCE

and Asia hold similar sentiments regarding investment from overly aggressive
U.S. firms.
Local Governments as Stakeholders
Local governments are becoming aware of the leverage they hold in control-
ling access to the wireless Web. For example, Sweden’s auction for G3 wire-
less licenses wasn’t simply awarded to the highest bidder. As part of the
bidding process, the telecom companies had to convince local regulators that
they had the means to construct a G3 network and could guarantee excellent
coverage and rapid development. In other words, Sweden didn’t want to sim-
ply be a piece on a Monopoly board, with the licenses it granted to be used in
some other business transaction, but required the recipients of their licenses
to be committed to actually performing the development. The so-called
beauty contest approach in which bidders compete to promise the best lev-
els of service and most timely rollout, has also been embraced by Spain, Nor-
way, France, and Portugal.
International Politics
The control of domestic telecom companies by foreign governments, espe-
cially as it relates to national security and market dominance, is a political
issue in Asia, Europe, and the United States. For example, the FBI is con-
cerned that a foreign-owned telecom company would be in a position to con-
trol or hide communications of a national security nature. As such, the FBI
wants to maintain full access to all communications networks.
The value of wireless licenses as a card in international politics became
obvious when China was desperate to join the World Trade Organization
(WTO). At the time, there were indications that China’s state-owned Uni-
com Telecommunications Company would use the CDMA standard popu-
lar in the United States instead of the European GSM standard. An
agreement to use CDMA would have been a windfall for Qualcomm, Inc., the
California company that holds the patents on CDMA technology. Similarly,
Lucent Technologies stood to make millions installing the CDMA systems. In
the end, the political carrot of WTO membership was insufficient, and China
opted to use the GSM standard. However, there remains the potential for
Qualcomm and other U.S. companies to work with China on CDMA-based
systems in the future.
In potential agreements between U.S. corporations and foreign-owned
companies, the FBI has concerns over giving a foreign government–con-
trolled company access to U.S. government wiretapping activity, because it
represents an espionage risk. The FBI’s official stance is to bar disclosure of any
classified or intercepted information to foreign governments. Increasingly,
potential global wireless communications agreements face scrutiny from the
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
203

FBI, which often delays approval of agreements that have been approved by
the FCC. The FBI apparently fears that it may lose the ability to wiretap com-
munications outside of the United States, or that foreigners could eavesdrop
on business conversations and steal trade secrets.
Another political issue is simply the time required to obtain approval
from the FCC for mergers and acquisitions. A proposed merger or acquisition
of two wireless carriers commonly takes one or two years to make it through
the FCC gauntlet. Political snags also await U.S. and European companies
involved in the wireless expansion in Europe, even though the EU is a strong
proponent of wireless connectivity. Consider Britain’s telecommunications
industry. Even though Britain’s was the first telecom deregulated in Europe,
and has one of the most advanced telecommunications systems in Europe,
old monopolies are creating political roadblocks that threaten to stall Britain’s
move to the wireless Web.
MEDICAL ISSUES
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, every business venture is associated
with a medical or environmental impact of some type. For example, the
manufacture of the electronic components found in every cell phone and
PDA negatively impacts the environment because of the volatile solvents,
heavy metals, and other pollutants released into the environment. More
specifically, however, the medical issues related to cell phone use revolve
around the potential radiation hazard that long-term use poses to sub-
scribers, as well as the much clearer relationship between cell phone use and
driving accidents. (See Figure 8-3.)
204
CONVERGENCE
Figure 8-3. Medical issues in the emerging wireless Web industry.

Radiation Hazard
Speculation. The speculation surrounding the use of cell phones is that
prolonged operation of a cell phone held against the head results in an
increased incidence of certain brain cancers, and may adversely affect the
functioning of the brain. It is theorized that localized heating of brain tissue
may somehow hinder the DNA in brain tissues to repair itself, somehow
resulting in brain cancer. It is also theorized that any health effect of cellular
radiation will be more pronounced in children because cell phone radiation
penetrates more deeply into a child’s brain than an adult’s brain. As a precau-
tion, the British government officially discourages children from using cell
phones for nonessential communications.
The speculation surrounding the possible ill effects of cell phone use was
brought to the public’s attention in 1993 with a lawsuit filed by a Florida man
who claimed that his wife’s brain tumor was caused by her mobile phone. In
order to respond to the resulting public concern and to circumvent the
potential of federal legislation on cell phone use, the CTIA, the U.S. lobby
group for cell phone manufacturers and carriers, initiated a six-year study.
The $25 million industry-sponsored study on the health risks of cell phone
use, which ended in 1999, was inconclusive.
Objective Data. The biological effect of radio frequency radiation is
quantified in terms of Specific Absorption Rate (SAR), a figure that reflects
the absorption of RF energy by tissues. The SAR is a function of the cell
phone’s signal frequency, how the antenna is oriented relative to the tissue,
whether the antenna is in, out, fixed, or internal, and whether the signal is
continuous (analog) or pulsed (digital). It’s clear, through objective measures,
that cell phone radiation does affect brain tissue. Using a cell phone that gen-
erates the typical 1/4-W output for a few minutes raises the temperature of
nearby brain tissue by about 1/10th of a degree C. The implication is unclear,
in part because normal brain temperature fluctuation in a 24-h period is
about 1°C.
An objective characteristic of low-power RF energy in the cell phone fre-
quency range (about 800 MHz to 2 GHz) is that it’s nonionizing. In other
words, the photons or energy particles emitted by a cell phone aren’t ener-
getic enough to break down organic bonds in tissues or in a subscriber’s DNA
that could result in cancer-initiating mutations.
Several studies with mice suggest that cell phone radiation can affect
mental performance. Although mice exposed to cell phone radiation dis-
played decreased reaction times, they took longer to find their way through a
maze than nonradiated mice (the control group). However, results such as
these are inconclusive, in part because of how the studies were carried out and
interpreted. There are issues of disease incidence (number of new cases) and
prevalence (number of cases that exist at a particular time), what constitutes
a control group, correlation versus causation, and the relevance of animal
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
205

studies in predicting human outcomes. In addition, studies vary in the statisti-
cal methods used, including selection of subjects, sample size, the nature of
the subjects, experimenter bias, and the relative merit of epidemiology (stud-
ies of populations) versus limited lab studies. There is also a question of
whether RF radiation has a cumulative effect and follows a dose-response
curve, or is associated with threshold effect. The repeatability of studies is of
particular concern, in that several key studies that have been repeated by
other investigators reveal results very different from those documented by
the initial experimenter.
The problem with epidemiological or population-based studies is that
cell phones haven’t been in use for the decades that it might take for signifi-
cant health findings to become apparent. In addition, many cancers and
tumors require multiple causation (for example, exposure to radiation and a
toxic substance), and have incubation periods measured in years. In popula-
tion studies, the distinction between causation and correlation is an impor-
tant one. To illustrate, if 10,000 businesspeople hold bananas to their right ear
for one hour a day, five days a week, for years, it’s possible that, compared to
businesspeople who never touch a banana (the control group) the banana
holders will have a higher incidence of brain cancer—not to mention right
elbow pain. Even though banana use and an increased incidence of brain can-
cer are corelated—that is, the use of bananas is related to an increased inci-
dence of brain cancer—the cancer may have been caused by something else.
A pesticide or other toxin on the banana peel, a virus carried by fruit flies that
congregate near bananas, or some behavior of the businesspeople might have
a causal link. For example, some of them might wash their hands with a special
cleaner to get rid of the smell, and some substance in the cleaner actually
causes brain cancer. 
In appraising the relevance of cell phone radiation as a health risk, there is
also the practical issue of quantifying cost and relevance. If the incidence of
cancer in the control group is 1 in 1,000,000 businesspeople per year, a dou-
bling of the incidence to 2 cases in 1,000,000 businesspeople per year may
not be significant in the bigger picture of things. Every time a businessperson
embarks on a business trip, her chances of succumbing to a violent death as a
passenger in a taxi or airplane increases significantly, compared to the busi-
nessperson lounging at a poolside resort, conducting business over his cell
phone.
Regulations. The FCC limits cellular and PCS base station output
power to 500 W, depending on antenna height, and cell phones intended to
be installed in cars with roof-mounted antennas are limited to 3-W output.
Interestingly, in the United States, the FCC regulates personal exposure to
RF radiation, not OSHA, which is normally charged with evaluating health
risks, especially in the workplace.
The FCC’s guidelines limit SAR to 1.6 W/ Kg, measured over any 1 g of
tissue. Typical values for cell phones range from as little as 0.22 W/Kg to
206
CONVERGENCE
TEAMFLY

almost 1.5 W/Kg, as measured using a lab test dummy filled with artificial
brain matter. In addition to the SAR figure, the FCC limits radio frequency
exposure at 869 MHz to 580 µW per square centimeter of tissue. At 1850 to
1999 MHz, the exposure limit is 1000 µW per square centimeter of tissue.
In a CTIA move to circumvent federal legislation against cell phone use,
it requires cell phone manufacturers to disclose radiation levels produced by
their devices. The initial phase of the policy requires makers to provide infor-
mation on handset emissions, as well as details on the testing process inside
each cell phone box. The industry-imposed regulation doesn’t go as far as to
require the emission figures to be listed on the outside of the box—a move
that would make it easier for consumers to comparison shop.
Confounding Factors. One of the problems in looking for a causal
link between cell phone use and certain cancers is that virtually everyone in a
developed country is immersed in electromagnetic fields that may have detri-
mental effects. For example, the low-frequency fields produced by hair dryers
and around high-voltage power lines have been implicated as initiators of can-
cer in a number of studies. Since the introduction of electricity in the home,
most people in developed countries have been immersed in a 60-Hz electro-
magnetic field for their entire lives.
Secondary Gain. There are several groups with vested interests in
both sides of the cell phone use and cancer issue. For example, while the
major telecom companies are obvious stakeholders, there are activists that
claim to be acting in the public’s interest in order to gain personal attention
and political clout. There are also multiple national and international political
agendas and billions of dollars at stake. Wireless Technology Research
(WTR), a private company with the responsibility of controlling and funding
the CTIA’s cell phone health research in the United States, and the Scientific
Advisory Group of the CTIA have much at stake as well.
In the end, if a causal link between cell phone use and cancer or some
other health condition is established, then the industry may experience a
major setback. However, if managed properly, the findings could also repre-
sent an opportunity for companies that offer Bluetooth headsets and other
low-power radio frequency communications technologies.
Public Safety
In contrast to the uncertainties surrounding the potential hazards of cell
phone use on the physiologic health of subscribers, there is a direct, causal
relationship between cell phone use and higher rates of traffic accidents when
subscribers talk and drive. As such, the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA) advises drivers not to use cell phones and other
electronic devices while driving. Restrictions have also been advanced at the
state and city level. New York, for example, bans taxicab drivers from using
cell phones while driving. Similarly, Merck Pharmaceuticals provides hands-
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
207

free sets to its employees, and has an official policy that employees pull over
before phoning. At least some of the motivation for cautioning employees on
cell phone use is that employers may be held liable for employee accidents
related to cell phone use while driving.
In the first U.S. criminal trial of a case involving a driver distracted by a cell
phone, a Maryland man was convicted of negligence, but not manslaughter,
in two deaths. The judge in the case was unable to convict the man on
manslaughter charges because it was not illegal to talk on a cell phone while
driving in Maryland or any other state.
Although additional restrictions have been proposed at the state and fed-
eral level, there is significant resistance from the domestic wireless industry
against any form of legislation. Since the majority of wireless calls are made
from vehicles, cell phone carriers depend on drivers for a vast amount of their
revenues. Similarly, the auto industry is seeking to add navigation and other
Web-based features to car-based cell phones in order to sell services to drivers.
In an attempt to head off legislation that would negatively impact the sales of
cell phones in the United States, the major handset manufacturers, including
Nokia, are sponsoring public safety notices through radio and other media to
urge drivers to use cell phones responsibly.
An additional public safety risk, although slight, is that the use of a cell
phone near gas pumps may lead to explosions. In addition to potential danger
from a cell phone’s radio frequency signal igniting gas fumes, it’s far more likely
that dropping a cell phone in the proximity of gas fumes may lead to an explo-
sion. The danger is that if a phone is dropped hard enough to dislodge its bat-
tery, then arcing at the point of contact between the phone and the battery
pack may ignite gas fumes. Problems with arcing and batteries aren’t new to
the electronics industry; Apple Computer’s initial Powerbook battery packs
were known to burst into flames under certain conditions. In recognition of
the potential risk of using a cell phone near open fumes—even if only risk from
lawsuits—Exxon posts a “no cell phones” sign on their self-service gas pumps.
LEGAL ISSUES
With the technical convergence of voice and data, wireless Web executives
face a clash of legal cultures. The Web industry, through major lobbying
efforts, managed for years to keep the Web free of any tax, even while business
conducted over the telephone or fax—wireless or wired—was subject to tax-
ation. While the wired Web has maintained a relatively free-for-all attitude
toward eCommerce, the telecoms face local, regional, and federally imposed
taxes and regulations. To a CEO recruited from wired dotCom companies,
the impact of dealing with the legal overhead associated with the wireless
Web can result in culture shock.
Listed in Figure 8-4, and described below, are other issues that relate
directly to the bottom line.
208
CONVERGENCE

Figure 8-4. Legal issues in the emerging wireless Web industry.
FCC Licensing
To the CEO of a wireless Web company, the FCC can be a welcome friend or
a formidable foe, depending on the size of the company and its place in the
wireless Web value chain. For example, in order to give smaller carriers the
ability to compete against larger, established companies for spectrum space,
the FCC typically imposes limitations on bidders, such as total revenue and
asset caps. As a result, smaller domestic companies can compete in markets
they would otherwise be barred from. 
The FCC also has a history of providing licenses in order to encourage
experimentation on frequencies beyond what is considered commercially
viable. These experimental licenses encourage development of future com-
munications technologies. However, as higher and higher bands are con-
quered and commercialized, what constitutes as experimental continually
changes. For example, the bands now occupied by cellular communications
were once considered virtually unusable, and allocated to experimenters.
Intellectual Property
Like her dotCom counterparts, a CEO heading a company in the wireless
Web space has to stay abreast of the evolving status of Web-based intellectual
property issues, especially if her company is involved in content creation or
repurposing. For example, MP3 was ordered to pay $250 million to the music
industry for copyright violations. Similarly, the “conglomerates” face legal bat-
tles over repurposing Web content in browser environments that combine
content from multiple sites into one page.
As wireless handheld devices increase in popularity, clipping services that
selectively extract data from content originally developed for the wired Web
will likely face legal challenges, as well. For example, if the clipped content
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
209

doesn’t provide the same subjective response from subscribers, does the com-
pany that developed the content have any recourse against the clipping ser-
vice? Do advertisers and backers of content development have a right to have
their ads and recognition of their contributions survive the clipping process?
For CEOs of companies developing wireless Web devices for internal
employee support, there are an increasing number of intellectual property
issues to contend with. For example, when a salesman leaves a company, from
a practical perspective, how are lists of contacts and other corporate informa-
tion on his personal wireless PDA and the synced information on his home
PC reclaimed by the company? Can this dilemma be solved by issuing wire-
less EDAs in which the data are available to salespersons, but can’t be synced
or otherwise downloaded to other devices?
Revisiting the student introduced in Chapter 7 who had her classroom
work during college stored on the Web, primarily with the assistance of wire-
less devices, what intellectual property rights can the college retain? Similarly,
what rights do her college professors have over the use and repurpose of the
content, since, in many respects, they are the originators of the intellectual
property? Do universities have the right to sell a student’s intellectual prop-
erty to a third party without the student’s permission? While there are obvi-
ous opportunities for legal firms in the area of intellectual property, there is
also a place for companies that provide employees with information that can-
not be easily extracted from handheld devices, and that allow only context-
specific viewing of account information.
Fraud
When President Clinton signed the digital signature bill into law in June
2000, for many transactions, online signatures became as valid as pen-and-ink
signatures. However, the bill doesn’t specify what constitutes a legitimate,
safe, secure digital signature. It’s up to the online community to establish
technology standards in secure digital signatures, which can range from smart
cards to biometrics, including thumbprint, retinal, or voice-recognition.
Paradoxically, one area that isn’t affected by the digital signature law is
online sales, which continue to be a major risk for online merchants. If a hacker
steals a credit card number and uses it to make a purchase online, the card
holder isn’t held liable. Instead, the credit card transaction disputed by the
cardholder—the chargeback—is the merchant’s responsibility. Although
credit card companies usually absorb chargeback costs resulting from offline
transactions, without a pen-and-paper signature, charge card companies won’t
honor a merchant’s claim that a product was shipped. In short, the merchant
pays even if a customer orders an item online and then claims that she never
received it.
Chargeback is four times greater for online sales than for mail-order pur-
chases, and almost 6 times greater than brick-and-mortar purchases. Of par-
210
CONVERGENCE

ticular note for the CEO of a wireless Web company targeting the lucrative
travel industry is that online credit card fraud is greatest with high-value
items, such as airline tickets.
Although credit card fraud is an industrywide problem, it also represents
an opportunity for companies offering solutions. Companies that create
screening software that profiles and identifies suspicious charges, much like
the closely guarded systems charge card companies use internally to detect
fraud, would find themselves very much in demand. A fraud detection sys-
tem that looks for high-priced airline tickets purchased at the last minute
could potentially reduce fraud, assuming tickets are stolen for immediate
resale to travelers.
Other solutions to credit card fraud involve more secure methods of pay-
ment. For example, American Express offers a disposable credit card,
expressly for use with all Web-based transactions. Their Private Payments
option allows cardholders to obtain a unique card number each time they
purchase something through the Web, so they don’t give out their actual
credit card number. Once the card number is used, it becomes invalid. The
service, which is free to cardholders and merchants, complements the
AMEX Blue Card service that allows holders to transfer credit information
directly to online retailers. The Blue Card system, which requires cardhold-
ers to use a card reader that is larger than most handheld units, isn’t practical
for wireless handheld devices.
An alternative card-based technology is available from ComSense Tech-
nologies (www.com-sense.com). The system uses a smart card that, when
squeezed, sends an ultrasonic signal to a PC or wireless handheld’s micro-
phone. The signal routes an encrypted one-time code to an online retailer’s
server where it is decrypted and compared with a credit card database.
ECONOMIC ISSUES
Regardless of how sanguine the visions of the future wireless world are, and
the impressiveness of the technology, at the end of the day the companies
involved in creating a future wireless utopia must profit from their activities.
As the wired Web has taught many dotCom CEOs, activity on the Web, even
when offering obvious benefits, poses several questions regarding long-term
viability. CEOs involved in applying wireless devices to external markets not
only have to contend with the issues related to the wired Web, such as con-
version rate, stickiness (how much time a user spends at a Web site), and
developing customer loyalty but they also have to contend with a fee struc-
ture that raises expectations.
It’s one thing for a dotCom to attract customers to a freely accessible
Web site where they can be exposed to the products and services, and
another for a company to offer a touch point in which customers have to pay
for the privilege of receiving the same information. For example, other than a
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
211

businesswoman who has connect charges paid for by her company, not many
potential customers can afford to pay $90 per month for cell phone charges
and another $50 per month for wireless PDA connect charges—on top of
their wired service provider charges.
Multiple devices may be affordable, but the total cost of ownership may
be prohibitive in the private sector where most of the potential wireless cus-
tomers are. Domestic demographics continue to show an increase in consult-
ing and other forms of self-employment. Few of these workers, who pay their
own connect charges, can afford the expense of multiple service provider
accounts.
Listed in Figure 8-5 and described below are other issues that relate
directly to the bottom line.
Speculation
Much of the Web—wireless or otherwise—is speculative. A CEO must deal
with the uncertainty of which technologies and companies will survive after
each business cycle. Some companies go after market share, speculating that
sacrificing short-term profit for visibility will pay off in long-term viability.
Other companies invest in securing a high-profile customer, often at a loss,
expecting to improve their credentials through the association.
Many questions regarding the ultimate ROI of the wireless Web activi-
ties are unanswerable because of lack of experience with the medium. For
example, will captive portals, such as the MODO wireless pager, which can be
personalized to reflect preferences for social events, be a hit outside of New
212
CONVERGENCE
Figure 8-5. Economic issues in the emerging wireless Web industry.

York, Los Angeles, and San Francisco? Will an investment in a wireless infra-
structure serve as a hedge against being one-upped by the competition? Will
increasing the stickiness of existing customers through increased personal-
ization and adapting applications for customers and their businesses pay off?
The stickiness issue is especially relevant on the wireless Web because of
the freedom the technology affords customers. For example, of the major
players in the wireless Web space, the hardware vendors, software vendors,
portals, ISPs, carriers, banks, and the stream of new entrants, it seems that
banks are in the best position. After all, people don’t often change banks, but
everything else seems negotiable. That said, consider the effect on the retail
industry of a bank and a hardware vendor getting together to provide a hip-
mounted ATM with a bar-code scanner front-end.
Competition
Not only are there multiple entrants in the wireless Web space that are
attempting to dislodge legacy technologies in favor of their own, but there are
companies in other, nonwireless areas positioned to claim the same space. For
example, CEOs and other executives of cell phone and smart card technology
companies are stalking the lucrative charge card business. Smart cards have an
advantage of increased security over conventional cards, without requiring
the customer to learn or do anything new. Web-enabled cell phones that can
initiate secure business transactions, in contrast, offer little to the customer,
other than the advantage of receiving one less statement at the end of each
month. For the telecoms, however, the capability of becoming a financial insti-
tution represents a huge potential market.
Infrastructure Investment
As wireless companies in the EU and Japan have shown, supporting a suc-
cessful wireless Web initiative requires a significant investment in the under-
lying communications infrastructure in order to provide the security and
bandwidth necessary for the development of wireless Web applications. This
investment may be direct in an enterprise-centric model, such as allocating
funds for servers, routers, and database management systems. It may also be
indirect, especially in an eCommerce model, in the form of licensing arrange-
ments with service providers.
Moving Targets
One of the most frustrating aspects of leading an organization through the
wireless Web space is that what constitutes a deliverable product or service is
a constantly moving target. In any emerging wireless Web market, what the
customers want will certainly change by the delivery date, requiring more
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
213

time and money to deliver what they actually want and need. For example, a
wireless PDA without an always-on feature may be sufficient initially for the
exchange of corporate communications, until some employees realize that
they need the feature to receive immediate communications.
Support Structures
One of the side effects of activity on the wireless Web is the emergence of
support structures and services that feed on and feed the early movers. Many
of these support services, such as advertising, banking, and headhunters, ben-
efit from the increased business activity. For example, radio broadcast stations
benefit from ads for cellular services, battery manufacturers are pressed to
supply new battery configurations for new wireless devices, and, accessory
manufacturers attempt to profit from add-on cases, chargers, and long-life bat-
teries. The issue for the CEO of a wireless Web company is whether these
structures are serving only to divert capital away from their activities, or if they
add to the validity of a product line by extending it.
Scarcity of Expertise 
The new experts in the field of wireless Web communications and computa-
tion are in short supply, and these experts are demanding increasingly higher
salaries. As a result, much of the workforce of wireless Web start-ups tend to
be expensive consultants with no long-term commitment to a company, and
who may take the knowledge gained through working on a problem with
one company with them when they go to work for the competition.
Time Pressure
Executives in wireless Web companies are actively pursuing the highly cov-
eted first-mover advantage in a variety of niche areas. Activity on the wired
Web demonstrated that the first movers generally realize a competitive
advantage by claiming a niche first; later movers are forced to do so simply to
keep up with the competition. Many of the niches in the domestic wireless
Web space have yet to be claimed—or defined.
Strategic Partnerships 
The wireless Web space is too big to go it alone, even for the CEOs of the
largest dotCom and telecommunications companies. Some strategic partner-
ships are more obvious than others, especially when they are between mar-
ket leaders. For example, Motorola, the number two cellular handset
supplier, and Palm formed a strategic partnership to codevelop a Web-
enabled cell phone. Similarly, Phone.com, which produces WAP and micro-
214
CONVERGENCE

browsers for cell phones, partnered with application developer Software.com
to provide a more rounded portfolio of products. However, few strategic part-
nerships are this clear or synergistic.
The issue of choosing a strategic partner is much more complicated
when relatively new, minor players are involved. Typically, the strategic part-
nerships that form in a nascent industry such as the wireless Web are
between established, high-profile companies and customers and new
entrants in the field. Because the high-profile companies understand their
positioning in the industry, they are able to demand very favorable partner-
ship arrangements with smaller companies.
Critical Mass
The critical mass—or chicken-and-egg—problem that most wireless Web
CEOs face is that there aren’t enough customers to buy their products or
services, in part because there isn’t a large enough delivery platform. For
example, even though the Palm VII is one of the most popular wireless
PDAs in the United States, the installed base is insignificant compared to
the number of PCs on the wired Web. Because of variation in the devices
developed for the wireless Web, no one device has the critical mass neces-
sary to attract customers or developers to a particular platform to the
exclusion of all others.
The lack of a critical mass of wireless subscribers causes many application
developers to take a wait-and-see approach. Early adopters are an important
component of the user population, but they are usually insufficient in num-
bers to move a new wireless product or service into profitability. For example,
although Bluetooth products were released in 2000, devices supporting the
standard aren’t expected to reach critical mass before 2004.
Popularity versus Profitability
As the wired Web has demonstrated, the popularity of a Web site doesn’t
necessarily translate into profitability. There are tens of thousands of popular
Web sites that have yet to turn a profit, either because of flawed business
plans or because it’s easy for a company to create a popular Web site when the
site is provided free of charge. Although there are notable exceptions, for
example, the cartoon subscription service offered by NTT DoCoMo, prof-
itability on the Web continues to be elusive, regardless of whether a cable or a
wireless link provides the connectivity. 
Existing Processes
A wireless solution has value if it saves a subscriber time, money, or both, rela-
tive to other competing solutions. For example, in the United States, where
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
215

virtually every office worker has email, and most have wired Web access, 
simply offering these desk-based workers a wireless email solution isn’t likely
to sell millions of wireless Web appliances.
In countries like Czechoslovakia, where few adults carry or use credit
cards, and most transactions are made with cash, Web-enabled cell phones
may preempt the credit card. Because there is no legacy of plastic money,
Czech businesspeople are more likely to accept the use of their cell phone as
a method of payment. In contrast, in the United States, where the typical
businessperson carries at least one charge card, there is little need for a new
payment system, especially if it’s slower or more complex than simply hand-
ing a salesperson a charge card. The challenge for CEOs of businesses that
depend on wireless eCommerce for survival is to provide a compelling reason
why cellular subscribers should use their cell phone instead of cash or a
charge card.
Lost Opportunity Costs
Cellular voice services are now commodity items with decreasing profit
margins. With the possible exception of pager services, voice makes up the
bulk of billing time for wireless operators, even in Japan and Europe. One
challenge that the CEOs of these wireless operators face in developing and
supporting bandwidth-hungry 3G wireless services is evaluating lost oppor-
tunity costs. Since hundreds of voice calls can fit into the bandwidth pro-
posed for 3G services, and as long as there are potential customers for
wireless voice communications, providing affordable 3G-level multimedia
services will cost the wireless operators potential revenue.
The potential for lost voice business isn’t a major concern in Japan and
Europe, partially because operators that run out of bandwidth can license
new spectrum for 3G services. In contrast, lost opportunity costs are signifi-
cant for operators in the United States because of the lack of spectrum for
expansion. For example, PCS operators in the United States already occupy
the 2-GHz spectrum that other countries are licensing for 3G services.
Billing Structure
A key business issue in the United States is the billing structure for wireless
services. In most cases, the cell phone subscriber pays for calls initiated and
received at a cell phone. This is a major deterrent for ubiquitous cell phone
use—simply because most businesspeople don’t give out their cell phone
numbers to casual acquaintances as they might with a wired phone number.
Most of the wireless carriers are actively experimenting with a variety of
billing schemes in order to attract and keep customers. For example, AT&T
was the first major domestic cell phone service provider to offer voice sub-
scribers wireless Web browsing without extra fees.
216
CONVERGENCE
TEAMFLY

Sensitivity to Pricing
The sensitivity to pricing demonstrated by wired telephone subscribers in
response to special calling plans pales in comparison to price sensitivity along
the wireless Web value chain. Because the basic assumptions of CEOs of com-
panies along the value chain are so volatile and based predominantly on pre-
dictions, small changes in the pricing structure can decimate entire categories
of product and service providers.
Several wireless middleware vendors offer systems that assume that sub-
scribers pay for connect time, regardless of the amount of data transferred to
their wireless PDAs. In this scenario, the middleware products, which down-
load all potentially interesting information at once and then quickly discon-
nect from the network, provide value to subscribers in part because they can
work with the data offline. Not only are connect charges lower, but systems
that take advantage of local processing power for tasks such as compressing
and uncompressing text, can provide subscribers with greater interactivity. 
If, however, the wireless carriers change their pricing structure to reflect
the amount of information transferred, regardless of the connect time, then
these same middleware applications become much less attractive to sub-
scribers. Although the advantages of local processing potentially provide a
more enjoyable subscriber experience, the economic and time penalty sub-
scribers pay for downloading several KB of content they won’t view may out-
weigh any advantages of the middleware.
Wanted: Killer App
The dream of every dotCom CEO, wired or wireless, is to offer that one “killer
app” that everyone simply has to have. In Japan and the European countries
with a low penetration of desktop computing, the killer app, not surprisingly,
appears to be email. However, aside from infrastructure developers, there isn’t
a very large market for email suppliers; the challenge for CEOs in the United
States is to find a wireless must-have application other than email, which vir-
tually every businessperson has at home or in the office.
In Europe, a must-have application that’s also economically viable has yet
to surface. While Web-enabled vending machines frequently make the news,
simply because of the novelty factor, the soft drink industry isn’t large enough
to support all of the activity planned for the wireless Web. A killer app hasn’t
yet appeared that will make accessing the wireless Web an indispensable part
of everyone’s daily routine.
TECHNICAL ISSUES
The primary focus of all the wireless Web activity at this stage in its life cycle
is technology. CEOs in the industry contend with issues such as how to best
support wireless eCommerce, synchronization of data and applications,
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
217

partnering with a wireless ISP, and how to develop a wireless Web portal. 
But for their technology to succeed in the wireless marketplace, five core cri-
teria must be satisfied: performance, reliability, availability, ease of use, and
security.
Although these criteria may seem self-evident, they are difficult to realize
in practice. For example, product availability is susceptible to disruptions in
the supply chain. In late 2000 and early 2001, there was a worldwide shortage
of LCD panels, due in part to the increased worldwide demand for laptop and
handheld computers. As a result, prices for LCD panels skyrocketed. In order
to avoid forfeiting market share, many companies priced their wireless hand-
held devices below cost. The situation parallels the events in the late 1990s,
when the desktop PC market suffered from the scarcity and expense of RAM
chips following the destruction of a RAM factory in Taiwan caused by an
earthquake.
Because new technologies create shortages by their very nature, the sup-
ply of electronic components will likely periodically adversely affect wireless
hardware production and distribution. Since only a few manufacturers in the
world produce the leading-edge technologies used in wireless handheld
devices, political or natural disruptions can easily upset the supply chain, and
derail the projected progress of the wireless Web technologies.
Additional technology-related challenges associated with the wireless
Web are described in Figure 8-6.
Figure 8-6. Technical issues in the emerging wireless Web industry.
218
CONVERGENCE

Complexity
The overriding technical concern of CEOs and CTOs in the wireless space is
increasing complexity. With billions of two-way communications, glitches
and down time will be unavoidable. The eventual move to a single wireless
standard will mean that a computer virus may be able to cover the globe
within minutes.
In addition to challenging executives, complexity also negatively affects
the subscriber’s experience. For example, although NTT DoCoMo I-Mode
customers can subscribe to and unsubscribe from wireless Web access service
with a few key clicks, the process is much more complicated for most U.S. and
European subscribers. In order to subscribe to wireless Web services, wireless
subscribers in the United States typically need to wade through several
postage stamp-size pages of menus, and may even have to use the wired Web to
finalize the transaction. For example, if a businessman in the United States
wants to personalize the home page for his Web-enabled cell phone, he typi-
cally has to log on to the Web from his home or work computer. Interestingly,
unsubscribing tends to be a much more arduous process than subscribing.
Device Diversity
The early, evolutionary phase of wireless Web development is characterized
by incredible device diversity. There are PDAs designed for children, systems
designed for automobiles, cell phones designed to be attached to clothing,
and dozens of Web-enabled cell phone formats, and each device has its own
development environment and standards, such as WAP, XML, or Palm.
Not only are the choices confusing for potential consumers, but software
developers, system integrators, and executives with companies that want to add
wireless touch points to their business are pressed to select the most viable
options from a constant stream of hardware options. For example, the CEO of a
company that needs to support customers or employees in the field must
choose between dozens of two-way pagers, Web-enabled phones, and wireless
PDAs. What’s worse, the expected lifetime of these devices is typically less than
12 months, in part because better models are constantly being introduced. 
Scalability
Virtually all wireless connectivity technology solutions have inherent scala-
bility limits. For example, the Bluetooth standard is a viable technology for
use with a handful of wireless devices. However, the system doesn’t scale past
nine Bluetooth units. Similarly, database connectivity and other infrastruc-
ture characteristics typically have a scalability limit, based on assumptions
made by the original equipment designers. The challenge for the CEO of a
company developing or delivering end-user wireless solutions is to correctly
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
219

assess the scalability of the components and subsystems used in her com-
pany’s products and services.
Testing Standards
Because wireless Web devices and software applications have not yet stabi-
lized, there are no universally agreed-upon testing standards, especially in the
areas of usability and ergonomics. In contrast to the desktop computing world,
testing methodologies for user interface designs have not been fully developed,
and those that have been advanced have not been fully adopted by the devel-
opment community. Ease of use criteria, user testing, and other subjective tests
are in their infancy in most wireless Web application development initiatives.
Part of the challenge is that the criteria for optimum handheld device configu-
ration take time to establish and disseminate. In addition, wireless handheld
devices vary considerably in their physical user interface design from model to
model, even with devices produced by the same manufacturer.
User Interfaces
The common denominator of wireless handheld device user interfaces is
that they’re new. It remains a challenge for even the most experienced desk-
top PC interface designer to develop and test a cell phone user interface that
is limited to 16 characters per line or a wireless PDA with 200 characters per
screen. The art and science of developing and testing wireless handheld
device interfaces will likely remain a major challenge until a universal wire-
less communicator is designed.
Security
Security is perhaps the greatest challenge—and opportunity—for CEOs in the
wireless Web space. Not only are wireless handheld devices subject to most of
the same security limitations that plague wired desktop and unwired handheld
units, including theft and attacks by viruses, but wireless communications can
be intercepted more easily than signals traveling through a copper or fiber optic
cable. The opportunity for CEOs of companies with security solutions for wire-
less handheld units rests in the fact that most potential customers understand
that security has a cost, and many are willing to pay for peace of mind.
Network Capacity
Adding new wireless users to an already stressed network requires technical
expertise, investment in infrastructure, and, if the legacy network system
doesn’t scale very well, a new network design. Larger, public networks tend to
be configured for scalable growth. However, small and medium-size compa-
220
CONVERGENCE

nies that add a few thousand new wireless network accounts to their existing
network may have to invest considerable resources in network infrastructure
and support staff.
Development Tools
The wireless Web value chain is inhabited by software tool builders and tool
users. To some extent, the initial stages of wireless Web development parallel
those of the wired Web, in that even software tool users end up performing
some low-level development. For a company to create application- and hard-
ware-specific features requires highly trained developers who can either
work without advanced software tools or modify tools developed by others.
The unknown and shifting standards in the wireless Web space make toolset
development problematic.
For companies involved in tool development, the lack of mature develop-
ment tools is a good thing. However, for companies interested in delivering
their content to customers, the lack of tools presents a time and resource chal-
lenge. Software toolsets tend to be expensive when they are initially intro-
duced, in part because the developers need to recoup their investment as
soon as possible. Although most wireless development projects demand a
suite of tools, costs can be prohibitive, especially if licensing significantly
increases the price of the end user product.
Fortunately, the lack of development tools for wireless Web applications
isn’t a universal problem. Palm Computing and RIM, for example, offer a com-
plete suite of development and testing tools for building wireless applications
that run on their respective platforms. One of the Palm’s strengths in the mar-
ket is the thousands of applications that run under Palm OS. The large num-
ber of applications available for the Palm is in part due to the availability of
tools from Palm, as well as a variety of high-level third-party tools that can min-
imize time to market.
Infrastructure
Nokia, Motorola, and Ericksson can continue to create miniature, light-
weight, multifunction Web-enabled phones, but without a supporting infra-
structure, they are valueless as communications devices. While there are
standards evolving to provide support for wireless devices in the home and
office environments, the infrastructure is by no means in place. 
A wireless Web presence assumes that there is an infrastructure that can
deal with issues from file distribution and email to security and systems manage-
ment. Moving up the structure, from a PC with wired Web connectivity to a
wireless handheld device should be accompanied by increased ease of use. For
example, there are no disks to deal with, no waiting for a system to boot, no
archiving to a server, or other routine maintenance tasks associated with a 
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
221

desktop PC. Conversely, moving up the pyramid represents increasing system
complexity. Hiding all of the details of the underlying system takes more effort
from programmers and device designers. This situation is similar to when Apple’s
Macintosh GUI was introduced at a time when MS-DOS was the predominant
operating system on desktop microcomputers. DOS programs were much eas-
ier to write because, except for games, there was little attention paid to the user
experience. The added overhead imposed by the Macintosh, and later Windows
GUIs, complicates the programming and systems design tasks considerably
because they shield the user from unnecessary details of computer operation.
Although, with outside help, some third-world countries can jump
directly to wireless without ever developing a wired infrastructure, most
companies in developed countries require experience and expertise with the
wireless Web in order to realize the full potential of the medium. If the CEO
of a company doesn’t have a managerial, economic, and technical handle on
his company’s wired infrastructure, then moving to a handheld or wireless
handheld system has a high degree of risk. Similarly, for a company to move to
wireless handheld devices, it should first deal with the added challenge of
handhelds, from the perspective of security, theft, and display limitations.
Interference
Dealing with radio frequency noise pollution is a major technological hurdle
for the wireless Web industry, even without the addition of a billion cell
phones. There is an increasing amount of radio frequency noise from com-
mercial, military, police, airplane, and entertainment services, as well as
devices such as microwave ovens and desktop PCs and peripherals. Some
sources of RF noise are more problematic for the wireless Web than others.
For example, desktop computers emit signals at and above the frequencies
used for cellular communications. 
Most countries set limits on the maximum incidental radio frequency
that a device can emit at different frequencies, measured a set distance from
the device. In the United States, desktop computers and other potential
sources of interference designed for home use are limited in the maximum
permissible radiation in the range of frequencies that includes the cellular
band. Computers and other devices intended for business use have much less
stringent requirements. For example, computers intended for business use
are allowed to emit potentially interfering radiation at nearly 40 times the
level permitted for consumer devices.
Competing Standards
Multiple operating systems, nonstandard display formats, new user interface
designs, and, most importantly, evolving communications protocols will con-
tinue to challenge wireless application developers and service providers, espe-
222
CONVERGENCE

cially in the United States. In Europe, where GSM is the standard for 3G wire-
less communications, there are still multitudes of unresolved communications
issues, such as the fate of WAP versus SMS for email.
Bandwidth Projections
Worldwide, wireless carriers are predicting that they will need to double
their current bandwidth in order to adequately support the demand for wire-
less communications by 2010. Part of this needed bandwidth will undoubt-
edly come from technologic advances in data compression and encoding.
However, there will also be a real need for spectrum real estate, especially in
the United States. Given the history of wireless communications in the
United States, this real estate will most likely come from increasingly higher
frequency bands, including light-wave communications.
Content
The lack of compelling content on the wireless Web, especially in the United
States, is part of the challenge facing most CEOs whose companies do not have
wireless connections. The wireless community recognizes that at least part of
the success of ITT DoCoMo’s I-Mode can be attributed to content. I-Mode
customers are willing to pay for the premium wireless service over the other
three wireless data services available in Japan because I-Mode is faster, has bet-
ter service, and, most importantly, provides more and better content. In the
United States, it’s almost impossible to attract and maintain Web designers for
Web projects because demand far outstrips supply. Given this reality, it isn’t
clear where the talent for creating wireless content will come from—much
less the applications for hotels, restaurants, and other markets. If a pervasive
computing environment based on wireless virtual machines becomes a reality,
then the search for content will include libraries of applications as well.
Personalization, Localization, Timeliness
The three big draws of wireless Web access—personalization, localization,
and timeliness—are still promises, since the technology simply cannot yet
deliver. The companies most likely to succeed first in delivering on some of
the promises have experience in developing infrastructures capable of pro-
viding transaction-based customer profiling on the wired Web. 
Hardware Limitations
First-generation wireless handheld devices, like the first desktop microcom-
puters, are hardware limited. Web-enabled cell phones have very little local
RAM and insignificant local processing power, and all wireless Web devices
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
223

are bandwidth limited. For example, it might take a half hour for a business-
woman to download her incoming email onto her wireless PDA, compared
to a few minutes for the same operation on a desktop PC with a high-speed
wired connection to the Internet. There is also the ergonomic issue in evalu-
ating the adequacy of a particular device when used to support given tasks.
For example, the clamshell design used in some Motorola two-way pagers, is
more likely to survive clipped to the belt of a telephone lineman, compared to
a standard, not very rugged Palm or RIM wireless PDA with a larger exposed
LCD panel. Every device has idiosyncrasies that must be addressed in a man-
ner that makes sense to the intended user and the application.
Platform Standards
Whereas the desktop PC operating system has stabilized, Java OS, Palm OS,
Symbian, Windows CE, Linux, and a variety of other platform standards, includ-
ing DOS, compete for market segments on the wireless Web. For example, for-
mer Borland CEO Philippe Kahn’s company, LightSurf, developed a wireless
digital imaging infrastructure based on Linux. Although the future of the oper-
ating systems under development for wireless devices is uncertain, Palm has
apparent support in the low-end market, Symbian dominates the cell phone
market, while CE devices are positioned for the higher end and specialized ver-
tical market applications. Linux has potential in the embedded device market,
whereas Java OS, DOS, and other platforms have only pockets of support in
niche areas. As noted earlier, it’s premature to assume an OS environment, given
the great interest (reflected in investment dollars) surrounding the use of vir-
tual machine environment architectures based on some flavor of Java.
Quality of Communications
The ultimate technical challenge for a CEO, regardless of the other issues
involved, is for his company to provide reliable, clear, timely communications.
A great user interface isn’t very helpful to a trader on the stock exchange floor
if she has to wait more than a few seconds for a stock quote. Similarly,
extended battery life for a wireless PDA is inconsequential if a complex or
awkward user interface makes sending an email an exercise in futility.
MARKETING ISSUES
The process of promoting the wireless Web includes the four classic compo-
nents common to marketing most products and services: defining the product
or service, establishing a price, selecting and designing distribution channels,
and promotion. In addition, as described below, marketing in the wireless Web
space shares many of the characteristics associated with new technologies.
(See Figure 8-7.)
224
CONVERGENCE

Unknowns
The wireless Web market is like a multivariate equation with multiple
unknowns in that the customers, competition, and market potential have yet
to be fully defined. Although much more is known about the wireless mar-
kets in Japan and parts of Europe than in the United States, no one CEO, com-
pany, or country has all of the answers on how to best capture the global,
evolving wireless Web market.
In the United States, where most households don’t yet use charge cards,
how likely are Americans to embrace the concept of a cell phone as an eWal-
let? How is the marketing department of a service provider going to convince
a subscriber that it’s in his best interest to use his cellular phone as a charge
card? After all, a charge card has a small form factor, there’s a chance to visually
inspect the bill before it’s signed, and there’s a hard copy of the transaction for
reimbursement and budgeting purposes. Using cell phones for credit pur-
chases has worked in several European countries, but the success has been
the most pronounced in countries without charge cards. That is, given a
choice between a charge card that never needs batteries and is virtually inde-
structible, and a fragile electronic phone, why would someone choose the
phone? Perhaps the “coolness” factor will help, or creating the impression
that only a select few million people can use the services. After all, exclusivity
works for the millions of consumers who have bought into the proposition
that membership with a credit card company has its privileges.
Business Myopia
One of the challenges facing CEOs in assessing the market potential of wire-
less Web technology is how to critically evaluate the wireless Web market
potential beyond their work environment. Executives in the fast-paced dot-
Com industries that spend much of their time in airports, toting cell phones,
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
225
Figure 8-7. Marketing issues in the emerging wireless Web industry.

laptop computers, and PDAs can easily get a distorted image of the “real”
world. While the industry debates over what constitutes the best handheld
device, less than 5 percent of U.S. households own a PDA. Similarly, while fre-
quent business travelers long for ubiquitous, worldwide cell phone coverage,
the majority of domestic subscribers live and work in the same community.
For most potential subscribers, whether or not their cell phone works seam-
lessly in Sweden or even in the next state isn’t a concern—as long as it works
from the grocery store.
Product Confusion
With so many wireless Web options on the market, it’s difficult for most
potential consumers to critically evaluate products and services with same
degree of certainty that they are accustomed to with comparable desktop PC
technologies. With the elevated level of hype, relatively high prices, and lack
of a critical mass of wireless Web devices, evaluating the options is a challenge
for most customers. As a result, customers are more likely to rely on review
articles and other sources of secondary information, including early adopters,
instead of promotional materials from manufacturers.
The challenge for the marketing executive is to reach the early adopters,
arrange for product reviews, and target users more likely to purchase their
technologies. The goal is to create localized concentrations of satisfied users
that can serve as references for other potential customers.
As an example of potential product confusion, consider the current gen-
eration of two-way pagers and wireless PDAs. As pagers become more pow-
erful, the distinction between pagers and wireless PDAs is diminishing. Even
the name of Motorola’s two-way pager, the Talkabout T900 Personal Interac-
tive Communicator, is a potential source of confusion. The communicator
allows subscribers to send and receive text messages, receive email, and
review market updates, news, and sports. Similarly, the RIM two-way pager,
with its miniature keypad and email functionality, has more in common with
a full-function PDA than a traditional pager.
Heightened Expectations
Because of the hype surrounding wireless computing, including selective
reporting of the apparent success of companies in Japan and Europe, as well
as the general trends in the electronics industry of decreasing price and
increasing functionality, customer expectations are constantly increasing.
Whereas a CEO may think that her company’s thinner, lighter, more capa-
ble device is the next “new thing,” potential customers may take little
notice because miniaturization and other advances are expected. Cus-
tomers who are aware of the computer and consumer electronics indus-
tries know that if they wait long enough, the current model of whatever
226
CONVERGENCE
TEAMFLY

they’re interested in will be available in a form that is cheaper, smaller, and
with more features.
Against this backdrop, marketing a new product or service is a challenge,
simply because wowing a potential customer is virtually impossible. As it is,
wireless customers in the United States are more likely to be disappointed
with the slow speeds and limited displays of wireless PDAs and Web-enabled
cell phones.
Wait-and-See Attitude
In part because of increased customer expectations and the inability of the
current wireless technologies to replicate the wired Web experience, many
prospective customers are taking a wait-and-see attitude toward wireless
Web technology. A CEO willing to take on the challenge of dislodging these
potential customers has to properly highlight the features and benefits of her
company’s current products.
Product Divergence
Web-enabled device manufacturers are creating mutations and seemingly
random combinations of features and forms to explore the potentials of the
marketplace. For example, there is a proliferation of specialized handheld
devices that combine wireless connectivity with music, alarm systems,
pagers, and wearable computers in a variety of form factors. Similarly, service
providers are experimenting with pricing schemes that are attractive to both
business and nonbusiness customers. 
In the short term, the challenge facing a CEO at one of these companies is
to focus the company’s marketing activities in areas that are most likely to be
receptive to the particular mix of features and benefits offered by the device
or service. For example, wireless PDAs with enough memory to hold and play
MP3 music titles that have been downloaded from the Internet may have
greatest potential in the college student market. In the long term, as products
converge on one or two standards, the marketing challenge will shift to high-
lighting small distinctions in features and capabilities between the standards.
Evangelists Wanted
When the benefits of a new technology aren’t readily apparent, someone
needs to create a level of excitement that translates into product awareness.
To this end, a successful marketing program often includes enlisting a person-
ality that can articulate a vision that is understandable to a wide customer
base. For example, Guy Kawasaki helped create the Apple Macintosh
through his evangelism. Products for the wireless Web need similar evange-
lism in order to break into and succeed in the general marketplace.
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
227

SOCIAL ISSUES
Business executives, homemakers, and professionals are all social creatures,
and the introduction of a technology, no matter how advanced, doesn’t
change their basic human needs or traits. In many respects, the hardware and
technical infrastructure in the wireless world today has far outpaced the
social systems.
With the exception of restaurants that distribute pagers to patrons wait-
ing to be seated so they are free to walk around without blocking the restau-
rant entrance, most retail outlets don’t use cell phone or pager technology. A
doctor’s office could easily page or phone a patient when the doctor is ready,
instead of making her sit for an hour in a crowded waiting room. Similarly, a
dry cleaning service could page a businessman to let him know that his shirts
are ready. Although the technology for these types of services has been avail-
able for years, societal expectations haven’t created a demand for it. There are
additional social aspects of wireless Web technology, from both the producer
and consumer sides of the equation, as described in Figure 8-8.
A New Technologic Elite 
Because of intense interest and development in wireless Web technologies,
communications and network engineers are displacing traditional program-
mers as the technologic elite. Executives and managers who have experience
in the communications field are achieving a new level of prominence, both
financially and professionally. This emergence of a new technologic elite in
the United States, Asia, and Europe is having a ripple effect throughout the
educational system as well as the economy. In the United States, where the
majority of programmers do not hold computer science degrees and come
from other disciplines, there is an increasing demand for corporate or self-
funded education on the technical aspects of wireless communications.
228
CONVERGENCE
Figure 8-8. Social issues in the emerging wireless Web industry.

Local Culture
In Japan, mobile messaging fits the compact, always on the move, public tran-
sit, small living and working space culture. Unlike businessmen in the United
States, Japanese businessmen don’t sit down to surf the Web to search for the
best airline ticket prices. As such, it will take time to work wireless Web tech-
nology into the social fabric of the United States. 
One advantage of the U.S. wireless market is that the typical businessper-
son is familiar with cell phones and PDAs, and relies on them regularly in the
course of the business day. These businesspeople are likely to have a level of
trust in the technology that may help them make a painless transition from
the wired to the wireless Web.
Global Worker Shortage
The severe global shortage of skilled technology workers acts as a brake
for many wireless technology companies. For example, Nokia can no
longer fill positions with Finns, but relies on a global recruiting effort to
bring in programmers from India and China on a regular basis. Consider
that, in 1998, Nokia’s workforce of 44,500 was 50 percent non-Finns. By
2000, the total workforce jumped to 56,500, with 60 percent non-Finn
workers.
Similarly, in the United States, CEOs with dotCom and wireless compa-
nies are looking to Korea and India for skilled technology workers. Telecom
companies in the United States are cannibalizing each other’s workforces,
enticing employees to stay or move to their company through cash and
incentives such as on-site daycare, generous vacation time, and more. For
example, one in every three Cisco employees is a millionaire, and employees
with Nortel and Lucent are compensated handsomely, as well. Because
employees with engineering and telecommunications experience are so dif-
ficult to find, companies are increasingly training employees in-house. Para-
doxically, although the United States attracts foreign technology students to
attend school, U.S. laws don’t allow them to work in the United States once
they’ve graduated.
Bounty fees for turning in candidates and other incentives that hark back
to the early days of the wired Web are common. Unfortunately, the churn
rate is also similarly high. High growth areas, such as optical networking, are
attracting the brightest talent, in part because they’re cash-rich from venture
capital. Because demand outstrips supply, there is a major disequilibrium in
the wireless and wired job market. Workers skilled in both communications
and programming are encouraged by economic realities to change jobs often,
creating a disincentive for employers to invest in employees. The move by the
U.S. Senate to provide 600,000 new visas from 2001 through 2003 may help
the domestic high-tech worker shortage.
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
229

Reality Distortion
As noted in the marketing section above, life in Silicon Valley is rarely repre-
sentative of how “real” people spend their time. Despite the hype regarding
how wireless computing is changing the world, most doctors in the United
States use paper and pen to create patient records. Most families can’t afford
the monthly service charge for cellular service, much less a wireless PDA or
pager. Many schools are without Internet access. Some segments of the U.S.
population, for example, many Native American reservations, don’t even
have basic phone service.
Vendors are quick to point out how their wireless communications prod-
ucts can be used to provide telemedicine in remote areas of the United States,
but fail to point out that federal laws prohibit physicians from practicing
remotely without a license to practice in the patient’s state. Most families in
the United States plan a dinner out at an expensive restaurant weeks in
advance, simply because of the cost, and don’t need a wireless device to help
them find an appropriate restaurant within seconds of realizing that they’re
hungry. In other words, the world that the current incarnation of the wireless
Web caters to is a select, somewhat rarified subset of the general population.
Privacy
One of the most highly touted advantages of the wireless Web is the propo-
sition that customers appreciate the convenience of 24x7, location-based,
personalized attention from businesses. However, with the possible excep-
tion of a businessman who is interested in receiving the best rates for a rental
car and a hotel room soon after his plane lands, most people regard their pri-
vate time as just that. After a long day at the office, most executives don’t
appreciate an intrusive phone call at dinnertime, nor do they appreciate a fax
advertisement printed with their ink and paper. In this context, 24x7 cus-
tomer access, especially when the customer pays for the access, has to pro-
vide more value to the customer than the cost of the call and the intrusion
into the customer’s private life. Voice or email ads that are unsolicited, out of
context, disregard subscriber preferences, and interfere with other services,
such as the receipt of important voice and email messages, won’t be toler-
ated. Similarly, merchants that violate privacy relationships, offering sub-
scriber profiles to other merchants without subscriber approval, for
example, won’t be tolerated. 
In general, Europeans perceive cell phones as trusted, personal devices. As
such, for a European subscriber to pay for something with a cell phone doesn’t
require a huge leap of faith. However, typical cellular subscribers in the United
States tend to perceive the use of cell phones in place of their credit cards as a
threat to their privacy. Because of the way the U.S. cell phone system is
designed, there may be some reason for concern. For example, if a business-
230
CONVERGENCE

woman uses her cell phone to make an appointment, according to FCC regu-
lations (see Figure 8-9), the cellular provider has to have the ability to track the
location of her phone to within 135 meters (443 ft). The businesswoman’s
location, specified in terms of latitude and longitude, is based on the triangula-
tion of her cell phone signal from several adjacent cells. That is, the relative sig-
nal strength of her cellular signal from adjacent cells is used to estimate the
position of the phone. In order to give carriers time to work out the bugs in the
system, the location-tracking capability, which must be independent of GPS
technology, initially has to be available only two-thirds of the time.
Privacy advocates and many of the CEOs of ISP providers in the United
States are concerned about the implications of the FBI’s Carnivore system.
Carnivore is a hardware device and software that can track a subscriber’s
email, instant messages, the log of Web sites visited, and Internet relay chat
sessions over an ISP. One source of concern is that there is no way for an ISP
operator to know what the software and hardware are doing, or whether
monitoring is being performed on a person named in a court order or some-
one else. ISPs take the stance that they don’t want the privacy of all users on a
system compromised on the basis of one user’s presumed activities.
There are several potential solutions to these and other privacy issues,
however. For example, context-specific, personalized, time and place–appro-
priate advertisements over a cell phone can be made a tolerable and even a pos-
itive event. Compensating subscribers for the right to offer them advertising,
which has to include more than simply paying for the airtime, is one approach.
Timely offers that parallel subscriber-defined filters can be welcome and con-
venient. For example, a woman who is an avid cyclist and in the market for a
new helmet could be given the ability to set her wireless microbrowser to filter
for advertisements from local bike shops for a sale on bike helmets. If this filter-
ing is presented as an RFP (request for proposal), where merchants are given
the opportunity to bid on the subscriber’s business through a personal invita-
tion, then notices become personal services. Consider the utility of a wireless
handheld device placed in a cab that presents the same woman with informa-
tion on retail shops in a two-block radius of the cab’s destination—especially if
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
231
E-911 Federal Regulation
GPS Independent
Location by Latitude and Longitude
Location within 125 meters
Available at least 2/3 of the time
Effective Oct 1, 2001
Figure 8-9. Summary of the E-911 Federal Regulation.

she is given a reduced cab fare for using the system. Yahoo.com has tried captive
wireless portals on a limited basis in New York City.
Even though everyone enjoys their privacy, there are times when some
people simply can’t be out of touch, and are willing to pay for the service. For
example, a businessman who is a subscriber to British Telecom who is flying
Virgin Atlantic can receive calls while in flight. He inserts a card containing his
mobile phone information through a seat-back phone, which registers his cel-
lular phone account information and seat information with the plane’s on-
board network. When someone calls the businessman’s usual cellular phone
number, the call is routed through British Telecom’s satellite system, and to
the businessman’s seat-back phone.
Tech Burnout
For an increasing number of executives and the cities in which they live, the
days of dotCom euphoria are over. Productivity tools such as email, once pro-
moted as time savers, are now seen as time stealers that can consume precious
hours every day. Many CEOs are restricting the use of email at their compa-
nies, simply because their employees are spending too much time initiating
and responding to electronic messages. CEOs and other executives have to
deal with the prospect of data overload on a daily basis. Even for the techno-
savvy early adopters, having to remember yet another username and pass-
word for every wireless device is becoming an arduous task.
Social disapproval of cell phone use in restaurants, museums, and other
public places is on the rise. Some restaurants restrict phone use or have a des-
ignated phone area. Many public areas, such as the San Francisco Museum of
Modern Art and the Philadelphia Museum of Art, ask patrons to refrain from
using their cell phones. It’s becoming common etiquette to turn all phones
and pagers off during meetings, even in technology companies. At least one
company, BlueLinx, is developing a Bluetooth-based system that automati-
cally lowers the ring volume of a cell phone within designated areas, such as
theaters. 
There is also a public outcry against the speeding motorist who has one
hand on the wheel and one on a cell phone. Some wireless carriers, such as Bell
South, are proactively addressing the public backlash against drivers who dial
with a series of radio commercials that suggests safer driving habits.
DISCUSSION
The challenges and opportunities that lie ahead for CEOs in the world of the
wireless Web are almost limitless. With the proper focus, visionary leaders
can map out a path through the diverse space, navigating their companies to a
rewarding future in spite of shifting standards and evolving technologies. The
high degree of global interdependence in wireless Web hardware and soft-
232
CONVERGENCE

ware suppliers, and the pockets of expertise appearing in certain countries,
demand communications that far exceed the norms established for the wired
dotCom world. For example, decisions made by engineers in Japan on cell
phone screen size and button layout dramatically affect the task of software
developers in Europe and the United States. 
Even the underlying rules for company involvement in domestic wire-
less commerce are changing. For example, in late 2000, the FCC changed the
rules for PCS auctions, allowing large companies to bid on the broadband
licenses that had been reserved for smaller companies. Under the new rules,
companies with more than $500 million in assets and $125 million in rev-
enue can acquire up to two-thirds of the spectrum in large markets, and up to
one-third of the spectrum in smaller markets. This change should at least par-
tially address the problem of multiple, noncompatible standards in most
wireless markets.
A hot issue in companies that are adding a wireless component to their
wired Web presence is ownership of wireless Web projects. When the Web
first became popular, it was seen as a media for advertising, and so became the
preview of marketing. However, as the full potential of the Web emerged, and
executives began to take note of the new potential touch point, the Web took
on a life of its own. Today, in many organizations, there is a head of Web devel-
opment, usually at the VP level or equivalent, who is in charge of Web initia-
tives. However, because the eCommerce landscape is changing so rapidly,
most companies have yet to fully develop their wired Web touch point. In
addition, less than 1 percent of the eCommerce sites have shown a direct
profit of any type. 
Given the lack of resources in the dotCom space, should wireless Web
development be considered separate from wired Web activity? The answer
to this and similar questions must be answered on a case-by-case basis,
because every wireless Web activity, like every dotCom project, is different.
The theme of differences and the opportunities available to executives who
are committed to exploring the potential of the wireless Web space contin-
ues in the next and final chapter. 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The challenges and opportunities in the emerging wireless Web space can be
categorized as managerial, political, medical, legal, economic, technical, mar-
ket-based, and social. Management issues include an enterprise-centric versus
eCommerce-centric duality of focus, the need for CEOs and other executives
to focus on technologic details early on, volatility in the wireless Web space,
the crystallization of geographical pockets of expertise, competition with
wired Web projects for resources, the diversion of resources from other infor-
mation–based projects, volatility in value chain positioning, difficulty evalu-
ating vendors, the need to identify and act on low-hanging fruit, the challenge
WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
233

of working in the vast space of the wireless Web, and the management strate-
gies and structures that need to be developed in order to address these and
other challenges.
The political issues for CEOs in the wireless Web space include dealing
with standards organizations; contending with political organizations for lim-
ited RF spectrum; understanding the general opposition to foreign invest-
ment in the United States, Europe, and Asia; realizing that local governments
are major stakeholders in the wireless Web; and working through interna-
tional politics.
The top medical concerns revolve around the potential radiation hazard
that long-term cell phone use poses to subscribers, and the threat that driving
while dialing presents to other motorists. Legal issues include the status of
FCC licensing, how intellectual property is evaluated, especially for firms that
use clipping and other technologies to dynamically repurpose content, and
how to deal with fraud.
The economic issues surrounding use of the wireless Web include the
speculative market, competition from wireless and wired systems, the need
for infrastructure investment, the challenge of moving targets, working with
support structures that either are fed by or feed on the success of other com-
panies, the scarcity of expertise, time pressure to acquire the first-mover
advantage, the challenge of acquiring a critical mass of users and devices or ser-
vices, the difference between popularity and profitability, the competition
from existing processes, lost opportunity costs associated with moving to 3G
wireless services, changes in cellular billing structures, sensitivity to pricing,
and the need for a Killer App to move things along.
Technical issues include dealing with complexity, device diversity, scala-
bility, a lack of testing standards, new user interface issues, the challenge of
providing adequate security, providing added network capacity, the lack of
development tools, creating a supporting infrastructure, dealing with inter-
ference, competing standards, increasing bandwidth requirements, the lack
of compelling content, providing personalization, localization, and timeliness,
hardware limitations, evolving platform standards, and providing an overall
high quality of communications.
Marketing challenges revolve around the unknown customers, competi-
tion, and market potential, the potential of business myopia, product confusion,
heightened customer expectations, a wait-and-see attitude from customers,
product divergence, and the need for evangelists to promote a vision.
The social issues facing CEOs of wireless Web companies include the cre-
ation of a new technologic elite, the significance of local culture, the global
high-tech worker shortage, the reality distortion created by executives living
in the center of technical innovation, the threat that the wireless Web poses
to privacy, and the technology burnout that many knowledge workers expe-
rience from being continuously plugged in.
234
CONVERGENCE

Long-term planning does not deal with future decisions,
but with the future consequences of current decisions.
Gary Blair
INTRODUCTION
Following the line of reasoning that every new beginning starts with some
other beginning’s end, the wireless Web begins with the resolution of dot-
Com fever. As the wired Web stabilizes and consolidates, the CEO who was
once in charge of an adrenaline-packed roller-coaster ride through the dot-
Com space is now managing a fleet of tour buses. This CEO, who proved him-
self in the wired Web and is now looking for adventure in the wireless space,
isn’t the only one affected by the lure of the wireless Web. Rising customer
expectations of the Web now include the notion that anything can and
should be available to them at any time—for a price. This and similar expecta-
tions are fueling the consumer market for time-saving conveniences such as
wireless home shopping, cellular voice communications, two-way pagers, and
wireless, Web-enabled digital cameras.
Assuming that the industry projection that 1 billion wireless hand-
held devices will be in use worldwide by 2003 is correct, most subscribers
will experience the Web for the first time through wireless portals. How-
ever, not only does the wireless Web offer a very different user experience
compared to the wired Web but it also requires that the CEO from the
wired Web world stand back and appraise the differences between the
two touch points.
The differences between the wireless and wired Web are significant, even
though the wireless applications of the Web are a natural outgrowth of wired
235
9
Timing Is Everything
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

Web technology. These differences include technology focus, staffing
requirements, complexity of the space, and the rate-limiting resources.
For example, the technology focus of the wired Web is primarily soft-
ware development. Furthermore, software innovations developed for the
wired Web tend to be related to applications that assume a stable hardware
and network infrastructure. Innovations such as P2P (person-to-person)
eCommerce, popularized by the server-based Napster and server-less
Gnutella models, assume a standard user hardware configuration and con-
nectivity infrastructure. In contrast, the technology focus of the wireless
Web tends to be intimately related to specific hardware features of handheld
devices, such as the number and placement of keys, battery life, communi-
cations range, and the variety of input and output of modes supported.
Because the universal communicator has not yet been invented, wireless
software development typically focuses on applications for a specific hard-
ware platform, such as a Palm wireless PDA or RIM pager. Furthermore,
wireless device developers are concerned with issues such as battery life, the
ergonomics of user interaction, and how to make the best use of limited
screen real estate.
User interactions with wireless, minimum bandwidth, small-screen
handheld devices tend to be surgically precise, transaction-directed activities.
Except for pockets of early adopters in Asia and Europe, most handheld sub-
scribers don’t use wireless devices for browsing the Internet. U.S. subscribers
are especially averse to handheld browsing, given that they are accustomed to
surfing the Web on high-speed desktop PCs. In addition, as noted in the pre-
vious chapter, whereas the user interface design for the wired Web is
grounded in established principles, expertise on user interface design for
wireless devices is scarce.
To the CEO most familiar with the wired Web, the wireless Web space
represents a vast, expanding, and virtually unknown business opportunity. In
contrast, the wired Web is relatively contained and expanding at a steady but
moderate rate. Even with the millions of pages of content that are posted to
the wired Web daily, the major wired Web players have staked their claims in
the space. For most companies, whether or not to have a wired Web presence
is no longer a topic of discussion—it’s assumed. 
Staffing tends to be more of a challenge with wireless Web development,
in part because Human Resources (HR) executives and middle management
are more familiar with what is required to create and maintain a wired Web
presence. For the wired Web development shop, Web designers, C++, Java,
and HTML programmers, and graphic artists are all known quantities, in
terms of cost and what can be expected from each employee. However, on the
wireless Web, communications engineers, network specialists, and XML and
WAP programmers are not only in short supply but their skills, roles, and
expected contributions are less well defined. Furthermore, since workers
skilled in communications and networking are in demand in other areas, such
236
CONVERGENCE
TEAMFLY

as the burgeoning field of high-speed optical networking, they are more chal-
lenging to recruit and retain.
The projection is for parity in numbers of wired and wireless Web
devices in the near future, with an explosion in the number of wireless sub-
scribers shortly thereafter. In contrast, only moderate increases are projected
for the wired Web. This explosive growth in the number of wireless Web sub-
scribers represents a significant potential customer base for wireless Web
companies throughout the entire wireless Web value chain.
Because of the inherent uncertainties in the wireless Web space, the lack
of readily available expertise, and an overall increased complexity, creating a
wireless Web presence is more challenging than simply erecting a home page
on the wired Web. In addition, there are significant risks associated with the
wireless space, including short-lived, rapidly changing hardware platforms,
unstable standards, and unknown and potentially unreliable business part-
ners. As such, the cost of entering the wireless space tends to be prohibitive
for many companies. Although skilled workers and the intellectual property
they generate are scarce commodities in all areas of Web development, the
rate-limiting resources in the wireless Web space additionally include scarce
hardware and software tools.
At a minimum, the CEO who is developing a wireless strategy for her
company should have an appreciation for the differences between the wired
and wireless Web, an understanding of the historical context of the wireless
Web, an overview of the technologies involved, and at least an awareness of
some of the challenges involved in achieving a wireless Web presence. How-
ever, for an intrepid CEO to develop and execute a winning wireless strategy,
she must also have a blueprint for the process of moving her company from
where it is to where it needs to be, as well as a knack for timing. The purpose
of this chapter is to provide the CEO with that blueprint; she must be able to
accurately anticipate her customers’ needs before they do.
DEFINING A WINNING WIRELESS STRATEGY
Before a CEO can embark on the path to defining a wireless strategy for his
company, he has to build a foundation of knowledge. At the most basic
level, he must thoroughly understand his organization, in terms of its
strengths, weaknesses, and goals, and the environment in which it operates.
To this end, the CEO must acquire knowledge of the issues and the tech-
nologies relevant to establishing a wireless Web presence. In order to quan-
tify the value of a wireless touch point to his organization, he may have to
survey his organization to identify the relevant issues. This, in turn, will help
him determine, for example, whether the market focus for wireless tech-
nology should be primarily enterprise-centric or eCommerce-centric.
Once the technology, business, and political issues have been identified, the
CEO can decide where to invest his company’s resources, for example, in
TIMING IS EVERYTHING
237

enterprisewide wireless network infrastructure development or in a pilot
study using a few dozen handheld wireless devices. Finally, the CEO should
develop the metrics for quantifying his company’s success in creating a
valuable wireless Web presence.
A practical implementation of this general process description is to fol-
low the five-phase strategy illustrated in Figure 9-1. Phase I of this process or
strategy, deciding whether to develop a wireless Web presence now or to wait
until some point or event in the future, is probably the most critical. The
issues at Phase I include the overall focus of the plan, gathering knowledge of
the issues and technologies involved, and determining the type of wireless
Web presence that should be developed. The tasks in Phase II of the process
are to define the development approach, in terms of the tools and resources
required, and to determine whether these will come from inside the organi-
zation or outsourced to those with external expertise. 
238
CONVERGENCE
Decide
PHASE
ISSUES
Develop a Wireless Presence Now vs
Wait & See, Knowledge Acquisition, Focus,
Type of Presence
Vision, Strategies, Software Tools, Resources
 In-House vs Outsource Development
Vendor Selection, Staffing, Project 
Management,Quality Control, 
Maintaining Vision
Sales, Distribution, Marketing, Training, 
Support, Security, Inventory Management
Market Conditions, Competition, 
Technology, Return on Investment
Define
Approach
Develop
Deploy
Evaluate
I
II
III
IV
V
Figure 9-1.
A five-phase process for establishing a wireless Web presence. Because of the rapid
rate of change in the wireless Web environment, the assumptions made in Phase I of the process
should be revalidated at each subsequent phase.

The goal of Phase III involves actually developing the wireless presence,
whether it involves hardware development, software development, or both.
At this phase, issues include vendor selection, project management, and qual-
ity control. Phase IV, the deployment phase, entails the use of a distribution
system, training, security, and, if the distribution of handheld devices is
involved, inventory management. Phase V, evaluation, is when the CEO
should critically evaluate the market conditions, competition, technology,
and return on investment for his company’s activities.
As suggested by the dotted lines leading back to Phase I at each subse-
quent phase in Figure 9-1, the tasks of knowledge acquisition, defining a focus,
and the type of wireless presence that should be developed are revisited at
each phase in the process. The wireless Web is a dynamic, rapidly changing
environment, and the introduction of a new technology or standard and
internal changes in the company may alter the basic assumptions made in
Phase I, necessitating a major shift in other phases of the process. Depending
on the change, it may be better for the CEO to adjust the approach instead of
investing time and other resources in a product or service that may have less
than optimum results. The impact of some changes in basic assumptions is
more obvious than others. For example, if a hardware manufacturer discon-
tinues the production of a PDA that the CEO targeted as the sole deploy-
ment platform for her company’s wireless product, then it probably makes
sense for the CEO to at least revisit Phase I, regardless of which phase of the
process her company is in.
The issues and milestones related to each phase of the five-phase model
are described in more detail below.
PHASE I: THE DECISION
In Phase I of the process of developing a wireless Web presence, the CEO
must decide whether or not the timing is right for his company to move into
the wireless space. The CEO should make his decision after gathering as
much information as is practical. The CEO should evaluate the risks of start-
ing a wireless Web project based on his estimate of the investment required
relative to its likely return, the project’s duration, the technical challenges to
be addressed, the internal infrastructure changes required, the availability of
skilled workers with the competencies needed to complete the project, and
the overall likelihood of success.
In order to make the decision of whether to move immediately to the
wireless Web or wait, the CEO should determine the type of wireless Web
presence that will provide the greatest value to his company and its cus-
tomers. The value of the wireless Web depends on whether customers are
internal, such as an internal sales force, or external and focused on eCom-
merce. For a retail company that sells services to primarily mobile cus-
tomers, providing a wireless touch point may provide a means of cementing
TIMING IS EVERYTHING
239

customer relationships with the company. That is, by making the com-
pany’s services available to existing customers at an additional touch point,
the value of the wireless Web has the potential to increase customer loy-
alty—as long as they’re recognized as existing customers.
The value of a wireless Web presence also depends on the company’s
experience with the wired Web. For example, a typical brick-and-mortar
company without a Web presence of any type should consider developing a
standard wired Web site first, for the reasons outlined in Chapter 8. The pru-
dent CEO will guide her brick-and-mortar company to use tools and tech-
niques—either directly or through an outside vendor—in developing a wired
Web presence that facilitates a future move to the wireless Web. A parallel
wired and wireless Web development project, while possible, will require sig-
nificant resources, and is probably unrealistic for most companies. For exam-
ple, creating a seamless click-and-mortar entity from a brick-and-mortar
company by simultaneously adding wireless and wired Web touch points
requires the best of the physical world and the best of online technology. The
disruption in normal business processes resulting from the addition of wired
and wireless touch points is compounded by the time and energy required to
establish an infrastructure of customer call centers, data mining applications,
and online features such as personal shopping assistants, gift registries, and
other parallels of retail operation.
For a click-and-mortar company with a wired Web presence or at least a
mature intranet, supplementing a wired Web site with “thin” pages designed
expressly for wireless PDA or cell phone access may be a viable initial step.
For example, Nissan and Infinity dealers access customer relationship man-
agement information from the showroom floor via two-way pagers. In this
way, dealers are freed from breaking the focus of the sales process to go to
their desks and access information with their desktop PCs. After a company
gains experience with supporting wireless devices, it can add transaction
capabilities, perhaps transaction-processing hardware and software for faster
responses.
The primary business challenge for the CEO involved in Phase I of the
process is to estimate how a wireless presence will affect his company’s
bottom line. Working with early adopters may not be profitable in the
short term, but may create a test bed of customers who will help compa-
nies work out the kinks in their wireless strategies, in preparation for a
larger market. Potential cost savings over alternative approaches to sup-
porting a mobile workforce should also be considered in Phase I. For exam-
ple, deploying a handheld wireless device in the field has a Total Cost of
Ownership (TCO) of about $2700, compared to over four times that for a
laptop computer.
Some paths to profitability are less obvious than others. For example,
NTT DoCoMo is a deep-pocketed company with millions of subscribers
who pay for content and this positions the company as a credit house with
240
CONVERGENCE

$200 million per month of content-related business. Consider that NTT
DoCoMo’s I-Mode phones are thriving with its microbilling system. In addi-
tion to an added monthly service charge, which is typically paid by automatic
bank withdrawal, accessing certified I-Mode sites incurs an additional
monthly fee. Although any site can be accessed on the Web by tapping out an
address, certified I-Mode sites can be accessed with a thumb-controlled joy-
stick from a list on a cell phone screen. 
The small monthly fee (about $3 U.S.) charged for accessing certified sites
appears on the subscriber’s monthly statement. Since the fee is split between
DoCoMo and the content provider, the relationship is a win-win, with huge
profits for NTT DoCoMo and successful sites. For example, a service run by
Bandai Company that ships different animated characters to cell phones
every day has over 2 million customers—representing a $6 million revenue
stream. Even the local Tokyo weather site hosts over a quarter of a million sub-
scribers. In addition to positioning itself as a bank, NTT is using its customer
contact and financial strength to offer insurance to subscribers over the wire-
less Web.
Another business model involves positioning a wireless touch point as a
captive portal. Several financial institutions are giving away wireless handheld
devices as part of pilot programs for their best clients. The instant-on hand-
held devices, which are locked to the financial institutions’ Web sites, allow
clients to trade stocks and direct other financial transactions through secure,
real-time communications.
The issue in taking a wait-and-see approach toward a move to the wireless
Web is defining the criteria for reexploring the wireless space in terms of
either time or events. For example, revisiting the Phase I decisions in six
months, or when a clear hardware device standard has emerged in a particular
industry, are both reasonable criteria.
PHASE II: DEFINE AN APPROACH
Once a decision has been made to establish a wired Web presence, the CEO’s
next step should be to define an approach. The milestones for the CEO
involved in Phase II of the process include creating a vision for her company
and defining what the customers experience from their interactions with the
wireless Web. The CEO should also define an overall strategy for her com-
pany, in terms of technology, management, and the business model, including
an inventory of resources required to realize success.
For a CEO to help her company achieve these milestones, she must con-
sider issues ranging from choosing potential technology and business part-
ners, performing a risk analysis, considering integration of existing touch
points, selecting hardware, locating software tools, defining a network infra-
structure, developing contingency plans, defining timelines and budgets, and
identifying a reasonable home for the project within her organization.
TIMING IS EVERYTHING
241

Technology Strategy
The most appropriate strategies for achieving a wireless Web presence neces-
sarily follow from the CEO’s vision of his company, which should also reflect
the corporate mission. Similarly, defining a technology strategy, including a
plan for securing the most appropriate devices, the type of connection or infra-
structure provider, and application areas, must also reflect customer require-
ments. For example something as simple as the characteristics of a handheld
device, such as its need for frequent recharging, may cut too deeply into the
customer interaction time for a mobile sales force for the device to be practical.
The CEO evaluating the connection associated with a particular wireless
technology approach should consider three primary parameters: speed, cov-
erage, and mobility. Consideration for speed or bandwidth should encompass
not only top speed, but also the typical speed, which takes the contention of
limited channels and interference from other services and the environment
into account. Coverage, the geographic percentage of urban and rural areas
covered by a wireless service, should be evaluated in terms of inside and out-
side building penetration. For example, if the intended wireless customers are
a mobile sales force who will connect to the Web while they are in their cars,
then inside building coverage isn’t relevant. However, for a copier repair busi-
ness that needs to contact its repair people at any time, then the in-building
coverage is critical. Mobility factors, such as the ability to roam, and the asso-
ciated charges, are important if the CEO’s company routinely does business
outside of a single metropolitan area.
In evaluating the appropriateness of wireless applications for her com-
pany, the CEO and her technical staff typically have industry standards to use
as a guide. For example, medical applications, which usually trail applications
in the financial area in terms of technical sophistication, should be evaluated
relative to competing solutions, wired or wireless, in the medical space.
The technologic strategy should also focus on the range of handheld
devices and other hardware supported, from wireless PDAs to wireless
modem cards for laptops. Because the wireless device is the primary interface
between customers and the Web or some custom application, the appropri-
ateness of the device to the task is central to its evaluation. There are many
parameters that go into the wireless hardware evaluation mix. There are obvi-
ous factors, such as connectivity options, in terms of the protocols supported,
and the total cost of ownership for the devices, including initial and recurring
costs, such as monthly connect charges, insurance, and keeping an inventory
of spares in stock. Additional factors include the mean time before replace-
ment (MTBR), the modalities supported (text versus voice, for example),
power requirements, theft potential, portability, and fragility. Some features
are orthogonal to others, and their relevance depends on the application and
the customer environment. For example, increased portability tends to
increase theft potential. Special security features, such as password protec-
242
CONVERGENCE

tion, tend to diminish ease of use. Similarly, a small form factor may require a
hard-to-find, expensive battery pack.
In evaluating the appropriateness of the range of wireless devices avail-
able, the CEO should consider the information needs and processes required
by potential customers. The most appropriate wireless device depends on
the degree of portability required by customers and the tasks that must be
supported. As the task moves from simple data viewing to data acquisition to
data creation, the optimum hardware power increases, moving from cell
phones and two-way pagers to PDAs and wireless laptop computers. For
example, Web-enabled cell phones support data viewing in a highly portable
form factor. PDAs with bar-code scanners and other data acquisition features
are more portable but less powerful than wireless laptops.
Although laptop computers are capable of supporting bar-code scanning
with the appropriate attachments, they tend to be overpowered for the task.
Conversely, for creating a large number of email messages and graphic data,
the processing power and screen size provided by wireless laptops are usually
necessary. Because portability is also a consideration, the optimum device cat-
egory depends on where the company’s customers lie on the Power-Portabil-
ity curve. The exact position of a device on the Power-Portability Curve
depends on the particular device characteristics. The miniature, full-featured
keypads supplied on two-way pagers from Motorola and RIM, for example,
tend to be easier to use to write email messages than the limited keypad of a
cell phone.
There are additional, subjective metrics that a CEO and his technical staff
can use to evaluate the applicability of wireless Web technologies to their mis-
sion. For example, the maximum tolerance a businessperson typically has for
device availability is related to her intended interaction time or the perceived
value of the interaction, as well as to her expectations. For example, if the busi-
nesswoman is working in her hotel room, she may be willing to wait two or
three minutes to boot up and connect through her wireless laptop computer.
Conversely, she won’t wait for more than a few seconds for her wireless PDA
to be available—unless her PDA holds vital information that she simply must
have. Instant-on devices, such as most PDAs, have interaction times measured
in minutes and seconds; high-latency devices, such as wireless laptops, have
extended boot times and interaction times measured in hours and minutes.
Rising expectations, either because of the technologies that the competi-
tion offers or because of alternative channels available to customers, shift the
delay tolerance–interaction value curve downward. That is, customers are
less willing to tolerate a delay when they know that the technology exists for
better responsiveness. For example, even though most patients will wait two
hours in a stuffy waiting room in order to spend five minutes with a doctor,
most PDA users won’t tolerate a PDA that doesn’t provide instant-on capa-
bilities, in part because all PDAs on the market provide that capability. Simi-
larly, the 5- to 15-s latency associated with data accessed through the
TIMING IS EVERYTHING
243

first-generation wireless Palm PDA is becoming less tolerated as more wire-
less customers become familiar with other PDA designs, such as the RIM
Blackberry, that support always-on, instant wireless Web connectivity.
Clearly, the intended application of wireless Web communications must
define the hardware device and connectivity characteristics. In the end, a
mobile salesperson doesn’t care about the make and model of his PDA or cell
phone; what he cares about is providing service to his clients. To this end, the
wireless device should be transparent to the customer and the task.
The final milestone in defining a technology strategy is for the CEO to
identify an infrastructure capable of supporting the company’s wireless Web
initiative. A short-term approach is to outsource, picking the best of breed.
Alternatively, there is the long-term approach of slowly acquiring a suite of
infrastructure tools. However, there are no universal infrastructure develop-
ment tools that work across a wide range of devices. Given the uncertainties
in the wireless space, an agnostic infrastructure should be created, as long as
the lack of support for specific device features doesn’t detract from the cus-
tomer’s experience.
An increasingly popular, low-risk infrastructure approach on the wire-
less Web is to use Wireless Application Service Provider (WASP) technology,
either supported in-house or outsourced to a wireless enabler, such as Ora-
cleMobile (www.OracleMobile.com). As listed in Figure 9-2, there are several
advantages to using WASP architecture. For one, the WASP design supports
the integration of third-party content, as well as data from intranets and the
Internet in one seamless presentation. That is, content from a variety of
sources, including different pages from the same Web site, whether on the
Internet or from a corporate intranet that is located behind a firewall, can be
formatted and displayed on a single page or series of pages. 
Secondly, because of the degree of integration possible, the WASP design is
compatible with smart linking. With this technology, wireless subscribers can
be presented with the links they are most likely to use from any data display.
For example, when a customer lists restaurants in an area on a Web-enabled
cell phone, links to the restaurants’ Web sites and to a separate online reserva-
tion service can be provided next to the listing of the restaurant names.
A third advantage of the WASP design is that it is inherently scalable, in
that the architecture can be developed for internal use on an intranet and
then opened for general access by simply adding processing power. Multiple
levels of security can be provided as well. For example, sensitive, password-
protected information can be kept behind a secure firewall, allowing cus-
tomers to access general information on a server outside the firewall, and a
mobile sales force with the appropriate access privileges, for example, can use
the same Web site to access sensitive corporate data.
In addition to simplifying the distribution task to a variety of hardware
devices through the use of a central database and XML or other language that
supports models of handheld device characteristics, the WASP model sup-
244
CONVERGENCE

ports the generation of alerts on always-on hardware. Because a minimum of
local processing power is used on the subscriber’s hardware, a variety of high-
computational load processes can be supported, such as data mining, content
filtering, and location-based services. Finally, the server-based processing of
the WASP model is also compatible with alternative user interfaces, such as
voice recognition.
Management Strategy
Defining an approach to the wireless Web is not only a question of having the
right tools but using them correctly—which is where management strategy
comes in. A primary issue in this area is developing contingency plans in the
event that the wireless system fails or even fails to be realized. For example,
the implementation plan may take longer than estimated, requiring alterna-
tive forms of communications and support for a field sales force for several
months.
Ownership of the wireless space, at a corporate level, is also at issue. As
introduced in the previous chapter, the nature of the business should dictate
where the wireless Web development team lives. Although a wireless com-
munication system may be connected to the Web, the main components
may fall under what would normally be considered the purview of telecom-
munications or the IT department. For example, email, one of the major appli-
cations used on Web-enabled handhelds, is normally administered through a
company’s IT department. Similarly, pagers are typically administered by
telecommunications, which assigns user IDs and access numbers. These and
TIMING IS EVERYTHING
245
WASP Advantages
Allows Integration of Third-Party Content
Can Combine Intranets with the Internet
Compatible with Smart Linking
Scalability
Security Through Firewalls
Simplification of  Distribution
Supports: Alerts
Alternative Interfaces
Content Filtering
Data Mining
Location-Based Services 
Figure 9-2. The advantages of Wireless Application Service Provider (WASP) technology in achiev-
ing a wireless Web presence. 

other administrative tasks don’t normally fall under the heading of Web
development. However, if the purpose of a wireless Web presence is to sup-
plement the Wired component by mirroring functions, which may include
transaction processing, then it may make sense to keep the administration of
wired and wireless Web development projects under the same management.
Business Models
In order for a wireless Web development project to succeed, the business
model must incorporate an integration effort, define the legacy processes that
will have to be updated to support the wireless effort, identify the most likely
business and technology partners, and target the resources needed to com-
plete the project on time and on budget. Business partnerships are especially
crucial for success, given that no one company is large enough to go it alone in
the wireless space.
Maintenance costs, life cycle, time to market, and likely return on invest-
ment figures should be part of the business model. The model should also
define a limited time and budget for the project in order to avoid escalating
cost due to added features not considered—and perhaps not available—at the
time the project was started. From a strategic business perspective, the CEO
should evaluate business decisions in light of her company’s overall eCom-
merce technology strategy. For example, the technologies employed in devel-
opment of a wireless Web presence for an international company should
scale globally. For this reason, voice recognition and synthesis systems that are
limited to English, databases that support only ASCII, search engines that
only work with English, and computer languages that can’t support the char-
acter sets of a variety of international languages are strategically poor business
choices that should be avoided, even though they may satisfy the immediate
technologic requirements.
PHASE III: DEVELOP
Given a decision to go ahead and a definite approach, the next step for the
CEO to take toward providing her company with a wireless Web presence is
to simply plan the work and then see to it that the appropriate resources are
focused on working the plan. Planning involves the steps typical of any major
software or hardware project, including creating written requirement and
functional specifications, establishing a budget, developing timelines, defining
deliverables, and creating milestones. If the decision is to work with outside
vendors because of the expense or disruption of using internal staff, the CEO
needs to identify vendors, establish quality control standards, and set definite
timelines. Similarly, if the work is to be done using internal staff, then the CEO
will need to work with project management issues, including staffing, pro-
ductivity, and quality control.
246
CONVERGENCE
TEAMFLY

The selection of a wireless technology vendor is one of the most impor-
tant decisions in the process of developing a wireless Web presence. There are
various levels of vendor involvement, from supplying a piece of middleware,
such as an application server, to a virtually complete solution that includes
hardware, application software, and the underlying infrastructure. The basic
components involved in wireless vendor selection are the connection or
infrastructure, the application, and wireless device characteristics.
Vendor evaluation criteria should include examining the vendor as a sta-
ble, financially sound business, including bank references, number of years in
business, credentials of the CEO and management team, references from
clients, the proximity of their physical plant, the breadth and depth of their
technical knowledge, and customer support capabilities. If the vendor is sup-
plying a mission-critical software application, then it must be amenable to
establishing a software escrow account that provides the CEO’s company
with access to application source code and documentation in the event that
the vendor goes out of business.
Aside from vendor selection, the CEO’s most important role in Phase III
is to develop, maintain, and articulate a clear vision of what the project will
provide the customer and the company. A clear vision of the final product is
especially crucial with wireless Web development, given that the rapidly
changing environment can distract an unfocused development group away
from the task at hand. Without a clear vision, it’s easy for development staff to
divert too much energy and time into second-guessing the development plan
and exploring possible alternatives to the selected approach.
PHASE IV: DEPLOY
After the months of work developing the software and infrastructure neces-
sary for a wireless Web approach, the CEO’s next step is to deploy the prod-
uct or service. The milestones in Phase IV include establishing a sales and
marketing center, creating distribution channels to customers, providing
support and training, developing security procedures, and, if wireless devices
are distributed to employees, inventory control. 
Subtle but significant differences in this phase of the process exist
between internal and external deployment. For example, if a wireless applica-
tion is developed for an internal sales force, then relevant issues include the
impact on the bottom line, infrastructure demand, training, monitoring
results, security, and employee feedback. If the product or services are aimed
at external eCommerce, however, there will likely be more of a focus on the
sales and marketing process, a potentially more complex and difficult distrib-
ution mechanism, cost containment, and customer support.
All of these factors come into play to some degree in both internally and
externally focused wireless products and services. For example, inventory
control may be a major factor in enterprise-focused deployment, especially if
TIMING IS EVERYTHING
247

several hundred handheld devices are in service simultaneously. There must
be a mechanism to rapidly replace defective or stolen devices, adequate inven-
tory for providing loaner devices while an employee’s unit is being repaired,
and enough stock to adequately equip a wave of new employees.
PHASE V: EVALUATE
German science, technology, and business are known for their reliance on out-
come measurements, in which evaluations are based on hard, objective data.
Although soft, subjective measures certainly have a place in evaluating the
impact of a wireless Web presence, there is something to be said for critically
quantifying the impact of a new technology on an existing business process.
Milestones at Phase V include evaluating the new technologies, assessing
the competition, identifying new business opportunities, continually moni-
toring the status of the implementation, and modifying the overall approach
as necessary. At this phase, the CEO should be prepared to modify the system
based on customer feedback, regardless of how well the system fits the origi-
nal functional specifications document. For example, given the rapid rate of
technologic change, there is a good chance that, as technologies evolve,
reliance on multiple operating systems and protocols will shift to one or two
standards. WAP may prove too limited and fail to scale when higher band-
widths and larger displays become available. Heads-up displays, biometric
security, and other technologies may fundamentally change how users inter-
act with their devices. 
EXPECTATION MANAGEMENT
A key issue in developing a wireless Web presence is to appropriately manage
customer expectations. Since the wireless Web won’t be able to meet most of
the market hype for several years—if ever—there is the potential for cus-
tomer frustration and wholesale rejection of the wireless Web. As such,
expectation management requires a careful marketing strategy. The wireless
Web won’t succeed as a touch point unless the companies involved manage
to capture the hearts and imaginations of the subscribers. In other words, the
CEO should provide customers with a clear vision of where the technology is
heading and a clear list of benefits customers can expect from the technology
today, all the while generating an air of excitement about his company’s wire-
less products and services.
Consider how NTT DoCoMo manages customer expectations in Japan.
DoCoMo doesn’t even mention the terms Webor the Internetin its marketing
materials, thereby avoiding any expectations, especially that the Web is a free
library of information.
In the United States, however, wired Web users have a preconceived
notion of what the Web is or should be, based on their experience with the
248
CONVERGENCE

multimedia Web. However, if U.S. subscribers approach the wireless Web as
a portable version of the wired Web, they’ll be extremely disappointed. For
example, the wireless Web is not based on the model that everything is free.
THE WIRELESS FUTURE
Even the most driven, time-limited CEO has a profound need to communi-
cate her thoughts, experiences, desires, dreams, and ambitions to others.
Although nothing can come close to the quality of a face-to-face exchange of
ideas, over time, technologies have been developed to support communica-
tions over increasingly greater distances. Today, distance is no longer an obsta-
cle; given access to the appropriate technology and the knowledge of how to
use it, virtually anyone on the planet can communicate with any one of the
other billions of inhabitants. The keys to ubiquitous communications, includ-
ing access to technology and a supportive social infrastructure, remain as
unanswered challenges—and business opportunities.
As the number of wireless users worldwide exceeds a critical mass of a bil-
lion businesspeople, homemakers, professionals, and students, the limita-
tions of technology access may no longer be an issue—for those who can
afford it. Even so, there will continue to be haves and have-nots owing to tech-
nologic, economic, social, and political factors. For example, in the United
States, the sign that wireless communications technology has reached a level
of general usability will be when a working knowledge of the wireless Web
migrates from the well-heeled early adopters in business and technology to
the mothers and fathers of the current generation of decision makers. 
Although the wireless Web market only started at the turn of this cen-
tury and is in an early-adoption phase, the market is large enough to provide
many companies with sufficient incentives to court the high-value early
adopters. Part of this incentive is short-term monetary reward, and part is
gathering knowledge that may be useful in future business. For example,
information from the businesses serving the early adopters thus far strongly
suggests that the wireless communications solutions developed in each mar-
ket must stand on their own. That is, they must reflect the social needs of local
markets and corporate cultures. For example, when the business practice of
quality circles—a wildly successful practice in Japan based on a small group
that performs voluntary quality control activities within the same work-
group—was instituted in the United States, it failed. The U.S. business culture
simply didn’t support the practice. Similarly, the particular successes with the
wireless Web demonstrated by ITT DoCoMo in Japan won’t necessarily
translate to subscribers in Europe and the United States. 
Technology transfer doesn’t always occur smoothly or predictably, even
when the benefits have been demonstrated for decades in other cultures. For
example, through the use of smart card technology, Poland is moving from a
cash economy directly to a credit economy, bypassing checks and credit cards
TIMING IS EVERYTHING
249

altogether. Although the smart card technology is stable and mature, the social
and economic issues of dealing with buying on credit are being resolved very
slowly. Even though credit is a normal part of contemporary life in the United
States, it may take a generation or more for customers and businesses in Poland
to fully understand the inherent benefits and limitations of living on credit.
It’s clear that the goal of pervasive computing will be achieved, at least on
a technologic basis, within the first decade of this century. What is unclear,
and much more significant, are the social, political, and cultural consequences
of billions of subscribers connected to each other and to the knowledge
repository of the future Web. At least one possible future is both very similar
and very different from a typical scene in downtown New York or Tokyo
today. Businesspeople, customers, and couriers will be walking around with
wireless wallets in their pockets, talking into their wireless communicators.
However, instead of talking and listening to others in real time, they’ll be con-
versing with the wireless Web through multimedia communicators
equipped with speech synthesis and voice recognition interfaces.Web-cen-
tric communications will allow businesses and customers to transact busi-
ness on a global scale and on a 24x7 basis, without having to wait for a human
operator. In order to provide a semblance of a human touch and thereby
develop some degree of customer loyalty, businesses will use synthetic, per-
sonable, animated sales personalities that are age, race, and affect-appropriate
to fill the video screens of Web-enabled cell phones and PDAs.
Another possible future is one in which every man, woman, and child is
encouraged or required to accept ingestible and injectable Web-enabled
biochips. These chips will be used to communicate with Internet appliances,
automating the tasks of daily living, such as opening refrigerator doors and
turning on room lights as a person stumbles into the kitchen in the middle of
the night. The devices will also allow self-communications—a form of
biofeedback—that will allow athletes to train better and diabetics to more
easily monitor and control their blood glucose levels. This level of intimacy
and immediacy with the wireless Web will also bring the focus to the political
arena of social compliance, in which rules communicated by the government
or an employer must be obeyed. For example, if a diabetic patient fails or
refuses to take her medications, she may lose her medical insurance coverage.
For some subcultures, this type of Web presence has the potential to take on
the characteristics of the compliance collars that prisoners were forced to
wear in The Running Man. In addition to monitoring each prisoner’s location,
the collars allowed the government to administer painful shocks to prisoners
who did not comply with established behavioral norms.
While it’s important for every CEO to be responsible and look ahead to
the possible social consequences of introducing a new technology into a cul-
ture, the short-term issues are much more pressing. They are the prerequisites
for either of the above scenarios to become reality, and ones that will most
assuredly be met by innovative, entrepreneurial executives. These include the
250
CONVERGENCE

carriers that will serve as pipelines to consumers, applications and protocols for
wireless devices, and content to attract customers. In addition, there are the
PDAs, pagers, and other wireless devices needed to serve as platforms for com-
munications and content display, and the infrastructure to provide transmis-
sion technology to network carriers. Finally, there are the software tools
needed to provide meaning to the huge quantities of data that will result from
the billions of wireless devices that will soon populate the planet.
The wireless Web is just beginning, and yet, as every CEO knows, by
beginning to live, it’s also beginning to die, with another new beginning just
over the horizon. The current incarnation of the wireless Web, like every
technology, has a finite, fairly predictable life span. As such, the prudent CEO
is positioning her company to exploit the wireless Web, either directly or
indirectly, while looking for an opportunity to develop and introduce the
next evolutionary or revolutionary application of wireless Web technology.
After all, the best way to predict the future is to create it.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
A practical approach for a CEO contemplating a move to the wireless Web is
to follow a five-phase strategy that considers the company’s resources, includ-
ing available capital, other ongoing projects that require IT resources and
their relative priority, the type of business the company is involved in, and
what the competition is doing.
Phase I. Decide whether to develop a wireless Web presence now or to
wait until some time or event in the future, based on technologies involved
and the type of wireless Web presence to be developed, from a limited pilot
program to a full-scale eCommerce service.
Phase II. Define the development approach, in terms of the tools and
resources required. 
Phase III. Develop a wireless presence with vendors and/or in-house
expertise.
Phase IV. Deploy the product or service, which may entail establishing
a distribution system, training, security, and inventory management.
Phase V. Evaluate market conditions, the competition, the latest tech-
nologies, and the projects likely to produce return on investment.
Because of the hype surrounding wireless Web technology, it’s impera-
tive that the rollout of wireless technology be accompanied by a carefully
orchestrated plan of customer expectation management.
As the upheavals in the valuation of dotComs so adeptly demonstrated,
it’s imperative to separate form from the substance of communications; a clear
communications channel will only have value if someone has something of rel-
evance to say. Simply existing on the Web as an electronic billboard, wireless or
otherwise, doesn’t add value to the customer relationship. Although the early
movers in the wireless Web space will bring public attention to—and eventual
TIMING IS EVERYTHING
251

acceptance of—the wireless Web as a valid form of communications, when the
dust settles, it will be business as usual, albeit at a faster pace. A wireless touch
point will be as expected and as commonplace as a wired Web, telephone, or
fax touch point. 
Given these realities, a prerequisite for any CEO contemplating a move
to the wireless Web space is to have her brick-and-mortar house in order. This
means understanding her company’s current and potential customers as well
as the perceived or real advantage of its products and services in the market-
place. This also means having the infrastructure in place to support the seam-
less integration of all touch points, thereby avoiding the frustrating “you can’t
get there from here” encounters many customers initially associated with the
wired Web. Customer relations management should be empowered—not
supplanted—by wireless Web communications technologies.
With a solid business infrastructure in place, a wireless Web touch point
has the potential to become a value-added multiplier of sorts, much as the
telephone has been to business. In this respect, the wireless Web is to the
wired Web as the cell phone is to the wired phone. For many potential cus-
tomers, communications now extends beyond the confines of a pay phone or
desk and into the very fabric of daily living. However, a ubiquitous, universally
available communications channel to and from customers is only useful if cus-
tomers want the company’s products or services, especially when the cus-
tomer pays for the communications.
It’s the CEO’s charge to lead her company through the inevitable grow-
ing pains of adding and supporting a wireless Web touch point. However, in
order to decide when and where to invest in wireless Web technology, she
needs to understand the current status of wireless Web technologies, the
probable trajectory of these technologies, and the likelihood that they will
survive into the next decade. She must also have a firm grasp of the repercus-
sions associated with selecting one technologic approach over another, in
terms of resource requirements, return on investment, and interoperability
with other technologies on the horizon. 
With time, selecting a wireless Web strategy will be akin to picking an office
telephone system today. The decisions involved will be as commonplace and as
obvious as selecting the number of phone lines, special features, such as caller ID
and conference calling, and perhaps the color of the handset. Until then, how-
ever, there will be years of technologic evolution, battles over standards, the
need to develop new communications infrastructures, and marketing to cus-
tomers, whether they’re employees, other companies, or end consumers.
Grounded with the knowledge of the technologies and business issues
involved in the wireless Web, the decisions that a company will have to make
to gain a stable foothold in the wireless Web space can be based on sound
business principles, as opposed to dotCom hype. For the technologically
savvy CEO, the journey into the technologically and economically complex
space of the wireless Web will be a marvelous adventure.
252
CONVERGENCE

1G: First generation wireless communications infrastructure. Synonymous
with first  generation analog cellular services.
2.5G: A wireless communications infrastructure somewhere between sec-
ond  and third generation in terms of bandwidth. ITT DoCoMo’s I-Mode is
generally considered to be a 2.5-G network infrastructure.
2G: Second generation wireless communications infrastructure, which
includes digital cellular and PCS.
3G: Third generation communications infrastructure, designed to deliver
information to handheld wireless devices at speeds of up to 2 MBps. 
A/D Conversion:Analog-to-digital conversion. The process of converting
voice and other continuous signals to discrete digital signals. 
Advanced Wireless Access (AWA): A high-speed wireless system
based on ATM technology.
Alpha Testing: The first stage of testing a new product, carried out by the
manufacturer’s own staff.
AM:Amplitude Modulation. Varying the amplitude or strength of a signal in
relationship to another signal, such as voice.
Amplifier:An electronic circuit that increases the strength or amplitude of
a signal. 
Amplitude: The extent to which the voltage or current of a signal varies in
time. Higher swings in voltage or current correspond to greater amplitude.
AMPS: Advanced Mobile Phone System. The analog cellular system in the
United States.
253
Glossary
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

Analog Network:A network in which voice and data are sent “as is,” with-
out going through a digitization process.
Analog Signal: An electronic signal that is represented by varying levels
over continuous range rather than in discrete steps (digital).
American National Standards Institute (ANSI):A voluntary stan-
dards organization that develops and publishes standards for transmission
codes, protocols, and languages in the United States.
Application Service Provider (ASP): A technology that provides
access to software through a Web browser, negating the need for the cus-
tomer to purchase and run the software locally. 
Architecture: The general technical layout of a computer system.
Asynchronous: A property of an event that occurs at an arbitrary time,
without synchronization to a reference clock.
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM): A telecommunications
method for relaying images, sound, and text simultaneously at very high
speeds.
Auction: A form of bidding for G3 licenses in which the highest bidder
wins.
Bandwidth: A measure of the information-carrying capacity of a medium.
On the Internet, bandwidth is commonly measured in bits per second (Bps).
Beauty Contest: A form of bidding for G3 licenses in which wireless
providers vie to promise the best levels of service and most timely rollout.
This approach to granting wireless licenses has been embraced by Sweden,
Spain, Norway, France, and Portugal.
Beta Testing: The second stage of product testing, carried out by typical
users in a variety of settings that mimic those in which the final product will
be used.
Binary: A system of expressing numerical values as 0’s and 1’s.
Bit: The smallest unit of data in a computer system. Any specific data bit can
either be high (1) or low (0). 
Bitmapped Screen: A display screen where every pixel is represented by
a memory location. 
Bits Per Second (Bps): A measure of the speed at which data is transmit-
ted or received.  Maximum Bps is limited by the bandwidth of the connection.
KBps, MBps, and GBps refer to thousand, millions, and billions of bits per sec-
ond, respectively.
254
GLOSSARY

Bluetooth: A very short-range wireless connection standard. Its aim is to
link a wide range of computers, electronics, and telecom devices. 
Brick and Mortar: A traditional business with a physical presence. 
Broadcast: One-way communications from a single transmitter to many
receivers.  As in broadcast TV and radio.
Browser: A software program that interprets documents on the Web.
Netscape Navigator and Microsoft Explorer are the two most popular
browsers in use today.
Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA): A wireless communica-
tions protocol that is based on digital spread-spectrum technology. Each
transmission is identified by a unique code, allowing multiple calls to use the
same frequency spread. 
CDMA2000: A third generation wireless technology derived from
CDMA.
Cellular Digital Packet Data (CDPD): A wireless transmission pro-
tocol in which each wireless device has a unique network IP (Internet Proto-
col) address and remains connected as long as the modem is on. Broken
connections are automatically and transparently resumed. 
Cell: The area covered by a single cellular base station transmitter and
receiver pair.  A typical cell is a few hundred meters or more in diameter.
Click and Mortar:A traditional business with a significant Web presence.
A hybrid between the pure dotCom and brick-and-mortar companies.
Client: A PC or wireless device that communicates over a network both
with its peers, other clients, and with a larger computer, called a server, which
typically stores data that many workers need to use. The client has just one
user, the server many.
Client-Server: A computer architecture in which the workload is split
between desktop PCs or handheld wireless devices (clients) and more pow-
erful or higher-capacity computers (servers) that are connected via a network
such as the Internet.
Common Carrier: Licensed utilities that provide communications ser-
vices for a fee, under nondiscriminatory terms. Companies usually rely on
common carriers to send data between offices in different cities.
Compression: Manipulating a signal to minimize bandwidth require-
ments.
Convergence: The merging of all data and all media into a single digital
form. 
GLOSSARY
255

Cross Talk: An unwanted signal on one channel due to an input on a differ-
ent channel. 
CTIA: Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association. The U.S. trade
association representing the interests of the domestic telecommunications
industry.
Customer Relations Management (CRM): The process of manag-
ing the relationship between a business and its customers.
D/A Conversion: Digital-to-analog conversion. The conversion of a dis-
crete digital signal into a continuous, time-varying analog signal. 
Digital Advanced Mobile Phone System (D-AMPS): Digital cellu-
lar.
Data Mining: The process of extracting meaningful relationships from
usually very large quantities of seemingly unrelated data.
Data Warehouse: A central database, frequently very large, that can pro-
vide authorized users with access to all of a company’s information. 
DCS1000: Digital collection system, version 1.  A program, formerly
known as carnivore, developed by the FBI to locate and read the email of peo-
ple targeted by court-ordered investigations.
Digital Encryption Standard (DES): A communications encryption
standard defined by the National Bureau of Standards.
Dial-Up: Connection to the Internet through an Internet Service
Provider’s (ISP’s) host computer over standard telephone lines. The most
common type of Internet account for home users.
Digital Network: A communications network in which speech and data
are first converted to digital form (A/D Conversion) before being transmit-
ted on the network. 
Digital Signature: An encrypted digital tag added to an electronic com-
munication to verify the identity of a customer. Also called an electronic sig-
nature.
Digital Subscriber Line (DSL): A digital phone connection that skips
the analog-digital-analog conversions and sends data directly in digital format.
DSL supports simultaneous voice and data communication on the same line.
Digital Switching: A means of supporting multiway conferencing in a
fully digital network. 
Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS): A wireless spread spec-
trum method that breaks each transmission into pieces, scatters them across
the designated spectrum, and reconstructs the pieces at the receiving end.
256
GLOSSARY
TEAMFLY

DSP: Digital Signal Processing. The manipulation of digital information,
often with the aid of specialized hardware.
DSP Filtering: The use of computer-simulated filters for processing digital
information. The original information is usually an analog audio or video sig-
nal that has been digitized for DSP operations.
Early Adopter: In marketing circles, a customer who must have the latest
and greatest gadget, regardless of cost or inconvenience.
Ease of Learning: Regarding a user interface, the ease with which a partic-
ular interface can be learned. Contrast with Ease of Use.
Ease of Use: Regarding a user interface, the ease or efficiency with which
the interface can be used. An easy to use interface may be difficult to learn and
vice versa.
Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC): A method of encryption and
digital signatures that is optimized for computationally limited devices, such
as wireless PDAs and cell phones. ECC is more efficient than RSA, the stan-
dard encryption used on the wired Web.
Enhanced Data Rates for Global Evolution (EDGE):A technology
that can be used to boost data speeds on both GSM and TDMA networks. 
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI):A standard transmission format for
business information sent from one computer to another using strings of data.
Encryption: The alteration of transmitted information to keep it secret.
EPOC: An operating system for wireless devices, developed by Psion.
Ethernet:The most common form of network used in corporations, with a
top speed of 10 MBps. Because it works like a party line, if too many users try
to send messages at once, the network slows dramatically.
European Union (EU): The EU member nations are Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC): The U.S. govern-
mental office responsible for radio emissions, including wireless signals, and
for assigning different parts of the radio spectrum for a variety of reasons.  The
FCC does not license the optical spectrum for communications.
Fire Wall: A network security device that can limit unauthorized access to
parts of a network. 
Frequency-Hopping Spread Spectrum (FHSS): A wireless spread-
spectrum method that “hops” its transmission across multiple channels
instead of remaining on one signal.
GLOSSARY
257

Fuel Cell: A battery that creates electricity by separating protons from
electrons in hydrogen atoms.  Fuel cells often use methanol and water for a
source of hydrogen atoms.
General Packet Radio Service (GPRS): A method of sending Inter-
net information to “always-on” wireless devices.
Global Positioning System (GPS): A usually handheld navigation
device that receives transmissions from several satellites, enabling users to
plot their positions in latitude, longitude, and altitude.
Graphical User Interface (GUI): The point-and-click interfaces first
popularized by the Apple Macintosh and now used by Microsoft Windows.
Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM): A digital cel-
lular standard that uses time-division (TDMA) to carry multiple, simultane-
ous calls on the same frequency. The vast majority of European mobile phone
networks are built in accordance with the GSM Communications standard. 
Home Audio Video Interoperability Organization (HAVi): A
consortium of consumer electronics companies that is developing a wired
and wireless standard for home entertainment systems.  HAVi is compatible
with JINI and UPNP, the competing smart home communications standards.
Handheld Device Markup Language (HDML): A proprietary lan-
guage for coding Web sites so that the content can be downloaded quickly
onto handheld wireless systems.
High Data Rate CDMA (HDR):A proposed third generation network
standard. 
HomeRF: An inexpensive wireless network designed for home applica-
tions.
HyperText Markup Language (HTML): The most popular pro-
gramming language used to create documents on the Web. 
Human-Computer Interface: The combination of hardware and soft-
ware elements that provides the communications channel between a com-
puter and the computer operator. Also called the user interface.
I-Mode: I(nternet)-Mode.  NTT DoCoMo’s proprietary wireless Internet
service that is popular throughout Japan.
International Mobile Telecommunications for 2000 (IMT-
2000): The third generation global wireless initiative by the ITU-T. 
Infrared (IR):Light just below the frequency of the visible light spectrum.
IR wireless communications are used in devices from TV remote controls to
PDAs.
258
GLOSSARY

Infrastructure:In the context of the Internet, the system of servers, cables,
and other hardware, together with the software that ties it together, for the
purpose of supporting the operation of the network.
Instant Messaging: A type of communications service that allows some-
one to establish a private conversation with another individual.
Internalization:The process of matching the content in a Web site to suit
the language and culture of specific customers.
Internet: An internet is a collection of local area networks (LANs) con-
nected by a wide area network (WAN). The Internet is the World Wide Web,
one of many internets.
Internet Phone: A wireless phone that can access the Internet. Smart
Phones are also Internet Phones.
Internet Protocol (IP):The most important protocol on which the Inter-
net is based.
Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN): A digital circuit-
switched telephone system that integrates voice and data services.
ISM: The Industrial, Scientific, and Medical frequency band that is shared
with the Bluetooth wireless standard.
Internet Service Provider (ISP): A commercial organization that pro-
vides clients with access to the Internet.
International Telecommunications Union (ITU): The interna-
tional standards organization, based in Geneva, Switzerland, that standard-
izes telephone service throughout the world.
ITU-T: The Telecommunications Sector of the International Telecommuni-
cations Union.
Java 2 Micro Edition (J2ME): Sun Microsystems’s development plat-
form for Internet phones. J2ME is a potential competitor to the Wireless
Application Protocol (WAP).
JINI: The standard proposed by Sun Microsystems, Inc., for the wired and
wireless connection of appliances to the Internet.
Local Area Network (LAN): A group of computers, interconnected
through wired and/or wireless communications, so that they can share data,
software, and storage devices. LANs are part of a client-server computing
architecture.
Latency:The delay inherent in wireless systems, such as the time it takes for
a file or a program to arrive once a request has been sent.
GLOSSARY
259

Legacy System: An existing information system in which a company has
already invested considerable time and money. Legacy systems usually pre-
sent major integration problems when new, potentially incompatible sys-
tems are introduced.
Liquid Crystal Display (LCD): The flat display technology used on
laptops, cell phones, and wireless PDAs.
Lithium Polymer: A form of lithium battery that can be molded into vir-
tually any shape.  Polymer batteries, while expensive, offer a high energy den-
sity in a package that can complement the form factor of a wireless device.
Local Exchange Carrier: The telecommunications company that pro-
vides public switched network access services.
Localization:The process of adapting a Web site to a particular country or
region. 
Loyalty: A positive inner feeling or emotional bond between a customer
and a business or a brand. Loyalty can’t be assessed directly, but can be
inferred from a customer’s actions.
Loyalty Effect:The quantifiable behavior normally associated with loyalty,
such as repeatedly transacting business with a particular retailer or Web site.
MCommerce: Mobile Ecommerce or eCommerce on wheels.  Web-based
transactions made with the help of wireless PDAs, Internet Phones, and other
nonfixed Web-enabled devices.
Metropolitan Area Network (MAN): A high-speed network that
links multiple locations within a city. 
Minibrowser: An application, similar in concept to Netscape Navigator or
Microsoft Internet Explorer, that enables handheld wireless devices to access
to the Web.  
Mobile Telephone Switching Office (MTSO): The connection
between cellular services and the wired telephone network, as well as con-
nectivity to the wired Web.
Noise: An undesirable electrical signal.
Packet Switching: A data transmission technology that breaks down a
stream of data into smaller units, called packets, and routes them separately
over a network.
Personal Communications Network (PCN): Originally conceived
as a very low-power, city-based communications system, but implemented in
the form of PCS.
260
GLOSSARY

Personal Communications Service (PCS): A digital service similar
to cellular phone service.
Personal Digital Assistant (PDA): A handheld electronic organizer
that may have Internet access and email functions.
Personal Digital Cellular (PDC): One of several alternatives to the
GSM standard.
PocketVideo: A proprietary technique for delivering pictures to wireless
handheld devices.
Portal: A Web site that offers a broad array of resources and services, from e-
mail to online shopping.
Process Management: An evaluation and restructuring of system func-
tions to make certain processes are carried out in the most efficient and eco-
nomical way.
Protocol: A set of standards that defines communications between devices.
PSTN: Public Switched Telephone Network.
Push Technology: The automatic delivery of information without contin-
uous prompting from the user. 
Radio Frequency (RF): Any frequency that corresponds to signals that
can propagate through the ether, including those used by cellular telephones
and wireless networks. 
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID): The use of electronic tags
that emit or reflect signals for nearby readers that are part of a wireless net-
work.  RFID tags can be used to wirelessly track stationary and moving
objects, from pallets in a warehouse to missiles in transit to a battlefield.
RSA:An encryption algorithm that forms the basis for security on the Inter-
net. 
Server: The computer that serves data or applications to one or more client
computers.
Shared Wireless Access Protocol (SWAP): The standard behind the
HomeRF wireless network.
Short Message Service (SMS): A technology used to send limited (a
few hundred characters) text messages to Internet phones. SMS is an inex-
pensive alternative to the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP).
Smart Phone: A cell phone with Internet access as well as onboard PDA
capabilities. That is, an Internet Phone with PDA capabilities. Every Smart
Phone is an Internet Phone, but not every Internet Phone is a Smart Phone.
GLOSSARY
261

Spread Spectrum:A wireless communication method that spreads trans-
missions across a spectrum instead of transmitting over a fixed radio fre-
quency. The two types of spread-spectrum transmission, direct sequencing
(DSSS) and frequency hopping (FHSS), deter eavesdroppers because the sig-
nals are either encoded or are difficult to intercept. 
Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA):A wireless communication
method that divides the designated frequency into time slots. Each frequency
can carry multiple transmissions, with each call taking a turn in a time slot. 
Telecommunications 
Infrastructure:
The telecommunications
spaces, cable pathways, grounding, wiring, and termination hardware that
together provides the basic support for the distribution of all telecommuni-
cations information.
Text-to-Speech (TTS): Voice synthesis, using email or other text source
to drive the voice synthesis process. 
Thin Client: A “stripped down” application designed specifically to run
over a low-bandwidth communications channel. 
Touch Point: The point of contact between a customer and a company.
Touch points include the wired Web, the wireless Web, telephone, fax, email,
and person-to-person conversations.
Universal Mobile Telecommunications Systems (UMTS): In
Europe, third generation networks built with Wideband-CDMA (WCDMA)
technology.
Universal Plug and Play (UPNP): The standard advanced by
Microsoft for connecting appliances to the Internet via wired and wireless
communications. 
Voice Portal: A connection to the Internet based on voice recognition and
speech synthesis instead of graphical or textual input and output.
Voice Recognition: The automatic conversion of the spoken word into
machine-readable text or computer commands. Voice Recognition is espe-
cially attractive as an alternative to keyboard and stylus input on handheld
wireless devices.
Wide Area Network (WAN): Multiple local networks tied together,
typically using telephone company services. WANs may connect users in dif-
ferent buildings or countries.
Wide-Band CDMA (WCDMA): A third generation wireless technol-
ogy derived from code-division multiple access (CDMA) that is officially
known as IMT-2000 direct spread. Referred to in Europe as UMTS,
WCDMA is a rival to CDMA2000.
262
GLOSSARY

Wireless Application Protocol (WAP): A standard for delivering
information to Internet and Smart Phones. 
Wireless Application Service Provider (WASP): The wireless
equivalent of an ASP.  Also known as a wireless enabler.
Wireless Markup Language (WML): A derivative of XML optimized
to create Web pages that are compatible with the Wireless Application Pro-
tocol (WAP).
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C):An international organization
that develops programming and interoperability standards of the Web.
Extensible Hypertext Markup Language (XHTML): A hybrid
between HTML and XML, designed specifically for creating documents on
the Web.
Extensible Markup Language (XML): A markup language used to
create Web pages that can be automatically reformatted to suit the needs of a
variety of devices, from Internet phones with postage-stamp–size displays to
large desktop monitors.  Unlike HTML, XML specifies not only the appear-
ance of data but also defines what the data represent.
GLOSSARY
263

This page intentionally left blank.

Absorption, 83, 84
Activation energy, 188, 189, 197
Ad hoc network, 93
Advertising industry, 64
Aether Systems, 62
Affordability, 126
AI, 22
All-digital cellular systems, 28, 29
America Online, 64
American Express, 211
American Express Blue Card, 166
AMPS, 110, 111
Ancillary contributors, 19
Antennas, 80–83
Antiviral utilities, 159
Application developers, 51
Arcing, 208
Aristotle, 73
ARPANET, 10
Artificial intelligence (AI), 22
Asthma monitors, 185
Asymmetric encryption, 164–167
AT&T, 7–11, 134, 216
Bacon, Francis, 173
Bagehot, Walter, 3
Balanced communications systems, 107,
108
Bandwidth, 77–79
Bandwidth compression, 145, 146
Bandwidth limitations, 32–35, 87
Bandwidth projections, 223
Banking, 60
Banner ads, 64
Batteries, 155–157, 208
Bell, Alexander Graham, 6, 99
Billing structure, 216
Biometrics, 160, 161
Blackberry, 140, 141, 155, 156
Blair, Gary, 235
Blood-testing systems, 185
BlueLinx, 232
Bluetooth, 36, 37, 114–116
Bot portal, 146
Bots, 143, 168
Bus network, 94
Business implementation, 171–252
business models, 246
challenges and opportunities, 195–234.
See also Challenges and opportunities
change agents, 186–188
change process, 188–190
expectations management, 248
five-phase implementation strategy, 
238
identifying what needs to be wireless,
183–186
management strategy, 245, 246
opportunities for change, 182, 183
phase 1 (decision), 239–241
phase 2 (define an approach), 241–246
phase 3 (develop), 246, 247
265
Index
Copyright 2001 Bryan Bergeron.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

Business implementation (cont.)
phase 4 (deploy), 247
phase 5 (evaluate), 248
privacy, 191, 192
solid business infrastructure, 252
technology strategy, 242–245
vendor selection, 246, 247
Business models, 40, 246
Business myopia, 225, 226
CA, 165
Cable modems, 92
Capacitive fingerprint recognition, 160
Carnivore, 231
Catalyst, 189
CCITT, 201
CDMA, 110, 111
CDMA 2000, 113
CDPD, 112
Celestica, 20
Cell phone dangers, 205–208
Cell phones, 29, 179
Cells, 106
Cellular communications, 99–110
balanced communications systems, 
107, 108
cellular networks, 105–107
frequency allocation, 102, 103
geographic coverage, 108, 109
interference, 109, 110
modulation, 103–105
Cellular networks, 105–107
Cellular Telecommunications Industry
Association (CTIA), 14, 202
Certification authority (CA), 165
Challenges and opportunities, 195–234
economic issues, 211–217
legal issues, 208–211
management issues, 197–201
marketing issues, 224–227
medical issues, 204–208
political issues, 201–204
social issues, 228–232
technical issues, 217–224
Change agents, 186–188
Change process, 188–190
Chargeback, 210
Chicken-and-egg problem, 215
Choice board, 56, 57
Circuit switching, 110
Cisco Systems, 21
City and metropolitan areawide coverage,
106
Clarke, Arthur C., 135
Commercial fixed wireless systems, 134,
135
Communications model, 84–89
Communications protocols,  110–114
Communications standards, 34
Complexity, 219
Consultative Committee on International
Telegraph and Telephone (CCITT),
201
Content, 33, 223
Content aggregators, 53
Content authors, 51–53
Content providers, 53
Convergence, 179, 180. See also Business
implementation
Cordless phones, 42
Coverage overlap, 106
Credit card fraud, 210, 211
Critical mass, 215
CTIA, 14, 202
Customer expectations, 226, 227, 248
Customers, 65
D-AMPS, 110, 111
Data overload, 232
de Forest, Lee, 7
Definitions, 253–263
Deutsche Telekom, 21
Development tools, 221
Device diversity, 219
Diffie, Whitfield, 164
Digital cellular services, 102, 103
Digital signature law, 210
Digital subscriber line (DSL), 92
Digital wearables, 132
Direct sequencing spread spectrum 
(DSSS), 104
Disney World, 56
Domestic wireless market, 20–22
dotComs, 55
DoubleClick, 64
DSSS, 104
266
INDEX
TEAMFLY

eBay, 56
eBooks, 180
ECC, 165
Economic aspects. See Money matters
Economic issues, 211–217
eCoupons, 15
EDGE, 113
Effective radiated power (ERP), 81
EII, 142, 143
eLearning, 15
Electrical noise, 79, 80
Electronic manufacturing services (EMS), 19
Elliptic curve cryptography (ECC), 165
eMenus, 15
Emergency services, 58
Emotional interface, 142
Emotionally intelligent interface (EII), 142,
143
EMS outsourcing, 19
Enabling technologies, 35–37, 131–169
portable power, 155–157
satellite-based fixed wireless, 135–139
security and privacy technologies,
157–167. See also Security
terrestrial fixed wireless, 133–135
user interface technology, 139–154. See
also User interface technology
Encapsulated battery pack, 157
Encryption, 161–167
End-user hardware suppliers, 60, 61
ENIAC, 9
Ericsson, Lars Magnus, 6
ERP, 81
Ether-commerce, 14–17
eTickets, 15
Eurasian advantage, 67, 68, 100
European Union (EU), 27, 100
Evangelism, 227
Evolution of wired web, 25–31
Evolutionary changes, 5
Excite UK Ltd., 12
Expectations management, 248
Explosions, 208
FCC, 8
FCC licensing, 209
Federal Communications Commission
(FCC), 8
FHSS, 104
Field strength, 80
Finance, 60
Financial computer support, 16
Fingerprint recognition, 160
Fixed wireless, 133–139
Flextronics, 20
Foreign investment, 202
Form, 127
Formatters, 53
Fraud, 210, 211
Frequency allocation, 102, 103
Frequency hopping spread spectrum
(FHSS), 104
Function, 126, 127
Funny Lady, 75
Future of wireless web, 249–251
Games, 58
Gates, Bill, 138
GeePS, 59
GEO systems, 136, 137
Geostationary earth orbit (GEO), 136, 137
German Tax Reform of 2000, 187
Global system for mobile communications
(GSM), 17, 100, 112
GlobalStar, 137, 138
Glossary, 253–263
Government, 49, 50
GPRS, 112, 113
GPS, 128
Graphic interface developers, 61, 62
Graphical user interface (GUI), 39, 140, 141
GSM, 17, 100, 112
Hardware limitations, 223, 224
Harmonics, 84
HAVi, 116
HDML, 118
Head of Web development, 233
Helman, Martin, 164
High-level languages, 116–124
Historical overview, 6–11, 73, 74
Hollings, Ernest, 202
Home Audio Video Interoperability 
Organization (HAVi), 116
Home monitoring, 185, 186
Home office, 42, 43
INDEX
267

Hotels, 58
HTML, 118
HTML-based wired/wireless content d
istribution system, 119
Hybrid topology, 93
HyperLAN, 109
I-Mode, 18, 100, 112, 223
ICD+ jacket, 144
ICO, 137
IEEE 802.1 1b, 95
IEEE 802.1 1b High Rate Standard, 116
Imaging technology, 167, 168
Implementation. See Business 
implementation
Improved mobile telephone service
(IMTS), 9, 105, 106
IMT-2000, 114
IMTS, 9, 105, 106
Information content, 76
Infrastructure, 221, 222
Infrastructure builders, 50
Installed user base, 33
Instant ordering, 15
Integrated circuit (IC), 10
Intel, 21
Intellectual property issues, 209, 210
Intelligent interface, 142
Interface developers, 61, 62
Interference, 84, 109, 110, 222
International politics, 203, 204
International standards organizations, 
201
International Telecommunications Union
(ITU), 201
Internet, 95
Internetworks, 95
Invasive computing, 177
IR remote controls, 43
Iridium, 48, 137, 138
ISDN, 92
ITU, 201
J2ME, 124
JavaLite, 124
JINI, 116
Jobs, Steve, 177
Just-in-time, just-in-place information, 15
Kawasaki, Guy, 227
Killer app, 217
LAN, 94
Land-based fixed wireless, 133–135
Languages, 116–124
Legal issues, 208–211
LEO systems, 137, 138
LEP screens, 167
Licensing, 209
Life F/X, 143, 146
Light emitting polymer (LEP) screens, 167
Limitations and opportunities, 32–35
Lithium ion batteries, 156
Lithium polymer batteries, 157
Local area network (LAN), 94
Local governments, 203
Local roaming, 42
Logical interface, 141, 142
Lost opportunity costs, 216
Low earth orbit (LEO), 137, 138
Lunden, Joan, 195
Luther, John, 131
Major players, 18–20. See also New players,
Stakeholder businesses
MAN, 94
Management issues, 197–201
Management strategy, 245, 246
Marconi, Guglielmo, 7
Market drivers, 40, 41
Marketing issues, 224–227
McCaw, Craig, 138
mCommerce, 14
Med Watch, 186
Media and entertainment industries, 58
Medical issues, 204–208
Medical uses, 185, 186, 189, 190
Medium earth orbit (MEO), 137
MEO systems, 137
Merck Pharmaceuticals, 207
Mergers and acquisitions, 65–67
Merita Nordbanken, 12
Metric of transparency, 184
Metricom, 133
Metropolitan area network (MAN), 94
Microbrowser, 117
Microsoft, 21, 37, 38, 115
268
INDEX

Middleware, 101
MindSurf, 62
Mobile commerce, 14
Mobile telephone switching office (MTSO),
107
MobilID, 54
Mobility, 89
Modulation, 77, 103–105
Money matters, 47–69
Eurasian advantage, 67, 68
mergers and acquisitions, 65–67
stakeholders, 48–65. See also Stakeholders
Morphing, 125
Morse, Samuel, 6
Motor vehicle accidents, 207, 208
Motorola, 48, 115
MTSO, 107
Myphone.com, 54
N-squared problem, 163
NA-TDMA, 111, 112
Natural touch-point extension, 27
Netmorph, Inc., 125
Network and wireless technologies, 73–97
antennas, 80–83
bandwidth, 77–79
communications model, 84–89
field strength, 80
interference, 84
mobility, 89
modulation, 77
networks, 90–96. See also Networks
noise, 79, 80
operating frequency, 76, 77
physics of communications, 75–80
receiver sensitivity/selectivity, 83
signal absorption, 83, 84
signal loss, 79
signal propagation, 84
signals/information content, 76
Network architecture, 90, 91
Network capacity, 220
Network protocols, 95
Network topologies, 93, 94
Network topology, 93
Networks, 90–96
application, 95
architecture, 90, 91
Networks (cont.)
data transfer rate, 91–93
geographic extent, 94
jargon/vocabulary, 96
protocols, 95
signal type, 91
topologies, 93, 94
New business models, 40
New interface paradigms, 38–40
New players, 38
New services, 37
Nickel cadmium batteries, 156
Nickel metal hydride batteries, 156
Noise, 79, 80
Nokia, 52
Nortel Networks, 37
Novatel Wireless, 43
NTT DoCoMo, 18, 66–68, 100, 240, 241,
248
Nylon Beat, 37
OmniSky, 155, 157
Omnitracs, 59
Online auctioning, 15, 16
Operating frequency, 76, 77
Optical fingerprint recognition, 160
OracleMobile, 54
Orbiting cellular communications,
135–139
Ownership of wireless Web projects, 233,
245
Packet switching, 110
Pager companies, 63
Pagers, 41, 42, 109
Palm Computing, 21, 221
Palm Pilot, 140, 141
Palm VII, 43, 102, 155
PAN, 94
Passwords, 160
Pattern recognition, 142, 143
PBX, 95, 96
PCMCIA cards, 43
PCS services, 102, 103
Personal area network (PAN), 94
Personal digital assistants (PDAs), 12, 29, 43
Personal health monitors, 185
Personal productivity, 16
INDEX
269

Personal simulations, 15
Personalization, 186
Pervasive computing, 41, 42, 177–179
Pervasive memory functionality, 186
Peters, Tom, 25
Phage, 159
Physical interface, 140
Physics of communications, 75–80
Pill Box, 185
PKE, 164, 165
PKI, 165
Platform standards, 224
Point-to-multipoint fixed wireless, 135
Point-to-point fixed wireless, 135
Political issues, 201–204
Portable power, 155–157
Portals, 53, 54
Preview events, 15
Price sensitivity, 217
Privacy, 42, 191, 192, 230–232. See also
Security
Private Branch Exchange (PBX), 95, 96
Product confusion, 226
Product divergence, 227
Protocols. See Wireless web protocols
Proximity-based multimodal advertise-
ments, 64
Public key encryption (PKE), 164, 165
Public key infrastructure (PKI), 165
Public safety, 207, 208
Quantum cryptography, 165, 166
QXL.com, 56
Radiation, 205–207
Radio frequency noise pollution, 222
Radio frequency radiation, 205–207
Reality distortion, 230
Receiver sensitivity/selectivity, 83
Rechargeable batteries, 156
Remote services, 16
Restaurants, 56–58
Retail, 59
Revolutionary changes, 5
Revolutionary developments, 31, 32
RIM Blackberry, 140, 141, 155, 156
Ring topology, 94
Running Man, The, 250
s/n ratio, 80
SAR, 205
Satellite-based fixed wireless, 135–139
Satellite network connection, 93
Scalability, 219
Screen scraping, 125
Search engine developers, 54
Secure socket layer (SSL), 158
Security, 157–167, 200
antiviral utilities, 159
biometrics, 160, 161
credit card fraud, 210, 211
encryption, 161–167
privacy, 191, 192, 230–232
Security solutions providers, 60
Selectivity, 83
Sensitivity, 83
Sensitivity to pricing, 217
Service coverage, 33
Service providers, 53, 54
SGML, 118
Shannon, C. E., 78
SHF frequencies, 76, 77
Shortage of skilled technology workers,
229
Signal absorption, 83, 84
Signal loss, 79
Signal propagation, 84
Signal-to-noise (s/n) ratio, 80
SIMs, 166
Smart batteries, 157
Smart cards, 166
Smart phones, 43, 59
Social issues, 228–232
Software robot, 143
Software toolsets, 221
Solectron, 20
Special protocols, 114–116
Specialized mobile radio (SMR), 10
Specific absorption rate (SAR), 205
Speculation, 212
Speech recognition technology, 38, 39, 61,
62, 147–164
SpeedChoice, 134
Spread spectrum modulation, 104, 105
Sprint, 53
SSL, 158
Staffing, 236
270
INDEX

Stakeholder businesses, 48–65
advertising industry, 64
application developers, 51
content authors, 51–53
content providers, 53
customers, 65
dotComs, 55
end-user hardware suppliers, 60, 61
government, 49, 50
infrastructure builders, 50
interface developers, 61, 62
pager companies, 63
search engine developers, 54
security solutions providers, 60
service providers/portals, 53, 54
stockholders, 65
telecom giants, 49
transaction businesses, 56–60
vertical integration, 62
wireless enablers, 63
Stand-in compression technology, 143, 146
Standards organizations, 201
Star topology, 93
Stickiness of existing customers, 213
Stockholders, 65
Strategic partnerships, 214, 215
Super-high frequencies (SHF), 76, 77
SWAP, 116
Symbian Alliance, 19, 36
Symbol Technologies, 145
Symmetric encryption, 161–164
Synthetic actors, 143, 168
T1 line, 92, 93
TCP/IP, 90, 91
TCU, 115
TD-SCDMA, 113, 114
Tech burnout, 232
Technical issues, 217–224
Technologic convergence, 179, 180
Technology strategy, 242–245
Telecom giants, 49
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 11
Teledesic, 138
Telematics control unit (TCU), 115
Teligent, 134
Tension between form/function/
affordability, 126, 127
TeraBeam, 134
Terrestrial fixed wireless, 133–135
Testing standards, 220
Time management, 15
Timofonica, 159
Token ring, 94
Top language technologies, 116–124
Traffic accidents, 207, 208
Transaction businesses, 56–60
Transcoding, 125
Transparency, 184
Travel, 59
Triton Network Systems, 135
Trucking industry, 59
2.4-GHz spectrum, 109
Two-way pagers, 43
U.S. market, 20–22
UHF frequencies, 76, 77
Ultra-high frequencies (UHF), 76, 77
UMTS, 113
UPNP, 116
User interface technology, 139–154
applications, 143–146
bandwidth compression, 145, 146
emotional interface, 142
emotionally intelligent interface, 142,
143
GUI, 141, 142
intelligent interface, 142
logical interface, 141, 142
physical interface, 140
voice enabled interfaces (VEIs),
147–149
voice portals, 149–154
wearable computers, 144, 145
Value chain positioning, 200
Vanderpoel, Robert P., 47
VEIs, 147–149
Vendor evaluation, 200, 247
Vendor selection, 246, 247
Verizon, 21
Vertical integrators, 62
Virus, 159
VirusScan Wireless, 159
Voice commands, 61
Voice enabled interfaces (VEIs), 147–149
INDEX
271

Voice portals, 145, 146, 149–154
Voice recognition systems, 38, 39, 61, 62,
147–164
W-CDMA, 113
Wait-and-see attitude, 227
WAN, 94
WAP, 36, 121–124
WASP, 180, 244, 245
Wearable computers, 144, 145
Web clipping, 125
Web implementation languages, 116–124
WebSphere Transcoding Publisher, 119
Wi-Fi, 116
Wide area network (WAN), 94
WIM cards, 166
Wireless application protocol (WAP), 36,
121–124
Wireless application service provider
(WASP), 180, 244, 245
Wireless choice board style systems, 56, 57
Wireless communications. See Cellular
communications
Wireless docking stations, 42
Wireless enablers, 19
Wireless game market, 58
Wireless home monitoring system, 185
Wireless integrators, 63
Wireless LAN (WLAN), 94
Wireless local loop (WLL), 92
Wireless market drivers, 40, 41
Wireless networks. See Networks
Wireless portals, 53, 54
Wireless service providers, 53, 54
Wireless technologies. See Network and
wireless technologies
Wireless web protocols, 110–125
communications protocols, 110–114
generations, 114
high-level languages, 116–124
other approaches, 124, 125
special protocols, 114–116
Wirephoto, 6
WLAN, 94
WLL, 92
WML, 118, 119
WMLScript, 119
Worker shortage, 229
XML, 120, 121
XML/XSL-based wired/wireless 
content distribution system, 122
XSL, 121
Yahoo, 54
Zaplet technology, 191
Zinc-air batteries, 157
272
INDEX

Bryan Bergeronhas over 30 years’ experience designing and working with
wireless systems and has been writing about leading-edge technology and
envisioning the future for most of that time. He teaches at Harvard Medical
School and MIT, is editor-in-chief of e.MD, technical editor of Postgraduate
Medicine, among others, the author of over 275 articles and chapters on busi-
ness and technology, The Eternal E-Customer: How Emotionally Intelligent
Interfaces Can Create Long-Lasting Customer Relationships, The Hitchhiker’s
Guide to the Wireless Web, and several commercial software packages, includ-
ing many “firsts” in the industry. He is president of Archetype Technologies,
Inc., a technology consulting firm, and speaks internationally on a variety of
technology and business issues.
About the Author

